

T. STUART GURR


* ,v
V


V**i




ft
/
JUNGLE VAGABONDS
i
\


r- ' v
I


T. STUART GURR
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY :: LONDON
19 4 2


Set up, printed and hound
in Australia by
- Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
19 kt
Registered in Australia for
transmission through the
post as a book


Cl 5458
MY GRANDCHILDREN
ANN, ROBIN AND JENNIFER
AND TO ALL ANIMAL LOVERS


■
.


PREFACE
Selim, the Tiger, belongs as much to Ann as he does to me. And,
because both of us love animals, we thought we would share him
with the boys and girls who love them too.
I remember when we first got to know Selim. It was one of those
peaceful winter evenings that close on a day of happiness and content.
Ann and I sat in a big cosy chair watching little flames spurting and
flickering from the logs in the fire-place and heard like a sigh, or the
distant surge of the sea, the curtain of night softly rustling down. Then
we noticed how the colours in the carpet and the bright cushions on
the settee grew misty and dim, while the shadows crept into their
proper places to listen to the usual bedtime story. We weren’t a bit
frightened when Selim walked into our lives. In fact, Ann just stroked
his ear and snuggled more closely into my shoulder.
Since that day we have been deeply interested in him and his
adventures. There are many more which must remain untold till
another book is written. We often sit together, Ann and I, staring
at the door which leads to the veranda, half expecting Selim to thrust
his head and shoulders through the curtains. Jackie, the Jackal, will
be sure to be at his heels and will bed himself down on the hearth-rug
beside his friend, watching the firelight gleam in his golden eyes. Of
course Bhundy, the Monkey, will find the cosiest chair in the room,
while on the corner of the mantelpiece, like a piece of a rainbow that
has been broken off and left behind, will perch Po-putt, the Royal
Parrot, that once belonged to the Rajah of Gooj.
They are real, very real indeed, to Ann. And to me.


«


CONTENTS
I. THE DESERT ROAD i
11. NEWS OF GREAT TREASURE 5
111. THE QUEST BEGINS 11
IV. ALONG COMES A CIRCUS 15
V. THE TIGER COMPARES NOTES 20
VI. THE JUNGLE FOLK MEET 25
VII. A FIGHT TO THE DEATH 28
VIII. THE TEMPLE RUINS 33
IX. BHUNDY FINDS SOMETHING 39
X. THE TAILOR TELLS THE RAJAH 46
XI. THE GREAT HUNT 52
XII. COUNTRY RESIDENCE 58
XIII. HARD PRESSED 63
XIV. WHAT HAPPENED IN GOOJ 68
XV. THE PARROT JOINS THE GANG 75
XVI. THE TAILOR LOSES HIS BEARD 81
XVII. BURGLARY 88
XVIII. AND HERE COMES ’ERBERT! 94
XIX. DEEP LAID SCHEMES 100
XX. THE TAILOR GETS A PRESENT 105
XXI. NEWS OF BETTY 110
XXII. SHERLOCK ON THE JOB - - - - - - n 4
XXIII. ’ERBERT HAS A DAY OUT 122
XXIV. BETTY AT LAST 127
XXV. AND SO-GOOD-BYE 131


m
I
d


CHAPTER I
THE DESERT ROAD
The road wriggled like a great snake through the desert till it entered
the main gate of the City of Nasrabad. The landscape, littered with
stones and dotted with clumps of cactus and camelthorn, with here
and there a stunted tree, was dreary and desolate. Looking backward
to the skyline, the road seemed as fine as a thread, but became as wide
as a good road should be as it passed Chota Dongri, a little hill that
appeared to stand in the centre of the plain. From this point it
narrowed again till it reached the city wall.
There were times when no sign of life could be seen from that
little hill, except a great vulture or eagle thousands of feet up in a
brazen sky. Again, the road would be a smudge of people moving
with their camels, horses and bullock carts towards the city. On rare
occasions the Rajah, on a huge elephant with bejewelled tusks and
trappings of scarlet and gold, escorted by a bodyguard of lancers almost
as gorgeous as himself, would pass and add colour to the surrounding
drabness. The sun always seemed a trifle hotter, and the road a little
whiter, after he had gone by, and the dust had settled down.
At a certain point travellers got their first clear view of Nasrabad,
with its domes and slender minarets, fragile and shimmering in the
heat, like a dream city that might dissolve as a mirage does, at any
moment. Here they wiped their foreheads, gazed with wonder in their
eyes, and said: “Bismillah! The city at last.” They noticed too, for
the first time, the little hill to the left of the road, that looked like a
heap of stones and boulders swept round a massive pillar of rock.
A few stunted trees and parched-looking scrub covered that hill,
but altogether it looked so dreary a spot that no one ever left the road
to explore it. People used to say evil spirits in the shape of cobras lived
there in holes and crevices, and hissed whenever any one approached.


The evil spirits once had been robbers and murderers, whose heads
had decorated the city wall as a warning to all people that no one could
break the laws of the country and escape punishment.
On a ledge of the rock a huge tiger lazily sprawled and blinked at
the glare and whiteness of the road. His tawny coat was sleek and
shiny as plush, and the dark markings that slashed it rippled with the
least movement. All the morning his yellow eyes had looked toward
the city gate, until at last he caught sight of a mere dot that leisurely
came nearer to the hillock. The dot was a jackal, his tail held aloft
like a plume, his tongue lolling thirstily from his mouth. A few
hundred yards behind ambled an old pony with a spare-looking man
in the saddle, wearing a very long white beard. Cautiously the Jackal,
dust-covered, tired but still alert and cheeky, threaded his way through
the scrub to the cool cave just below the ledge where the Tiger lay.
Selim, the Tiger, stretched himself with a yawn and leaped from
his lookout to greet his little friend. Inside the cave it was cool and
dark, and the earth was damp to the smell and touch. Back in the
farthest recess, where no one would expect to find it, was a little pool
of pure spring water. The only prints in the soggy marge were those
of Selim and Jackie, and of birds who flew in and out unmolested. On
one side of the cave, close to the entrance, the Tiger and the Jackal
slept. On the other, heaps of bones indicated that they used it as a
dining-room.
Selim greeted the Jackal with a low growl. “Jackie,” he inquired,
“where’s the Tailor?”
“Coming. I just ran ahead to tell you he won’t be long.”
A flea at that moment bit the tip of Jackie’s tail. With a whine he
flung himself down and nibbled at it frantically.
“How dare you?” roared Selim.
“I beg your pardon,” said Jackie very meekly.
“How dare you chase fleas when I’m talking to you? What coloured
silk patterns is the Tailor bringing?”
“White, yellow, blue, red and green.”
“How dare you! Didn’t I tell you I wanted pink pyjamas?
“Yes, I told the Tailor you said pink,” the Jackal replied with a
yawn.
The Tiger snuffed the air. “I think he’s coming up now,” he said.


“Go down the hill and meet him and see that he doesn’t tread on the
snakes, or else I’ll have no pyjamas.”
The Tailor, led by Jackie, trudged towards the cave, keeping his
eye open for snakes, and taking pinches of snuff which made him
sneeze so violently that the cobras thought it was a hiss from some
giant serpent and slid to cover. He was so thin that his clothes hung
from his bones and flapped in the breeze, that is whenever there was
a breeze. A hooked nose, deep set eyes, a closely cropped head on which
he wore a tight-fitting turban, and a wisp of beard long enough to trail
on the ground if he permitted it, made the Tailor recognizable any-
where. Altogether, he looked sly, greedy and crafty. In his house in
a back lane of the city he had a room with a window too narrow for a
cat to crawl through, and a door four inches thick and doubly pad-
locked. Here every night he counted his hoard of gold pieces, with
sparkling eyes and trembling fingers. The Tailor had no wife or
children. He lived for one purpose, to add to his store of wealth, and
to obtain the money by fair means or foul.
He had hurried to the cave with his tape-measure and patterns as
soon as Jackie called to tell him Selim wanted to see him about a pair
of silk pyjamas. It paid him to be friendly with Selim, because he was
the most extraordinary animal he had ever met or heard about. Some-
times he wondered if Selim had once been a man changed to a beast
by a djinn or evil spirit, for not only could he speak, but he had many
human qualities. People always are interested in the mysterious. For
instance, the Tiger had a little store of money somewhere and under-
stood its value. The Tailor wished to know where he got it and just
where it was hidden. Even the Jackal knew how many annas went to
a rupee, and how many beans made five.
The Tailor, tired with his tramp up the hillside in the heat and
dust, stood before the cave entrance and mopped his face with a red
handkerchief. Jackie had disappeared into the gloom, and everything
was so still and silent that the Tailor could hear the beat of his heart.
“How dare you?” growled Selim from the shadows.
The Tailor stiffened with fear, and with a low salaam asked: “What
wrong have I done?”
“You’re using a red handkerchief. Don’t you know red makes me
savage?” snarled Selim.


JUNGLE VAGABONDS
“I thought red enraged bulls only,” said the Tailor slipping the
bandanna in his pocket.
“Don’t stand there like a scarecrow,” bullied Selim. Come in or
I’ll drag you in by your whiskers.”
The Tailor opened a little cloth roll and displayed his silk patterns.
He looked humble, but sly too. . ■
“I see you have some pink silk,” Selim remarked approvingly. 1
like the material and the shade. Now measure me.”
Very gingerly the Tailor took Selim’s measurements while Jackie,
with a suspicious look in his wicked eyes, followed the Tailor s heels.
“Umph,” said the Tailor jocularly, ‘‘an inch or two more round
the bimjee than I expected!”
Selim turned and lifted a huge paw with claws extended. How
dare you?” he roared.
“Huzoor!” the Tailor exclaimed meekly.
“You may speak of my stomach as my waistline. You may even say
I am pot-bellied. But to refer to it as a bimjee, by the Pit, is more
than any self-respecting tiger can stand.”
“Forgive me, O Great One,” the Tailor begged in a low voice. “I
shall be more careful in future.” Hooking his beard to his waistband
he prepared to leave. , .
“What are you going to charge me for making those pyjamas?
Selim demanded.
“Only two gold pieces. That’s cheap, very cheap,” the Tailor said
affably.
“One gold piece,” Selim growled.
“But pink silk is so expensive,” moaned the Tailor. And besides,
look how far I have to come to measure you. Two gold mohurs, and
that is giving the pyjamas away. I swear it by the Prophet s beard.
“I’ll pay you two if you embroider a dragon on the back of the
coat in gold thread,” haggled Selim. “Now, not another word. 111
expect the pyjamas in two days. Be off, and don t tread on any of
my snakes.”
From the ledge of the rock Selim and Jackie watched the bent
figure of the Tailor wearily riding towards Nasrabad. As he disappeared
from sight they climbed down and drank deeply from the spring in
the cave.


CHAPTER II
NEWS OF GREAT TREASURE
Two days later, on an afternoon when the intense heat seemed to melt
the landscape and shake it into waves and ripples, the Tailor arrived
with the pink pyjamas. He held up the coat to let Selim see the hideous
Chinese dragon embroidered on the back of it.
Selim tries on his pink pyjamas.
Selim’s eyes goggled at the splendour of it. He slipped into the
coat easily enough—the sleeves were short and very wide. But the
trousers were not so easy. Threading his tail through a slit in the back
was a bit of a job, but with the help of the Tailor and the Jackal it
was done, and Selim strutted round in his finery.
“I look more human that you do,” Selim said very proudly to the
Tailor.


“You are more human,” said the Jackal with a sneer, moving away
from the Tailor.
“I think,” said the Tailor, noting how pleased Selim was, “the suit
is well worth three gold pieces. Look at the gold thread in the
embroidery.”
“I said two, and that’s all I’ll give!” said Selim, working himself
into a terrible rage. “Jackie, give the scoundrel two gold pieces and
let him clear out, and may a King Cobra fasten his fangs into his heels
as he goes.”
The Tailor took the money with a deep salaam. “I hope,” he said,
“your pyjamas will be both cool and comfortable.” He walked behind
Selim, giving the coat a final look over, stroking the silk, pulling and
patting it, while the tiger beamed with pride and importance. Quickly
and deftly, while he talked to Selim, the Tailor tied a knot in the
Tiger’s tail.
“Here, no monkey tricks,” said Selim, sensing something was
wrong, but parading himself with all the gay abandon of a mannequin.
“Shabash!” said the Tailor approvingly. “You now look really like
a human being. Someday I will make thee a State uniform.”
“I shall then look more magnificent than the Rajah of Nasrabad,”
Selim exclaimed in his haughtiest manner.
Soon after the Tailor left Selim climbed up on the ledge of the
rock and went to sleep. Perhaps it was the pyjamas that made him feel
so drowsy. At sundown he woke with a start, just in time to see the
Jackal skulking off to see what food he could pick up on the outskirts
of the city.
“Wait!” Selim commanded, halting Jackie. “I’m hungry too. I
must prowl round a little myself. Perhaps I shall meet a stray goat.
Here, help me off with these pyjamas! I can’t hunt with them on.”
He got out of the coat easily enough. But the trousers were a
different matter. Jackie looked really troubled.
“We’ll never get the trousers off,” Jackie said tragically. “That—
that Tailor has tied a knot in your tail.”
“Tied a knot in my tail?” Selim roared. “How dare he? Thinks
he’ll keep me in pink pyjamas whether I want to wear them or not!
Wait till I meet him. I’ll give him pink pyjamas!” Roar after roar
shook the cave as Selim became more angry at the thought of the


Tailor’s impudence. The bats flew out in a great flight as he sprang
from rock to rock in his wrath. Presently Jackie heard a ripping sound,
and Selim flicked a pink bundle of rags towards him.
“Make yourself a turban with that, Jackie,” Selim said quite
cheerfully.
The tears came into the Jackal’s eyes. “Oh, the beautiful pyjamas,
the beautiful pink pyjamas,” he kept moaning.
“Don’t be a fool, Jackie,” Selim said, not unkindly, as he stretched
his muscles ready for the road. “There’s plenty of pink silk in the
bazaar in Nasrabad, and we’ll find a new tailor.”
That night the Tailor, adding two gold pieces to his hoard, counted
it again. He liked to sit in this bare, stuffy little room, and in the dim
light of a small candle touch the coins one by one. He felt safe here
with the narrow window and the thick, heavily padlocked door. The
Tailor lived alone, eating his meals in a little shop round the corner
noted for its pilaus, curries and kabobs. His house of stone and mortar
had limewashed walls and green doors and windows. A steep staircase
led from his shop to the living-rooms above it. His reception-room,
richly carpeted, blazed with fine brass and silverware. His bedroom
was simply furnished with a charpoy or rope-strung cot, and a hookah
stood beside it, handy to smoke during the night whenever his
conscience kept him from sleeping soundly.
As he counted his gold pieces the Tailor thought hard. Again he
wondered where Selim got his little store of gold to spend on such
ridiculous things as a suit of pink silk pyjamas. He must have access
to a treasure hoard somewhere. He remembered how a caravan
conveying a chest of Treasure for the Rajah of Nasrabad was looted
within sight of the city by a band of robbers. The Treasure was
payment of a long-standing debt by the ruler of a neighbouring state,
and included two gorgeous necklaces of precious stones. The Rajah
had a thorough search made, believing the chest was hidden near the
city, but no trace of it was found.
“If Selim has not found the Treasure, he would be very helpful in
a search for it,” the Tailor said aloud, as if he were trying to convince
himself. “If I possessed those two necklaces I would be so rich that
only the Rajah could live in greater splendour. I wish now I hadn’t


tied a knot in Selim’s tail. That was mean and petty—very mean and
petty—and may have annoyed him very much.”
He wanted to think this great scheme over under the stars. From
his balcony window he looked at the sky. There was a quarter-moon
and not a fleck of cloud. He pushed his feet into his shoes, pointed and
curled at the toes, picked up his staff, shuffled downstairs, and after
carefully searching his shop for hidden thieves, locked the street door
behind him.
He passed through the Street of Tailors and Embroiderers, the
shops closed for the night. Sniffing the air like a hungry hound he
turned the corner where gaily-lit eating-houses displayed food of great
variety and appetizing odour. Here the narrow street was full of people
who, having dined, laughed and talked or made purchases or listened
to a band of minstrels singing a song with a chorus.
Presently there was a shout and a great hubbub. Men yelled
“thief!” and rushed here and there, while others stood and laughed
as they saw a dog with a leg of mutton in its mouth diving in and out
of the crowd. The Tailor stopped as the mongrel rushed past, and
chuckling, recognized Selim’s friend, Jackie. He too chased the Jackal,
who dodged a pack of hungry street pariahs and made straight for
the wicket in the main gate.
The Tailor followed. Outside the city wall the great plain slept
under the drowsing stars, a light breeze barely shaking the fronds of
a short avenue of palms that made an imposing entrance to the main
gate. The Jackal had disappeared into the gloom as though he had
sunk into the earth. The Tailor peered about him, stroking a length
of his beard and listening intently for the least sound or movement.
To him it seemed as though a million eyes watched, while breath came
slowly and guardedly from twitching nostrils. The Tailor moved a
hundred paces farther away from the city wall and again watched and
listened.
Then he heard a crack and the slow steady crunch of an animal
enjoying the marrow and the nutty flavour of a bone. The Tailor
stood stock still, waiting for Selim to finish his meal.
“That was only a titbit, Jackie,” he heard Selim growl. “The
Tailor is standing on the edge of the road. Shall we make a real meal
of him?”


But first, he heard Jackie pipe, “he will take the knot out of
your tail.”
The Tailor laughed as though at a jest and hailed the Tiger. “I’m
too old and tough to eat,” he said. “Presently I’ll lead out a nice tender
goat for you, if you will do what I ask.”
The Tailor squatted on the hot sand, and the Tiger, on his
haunches a few feet away, licked his lips in the vain hope that a slight
taste of marrow still clung to them. Jackie, gnawing at the knuckle,
peered at the Tailor with his wicked little eyes, a little resentful that
Selim had left him a mere morsel of the joint he had stolen. The
expectation of a whole leg of juicy goat made him interested in the
conversation.
“We are really old friends, Selim, are we not?” the Tailor said,
rather distrustful of the Tiger s mood. “I have a little scheme that will
make both of us rich. You will be able to travel all over the world,
and who knows, I may come with you.”
In that case,” said the Tiger, “I would not like to go.”
The Tailor told Selim about the Rajah’s Treasure that had been
stolen a couple of years ago.
“I heard about that,” said Selim. “Do you think it is hidden
close by?”
‘Tes,” said the Tailor moving his hand in a circle. “Somewhere
on this great plain. Perhaps it is hidden deep in the sand or under a
pile of stones or even in a cave where the hyena slinks in the daytime.
Or again it may be located in the old temple ruins at Sangaur, by the
bank of the great river which changed its course and left the old town
to the serpent and the beast.”
A likely place, Selim agreed, “to hide treasure. No one lives
there now but a few priests.”
I was born there,” said Jackie. “Born under a pile of rubble with
an image of the god Ganpati at top, standing on its head. Hathi pushed
him off his pedestal.” r
“How long ago was that?” the Tailor asked.
“I can’t remember,” said Jackie. “The priests killed my mother
and stoned me away. Someday I shall go back and then ”
‘They’ ll shoo you away once more,” said Selim. “Don’t interrunt
Jackie. Let us get to business.” “ *


Turning to the Tailor he inquired why he thought the Treasure
was hidden in these old ruins.
“It’s a likely spot,” ventured the Tailor.
“I’ve heard,” said Selim, “that the temple is guarded by huge
snakes, alligators, ferocious beasts and wild buffaloes. Even Hathi, the
Elephant, Lord of the Jungle, has been hunted away because he
pushed over the Ganpati idol. The priests, they say, mount guard with
poisoned shafts and spears. How then could any one approach to hide
the Treasure in the temple ruins?”
“Does that not prove,” said the Tailor, “that the priests are parties
to the theft? I see it so clearly now. A small party of robbers would be
allowed to bury the Treasure, but not to leave the ruins alive.”
“If it is there I shall find it,” Selim observed in his confident way.
“I fear no priests. I fear nothing that opposes me.”
“It should be easy for you with your keen scent,” the Tailor said,
noting the Tiger’s excitement.
“And what will you do? Just divide up the Treasure?” Selim asked
with a sneer.
“I always shall be near to help you. You will need me when the
booty is to be sold,” the Tailor replied. “It is the King’s Treasure,
never mind who finds it. Don’t let us quarrel over it before we know
where it is hidden.”
“Whatever the difficulties, I shall never share the Treasure with
thee of the long and trailing beard,” said Selim, a nasty note creeping
into his voice.
“Oh, stop arguing, can’t you? There’s wealth enough for everybody
if the Treasure’s found,” suggested the Jackal. “I’m hungry, which is
more important than necklaces of precious stones. Tell the Tailor
you’ll agree to share it with him if he quickly leads out a plump goat.”
“Very well,” Selim said impatiently. “I’m hungry, too. I’ll agree
if you provide us with a good meal at once. And before you go,
Mr Tailor, just untie the knot in my tail, and don’t repeat jokes like
that again. I don’t like them. How dare you try such pranks on me?
How dare you?”


CHAPTER 111
THE QUEST BEGINS
They set off for the ruins of the temple the following morning, four
hours before the sun rose. Selim sought cover wherever it offered, and
Jackie slunk along by his side or ran behind when the Tiger quickened
his pace. They moved south and, at daybreak, when they looked
behind, Nasrabad had sunk below the horizon, and the White Road
to their left shrank to a mere thread. The country began to look more
green and fertile, and shady trees dotted the flat landscape.
“Can you sniff water?’’ Jackie asked. “I’m parched, and tired too.”
“So am I,” said Selim. “I know there’s a stream about a mile ahead.
After a drink we’ll hide in a thicket and have a sleep.”
Twenty minutes later Selim slunk silently to the edge of a jheel
and stood stock still, half hidden by rushes. A brace of wild duck rose
from the grey water with a cry and whirring of wings, and instantly
every animal and bird knew some terror had disturbed the peace of
the little glade. Something moved to their left and Jackie gave a low
whine, his eyes bright, his ears pricked. Selim calmly lapped up the
water until he had drunk his fill.
Jackie had cut off a monkey quenching her thirst, and growled as
the frightened animal sought an opening to bolt for a tree some distance
away. She too was aware a tiger was close by, and deadly fear sapped
her strength. Only a month ago a prowling leopard had clawed her
right flank very badly as he sprang to make a meal of her. The leg was
still stiff and very painful.
Selim s head appeared through the rushes, his eyes gleaming, his
ears set back, his sleek hide taut and quivering. Jackie moved closer
to their prey. He knew it was impossible for the monkey to escape now.
To the Jackal’s surprise Selim squatted on his haunches and rubbed
his whiskers with the back of his right paw.


“Jackie,” he observed solemnly, “whom does she remind you of?”
“A good breakfast,” said Jackie.
“You always think with your stomach!” Selim snarled. “Let me
see. I’ve got it. She’s like the Tailor,”
“Yes,” said Jackie, “her face is small and wrinkled like the Tailor’s,
but without his beard. Of course, one can’t eat a human being, but
a monkey ”
The Tiger looks the Monkey over.
The Monkey looked imploringly at Selim. She was a big grey
monkey, and her eyes filled with tears, and her limbs trembled.
“Spare me,” she prayed, “and I shall be your slave all my days.”
“She has courage,” Selim said admiringly, “and she trusts me. You
know, Jackie, your confidence in me is the only thing that saves you.
We’re going to make her one of us. Come along, Bhundur.”
With that he strolled off to a patch of thick brushwood and the
Jackal and Monkey followed. Stretching himself on the damp earth,
Selim gave a terrific yawn.
“I’ll have a nap till late noon. You and the Monkey see that I am
not disturbed unless danger threatens.”
Selim was soon asleep, and his deep breathing kept Jackie alert


although he was very tired. It was cool among the shady bushes, and
the deep silence made Jackie drowsy. The Monkey, still distrustful
and trembling, watched the Jackal. Strangely enough, she felt less
afraid of the Tiger.
“We’ve been travelling all night and I’m dead tired,” said Jackie.
“I can’t keep my eyes open. Will you keep watch?”
‘Yes, but first tell me where you are going.
‘To the temple ruins at Sangaur. Do you know them?”
‘Yes, I was born there.”
‘So was I,” said Jackie eagerly. “When did you leave Sangaur?”
‘Oh, a long time ago,” the Monkey replied a little more boldly.
“The place is full of snakes and wild beasts . . . Oh, I beg your pardon.”
“That’s all right. I don’t mind being called a wild beast.”
“You don’t act like one,” the Monkey said, trying to be friendly.
“Oh, I’m fierce enough. It’s Selim who is soft. You know he’s
almost like a human being and loves to be mistaken for one. He likes
every one to think he’s good and kind and gentle. If I didn’t keep
up his spirits and remind him that he is a tiger, do you know what
he’d do?”
The Monkey shook her head.
Jackie put his paw to his mouth and lowered his voice. “He’d be
wearing pale pink silk pyjamas.”
“Never,” said the Monkey, not a little horrified.
“It’s true. D’you know what will happen if you join up with us?”
Again the Monkey shook her head.
“You’ll be wearing a cape and a bonnet and trying to look like a
human being.”
The Monkey’s face puckered into a smile as if she remembered
something very pleasant. “I don’t think I’d mind that very much. Why
are you going to Sangaur?”
Are you sure you’re one of us?” the Jackal inquired cautiously.
Oh, quite,” said the Monkey. “I always tell the truth and shame
the devil.”
“That means you never repeat anything you hear, and will not
give us away. If you do, well,” said Jackie showing his sharp cruel
teeth, “we’ll just gobble you up.”


“I promised I’d devote my whole life to Selim.”
“Yes, I remember that. Tell me, did you ever hear of a King’s
Treasure being hidden in the temple ruins?”
“No, I was just a baby when I left Sangaur,” said the Monkey.
“But even if I did, it wouldn’t interest me. A box full of gold coins and
diamonds and rubies would be valuable to men and women, but give
me a box full of ripe figs or bananas.
“Ah,” said Jackie, now wideawake. “Isn’t it strange? Hold up a
gold piece and what will not these humans do? For two pieces the
Tailor in Nasrabad braved the heat of the plain, the fangs of hundreds
of King Cobras to make Selim a pair of pink silk pyjamas. A silver coin
gives man all his stomach desires, a gold piece all his heart desires.
Men are cunning, clever and obstinate, but money makes them foolish
and as weak as water. Money is more precious to them than is marrow
in a bone to me.”
This was a very long and wise speech for Jackie, so long indeed
that at the last word he fell sound asleep and started to snore.
The Monkey, feeling strangely secure and safe, stretched herself
close to Selim and also fell asleep. She dreamed that, dressed in a black
cape and bonnet, with a pair of silver spectacles balanced on her button
of a nose, she was patching a rent in Selim’s silk pyjamas.


CHAPTER IV
ALONG COMES A CIRCUS
Just as the sun set Selim stretched himself, yawned a couple of times;
shouted “Come on’’, and bored through the brushwood, leaving Jackie
and the Monkey to follow as best they could. The country around was
very quiet, except for a couple of doves that cooed so drowsily from
the branch of a dead peepul-tree that Selim yawned again. As he moved
forward everything became strangely silent, but his alert ears heard
distant animals hastily bolting for their lives, or when surprised,
standing stock still, trying to repress their breathing.
The country gradually became more wild and wooded, and in
the distance a range of hills, like a low-lying cloud on the horizon,
reminded Selim that the Trimbuc Jungle lay beyond and skirting it
the ancient temple of Sangaur. The Tiger kept clear of villages, and the
sight or smell of a human being immediately drove him to cover.
Selim was not frightened of man, but he knew man was very frightened
of him.
Presently they came to the Grand Trunk Road which cut right
across their path, and Selim halted and cautiously looked about him
as he sniffed the air. The poor Monkey loped up, very tired, and
Jackie curled himself up and closed his eyes. It was better to appear
disinterested when Selim was thinking something over.
In the still evening Selim heard the distant jingle of bells
approaching. He first thought of moving back a little but decided to
stay where he was as the light was fading fast. In a few minutes from
around the bend of the road a little cavalcade came into view led by
an elephant hauling a big van. Behind it came two camels, loaded with
baggage, half a dozen Deccanee ponies, sleek and well groomed, some
buffalo carts, one containing a leopard and another a couple of hunting
cheetahs, the rest full of chattering women and children and their


household goods. At the tail-end of the procession a ragged looking
man with a huge turban and a white beard led two monkeys and a
Himalayan bear. The poor bear, an iron ring through its nose, padded
through the dust, looking very tired and bad-tempered, and the
monkeys had to be dragged along, the keeper halting now and again
to give them a cuff or a kick.
“Wake up, Jackie,” Selim said. “Here’s something you’d like to
see—a circus on the road.”
As he spoke the elephant stopped and trumpeted. The camels
immediately became nervous and fractious, and the ponies prepared
to stampede. The bullocks came to a halt, and every animal’s eyes
turned to the right. The bear-keeper hastened his steps and got behind
the cart with the hunting cheetahs.
“Bagh,”* said the mahout, stroking the swaying elephant to
soothe it.
“It is near by, O Chunderjee,” said a bullock cart driver with his
hands on the yoke of the offside bullock, “but it will not attack. Its
presence unfortunately disturbs the animals.”
“A tiger strikes terror into the stoutest of hearts, Babajee.”
“See how frightened they all are,” grinned Selim. “There’s old
Hathi there, waving his trunk, expecting me to charge. He’s been with
men perhaps since he was a few months old, and he almost thinks like
a human; in fact, he is almost human. I’d love to go up to him and
stroke the end of his trunk with the back of my paw or tickle his ribs.
I wouldn’t hurt the dear old blockhead for the Rajah’s lost Treasure.
Yet he doesn’t trust me. Look at those stupid oontsj' rampaging about,
and the poor patient jolting their lumbering carts. If they’d
only learn to trust me they’d know I am really as harmless as they are.
Even if I tried to be friendly with that old bear he’d scratch me. Come
on, Jackie, let’s run down the wind a little way, and they’ll move on.”
The circus was a mile away before Selim crossed the road. Two
dark objects lay in the centre of it. Jackie sniffed them and passed on,
but the Monkey grabbed both and hugged them close.
“What have you picked up?” Selim inquired.
• Tiger. f Camels. + Bullocks.


‘‘A cape and a bonnet of black silk with jade bead ornaments. The
circus must have dropped them,” sniggered the Monkey.
She put them on without further ado and treated Selim and Jackie
to a little pantomime. The Monkey, in her odd dress, strutted about,
making first a little bow and then a little curtsy, walking slowly and
with great dignity up and down the road, and then suddenly giving
an odd back kick and a spring turn so ridiculous that Selim laughed
and rolled in the dust till his ribs ached.
The Monkey finds a cape and bonnet.
‘‘You’d better run on and catch up with the circus,” said Selim,
“‘before I die laughing.”
They were so engrossed in this performance that they did not see
a man with a long staff walking towards them, searching the road as
he came. When he saw the tiger he gave a loud yell and bolted off at
full speed. Jackie started to chase him, but a discreet cough from
Selim brought him back.
‘‘Leave him alone, Jackie. He’ll run till he finds a tree and hide in
the topmost branch till morning. Then he’ll tell the whole countryside
we’re in the neighbourhood. We must go on.”
The Monkey, still in the cape and bonnet, suddenly acquired a


new dignity and interest as she awaited the Jackal’s return. Gentle
and humorous as she was, Selim knew she had not the slightest fear
of her companions, unlike the man who fled in terror for his life.
“Come on,” Selim ordered and made off at so great a pace that he
soon left his companions far behind. He waited, and the Monkey
caught up last. “Are you tired?” he inquired.
“Yes,” said the Monkey. “We monkeys rarely travel long distances,
except over tree-tops.”
Selim had a suggestion to make, but he did not know if it was
quite a proper one. But he started to remember something and said
quite hastily, “Jump on my back. We can move faster then.”
The Monkey, without hesitation, jumped up, and Selim started
off at a jog-trot. The Monkey kept her seat, leaning forward like a
jockey, her back bent and her cape flying behind. Selim, in the dark-
ness, kept to open country. He knew it would not be long before the
jungle wbuld spread out its arms to hold him back, and passage through
it would be dangerous and slow. As the night became chill they heard
a distant cock crow, and Selim made towards a village sleeping peace-
fully beneath the stars.
“To your left,” he said to the Monkey, “is a mango tope. Eat your
fill. Jackie and I will call for you before dawn-break.”
The Monkey broke through a hole in a cactus hedge and clambered
up a mango-tree laden with luscious ripe fruit. As she satisfied her
hunger she looked towards the village, near by, where banana-leaves
rustled softly in the night air and the jamblo and the guava, the
mulberry and the fig, formed a grove in which the creeper-covered
huts nestled.
She knew that near the village well she would find a little colony
of monkeys—grey monkeys like herself. Near by would stand the little
temple where, morning and evening, the villagers gathered for worship,
watched by the monkeys on the great banyan-tree which overshadowed
it- There was always good food near the temple—gifts to appease the
gods such as corn and chunna and parched rice and peanuts, and often
delicious chupatties and sweets. Here she would live in happiness and
peace, instead of rushing round the country with a tiger and a jackal,
never knowing where they would find a meal. All she had to do was


to climb up that banyan-tree and Selim would never find her again.
He would not dare to look for her there.
How could she be sure that the Tiger, in angry mood, would not
kill her, or the Jackal attack her when the Tiger was away. Both were
deadly enemies of .the Monkey tribe, and she had been terrified of
their smell alone until she had met Selim. Now, in some miraculous
way, she trusted both of them. Had not Selim spared her life? And
had she not promised to be his slave? He was an extraordinary tiger,
kind, almost, as the human beings who never raised hand to molest
monkeys, and even regarded them as sacred.
Towards daybreak she heard a village dog bark, and then a chorus
of yelps, howls and hayings. Selim thrust his head through the hole in
the cactus hedge and said: “Come on.’’ She hopped on his back and
soon the village lay far behind them.
“The dogs caught our scent,” Jackie said as he panted by Selim’s
side. “We had better leave villages alone. I’ll be glad to have a rest,”
Early dawn found them in scrubby forest that became more dense.
The Monkey climbed a tree and looked about her. No cultivated fields
or little villages were in sight. They heard sounders of wild pig rooting
about and grunting, until they caught Selim’s scent and rushed away.
They slaked their thirst in a little stream, and Selim sprawled in
the shade of a thicket and was soon asleep. Jackie followed suit,
but the Monkey lay awake in the half light and for some time listened
to the birds and jungle folk noisily greeting a new day.


CHAPTER V
THE TIGER COMPARES NOTES
In the late afternoon Selim woke with a tremendous yawn, stretched
himself, sharpened his claws on the trunk of a tree, and cautiously
loped down to the stream. He sniffed the air, heavy with the scent
of grass and aromatic leaves, and after a deep drink plunged into the
water. The Monkey, who followed him to quench her thirst, saw him
combing his hair and whiskers with his claws. She still wore her cape
and bonnet.
He strolled over after she had drunk her fill.
“Now I know where I’ve seen you before,” the Tiger said.
The Monkey looked at him questioningly and Jackie, lapping the
cool water, said: “Where? In a circus?”
Selim gave Jackie a warning cough. “Did you ever know a little
girl named Betty?” he asked.
The Monkey’s brows wrinkled as she looked up at the sky,
thinking hard.
“Did she have golden hair?” she cross-questioned.
“Yes,” Selim replied. “It shone so much when the sun touched it
that it made me blink.”
“I can remember that much,” said the Monkey. She again looked
up at the sky. “Now I remember a little more. I had a little band
round me and a clanking chain slid after me as I climbed up a pole
to a little house at the top. When the little girl with the shining hair
came out of a big tent I always leaped to the ground, and she fed me
with bananas or nuts.”
“Anything else?” Selim asked, excitedly.
“Yes, a bear cub was tied up not far from me, a friendly little
fellow who used to play with a big cat. Sometimes both of them would
follow the little girl, but I always felt afraid of the big cat. He tumbled


me over once with a friendly pat of one of his great paws. Dearie me!
I’m remembering more and more now. That cat was a tiger cub. It
grew very fast and followed the little girl all over the place, and used
to snarl if any one went near her.”
“I was that tiger cub,” said Selim very proudly.
“There, I knew I’d met you before somewhere,” said the Monkey,
wagging a finger at Selim. “You can’t deceive me. I used to get quite
angry because you and Baloo, the Bear, were free to follow her about,
and I had to be chained to that wretched pole. D’you remember the
purple bonnet and cape she made for me, all decorated with beads,
and the seeds of sepoy grass?”
“Yes,” said Selim. “The bonnet had some gold lace on it. When
she dressed you up in it I got terribly jealous and chased you up the
pole every time I saw you. Govind, one of the sepoys, slapped me
once when he caught me doing it. I liked Govind. He always treated
me like a human being. Oh, dear me, every one in the camp was nice.
Betty’s father often patted me, and her mother loved to darn socks or
do her knitting while I snoozed at her feet. Always plenty of kindness
and plenty of food and water. Where they got it from I don’t know—
the food and water I mean.”
“But Betty was the sweetest and the dearest
“Yes, yes, we had some great romps together. Sometimes Baloo
joined in the games, but I didn’t like him pushing his nose in and I
told him so. After that Betty thought Baloo became very shy and not
nearly so playful. He went off first, you know.”
“Where did he go?”
“To Bombay, I believe. Poor Baloo. I really loved the poor chap.
He was in the circus we passed yesterday, just before you found the
bonnet and cape.”
“Were you sure it was he?”
“Yes. He had a scar on his nose where I scratched him. Now he has
a ring through it, fastened to a chain. I don’t think it’s possible to be
happy in a circus. Do you?”
“Well, I always rather liked the idea of belonging to one. But we
may get him away from it someday,” suggested the Monkey. “It would
be nice to have him with us again.”
Wait till we find the Treasure. I’ll buy the circus right out and


set free every animal in it. I’ll set free some of the poor humans in it,
too.” Selim began to pace up and down as he became more heated.
“What became of you when Baloo was sent away?” the Monkey
inquired.
“Oh, I ran away. I overheard them talking about me. Betty’s father
was going to England and wanted to send me to the zoo with Baloo.
Betty cried bitterly and begged her parents to take me with them, but
they said it couldn’t be done, as I was getting too big and fierce. I
admit I had grown a good deal—l broke a chair once when I jumped
on it—but I wasn’t fierce. I’ve never been fierce. You don’t think I
really am fierce, do you?”
“No,” said the Monkey. “Would I be here if you were?”
“I slept by the side of Betty’s bed the last night I spent in the
camp,” continued Selim, “and she cried most of the time. Early in
the morning, before it was light, she got up and sat in a little bamboo
chair. She called me, and I put my head in her lap and I felt her tears
fall on my nose.”
“Did she say anything?” the Monkey inquired with a tear in her
voice.
“Yes. It was hard to understand her because she sobbed so much,
but she said: ‘Selim darling, they’re taking you away from me. Father
says he is going to break up camp and put you in a zoo, and that
someday I’ll be able to come back to Bombay and see you and poor
Baloo too. But, Selim, I couldn’t bear to see you in a cage. I once
saw a poor tiger in a zoo pacing to and fro, and he never seemed to
stand still, and I think from the look in his eyes the poor thing had
gone mad. Oh, Selim, nobody will ever love you like I do. No one
will care for you as I have done—and dear old Govind. So lam telling
you what to do, and I want you to do it at once. Go back to the jungle
where we found you and roam about just as you please. I don’t know
when we’ll come back or just where we will be, but I know you’ll
look for me, and someday we’ll meet again.’ ”
Poor Selim broke down here, and for a good reason too. The tears
were running down Jackie’s cheeks at this sad story, and he snuffled
and sneezed as though he had hay fever. The Monkey wept so much
that a little trickle formed in the dust. The tears simply poured from
Selim’s eyes. Jackie looked up at him warningly. Things happened


when the Tiger became overcome with emotion. Selim coughed a
little, snuffled a little, and choked a little, and at last began to sob.
That set Jackie going, and the Monkey too. Once all of them started
nothing could possibly hold back what was coming. Jackie gave a little
whine which finally broke into a howl. The Monkey, with her face in
her hands, joined in with a piercing yell, and Selim, not to be outdone,
gave a hoarse sort of cry, alniost human in its abandon and pathos, and
then, as if ashamed of himself, burst out into a tremendous roar.
Never had the jungle heard such grief.
After that it must be admitted that they all got quite out of control.
Howl succeeded yell and roar followed both. It was jungle hysteria in
its worst form. Other animals at a safe distance joined in the chorus,
and the kites or chils, thinking some great battle was being waged,
circled round with shrill cries. Never in the history of the jungle had
they heard such grief.
“Did you go?’’ the Monkey inquired in a weak voice.
“I—er—er—gave her—one last look,” Selim stuttered, “licked her
hand, and disappeared into the jungle.”
At this Jackie gave so piercing a howl that the Tiger thought he
had gone far enough.
“How dare you?” he said. “Jackie, how dare you make such a fool
of yourself? Stop it at once.”
That sobered all of them. The Monkey dried her eyes with the


corner of her cape, and Jackie curled himself up and pretended to
be asleep.
It took a few minutes for Selim and the Monkey to really compose
themselves. Then the Monkey asked: “Did you ever see Betty again?”
“No. In the jungle I had to hunt for food and that took me far
from the camp. When I came back to it every one had gone. But I’ve
been looking for Betty ever since, and one day I’ll find her. India is
such a big place, but I’ll keep on searching for her. As soon as I dig
up the Treasure we’re looking for we’ll do nothing else.”
The Monkey and Selim now had much to talk about. She had been
given to Govind, but like a good Hindu, he released her and she, like
Selim, had run wild since. Being pets of Betty both of them understood
and loved human beings. Selim confessed that he was more a human
than a tiger and would never be satisfied until he was all human.
“I like to do everything they do. One day, when I can keep a tailor
working for me all the time, I’ll wear beautiful clothes. I’d like to live
in a tent, like Betty did. Would you?”
“Yes,” said the Monkey. “I’d like to live with you and wear a cape
and bonnet, and eat fruit and nuts off a plate.”
“Didn’t Betty give you a name?” Selim inquired.
“Yes, she called me Bhundy, She was the only mother I knew.”
“Short for bhundur.* Clever, wasn’t she? I don’t know what made
her call me Selim, but—well, she was the only mother I remember.”
He looked up at the sky, “Come on, Jackie,” he commanded. “Time
to move. To-morrow should see us near the ruined temple. Then our
troubles will commence.”
Selim stood a moment in the full sunlight, a picture of beauty and
strength, and then headed straight for the Trimbuc Jungle.
• Monkey.


CHAPTER VI
THE JUNGLE FOLK MEET
News that Selim was heading for the temple ruins reached the animals
and birds of the jungle in that curious way in which all news travels
in India. Cagra, the Crow, first mentioned it to the Raven, who
perched on the highest branch of a neem-tree and repeated “Caw-caw-
co-o-o-r” in a deep and solemn voice, as though warning the whole
jungle that something dreadful was about to happen. Word reached
the kites and the eagles, and in no time the denizens of the jungle
gathered together near a great rock close to the temple ruins, to discuss
how to deal with the intrusion.
A blood truce had been called while the meeting lasted. A tiger
and tigress, a black leopard, a panther and a couple of cheetahs were
the first to arrive. They were followed by two large, slimy, hideous
alligators, a huge and very formidable looking gaur or wild bull, and
then an assortment of smaller animals, headed by a great tusker who
rooted and grunted while he kept in the background.
“Where is Hathi?” the Tiger inquired.
“The elephants refused to come to the meeting,” said the Crow.
“The Lord of the Jungle is the most willing slave of man. Look
how he carries and stacks great balks of teak for his tyrants. He would
be sympathetic to Selim,” the Tiger observed sarcastically.
The Gaur pushed his way to the front. “Since the dawn of time
my kin have resisted man. The lesser breed are yoked to cart and
plough and provide mankind with milk and butter, but the Gaur is
still free and goes where he wills. Death to Selim, I say.”
The Gaur, with a nervous glance at the Tiger and black leopard,
moved to the foot of the rock.
“The bullock, the horse, the camel, the sheep, the goat and the pig
have all been pressed into the service of man. But the fiercer beasts


have resisted any attempt to tame them. If they fail us now, every
denizen of the jungle will be enslaved. This creature, called Selim,
they tell me, is almost human. He loves the company of men.”
“He even consorts with monkeys,” said the Leopard, licking jaws
that dripped at the mention of his favourite prey.
“I am ashamed of him,” said the Tiger. “No one in the jungle has
ever heard of a tiger that not only speaks the language of man, but
also seeks to associate with him. He is coming here to spy upon us, or
persuade us to give up the free life of the jungle for the service of man.
Therefore he must be destroyed.”
“And who will destroy him?” asked the Honey Bear, who had just
arrived, his coat thick with grass seed, dead leaves and thistle down.
“Selim is no weakling. We must look to the tiger, to the wild bull, or
to the alligator to do that.”
A rustling, slithering sound broke the silence. A huge boa-con-
strictor, its scales shining in the sunlight, its eyes gleaming like topazes,
moved into the forefront. The animals, with a nervous start, shifted
back out of striking distance.
“Leave Selim to me. I will kill him,” the great Snake said boldly.
The Black Leopard laughed. “Can a snail catch a grasshopper?”
he inquired.
“No,” said the Boa-constrictor with a contemptuous sniff, “but I
will meet my adversary, do not fear. I shall challenge him to a combat.
Selim will not refuse. There is no braver animal in this world than he.”
And so it was arranged that the Crow should convey to Selim the
Boa-constrictor’s challenge. The animals dispersed with the under-
standing that Selim’s passage through the jungle should be halted, if
the great Snake could not stop him.
Late that noon the Crow saw Selim move out of a thicket—and,
most shameful of sights—with Bhundy astride his back.
The Crow fluttered to the lower limbs of the skeleton of a tree that
had perished in the summer heat, and mocked the Tiger.
“Next,” said the Crow, “I shall see you carrying a load of bricks,
with a man behind thee cracking a whip.”
“Never be cheeky to your betters, 6 Cagra! Even though you may
pick their bones in the finish,” observed Selim good humouredly.
“What brings you here?” the Crow asked cheekily.


“We came just to meet you,” Selim replied, and curled himself up
for a brief rest, while the Jackal, sprawled a few feet away, watched
the Crow with his dark, beady eyes.
“Now you’ve done that, you had better return to your human
friends. We have no wish to welcome you in this jungle,” returned
the Crow.
“I go where I please,” said Selim.
“Your path will be barred in the Trimbuc Jungle,” the Crow
warned.
‘Who bars it?”
‘Sarp, the giant Snake.”
‘He?” said Selim contemptuously. “That slow-coach.”
“You might escape him,” the Crow twitted, “but you would not
dare to meet him in battle.”
Selim growled, and when he did that he was annoyed. “I fear no
animal, even Hathi whom I most respect. Tell me where the Snake
will bar my path, and I shall let him dispute it with me.”
“To-morrow then, soon after daybreak,” the Crow said jubilantly.
“I’ll return for you then and lead you to where Sarp is waiting.”
Like a thing of evil, the Crow flew away, and a great silence fell
on the jungle.
“Why do you want to fight a stupid thing like a snake?” Jackie
asked with a yawn.
Selim opened one sleepy eye. “I’ll have to fight someone at once
or be attacked the whole time I’m here. The Snake has been chosen
for the job. When I’m finished with him he won’t be worth much.
Now don’t talk any more. I’m sleepy. I must eat well and sleep well
before to-morrow.”
And while the trio rested the jungle folk moved towards Selim’s
camping-ground, guided thither by the Crow. The whole forest was
in a state of great excitement. Were they not to witness a memorable
battle that would settle who was to be lord of the Trimbuc Jungle?


CHAPTER VII
A FIGHT TO THE DEATH
Before dawn Jackie roused the Tiger and insisted on a smart run to
“loosen up”. He had no fear about the coming battle. Over and over
again he had seen Selim forced to fight for life, and never once had he
been beaten. It seemed strange that a tiger so human and kindly and
anxious to avoid a quarrel could be so terrible in conflict.
Bhundy on the tree above had not slept a wink. Every time she
thought of the great Boa-constrictor and its strong crushing coils her
heart sank. She hated strife. The monkey tribe asked for nothing more
than to sun themselves on a great rock, or fly through the forest in a
series of great leaps from tree to tree. To sway gently on a mango
bough and suck the juicy fruit was the very essence of bliss. She knew
Selim had great strength, cunning and tenacity. Against an-opponent
who fought back in the same way Selim would be sure to win, but
she had a natural horror of a snake.
She clambered down from her perch after Selim had finished
sharpening his claws on the tree-trunk. For ten minutes or so he licked
his coat, and Jackie helped by attending to the top of his head and
his ears. With eyes flashing, coat shining, his muscles rippling with
strength and condition, the Tiger impatiently clawed the earth. As
the sun rose a dark shadow hovered overhead and the Crow settled
near by.
“Sarp, the Snake, awaits you,” the Crow announced.
“And the jungle with him?” Selim inquired.
“Only to watch the fight,” the Crow answered, as it took flight.
“Keep to the tree-tops,” Selim advised the Monkey, “till it’s over.
Jackie, you hang round!”
Hundreds of eyes in the trees and in the brushwood watched Selim
approach; some boldly, others ready to stampede. They knew where


Sarp, coiled round the thick branch of a tree, waited to drop on
the unsuspecting Tiger. The Crow flitted from tree to tree, enticing
Selim.
The Boa-constrictor, timing it precisely, dropped like a plummet.
Selim just managed to avoid the Snake’s weight, and leaping on one
side, sprang at its head with a roar that shook the jungle.
A fight to the death.
The Snake, releasing its tail from the branch, gathered itself into
a compact coil, and rearing its head, prepared to strike. From side to
side Selim stalked warily, sometimes moving swiftly as he circled round
the huge reptile to get it at a disadvantage. Once Selim struck at the
Snake’s head and clawed it badly. But the Boa had cunning and
strength. As the Tiger attempted to get to close quarters again, the
Snake suddenly darted, caught him off his balance and enveloped him
in its coils.
Now commenced a battle so fierce and so tremendous that the
forest folk moved out of cover to watch it. They had united against
Selim, but all of them hated the Snake. The Tiger’s roars and snarls
were terrifying. For a few minutes the combatants struggled and
threshed amid a whirl of leaves and dust that gleamed in the yellow


light where the sun’s rays pierced the foliage. It seemed that at any
moment the Snake would break the Tiger’s back, or Selim would
catch the Snake’s swaying head in his foaming jaws and crush it.
Bhundy, immediately above, watched the fight, too terrified to
move. Jackie, afraid to come close, yelped and snapped at the reptile’s
tail. If he could only sink his vicious teeth into it he felt sure he
would distract the Snake and give Selim his chance.
A scream from the Monkey, and a howl from the Jackal, warned
the onlookers the battle had reached a critical stage. Selim, exhausted
with his struggles, lay on his side, firmly gripped in Sarp’s powerful
coils. Fiercely he bit, clawed and struggled, but relentlessly the Boa-
constrictor tightened its hold. By degrees Selim weakened, until finally
he just gasped, while a stony look crept into his eyes.
The Gaur rushed out of cover angrily, his blood-shot eyes fixed on
the triumphant Boa-constrictor as though about to charge. A tiger,
with teeth bared in a snarl, moved into the foreground.
“Stand back and stop your stamping and bellowing, unless you
want to see the fight spread,” the Tiger said warningly.
“Had it been a fight between you and Selim, I should not interfere.
But with this gross reptile—”
“Stand back, or else I shall make thee,” roared the Tiger, and the
Bull sulkily retreated.
Selim was lying very quiet now, just breathing, while the great
coils tightened round his ribs till they almost met. The fight was
practically over. Even the wild boar came into the open, grunting and
rooting round within a few yards of the spot where Selim lay so quiet
and still. The Raven broke into a solemn “Caw-caw-c-o-o-r”; and above,
in the hot sky, a vulture wheeled ready to swoop to the earth when the
forest folk scattered, and left the dead to sleep in the hush of the forest
shadows. Jackie, panting and hopeless, lay at the foot of the tree-trunk
on which Bhundy was perched, his little eyes snapping as though he
were thinking hard. Already he could hear some of the forest animals
leaving the scene of battle.
The Monkey suddenly leaped to the ground. She had noticed that
the Boa-constrictor was also exhausted with its wounds and struggles,
and that its head had sunk on the earth instead of being reared


defiantly. She gathered up a big stone under her arm and made a
desperate effort to climb the tree. After a great struggle she gained
the first fork, rested for a few seconds, and then, straining i every muscle,
reached the third great limb. Along that she crept till she got a clear
view of the Snake’s head, and a free passage for the stone. Taking
careful aim she dropped it like a bomb.
It was a splendid shot. The stone bounced off Sarp’s head and
clattered into a nearby bush. Almost stunned by the blow the Snake
wriggled, and its grip on Selim weakened. At the same moment Jackie
fastened his teeth into the Snake’s tail and clung to it till he was almost
beaten into rags as it flicked from side to side. This was Selim s chance,
and he rose to it at once. He scratched and tore, using all his strength
and craft to scramble to his feet, trying at the same time to grip the
reptile’s throat in his jaws.
Slowly the dazed Snake rallied, lifted its head and prepared to
renew the fight. But Selim had regained his feet, and, shaking himself
nearly free, seized his enemy by the throat and buried his teeth deep.
Once more the combatants struggled and crashed into bushes and trees,
and Jackie filled the air with yelps and howls, as he vainly tried once
more to anchor himself to the Snake’s tail.
Presently, the struggling subsided a little, and with it the noise and
dust. As her vision cleared, the Monkey saw that Selim, free from Sarp’s
coils, had shifted his death grip to the nape of the neck. Now, unless
the Tiger’s strength failed, he had the reptile at his mercy.
The writhing, twisting Snake was in its last throes. It collapsed
very suddenly, its head lying limp and helpless and its whole length
trembling, but unable to move. Selim released his hold, glared at his
dying enemy, and woke the jungle with a resounding roar of defiance.
Before it died away the jungle folk had all fled, but the Crow remained.
“That was a great fight, Tiger,” he croaked. “Hail, Lord of the
Jungle! Command me to do your will.”
“Lead me to a stream or pool where I can quench my thirst, and
then by the shortest way to the ruined temple,” Selim said, feeling
very much in need of both a drink and a rest.
Bhundy had jumped to the ground and affectionately stroked
Selim’s ears, Jackie pranced round with glad little yelps.


Selim gave them both a lick as a caress, “The two of you were
grand,” he whispered. “When you dropped that stone, Bhundy, I was
almost done. Jackie, you’re a fighter, every inch of you. Come on. The
Treasure, next.”
Before moving off Selim glared fixedly at the dead Snake for at
least a minute. “How dare you?” he demanded in his best manner.
Then with a contemptuous sneeze, he headed in the direction the
Crow had taken.


CHAPTER VIII
THE TEMPLE RUINS
The ruins of the temple at Sangaur, surrounded by dense forest, lay
in a bend of the river. In flood the water lapped round broken images
and carved and fretted friezes piled on mounds of building stones. But
in summer the river retreated to its banks, and animals returned to
their lairs, and snakes to their refuge.
Rank vegetation grew in the swamps and on the higher ground,
and giant creepers trailed from the limbs of parasite-covered trees.
Only a vague outline of the great temple remained. Trees, rooting in
its walls, had split them, great stones rolling away like rubble to be
hidden in sepoy grass and scrub. Except for a few priests who lived
in a small grotto, no human being dared to approach the sacred spot.
One of the priests, with bare legs and arms and shoulders, covered
with ash, his hair unkempt and matted, sat on his haunches before a
great flat stone, and played softly on a reed pipe. As he played cobras
emerged from holes and crevices, and swarming about him, swayed
their hooded heads and hissed in time to the music.
“Hungry, brothers?” he inquired, laying his pipe aside and picking
up a gourd from which he poured milk into various small earthenware
saucers. While his pets drank, the priest, in a low soft tone, chanted
monotonously.
A voice interrupted: “Any news, O Ganpat Rao?”
“None, O Krishna! The soldiers are still camped a koss away from
here. How many more times must these ruins be searched and our
peace disturbed?”
“Men’s minds are set on riches, and not on the things of the spirit.
So it is well if the Treasure remains where no one will think of looking
for it.” Krishna laughed in a way that wasn’t very pleasant.


"The Tailor of Nasrabad is still camped by the river. He is waiting
for somebody,” said Ganpat, lighting his cheelum and taking a great
draught of the pungent tobacco smoke.
“Ah-h-h,” he grunted, as he let the smoke drift out of his lungs
in little gusts.
“He is waiting to see what the soldiers will do,” Krishna replied.
“After they have ransacked the place we may expect a visit from that
Mussulman dog.”
In the early dawn Selim arrived at the river-bank, very tired. His
whole body ached and his muscles were stiff and painful. He wanted
to crawl into a cool thicket and sleep peacefully till he felt lissom again,
and the breath came from his lungs without making him shrink with
agony. Jackie, very footsore, limped behind, but Bhundy, with her
cape and bonnet rolled up and hugged to her chest, seemed fresh
enough after her long ride.
“Why not rest near the river?” she suggested.
“Where’s the Crow?” Selim asked.
“Picking the bones of the dead antelope we passed yesterday. He
won’t find us.”
Just then the Jackal, who had slunk to the river for a drink,
hurriedly sought cover.
“A man is camped by the other bank,” he whispered.
Selim peered from behind a bush. “It’s the Tailor!” he said.
They heard a horse neigh.
“Of course he doesn’t trust us,” Jackie said. “He started off as soon
as we did.”
“He thought we might get away with the Treasure before he
arrived,” Selim replied. “Don’t let him see us, but we’ll keep a watch
on him. Swim across after sunset and have a look around.”
“I wonder if Ganpati is still standing on his nose?” Jackie said
reminiscently. “I was born under a rock near by. The place is full of
cobras. I remember that.”
From out of the shallows of the river six alligators waddled on to


the bank. They basked in the sun, with the tips of their tails in the
water. Presently one cleared his throat and began to sing:
All jolly ’gators are we,
Who love to bask in the sun,
Until a good meal we see.
And then, we’re off with a run.
It’s good to lie in the mud,
Or in the shallows to flop,
And hear our jaws in self-applause
Klip-klop, klip-klop, klip-klop.
Then all the ’gators took up the chorus:
Klip-klop, klip-klop, klip-klop,
Now tails together, flip-flop.
We’re like a band or an orchestra grand
Klip-klop, klip-klop, klip-klop.
Selim and Jackie almost broke into the chorus, but they saw some-
thing that made Selim whistle through his teeth. Dozens of alligators
crawled out of the river, formed regular rows and joined in the refrain,
their jaws keeping time.
This is how the second verse went:
All jolly ’gators are we,
Grown fat in the slime and ooze.
We’ve little to do but sleep,
And beat these daily tattoos.
Don’t try this river to cross.
For there, we warn, you will flop.
Better to pause and hear our jaws,
Klip-klop, klip-klop, klip-klop.
“I’m not going to swim across that river,” Jackie exclaimed
decidedly.
“You’ve got to nose round, Jackie. If I do the fighting, you must
do the nosing. There might be a ford somewhere. The Tailor got
across.”
“Listen to that,” said the Jackal with a shiver: “Klip-klop, klip-
klop. It sounds like a mincing machine. My back feels as if a panther
were licking it.”


Just then a dark shadow flitted across and the Crow settled on a
perch overhead.
“Keep in hiding,” the Crow warned in a low voice. “A troop of
soldiers will search the temple ruins to-morrow. They’re on the
march now.”
“We’re safe enough this side with those ’gators in the river. Listen
to that,” Jackie said with a shiver.
Don’t try this river to cross
the ’gators were singing.
“The soldiers will catch the Tailor. Then there will be no more
pink pyjamas for me,” Selim said rather dejectedly. “He couldn’t cross
the river with that chorus hanging round.”
“There’s a bridge a koss higher up,” the Crow croaked. (He always
spoke as if he had croup.) “The priests built that bridge two months
ago.”
“Someone must warn the Tailor. He’s a liar and a rascal; but he
can’t help that. All men are liars. Still, I would not like to see the
soldiers kill him, or the alligators make a meal of him. Cagra,” Selim
appealed to the Crow, “the Tailor’s camp is just the other side of the
river. Fly over and tell him about the soldiers ”
“No,” the Crow replied decidedly. “I never interfere in human
affairs. Besides, why should I be the friend of man? They stone me
whenever they see me. No, I don’t mind picking his bones when the
soldiers have finished with him.” With these unkind remarks the Crow
flew away.
“I suppose I’ll have to go,” Jackie said grudgingly, and started off
for the Tailor’s camp, wondering why Selim wanted to trouble his head
about the Tailor at all. As dusk fell Selim and Bhundy became anxious
for Jackie’s safety.
A full moon rose in a clear sky and made the night almost like day.
Selim, sprawled among some tussocks, listened intently for the Jackal’s
return. But he was feeling very tired and sore, and at length fell asleep.
Just at dawn-break an uproar across the river woke him. A mist
floated across the tree-tops in thin wisps, and flocks of birds rose from
the forest and the marge of the river with shrill cries. Sharp and
distinct he heard the sound of rifle-shots above a surge of human voices.


V i -J J /“I
%. «® I %»„ * -. .-^S,
; 3
wlW/yVf n K
■ '^#^Uuj, y^A^d^W 4
Then followed a terrible commotion in the river, as though all the
alligators in the world had met at the one spot to snatch some tooth-
some morsel out of it. The foam and flurry made ripples break just
below where Selim watched.
A figure rose out of the shallows and ran slowly up the bank. From
his flowing beard Selim knew it was the Tailor. His horse, which he
Exhausted the Tailor reached the river-bank.
had spurred to cross the river to escape the Rajah’s soldiers, had fallen
a victim to the alligators. A young one waddled behind the Tailor,
fierce and hungry, and gained on him every moment. Terrified, the
Tailor stumbled and fell.
The Tiger rose to his feet with a tremendous roar that startled
the tense jungle. After snakes, Selim hated alligators, and there was
a smell of blood in the air. He rushed to the Tailor’s rescue with a
series of great bounds, just as the exhausted man struggled to his feet.
The alligator turned to rush back to the water, but Selim cut off
his retreat. The pain and weariness suddenly left the Tiger’s muscles.


His glossy coat tautened on his rippling muscles, and the battle-light
gleamed in his eyes.
Warily, the alligator turned as the Tiger sought an opening to
spring upon him. If he could only spin round suddenly and strike his
dread foe with his great horny tail, he might disable him sufficiently
to attack with his great jaws. But the Tiger knew the ways of ’gators,
and also that tooth and claw could only be used on the underside of
the lumbering brute.
Selim heard a quick succession of shrill yelps and knew Jackie had
joined the fray. Bhundy had also rushed into the fight and busied
herself throwing handfuls of sand and pebbles in the ’gator’s eyes. The
Tailor, waving his long staff, cheered Selim to victory.
The Tiger gave the ’gator plenty of sparring-room except towards
the water’s edge. The ’gator lashed with its tail and then, with head
down and its cunning eyes fixed and alert, awaited the Tiger’s on-
slaught. On a rock, a little downstream, a great ’gator started to sing
the ’gator chorus:
Klip-klop, klip-klop, klip-klop.
The other ’gators joined in one by one. They had lined the banks
until they saw one of their tribe attacking something and immediately
set off to join in the hunt.
The Tailor saw them coming and yelled: “Run, Selim! Run!”
The Monkey bounded away, and the Jackal scurried up the bank.
The Tailor, hurling a great stone at the leading ’gator, also fled for
his life. Out of the corner of his eye the Tiger saw his danger, but
he never started a fight without finishing it.
Springing high in the air he alighted on the ’gator’s back and with
a deft move caught it off its balance and turned the ugly brute over.
With both paws on its throat, Selim held it down while his back claws
ripped and tore. Mad with pain the ’gator wriggled out of Selim’s grip,
snapped viciously to effect a hold, and managed to regain its feet and
waddle weakly back to the water.
Selim gave a loud roar of triumph and sprang away to avoid the
snapping jaws that almost encircled him. “How dare you?” he said
as he scratched a shower of earth and stones into their gaping mouths,
before bounding away.


CHAPTER IX
BHUNDY FINDS SOMETHING
After the battle they had a serious talk. The Tailor had been bitten
on the heel and limped badly. Selim licked a rather nasty wound in
his right paw, and Jackie whined with a thorn in his hind pad, which
the Tailor soon extracted. Bhundy, well out of reach, dozed on the
branch of a tree.
What brought you here?” the Tiger inquired, vigorously cleaning
his paw.
The Tailor, leaning against a tree-trunk, straightened himself up.
“I wanted to help you find the Treasure.”
“You didn’t trust me,” Selim replied. “You wanted to get here
first. Had you found it, what would have happened?”
“I’d have divided the gold and the jewels and given you first pick,”
the Tailor said solemnly.
“Ha! Ha!” laughed the Jackal annoyingly. “That’s hard to believe.”
“Let him tell us how he’ll get back to Nasrabad?” the Monkey
piped.
That was exactly what the Tailor was thinking. His horse had
gone, and his foot was too sore to walk any distance. There also was
the danger of wild beasts, and, worst of all, the difficulty of getting
food for the journey home.
“He won’t get back,” the Jackal snapped.
“He may,” said Selim in a sleepy voice, “but not with the loot, if
we find it.” Then he gave a tremendous yawn.
Every one thereupon went to sleep, except the Tailor, who sat up
and combed his long beard, thinking what he should do next. Perhaps,
he reasoned, the temple priests might help him. He had a few gold
pieces in a small bag which he hung round his neck. He looked across
the river, sparkling in the sun, in the direction of the temple, and


wondered if the soldiers were searching for the Treasure, or perhaps
torturing the priests to make them confess where it was. He had
surveyed the ruins from a distance and was still puzzled to know where
he could begin the search in that tangle of grass and undergrowth.
The sun now was very hot and the air filled with the drone of insects
and the chirrup of cicadas and crickets. A hoo-poo bird in a nearby
tree hoo-pooed as only a hoo-poo can hoo-poo, and made every one
drowsy.
Presently some smoke drifted above the forest, and a minute or
two later came a sound of crackling. The soldiers had fired the grass
and scrub round the ruins, and the flames soon spread. In a short time
great fiery tongues leaped over the tree-tops, bursting through dense
columns of smoke. Birds soared upwards with noisy clamour, and twice
the Tailor heard a tiger roar and its mate answer nervously. Animals
who made the temple ruins a sanctuary stampeded in all directions. A
sounder of wild pigs rushed to the river, but already gators had formed
up and were singing
All jolly 'gators are we.
The pigs stopped in their mad rush to escape and heard the warning
quite clearly.
Don’t try this river to cross,
For there, we warn, you will flop.
Better to pause and hear our jaws
Klip-klop, klip-klop, klip-klop.
They rushed up the bank again, and the Tailor heard them making
for the bridge, squealing with terror as they ran.
A great sambhur with several cows appeared on the bank, saw the
alligators, and followed the pigs. They halted as the swamp grass
caught fire and a wall of flame came down to meet them. The poor
beasts galloped madly along the river-bank, while the ’gators waddled
up to snap at their heels. They disappeared in an easterly direction
and the Tailor did not see them again.
Selim had wakened with the heat and the noise. The river was not
very wide, and sparks were dropping on their side of it. He noted the
alarmed look on the Tailor’s face and the pathetic one on Bhundy’s.


Her teeth chattered with fright. Jackie, as usual, had disappeared to
"nose round”.
The forest was afire right down to the river. The wind had risen
to a gale and, for a mile, the jungle was an inferno. What became of
the soldiers or the priests it was hard to say. The Tailor heard a few
shots fired some distance downstream. Perhaps the soldiers were firing
at the alligators in an attempt to cross the river.
The wind dropped at midday, but clouds of smoke blotted out the
sky, tinged a ruddy glow by the leaping flames. So far the fire had not
spread to the other side of the river, but the heat was so great that
Selim moved back into the forest. The Tailor walked slowly and pain-
fully, mumbling under his breath. Jackie kept well in the rear to watch
the progress of the fire, and Bhundy climbed a tree now and again to
see if all was well. By late afternoon the fire had practically burnt out
in the river-bend, and Selim decided to cross the bridge and camp
for the night on the site of the temple. The river ran sluggishly, the
surface grey with ash or blotched with charred branches and leaves,
the flotsam of the burnt forest. The alligators, swollen with food, lay
in the shallows, their snouts peeping out of the water.
They found the stone bridge intact, and as they crossed it Selim
and Jackie sniffed the dust in which red deer, sambhur, antelope, bear,
hyena, wolf, tiger, leopard and cheetah, with wild boar and a host of
the more harmless denizens of the forest, had left their imprints. Every
animal had fled except the loathsome reptiles in the river who were
too lazy and well fed even to “klip-klop”.
They stepped warily over burning logs, but the grass and the scrub
had ceased to smoulder. The temple ruins, black and stark in the
westering sun, were mere heaps of stones from which all life had fled
except the snakes. Jackie rushed round, trying to get his bearings. He
halted near a great upended stone idol with an elephant’s head and
numerous human arms.
"Here’s Ganpati!” he shouted excitedly. "I was born under that
pile of stones there.”
He seemed very happy about it and began to remember where the
priests lived, and pointed to the stone where the cobras were fed. The
Tiger made a thorough search for a likely hiding-place for the Treasure
and the Tailor wandered round by himself intent on the same job.


At the first sign of dawn Selim started work. He and Jackie worked
together, and their loud sniffs could be heard quite a distance away.
If the earth showed the slightest sign of being disturbed, they dug
deeply. The Tailor shifted stones in the hope that the Treasure chest
would be found under one of the many heaps lying round. Sometimes
he disturbed a cobra, and then he poked round with his staff, and felt
very nervous indeed. And so the day wore on. Bhundy busied herself
as usual, climbing up fragments of wall still standing, or up the stumps
of trees. She looked more like a chimney-sweep than a monkey.
About five o’clock in the afternoon Selim announced that so far as
he was concerned the Treasure hunt was over. In his heart he did not
believe it was hidden anywhere near the temple ruins, and he felt
rather resentful against the Tailor for leading him on this wild-goose
chase.
“I am going north at nightfall,” he said to the Tailor. “You can
stay here and find the Treasure yourself.”
“In that case you can hardly expect half of it,” the Tailor retorted.
“Quite so,” observed Selim. “From now on, finding is keeping.
What I find, I keep; what you find, you keep; what Jackie and the
Monkey find, they keep.”
“That’s a bargain,” said the Tailor, who had begun to feel rather
hopeful as the pile of stones he was working on bore signs that they
had been fairly recently shifted.
And then they heard Bhundy give a scream of excitement as she
drew a little package out of a hole in a tree-trunk (probably an old
woodpecker’s nest) about forty feet from the ground.
Quickly she drew from the package two necklaces, which she hung
round her neck before she clambered down.
One was a necklace of rubies, the central stone or pendant a
magnificent emerald, the other was a necklace of brilliants, the centre
stone a gorgeous black diamond. The sun caught the stones, and their
dazzling lustre made the Tailor blink. He had seen those gems before
at the great Durbar in Nasrabad, which the Maharaj of Goondee had
attended in all his oriental splendour.
Now he knew how desperately short of money the Maharaj must
have been to repay the loan to Nasrabad with these jewels of State.
The Tailor trembled with excitement, and his eyes bulged.


although he tried to keep himself in control. If he could secure pos-
session of those two necklaces the rest of the Treasure could be left
for any one to find. Selim watched him from the corner of his eye.
Bhundy ran up to Selim. “See what I have found!’’ she said.
“Aren’t they beautiful? I’ll wear them with my cape and bonnet.’’
“Pretty baubles,” said the Tailor indifferently, “but just glass
They’re not worth keeping.”
Bhundy finds the necklaces.
“They’re beautiful! I’ve never seen anything more lovely in my
life,” spluttered the Monkey. “You may not think so, but I do.”
“Well,” said Selim, “Bhundy is the only one who has found any-
thing. I’m tired of treasure-hunting. There’s no excitement in it. I’m
going to have an hour’s nap, and then we set off on real adventure.”
The Tiger flung himself down behind the god Ganpati and was
soon asleep. Now and again his body twitched. Perhaps he was fighting
the alligator again in his dreams. He was wakened from a deep slumber
by the Monkey’s screams.
He was on his feet in an instant, ready to fight or flee. Bhundy


came rushing towards him, but the necklaces were not hanging from
her neck.
“He ..he . . . The Tailor took my necklaces.”
“I did no such thing,” the Tailor shouted back. “She lost them.
dropped them somewhere.”
Leisurely, with his head swaying slightly from side to side, his eyes
blazing with wrath, the Tiger approached the Tailor, who was seated
on a great stone and calmly smoking a cigarette.
“Hand those back,” he said fiercely, “or else I shall tear you to
pieces, or drag you to the river and let the ’gators do the job for me.”
“I swear,” said the Tailor, “I don’t know where those glass beads
“Liar,” growled Selim. He caught the Tailor’s beard between his
teeth and dragged him towards the river.
The Tailor now was very frightened. He begged and prayed to be
believed. But the more he implored, the louder Bhundy, who followed
him, insisted that he had hidden the jewels in his clothing. Jackie kept
close enough to snap at the Tailor’s heels. Secretly, he was enjoying
himself immensely. He never did like the Tailor.
Selim broke into a steady lope, and the Tailor found it difficult
to keep pace. Once he tripped and fell, and Selim dragged him through
the burnt grass and embers till he managed to regain his feet. Now he
had breath only to keep running, and none to beg for mercy.
As the party came to the river-bank they heard the ’gators singing
their usual chorus.
Klip-klop, klip-klop, klip-klop.
If the Tailor had had wind enough he would have screamed.
Selim stopped to take a short hitch of the Tailor’s beard. Now,
he said between his teeth, “the necklaces or the alligators.”
The ’gators, just below them, stopped singing and waddled up
the bank.
The Tailor’s hand dived into the inner pocket of his coat and
drew out the jewels.
“How they got here I don’t know,” he said brazenly. “The Monkey
must have put them there.”
“Liar,” Selim roared. “Hang them round Bhundy’s neck at once.


and then take the bridge back to Nasrabad. Sometimes, Tailor, you
make me glad I am only an animal.”
The Tailor hung the necklaces round Bhundy’s neck and made
Selim a deep salaam.
“I go,” he said. “When you return to your cave I shall make you
a coat of velvet and gold for this kindness.”
“That’s an idea,” Selim thought, his vanity overcoming him for
a moment. But his indignation was still deep.
“How dare you suggest that?” he roared. “How dare you?” He
made a short spring at the Tailor, who yelled with terror and scuttled
away as fast as his thin legs could carry him.


CHAPTER X
THE TAILOR TELLS THE RAJAH
Ten days later the Tailor was brought to the City of Nasrabad by a
small troop of soldiers who had escaped from the great forest fire. He
was arrested close to the river, and no prisoner was more pleased to
have handcuffs clipped to his wrists than he was. The Commander
charged him with trying to steal a hidden Treasure which belonged
to the Rajah; but the Tailor swore he was making a business journey
to a distant town and had lost his way.
In due course he was taken from prison and led to the Hall of
Audience to be questioned by the Rajah. Handcuffed to a huge warder,
the Tailor wended his way through the great columns of black, grey
and green granite, until he came to a raised throne of gold, behind
which stood a delicate and lovely marble screen studded with jewels.
At the foot of the dais he first sank on his knees and then flung himself
down to his stomach and said: “O, great Emperor of the Earth and
the Seven Seas, Lord of Light and Darkness, I render thee due homage
and ”
“Silence, fool!” barked the Rajah, “Enough of that nonsense. Tell
me, before I break every bone in your body, what you have done with
the Treasure.”
“As my soul lives,” the Tailor replied, “I know nothing about it.
I repeat I lost my way. Your soldiers saved me from a burning forest
and certain death. Did your Sublime Excellence know what treasure
was in the chest that was stolen?”
“Gold mohurs and jewels,” the Rajah answered crisply. “Most
valuable of all, a necklace of diamonds and a necklace of rubies. To
the person who can restore them to me I will give a reward of one
thousand gold pieces.”


“I desire private speech with the Rajah,’ the Tailor said
impressively.
“Do not waste my time on trifles,” warned the Rajah, “or else it
will be an evil moment for thee. Retire!” the Rajah yelled to his
attendants. The warder hastily moved away and dragged the Tailor
with him.
“Unloose him, fool,” the Rajah commanded-.
The Tailor, a free man, stood before his ruler, and once more
noted with admiration the thickness of the black beard which hid the
royal features, except the tip of his nose and the shadowy lustre of his
eyes. He wore pale green satin trousers, crinkled from the ankle to
the knee, and a coat of pink velvet, heavily embroidered with silver
thread and seed pearls. The Rajah believed he dressed simply. In fact,
he regarded this costume as a sort of working overall. His silk turban,
however, was almost as big as a cart-wheel, and the Tailor was afraid
it might fall from the Rajah’s head when he shook it in anger and
become unravelled as it rolled among the granite columns.
“Was there a big black diamond in the necklace of brilliants, and
a great emerald in the centre of the ruby necklace?” the Tailor meekly
inquired.
“By Gunga!” the Rajah yelled, “you have described them exactly.
Where are they? Tell me quickly before I deliver thee to the
bowstring!”
“I thought at first the necklaces were of glass,” the Tailor said.
“The stones were so large, but then no glass could possibly have such
lustre.”
“Who wore them, dolt?” the Rajah demanded impatiently.
“A monkey,” the Tailor answered.
This flippant reply so angered the Rajah that he struck the Tailor
across the face and then, as he lay on his stomach, wiped his shoes on
his tunic, “I shall have thee hanged for joking with a King,” he yelled.
The Tailor, kneeling humbly, told the Rajah an extraordinary
story of a tiger, a monkey and a jackal who kept company, and whom
he last saw wending their way north, the monkey wearing the necklaces
round her neck.
“First,” said the Rajah, “no monkey would be friendly with a tiger,


who would eat it forthwith. The whole story is so silly that no fool
would believe it.”
“Listen with patience,” the Tailor begged. “Is not a great treasure
at stake? I have described the necklaces because I saw them but a few
days ago.” The Tailor then told the Rajah the incredible story of Selim.
“And you say this tiger can speak?” the Rajah said scoffingly. “If
that is so, it is possessed by a djinn, or the animal has been changed
The Tailor tells the Rajah his story.
from a man by magic. This tiger is more priceless than the necklaces,
if what you say is true.”
“When you learn that I have lied, let the executioner chop off my
head,” the Tailor suggested boldly.
The Rajah clapped his hands, and immediately all his courtiers and
attendants returned. In the rush the Commander-in-Chief of the Army,
in a superb uniform of blue and gold, caught his spur in the long
robes of the Master of the Privy Purse and crashed on his left ear.
“Come hither, Chundra Bhose,” the Rajah commanded the Prime
Minister, who hurried forward as fast as his tight shoes and his corns
permitted. “Take this Tailor to the Chief of the Police, and also the


City Commandant. He is to have all the men and the help he needs
for a secret mission, which only he and I know about.
With these instructions the Rajah rose and left the hall.
In the meantime Selim and his two friends had journeyed by slow
stages to the top of a short range of mountains. The Tiger’s paw did
not improve with travel, and his ribs were still very tender and sore.
They found a good hiding-place among some thick curwunder bushes
with a cool, clear rill of water close by. Here, thought the Monkey,
Selim should have a good rest, as there was not a sign of man anywhere,
and therefore they could count on being left in peace.
Bhundy loved to sit on a rock in the sunshine dressed in her cap
and bonnet, and with the necklaces round her neck. With hands folded
in her lap she gazed at Selim stretched below her, breathing heavily,
his limbs twitching. Jackie, active and alert, roamed round the
mountain top, and brought back news of anything he saw or heard.
Sometimes Jackie dreamed of the great fight between Selim and the
Boa-constrictor, or the quicker and less deadly battle with the alligator;
then he would give a little yelp, and Bhundy would poke him in the
ribs and wake him up.
Bhundy felt that she needed a rest, too. The fight with the alligator,
and the terrible forest fire which followed, had made her nervous and
jumpy. In her dreams she often heard the alligators’ “Klip-klop”
chorus, and saw the long, hideous, slimy bodies in rows on the river-
bank, their jaws opening and shutting in time. But all these horrors
and dangers were worth going through for the sake of the necklaces
she had found. She loved to touch them, stone by stone, to watch the
sun flash from them, until she became drowsy with their beauty and
colouring. Somehow she knew they were rare and of great price, for
she always packed them in her little bag when she moved about, and
only wore them when she had nothing else to do but laze in the sun.
On the morning of the eighth day on the mountain top they heard
a shout in the valley below, and then another one answering it farther
away. Selim rose to his feet and sniffed the air.
“Man,” he said. “That means we have to move on.”
A few minutes later, after stretching himself and giving himself a
hasty lick over, Selim, with the Monkey on his back and Jackie at his


heels, started off along the mountain ridge, going south. His muscles
were still stiff and sore, and his lungs hurt him when he breathed. At
midday he was too tired to go farther, and they took cover in a thick
clump of brushwood. Bhundy hung the necklaces round her neck and
placed her cape round her shoulders.
“I’m sick of being an animal,” Selim said, “and being hunted about
from place to place.”
“Oh, that’s because you don’t feel very well just now,” Bhundy
replied.
“I hate being fierce and cruel and frightening the jungle folk
wherever I go. Of course I have to eat. I wish sometimes I could live
on grass like the cattle and deer.”
“Why don’t you eat fruit and nuts like I do?” Bhundy asked.
“To begin with, even if I could climb trees,” Selim said, “I don’t
want to be a monkey. I’d rather be a human being than anything else.
If people would just leave me alone, and not take any notice of me.
I’d live among them in a village quite happy and peaceable. Take the
Tailor as an instance. I’m really a far better man than he is now. He
plays such dirty tricks on others. Look how he tried to rob you of the
necklaces.”
“Ha! Ha!” laughed Bhundy. “You should have seen his face as
you dragged him to the alligators!”
“I just wanted to frighten him. Do you know he is a fine tailor.
Once he made me a pair of pink silk pyjamas. He has promised to
make me a grand uniform someday. That’s why I don’t want to quarrel
with him. There’s another reason. He’s the only man who is not
frightened of me, and who talks to me. Other men wouldn’t believe
I can talk, and they’re too scared to stop to listen.”
Which was very true.
“I feel there is something strange about me,” Selim continued.
“Perhaps if I could live a little while in a real house I’d feel different.
When I lived with Betty I liked to jump up on a chair, especially if it
had a nice, clean, soft cushion, or on to her bed. Best of all, when I
was a cub, I loved to sit in her lap and feel her stroke my ears. That
was a happy time. Everybody was kind, and gave me food and water,
and spoke in a quiet, low voice. The only time I ever got slapped was


when I chased you up the pole. Why couldn’t you and I have gone on
living like that for ever?”
“I suppose it wasn’t to be,” Bhundy said, looking very wise.
“I’ll never be satisfied,” said Selim, “till I find Betty again. I won’t
be able to jump into her lap now because I’m too big, but I could give
her a ride on my back, and she wouldn’t be like that young lady of
Riga, that Betty used to talk about.”
“I wonder,” Bhundy observed, looking up at the tree-tops as if she
expected to find Betty there, ‘‘where she is now? If we got close to
people, and listened carefully, we might hear someone talking about
her and her parents, and learn just where she is.”
‘‘That’s an idea I’ve been turning over in my mind for a long time.
We must move among people, especially white people. It’s dangerous,
I know; but I’d face any peril to learn where Betty is.”
‘‘Yes, let’s go,” said Jackie. “I’m beginning to feel I’d like to stick
my teeth in a juicy leg of mutton, or crunch a nice beef bone. I’m
ready as soon as you are.”


CHAPTER XI
THE GREAT HUNT
It didn’t take long after the Tailor’s talk with the Rajah for every
post and wall throughout the length and breadth of the Kingdom to
be plastered with a notice offering a reward of one hundred gold
pieces to any one who could give information about a tiger, a jackal
and a monkey who journeyed together, the monkey wearing two
strings of glass beads, cheap imitation of diamonds and rubies.
A hundred gold pieces was a big sum of money. It could buy a
farm or a good house or a business, or pay off the debt of a lifetime,
and hundreds of thousands of people read the notice with great
interest. At first they thought it was a joke, because no one had ever
heard of a tiger and monkey keeping company; but of course, as some
explained, they might have been trained together, when very young,
in a circus.
As a matter of fact, the necklaces of cheap beads worn by the
monkey gave colour to the story. Yes, both animals had undoubtedly
escaped from a circus, but why the Rajah wanted information about
them was not so clear, unless he wished to make pets of them, or place
them in his private zoo.
Now every one wanted to earn the hundred pieces of gold, but no
one wanted to meet the tiger, and all hoped when they did a good
distance would separate them. Presently, small parties of soldiers and
police started to scour the country, giving special attention to the
mountains, forest country, and wild jungle land. War elephants and
shooting elephants, with hunters on their backs, tramped from one
end of the State to the other, while thousands of peasants as beaters
swept through the jungle and drove every animal out of cover. The
forest folk, angry at being disturbed so often, began to inquire what
all the pother was about, and presently Cagra the Crow flew back


with the news. The Crow had missed Selim in the confusion of the
great fire and had searched for him ever since.
“The Rajah has set every one of his subjects to find Selim,”
the Crow reported. “He must be very important.
The Black Leopard looked up sleepily, and only the end of his
tail quivered. “Perhaps he heard how he killed the great Boa-
constrictor, and so became Lord of the Jungle, barring always Hathi,
the Elephant.”
“No one ever wants to shoot Hathi,” said the Hyena, “because he
is Lord of the Jungle. Man can force Hathi to work, just as they force
the horse, the camel, the donkey and the bullock. It is we who are
untamed that men desire to destroy.”
“If that is so,” the Leopard growled, “we must do all we can to
help Selim, even though it is said that he is more man than tiger in
his ways.”
The Crow flew away to hear what other great ones of the jungle
had to say, and found they were all of one mind. Even though the
search for Selim and his two friends disturbed them a great deal they
were determined to do all they could to help them from being captured.
By very quiet and easy stages Selim reached the plains, where villages
clustered with green fields around them. They travelled at night,
mostly on the high road, from which Selim slipped silently if he heard
any one coming. He fed where he found his meals, always taking care
that little Jackie ate his fill. During the day he hid in nullahs or clumps
of bush, and Jackie and Bhundy took turns to watch while he slept.
Selim knew he was safer near a village than miles away from it, because
no one believed he would venture so close. His muscles still ached,
and his appetite was very poor.
One day as he snoozed under a banyan-tree on a little rise, which
gave him a good view of the country for miles around, he was wakened
by the hoarse voice of the Crow.
“Oh, shut up!” Selim shouted angrily. “Can’t you see I’m asleep?
Where did you spring from?”
“I’ve searched for you everywhere,” said Cagra. “I missed you
after the fire. That was a bad day. Flames burned my nest and three
fledglings.” The Crow began to weep.


“Were you trying to find me to tell me that?” Selim said harshly.
“No. The jungle folk met and sent me to give you a message.”
“How very kind of them! Do they want me to fight another boa-
constrictor?” Selim asked, sarcastically.
“I don’t think so,” the Crow replied. Then he told Selim all about
the Rajah’s great hunt for him and how, though the forest folk were
being chased and harried, they were resolved to help Selim escape
capture.
“I thank you,” said Selim, “and all my friends of the forest and
jungle for their sympathy. Tell them I have done no wrong and
deserve no punishment. Just now I am sick, but I shall soon be well,
when my courage and my strength will be equal to my enemies.”
The Crow, after further talk, flew away, very much impressed.
Selim had not only strength and courage, but also wisdom. Even a
crow, as wise almost as an owl, learned that. x
After the Crow left, Selim looked troubled. He always blinked
when he was thinking hard. Bhundy, sitting near him, asked him
what his worries were.
“This,” said Selim. “Why is the Rajah of Nasrabad chasing us
like this? I know sometimes he goes hunting with his elephants just
for sport, which means many poor jungle folk are either shot and
killed, or crawl away wounded to die. Why should he slay those of
us who never attempt to molest man? We always are ready to be
trustful and to respond to kindness. I can’t understand why the Rajah
should order his people to hunt and kill you and me.”
“Then let us find out,” said Jackie. “Bhundy and I can go where
you can’t. We have sharp eyes and alert ears. We will go where men
gather together and overhear them talk.”
That night, while Selim crept into a cactus thicket, the Jackal and
the Monkey sneaked up to a village. It was the hour when people
gathered under the great tamarind-tree in the middle of the village
green, the elder men to talk wisely about crops and cattle and village
affairs, the young men to wrestle, while the children played ball games
or tig, and the women sat outside their huts and gossiped. It was a
peaceful time, work finished and evening meal enjoyed, and prayers
offered in the temple; an hour in which Nature was steeped in a deep,
brooding silence, broken only by crows cawing as they returned to


roost, or by the mynahs and sparrows quarrelling as they settled down
for the night in the bamboo clumps.
Though Jackie and Bhundy managed to get within earshot, the
wary pariah dogs caught their scent and barked furiously. Jackie
crouched, but Bhundy, not used to stalking, was spotted and chased
by a snarling pack of mongrels. Fortunately for both of them, Selim
heard Jackie’s startled yelps and, sensing danger, rushed to their
rescue. The terrified howls of the dogs alarmed the village.
“Bagh!” the peasants whispered one to another, and went indoors
for their spears, axes and the few old muskets they had hidden away
during the last police raid. The women and children rushed indoors,
and the young men slapped arms, thighs and chests, and leaped into
the air to show the village maidens what they would do to the tiger
if it dared to poke its nose into the village bounds.
“You bungled that,” Selim said to Jackie, “but never mind. We’ll
learn what we want to know in another way.”
Again they took to the main highway, usually deserted after night-
fall, except for a little camp where there was water or a clump of trees.
They passed one camp where several horses were tethered, and a
few men sat round the embers of a fire and talked and smoked before
going to sleep.
Selim, leaving his companions, cautiously crept towards it against
the wind. Even then the horses became restless, and a man rose and
quietened them.
“They’re trembling,” he said, “What could have frightened them?”
“Oh, a rustle, or perhaps a forest animal,” a man observed, taking
the mouthpiece of his hookah from his lips.
“Perhaps it was Selim, the Tiger,” said a familiar voice, and in
the glow of the fire Selim distinctly saw the long wispy beard of the
Tailor.
“That,” said one of the party, “is the Tiger who can speak and
understands speech, the one you have spoken about, isn’t it? What
utter nonsense! A tiger is a tiger, unless he is possessed by a devil.”
“Which is the case with Selim,” said the Tailor. “But sooner or
later the budmash will be caught and killed, and the Monkey will be
placed in a cage after the Rajah’s police have stripped her of her
precious ornaments.”


As he finished this little speech Selim stood up and gave one of
the loudest and fiercest roars of his life. The men rose and ran towards
the horses, which reared and plunged until they broke loose and
stampeded. The Tailor rushed to a tree and managed to clamber up
a few feet, but was too frightened and exhausted to climb any higher.
There he clung while Selim sniffed around him, tugged at his
beard, licked some skin off his leg, and frightened him so much that
Frightened, the Tailor slipped down from the tree.
he slipped down and pretended to be dead. While the Tailor lay at
the foot of the tree Selim found a large cooking-pot half full of tasty
lamb stew, which he ate with great relish, licking the pot clean and dry.
The Tailor held his breath when Selim came up and pulled him
over on his back.
“Get up, before I tear you to pieces,” the Tiger said. “So you are
the one who started this great hunt for my skin?”
“Nay,” the Tailor answered with a quaking voice. “I rode out to
see if I could find and warn you. Believe me, Selim, I am still your best


friend. I have in my work-room a piece of brocade with more gold in
it than silk, which I bought to make you a gorgeous uniform ”
“What colour is it?” said Selim, interested at once.
“It is purple—royal purple. Art thou not the King of Beasts?”
The Tiger growled. “How often am I to tell thee I am not a beast?”
“Think of it, Selim. One stone from that necklace which the
Monkey so carelessly wears will buy thee ten such uniforms.”
“You told us they were glass beads,” the Tiger reminded him.
“Well they are valuable to me but to no one else,” the Tailor
explained. “Hand those necklaces over to me, Selim, and this hunt
will be over, and you will be able to live in your cave outside Nasrabad
in quietness and peace.”
A rifle-shot rang out. A bullet struck Selim’s flank. With a great
roar he sprang in the air and charged. Another bullet followed and
hit the ground close by. Selim stopped. “How dare you?” he roared,
and turned to run.
“Come on,” he shouted to Jackie, “I’ve found out all I want to
know.”
“Blood is running down your leg, Selim,” Bhundy said concernedly.
“Let me do something for you?”
“No, jump on my back, Bhundy, and look after those necklaces.
They’re not glass. I found that out.”


CHAPTER XII
COUNTRY RESIDENCE
The bullet wound in Selim’s flank gave him much pain and trouble.
It filled him, too, with rage against the Tailor and all dark people. So
lame he became that he could travel only a few miles each night. Worse
than all, he was not able to hunt for food, and Jackie’s efforts brought
little to the larder. Hungry and miserable, they talked over what they
should do next.
“We should never have left the Trimbuc Jungle,” moaned Jackie.
“We had plenty of food and shelter there.”
“Didn’t the Crow say that thousands of people had scoured that
jungle looking for us?” Selim replied angrily.
Bhundy, who had placed her cape round her shoulders, shivered
in the chill of the morning. At her side was the little leather bag which
contained the necklaces. This constant moving from place to place
worried her and made her tired. She longed to live in a mango tope,
where food was plentiful, and life was safe and secure. She dreamed
often now of the happiest period of her life, with Betty in a camp that
shifted almost weekly, but where there were always good things to eat,
and above all, love and companionship. Just now she felt very sad.
“Where are we to go?” she tearfully asked.
“Just do what we are doing until I’m better. Sneak from one hiding-
place to another.”
They were camped in the ruins of an old roofless stone house,
standing in a big compound overgrown with grass, creepers and shrubs.
About a mile away a small town lay in the fold of a little valley. They
could plainly see the peasants working in the fields, and Selim’s sharp
ears caught the shrill voices and laughter of children. The country
around consisted of great stretches of parched grazing land, with a


chess-board of green fields around the villages. It was new country to
him, and from a tiger’s viewpoint, too open for safety.
“I wish—l wish,” Bhundy snivelled, ‘‘we could find Betty.”
Selim looked up with moist eyes. Strangely enough, at that moment
he was thinking of her too. He had thought a great deal about human
beings and their strange ways since he had crept, feverish and lame,
into this old abandoned dwelling. He had never lived in a house, but
he knew what a big tent was like. The large room where he sprawled
used to be the dining-room, and the one next to it, the bedroom. Off
it was a smaller room in which a little girl like Betty might have slept.
He remembered Betty had a separate room in the great tent he knew
so well.
He tried to imagine what the dwelling and garden used to look
like. The front of it overlooked the carriage drive. Above the tangle
of weeds and wild shrubs, he saw Persian roses bravely flaunting, and
crotons struggling for the sun. In fancy, he saw Betty sitting in a
bamboo chair on the veranda, with a bright silk cushion behind her,
patting his head lovingly as he sat beside her while she gazed dreamily
at the roses and the mogras. How he longed to see her again! It would
be a simple matter to find her if he could only inquire from people
where she was. It seemed to be quite useless to approach the natives.
They either ran screaming away, or wanted to kill him. Betty’s father
and mother were white people. He knew them to be kindly people.
Perhaps he would learn more if he left the dark people alone and
tried to be friendly with the white.
“Don’t cry,” Selim said. “I know how you feel. I did think once
of going back to Nasrabad when things got quiet again. But I think
I’ll try to find Betty instead. What I want is a really good rest. When
my strength comes back I shall fear nothing.”
They started off again, and at dawn next morning Selim ran down
an antelope. While he and Jackie had a good meal Bhundy found an
orchard and returned with her cape full of ripe guavas. Sunrise caught
them in the open, and they rushed to the bottom of a nullah and took
refuge under a clump of thorn. The shade was too scanty for comfort
and at noon Bhundy saw a man coming towards them with a bundle
of hay on his head. Selim lay perfectly still until the man crossed the


nullah. He was glad to see the back of him, and his limbs did not stop
trembling till that danger had passed.
As the sun was about to set Selim crept up to the edge of the nullah
and looked about him. He found himself close to a little straggling
town, with a sugar mill close by. The doors and windows of the mill
were closed, and a few horses and ponies grazed in the compound. It
was dangerous now to keep too close to the road, and they struck across
country towards a little hill crowned with a thicket of trees. When a
great moon came sailing into the sky the Tiger moved cautiously,
seeking every bit of cover. Bhundy sniffed as they climbed the hill.
“Fruit!” she said, and Jackie sneezed to clear his nostrils of the
scent of it.
They reached the low-clipped hedge of a well-kept garden and saw
a big bungalow with a veranda running round two sides of it. No dog
barked, nor was there any sign of life. First Jackie scouted round and
made sure there was no one about. After him Bhundy explored a little.
She peeped through the panes of the doors and the windows.
“No one is there,” she said very softly to Selim.
“Then we’ll occupy the house,” the Tiger said, “until someone
turns up.”
“But supposing they come and find us here?” Jackie asked
nervously.
“No one will look for me in a bungalow,” chuckled Selim, already
enjoying himself.
“But what about the tenants?” Bhundy suggested.
“We’ll leave as soon as they come,” Selim replied, giving the
veranda door a gentle push with his shoulder. It opened with a
splintering sound, and Selim walked inside.
The big carpeted dining-room had a table, a big sideboard, and
about half a dozen chairs. Selim jumped up on the chair at the head
of the table, but overbalanced and fell off again. A quick run through
the house proved it to be well furnished, clean, and free from dust.
A fine double bed in the main bedroom attracted Selim.
“That’s mine, Jackie. You can sleep under it.”
“You won’t catch me sleeping in a house. I’ll doze under a bush
in the garden,” Jackie answered. “It’s safer outdoors.”
Quickly they ransacked the house. They found some biscuits and


an open tin of butter, which Selim quickly licked up. Bhundy dis-
covered a box of dates in the pantry, and three great bunches of
bananas, hung in an outhouse to ripen, and thought she would stay
until the fruit had been eaten.
That night Selim slept in a double bed, but did not pull the eider-
down over him. Bhundy, more nervous, parked herself on the couch
near the open window, but Jackie wriggled into a clump of fern and
begonias, and kept an eye open most of the night.
Selim did not pull the eiderdown over him.
At daybreak the Tiger solemnly examined all the pictures and
photographs, but saw none that looked like Betty or her father and
mother. He tested the comfort of the ottoman, and a couple of saddle-
bag chairs, but thought the double bed was most comfortable and went
back to it. Bhundy, still very nervous, climbed the tallest tree and
kept watch.
The little town woke to life at sunrise. The peasants began to toil
in the fields among the crops, and a thin but steady stream of travellers


either walked or jolted along towards the town in bullock carts. A
road ran straight to the mill, but no one used it or seemed a bit
interested in the carriage drive, which led to the big bungalow on
the hill.
Towards evening Jackie became ravenous, skulked into the town,
and hid in a culvert before a butcher’s shop. He used to like to forage
in the crowded street of Nasrabad. It was easy there to grab a leg or
shoulder of mutton from the bench and escape among the legs of the
crowd. He was afraid this country shop would close before night fell
and so leave him hungrier than ever. Selim always ate a huge meal
and then slept it off. He did not feel the pinch of hunger as quickly
as Jackie did. The sight of the meat hanging up or lying on the broad
shelf in the shop which he watched so intently made Jackie’s mouth
water. Anxiously he waited till the shop was empty, and then made
a clean getaway with the plumpest leg of mutton he could see.
Usually he took the meat to Selim and ate what the Tiger
generously left him. But his stomach gnawed with emptiness, so he
cleaned the bone and hid it. He knew he would relish the marrow
more next day.
Ashamed, he did not return to the bungalow till long after dark.
By the light of the moon he saw Selim gnawing the carcass of a sheep
on the dining-table. He explained that he had found the sheep tied up
in a field just at the back of the house.
He invited Jackie to join him, but Jackie begged to be excused.
“I don’t know what’s wrong with me, Selim, but I have no appetite.
I may feel better to-morrow.” With that explanation Jackie bolted for
the fern clump.
Jackie’s legs got tangled up with shreds of clothing which littered
the floor before he got to the veranda doors, so he cocked his ears in
inquiry.
“I’ve been trying on some clothes I found in a cupboard, but I
couldn’t get into them,” Selim explained. “After all, the Tailor is not
so bad. He did make me a pair of pyjamas that fitted.”


CHAPTER XIII
HARD PRESSED
On the fourth day of his stay in the bungalow Selim began to feel a
great deal better for his rest. His wounds were healing quickly, and his
strength came back. He wanted now to set out roving once more, to
sleep in a thicket or cave during the day, and roam under the stars
when evening came, sniffing the night air with its many perfumes.
Excitement was the spice of life to him, sometimes hunting, sometimes
being hunted, his nerves throbbing, his senses alert, smelling, listening,
ready to spring or take cover, and if necessary to flee.
Jackie was very restless. The scent of man was in his nostrils all
day and kept him in a constant state of fear. His ears were always
cocked for the sound of human footsteps, and even when he had
thoroughly gorged himself with food he felt too timid to sleep soundly.
Selim appeared to be enjoying himself and soon made a litter of
the larder. Even tinned goods did not escape his powerful teeth. He
slept on bed and couch in turn, and left loose hair to bear witness.
He rather liked to get under the bed-cover and stare at the ceiling in
the way Betty used to do.
In the afternoon Jackie burst into the house in great excitement
and said a native man was walking towards the bungalow. Selim was
ready to be friendly immediately, but knew the man would give an
alarm. The Tiger rather enjoyed seeing human beings rush away in
terror from him, although he really wanted them to stay and be pals.
Late afternoon was not a very good time for a tiger to be abroad, and
so the only thing to do was to let the man into the house and keep him
there till night fell. The Tiger hid behind a clump of bougainvillaea
and waited to see what happened.
The gardener, who had deserted his post for a week, was glad to
find that the manager of the sugar mill, Selkirk Sahib, and his wife


and family had not returned home earlier than he expected them. He
hastened first to the back to see how the pet sheep was getting on.
When he found the tether rope broken and the sheep gone, he became
very anxious. After searching round, Chundoo came back to the
bungalow. The open veranda door filled him with fear that the house
had been forced open and robbed. Timidly, he went inside. The
confusion startled him. Broken crockery, tins twisted and chewed, a
litter of clothes torn to shreds, beds rumpled, in fact every room turned
topsy turyy, led him to think a band of dacoits had plundered the
house and ruined what they could not take away. On the dining-table
lay the skin of the pet sheep.
Chundoo, a tall, thin and sinewy Mahratta, broke into a sweat and
prepared to flee. Perhaps the thieves would soon return and kill him
if he stayed there. In any case he did not dare to remain and face his
master’s wrath. He moved to the window to see that all was clear for
his flight and noticed for the first time that the couch was covered
with loose hair. Almost at that moment the door creaked, and the head
and shoulders of a huge tiger were thrust into the room.
“Don’t yell,” Selim said, “or I’ll have to kill you.”
Chundoo squatted on the floor after making a deep salaam. To be
in the same room with a tiger was bad enough, but to hear one speak
forced him to believe he was facing a devil. He bent his head between
his knees to avoid looking into the Tiger’s fierce eyes. A minute
passed—a nerve-racking minute. Strange though it seemed, he was still
alive. His brain at first refused to work, but a few moments later he
remembered the notices on the fences and the telegraph posts about
a tiger and a monkey. Perhaps this was the notorious Selim. ... If so,
his end was near.
The gardener, terrified, sat so still that Selim wondered if he were
asleep. Only, his limbs trembled.
“Wake up!” he growled. Chundoo raised his head and saw the
Tiger sprawled on the couch. “Do you know where Betty is?”
“There’s one in the cook-house,” he said almost in a whisper.
“I didn’t say butty, # but Betty, who is a very dear little girl with
a white and pink face, blue eyes, and lovely golden curls.”
• A lamp.


“Selkirk Sahib,” explained Chundoo, “has one daughter only, and
two sons. The girl is called Lisbeth, and has dark hair and brown eyes.
“She is not Betty then. Did they ever speak of a girl of that name?’
Selim asked a little impatiently.
“No, I only know the white people I serve. Perhaps Selkirk Sahib
will know. He will be here very soon.”
“Dark people,” Selim said, “seem to be mostly fools. You are no
good to me. As soon as night falls you may leave this house, but not
before. If you tell people you have seen or spoken to me, I shall crunch
your shin-bone.” With that, the Tiger jumped off the couch, and as
he passed Chundoo, knocked his turban off his head with a flick of
his tail.
They were well on their way across country before the quaking
Chundoo returned to the town and told the townspeople that he had
seen the Tiger. He begged the police to come up and learn for them-
selves what havoc it had made in his master’s bungalow, but the
havildar said he had more important work to do.
Soon the news spread that the famous Nasrabad tiger was prowling
round, and every one was warned to keep a keen watch for it.
As dawn broke Selim, very tired and sleepy, saw some figures ahead
of him on the Grand Trunk Road, and before he could run to cover
he drew a volley. The bullets pinged so close that he made a run for
it. Half an hour later, in the light of a crimson sky, more shots were
fired as he skulked through a clump of scrub. He now heard the shouts
and tom-toms of villagers hunting him down. Probably the scent of
him made an elephant trumpet downwind. That told him he had
stumbled into a beat, and it would need all his courage and cunning
to break through.
The country around was bare and broken. Selim sought cover in
an old watercourse from the advancing line of hunting elephants.
Bhundy clung to his back, and Jackie, with dry, panting tongue, kept
close to his heels. Clear of the watercourse he boldly moved into more
open country. On his right he heard a great deal of noise and shouting,
and charged boldly towards the enclosing beaters, who fired a few
shots and bolted, screaming with terror. The sun had now risen and
melted the mists away. It was hard to escape being seen, and falling
bullets warned him he was being spotted. The whole countryside


seemed to be chasing him. As Selim advanced, the peasants drove their
cattle into village bounds. A great fear seized even those who were
anxious to win the reward. If Selim were terror-stricken, so were the
people around him.
From every quarter came men in police and military uniforms. At
noon he took refuge in an old sandpit, but his uneasy slumbers were
broken by a warning yelp from Jackie, and away in the distance he
saw the sun glint from' the spear-tips of the Rajah’s Lancers. Very
weary, he pressed on once more. Once he found progress barred by a
river. A couple of horsemen, firing wildly, tried to cut off his retreat.
Savagely charging, Selim put both to flight. One horse stumbled and
threw his rider, who lay stunned or too frightened to move while
Selim sniffed round. His rifle lay by his side, and the Tiger dragged
it away and dropped it into the river as he swam across.
The country gradually became wilder and rougher. Great outcrops
of rock and thorny scrub afforded good cover, and one by one his
pursuers dropped behind. Perhaps they were afraid the Tiger would
waylay them, as they had now completely lost track of him.
Selim, breathing heavily, his heart thumping, felt he could go very
little farther. In a small cave, half-way up the side of a little gorge, and
hidden by a clump of bush, he flung himself down. With a pitiful little
whine, Jackie dropped beside him.
There, while Bhundy kept watch, they slept soundly. At sundown
Selim started up, and sniffing the air clambered to the top of the gorge.
A few minutes later he ran down a buck, and he and the Jackal finished
a meal at the foot of a great rock. A mile farther along they drank
deeply at a little jheel. There were no signs of men now. Beyond were
the foothills of a mountain range, and the country looked too bare and
curdled to grow anything. Selim did not know it, but he had crossed
the frontier of Nasrabad and had entered the little native state of Gooj.
There was no need now to move faster than Selim wished. Food
was plentiful, and in valleys or at the bottom of great ravines they
found pools of ice-cold water. Buck and antelope gave place to spotted
deer and sambhur, and great monkeys with grey coats and black faces
sat on the edges of precipices and sunned themselves. Behind them
leopards stalked, and in the clear blue sky the vulture wheeled.
Here, most unexpectedly, Cagra the Crow suddenly appeared. On


his way back to Nasrabad he had spotted Selim and the Monkey. The
Crow had scented the approach of the monsoon and knew that shortly
the wet season would begin. He did not like draggled wings and a
damp nest.
He flapped his wings after he had settled on the dead limb of a
tree and cocked his head on one side. “So you got through? he croaked.
“What did you think?” Selim replied.
“Every soldier and every subject of the Rajah was ordered to join
in the hunt to capture you; yet you escaped,” the Crow observed.
“Selim, you are a marvel. You are as great as the Parrot of the Rajah
of Gooj.”
“Don’t compare me with a parrot!” said Selim irritably.
“This is a wonderful Parrot. Its brilliant plumage is like a rainbow,
and it talks
“Well, so do you, and I
“But this Parrot is wiser than all parrots. It is so wise that the Rajah
and his Counsellors consult it.”
“Perhaps,” said Selim, “it may answer a question or two that I
may ask it.”
“I’d like to wring its neck. It suggested poison should be laid for
all crows and ravens ...”
“It is wiser than I thought,” said Selim. “Have you fed, Cagra?
Flutter down. There is a nice shoulder of venison here for you to pick.”


CHAPTER XIV
WHAT HAPPENED IN GOOJ
Selim climbed up to the City of Gooj through great ravines clothed
in shaggy forests. There was a road, of course, that zigzagged along
the shoulders of the mountains, but it was not safe for tigers. The men
of Gooj carried rifles and fired at anything in the undergrowth that
looked like a beast of prey. It was dangerous for tonga ponies or cart
bullocks to scent a tiger as they turned a bend.
Along that mountain road marched a broken line of travellers,
merchants, and peasants, mixed up with hillmen laden with faggots
of wood, or with pumpkins and melons of unusual size. Selim, sprawled
above the road, well out of sight, spent hours watching this stream
of traffic, listening to the men’s voices goading the patient bullocks,
and the tinkle of the bells as the poor beasts swayed their heads to
scare away the flies. Now and again the laughter and prattle of little
children made Selim think of Betty, and wish he could romp with
them, just as he used to romp with her. Why men wanted to run away
from him, or try to shoot him every time they caught sight of him,
was not only a mystery to him, but also will be a mystery to every boy
and girl who reads this story.
“I believe,” Selim said to Bhundy, ‘‘that when we were young,
white people, like Betty and her father and mother and their friends,
understood animals much better than the dark people. I am sure
everything will change when we meet Betty. She will be able to explain
that we are not cruel or treacherous, but harmless and lovable.”
And with that they got to speaking of Betty and the happy days
they spent with her, till Jackie interrupted with a warning:
Whatever you do, don’t get hysterical. It’s bad enough hearing
both of you sniff and howl in the middle of the jungle where no human
beings wander around, but here it is dangerous.”


Bhundy raised her eyebrows. This was a long speech for Jackie,
and he used such big words that she wondered if it really were their
cheeky little Jackal, or somebody else.
Selim wiped away a big tear with the back of his paw. “All right,
Jackie,” he said very mournfully, “I’ve got myself in hand.”
“I believe in leaving tears to girls and she-monkeys,” Jackie said,
chasing his tail twice before he dropped among some dead leaves and
fell asleep.
“Somehow,” Bhundy said lowering her voice, “I can’t help thinking
Betty is not far away. But the point is, where is she? We’ve got to find
that out. I wonder if the Tailor could help us?”
“He may. He seems to know most things,” said Selim, thinking of
a really bright idea. He told Bhundy all about it the following evening,
as they crept up the last slope of the mountain range and saw they
were a short distance from the summit on which Gooj was perched.
Since meeting Cagra, the Tiger had thought of little else but the
Rajah’s Parrot. Either in a spirit of adventure, or one of vanity, Selim
resolved to steal it. How that was to be managed he had not worked
out, and he discussed the matter with Jackie. The Jackal, very nervous
and cautious, said the idea was stupid, and pointed out the dangers of
approaching too near a strange city. But Selim grimly kept on. The
mention of the Tailor by Bhundy suggested an excuse for his project.
He confessed to his two companions that his principal mission to Gooj
was the theft of the Parrot.
“But what could we do with a chattering parrot in a cage?” Jackie
very sensibly asked. “It would be a nuisance to you, like your pink
silk pyjamas. Who’ll look after it?”
“Bhundy, of course,” Selim replied. “How lovely the cave will look
with a parrot’s cage hung in the entrance—just like a real house.”
“I remember Betty had a parrot,” Bhundy observed very quietly.
She couldn’t bear to cross Selim even in little things. “I must say I
don’t like parrots very much. They’re nasty, shrieking things.”
“The Rajah of Gooj wouldn’t keep an ordinary parrot,” Selim
broke in. “I am sure the Tailor would give all he possesses to own a
wonderful bird like that.”
“If he sees the Parrot when he visits the cave, he’ll steal it. So why
bother about collecting it now?” the Jackal observed.


“He wouldn’t dare rob me of the Parrot,” Selim snarled. “But I
tell you I’d give it to him, if he helps us to find Betty.”
The Tiger blinked his eyes like one inspired, after providing such
a logical reason for the theft. Even Jackie looked impressed. It was
plainly a sacred duty to steal the bird.
It was dark as they struggled up the last steep pinch of the ravine
and found themselves on a scrub-covered plateau from which they
could hear the murmur of the city. Selim’s spirits rose. His journey
was over. His next step was to find a hide-out handy to the Rajah’s
palace. Jackie’s nervousness increased, and Bhundy eyed every tall
tree wistfully. A little farther on the lights of the city came into view.
They were not numerous in the outskirts, but blazed from two
quarters, the Rajah’s palace and the main temple. A dog began to
bark, and set others baying and howling. A lonely bungalow near the
main road, with every window alight, reminded him of the home of
Selkirk Sahib, the manager of the sugar mill, where he had spent a
short holiday and slept in a double bed. A lot of excitement was going
on in it, people coming and going, and shouting to one another as
they dispersed.
As Selim watched them rather fascinatedly a small party came
towards him, following a man with a hurricane light. The Tiger
turned to retreat, and saw below him other lights moving through
the trees. About half a mile along to the right, men, carrying torches,
combed the jungle, shouting to one another as if to keep up their
spirits in the darkness, and scare away lurking animals. Jackie, in
alarm, raced up to Selim.
“They’re looking for somebody,” he said. “It might be us.”
“Men don’t look for tigers with a hurricane lamp,” Selim grunted.
“You never know what humans will do. I don’t trust them any
more than I trust a crow,” said Jackie, ready to bolt at the least sound.
“I wouldn’t be surprised if Cagra already has told the Rajah we’re on
our way to steal his precious Parrot. If he has we’d better give up the
idea and go the way we came.”
“No crow will scare me from my purpose,” said the Tiger, grimly.
“I’ve come for the Parrot, and I shan’t leave Gooj till I get it.”
“I know what’s happened,” Bhundy broke in. “Somebody’s lost,


and the search parties are out. There’s nothing to be afraid of. You
and Jackie stay here while I nose round.”
“If there’s any nosing round to be done, I’ll do it,” said Jackie.
“But Bhundy may come with me if she likes.” With an offended air,
he led the way, while Bhundy followed meekly. Selim, feeling safe
enough in the darkness, flung himself down to rest, tired but alert. He
wasn’t afraid the people combing the bush would do him any harm,
except stampede on seeing him and so give the alarm that he was in
the neighbourhood. If that happened it would be unsafe to lurk round
the outskirts of Gooj.
A search-party came unpleasantly close to the Tiger, who slunk
away to the left. The men spread out, and keeping in touch by talking,
thoroughly combed the rough country. Their boisterous chatter
smothered the frightened yelps of a black dog whose trailing chain
had been caught in some bushes through which he had attempted to
force his way. He caught Selim’s scent and cowered down, too terrified
to utter a sound. As the Tiger approached, the Dog made one supreme
effort to break away, and then collapsed with a pitiful and hopeless
whine.
The Tiger bored his way through the scrub, and in doing so,
released the chain. The poor Dog lay on its back, and with terrified
eyes watched Selim as he sniffed round him.
‘‘What are you doing here, Kallia?” he asked gruffly.
‘T’m lost,” the Dog replied in a quaking voice.
‘‘So it is you that people are looking for?” the Tiger said. ‘‘Let’s
get into the open where we can talk. Don’t attempt to run away, or
else ...” Here the Tiger showed his teeth, and the poor Dog lay on his
back once more, with his heart beating like a kettledrum. ‘‘Don’t
cringe like that,” Selim angrily snapped. “Sit up and talk. I won’t
hurt you.”
“They are not looking for me; they are looking for my master’s
little son. He lives in that big bungalow by the side of the road,” the
Dog said, with rising courage.
“How do you know that?” Selim demanded.
“Oh, I broke my chain and ran to the edge of the ravine after a
wild cat . . The Dog suddenly became embarrassed. It occurred to
him that, after all, Selim was a big, wild cat.


“Well?”
“Little Godfrey ran after me. He got lost in the bush. I couldn t
go to him because I got tangled up in the prickly shrubs where you
found me.”
“You’re a poor sort of dog,” the Tiger said with contempt.
Kallia didn’t like to contradict Selim. After all, he was a careless
dog. He knew that if his master’s son were not found there would be
grievous trouble. No one would believe he had been caught in that
wretched bush. He wanted to sneak home now and hide in his kennel.
Why Godfrey wanted to run after him and get lost was more than he
could understand.
“Of course I’ll be blamed for everything and get whipped when
I go home,” said Kallia. “Do you mind if I start off now?”
Jackie suddenly loomed up and snarled at the black Dog, who
shrank behind the Tiger.
“The people are searching for a little boy, Selim,” Jackie said
excitedly, “and I believe I’ve picked up the scent. Bhundy’s waiting
at the spot.” He looked cheekily at the black Dog. “Who’s your friend?”
“The little boy’s pet,” Selim replied. “He’s coming with us to find
him. Lead on, Jackie. There’s no time to lose.”
They ran up the ravine till they picked up the scent and then
veered to the right. The black Dog, with a glad little whine, took the
lead, his nose never leaving the ground. Suddenly he gave several
quick barks and stopped. Beneath a rock, and almost hidden by a clump
of fern, Godfrey lay fast asleep on the moist earth. The grime of his
tears had dried on his cheeks. Perhaps he had thought that, after all,
there was no more to fear in the dark than in his own little room
after his mother had snuffed out the candle.
“Stop barking,” Selim snarled. “Do you want to tell the world
we’re here?”
Bhundy stooped over the child. “If the child wakens and sees us
he’ll be terrified out of his life. What are we to do next?”
“Let his parents know where he is,” said Selim. He turned to the
black Dog: “We’ll keep watch and see no harm comes to the child.
You go back home and bark and make a fuss till someone follows you
here. If you don’t bring someone back with you. I’ll hunt you down
and break your neck, even if I have to come to your kennel to find you.”


The black Dog bolted for home, Down in the ravine the lights
twinkled through the foliage as the faithful searchers continued their
quest. The bungalow veranda was still flooded with light, and his
distracted mistress paced it in an agony of despair. Her husband, con-
ducting the search, kept sending reassuring messages, but so far there
Asleep beneath the rock was little Godfrey.
was no definite news of her child. He had been missing since four
o clock. No one had seen him leave the house. A peasant, who brought
news when the search began, said he had seen the child walking towards
the ravine.
Every time the mother looked towards the ravine, and thought of
the wild beasts and reptiles which abounded in the forest, her heart
sank. She remembered stories of men and women who had been lost
m those mountain fastnesses, and now believed only a miracle could
save her boy. In the confusion the household had not noticed that


74 JUNGLE VAGABONDS
the Dog, too. was missing. Now, as he barked and yelped at her heels,
she remembered she had not seen him all the afternoon. And then
her husband climbed the steps.
“Any news?” she asked breathlessly. .
“None. But we haven’t given up hope,” he replied, mopping is
forehead. He turned from his wife’s haggard face to the Dog, which
now frisked around him, barking more loudly.
“Where have you been, Nigger?” he asked stopping to pat him
Nigger bolted down the steps and back again, becoming more excited
every moment. . . n
“Can’t you see?” his mistress said. ‘‘Nigger is trying to tell you
something. Why not follow him, and see where he leads you.
Holding the Dog’s chain, Godfrey’s father followed him across the
scrubland and down the ravine. Nigger’s loud barks warned the Tiger
it was time to move out of the picture. Jackie hurried up to tell Selim
that the Dog and his master were approaching.
Stumbling, but following the Dog as fast as he was able, the lather
reached the spot where his child still slept. Selim and his companions
had silently disappeared. r , .
Striking a match with trembling fingers, the father saw his little
son was unhurt, and breathing softly in a sound sleep. He also saw
something which made him hurriedly strike another match, and go
down on his knees for a closer examination.
They were several fresh pug marks in the soft earth, close to his
child In his den at home the heads of three tigers decorated the walls,
and their skins covered the polished floor. Yes, he recognized those
tiger, and a huge one at that, has been here, he exclaimed
with a shudder, as the burnt match slid through his fingers. Only a
miracle must have saved his child from being mauled by this savage
b ea st
“X mustn’t let his mother know about the tiger. She would never
get over the horror of it.” He picked up his sleeping son, and jubilantly
followed the Dog as they retraced their steps to the lighted bungalow.


CHAPTER XV
THE PARROT JOINS THE GANG
The greatest treasure of the Rajah of Oooj was his extraordinary
Parrot. Its plumage of every hue dazzled the eyes, and it spoke so
clearly that it was often mistaken for the Rajah himself. The bird’s
silver cage hung just out of the window of a beautiful summer-house
in the palace garden, where the Rajah spent most of his time. No
one was welcome there except the Rajah’s family and a few nobles,
and even they were not encouraged to take any notice of his pet.
The Rajah was not a happy man. Early in his youth he had lost a
leg, and, some years later, the sight of an eye. His Counsellors lived in
great dread of his short and violent temper. It was said that the only
living thing that dared to answer him back was the Parrot. The Rajah,
according to gossip, believed it had more wisdom than any one in his
realm, even including Colonel Burrows, the British Resident, Nothing
annoyed this despot more than to be contradicted. As a matter of fact,
the Parrot alone agreed with him, because it repeated all its master said.
The Parrot, as can be supposed, was feared by the Rajah’s subjects
as well as the servants of the household. They all strained their ears
when it talked, because they knew that whatever had been in the
Rajah’s mind always escaped on the Parrot’s tongue. Some people
gladly would have wrung the bird’s neck, but the Rajah threatened
that if any evil befell his pet, the guard on duty would be cruelly
punished.
Now the Rajah of Gooj had a deep dislike for the Rajah of
Nasrabad, whose sister he had married. He did not know which of the
two he hated more. He had visited Nasrabad once only. Although he
admired the city, the desert depressed him. Little did he know that
the most famous animal in that great state actually was in his capital,
and was planning to steal his Parrot.


The palace, with its lovely garden, stood near the city wall, and.
overlooked the ravine. Gooj had many fine buildings, all built of stone.
In the centre of the city stood a great lake, surrounded by a covered
colonnade of pure white marble. A beautiful temple and many shady
trees were reflected in the clear water. The temple and the palace were
the pride of all the good people of Gooj. The Rajah may have been
a tyrant, but at least he kept his subjects happy and prosperous.
The Jackal lost no time making a tour round the city. No dogs
were allowed in the palace grounds, but when it became dark Jackie
scrambled over the low wall and sniffed around. He expected to hear
the Rajah’s Parrot chattering, but it usually talked so much that when
evening came it was glad to give itself a rest. Selim was very dis-
appointed when Jackie returned and told him that he had not found
the Parrot.
“You must go into the grounds during the day and see if you have
better luck,” Selim said. “Most birds keep silent at night.”
“Bah! Why do we trouble about a parrot?” Jackie retorted. “What
will we do with it when we do steal it?”
“I shall present it to the Rajah of Nasrabad, and then perhaps he
will let us live in peace. Do you ever think of our cosy cave there?”
Selim asked.
“Very often, and the legs of mutton I used to steal from the
butchers’ shops in the city. If I thought the Rajah would stop hunting
us round the country I’d steal forty parrots for him.”
“So you see,” said Selim, “we are of one mind.”
That night Jackie hid himself in a thick clump of bamboo in a
corner of the palace gardens and waited for daylight. It so happened
that his hiding-place was almost in front of the summer-house, and to
his great joy he saw the Rajah hang the Parrot’s cage under the eaves.
The Parrot chattered at a great rate, while the Rajah fed it with
nuts and small bananas, and talked to it. There in the shade the Parrot
remained all day. Although a few nobles visited the Rajah in his
summer-house, and the gardener swept the paths quite close to the
bamboo clump, no one disturbed the Jackal. He noticed a troop of
monkeys lived in a large banyan-tree close by, and several times during
the day they came down to be fed by the Rajah or his attendants. This
gave Jackie the idea that Bhundy would raise no suspicion if she joined


the party too. It would then be easy for her to steal the Parrot—if she
used her head.
Selim thought it a good idea. He was living in a cave half-way down
the ravine, very hard for even a tiger to reach, and was getting tired of
doing nothing. Bhundy readily agreed to follow the scheme. She was
always willing to do anything Selim wanted, and promised to get away
with the Parrot within a week.
Leaving her bonnet and cape and the necklaces behind, Bhundy
climbed up the ravine to the palace garden and joined the troop of
monkeys, who gave her a friendly welcome. Bhundy was very clever,
and it didn’t take long for the Rajah’s monkeys to find that out. All
day she listened to the Parrot. Sometimes it whistled or talked in a
quiet and kindly way, and again, for no apparent reason, worked itself
into a rage and shrieked and swore until Bhundy felt like choking it.
At night the Rajah hung the cage from a rafter just before the open
window, and Bhundy saw how simple it was to steal the cage, although
she thought it too heavy for her to carry any distance.
Every night Jackie visited her and carried the news back to Selim,
until their plans were made. Bhundy’s job was to unhook the cage and
lower it to the ground, Jackie’s to take it to the outer wall where Selim
waited. After that, they were to sneak as far away from Gooj as possible
while it was yet dark.
Like most plans, this one did not work very smoothly. Bhundy
leaped noiselessly to the ground, listened, and then jumped upon the
sill of the open window. Jackie waited below, trying not to breathe
hard. As Bhundy unhooked the cage the Parrot awoke and screamed
so loudly that the Rajah and some of his attendants thrust their heads
through the palace windows and called for the guard. But long before
they rushed up to inquire what all the shouting was about, a great
shape leaped lightly into the garden from the top of the wall, took
the Parrot’s cage from Jackie’s dripping jaw, and hopped over the
other side with it.
Bhundy and Jackie escaped easily enough, glad to be out of earshot
of the Rajah’s outburst of rage. How the Parrot was stolen the Rajah
did not know, but it angered him to think it was so brazenly done. He
threatened to dismiss his Prime Minister if the Parrot were not quickly
recovered, and to place the members of the guard in prison for the


rest of their lives. He stamped about and swore so much that he over-
balanced and sprained the ankle of his only leg, and that made him
angrier than ever.
The theft of that Parrot woke every person in Gooj. The bells of
the palace rang. The bells of every temple in the city were tolled.
Soldiers shouted and rushed about, firing their guns at random; horse-
men galloped to the gates, and then along all the roads that led from
the city. What with the banging of drums, the beat of tom-toms, the
blast from conches, the trumpeting of elephants, and the shouting and
wailing of the panic-stricken people, one would have thought the city
was being attacked by the Rajah of Nasrabad. And as Selim, the Jackal,
and Bhundy scrambled down the ravine, the Parrot screeched and
swore and kept repeating: “I want to go back to Gooj; I want to go
back to Gooj.” Once Selim let the cage roll down the steep slope for
some distance and that quietened the Parrot. It looked a crumpled
ball of feathers and very annoyed at this rough treatment, but too
sick to show it.
Leaving the State of Gooj with a fretful Parrot that kept shrieking
was not a simple matter. The whole country-side was being searched
by soldiers, policemen, and thousands of people anxious to win the
reward of ten thousand rupees which the Rajah offered for the safe
return of his pet. Wild reports came in to the capital about the bird.
Its chattering and evil language had been heard in the north and the
south, the east and the west. Every bad character in the State was
arrested on suspicion and put into jail; every traveller was searched
in the hope that his baggage would contain the missing Parrot.
Nervous, tired, and drowsy, Selim and his companions, taking the
roughest and wildest route through the State, at last shook off their
pursuers.
Jackie wanted to kill the Parrot. Selim thought ducking it under
water would make it a good and civil bird. But Bhundy soothed it
with endearing words she had heard Betty often say, and fed it with
the sweetest fruit she could find, and the tastiest nuts. Kindness won
in the end. The Parrot seemed to know they were in danger and
learned to keep silent.
After many days of travel, during which all suffered from hunger
and sometimes from thirst, Selim and his friends journeyed through


the great sandy plain, and from a rise saw the City of Nasrabad, looking
as though it floated on the edge of the world. At the sight of it, Selim
dropped the Parrot’s cage, gave two bounds in the air, and chased his
tail for several minutes. Jackie, throwing all caution to the wind,
yelped with joy, while Bhundy, who could not understand what it all
was about, looked on in amazement.
“Shut up, Jackie,” Selim exclaimed. “Remember the Rajah’s
soldiers are still looking for us.”
“Nonsense!” said Jackie. “I haven’t seen one for days. They’ve
given us up.”
“The cave is over there,” Selim whispered trembling with excite-
ment. “Well be there before sundown, and then I shall sleep for a
week.”
Bhundy looked at the cage. It lay on its side with the door open,
and the Parrot that belonged to the Rajah of Gooj was not inside it.
Selim gazed at it too, and then searched the brassy sky for a
vanishing speck. But there was no sign of life in the sky, on the parched
earth, or on the pricky scrub that grew in patches upon it.
“The ungrateful wretch,” Selim said with deep disgust. “It has
flown away.”
“That’s what we’d better learn to do,” said Jackie. “The Rajah
will hunt us out of the cave as soon as the Parrot tells the world all
about us. What can we give him for a present now?” Jackie scratched
his ear and thought hard. “Oh, I know. What about Bhundy’s
necklaces?”
“They’re for Betty. Don’t you dare to take them, Jackie,” Bhundy
replied firmly.
Selim settled the argument after it had gone on for a few minutes.
“The necklaces are for Betty. That’s settled.”
They prepared to start off again, very sad and dejected over the
loss of the PaiTot. Selim, in a spasm of rage, struck the silver cage a
blow with his great paw, and it ceased to look like anything they had
seen before.
“How dare you!” he roared as he smote the cage.
As the sun set the tired travellers reached the cave. The cobras
crawled out of their holes and hissed a welcome, swaying their expanded


hoods from side to side. Both Selim and Jackie sniffed at the path, and
knew no human foot had trodden it for some time. The cave looked
cool and inviting as they came near, and to their great delight they
saw the Parrot perched above the opening.
“Welcome to Nasrabad!” the Parrot said. “I’m glad you didn’t
bring the cage, Selim. I’m one of the gang now-and free.’’


CHAPTER XVI
THE TAILOR LOSES HIS BEARD
With Po-putt, the Parrot, at large, and its cage battered, Selim had
to think of some new present for the Rajah of Nasrabad. The Parrot,
glad to be able to do what it liked, did not fly back to the Rajah of
Gooj as Jackie believed it would. Instead, it perched in a little recess
over the entrance of the cave when it returned from its daily trips to
Nasrabad. It became a really good companion, amusing Selim by its
quaint stories of city life and the queer ways of human beings. But
even so wise and cunning a parrot could not be expected to escape the
notice of people who had long since heard of the theft of the wonderful
bird owned by the Rajah of Gooj, and so freedom made it very wary
and alert.
With Po-putt roaming the city by day, and Jackie skulking its
streets at night, it was not long before Selim heard that the Tailor
was back in the Street of Tailors and Embroiderers. Jackie reported
he was as thin as ever and just as greedy looking, and his beard, if
anything, was an inch or two longer. Luckily for him, his story about
Selim and the Monkey was believed by the Rajah. Hundreds of people
who had taken part in the great hunt or chase were able to swear that
they had seen them together. Although no one had actually set eyes
on the jewels, that part of the Tailor’s story could not be disputed. The
Rajah, however, told the Tailor that if the necklaces were not handed
over to him within three months, he would strangle the Tailor with
his own beard.
For several months the Tailor had closed up his shop while on the
Treasure hunt, and during that time not one gold piece had been
added to his hoard. In fact, he had spent so much money that the mere
thought of it brought the tears to his eyes. So with scissors, needle and
thread he tried to restore his fortunes. He worked hard all day, eating


little till night fell, when he went to his favourite kabob shop and
stuffed himself with curries and pilaus till the moisture stood in beads
on his forehead. Often, as he counted his money in the little room
with the narrow window and thick strong door, he wondered where
Selim was. Of course, he did not expect him to return to Nasrabad;
probably he was hiding in the depths of a jungle somewhere up in
the Terai. Probably, too, long before this the Monkey had been killed,
or else had dropped the necklaces in the usual stupid way of all
monkeys.
One night, after he had eaten so much that he felt like a drum,
he strolled a little distance down the street before he went home.
Presently behind him he heard a hubbub of voices and hurrying foot-
steps, and recognized the Jackal bolting with a fat leg of mutton. His
heart gave a thump, but he laughed as merrily as the rest of the crowd
at the Jackal’s daring.
He knew now that Selim was back in the cave.
He wanted to see the Tiger very much, but remembered the last
time they met. His leg was still sore where Selim had licked off the
skin. He also had good reason to believe that the man in his party
who had fired at the Tiger had wounded him, and if Selim were not
dead he would be in a very bad temper. Again, where Selim was, the
Monkey and perhaps the necklaces would be. Although nothing but
ill had befallen him since he started off on the Treasure hunt, he
could not let this chance go by. He made up his mind to see Selim
next day. He could always soothe the Tiger and make him good-
humoured if he were in an angry mood.
Early in the morning he started off with some samples of red and
blue cloth, and a picture in colour of an officer in the Rajah’s body-
guard, whose uniform, rich with gold embroidery, made him look like
a prince. It was past midday before he reached the cave. Jackie and
Po-putt had left for the city, but Bhundy sunned herself on the highest
point of the cave, while Selim slept soundly in its cool shadows. Very
quickly she hid the necklaces in a crevice as the Tailor shuffled up
the rough path, then woke the Tiger.
“What is it?” Selim asked drowsily.
“The Tailor is here,” Bhundy replied.


“Then,” said Selim leisurely standing up and stretching himself,
T shall kill him.”
“No,” begged Bhundy. “You can never do that. For the sake of
Betty whom we love, remember we have a truce with all men.”
The Tailor at the entrance tried to accustom his eyes to the gloom
of the cave. He knew Selim was within, although he could not see or
hear him. He also felt that his life was in danger and he had been
very foolish to come. Bracing himself, he called: “Selim, I am here to
make you the uniform I promised.”
Then he caught the fire in Selim's eyes, and watched those points
of light coming slowly nearer.
“I shall make thee look even grander than the Rajah of Nasrabad,”
the Tailor said, not quite so boldly, as he nervously stroked his beard.
The eyes did not move. The Tailor’s terror increased. He waited
several minutes, and spoke again.
“Don’t be angry with me, Selim. It was not I who fired at you,
although you ate all my lamb stew, and scraped off several inches of
skin from my leg with your rough tongue.”
There was no response. The Tailor became more alarmed.
“Do not think I begged the Rajah to drive thee out of his realms,
or command the people to steal the necklaces from the Monkey and
return them to him. Every one knows the stones were only glass.”
The reply came in a deep voice that was more like an angry growl.
“Liar!”
The Tailor, losing nerve, turned to flee, but Selim gripped him
by the tail of his loose coat.
The Tailor’s trembling legs crumpled under him, and he sat on
the ground.
“Please look at the picture of the uniform and the patterns of the
cloth before I measure you,” the Tailor besought Selim in despair.
“No!” Selim replied furiously. “I don’t trust you. To-morrow I
know this cave will be surrounded by the Rajah’s soldiers. That is
why you cannot leave it alive.”
With a snarl the Tiger drew up his great powerful paw to rend
the Tailor, who broke into a wailing sob.
“No, Selim. No!” Bhundy said.
Selim hesitated. “Get up!” he shouted. “Get up and go. I’ll spare


your life for Bhundy’s sake, although I know mine will be in danger
from now on.”
The Tailor ran hurriedly down the hill, not even watching his foot-
steps, or the cobras that glided from his path. So great was his terror
that he did not look behind, until he heard Selim cough close at his
heels.
‘‘What is your pleasure?” the Tailor gasped, standing his ground
Selim forces the Tailor to cut off his beard.
Just this. I have changed my mind. Choose between your life and
your beard.”
‘‘What is a beard compared with the rest of the body,” said the
Tailor.
‘‘Thou art a wise tailor. So take thy scissors and cut it off a palm’s
width from thy chin,” Selim commanded.
The Tailor drew his scissors from his pocket, the tears streaming
down his shrivelled cheeks. ‘‘Oh, Selim, my old friend, must you
bring this disgrace upon me? Must I, who own the world’s longest
beard, have it clipped so that I look like a youth?”
Selim’s teeth closed very lightly on the Tailor’s calf. “I’m waiting,”
the Tiger grunted.


The Tailor looked so odd without his long beard that Selim roared
with merriment. The Tiger picked up the hank of hair and loped
back to the cave.
“That was a foolish thing you did,” Bhundy said. “He will hate us
more than ever. We cannot stay here now. The Rajah and his men
will give us no respite day or night, after the Tailor seeks an audience.”
“I shall win the Rajah’s friendship, whatever the Tailor says,”
Selim replied, in a sturdy voice.
“Not with the necklaces,” said Bhundy, “for those belong to Betty
and are hidden; nor will it be with Po-putt, for he is as free as you
Iff
.
Poor Selim looked dejected.
“What is the Rajah’s friendship worth?” continued Bhundy. “If
he saw you he would shoot you. He is like the rest of men. He doesn’t
understand. There is only one man who knows your thoughts, and
can speak to you as men speak one to another, and that is the Tailor.
And see what you have done with his precious beard!”
“There you are wrong,” said Selim. “Betty and others in the camp
spoke to us.”
“Selim, I have thought much of Betty in this cave. Will she know
you when she sees you, or will she be frightened and run away before
you are near enough to call her by name?”
“I, too, have thought of that,” the Tiger replied. “That is why I
want to be different. If,” he said with a dreamy look in his eyes, “I
wore a beautiful uniform like the Tailor wanted to make me, she
would know me. All the world would know me, because I should be
different from any tiger that ever lived.”
“But can you trust the Tailor?”
“No,” said Selim, “except that so far he has not done me a great
hurt. Perhaps he is too frightened. Who knows? I think if I gave him
gold and silver, or jewels and precious stones, he’d do anything for
me. Why is it men set a value on such baubles?”
“He’ll never get those necklaces,” Bhundy replied. “They’re
Betty’s.”
“Po-putt, whom I stole for the Rajah, is now one of us and free, so
we can’t give him away,” Selim said gloomily. Suddenly his face
brightened. “Every time I’ve set out on a journey I’ve brought back


something good. Perhaps if I seek it I shall find a fitting present to
win the goodwill of the Rajah. I am well and strong again, ready for
more adventures. Will you come?”
‘‘lf you need me, I will come,” said the Monkey in her calm,
quiet way.
Just then Jackie sneaked into the cave, and Selim told him of
his plans.
‘‘l’m always ready for the road,” Jackie said. “I’m getting tired of
mooching round city streets and being chased by angry men and
snarling mongrels. Besides, I’m getting fat. Let us make a quick trip
and be back inside a month. I met the Tailor on my way back. How
I laughed at his little wizened face. He struck at me with his staff, and
swore he’d hunt Selim and me out of Nasrabad.”
‘‘That settles it,” said Selim. ‘‘He is going to tell the Rajah we’re
here. Better start off as soon as the sun sets.”
‘‘And we’ll leave Bhundy and the Parrot at home. No one would
hurt them. Besides, they can look after themselves. They can wait here
for us,” the Jackal suggested.
‘‘Just as Selim pleases,” Bhundy said with a patient little sigh.
“I’ll think about it,” Selim responded, and that ended the talk.
Late that night the moon rose over the desert, and the light was
clear enough to see the road to Nasrabad. Something, either of sight
or sound, disturbed Po-putt, who flew away at once to see what danger
approached. Half an hour later he awakened Selim with a screech:
Get up, lazy-bones. Get up at once. The Rajah’s soldiers are on
the march.”
‘Toot soldiers?” the Tiger asked.
‘‘No, mounted men,” the Parrot replied.
Selim rushed outside, but was back in a few minutes.
‘‘They are making a cordon round the hill to catch us,” he
exclaimed excitedly. ‘‘l must go at once. Jackie, it will be hard to
escape this time. You stay behind. The soldiers wouldn’t harm you or
Bhundy. They want me.”
“They won’t find me,” said Jackie, with a defiant look.
“I’ll sta Y behind,” poor Bhundy whimpered. “I’m not frightened,
except for your safety, Selim.”
No one needs to be nervous about me,” said Selim. He sharpened


his claws on the rock, stretched himself, and very calmly said “Good-
bye”. Before any one could reply he had gone.
The Tiger made a quick dash towards the road. A great circle of
cavalry was closing upon the cave.
Selim crouched perfectly still, all his senses keen and alert. The
moonlight was almost as clear as day, but the Tiger hoped no one had
spotted him.
A little nose pressed against his side, and Jackie whispered,
“Nothing for it but a bold run, Selim.”
“Go back, you little fool,” the Tiger growled.
“No, I’m coming too. All set? Now, make a run for it. They’ve
spotted us. They’ll shoot.”
The soldiers caught sight of the oncoming tiger and nervously
blazed at him with their carbines, but the horses caught the Tiger’s
scent and got out of control. All except one. Its rider, a huge man
famed for his courage and daring, used the spurs and charged Selim
with his lance. The point of it caught the skin at the nape of the neck
and spun the Tiger round.
The soldier wheeled and charged again. But Selim, hot with pain
and wrath, sprang and brought the man heavily to the ground.
His enemy lay stunned and motionless. Turning, Selim scratched
some sand over the soldier’s face and sneezed defiantly.
“How dare you!” he exclaimed angrily, then followed Jackie, who
had made good his escape.


CHAPTER XVII
BURGLARY
It was the time when wood apples ripened and the borah, plump and
crisp, was most acid-sweet. The sun during the day lay warm on the
houses, the towers, the domes and minarets of Nasrabad; but as soon
as it set, the night wind blew from the desert so chill that it made
people’s teeth chatter. In the cold season of the year caravans set out,
and a ceaseless procession of travellers moved into the city through
every main gate. Outside the walls men lit their campfires at night,
and one could hear the jingle and movement of horses and camels
tethered in long neat rows. Round the cheerful glow men ate their
evening meal and drank and smoked, and told stories of travel and
adventure, or broke into boisterous songs. Inside the city the streets
were gay with carnival; at every corner some entertainment drew a
little crowd. The sound of music and laughter was heard in the gay
tents and booths pitched for the great annual Fair.
The cave became very lonely after Selim and Jackie had gone, and
the night winds searched every corner of it. Even though she wore her
bonnet and cape Bhundy felt very cold. Po-putt huddled against her
at night, and together they listened for the approach of danger. Long
before dawn broke Po-putt would start to tell the Monkey all it had
heard and seen in Nasrabad the previous day, and as soon as the sky
began to blush, the Parrot flew away to the city and left poor Bhundy
to wait, tearful and lonely, till he returned. At length the Parrot
suggested that both of them should leave the cave and live in the city
till Selim came back.
The safety of the necklaces worried them until Bhundy decided
to hide them in a little crevice near the ceiling of the cave, well out
of reach, and very difficult even for her to get near. So she wrapped
the jewels in her cape and bonnet and thrust them into a crevice, which


she carefully plugged with grass and dried leaves. Then joyously she
set out one night for Nasrabad. Po-putt told her exactly where she
would find the great temple, and which of the shady trees would bring
her close to the stream of pilgrims and worshippers who never forgot
the sacred monkeys, Bhundy found a comfortable perch with little
difficulty. It was very pleasant here, watching thousands of women in
gay saris and shawls, or in long silk tunics and coloured trousers taking
offerings to their gods. The children laughed at the antics of the
monkeys and squirrels, and fed them with fruit and nuts.
The Parrot kept out of sight as much as possible all day, for if any
one caught sight of his brilliant plumage a thousand fingers pointed
him out among the foliage of the trees. Sometimes a visitor from the
city of Gooj would catch a glimpse of him and swear by all that was
holy that there was the Rajah’s Parrot. But Po-putt was a wise bird
and kept a still tongue. Bhundy had warned him never to speak when
humans were about.
So, during the day, the Parrot ranged far and wide, and visited the
cave every second day to see if any one had disturbed the crevice
where the jewels were hidden. He had spent years in a cage, and now
the great world held so much interest and happiness that the days did
not seem long enough. Very rarely did he give even a thought to his
royal master or the pleasant summer house in the royal gardens. At
night he snuggled close to Bhundy, and woke her very early so that
they could go down to the lake undisturbed, and splash in the water
and make themselves look clean, neat and tidy for the day.
One day, as the Parrot sat on a neem-tree that flanked the main
street of the city, he saw a little bent figure moving swiftly along, and
recognized the Tailor. Po-putt kept him in view till he saw him enter
the street door of a narrow two-storied house, with a tailor’s shop
on the street level. “Ah,” thought he, “here is where the Tailor lives,”
and he perched on the ridge of the roof. At the back of the house
Po-putt noticed there was a narrow garden where several tall slender
cypress-trees cast shadows over a smooth well-clipped lawn, flanked
with flower beds. A little garden seat beside a fountain was the Tailor’s
favourite spot to sit and think in the cool of the evening, hidden from
prying eyes by the stone wall that surrounded the garden. The Parrot
often perched on that roof, and learned a good deal about the habits


of the Tailor—where he went, and what he did—and gave the Monkey
all particulars.
So a couple of weeks passed pleasantly enough. Every day some-
thing happened in Nasrabad that brought the people in holiday mood
into the street. But there was nothing more grand and colourful than
the procession of elephants to the great temple, led by the Rajah
himself, at the end of the great Fair. The rich saddlecloths, the
embroideries and jewels which decorated the mahouts as well as their
mounts, almost took Bhundy’s breath away. The Rajah showered
coins among the people and provided cakes and sweets for all who
asked. The sacred monkeys had double handfuls of peanuts and
parched rice and grain scattered under the trees.
When Po-putt rejoined the Monkey at nightfall, Bhundy said:
“What a wonderful day it has been. I should be happy, but I can’t
help feeling worried about the cave.”
“Oh, go to sleep,” said the Parrot. “I’ll go there to-morrow and
make sure everything is right.”
Neither of them had forgotten Selim and Jackie. They longed for
them to come back; but both had thoroughly enjoyed themselves at
the great annual Nasrabad Fair.
As the sun rose next morning Po-putt flew into the cave. At once
he knew someone had visited it. There were tallow droppings every-
where, and marks and scratches on the floor that he had not noticed
before. Perching near the crevice, he saw that the grass and leaves had
been removed from it. With a squawk of alarm the Parrot returned
to the city.
The day before, the Tailor had mounted a hardy Deccanee pony
and leisurely ambled to the cave. Dismounting, he cautiously struggled
up the hill, fearful that Selim had come back and was waiting for
him. He had not forgiven Selim for forcing him to cut off his beard;
even now men turned and laughed as he passed. His beard had been
the pride of Nasrabad. In fact, it was spoken of from the Himalayas
to Cape Comorin.
A less insult than this might have been forgiven. However, deep
down in his heart the Tailor was fond of Selim. To him, he was not a
tiger but a beast with the soul and spirit of a man. He felt happy to
possess the friendship of those two queer companions, for Jackie, in


his way, was even more quaint. Selim seemed to understand that man’s
great weakness was selfishness and greed. Somewhere, the Tailor
suspected, the Tiger had a little store of gold pieces, but he had been
unable to find it.
Just as Selim knew the Tailor’s weak points, so the Tailor under-
stood that he could easily appeal to the Tiger’s vanity, especially his
love of gaudy clothes. The Tailor, who had saved a good deal of
money, wanted wealth enough to live in a beautiful palace, and out-
shine the Rajah himself. All this was possible if he could only lay his
hands on the necklaces, which he had resolved would never find their
way into the Rajah’s hands if they first fell into his.
As the Tailor neared the cave he coughed loudly, but everything
was quiet and still. He felt rather mean that he had reported to the
Rajah that the famous Tiger had returned to the cave, and that the
lives of travellers to and from the city henceforth were in danger. Of
course he had heard that Selim had narrowly escaped after dragging
down a sowar who was the most stalwart soldier in the realm. It was
very unlikely, after a fright of this kind, that Selim would come back
to his old haunts, and in the meantime if the Monkey were still there,
he would have a good chance of learning something about the jewels.
As there was no sign of life the Tailor, in a quaking voice, began
to sing, and shortly afterwards entered the cave. He had brought with
him a packet of candles, and lighting half a dozen he stuck them round
so that he could see into the innermost corners. Flocks of disturbed
bats flew to and fro. His searching eyes soon caught sight of the crevice,
and he began to wonder why it was stopped up with grass and leaves.
It did not take the Tailor long to collect and pile up a platform of
stones that enabled him to reach the crevice quite easily. First he drew
out the rubbish, and then he came upon Bhundy’s cape and bonnet,
which he threw to the floor. Back went his trembling hand into the
crevice, and the jewel bag containing the necklaces soon found its way
into his coat-pocket.
His first impulse was to rush down to his pony and ride hard back
to Nasrabad. With a fortune in his possession, however, it would be
foolish to act hastily and draw attention. At all costs Selim must never
guess or learn that he had stolen the jewels. Swiftly, but carefully, he
stuffed the Monkey’s cape and bonnet and the empty jewel bag into


the crevice and concealed it with a plug of dry grass and leaves. Then
he removed all the stones from the cave, collected his candles, and after
saying a brief prayer to Allah, strolled down to his pony.
Poor Bhundy wailed and moaned when she arrived at the cave and
found that Po-putt’s surmise was correct, and the necklaces were gone.
Every time she thought of Selim she groaned, but every thought of
The Tailor steals the necklaces from the cave.
Betty brought a flood of tears. There was little use staying in the cave
now, even if she had the courage. The robber might return and
kill her.
Of course she guessed who the thief was, and mentioned him to
the Parrot as they whispered together in the banyan-tree, when all the
rest of the world seemed asleep.
“Don’t be afraid, Bhundy,” Po-putt said. “Well get the necklaces
again. You wait till Selim and Jackie come back.”
It was not long after this that the Tailor bought a nice house and
some land from a nobleman who needed money quickly to pay his
gambling debts. Following this, he sent for an architect who had built
more palaces than any other in the State.


“Oh, Abdul Azur,” he said haughtily, “design for me a beautiful
house with windows for every week in the year, regardless of cost, to
replace this one.”
“This is a big order,” said the architect, who often called on the
Rajah in both a business and a friendly way. “Hast thou the money
to build so costly a home?”
“Yes, and more to come,” the Tailor replied. “I have just heard
that an uncle of mine, a wealthy jeweller of Delhi, has died and left
me a great fortune. But please keep that a great secret.”
When the architect, thinking the Tailor was not in his right mind,
had gone, the Tailor went up to his upper room, and opening his
treasure chest drew out the two necklaces. Lovingly he passed each
stone through the palm of his hand, trembling with excitement at the
thought that the gems were to make him one of the wealthiest, and
therefore one of the most important men, in Nasrabad. The beauty
and the lustre of the jewels in the candlelight almost blinded him.
Carefully he replaced them in a carved case of ivory, then closed and
locked the lid of the chest. In his joy, pride and greed, the Tailor
had forgotten that the Rajah had sworn that if the necklaces were
not handed to him within three months, he would have the Tailor
strangled .with his own beard.
The Tailor felt thankful, when he remembered the Rajah’s threat,
that he had lost his beard.


CHAPTER XVIII
AND HERE COMES ’ERBERT!
For ten days Selim and Jackie travelled due north for no other reason
but that Selim believed if they kept on in that direction they must
run across Betty. Then again, the country in full crop made the deer,
antelope and wild pig plump and good eating, and one could travel
far when the- nights were clear and cold. The spear-thrust in Selim’s
neck had not pierced a muscle, and the wound soon healed. Both
animals, fit and strong, enjoyed life to the utmost.
Every day they thought and talked of Bhundy and Po-putt, and
Jackie could always raise a chuckle if he spoke of the Tailor’s wizened
face with its little brush of beard. It was hard to avoid meeting human
beings, but sometimes at nightfall they rested close to a village just to
hear the children laughing and romping before going to bed. The
dogs, however, soon scented them and barked furiously, and they had
to move on.
Although they were both active enough, nothing really exciting
was taking place, except that Selim believed every mile brought them
nearer to the great moment when he would see Betty. But one evening
as they crossed the Grand Trunk Road, Selim sniffed about and then
ran down the road a little way.
“What’s wrong?” asked Jackie, who, as usual, flung himself down
for a rest till Selim stopped being mysterious.
“A circus passed this way about an hour ago,” Selim said, looking
very wise.
“Which circus?”
“The same one that left Bhundy’s cape and bonnet behind
“How do you know that?” Jackie inquired.
“At the tail-end was old Baloo, the Bear, and two monkeys. They
are still with them. Poor Baloo! I’d like to set him free.”


“Please don’t tack him on to us,” Jackie said. “He’s much too
slow.”
“Anyway,” Selim declared, “I’m going to follow that circus.”
They took a short cut and crossed some land where the trees had
been ring-barked. Beyond was a clump of forest. Leisurely they
approached it until Selim suddenly stopped.
“Elephant,” Selim exclaimed sniffing the air. “He’s got our scent
too, and bolted. Dear old Hathi. What’s he afraid of?”
They kept on his trail until the great beast ahead decided to stand
his ground. He chose a clearing and trumpeted loudly as Selim came
up. The light of battle was in his eye, and the great folds of his skin
were smooth and taut.
Selim squatted on his haunches and watched him with an amused
smile.
“I’m not fighting, even if you are, brother,” the Tiger said to the
great stamping beast. “There’s a smell about you that reminds me of
a circus. Did you belong to the one that went south a few hours ago?”
“Yes,” said the elephant, glad to meet a friendly tiger. “They drove
me out of it with stones and curses.”
“What on earth for?” asked Selim.
“Oh, they said I w T as no good, just a clumsy stupid beast that didn’t
know its trunk from its tail.”
The Tiger came a little closer. “Well, now I come to look you
over brother, you would have a job. Why, your tail is just as long as
your trunk.”
“Yes, and it makes things so confusing. I don’t know whether I’m
coming or going. Sometimes I get so worried about it that the world
goes spinning round me. Do you know what my parents called me?”
“No, what?”
“The Waltzing Elephant. When the world spun round I went
round with it. The elephants in the herd thought I was wonderful.
So did some men who saw me waltzing in a clearing. They caught
me and sold me to a circus. I was with them until a few hours ago.”
“What’s your name?” asked Jackie.
“ ’Erbert. I don’t like the name much. An English soldier christened
me that. Do you know any one truly great who was called ’Erbert?”


“No,” said Selim. “But you ought to be mighty glad they didn’t
call you Adolf.”
“Well, there’s nothing in a name, is there? But that doesn’t make
me unhappy,” said the Elephant, very tearfully.
“What does?” asked the Tiger.
“Oh, I feel so lonely and friendless. All my friends are in the
circus. There’s old Baloo, the Bear, and the camels and ponies and
dear old Gopal, the mahout, who fed me every night with great piles
of cakes and chupatties. Who’s going to feed me now?”
Poor ’Erbert began to weep.
“I don’t think there’s anything to weep about,” said the Tiger.
“Now you can go where you please, and do as you please, and eat what
you please. Look at Jackie and me. We’d simply hate to belong to
a circus.”
“Don’t you believe that,” interrupted the Jackal. “He’d join a
circus to-morrow if they’d let him wear pink silk pyjamas, or a
uniform.”
Selim gave Jackie a smack across the head which made him yelp.
“Don’t listen to him,” said Selim. “I heard you speak of Baloo the
Bear. I used to know him when he was quite little.”
“He’s grown into quite a snarly old bear now,” the Elephant
observed.
“Wouldn’t he like to be free?”
“I believe he would,” said ’Erbert. “He hates being chained up,
which is very hard to bear, and he’s always longing for honey, which
he never tastes now. This is a stupid world. They keep Baloo tied up,
when he wants to run away, and they chase me out of the circus, because
I want to stay in it. Oh dear, oh dear.” ’Erbert’s tears suddenly ceased
to fall, and he stood with legs apart, swinging his trunk and head from
side to side in a nasty sort of way. “D’you know what’s wrong with me?
“Lots of things. You haven’t got any spirit, for one,” Selim replied.
“Now, you’ve said it! I have no spirit. I am afraid of the mahout
and I’m really scared of Rahman, that old dolt who owns the circus.
If I had the proper spirit I’d go back and wreck that circus. I’d take
old Rahman by the waist and pitch him into a tree. I’d . . .”
“Why don’t you do it?” Jackie said wickedly. “We’ll come along
and see that you make a good job of it.”


“I promised I’d set Baloo free if I had the chance,” Selim growled,
“and now that chance has come. Always seize the opportunity, ’Erbert.
I always do. You’d better do something before you weaken. Besides,
we’ll come with you and back yOu up.”
“I’ll never weaken!” shouted ’Erbert, breaking into a run. “I’ll
never-never-never weaken. I’m getting madder every minute.”
’Erbert broke into a steady jog-trot, and about midnight he came
to a halt and pointed with his trunk. The circus was camped about
three hundred yards away, close to the road, in a shady tope of trees.
The men could not have long gone to sleep because the campfires
were still smouldering. The camels and the ponies were tethered on
one side of the camp. On the other, the hunting cheetahs, a couple of
leopards, and poor old Baloo, chained to a bullock cart, slept uneasily.
’Erbert gave a little sigh as he looked at that sleeping camp. After
all, it recalled quite a number of happy memories. Of course he had
had work to do, but he had rather enjoyed trundling a big van behind
him along the Grand Trunk Road, watching the scenery and meeting
all sorts of people who offered him titbits like pieces of sugar-cane. He
didn’t care for the circus performances so much. The chattering people,
the gay lights, the strange smells worried him, and the band playing
“Nelly Bly” had a most disturbing effect upon him. It always made
him want to waltz. At one time he followed the acrobats and gave a
dancing turn, but dancing made him so giddy that he couldn’t keep
within the ring, and knocked people over with his outstretched trunk
and tail. That started the bad feeling between him and the mahout
and the circus owner.
'V
’Erbert sniffed the sweet night air, hoping a stray aroma would
lead him to a pile of chupatties. As he thought of his dinner, his eyes
started to fill with tears, and his stomach gave several distinct groans.
Selim watched him with an understanding eye. ’Erbert was weakening.
Of that there was no doubt.
“I think you are going musth,* ’Erbert,” Selim said provokingly.
“I can see that in your eye. When a hathi goes musth it crashes into
anything in its path. What a camp to wreck! I am going to raise my
tail, ’Erbert. When I lower it, that means ‘go’. Jackie and I will leave
the rest to you.”
• Mad.


At the fall of Selim’s tail, ’Erbert pitched forward. The ponies and
camels heard him coming, scented the Tiger, and squealed and reared
and made an awful din. The camp woke, and seeing an elephant
charging down on them, the men fled in all directions, shouting
’Erbert the Elephant wrecks the circus camp.
dhuanna hathi! * Erbert did not do very much damage, although
he puffed and blew a lot. He trampled down the tents, jumped on the
cooking-pots, overturned the carts and pushed over the van, and
then thought he had done enough. Poor Baloo saw him, with trunk
extended, bearing down on him, and thought his last moment had
come. Erbert, however, grabbed Baloo’s chain, snapped it from the
post to which it was fastened, and dragged the Bear away. At the sight
* Mad elephant.


of the waiting Tiger, Baloo gave a queer little squeal of fear, but Selim
gave him a hearty pat on the back.
“Come along, Baloo,” the Tiger said. “You’re a free bear at last.
’Erbert and I will look after you.”
Selim thought they ought to keep to the hilly and wooded country
for a little while until ’Erbert and Baloo got into good marching trim.
As soon as the Tiger had had a talk to the Bear and had recalled the
camp where, as cubs together, they had been so happy, Baloo became
as keen as Selim to find Betty.
I wish I were able to tell you that Baloo did meet Betty as Selim
had planned. The facts are that Baloo met a very pretty young bear on
their journey over a mountain range, and went for a walk with her
one afternoon. As Baloo did not return at nightfall, the rest of the
party went to look for him. They found Baloo next day in a com-
fortable little cave, a sheepish look in his eyes, and his jaws dripping
with honey. His companion was in the same state. Selim looked at him
very reproachfully.
“I’m sorry, Selim,” said Baloo, “that you think I’m letting you
and Betty down, but I’ve made up my mind to stay here for a bit.
There’s plenty of honey and fruit hereabouts, and besides this is a
real taste of home life after that circus, and I rather like it.”
So they left Baloo quite contented and happy. Selim and Jackie
licked his forehead affectionately in farewell, and ’Erbert put his trunk
round him and gave him a hug. What was more, the gallant ’Erbert
threw Mrs Baloo a kiss as his lumbering body disappeared into
the bush.


CHAPTER XIX
DEEP LAID SCHEMES
They rather missed Baloo, although he hadn’t been with them long.
Jackie used to get a little impatient with him because he just ambled
along with the same steady pace o£ the circus on the march. Baloo
wouldn’t be hurried, and if he found a hive in an old tree-trunk or in
a crevice of a cliff, all had to wait until he had robbed it of every bit
of honeycomb. Then, for no particular reason, he would suddenly
stand up and do a dance, and give a grunt. That, in circus days, meant
“thank you’’ to any one who put a pice into the brass vessel which his
old keeper held out to take up a collection.
Sometimes Baloo and ’Erbert would have an argument about the
proper running of a circus. They never agreed about anything, except
that the acrobats and the jugglers were very stupid people who
reminded them of monkeys. The clown, to their minds, was the most
dismal creature they had ever met. Baloo seemed to have a grouch
against everybody in the circus, but ’Erbert spoke very kindly of the
mahout, especially when he was hungry.
Baloo lived in the hope of sticking his nose into a honeycomb, and
’Erbert to sniff the appetizing smell of a pile of hot chupatties. As a
matter of fact both Baloo and Erbert were never so happy as when
they were showing off. Well, people who entertain others always are
more or less like that. They like people to notice them, and think
they are important.
Having Erbert with them made it hard to travel without being
spotted. So they stuck to the forest and jungle, where it was most
unlikely they would see white people or run across Betty and her
parents. Erbert couldn t crouch or hide like Selim, and for a big,
powerful beast he was very nervous. After a few days of aimless


wandering, the Tiger decided they were getting nowhere, and would
have to strike out for more open country.
As a matter of fact, poor ’Erbert became more miserable every day.
He couldn't see the use of just moving from place to place, far away
from human beings and the smell of their food. Leaves and fruit and
grass are good enough for a wild elephant, but a circus elephant
expected more dainty fare. Thinking so much about warm chupatties
made 'Erbert’s brain dull and tired. He was never very bright. Some-
times it took a fairly long time to get him started off on their travels.
He would move forward and then backward, blinking and thinking
which was the front of him and which was the rear. If he got very
confused he’d start to go round in a circle, and a waltzing elephant in
thick jungle is apt to be a trifle boisterous.
In the noon of a very hot day, while they rested in a little glade,
'Erbert stopped fanning himself with the bough of a tree and said,
“I’m sick of the jungle. I’m going back.”
“Where to?” Selim asked.
“Back to human beings.”
“Why be a slave to any one?” said Selim.
“Oh, well,” ’Erbert replied, “what does it matter so long as one
gets plenty of good food?”
(Quite a lot of poor people, let it be said here, have to think that
way too.)
Selim looked ’Erbert over. Except for his overlong tail, he was a
handsome elephant. The Rajah of Nasrabad did not own a finer
animal; properly rigged out for a procession or festival, ’Erbert would
cut a very majestic figure. Selim had a fine imagination. He thought
of himself dressed up in a gay uniform squatting in a howdah with a
mahout sitting on ’Erbert’s head and telling him what he was to do.
It was curious how such ideas flitted in and out of his mind and gave
him a wistful look.
“What do you want me to do?” Selim inquired.
“I’ve heard you speak a good deal of a certain tailor in Nasrabad,”
said ’Erbert. “He seems a bit of a rascal, but then one has to remember
he is only*h poor human being. One always knows what an animal will
do, but never how a man will react. Perhaps he would like to own an
elephant.”


“Very well, if you must be owned and cared for by a man we will
take you to Nasrabad,” Selim replied. “You see, we started off to find
Betty, but found you instead, and I think it would be better if we
placed you before we resume our search for our little friend.”
They came to the edge of the desert where the country became
more rocky and stony and barer of trees and shrubs. ’Erbert’s spirits
had risen after they left the mountains and forest behind, and passed
through cultivated fields with pleasant little villages strewn about.
Here he played havoc with the crops, and left the poor farmers very
puzzled to know who the marauder was. Wild elephants were unknown
in open country, but surely nothing but a wild elephant would eat so
much, or trample so much down. No elephant in charge of a respectable
mahout would have been permitted to do such damage.
Selim, as usual leading the way, suddenly stopped. On the branch
of a stunted tree, he saw the dazzling plumage of the Parrot.
“Hullo, Po-putt,” hailed Selim, mightily glad to see his pal.
“Hullo, Selim,” the Parrot replied. “Who’s your big friend?”
“Oh, just another companion we picked up. How’s Bhundy?”
“Crying her eyes out. I couldn’t stand her tears any longer, so
flew off to find you.”
“What’s wrong?” asked Selim, very concerned.
“Hurry up,” Jackie added impatiently. “Can’t you see I’m anxious
too?”
“Someone stole her two necklaces out of the cave,” Po-putt said
very shortly.
That would be the Tailor,” Selim burst out, so overcome that he
flung himself down in the scanty shade of the tree. “Wait till I get
back. I’ll teach him to steal necklaces from Bhundy.”
“Of course the Tailor took them,” said the Parrot. “We put them
in the old place, and he found the spot. The cave was sprinkled with
candle grease.”
“Where were you?” Selim demanded.
Po-putt explained that they had gone into the city, and the cave
was burgled while they were away.
This enraged Selim more than ever. He almost broke into a roar,
but just caught Jackie’s eye in time.
“If the Tailor has stolen the necklaces,” Jackie said, with a cute


look in his eyes, “we’ll have to steal them back. There’s nothing else
to do, is there?”
Jackie’s case seemed unanswerable, so they started off for the cave,
the Parrot sitting on ’Erbert’s back and talking all the time. Some of
the things he said made ’Erbert very annoyed. However, long before
they reached the cave ’Erbert knew so much about Nasrabad that he
almost believed he had lived there all his life.
“You should see the Rajah’s elephants, ’Erbert,” Po-putt chattered.
“Their saddlecloths are blue and green, purple and gold. Of course
they would not have anything to do with a circus elephant. You’re not
in their class.”
“I’d be very pleased, Po-putt,” said ’Erbert, “if you’d refrain from
letting any one know I joined up with a circus. You see, I want to get
on in the world, although I always thought that all young folk believed
that nothing was more exciting and important than having a job in
a circus.”
(Well, quite a number of girls and boys think that anyhow.)
When they arrived at the cave they found Bhundy waiting for
them. ’Erbert was not very fond of monkeys. So with a superior glance
at Bhundy, he settled down to rest in the coolest part of the cave. The
others had a long and serious talk. Two things had to be done, quickly.
An owner had to be found for ’Erbert, and the necklaces had to be
recovered from the Tailor.
“I don’t suppose any one will want ’Erbert,” said Selim. “He’s
stupid and gets fits of giddiness. Yet we can’t let him run round like an
orphan.” Selim stopped. He had thought of a great idea.
They all expected something wonderful; and when, after a pause,
Selim spoke again, they realized he was the cleverest living thing in
the whole world.
“I have it! We’ll offer ’Erbert to the Tailor. If he refuses him,
we’ll have to offer Po-putt.”
The Parrot looked annoyed. “I refuse to belong to a mere tailor,”
he said haughtily. “I once belonged to a Rajah, and left him to regain
liberty. A'tailor? No, thank you. I haven’t got as low as that yet,”
“You don’t understand the big idea,” said Selim. “You’re going
to the Tailor not as a pet to be shut up in a cage, but as a detective.
You’re the only one in Nasrabad who will recover the necklaces.”


The Parrot first closed its eyes as though it had not heard what
was said. Then it moved two steps along its perch, and two steps back
again, keeping up a sort of jig that made Jackie want to drag out a
tail feather. Po-putt always behaved like that if he felt very important.
At last he spoke. “A detective? Well, of course, that’s another story.
I don’t mind living in the Tailor’s new house if I can fly in and out as
I please, because one day I shall fly out with the necklaces, and I’ll
never fly back again.”
“I think,” said Bhundy, “you can leave the necklaces to Po-putt
and me. We’ll talk over our plans. Selim, you and Jackie get rid of
’Erbert.”
“Then,” said Selim, “I want the Parrot to fly back to Nasrabad
with a message for the Tailor. Come here, Sherlock.”
“I rather like that name,” said the Parrot. “It sounds professional.
Po-putt is lyrical, but it’s so domestic, isn’t it? Sherlock! With a name
like that I could do anything.”


CHAPTER XX
THE TAILOR GETS A PRESENT
The Tailor sat on the balcony of his grand new home overlooking
the garden, feeling troubled. That morning the Rajah had sent for
him, and he had hurried to learn what his Royal Master desired. The
sudden rise of the Tailor to fortune, and his purchase of the city house
of one of his nobles, set the Rajah wondering how a mere tailor had
obtained such wealth.
The Rajah reminded the Tailor of his threat to strangle him with
his own beard if the necklaces were not handed to him. The time was
getting very short, and it looked to the Rajah that he would have to
think of some new method of execution, as the Tailor had taken the
precaution of cutting off his beard. The Tailor said he had failed to
find the necklaces, but was about to start off on another expedition to
look for them. Then the Rajah warned him that if he tried to leave
the city he would be arrested at once.
Now the Rajah of Nasrabad was a very shrewd man. Had he not
arranged a marriage between his sister, who had a terrible temper and
a sour face, and the Rajah of Gooj? Although he was at peace with his
great neighbour and brother-in-law, he never had the patience to read
his letters right through. For many weeks, Gooj did nothing but bewail
the loss of a parrot, and request that a proclamation be posted up
telling all good subjects of the State of Nasrabad that a reward of
twenty thousand rupees would be paid to any one who returned this
precious parrot to Gooj,
And by the way, said the Rajah, as the Tailor shrank away after
being dismissed, “perhaps, as you are so clever at recovering lost neck-
laces, you might also find for me a parrot of brilliant plumage which
speaks better than Oliver Goldsmith was reputed to do. The P.M. will
give you particulars.”


No wonder the Tailor did not feel very happy. He had spent on
this new house nearly all the gold he had hoarded, and it looked as if
he would not enjoy living in his house for long. Of course if he had to
choose between the necklaces and his life, he would give up the jewels,
but he wanted to avoid doing that, if he could. To live in proper
grandeur he had to sell the jewels. It cost him a good deal to live as
he was doing. His next big expense was to buy an elephant. A rich
man without an elephant was just as ridiculous as a rich man who
walked abroad in old, down-at-heel shoes. As for the Parrot, he would
not be bothered about it. Where was he to find it?
The evening was very still and cool. The crows and the mynahs
had gone to roost, and the noisy chirping of sparrows had died down
in the bamboo clump at the foot of the garden. The Tailor picked up
his staff and strolled up the rose avenue. Suddenly he stopped. A voice,
very sweet and very distinct, seemed to come from a clump of camellias.
It said: “Meet Selim outside the South Gate within an hour.’’ There
was no further sound or movement. Although he called, nothing
stirred.
The Tailor at first felt alarmed, just as all guilty people do if they
fancy they are to be faced with the wrong they have done. Then he
remembered that he was dealing with animals, who after all hadn t
got much sense and never did deceitful things. No one saw him enter
the cave or steal the jewels. He was sure Selim didn t, because he took
good care to drive him out of the country first. It was strange that
although the Tailor knew that he had done the Tiger much evil, he
was sure that Selim would never really harm him, however much he
deserved it. Here he was, a man who ought to know the difference
between right and wrong and kindness and cruelty, behaving in a way
that often made him ashamed; and Selim, a fierce brute whose instinct
was to prey and to kill, always trying to behave as a good man should.
Anyway, he had always outwitted the Tiger, and perhaps he could
gain some advantage if he saw him now.
The Tiger rose from the desert sand as the Tailor almost walked
over him. Not a soul was in sight. The great Fair had finished, and
the visitors who camped outside the walls because the city was over-
crowded had long since returned to their homes. A light breeze cooled
the air, and a haze dimmed the brilliance of the stars.


“Hail, Selim!” the Tailor said, raising his arm in salute.
“You did not expect to see me again, did you?” the Tiger exclaimed
in a gruff voice. “But you see I baffled the Rajah’s army, and am still
alive. Why do you do such evil things?”
“Why did you insult me by cutting off my precious beard?” the
Tailor rejoined.
“You cut it off, not I—but we won’t quibble over that. I have just
returned from my travels. Wicked as you are, I still remembered you
and brought you a gift.”
“You are very kind O Estimable Selim,” cried the Tailor. “What
and where is the gift?”
“I have brought thee an elephant. They tell me you now are a very
rich and important merchant and live in a great house. An elephant is
needed,” said Selim. “This one is a magnificent animal and has a tail
twice as long as any of the Rajah’s elephants.”
The Tailor’s breath came fast. “This is a most wonderful gift. Tell
me, where did you find him?”
“In the jungle. His name is ’Erbert. He was a tame elephant who
took a holiday, and now wants to find a new master.”
“Where shall I feast my eyes on him?” the Tailor asked in great
glee.
“Here, in a few minutes. Jackie is bringing ’Erbert along. Now I
want you to do something for me in return for this valuable present,”
said Selim.
“If it is in my power,” promised the Tailor in a very solemn voice,
“I shall assuredly do it.”
“I cannot ask any one else in Nasrabad, for they all seek my life.
Listen, O Tailor. There is a Government Sahib who travels round the
country in a great camp with horses and many servants.”
“A Commissioner Sahib,” suggested the Tailor.
“Yes, that is it. His name is Lancaster Sahib. Where is he to be
found?”
Now it so happened that Betty’s father was making a ceremonial
visit to the Rajah of Nasrabad in a fortnight’s time, and preparations
were being made to give him a splendid reception. That was one of
the chief reasons why the Tailor wanted to get an elephant without


delay. He could have told Selim at once all he wanted to know, but
the Tailor was too cunning for that.
“I shall make inquiries. Come back here in two days’ time and I’ll
let thee know. My friends at Court will be able to tell me,” the Tailor
said and then gave a cough. All important people like to give a cough
after saying something of a boastful nature.
“If you can give me the information I want, and swear by the
Prophet’s beard it is correct, I have yet another present to give thee.”
“How good you are, Selim! Pray, what sort of a present will that
one be?”
“A parrot—the most beautiful and the wisest parrot in the world.
I stole it myself from the Rajah of Gooj.”
“I heard that Gooj had lost a treasured parrot,” the Tailor said
with mounting excitement. “Rut what good is it to me?”
“Return it to Gooj and much of the yellow metal you love will be
pressed into your hands,” the Tiger answered.
“Where is the bird now?” the Tailor asked, his eyes alight.
“I shall send it to you, but on one condition. Do not attempt to
capture it, and don’t caress it unless it sits on your shoulder. It is a
very shy bird. But once it takes to you, as it surely must, O Excellent
Tailor, it will speak to you out of the fullness of its heart and will
never leave you. If you impatiently attempt to catch the Parrot it
will scream and curse and take flight, and you will never see it again.”
“It must be a very unusual bird,” the Tailor said.
“It is. You ask the Rajah of Gooj.”
The Tailor found it hard to hide his pleasure and good fortune.
If he captured that Parrot he would find favour with two Rajahs and
be able to see a way out of all his troubles.
“I shall be most happy to accept the Parrot and welcome it when
it arrives, my dear old friend,” the Tailor said with deep emotion. “I
promise faithfully not to attempt to touch it until it has learned to
love me, as I understand it once loved the Rajah of Gooj.”
“Very well,” said Selim. “Give me the information ,1 want, and
the bird will fly into your window. I swear that. Now, you had better
take charge of ’Erbert.”
With that Selim gave a loud cough, and a little later they heard
great feet softly crunching the sand. ’Erbert loomed up, a huge grey


shape, with Jackie trotting in front of him. He raised his trunk in
salute.
“Shabash!” said the Tailor, as he ran his fingers down his trunk.
“This indeed is a splendid elephant, and a well-trained one.” He
examined it, and then patted the flank of ’Erbert approvingly.
“Take him, O Excellent Tailor,” said Selim, “and be a good master
to him. He is one of the beasts of the forest who prefer the company
The Tailor leads ’Erbert to his grand home.
of men to the freedom of the jungle. So be kind to him, and feed him
on cakes and stacks of chupatties so that he changes not his mind.”
After making this long speech, Selim casually grunted, “So long,
’Erbert,” and slunk away.
The Tailor laid his hand on ’Erbert’s left tusk and said: “Come,
beautiful.” A few minutes later they passed through the South Gate,
and ’Erbert’s eyes blinked as he saw the myriad bright lights of
Nasrabad, and smelt many appetizing smells that floated from the
little shops, where great piles of chupatties were displayed to tempt
the hungry.


CHAPTER XXI
NEWS OF BETTY
’Erbert woke the next morning to a new life. Mahomed the mahout
led him out of his stable to a large tank in the grounds where he was
thoroughly scrubbed with stones and bricks by the mahout and his
assistant. After that the mahout took him for a walk up one of the
more quiet streets to get him used to city traffic. On his return ’Erbert
was fed with a pile of delicious chupatties, one by one, and he felt that
his bliss was complete.
The Tailor had scarcely slept a wink during the night with excite-
ment. It seemed to him that good fortune was coming to him from
all sides, and Selim undoubtedly was responsible for it all. He had the
necklaces, securely locked up in a chest in his bedroom, a splendid
elephant in his stable, and in a couple of days he hoped the Parrot of
the Rajah of Gooj would seek a home with him. Much as he wished
to possess so lovely and clever a bird, he knew it would not be long
before the Rajah of Nasrabad would learn where it was, and punish
him for keeping it. If however, he returned it, the Rajah might not
feel so nasty about his failure to recover the necklaces.
It was midday before he visited the stable where ’Erbert, tethered
under a tree, busied himself whisking away the flies. ’Erbert recognized
his new master at once, and to the Tailor’s great delight made a salaam.
The Tailor looked at ’Erbert from all angles. Truly he had a most
unusual tail; it was exactly as long as his trunk.
The mahout came up. “I have never seen so unusual an elephant.
It is worth ten times as much as any elephant the Rajah possesses. But
he has not been used right. I see certain marks on him which indicate
he used to draw’ a heavy load behind him, as elephants do who belong
to the working class.”
“We’ll soon make him forget his past,” said the Tailor. “I shall


have ’Erbert richly clothed and caparisoned, worthy in all respects of
his dignified master.”
That afternoon the Tailor called on the Secretary to the Prime
Minister to gather exact news about the reception to Lancaster Sahib,
and was very gratified to receive an invitation to a big garden party
which the Rajah was giving in ten days’ time in honour of his
important guest. The Tailor passed several pieces of gold to the
Secretary when he shook hands, and so one can be very sure that the
Rajah of Nasrabad had not commanded that the Tailor should be
present at this particular function.
Just then the Prime Minister drove up to the entrance of the
Secretariat in a light conveyance drawn by two camels. It was a brave
sight to see them sweep in with their harness sparkling, while the bells,
hung from their plush saddlecloths, tinkled merrily. The Tailor,
mouth agape, watched the Prime Minister alight. He had never before
seen such an equipage in Nasrabad. It gave him an idea. He would
have a light dogcart made to be drawn by ’Erbert, and so would eclipse
the Prime Minister at the garden party, and create a sensation as he
drove through the city.
He did not waste any time, for there was little time to waste. He
hurried home to summon tailors, jewellers, embroiderers, harness-
makers, and coach-builders. Plans were hastily drawn up, designs made,
measurements taken, and promises given that all would be ready in
time for the garden party.
Early next morning the Tailor mounted his pony and trotted
towards the cave, taking with him a sheep’s carcass for Selim and a
basket of fruit and nuts for the Monkey. Selim saw him coming and
sent Jackie out to meet him. The Tailor tethered his pony at the foot
of the hill and walked up the steep path, leaning heavily on his staff.
“I have great news, Selim,” the Tailor shouted as he stood before
the entrance of the cave. The Tiger came out leisurely to meet him.
Above, on a rock enjoying the sunshine, sat the Monkey, and by her
side a parrot so dazzlingly beautiful that the Tailor knew, as he blinked
in admiration, that it was the Royal bird from Gooj.
“When do they arrive?” Selim asked, in his forthright way.
“In about nine days. The Rajah is giving a big garden party to


welcome Lancaster Sahib, his wife and their daughter. And I am
invited to attend,” exclaimed the Tailor exultingly.
“So you will meet them and talk to them,” said Selim, looking
quite overcome. “Oh, how wonderful that will be! I wish I could be
there too.”
The Tailor laughed. “Be sensible. If you came every one else
would run away. Just think of a garden party with a great Bengal
tiger suddenly walking into it.”
“I wouldn’t hurt anybody,” Selim protested.
“Of course you wouldn’t. I know that—the Monkey and Jackie
know that; but no one else does. No, Selim, that would never do.”
“Then we shall not be able to see and talk to Betty after all,” said
the Tiger very despondently.
“I shall arrange that. The Lancasters will stay in the Rajah’s palace
for three days, and then will go south. Leave this to me Selim. I will
write to Betty and tell her that you and the Monkey will call at their
first camp pitched after leaving Nasrabad—say three hours after sunset.
How would that do?”
“Splendid,” said Selim. “She will have to meet me outside the
camp, because if I come close to it the horses will get alarmed, and
then every one will know a tiger is around, and come out to shoot me.”
“They wouldn’t if they knew you as I do,” said the Tailor suavely.
“Well, that is all arranged.” Again the Tailor let his eye wander
towards the Parrot, and stooping, whispered to Selim: “So that is the
Parrot?”
As though the Parrot were waiting for a cue it suddenly burst
out: “I want to go back to the Rajah of Gooj. I want to go back to the
Rajah of Gooj.”
The Tailor watched it, fascinated. “Yes, you lovely bird,” he
murmured. “I shall see that you go back to the Rajah of Gooj, if you
will only first come and live with me for a little while.”
“I want to ride on ’Erbert the Elephant,” the Parrot said next.
“My pretty dear, you shall ride on ’Erbert every day of your life,”
the Tailor replied. “What a bird! What a bird!” he went on in
admiration.
Bhundy did not leave her perch or attempt to speak to the Tailor.
She still felt very angry with him for stealing the necklaces, although


NEWS OF
Selim warned her not to say or do anything to make the Tailor think
that she suspected him.
The Tailor told Selim he had some presents to unload if he would
walk with him as far as the pony, but Selim said he would pick them
up later, as the sight of him might frighten the nervous mount.
Selim walked a little way with the Tailor. “I shall send the Parrot
to you to-morrow morning,” he said confidentially. ‘‘Keep your bed-
room window open, and permit it to fly in and out as it pleases. Don’t
shut up the bird,” Selim advised. “If you do, its screeches and shrieks
and bad language will be heard all over the city. You don’t want that
to happen.”
After a hearty lunch another meeting was held. The good food
the Tailor had provided, together with the fine news, raised their
spirits so much that Selim and Jackie sang a little duet very softly.
Selim and Bhundy talked of nothing else but Betty and the joy of
meeting her again. And Po-putt kept opening and shutting its eyes
and trying to look like Sherlock Holmes.
“You wait till I make friends with the Tailor,” the Parrot chuckled.
“I shall ask him all sorts of questions. I’ll want to see all the pretty
things he possesses. And then one day he will find the necklaces gone,
and Sherlock as well.” At the very thought of it, Po-putt broke into
a raucous laugh, and coughed and spluttered so much that Bhundy
had to thump him on the back and beg him to keep quiet.
“Just think of the look on his face when he finds the necklaces
gone,” the Parrot said, and started laughing all over again, until Jackie
warned him of the danger of going into hysterics.
“Only girls go into hysterics,” said Jackie warningly. “Don’t let the
sterner sex down.”
“I don’t want advice. And I don’t want any one to worry about
me,” said Po-putt from the side of his beak in true detective style. “I
promised Bhundy the necklaces would be in her hands in time to
present them to Betty. I’ll take my time and do the job in my own
way.”
With that the Parrot solemnly said good-bye to his friends and set
out for Nasrabad, winging through the sparkling sunlight like a gem
that had wakened to life.


CHAPTER XXII
SHERLOCK ON THE JOB
The following morning, as the Tailor stood at his bedroom window
brushing his beard, he heard a low but distinct voice, meant for his
ears alone, say: “Good morning, Huzoor.”
The Tailor looked towards a tall cypress which grew straight as a
column near the window, and there saw the dazzling plumage of the
Parrot.
“Good morning, beautiful. Be pleased to come in,” said the Tailor,
opening a casement, into which the Parrot immediately flew.
The Parrot sat on the panel of the Tailor’s bed with a twinkle in
its eyes. “Shsh!” Po-putt very cutely said. “I must not talk too loud,
or too much. It won’t do for any one to know I am here. Just go on
brushing your beard. Don’t take any notice of me.”
Now no one could help talking notice of such a gorgeous creature.
The Tailor felt that he ought to show it some special respect, for its
loveliness and conceits proclaimed it to be a Royal bird. In the State
of Gooj, to see the Parrot was a great honour, but to touch him would
have meant dire punishment, for that was a privilege reserved for the
Rajah alone.
The Tailor, rather overcome, did not know what to do next. He
wanted to impress upon the Parrot that if he were not a rajah, at
least he was a man of great importance and worthy of the honour of
having a Royal bird in his house. So very casually he drew from under
the bed a brass-bound chest which he opened with a key. From it he
took a small casket of carved ivory, a lovely piece of Burmese work. As
he slowly lifted the lid a shaft of sunlight fell on the gems of the neck-
laces, and the room seemed aglow with colour and magnificence.
The Tailor picked up the necklaces and placed them a foot away


from the Parrot and said: “I don’t know which is more beautiful or
precious.” The bird, however, did not even look at the jewels spread
on the white silk coverlet, or seem the least bit interested. Disappointed,
the Tailor put the jewels back in their ivory case, which he locked
securely in the brass-bound chest.
The Tailor, true to his promise, made no attempt to touch the
Parrot, although it spent an hour with him each afternoon after his
noonday siesta.
The city had begun to look very festive. The visit oh a British
official, and one so distinguished its Lancaster Sahib, roused a great
deal of excitement. The Rajah, spending money lavishly, asked his
people to make a special effort to decorate the city in a way worthy
of the occasion. The visitors were to arrive at the South Gate at three
in the afternoon, when they would be met by the Rajah and his retinue
of nobles mounted on elephants. The procession would then pass to
the palace grounds, where the reception was to be held.
The Tailor, caught in the excitement, could think of nothing but
the garden party and the important figure he would cut when he
entered the palace ground in a magnificent light chariot drawn by an
elephant. He learned that no one in Nasrabad would surpass him in
splendour on that great day. From the Rajah’s own firm of tailors he
had ordered a gorgeous costume of white satin embroidered in silver
and gold, with touches of scarlet on the coat sleeves and about the
neck. He would have liked to have worn the necklaces, because then
even the Rajah of Nasrabad would have had to take second place in
grandeur. But of course he did not dare to do that.
In the meantime, ’Erbert, fed on cakes, chupatties and plenty of
hay, and taken out regularly for gentle exercise, began to look plump
and contented. The Tailor visited him daily, and always patted him.
He was never without an attendant who seemed to know just what he
wanted. ’Erbert’s brains did not get so confused as they used to. In
fact, now he rarely had occasion to use them. At times, when he heard
the strains of distant music, he was strongly tempted to break into a
waltz, but the mahout always spoke harshly if he showed any signs of
becoming restive. Altogether, ’Erbert was having a wonderful holiday.
People came and went all day, each vieing with the other to make


l6 JUNGLE VAGABONDS
him look more magnificent. The hood and saddlecloth were so gorgeous
that his head swam when they fitted them on. All he really had to do
was to look important.
In all this commotion the Tailor did not forget his promise to
Selim. He wrote a short but neat letter to Betty, addressing it to the
Rajah’s palace. Briefly he told Betty who he was, and said that Selim
and Bhundy were in the neighbourhood, and wished him to let her
know they would meet her at the first camp pitched after her father
left Nasrabad. Bhundy would call first and lead her to where Selim
would be waiting.
Of course the Tailor had long guessed that Selim and Bhundy
had been pets of the Lancaster family, and he was very anxious to
meet people so loved by his animal friends. He knew he would not
have a chance of being introduced to the Rajah’s guests of honour,
but he hoped they would inquire who he was when he made a grand
entrance in his elephant-drawn chariot.
The Parrot, visiting him daily, came only into his sleeping-apart-
ment, and could not be tempted to enter any other room. Once he
tried to touch the bird, but the Parrot flew to the window-sill, and
said angrily: “Do that again, and I’ll scream, and that will be the last
you’ll see of me.” Nervously, the Tailor took the hint and spent an
hour every morning feeding Po-putt with bananas and nuts. He now
danced with sheer delight when the necklaces were laid on the bed,
and if the Tailor omitted to exhibit them, the Parrot beat at him with
his wings. The jewels appeared to fascinate him as much as they
fascinated the Tailor.
But all the time the Tailor was uneasy. The Rajah was an obstinate
man, and he knew sooner or later he would call on him for news of
the necklaces. He had already made up his mind that as soon as the
big garden party was over he would trap the Parrot in his room, place
it in a handsome cage, and hand it to the Rajah of Nasrabad to
present to his brother-in-law. While the Rajah was feeling pleased and
grateful, the Tailor intended to confess he had been unable to find
any trace of the necklaces, hard as he had tried. Then, with pleading
and tears, he intended to beg the Rajah’s forgiveness for raising false
hopes of their recovery.


About two days before the big reception, Bhundy came into
Nasrabad and climbed to her old perch in the tree before the great
temple. There she was joined by Po-putt, who told her the latest news
about the Tailor, ’Erbert, and, of course, the necklaces. Bhundy had
her little jewel-bag near at hand, because the Parrot had sworn he
would pick up the necklaces at the next opportunity, and fly straight
to Bhundy with them.
In the great city flags and banners now hung everywhere. Streamers
festooned the streets. Thousands of little oil cressets were placed on
ledges and window-sills so that houses in the main streets would be
outlined in points of light after dark. From far and wide troupes of
jugglers, acrobats and nautch-girls came into the city. Booths were
erected, and sweetmeat makers and cooks and shopkeepers prepared
to make a display that would tempt the huge crowds to festive mood.
Everywhere there was sweeping and cleaning, lime-washing and
polishing, till Nasrabad sparkled like a newly-built city.
On the day before the great event the Tailor became excited. The
chariot had been delivered. The lacquered woodwork, the wheels
adorned with gold leaf and the hubs of pure silver, almost took his
breath away. The upholstery was of plush, and colourful silk curtains
draped the windows. ’Erbert’s magnificent robes had also been finished,
and the Tailor’s court dress and shoes lay on his bed to be admired
whenever he could spare the time. In the afternoon ’Erbert was brought
out of his stable and dressed up for a rehearsal. It was a great moment
when the light chariot was fastened to him with chains encased in silk.
’Erbert drew the conveyance round the garden with such care and
dignity that tears of joy sprang to the Tailor’s eyes.
The Tailor, pleasantly tired after a good meal and a busy morning,
again went up to his bedroom to admire his new clothes. Here, to his
great joy, he found the Parrot, seated on the window-sill of the open
window. It flew to his shoulder and playfully bit the lobe of his ear.
Here indeed was a great opportunity to seize the bird, but as though
Po-putt had read his thoughts, it flew back to the window-sill again.
“What think you of my clothes, beautiful?” asked the Tailor as
he gazed in a sort of trance at the magnificence spread on the coverlet
of his bed.


“If you wear the necklaces with them to-morrow you will look
grander than the Rajah himself,” the Parrot replied.
The Tailor opened his treasure-chest and very tenderly drew from
it the Burmese ivory casket. Slowly he raised the lid and lifted the
necklaces from their soft silken cushion, stone by stone. Then he
draped the gems on the breast of his satin tunic, just where they would
The Tailor gloats over his plunder.
sparkle if he hung them round his neck on the morrow. He was sorely
tempted to wear them, and take whatever risk or punishment followed.
The gems enchanted him.
His servant at the door rather breathlessly called: “Come down
stairs quickly, Huzoor. A messenger has come from the Rajah.”
The news threw the Tailor into confusion. He rushed from his
room in great haste, locked the door, and stumbled downstairs as
quickly as he could. Before he reached the foot of the stairs the Parrot
that once belonged to the Rajah of Gooj was in full flight towards


the temple with the necklaces in his strong beak. They disappeared
into Bhundy’s bag.
“Whatever you do, don’t lose them,” said Po-putt blinking with
joy and pride. “I’m not going back to the Tailor again. He may think
I’ve taken them, and will try to find where I am. I think we should
not be seen together for a day or two.” Then, unable to restrain him-
self, Po-putt broke into a short but merry jig.
Bhundy thought that was sound advice, so Po-putt roosted in
another tree that night.
The Rajah’s messenger did not bring the Tailor any good or
comforting news. It was a curt summons to appear before his Highness
in three days’ time to hand over the necklaces, or to suffer the penalty
the Rajah had imposed.
After the messenger had gone the Tailor shut himself up in a little
room where he kept his Koran and other sacred books, and wrung his
hands with grief. He even plucked at his beard with his nervous fingers.
All the beauty of those stolen gems at that moment had no more value
to him than cinders. He regretted he had ever suggested to Selim that
he should search for the Treasure, for nothing but trouble had resulted.
In his terror he was full of repentance for all his sins. Nothing was of
greater worth than life. So the Tailor now learned.
But his cunning brain, even though he was frightened and anxious,
worked hard to find some way out of his difficulties. There was no
need to sacrifice his life. First he would capture the Parrot, and see
how that gift would soften the Rajah’s wrath. If that failed he would
plead for his life, and suggest that the Rajah should confiscate all his
property, and even expel him from the State. Possessed of the neck-
laces he could build up his fortunes anew, and live in great luxury and
comfort in some other land.
He was still trembling when he went up to his bedroom. The
evening shadows fell quickly. The room was almost in darkness.
He picked up the ivory casket and stowed it away in the treasure-
chest, believing he had packed the necklaces before he left the room.
Drawing a chair up to the window he looked out on the calm and
loveliness of the fast-falling night. The scent of roses floated upward
like incense.
In the servants’ quarters a group was squatted in the little court-


yard, and from wisps of conversation he overheard, they were speaking
of the grand doings of to-morrow.
After all, he had been in many tight corners before and had got out
of them, and there was no real danger to his life if he were prepared
at the worst to give up the necklaces. To worry about the future was
stupid. To-morrow was to be the biggest day in his life. Why think
of anything else?
About ten miles away the camp of Lancaster Sahib was spread out
under the stars. At daybreak it would move forward so as to reach the
South Gate of the city at the appointed time.
A girl of ten, with golden hair, prepared to go to bed. She was
saying her prayers:
. . Arid please bless my dear lost pets wherever they may be.
Baloo the Bear, Bhundy the Monkey, and most of all Selim the Tiger.
And grant that I shall see them again and that they will be as happy
to see me as I shall be to see them. Amen.”
At that moment Bhundy, clinging to her jewel-bag, looked out
towards the desert and wondered how far away Betty was, and if she
still remembered her. The procession to-morrow would pass close by
the temple and so, with good luck, she might be able to catch sight of
Betty as she rode or drove past with her parents. Merely to get a glimpse
of her would be a great thrill.
As for Selim, he could not sleep, but paced up and down before
the cave. Somewhere, not very far away, he knew Betty would be
camping for the night. Jackie had rushed away to find the camp and
get the first peep at her. It made Selim wish he had been a jackal
instead of a tiger. No one took much notice of a jackal. It was not
even worth shooting. But a tiger was different, even a tiger that in its
heart had a great love for human beings. It was an accepted law that
wherever a tiger was seen, except behind bars, it should be hunted
and slain. However, if the Tailor had kept his word, Betty would
know they were trying to meet her.
Very slowly and stealthily he stalked from the hillock until he
reached the road, and there he flung himself down where the feet of
many men had tramped with the animals that served them so faith-
fully. Selim looked up and down the road, but nothing moved. Just
where he lay Betty would pass to-morrow and not know that, hidden


from sight, her old pets would be searching every figure in that caravan
for her. The stars seemed very near and the very silence whispered
and reminded Selim of all the joy and happiness of his cub days. Now
and again a puff of wind came up and died away like a sigh. It seemed
to carry with it the strains of soft and distant music, as though the
angels were singing a lullaby to the desert so that it should never
waken to the desolation which lay so heavy upon it.


CHAPTER XXIII
’ERBERT HAS A DAY OUT
The city was full of commotion next morning. The Rajah had
proclaimed a holiday and all good citizens in their finest clothes and
ornaments swarmed into the streets to see the procession. The air was
scented with jasmine and mogra and the more pungent smell of mari-
golds. The Tailor rose early, expecting the Parrot to fly in at any
moment. He planned to shut the window when it did, and disregarding
its shrieks, to capture it and place it in a cage. The Parrot’s absence
alarmed him. With a very busy morning before him, he found time
to pay a number of visits to his bedroom, only to learn that the Parrot
had forgotten him. At midday he began to dress for the garden party,
feeling anxious as he wondered if anything had happened to the
Royal bird.
’Erbert, bathed and scented, was led out and dressed in his beautiful
robes. The prevailing excitement made the elephant feel that this was
not to be just an ordinary day in his life. The Tailor, in great spirits,
stroked his trunk and gave him a slice of hulwa, a sweet that ’Erbert
thought was very delicious. ’Erbert, being used to a circus, liked plenty
of fuss and admiration. He had an idea that he looked very imposing
indeed. A little later, when they drew out the chariot—a really lovely
and fragile chariot—and attached it to ’Erbert, he did not feel quite
so happy. He always hated pulling things about. It reminded him of
the time when he belonged to the working class. A rajah’s elephant
was never asked to behave like a byle in a bullock gharry. ’Erbert had
been hitched to a circus van often enough, but that was in a period of
his life he was trying hard to forget.
The Tailor as last came out, dressed in his finery, and looking so
gorgeous that all his servants bowed their heads to the ground. A
cannon-shot had announced that the distinguished guests had reached
the South Gate, and the procession had begun. The Tailor heard the


cheering come nearer and nearer, and thought it was time he took
his place in the rear of the cavalcade. With a coachman on the box and
two attendants in the back seat the Tailor stepped inside and sank
back into the plush cushions with a contented sigh. Not once during
the morning had he given the necklaces a thought. To the best of his
belief they were safe in his treasure-chest.
The Rajah and his Queen, in a magnificent howdah, rode abreast
with another elephant, also gorgeously draped, which carried Mr and
Mrs Lancaster and their daughter Betty. Behind the Royal bodyguard
came a line of elephants bedecked with silks, satins, velvets and
embroidery, ornaments of gold and jewels and great ropes of flowers.
Then followed a troop of household cavalry, with uniforms of blue
and scarlet, white turbans, and white and blue pennons at their lance-
points. The Prime Minister came next in his famous camel-drawn
coach, and farther down cheers greeted the Tailor’s equipage, which
might have been owned by a great Potentate. It was not long before
every one was amused with ’Erbert’s long tail. Not a few merchants,
who travelled far and wide, scrubbed their chins and murmured: “I
wonder where I have seen that elephant before.”
As the head of the procession reached the temple the priests released
hundreds of doves and white pigeons, and one alighted on Betty’s out-
stretched hand. This made the people cheer harder than ever. Choking;
with excitement, Bhundy saw Betty pass almost under her with the
white pigeon perched on her wrist. It was a very brief glimpse indeed.
But she had to be patient. Her time was coming. Later the Tailor,
looking very conceited, also passed under her. ’Erbert was not behaving
quite as well as he should, for one of the footmen had jumped off the
back seat of the chariot and was leading him along.
As a matter of fact ’Erbert’s temper was not improving as the
excitement grew. All this shouting and cheering, so like the old circus
days, befuddled his poor brain. Everything seemed to be moving,
twisting and twirling in confusion. The crowd, for instance, would
break bounds, and mounted men then had to push people back with
the rumps of their horses.
Nothing remained still for a moment. It made it hard for ’Erbert
to pull himself and his wits together. He had his own views about the
Tailor’s turn-out. Speaking professionally, it looked ridiculous. Per-


sonally he would like to detach it in a clear space, and then at full
tilt ram it with his forehead and stamp what was left of it into the
dust. The Prime Minister’s camels ahead, pulling a coach, increased
his annoyance. ’Erbert strongly objected to being placed on the same
plane as a camel. They smelt so nasty, too, when they became obstinate
and angry.
The procession was how filing into the palace grounds. A big tent
or shamiana covered a dais and chairs where the reception ceremony
was to be held. Near by a military band stood ready to play marches
and dance music. As the guests dismounted, the elephants and horses
were led away. The Rajah escorted Mr and Mrs Lancaster to their
seats amid applause. The band played the National Anthem.
Every one halted and stood in respectful silence. All except ’Erbert,
who began to show certain rhythmic symptoms. He began by swaying
his head from side to side while he rocked his body first on one foot
and then on another. The Tailor, feeling that he was the centre of
attraction, was rather proud of ’Erbert’s little tricks. The coachman
managed to quieten ’Erbert while the Rajah made a speech. Then the
band broke into The Blue Danube.
Here ’Erbert really did take the held. He loved music, and nothing
better than a good waltz, and The Blue Danube was his favourite. Very
slowly at first, he essayed a few hesitant steps. He recalled with pride
that in the old circus days he had won fame as a dancing elephant
until he lost his balance and poise, and lurched about so near the
edge of the ring that he knocked spectators over with his outstretched
trunk and tail. Well, it was a long time since he had enjoyed a good
dance, and here was the time and place to let himself go. So slowly
and cautiously he started to turn and, as he did so, he realized he was
anchored to a stupid chariot. Just then the band played a passage he
had never been able to resist.
What happened next is very hard to tell in proper order. ’Erbert
seemed to get tangled up with the coach, and the coachman and foot-
men hastily alighted and tried to calm him down. People rushed to see
what all the fun was about, just as the chariot began to skid round in
a circle, while the Tailor, with his head thrust through the window,
shouted for help. But ’Erbert now had warmed up to his job. The
band, disregarding the confusion and uproar, played louder than ever.


| Xu i u Ik K11' /V ,'iV\"i l i *■ ''«iV l11 (( fd
’Erbert breaks into a waltz.
The chariot, ’Erbert learned, was lightly built, and the Tailor a mere
wisp of a man, so he exerted himself to his utmost. The coach there-
upon left the ground and taking the air really helped ’Erbert in his
graceful gyrations. People fled in all directions. The band stopped and
stampeded as the focus of danger came nearer. Presently a terrific crash
startled everybody. The poor Tailor shot out of his whirling chariot
and was picked out of the shell of the big drum and laid in the dust
to come to his senses.
’Erbert, who had rid himself successfully of the coach, was quietly
led away with two side chains trailing behind him, and then the
garden party became less like a riot. The Rajah, as soon as he heard
the Tailor was responsible for the disturbance, ordered that he be
taken to jail at once. The Tailor did not look a very imposing figure
as he was led away, covered in the soil of a flower bed into which he
had been thrown in a futile struggle to escape arrest. It was a most
unfortunate end to what the Tailor believed would be the greatest day


of his life. The police hustled him through the streets, while curious
and unkind people laughed and jeered at him. The prisoner felt
relieved when the door of his cell closed on him, and he sank down
in a corner on a heap of dirty straw.
Erbert was taken to the Rajah s stables to await his fate. The
Rajah, very annoyed, told Betty during afternoon tea that he would
have the stupid, bungling elephant shot. Betty’s blue eyes filled
with tears.
“No, don’t do that, Your Highness,” she pleaded. “You see, some-
thing must have gone wrong with ’Erbert to make him behave like
that. I’d like to see him. You know, I love all animals and I think all
animals love me.”
The Rajah patted Betty’s hand. “You’re a very kind little girl, my
dear, and I shall take you to see ’Erbert myself after lunch to-morrow.”
“Poor ’Erbert,” Betty said as she stroked his trunk. “Isn’t he nice?”
elephant to flog him with a chain, and, as he still looked ill-tempered,
’Erbert had been given nothing to eat. When he was led out to meet
the Rajah and Betty he was feeling very sorry for himself, and ready
to burst into tears. But as soon as he caught sight of Betty, he knew
somehow that all his troubles were at an end.
“Poor ’Erbert,” Betty said as she stroked his trunk. “Isn’t he nice?”
Then she walked all round him, and of course noticed his tail.
She looked up at the Rajah’s stern face with a smile. “ ’Erbert’s a
splendid elephant, and a very tame one. Do you know what is wrong
with him? It’s his tail, Your Highness. It gets him confused. If it were
cut the proper length ’Erbert would know which really was his front
end and would then be the best behaved elephant in India.”
“I believe you’re right,” the Rajah laughed. “At any rate, we’ll see
what shortening his tail will do.”
“And you won’t kill him?” Betty begged.
“No, I won’t do that. Perhaps,” said the Rajah, “one day I’ll make
him my favourite elephant, just because you saved his life.”
And that precisely is what happened! ’Erbert now leads every
procession—the first Royal Elephant in the great State of Nasrabad.
He is a little fatter than is quite good for him, but then* you know
Erbert never could resist freshly cooked chupatties. As for hulwa, no
one has yet tried him out to his limit.


CHAPTER XXIV
BETTY AT LAST
The letter, written by the Tailor to Betty, was handed to her the day
before she left Nasrabad. The news it contained filled her with great
happiness. Not only did she learn her old pets were alive and together,
but in some strange way they had been able to convey to her that they
still loved her and wished to meet her again. She gathered from the
letter that the Tailor knew Selim and Bhundy very well, and she
believed that any one who loved and understood animals must be kind.
Nobody but such a man would have taken charge of dizzy ’Erbert in
the first place.
By this time the Rajah had not the heart to refuse Betty anything
and so, when she asked to meet the Tailor, the Rajah gave orders that
he should be brought to the palace at once.
“I don’t know why you want to meet him, Betty, because I think
he is an old rascal and a humbug. He has told me a few falsehoods and
I don’t like people who are liars, I suppose you want to talk to him
about ’Erbert?”
Betty thought that as good a reason as any, and nodded.
The Tailor looked a very forlorn creature as he was ushered into
a room where Betty begged she should be permitted to speak to him
alone. The Tailor made her a low and very respectful salaam.
“Sit down please, Mr Tailor,” Betty said with a smile. “What a
lovely suit that must have been before it got so dirty. You know, I
caught sight of you as you drove up at the Garden Party. Didn’t
’Erbert look grand?”
“I think. Missy Sahib, that ’Erbert went mad,” the Tailor replied,
standing with his arms humbly crossed on his chest. “They tell me
the Rajah is going to have him shot.”
“He was, but not now. He promised to shorten his tail instead.
Then,” said Betty, “he will behave like all good elephants.”


“You are a very wise child,” the Tailor went on, admiration in
his eyes. “I did not think of that. You see, it stands to reason that if
an elephant doesn’t know which is his tail and which is his trunk, he
must get muddled in his thinking.”
“He won’t be puzzled about that much longer,” said Betty. “And
now I want to thank you for this letter, and ask you some questions
about my old pets.”
The Tailor knew that all he had to tell would be believed. To
nobody else in this world would he have related such a story. He did
not mention the necklaces or the Parrot, because when he thought of
them he felt rather ashamed. Although he did not know the jewels
had been taken by Po-putt, he half expected the police already had
searched every hole and corner of his house and taken everything of
value away.
“The Tiger and Bhundy will meet you at your first camp after
leaving the city,” the Tailor explained. “The Monkey will come to
your tent first and lead you to where Selim is waiting to greet you.
Don’t be afraid of him. He is very kind and loves you very much.”
Then, as an afterthought, he added: “Ask Bhundy if she knows any-
thing about two missing necklaces.”
Betty laughed. “Yes, I’ll ask her that.”
The Rajah’s guard knocked at the door and said the talk would
have to end, as the Tailor must go back to prison. She felt very sorry
for the old man as they bound his wrists and dragged him away. She
didn’t know what he had done, but whatever it was she hoped the
Rajah would forgive him for it.
Before noon next day the Rajah rode through the South Gate with
his friends, and went a little distance with them along the desert road
before he bade them farewell. There he shook hands gravely with
Betty’s father and mother. To Betty he handed a light parcel, and
came smartly to the salute.
“Good-bye, Betty dear. I hope you will always remember me and
my people,”
She smiled. “I will, and please take care of ’Erbert,”
A little later they passed the hill where Selim had made his home,
and Betty’s mother said: “I see an opening in the rock. It looks very
much like a cave to me.”


“In just such a cave, Selim would live,” Betty thought.
Before sunset they reached their old camping-ground, and found
the tents had been pitched and everything for their comfort in the
right place. In a large tent a table was laid for dinner, and the servants
in spotless white uniforms and scarlet cummerbunds waited to serve
the meal. Betty opened her parcel, and exclaimed “How lovely!” as
she uncovered a silk parasol with a bejewelled, gold-mounted handle
inscribed with the Rajah’s coat-of-arms.
“You are a very lucky girl, Betty,” her mother said, putting her
arm round her.
Betty was too excited to be hungry, and went to bed as soon as her
father said it Was time to turn in, as the camp would be on the move
at daylight. He was one of those men whom people obeyed at once.
Betty’s room was next to her mother’s. Instead of getting into her
nightgown, she tumbled into bed fully dressed and pulled the sheet
up to her neck. Most little girls would have been afraid to lie there
in the darkness and quiet of the sleeping camp, waiting for a monkey
to call and lead her to see a tiger, but Betty’s heart beat with a great
happiness.
She did not know what hour of night it was when a little figure
crept into her tent and touched her hand. Without speaking she rose,
and, holding Bhundy’s fingers tight in her own, slipped out of the
camp into the darkness. The horses in the lines moved a little uneasily
as they passed, but no one woke and challenged them. To Betty it all
seemed a dream. She went along, not uttering a word, like someone
enchanted. They stumbled into a sleeping world where the stars kept
watch, and lit the desert path, strewn with stones and boulders. Then
something huge and massive rose from the earth and came forward
with quick and stealthy steps.
“There’s Selim now,” said Bhundy, speaking for the first time.
As she spoke, Betty fell on her knees and hugged the Monkey,
kissing her and crying with joy at the same time. Yes, Bhundy had
grown. There was nothing terrifying about her. But Betty had to
admit she felt just a little nervous when the most magnificent tiger
she had ever seen stepped up and said in a deep gruff voice: “Betty,
we’ve found you at last.”
She threw her arms round Selim’s neck and kissed his forehead.


tt&ov, ■. ' \ I y" *'?% z
'.m i imT I i^l*■ ' lm ,m^
Then he flung himself down, and Betty sat beside him, cuddling into
his massive shoulder and neck.
“Isn’t this wonderful?’’ Betty exclaimed. “And to think that you’ve
never forgotten me, and been looking for me everywhere.’’
Betty meets her pets again.
Jackie crept up, whining rather pitifully. He wasn’t going to be
out of the picture.
“That’s Jackie, a very faithful pal. He knows all about you,” Selim
explained.
Betty took him into her lap and patted him, and just then a voice
said: “I want to go back to the Rajah of Gooj. I want to go back to
the Rajah of Gooj.’ { Betty turned and saw a parrot sitting on Selim’s
back just behind her.
“That’s Po-putt,” said Selim. “Now you know all the members of
the family.”


CHAPTER XXV
AND SO-GOOD-BYE
They talked and talked, sometimes all of them at once, never thinking
of the time. Betty laughed over poor Baloo, and said she was sure he
was happily married, and that someday he might come into her camp
to say “How-do-you-do” and bring a little baby bear with him. They
spoke of the Tailor and all their experiences with him, and Bhundy
explained exactly how the Parrot recovered the necklaces. Po-putt
wanted to tell the story in his own way, but when a lady starts talking
first it is very hard to interrupt her.
What a happy band of vagabonds they appeared to be! Betty
listened with amazement at their adventures and wished she had been
one of them. There was something very fine and human and loyal in
this comradeship between such totally different characters, and some-
thing fateful in the way they came together. She laughed at their
meeting with ’Erbert, and was pleased she had been able to save his life.
The stars began to pale. Selim looked uneasy. Bhundy noticed that,
and knew she ought to make the great presentation to Betty without
further delay.
She lifted the little jewel-bag from her neck and placed it in Betty’s
hands.
“What is this?” Betty asked as she took it.
“Our present for you. Open the bag and see.”
Betty drew out the necklaces, and even in the starlight their beauty
struck them all silent with awe.
“Oh, Bhundy, how lovely they are! But I can’t take them. Why,
they’re worth millions of pounds. I don’t think Daddy would let me
keep them if he knew all I know about them. Really, they belong to
the Rajah of Nasrabad. He was very kind to me and you know he is
going to be very kind to ’Erbert. He gave me a lovely parasol with a


gold handle, set with jewels, before I left. Wouldn’t it be just gorgeous
if I sent him these necklaces as a present from us all.”
“He will never understand,” said Selim sadly.
“Of course he will understand, because I shall write and tell him
the whole story,” Betty exclaimed.
“I wonder if he would stop hunting us all over the country if you
gave him the necklaces,” said Selim. “A tiger’s life is very hard and
full of danger. Thousands and thousands of the Rajah’s subjects are
waiting to kill us. Perhaps if you told him that we are really harmless
folk who wish to live in friendship and in love with men, women and
their children, he would command his people to leave us alone, so
that we can live in our cave in peace.”
“But we are not going to that cave or Nasrabad, Selim, but back to
the camp with Betty. We are going to live with her from now on for
ever and ever,” Bhundy interrupted in a hasty voice.
“I was going to suggest that,” said Selim. ‘‘But I don’t think Betty
will approve. I remember what she said to me when she sent me back
to the jungle.”
Betty placed her arms round Selim’s neck and looked into his
golden eyes. ‘‘Oh, Selim darling, you know as well as I do that you
couldn’t do what Bhundy suggests. Bhundy can come, and so can Jackie
and the Parrot, but you will have to live alone. If I took you back to
the camp the horses would be terrified, the sepoys and the servants too.
No one would trust you but Daddy and Mummy and me. The others
would rush for their rifles and shoot you before I had time to explain
you were the dearest, kindest tiger in the world. Selim, no one in this
world would believe there can be a tame, kind tiger. They think every
tiger is fierce and loves to kill. Can’t you see that?”
‘‘Yes, I see it,” said Selim rather sadly, “so I shall go back to the
cave and the jungle alone. If the Rajah is good and merciful I may be
permitted to live in peace. Every day then,“ he said hopefully, “I can
strive to become less a beast and more like a human being. If you had
seen me in the pink silk pyjamas, Betty, you wouldn’t have believed I
was a tiger at all. I almost looked like a man.”
Betty smiled through her tears.
“Dear old Selim. Who knows what is ahead of you and me too?
Let’s have patience.”


AND SO-GOOD-BYE
There was no use arguing any further. Selim rose.
“The dawn is coming, Betty, and that means I must seek a refuge
where I can be safe from my enemies. Good-bye until I see you again.
Remember, every year on this day I shall be near your camp so that
you can come out and meet me as you have done this night.
Betty kissed him and turned away, weeping. Little Jackie looked
at her, and then at Selim, and slipped to the heels of the Tiger.
The Parrot blinked his eyes and flew over and perched on Selim’s
shoulder. He too had made up his mind.
Betty dried her tears and looked at Bhundy. She too was wavering.
Betty understood. They had shared so many adventures and dangers
with Selim, and Bhundy owed her life to him.
“Bhundy,” said Betty very miserably, “lam going back to the camp
alone. I love you very much, but I think it is your duty to stay with
Selim and look after him. You can help him if he is hurt or gets sick,
and I can’t. What do you really want to do?”
“Go back with Selim, although it is very hard to part with you,”
Bhundy replied. “But, cheer up, Betty. We’ll all see you again next
year.”
And so they parted. Betty cried so much that she didn’t remember
how she got back to camp and into bed. She felt very tired when her
mother roused her at five o’clock. She sat up and rubbed her eyes. Had
she really met Selim, or only dreamed it? She looked on the little table
by her bed to remove her doubts, and there was the little bag Bhundy
had given her, just where she remembered placing it. She wrapped the
bag in some brown paper and hid the parcel at the bottom of her
suit-case.
An hour after sunrise the little caravan moved off along the white
road that threaded its way through the desert, away from the City of
Nasrabad. Betty looked back and could just see its domes and delicate
minarets, fragile as a mirage, floating on the horizon. She waved her
hand in farewell. Nasrabad would always be, to her, a city of romance.
Perhaps the Baghdad of the Arabian Nights was something like it.
Suddenly the stillness of the morning was broken by a jackal’s long-
drawn howl and three short sharp yelps. Betty smiled and fluttered her
handkerchief in the direction of the sound, a great heap of rock about


a quarter of a mile away. Behind it, she knew, four pairs of eyes
watched her go by. All of them were as dim as her own.
A few days later, as the Rajah of Nasrabad was eating breakfast, he
received a letter and a parcel, not very neatly wrapped up or tied
together. He looked at the childish writing and knew at once who had
written to him. He read the letter, first with amusement, then with
surprise and interest. It was a long letter, and he laid it down and
stared with round eyes at the package before he opened it. He knew
that little girls, even if their parents were important British officials,
sometimes liked to hoax their friends.
But when he did open the parcel, and saw what it contained, he
picked up the necklaces and rushed off to show them to his wife and to
tell her the marvellous story of how they had come into Betty’s hands.
At once he called for the Prime Minister and commanded him to issue
a proclamation that no one should go within five hundred yards of
Selim’s cave. Also, that henceforward the Tiger was a protected animal,
and the Rajah’s particular pet, and that on pain of death no one was
to molest him or any animal or bird in the Tiger’s company. Then he
ordered the Tailor to be released from prison, as the Rajah now knew
his story about the Tiger and Monkey to be true.
The Tailor returned to his house in the Street of Tailors and
Embroiderers, where all good citizens of Nasrabad now see him at the
shop window, cutting and sewing from sunrise to sunset. His friends,
so it is said, often hear him say that pride goes before a fall, and that
honesty is the best policy. Every gold piece he earns, and can save,
goes into his brass chest.
Someone asked him if he knew anything about a lovely parrot that
belonged to the Rajah of Gooj.
The Tailor shook his head.
“I take no interest in parrots,” he replied primly.
Halstead Press Pty Limited, 9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney




*v|j




'
I
.
T \ - ■ .< •' * >f a V/"" r \ ”| gp %
■ • - x • :v. ;., * ■ •...'■•
.
4
