

KANG YU-WEI
MIS LIFE, IDEAS AND CHARACTER.
A PAPER
READ BEFORE
THE MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION
OF
TIENTSIN.
BY PROF. M. E. TSUR.
REPRINTED FROM
“THE NATIONAL REVIEW” (CHINA),
1915.


KANG YU-WEI.
ME. Chairman and Members of the Missionary Association,
this paper which I have been requested by your Secretary
to read before you this evening, should have come from
the pen of Mr. Chang Po-ling as was first intended; but on account
of that gentleman’s infirmity of health the task has devolved, by
mere chance, upon me.
The subject first given me was “Kang Yu-wei and the Chinese
Eeformers”. I have limited myself to Kang Yu-wei alone, because
whereas Kang Yu-w r ei is widely acknowledged as a reformer indeed,
there is on the other hand no fixed standard which we may
adopt in selecting other men from amongst the vast number of
the so-called reformers. Now, in this attempt to depict our
hero, I am very much afraid that I shall so distort him as to
occasion in my conscience some time afterwards, when I shall
have the opportunity to know better, an uncomfortable conviction
of my having once at the request of the Missionary Association of
Tientsin, China, misrepresented to the world one of its greatest
heroes. In reconciling myself to this rather daring adventure, I
derive courage and consolation, however, from one soothing con-
sideration which I beg also to offer to you as an excuse for my
boldness in giving my paper to such an assemblage of intellects
as is gathered here this evening; and that consideration is that I
do it to relieve another worthy gentleman who is, moreover, our
personal friend, to wit, Mr. Chang Po-ling, in the time of his in-
firmity.
I will treat my subject in three sections; (I) The Past Life
of Kang Yu-wei; (II) His Philosophical Ideas and Suggestions for
Practical Eeform for China; (III) His Character.
I—THE PAST LIFE OF KANG YU-WEI.
Kang Yu-wei is a scholar having the degree of doctor, being
very well educated in the old learning, and fairly well informed in
all Western ideas. He comes of a respectable family in Canton.
His grand-uncle Kang Kuo-chi, attained to the Governorship of


Kwangsi through meritorious service to the Government in the
time of the Taiping Eebellion. Kang Yu-wei was a marvellously
clever student in his juvenile years, and so stern in his manners
that he was at times greeted by his fellows with the satirical ap-
pelation of the “Modern Sage.” At the age of eighteen he placed
his partially developed intellect under the tutorial care of a
Mr. Chu Kiu-kiang, a teacher of great renown in the city of Can-
ton. From this worthy master he obtained much valuable in-
struction in Chinese Philosophy and History, and he became very
much attached to his tutor during the six years he was with him and
they were only separated by the death of the old teacher. Then
he left his home and took up his abode on the Woodman’s Hill
in the western suburbs of the city. There he pursued his studies
all alone, for four full years. Besides continuing his studies in
Chinese Philosphy and History, he also explored the solitary
groves of Buddhistic literature, and was greatly moved by Buddha’s
Assertion that he came into the world with a great purpose.
This sublime claim of Buddha’s led Kang Yu-wei to ascertain
for what great purpose he himself had been sent into this world
6f human possibilities, and that purpose, he told himself, was to
reform first Chinese society, and subsequently the whole human
race.
When he was about twenty-nine, he began his long tour of
six years over the Empire. He visited amongst other places the
Great Wall, the Confucian Sepulchre, the Metropolitan cities of
Peking and Shanghai, and the Island of Hongkong,- OneoLthe
effects of this travel was the deep impression left upon his mind
by his observations of the organizing power of the European
peoples attested by the general order and public health of the
British Colony of Hongkong and the Model Settlement of Shang-
hai. He was thereby induced to make a systematic study of
Western methods from, the only fountain available to him, to.
wit, the translated books, of which he got a good supply from the
Kiangnan Arsenal Translation Bureau and the Christian Liter-
ature Society of Shanghai. He bought also the Holy Bible and
many religious- tracts. These translated books did-not help him
much to understand what he desired, but his mind was thereby
enriched by a new category of ideas, and it would never be at
rest if he could not find out a way to reform China and save her
from the immediate partition which was being seriously considered
at.that time by our good neighbours of the West. From this
time forward he started in, earnest to carry out his great purpose
of reforming China.
Soon after he- had 1 returned' from his travels, he established- in
Canton in the year 1891 a school of new learning. The subjects-
that were taught by him in his school were: (1) Confucian
Classics y (2’) Buddhistic Literature; (3) Chinese Philosophy ; (4).
Chinese History and. (5), Western, Knowledge. A. great, many


scholars of good standing in the old learning flocked to him for
instruction ; the most prominent amongst them all was the well-
know Liang Chi’i-Ch’iao. His method of teaching was along the
line of comparative studies, and his aim was 'to train up many
free-thinking, liberal-minded, zealous patriots. He not only dir-
ected the thoughts of hisdisciples but also evoked their adoration.
He taught in Canton for four years, after which he went over to
Kweilin, the provincial capital of Kwangsi, and settled there
long enough to establish another school upon the same principles. :
Before this, in the year 1889, when he was only sui-tsdi, he
ventured his first memorial to the Throne, in which he lamented
the depraved condition of the Chinese nation and urged immediate*
reforms. Now, before this memorial could ever reach the
it had to pass throught the ordeal of the Imperial - Censorship ;
and it was discarded on account of the novelty of its ideas. In
the year 1893, at the time of the China-Japan -War, he sent up
another memorial in the name of more than a thousand scholars,
headed by himself, w T ho had come to Peking from all the Eighteen
Provinces for the Imperial Examination. This memorial was also'
rejected because of what seemed to the Censors to be its imprac-
ticable suggestions. In the four years that followed he sent up
altogether seven more memorials, none of which obtained the
favourable consideration of the Board of Censors; so none ever
reached the Throne. This, whilst it shewed remarkably well the
dogged stubbornness or ignorant cowardice of the members of the
Board of Censors, nevertheless gives sufficient evidence, on the
other hand, of Kang Yu-wei’s marvellous perseverance in what-
ever he attempts to do.
All this time he had been preaching amongst the officials and
scholars China’s great need of Reform. At that time, when
societies of any kind were looked upon with suspicious jealousy
by the Government and when they were indiscriminately repress-
ed, he had the courage to inaugurate in Peking in the year 1893
a Reform Society, with the intention of establishing branches in*
every large city of the Empire. Amongst those who enrolled,
were a great many officials of high rank and scholars of respectable
standing. We find on the list such conspicuous names as those of
Chang Chih-tung and Yuan Shih-k’ai. On account of strong op-
position, the headquarters of the Society were afterwards removed
from Peking to Shanghai; and before long the Society itself wais
dissolved by an Imperial Edict. But the spirit of combination
and co-operation for the purpose of promoting public welfare hav-
ing thus been awakened, meetings to discuss measures of reform;
were continuously being held in many large cities by progressive
scholars, in spite of governmental interference. The result was'
the Great Revolution of 1911.
In the early summer of 1893, Kang Yu-wei was at last re-:
commended to the,.Throne, and in the very first audience he Had


with Emperor Kwang Hsu of the late dynasty, he was able so to
move His Majesty by his clear views and convincing remarks
that the Imperial Head did not hesitate for a moment to confide
in him more unresrvedly than he had done with any other of his
ministers, and Kang Yu-wei was verbally instructed to recom-
mend to His Majesty the best men he knew of to help to carry
out the suggested reforms. Accordingly a new party was formed
by the progressive Emperor in the central Government and they
became his confidential advisors in the great reform movement
that was attempted by him with all sincerity and energy in face
of the strongest opposition from the Empress Dowager’s party. I
hope it is not very far from the truth for me to testify that the
Chinese people, the educated class at least, were quite jubilant at
the drastic measures of reform successively ordered by the Em-
peror. It was very unfortunate, however, that the Empress’s
party, conscious of their own insufficiency at this critical time,
should fear that the Dynasty would eventually lose prestige with
the Chinese people, and that they themselves could not long
maintain their enviable positions along with the new upstarts.
Opposition became so rife that Kang Yu-wei’s party was driven
to plan for the imprisonment of the Empress Dowager, so that
she and her party might be prevented from interfering inordinate-
ly with the Emperor’s doings. This prodigious design was
frustrated, however, and the result was the coup d’dtat of 1898.
I presume that you all know fairly well about the events of the
coup d’dtat, and Ido not need to give you the full details, Kang
Yu-wei, so goes the story, was in Tientsin when orders were
sent out by the Empress Dowager to arrest him, and he was
first apprised of his danger by Dr. Timothy Eichard, who
happened also to be in Tientsin. He had just time enough,
before his pursuers were upon him, to get on board one of the
steamers clearing for Shanghai; but he knew very well that
as long as the ship was in Chinese waters, he was not in perfect
safety. A rather romantic story was told of Kang Yu-wei’s
narrow escape from the self-interested vigilance of the Taotai
of Shanghai. When the steamer was as yet outside Wusung
Mr. Bland, of the Shanghai Municipal Council, came up from a
steam tug with a photograph in his hand. He succeeded in find-
ing out Kang Yu-wei in his cabin, and going up to him and shewing
him the portrait, he inquired whether Kang Yu-wei recognized it
as his picture. The latter imagined that the foreigner must be
some one in the Customs Service sent down by the Taotai to make
sure of his arrest. Being prepared, however, to meet his fate at
any time and anywhere, Kang Yu-wei, it was said, displayed
extraordinary courage in acknowledging his identity at once to his
unknown friend, as the foreigner afterwards proved himself to be.
Mr. Bland, thereupon, told him to follow him into the steam tug,
and not until he was delivered over into the care of a British man


of-war, did Kang Yu-wei have any correct knowledge of Mr. Bland’s
true mission. The Taotai’s deputies had followed in another steam
tug on a mission of an entirely different nature, but they were
much too late for their purpose. The safety of Kang Yu-wei’s
person was now secure under the protection of the British flag.
The truth of the details of this story I have not been able to
verify. At any rate, Kang Yu-wei’s life was saved providentially,
it seemed, that he might further develop his ideas and instruct
his compatriots in the great work of reforming China.
Liang Ch’i-ch’iao his greatest disciple, also managed with
good success to escape from the wrath of the Empress. In Japan,
many of the reformers rallied again under the standard of their
adored leader and carried on their unfinished work by means of a
magazine with Liang Ch’i-ch’iao as its chief editor. Thjs was
not the first time that Liang Ch’i-ch’iao had followed the journal-
istic profession. He had edited before this a magazine of very
great popularity whilst he was in Shanghai. He wrote in such a
convincing stylo that it was said his articles in the magazine had
done more than anything else to stir up the patriotism and public
spirit of his countrymen; so much so that though the new magazine
published in Yokohama was naturally under the ban of the ex-
asperated Empress, it found its way pretty easily into the libraries
of the young scholars of the Empire.
Kang Yu-wei organized in Japan, soon after his arrival there,
a big society with the ostensible object of protecting the Emperor,
the Pao Huang Tang. He .himself was, no doubt, sincerely
grateful to Emperor Kwang Hsu, but from the other members of
this famous society it was not to be expected that such loyalty as
was professed by their leader could exist, nevertheless the society
counted amongst its members many genuine patriots. Besides
those who had followed him into Japan, Kang Yu-wei enlisted as
members of this society many Chinese traders abroad, and also a
largo number of progressive scholars in the homeland. The real
object of the society, no doubt, was still the speedy reform of
China. Now, for the first time, they began to think it a step of
the utmost necessity to overthrow at least the Manchu Absolutism,
if not the reigning Dynasty. In 1900, the year of the Boxer
uprising, some members of the Pao Huang Tang attempted to
start a revolution in Wuchang. Their unripened plot was made
known to Viceroy Chang Chih-tung and their prodigious scheme
was nipped in the bud. Thirty of the conspirators were arrested
and mercilessly executed. After this the Pao Huang Tang grad-
ually lost prestige as Dr. Sun Wen’s revolutionary party increas-
ed in popularity. Their ostensible object of protecting the Emperor
and upholding the reigning Dynasty was thought by many to be
rather a hindrance than a help in the great work of reforming
China. Several of the members of the Pao Huang Tang decamped
and went over to join Dr, Sun’s, revolutionary party, and when


Emperor Kwang Hsu died in the year 1908, the last loyalist
members were absolved from all connexion with the Manchu
Dynasty and the Pao Huang Tang was only remembered as a
thing of the past. Kang Yu-wei by this time had seemingly for-
saken all political aspirations, and has now been for a long time
concentrating his entire energy on the reform of the Confucian
Religion. He is the founder of the Confucian Society, which is
enrolling amongst its members many respectable scholars. It is
largely due, to his influence that the recent attempt to establish
Confucianism as the State Religion was ever proposed in the Gov-
ernment and very nearly had the desired result. Now, I have
brought the life of the hero to the present day and have done what
I can in giving you the most important facts : but in order that
we may understand more clearly the man’s character we need
also to examine his Philosophical Conceptions.
11. PHILOSOPHICAL IDEAS AND PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS.
This brings me to the Second Part of my treatise, his Philo-
sophical Ideas and Suggestions for Practical Reform for China. I
have time only to give you a very brief summary of his many
strange ideas.
I. His Opinions on Education.
The object of Education, says he, is to develop the individ-
ual mind and to nurture the universal spirit; he is strongly
opposed to national or racial discriminations.
11. His Opinions on Religion.
He advocates free thought and religious liberty; but he is
partial to Confucianism because he believes that it is the religion
most suited to the present conditions of the Chinese; and his
great hope is that the three great religions of the world, Chris-
tianity, Confucianism, and Buddhism, may be united, as the funda-
mental doctrine of all three is the same, that is, the Biotherhood
of Mankind,
Confucianism, according to Kang Yu-wei’s interpretation,
positively advocates Progress and not Conservatism, Altruism and
not Egoism, the World-state and not the Division of Nations,
Equality and not Absolutism, Independence and not Parasitism,
and the Superiority of the Soul over the Body. The true doctrine
of Confucius, he says, is to be searched out from his own writings
and, not from what is recorded by his disciples. According to
Confpcius’ own prophecy, the world will evolve from the warring
state into the peaceful state, and from the peacful state into the
state of equality when all the nations of the world will unite into
one great Commonwealth or world state, the Ta Tung Shih Chai.
In his Commentary on the Book of Changes, Confucius has gone
beyond the limits of the physical world and touched upon spiri-
tual questions.
From Buddhism and Christianity Kang Yu-wei has apparent-
ly got bis ideas of self-sacrifice, public service, the Brotherhood o|


Mankind, and the equality of all classes. It was mostly on
account of his novel ideas upon religion that Kang Yu-wei was at
one time unmercifully criticized and stigmatized by many scholars
as eccentric and heterodox.
111. His Opinions upon Social Reform.
His ideas upon this head are rather Communistic and Utop-
ian in character. The Greatest Good, according to him, is Uni-
versal Happiness and in order to attain this Universal Happiness
it is necessary first to do away with all suffering. All human
suffering is divided by him into three orders: (1) that which is
caused by nature; (2) that which is caused by our neighbours;
and (3) that which is caused by our own ignorance and froward-
ness. Natural suffering can be finally overcome by the advance
of science. Social afflictions can gradually be removed by social
progress; whilst increased knowledge and wisdom will in the epd
dissipate our ignorance and correct our frowardness so that men
may be saved from all the unnecessary pain caused by their own
folly. The root of all evils, says he, is selfishness; there is the
selfishness of the individual, the selfishness of the family, the
selfishness of the community, and the selfishness of the nation,
and the results of all are the inhuman intrigues and the bestial
wars, of the vast number of which the many cases recorded in
history constitute but a few. The only remedy for such human
depravity is Communism, the Ta Tung , according to Confucius.
I have time only to give you a very brief sketch of the Social Re-
forms that Kang Yu-wei suggested not only for China, but for all
mankind. Allow me to divide his views under three heads: (l)
His Ideal of the Universal Government; (2) his Ideal Family;
and (3) his Ideal Society.
I.—ldeal of the Universal Government.
Government, says he, is the acknowledged organ to insure
public progress; it shall look after whatever concerns the popular
welfare and even interfere with private undertakings if necessary!-
His most important suggestion is that the modern nations of the
world should be readjusted and divided again into so many smaller
communities with their own local government to suit their peculiar
conditions and meet their particular needs. Besides these local
governments, there should be a Universal Government with a
constitution binding upon all, and power to enforce the same. All
the officers of both the Universal Government and the local
governments ought to be elected.
II. —The Ideal Family.
He thinks that there ought to be no family connexions
whatever. The root of all human miseries, says he, is the mutual
dependence of the members of the family. Parents shall not claim
their offspring as privately belonging to themselves; they are all
members of the great world-state and they should be brought
together in the public nurseries and kindergartens: and educated


ra the public schools, and colleges. The disabled and .the aged
should also be provided for by the Universal State so that the
young and the strong can be free to serve the public. Marriage
and divorce are to be without any restraint; the Government
should have power only to prohibit polygamy and polyandry and
to regulate the age at which it is proper for the young people to
marry.
lll.—The Ideal Society.
According to Kang Yu-wei’s ideals, there would be practically
neither nation nor family; all national and family distinctions
would be discarded in the world community. The Social Reforms
he has outlined begin from the root of the tree; they are as follows:
(a.) There shall be country villas built by the Government in
the neighbourhood of verdant hills and clear fountains for the
special purpose of affording suitable homes for the married people
to pass their vacation time. During the months of confinement
the prospective mothers shall live in hospitals and be tenderly taken
care of by professional nurses. Ethical lectures shall be delivered
for their elevation every other day, so that the very infants may
receive instruction indirectly even in their mother’s wombs.
All consumptive and insane persons shall be prohibited from
propagating their kind.
( b.) All nursery and kindergarten work shall be taken up by
professional persons; parents shall not be allowed to interfere
with the bringing up of their own children.
(c) The Government shall afford equal opportunities to all
the young people of being educated in the public schools and
colleges. All the young people up to the age of twenty shall be
under the control of their masters and mistresses; they shall not
be allowed to. act independently before they attain the age of
maturity.
(d ) Before giving the young people a proper education, the
Government shall also see to it that there be no idlers living on
the energy of their more industrious neighbours; every man or
woman must secure for himself or herself a suitable employment,
otherwise the Government may get one for him or her.
(e.) The working hours shall be as few as possible, that
there may be plenty of time for enjoyment.
(f.) Though there shall be perfect liberty in religious be-
liefs, it will be advisable to have some standard of morals; ethical
lectures shall therefore be given every seventh day for the edifica-
tion of all.
(g.) Sanitary improvements shall be strenuously carried out
and supervised by the Government.
(h.) Free hospitals for the sick shall be provided at every
centre of population.
(i.) Very comfortable homes shall be provided for the aged,
as a reward for their meritorious labour in the. public welfare.


There will be specially good and nice accommodation for those who
have rendered exemplary service to the community.
O’.) The land shall be the common property of the com-
munity ; a tithe of the value of the product shall be levied on the
cultivators as the only kind of tax imposed.
(k.) Great public works, such as the building of railways,
the opening of mines, the establishing of factories, etc. shall be
taken up by the Government, encouraging at the same time private
enterprises.
(Z.) Half of the estates of deceased persons shall be handed
over to the Government as public property.
(m.) Two classes of people shall be specially honoured by
the Government, the benevolent and the wise—those who have
rendered in their day valuable services to society, and those who
have through their scientific inventions or literary work benefited
society in various ways. As compulsory benevolence, every
young man or woman after his or her graduation from college must
serve in the hospitals for the sick or in the homes for the aged
for one whole year.
( n .) Punishments shall be meted out only upon the idlers
and those who are guilty of foeticide; other crimes will be non-
existent under the wise administration of the Commonwealth.
Hard labour will be the only penalty.
(o.) Men and women shall enjoy equal privileges in all public
affairs.
( p .) There shall be a uniform standard throughout the whole
world of measures and weights, and also a universal chronology
and language.
IV. His Opinions on the Present and the Future Life.
Every man or woman has each his or her individual duty to
do in this present life; each person has now duties towards his
blood relations, but in the ideal commonwealth there will be only
duties towards society. Death only relieves one from the carnal
relations, but does not terminate the inherent life, which will
continue to exist in its spiritualized state after being released from
the body, and which is co-existent with eternity.
The above is a very brief review of Kang Yu-wei’s philosoph-
ical ideas, which were only transmitted to his disciples and
were never meant to be realized in action at this stage of the
world’s progress.
The Reform measures he devised for the immediate relief
of China are more practicable and are as follows :
(1.) Though democracy shall be the final aim, limited
monarchy, he thought, was the most suitable form of government
for China at this time ; therefore his advice to his countrymen
was that the reigning Dynasty should be upheld rather than
overthrown.
(2.) He denounced as ungenerous the anti-Manchu spirit.


He prophesied that as the Chinese vastly outnumber the Manchua,
the latter, as a race, would naturally lose prestige in the long
run.
(3.) He was positively against the division of the Empire
into so many small states, as was suggested by some reformers.
United China must never divide within itself.
(4.) What China needed most at that time were: (a) a con-
stitution; (6) a better organized government; ( c ) the increase of
popular privileges.
(5.) Municipal Governments shall be immediately granted to
the people.
(6.) The provinces shall be subdivided into smaller depart-
ments.
(7.) The Chinese shall strive to excel other nations in com-
merce and industries rather than in big armies and navies.
(8.) The Confucian doctrines shall be strenously disseminat-
ed by preaching.
(9.) Mongolia, Turkestan and Tibet shall be colonized and
exploited.
(10.) The Home Government shall extend its protection, to
Chinese subjects abroad, and solicit for them equal rights and
privileges with the citizens of other nations.
(11.) China shall not squander upon her army and navy the
money which may be more beneficially expended in educational
and industrial enterprise.
(12.) When China is both strong and wealthy enough, she
will take the lead in establishing a world state of good will and
peace.
III—THE CHARACTER OF KANG YU-WEI.
Now that I have given you some idea of Kang Yu-wei’s im-
aginative power, his aspirations, and his achievements so far, I
should naturally say something about his character; this leads
me to the Third section of my paper.
I forbear to pass any judgements. I leave it to worthier
persons than myself to criticize the actions and ideas of a man of'
such superiority. I will just echo the praise rendered to our
hero by one of his own disciples, Liang Ch’i-ch’iao, though some
people might well object and say that a pupil’s praise of his teacher
could not help being partial. As Liang Ch’i-ch’iao is one of
the most intimate pupils of our hero, if not the most intimate
pupil, I am inclined to rely more upon his opinion than upon
that of any one else. I shall also take this opportunity to own
that much of the material I have made use of in preparing this
paper is derived from Liang Ch’i-ch’iao’s little pamphlet upon
the life of his teacher.
Liang Ch’i-ch’iao characterized his teacher as a man of
sublime ideas, self-confidence, and great courage. (I.) That our
hero is imbued with new and more or less strange ideas there can


be no doubt from what I have enumerated above; but whether
those ideas of his were sublime or not, I leave it to your finer
taste to judge.
(2.) That our hero has great confidence in his own powers
I rather doubt. I would rather call him a man of strong faith.
Kang Yu-wei has strong faith in Providence and the Great
Purpose for which he has been sent into the world. True, he
failed in his attempts to reform China in the year 1898, but his
work of reform began long before 1898 and did not end with the
coup d’Mat. It might be said with fairness that he began in
earnest to realize his Great Purpose when he established his first
school of New Learning in Canton, and that he has been working
until now towards the same end and will so work on as long as
he lives. We judge a man’s labour by its ultimate fruits. Our
hero’s labour has brought forth a remarkable crop in the shape
of his many disciples who have again disseminated the seeds of
reformation, and other labourers more lucky than themselves
have reaped the more or less harvest in the form of
the present Republic of China.
(3.) That our hero is a man of great courage I heartily be-
lieve. His courage comes from his firm faith in Providence and
in his vocation. Perhaps he will not be extolled as a hero accord-
ing to the European Ideal. Our heroes do not quite approach the
Herculean type. We are naturally a peaceful people and adore
such leaders as will lead us to honour and glory without the
sacrifice of so many innocent lives aff the makers of the Great
European War demand of its participants. At the same time we
must remember that the Chinese mind has been cruelly cramped
by long centuries of absolute rule. Kang Yu-wei was one of the
few Chinese who had the courage to go beyond the trodden paths
and express their convictions with boldness both privately and in
public. By some he was stigmatized as a heretic in religion, a
dreamer in politics, and a general disturber of peace. That he was
not a dreamer or a rash adventurer was proved by the distinction
he drew between what he considered to be best for human society
but not practicable under present conditions, and what he thought
to be most important for the immediate reform of China. He has
been accused by some of being in too much hurry and too drastic
in trying to pull down the time-honoured structure of monarchism
and scholasticism; but let us only compare his actions with those
of the revolutionists and we shall perhaps be more considerate in
passing our judgement. It would probably be fairer for us to say
that Providence had given him and his party the harder task of
first convincing the people of the need of reform and to the revolu-
tionary party the easier job of pulling down the already crumbling
edifice that had long ago been undermined by the fearless criticisms
of Kang Yu-wei and his followers.
I conclude my paper with the prayer that the All Merciful


God will send down to China at this critical period in her history,
and into the world at a large, more men of such sublime ideas,
such strong faith and such extraordinary courage.




