

KEEP AUSTRALIA
FREE FROM NAZIS
DANGER Of
MIGRATION POLICY EXPLAINED


INTRODUCTION
We Australians should oppose the present government
plan to bring thousands of young Germans to this country.
It is natural that because Jews have suffered most under
Fascism, they should be the most vigilant and outspoken
against the Nazi threat wherever and in whatever form it
arises. The introduction of Nazi Germans into this country
educated and reared under Fascism is a matter which
concerns all Australians who cherish their democratic ideals
and traditions. It is not a question of “Jewish vindictive-
ness” or “Jewish racialism” (for we welcome any Germans
who are anti-Nazis), but of the economic and political
security of all Australians.
REMINDER
In 1945 General Eisenhower stood in Belsen concentra-
tion camp. Tears ran down his face as he said; “The world
must know this and we will not forget it.”
But many have forgotten, and amongst them the General
himself. The seven years that have passed seem to have
buried the dread image of Fascism that nevertheless left its
mark in Europe. Recall that 12 million men and women
were murdered in cold blood by the Nazis. Recall, not the
cold statistics but the living people, Jews, Catholics, Church
leaders, Freemasons, Trade Unionists, savagely tortured
and starved to death. 'Recall, too, the sadistic stormtroopers,
the liquidation camps that dotted the European countryside ;
remember the emaciated faces and the limp near-dead bodies
hovering by the death-pits of Belsen and Buchenwald.
WHAT IS A NAZI?
This was the Nazi mentality. The mentality that built
up the concept of the Germans as a master race, destined
to rule all other inferior races and to exterminate those that
stood in their way. The mentality that fostered a hatred
of democracy, of religion, of Unionism, of anything in short
which gave people something to strive for. The mentality
that burnt books, because books might give people ideas of
freedom, might teach them the falsity of Nazi doctrines.
The mentality that glorified WAR as the noblest of all
things.


The Nazi may give the impression of being a courteous,
well-behaved member of society, but beneath this surface
there is the man reared to love war and violence, to hate
liberty and democracy, and to spurn compassion or love for
his fellow man. The Nazi in short is a dangerous criminal,
more dangerous now, when he is not openly identifiable,
than during wartime, when everyone recognises him and
knows how to treat him.
DENAZIFICATION
Since it is West Germany that is providing the migrants
to Australia, it is this zone we must examine. And here we
find two salient features:—
® Denazification has completely collapsed (no more than
600 Nazis remain behind bars for the many thousands of
war crimes).
® Denazification has become rampant Nazis dominate
the entire West German administration.
Let us look:
“Germany has lost a battle but not the war”.
(French cartoon from ‘Ici Paris’)
RENAZIFICATION
Adenauer recently announced that he had in his Foreign
Ministry 134 Nazi party members, many occupying posi


tions similar to those they held under Hitler. Examples
at random include Dr. Kurt Heinberg, who collaborated in
the massacre of Balkan Jews, and Werner von Bergen, who
in occupied Belgium was responsible for the deportation of
Jews and Belgian patriots to death camps. There is also Dr.
Mohr, who helped deport the Jews of Holland, and Dr. von
Rintelen, who ordered the extermination of Jews deported
from Rumania. These are only samples of the many Nazis
now occupying high positions throughout the Bonn admini-
stration. A short time ago it was revealed that Dr. Globke,
who wrote the official Nazi legal commentary on Hitler’s
Nuremberg Racial laws, was now occupying the position of
a senior civil servant. When this was pointed out to
Adenauer he refused to take any action.
Even the titular heads of the Bonn government them-
selves are not free from previous Nazi associations. Prime
Minister Adenauer was President of the Nazi-supported
Deutsche Bank. President Heuss voted in 1933 for Hitler’s
Emergency Powers Act. Deputy President Carlo Schmid
was in charge of occupied Lille and was responsible for the
summary shooting of French miners.
It is not surprising under such an administration to
find that: —
• In Bavaria 85 per cent, of Nazi civil servants are back
in their jobs.
• In the British zone 75 per cent, of Nazis, including
almost all Nazi judges, are back again in the
judiciary.
• 559 Nazi mayors have been restored in the State of
Messen.
THE NEW FASCIST THREAT
The Melbourne Argus (28/2/52) reported a warning
given by the U.S. High Commissioner in Germany, John
J. McCloy, that a new Nazi movement was growing and
constituted a “potential danger”. Until late last year ex-
servicemen’s bodies appeared to be non-political. But in
September, 1951, the League of German Soldiers amalga-
mated all ex-servicemen’s organisations under ex-General
Friessner, former director of training in the Nazi Wehr-
macht. Recently Friessner described the bomb plot to kill
Hitler as “an attempt to murder the Supreme Commander
behind the back of the Front.”
In the New York Times, October 21, 1951, Drew Middle-
ton wrote: —


“In addition to the many former and neo-Nazis who now
soil German political life, there has emerged in the last
three months a pressure group of Veterans which is moving
steadily toward a militant nationalism.
“These (veterans) have been brought under one leader-
ship that of the Association of German Soldiers, headed
by former Col. Gen. Hans Friessner . . . the association is
in politics up to its neck, demanding the freeing of our war
criminals and insisting on full armament equality for
Germany.”
MIGRATION POOL
Such is the atmosphere from which our migrants are
to be taken. Such an atmosphere has been characterised by
such post-war popular sellers as “My Brother Adolf” by
Hitler’s sister Paula, “Hitler as He Really Was”, “Hitler’s
Youth”, “Adolph Hitler’s Great Love”. At the same time a
publisher could not be found who would risk Kurt von
Blucher’s “Know Your Germans” a book critical of
Hitlerism.
Can it be expected that the migrating Germans
whose main age group is 20-35 have thrown off the
Nazi ideology or are even willing to do so, when clearly the
only efforts at “reform” have produced an extra resurgence
of the very thing against which we fought in the last war.
Current efforts to gloss over the dangers of German migra-
tion to Australia are brought to nothing when the “Screen-
ing System” is examined. As a matter of fact not only is
the system defective, but many Nazis have been discovered
to have got through with no trouble (none have been
deported), as though to confirm the fears of those who have
been actively opposing the Government policy.
‘NAZISM NO BAR’—SIR JOHN STOREY.
The complete hollowness of the argument that screen-
ing will protect Australia from Nazis is shown in the fact
that as far back as 1950 Sir John Storey, Chairman of the
Commonwealth Immigration Planning Council, announced
that membership of the Nazi Party was no bar to entry
here. Recently Mr. Holt, the Minister for Immigration,
underlined this as Australian Government policy. On
14/7/51 the Sydney Daily Telegraph reported that the same
Mr. Holt had announced that German ex-servicemen could
enter Australia. Thus the most the screening system now
pretends to do is to keep out the very worst Nazis. Even


so, note the pertinent comment published in the Perth Daily
News, 4/1/1951: —
“New Australians at Northern migration centre today
told of a racket being practised in Europe whereby faked
displaced persons are getting out of Europe. They told
how faked papers are not hard to get . .
No system humanly imaginable could exclude with any
amount of safety the importation into this country of Nazi
"HAVEN’T I SEEN YOU BEFORE?”
(By Vicky—Courtesy Daily News Chronicle, London)
elements. You can screen people for their health and their
trade skills, but here screening stops. You cannot ascertain
their political feelings by asking a few questions and by
perusing a few documents.
NAZIS ARE HERE !
Paul Kotting is a new Australian from Berlin. On
24/4/51 the Melbourne Herald reported an interview with
him. He spoke of the “bad” side of totalitarianism and im-
plied the “good” side was the German one. This former
member of Hitler’s Wehrmacht said: “Screening officers
asked us whether we fought for Hitler during the war.
They said it did not matter.”


Statues of Hitler have been found in migrant camps in
Australia, and officials have had occasion to seize German
army bayonets, knives, swastikas and leather whips.
Over recent months revelations of Nazi penetration into
Australia through the so-called German migration policy
have become more and more frequent.
The Melbourne Argus, 13/11/51, announced the arrival
here of two Iron Cross winners, Karl Drews and Horst
Gebranzig.
In November last year, Tasmanian Senator O’Byrne told
the Senate that 17 convicted Nazi war criminals were work-
ing on the Kiewa hydro-electric scheme.
About the same time, N.S.W. Labor Member Fitz-
gerald warned that nearly five hundred Hitler Youth were
on their way to this country.
In addition the Jewish Council to Combat Fascism
and Anti-Semitism has kept a file of the numerous reports
given to it by ordinary members of the public who have
encountered Nazi migrants in their everyday life. The fi l e
is open for anyone to see and each report has been sent to
the Minister for Immigration. He has failed to act.
EFFECT OF GERMAN MIGRATION SCHEME
ON AUSTRALIA
The large influx of people with anti-democratic ideas
can only have disastrous effects as far as the Australian
people are concerned. With the general employment position
becoming worse and economic hardship mounting it can
no longer be argued that Australia is in need of bigger
labour resources. And it may be that the first to suffer will
be trade unionists.
“The average German is a desirable type for Australia
because he is used to working a 48-hour week, is a first-
class tradesman and seems to thrive on incentive payments.
More and more production seems his constant goal.” (Mr.
W. H. Connelly, General Manager, State Electricity Com-
mission, Age, 31/8/50.)
Such migrants, too, brought up to hate the principles of
free trade unionism, might well be the spearhead of any
strike-breaking force should the need arise, and bring blood-
shed into our labour disputes.
The threat to the political freedom of Australians is
the same. The experience of the world of Germans has
shown the disinclination to adopt their country of residence.
So when Hitler marched into Czechoslovakia in 1938 he
found three million Germans who, practically to a man,


although they had lived all their lives with the Czechs,
rose in support of the invaders. Even in Australia al-
though they had lived here many years, 1,000 Germans
had by 1939 joined the Australian Nazi Party owing
allegiance to Hitler.
CONCLUSION
The signing of a Peace Treaty between the Western
Allies and West Germany puts the clock back to 1989. West
Germany replete with an administration unwilling to
combat the serious Nazi threat is free to go whatever way
it will and, what is significant from the democratic point of
view, to encourage the growth of Nazism with all its ugly
ramifications.
It is from this source then that the Australian Govern-
ment is drawing its pool of migrants. It is the task of every
Australian to join with the Jewish Council in its struggle
to stop the entry of Nazis.
In this struggle we acknowledge the great achievements
of the German people in former times, and look forward to
the day when we can welcome back a repentant and demo-
cratic Germany into the comity of nations.
STOP PRESS
A report in the Melbourne Herald, 11/6/52, pro-
vides yet further evidence for the Jewish Council
campaign against German migration:—
“A young German who arrived by air to-day
said that he and all of 14 Germans with him had
been members of the Hitler Youth Movement.
“The Germans are all in their early 20’s. They
have come to work for the Australian Gas Light
Company, Sydney.
“Airport Interpreter, H. Brinkman, said one told
him that some of them belonged to the Nazi Party.
ian passenger Per Schaug said the Germans
| 111 the old German national flag, which their
|| lisplayed wherever the plane stopped.”
Printed by Moran Bros. Printing Co., for the
Jewish Council. 325 Collins St., Melbourne, C.I
