

r-—T. E=T
The Dangers of Venereal
Diseases
Keep Yourself Fit
W
O You are going to fight in order that 2
D your children and your children's U
: children may enjoy the heritage of
liberty. See to it that no action of
yours will rob them of a heritage that
is as priceless as liberty—the heritage
of good health.
Willi.im Brook a- & Co., Ltd., Printers. Sydney.


» *
-TJtJ'erguson Coij.ectionA\?
Ill Library" | II


Keep Yourself Fit
AN ADDRESS
Given at the Camps in Queensland and
New South Wales
Dr. R. ARTHUR,
Issued by
THE AUSTRALASIAN WHITE CROSS LEAGUE
56 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.


ak:
MEN OF THE AUSTRALIAN
IMPERIAL FORCE.
There are five thousand of your comrades
lying in their graves at Arizac. You have
come forward to take their place and carry
to an end the task they so gloriously began.
I congratulate you on your decision. You
have chosen well.
All of you, I believe, realise what lies be-
fore in the shape of hardship, suffering and,
it may be, death; and yet, knowing these
things, your chief wish is to get quickly to
the fighting line.
Let me then help you with a few words
of advice and warning, lest through ignor-
ance or want of thought you fall out by
the way, and never attain your desire to
strike a blow for the Empire and for the
cause of liberty and justice.


Your Officers have taught you that the
first duty of a soldier is obedience. I, as a
medical man, would say that your second
duty is to keep fit.
No man who is sick or even out of sorts
is any good as a soldier. A sick man is
just a burden and a nuisance to an Army,
and if he has brought disease on himself
by his owp fault, it may be truly said that
he is fighting against his own side and
helping the enemy.
His services are lost to his Country just
as surely as if the enemy had put a bullet
through him, and there is all the trouble
and expense of keeping him in hospital.
His absence from the fighting line at a crisis
may mean all the difference between victory
and defeat, and thus he would play his
country and his comrades false.
The soldier has sworn to do his duty, and
all his will-power and determination must
be used to carry out his oath faithfully.
You must have always before you the reso-
lution: for my Country’s sake I will strive
my best to keep fit.


Now what is the chief way by which sol-
diers make themselves unfit?
Let me speak very plainly, but without
any exaggeration. It is by going with loose
women and acquiring one or other of the
foul diseases known as syphilis or
gonorrhoea.
Any man who yields to this temptation
may on the very first occasion become in-
fected by a disease which will make him
unfit for his duties for either months or
years, and may blast the whole of his life,
causing him to finish either as a helpless
paralytic, or in a lunatic asylum.
Syphilis is easily acquired, and once the
poison gets into the system, it may rot any
or every part of the body. It may break
out years after it is apparently cured, in
disgusting ulcerations eating away the nose
or the throat, or settling in the liver or the
brain or spinal cord.
Here is a man staggering along with the
aid of a stick, pounding his feet on the
ground. He is suffering from the incurable


disease of locomotor ataxy that is
syphilis; here is another with that agonising
and disabling malady—aneurism of a great
blood vessel—that is syphilis; here is yet
another with his mental powers gone —
dirty, noisy, boastful, awaiting an early
death. He is suffering from general
paralysis of the insane, and that is syphilis!
A man with syphilis is a danger to
his mates. If one of them should use a
drinking cup after him, or pick up his pipe
by mistake, the poison may enter through
a crack in the lip, and the innocent person
may be afflicted by all the same results of
this hideous malady.
And, further, if a man before he is cured,
marries a woman whom he loves and res-
pects, he may find to his horror that not
only she, but also her children become in-
fected by this loathsome disease, and if the
children survive, they grow up stunted both
in body and mind, fit often for only an
asylum for idiots.
Gonorrhoea (or clap, or a runner, as it is
often called) is commonly regarded as a


trivial complaint, but it is in many ways
just as serious as syphilis. Not only is it
in itself a very painful and disgusting dis-
order, but it sometimes goes on to inflam-
mation of the testicles, swelling of the
joints, heart disease, and death.
If any of the gonorrhoeal discharge gets
conveyed into the eyes, it at once sets up a
violent inflammation, which may lead to
total blindness. Again, a very serious
effect, coming on many years afterwards, is
a narrowing of the water pipe, which is not
only dangerous in itself, but may result in
bladder or kidney disease. Finally, the
germs of gonorrhoea may remain in a man’s
body for years, and when he marries pro-
duce the most serious disease in his wife,
either making her an invalid for life, or re-
quiring her to submit to very grave and
dangerous surgical operations.
And many infants become totally blind
for life by having their eyes infected during
the process of birth.
What must a man’s feelings of remorse be
if he looks on his innocent child condemned


to go blind all its days and never see the
light of the sun from its father’s fault?
See, therefore, the risks you run by in-
dulging in intercourse with some woman
who is willing to sell herself to you. And
a point to be noted is that the younger and
fresher a woman of this class appears to be
the more dangerous and likely to infect you
she is!
On the other hand, if you take advantage
of some innocent girl, then you are doing
her the greatest injury that a man can do to
a woman by robbing her of her chastity.
You may start her on the road that leads
to a life on the streets, and the death of the
harlot, or you may bring the horrors of un-
wanted motherhood upon her, and while
you are away at the War, she will have to
face all the shame and disgrace alone. It
is appalling to know that girls of 14, 15 and
16 years of age are to be found in Australia
who have been seduced and are about to
have a child, when they are almost children
themselves.
What has roused our fiercest and most


bitter rage against the German Army? Has
it not been the unspeakable outrages on
girls and women which have been commit-
ted in Belgium and elsewhere, even the
nuns in convents not being spared?
What would you think of the Australian
soldier who, if he were marching through
an enemy’s country, should take advantage
of the opportunity and violate the girls and
women within his reach? And yet how
much better is the man in Australia who
takes advantage of the weakness, the ignor-
ance, or the affection of one of our own girls
and ruins her? Some of you have a little
sister at home. What would you do to the
cowardly hound who should come along
and debauch her and get her in the family
way?
If I know anything of the men of Aus-
tralia, you would serve it out to him with
a stockwhip and a revolver.
Remember then that the flighty girl you
may meet, and who is prepared to let you
take liberties with her, is some other man’s
sister, and should be accorded your protec-


tion against yourself as well as against
others.
You are going off to the Great War and
the Great Adventure. Your own people and
your friends have praised your patriotism.
If you are leaving a mother, a sister or a
sweetheart at home, you know how proud
they are of you, and how they will weary
to hear news about you. They will live
from day to day in anxiety lest anything
should happen to you. Now what pain and
shame they would have to bear if you were
dismissed from the Force because you had
acquired a foul disease! How could you
explain to them that you were not going to
the War, but to a Venereal Compound!
And how would you stand being cooped
up as a prisoner in such a Camp when your
mates were marching to the transport?
Or, if you became infected in Egypt and
were returned to Australia, as some 300
men were some time ago in one ship, would
you not eat your heart out in regret and
remorse?


You would not be coming back with an
honourable wound, nor would your name
appear in any casualty list, but you would
be returning as one who had been false to
his duty, and you would be kept in dis-
honourable confinement until you could be
released without danger to the innocent
people with whom you would mix.
With such a hideous possibility before
you, I am certain, men, that most of you
are glad that I have come to give you this
information and offer a few words of advice.
I say straight out that I do not forget
the strength of the sex impulse in young
men. It is a natural instinct, and surges
up with tremendous force, calling for grati-
fication.
But have patience. Wait till the War is
over, and you will find plenty of sweet and
good girls to marry you and be the mothers
of your future children. For their sakes,
keep yourselves clean, as well as for the
sake of your country. Come back clean, to
be the fathers of a pure-blooded and virile
Australian race.


If you decide you will make a fight to do
this, then the first thing I urge upon you
is to keep away from drink. Doctors say
truly that drink and syphilis go hand in
hand. If a man takes intoxicating liquors,
two things happen. Firstly, his sexual de-
sire is aroused by the alcohol, and his
powers of control and self-restraint are
more and more lessened. He will then do
things he would never dream of doing in
his sober senses, and will go with women
the sight of whom would fill him with is-
gust if he were sober.
Again a soldier in training or on Active
Service is much better without drink of any
kind. It saps his energy, dulls the accuracy
of his senses, and makes it easier for him
to catch serious diseases like pneumonia
and meningitis.
Some men think it manly to get drunk,
and others believe it a sign of manhood to
go with loose women and take advantage
of girls.
I would try to impress upon you with all
the force at my command that these things


are the very reverse of what is fitting for
true manhood. Both of them lead to moral
degradation and physical disaster.
The good soldier calls his passions to
heel. He is master of them, not they of
him. If you are prepared to give your life
for your country, as so many of our gal-
lant lads have already done, will you not
go a little further, and sacrifice for the time
being your desires and pleasures?
Am I asking too much of you, or am I
not? I know what your reply will be. And
now I would finish with an appeal to the
older men to set a good example and lend
a helping hand to the younger ones. I
put you older men on your honour not to
try and induce the lads to drink or go with
women, but to warn them against these.
You have great influence with the lads,
greater probably than the officers can have.
See that you use it aright, and win the
gratitude of thousands of Australian
mothers, who are not so afraid of an hon-
ourable death for their lads as that they
might return to them drunkards or diseased.


And once more I say you have made a glor-
ious choice and taken the path of duty. I
hope you will all come back to us, and God
bless you.
william Brooks & Co., Ltd., Printers. Sydney.
