

K•• '■ M mi I 1 m f ..
pr §||1 | pr|J y i
I g | * '; '
It • - £ ■;:. -,.. , ■ gjjj g . _ : .. " ■:■' 'i-.u' ' l£ jgj '••• • ■ .•••■■•'■ V v ' ; ■"■


OfitK


k


KELSO CHURCH
AND THE
PIONEERS OF THE WEST
ARCHDEACON OAKES.
With Foreword by
J. A. FERGUSON Esq., 8.A., LL.B.,
Past President of the Royal Australian Historical Society.
The articles on the Pioneers of the West are
republished by courtesy of the Sydney
'Daily Telegraph.
Price, 2/6 per copy. Any profits
will be devoted to the Centenary
Fund of Holy Trinity Church, Kelso.
tSgbtttg:
D. S. Ford, Printer, 48.50 Reservoir Street


PREFACE.
I hope that this pamphlet will help to raise a substan-
tial sum to adequately commemorate the centenary of the
oldest church in the West. It surely must be right that
we should make a worthy thank-offering to Almighty God
for the privilege of possessing and maintaining such a his-
toric sanctuary. It cannot be right that a church, which
is nearly a hundred years old, should have neither an
organ chamber nor a vestry. Perhaps those who read this
history will send a donation, large or small, to the Hon.
Treasurer of the Centenary Commemoration Fund, Holy
Trinity Church, Kelso, New South Wales.
Kelso Church and the Pioneers of the West are in
many ways closely associated, therefore this little publi-
cation has a double objective:—(l) To interest the read-
ers in the centenary of a historic church, where many of
the pioneers worshipped, and where they were eventually
laid to rest in the adjoining churchyard; (2) to give some
record of the lives of the Pioneers of the West and hand
it down to posterity in permanent form.
I take the opportunity of acknowledging the great
obligation I am under to Mr. J. A. Ferguson, of the Royal
Australian Historical Society, from whom I have received
much practical help and sympathy.
Let me conclude with a thought from " Will Carl-
ton," which may, or may not, be appropriate:—
"So I strike the keynote of the national song
That shall stand through future years,
And the artist-tribes my strains prolong—
'Tis the song of the Pioneers."
Kelso, N.S.W.,
G.S.O.
June 11, 1923.


Regret has often been expressed that Australia lias
so few memorials of the past. A valuable incentive to
race pride, sturdy patriotic endeavour, and good citizen-
ship is thus generally lacking. We are said, as a people,
to be wanting in reverence. It becomes all the more
necessary to carefully safeguard and treasure such ancient
buildings, landmarks, and monuments as help to keep
.alive the historic sentiment and inspire reverence for those
pioneers whose self-denying and courageous exertions
securely established the future of our nation.
A visit to the beautiful old Church of Holy Trinity,
at Kelso, near Ratliurst, might well be likened to a pil-
grimage to a slrrine. The grey stones, the carved and
fretted timbers, the silent yet eloquent memorials of the
honoured dead, the great calm, take possession of the
imagination of the visitor, tilling his soul with reverential
awe and new visions.
Archdeacon Cakes has performed a public service in
telling with understanding, sympathy, and gracious dic-
tion the story of the venerable building, now approaching
its centennial year. Many who read this pamphlet will
be filled with a keen desire to visit so remarkable a
sanctuary. The reverend author, in the cause of a long
pastorate in the western districts of New* idouth Wales, has
had unusual opportunities of meeting with the pioneer
families. The story be has to tell of the pioneers and
their early achievements is not merely of historical im-
portance as a record, but arresting in its human interest.
The success of this little volume, and of the Church
restoration and extension effort, to which any proceeds
derived from its sale are to be devoted, will be earnestly
desired by all lovers of Australian history.
JOIIN A. FERGUSON,
Past President Royal Australian Historical Society.
Un ive rsity Chart ibrrs,
167 Phillip Street, Sydney.
June 6, 1923.


The writer of these articles has received quite a num.'
ber of letters and pamphlets giving the history of the early
days. The pamphlets were written, in the first place, for
private circulation by members of the different families to
which reference is made, and are valuable because
authentic.
They include: —
1. My Grandfather's Diary. Edited by Sir Francis Suttor,
2. The Lees of Claremont, by Edric H. Brady.
3. The Retnkens of Salt-ram, by Mrs. W. B. Ranken.
4. Memoirs of Mrs. Busby.
5. Recollections , by A. A. C. D. Boswell. Two vols.
6. Reminiscences , by J. B. Martin.
7. The Late William Tom, by W. 11. Webb.
Mr. Frank Walker, Fellow of the Royal Australian
Historical Society, writes:—''You have chosen a subject
that should appeal to all true Australians, who believe that
the most important and most interesting phases of Aus-
tralian history are those which deal with the lives and
works of our brave pioneers."


CHAPTER I.
Holy Trinity Church,
Kelso.
Kelso Church is to-day not only a historic landmark,
but a veritable memorial to many of those who have been
identified with the early history of Bathurst. It is too
well known, and has been "written up" too often, to re-
quire any detailed description. The Visitors' Book shows
that hundreds of "pilgrims come annually to this shrine."
The door is always open, and not a day passes but some
traveller walks around the sacred enclosure, or kneels for
a few moments within the hallowed precincts. On every
hand names meet the eye which call up old associations.
Those of Bishop Camidge, Oeorge Lee, Richard Young
Cousins, "William Kite, William Henry Suttor, J. B. Rich-
ards, are but a few that may be mentioned at random.
The last stained-glass window, and one of the latest
memorials, is a tribute to fallen -soldiers, and represents
the patron saint of the nation, triumphing over
a fearsome dragon, that stands for all that is per-
nicious and evil. It should be the pride and privilege
of the present generation to maintain, in unsullied beauty,
this sacred edifice, with its solemn surroundings. Here 1
their friends and forefathers worshipped, and here their
mortal remains have been laid to rest, with a sure and
certain hope of a joyful resurrection. Much still remains
to be done to make Holy Trinity Church, Kelso, worthy of
the traditions of the past, and a fitting symbol of future
hopes and aspirations.
The Sydney Herald , April 23, 1835, reported:—"The
new church at Bathurst (Kelso) was opened by the Rev.
Samuel Marsden. Very large congregation. The foun-
dation was laid by Archdeacon Broughton in 1834." In
1837 Bishop Broughton, reporting to the Diocesan Com-
mittee, says:—"Pew events of my life have afforded me
greater pleasure than consecrating this substantial evi-
dence to the worship of Almighty Cod." The cost


' "
f
I
I . i(
amounted to £I,OOO, half of which was advanced by the
Colonial Government. The Rev. John Espy Keane, M.A.,
was the first clergyman. Date of warrant, July 6, 1925.
The following have also been in charge:—Revs. Thomas
Hassall, Richard Taylor, J. K. Walpole, Charles Wood-
ward, William Lisle (twenty-eight years), Arthur Cass,
A. R, Blanket, Archdeacon Campbell, and Archdeacon
Oakes (thirty years). The church and cemetery were con-
secrated by the Lord Bishop of Australia on December 3,
1836, the petition being presented by T. F. Hawkins, Esq.,
J.P., and A. K. Mackenzie, Esq., J.P., officiating as Reg-
istrar.
Holy Trinity Church, Kelso.
At a meeting of the Kelso Parish Council, presided
over by the Bishop, on May 13, 1922, it was decided ade-
quately to commemorate the centenary of the foundation
of the parish in 1825.
This official act represents the planting of the Chris-
tian flag in the West, and from this the Bathurst Diocese
has grown.
The celebrations will take place during Synod Week,
1925, when representatives from all parts of the diocese,


on ,a day specially set apart for the purpose, will be asked
to join in a great service of thanksgiving, to be held in the
ancient Church.
So far the following proposals have been submitted,
and, with any others that may be sent in, will be con-
sidered :
(1) To complete the restoration of the Church, by
building transepts, which would provide a
much-needed vestry and organ-chamber.
(2) To erect a suitably-inscribed memorial in front
of the Church facing west, to mark the centen-
ary. And to establish a fund the interest of
which is to be expended on the upkeep of the
church building, which was the first church
erected west of the Blue Mountains.
This is a rare opportunity to preserve a historic
Church, and to perpetuate the memory of the departed,
and we ask for your assistance and co-operation. The
circular containing these proposals is signed by
G. M. BATHURST, Bishop.
G. SPENCER OAKES, Rector.
W. E. NORTH COTT, Secretary Sub-Committee.
KELSO CHURCH.
"SYDNEY GAZETTE."
Thursday, April 23, 1835.
BATHURST.
Dedication of Holy Trinity Church.
The Rev. Samuel Marsden, Senior Chaplain of the colony, and
officiating for the Archdeacon, performed the solemn duty of dedi-
cating the newly-erected Church to public worship on Easter
Sunday, in presence of a very numerous and respectable congrega-
tion. In an extemporaneous prayer and sermon adapted to the
occasion the rev. gentleman was particularly impressive, and the
service of the day was concluded by the administration of the Holy
Sacrament to a large number of communicants.
It may be pointed out that, although the Church was
dedicated in 1835, the parish records go back to 1825, that


being the year when the first Rector was appointed.
Divine worship was at first held in a rudely-constructed
barn, which the Rev. John Keane afterwards used as a
school "for the sons of the gentry." Other children were
educated in a denominational school adjoining the glebe.
This building is still used for general parochial purposes.
The most interesting fact in connection with Kelso Church
Holy Trinity, Kelso.
is not only that it is the first permanent Church that was
built beyond the Blue Mountains, but that it has the
unique distinction of being absolutely and entirely a
church of memorials. The richly-stained windows, the
carved rood screen, the oak altar, the organ, the choir
stalls, the stone pulpit, the brass lectern, the carved ceil-
ing, the oak pew-s, and every other appointment In this
beautiful 1-furnished sanctuary is the gift of one or other
of the descendants of the old pioneers in loving memory
of the departed.


For just on one hundred years the meihbers of the
old Bathurst families have borne the mortal remains of
their relatives into the old Church for a short and solemn
service before they were interred in the adjoining Church-
yard. Surely if there is a sacred edifice and hallowed
enclosure anywhere in the West, it is to be found here.
Is it any wonder that we try to keep this Church and
grounds in good order? Much still remains to be done,
but the old associations are sufficiently strong to make it
almost certain that the centenary celebration in 1925 will
be worthy of so great an occasion. It is a great privilege
to minister in this historic Church, and to worship where
the presence of the faithful departed undoubtedly is still
felt. It is an honour to have the names of our loved ones
perpetuated, and their memories reverenced with such sur-
roundings, and we shall do well to rise to the occasion,
and to make the most of this rare opportunity.
The words of John Oxenham may be aptly quoted in
this connection. They are entitled:—
THE LITTLE HOUSE OF BREAD.
O, little Home of Peace and Perfect Calm—
O, little, still, white, sacramental place,
Filled with the mystic effluence of His Grace,
Which makes of thee a healing and a balm.
God surely loves thee, little House of Prayer,
Nor ever fails the soul that seeks Him there;
No matter what his sore predicament,
No matter what the burden of his pain,
No troubled soul has ever healing sought
But here he found Divine medicament—
Losing himself has won the greater gain,
And, by his giving, nobler treasure bought.
Here in the silence you confess your sin,
And holy ministrants, unheard, unseen,
Beneath the red lamp softly whisper you
New hope—no matter what the past has been.
Here some have knelt before departing hence
For the Red Fronts, and have upbuilded been
With new-born Faith's most lofty confidence;
To face the High Call of the Unforeseen;
In weakness some, and 'some in penitence,
But all in highest, holiest reverence.
God surely loves thee, little House of Bread,
For here the seeking soul to Him is led,
And on His Living Bread the hungry soul is fed.


CHAPTER 11.
William and Mary Lee and
their Descendants.
In relating the histories of the Bathurst pioneers,
pride of place must be given to William and Mary Lee and
their immediate descendants.
William Lee was one of the first seven settlers, and
the first man to take sheep over the Blue Mountains. That
was in 1815. Mrs. Nevell, a descendant of another of the
settlers, whose grant was where the Kelso railway station
now stands, tells how William Lee's twenty-first birthday
was celebrated in 1815, and a memento of the occasion, in
the shape of a small cask, to hold a quart of brandy, is
still treasured by her family.
Incidentally, it may be mentioned that another mem-
ber of the Nevell family recently presented to the rector
and churchwardens at Kelso a well-preserved Bible, one
hundred and fifty years old, which was used by the Rev.
Samuel Marsden at the opening of Holy Trinity Church in
1835.
The original member of the family to come to Aus r
tralia was James Lee, of Warwickshire, England. He
was a marine in the ship Lady Penrhyn, one of the first
fleet in 1788, and his wife followed a year later. He was
sent "to Norfolk Island with Lieutenant Phillip Gidley
King to superintend the growing of flax. Here he died in
1795, leaving two children, William and Maria, both of
whom were born on the island. Those who are learned in
the laws of heredity may trace in the fact that Norfolk
Island is one of the most picturesque spots to be found in
the world the secret of the innate love which the descend-
ants of William Lee display to-day for the cultivation of


ornamental shrubs and flowers. Those who are familiar
with the annual displays at the Bathurst horticultural
shows will remember their exhibits. Their private gardens
have always been the wonder and admiration of all be-
holders.
The two Lee children were brought from Norfolk
Island to Sydney by the chaplain, Rev. H. Fulton. Wil-
liam was placed under the care of Lieutenant Cox at
Windsor, and Maria under the care of Surgeon Mount-
William Lee,
Born at Norfolk Island, April 1, 1794;
died at "Claremont," Kelso, November 18, 1870.
garret. She afterwards married James Bloodworth, and
lived to be ninety-nine years of age. Longevity is one of
the characteristics of the natives of Norfolk Island.
William was born in 1794. and Maria in 1796.


Young Lee on several occasions accompanied Lieuten-
ant Cox on his tours of inspection of the first road over
the Blue Mountains, and both he and his sister had grants
of land at Bathurst. The widow of James Lee married a
man named Panteney, and left for England in a vessel
that was never heard of again; consequently much of the
family history was lost. William Lee was married in the-
old church at Windsor in 1821 to Mary Dargin. The
original name was D'Argen. She was the daughter of
Thomas Dargin, who came of a Huguenot family. He-
came to Sydney as mate of one of the vessels of the First
Meet, and settled at Windsor, where he died in 1834.
William Lee brought his bride to "Wallaroi," Kelso,,
just about a hundred years ago. It is said that she was
so disappointed when she found that the floors of her home
were unboarded that she shut herself up in her room for
a whole day. In 1828 "Claremont," a much more preten-
tious residence, was built, and here most of the children
were born. Governor Darling visited the family at
"Claremont" on the occasion of his visit to Bathurst.
Mrs. Lee died in Sydney in 1886, aged 88 years. Wil-
liam Lee died at "Claremont" in 1870, aged seventy-six
years. Both were buried in the family vault in the Kelso
church-yard. As these notes are being penned word has
come that a legacy from a member of the family lately
deceased has been left to the church. Nor is this the first.
The late Hon. George Lee and his son, Walter G. Lee, both
remembered the sacred edifice in their wills. None have
done more to make Kelso Church a worthy historic feature
in the Bathurst district than the descendants of William
and Mary Lee, representatives of whom still delight to
worship within its walls. Among their varied gifts may
be mentioned a stained-glass window, a carved roof, a
stone pulpit, a magnificent oak rood-screen, choir stalls,
chancel tiles, altar rails, a litany desk, a richly-embroid-
ered altar frontal, and an ornamental processional cross;
whilst several mural tablets have been placed here, to the
greater glory of God and in loving memory of those now
numbered with the faithful departed, who once wor-
shipped in the first church on the Bathurst plains, which
they helped to erect. Kelso Church will ever stand as a
memorial to William and Mary Lee and their descendants,


and we know that at the commemoration of tlie approach-
ing centenary their names will not be forgotten.
AS MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT.
'William Lee sat in the first Parliament under respon-
sible government as member for Roxbourgh. He became
famous for his breeds of horses and cattle. He first intro-
Mary Lee,
Wife of William Lee; born at Windsor, September 23, 1798;
died at Sydney, August 29, 1886.
<duced imported Shorthorns from England to the West,
and maintained the herd pure till the time of his death,
when it was equally divided among his sons. A Lee mare
named Sappho was the grand-dam of some of the most
famous horses in the State.


William Lee was remarkable as a discoverer of high-
class pastoral land, and his judgment never erred. He-
took up stations on theßogan, the Lachlan, and the Castle-
reagh Rivers, and at Bylong, near Rylstone, and Larras
Lake, near Molong. He also accompanied Lieutenant
Lawson on the first journey to Mudgee. He was a man
of considerable literary tastes, and, although his educa-
tional opportunites were limited, his library contained
most of the standard works by the best authors of the
day. •
The children of William and Mary Lee were: William
John, Thomas, Maria (Mrs. Brady), Eliza, James, Eliza-
beth (Mrs. Lord), George, Edward, Henry, and' Mary Jane
(Mrs. Austin). Of this generation only one remains—
Mrs. Brady—who is over ninety years of age. There are
some thirty grand-children, besides many great-grand-
children, so that the name of Lee is not likely to die ouL
And it is one of which Australia has reason to be proud..


CHAPTER 111.
The Suttor Centenary
In looking over the memoirs of the late George Suttor,
the founder of the family in Australia, I have been im-
pressed with the sterling qualities which characterised this
early pioneer, and his brave and faithful wife. The pre-
sent representatives of the family—and their name is
legion—have every reason to be proud of the stock from
which they have sprung.
George Suttor was of Scottish descent, with Douglas
and Bruce blood running in his veins, so it is not surpris-
ing that he proved himself a man of courage, grit, and
integrity.' When quite a young man his chief ambition
was to marry a charming young lady (Miss Sarah M.
Dobinson), and to escape from the narrow confines of
English life for a more adventurous career in the newly-
established colony, commonly called Botany Bay.
An ardent lover of books, and a great reader, he knew
all about Captain Cook's voyages, and determined, if pos-
sible, to launch out and have a hand in the development
of a new country and the building-up of a great nation.
We are told that his actual capital at this time was £2O,
and there were almost insuperable difficulties in the way;
but to a man of George Suttor's temperament these only
acted as a spur to renewed activities.
He contrived to get an introduction to Sir Joseph
Banks, a man of much influence and authority, and whom
Air. Suttor always regarded as the father of the Austra-
lian colony. After the usual preliminary negotiations it
was eventually arranged that our youthful adventurer,
with his charming bride, was to be provided with a pas-


sage on H.M.S. Porpoise, and was to proceed to Australia
in charge of eighteen cases of plants, for the cultivation of
which he was to be responsible. He received no salary,
but was to have a grant of land and certain assistance
from the Governor of the colony. The young couple were
married on August 2, 1798, and immediately began to
make preparations for their long and perilous voyage.
War with France had broken out some five years before,
and this was the cause of much delay. In October, 1789,
the travellers, with their precious consignment of plants,
went on board the sloop, and proceeded down the.Thames,
where the vessel was caught in a gale and nearly wrecked
on the Margate Sands.
In January, 1799, they sailed for Portsmouth, but it
was not until September that they left for Sydney with a
fleet of five hundred vessels, and a convoy of twenty ships
of war to guard them to all parts of the world. In the
Bay of Biscay the fleet encountered a tremendous gale,
three vessels were lost and the Porpoise so badly damaged
that she had to return to Spithead. She was condemned
as unseaworthy and replaced by another vessel bearing
the same name, which sailed on March 17, 1800. In the
meantime their eldest son, George Banks Suttoiyhad been
born.
ARRIVAL IN SYDNEY.
After a delay of nearly four months at the Cape of
Good Hope, they finally reached Sydney on November 5,
1800, more than two years from the time they had first
set out. These details are given to show how things have
changed, and to indicate how much courage and determin-
ation was needed to embark upon such a perilous and un-
certain undertaking. Sydney then had more the appear-
ance of a camp than a town, and consisted largely of
stumps and dead trees.
Governor King did not give the young couple a very
cordial reception. He advised them to remain on board
the ship until they could get a house at Parramatta, and
added that he "could not be troubled with their affairs,
as he had five thousand people to govern,'which was as
much as he could do."


" y '" •■'•'••. I '^flflll
■;- y - yyyy
The simple-mindedness of the subject of this sketch
may be gathered from the following:—
Mri Patterson very kindly sent my wife a line of fresh pork
and some fresh butter, which the captain took for himself. I forget
how the mistake was made, but it was an odd thing that he should
appropriate to his own use what was intended for a lady and her
young child.
This was the man who was about to enter upon life
amongst those as to whom Governor King had warned him:
George Suttor, F.L.S., 1774-1859.
"Look upon every man as a rogue, and do not trust any-
body." After remaining on board ship for a fortnight,
Mr. Suttor settled in a small cottage at Parramatta. Six
months later, assisted by the advice of Rev. Samuel Mars-
den, Mr. Caley (the botanist), and others, he took up land
at Baulkham Hills and planted an orangery and vineyard.


The state of the colony was at this time most deplor-
able. Probably it never was "worse. Much actual star-
vation occurred, and a small field of turnips at Parramatta
had, it was said, saved many lives. One man fell dead at
Sydney from want of food. His stomach was opened,
and in it was found only a piece of raw cabbage leaf. This
state of things was largely due to floods on the Hawkes-
bury, which was then the chief seat of agriculture.
The prisoners frequently mutinied, and kept the
whole colony in a state of terror. But the chief |;rouble
was between the Governor and the military authorities.
Governor Bligh had succeeded Governor King, and on
January 26,1808, he was deposed and placed under arrest.
The chief promoters of this rebellion, or mutiny, as it was
called in England, were the triumvirate —Macarthur,
Abbott, and Bayley. Major Johnston was their tool and
victim.
One can hut dimly realise the beneficial influence that
Mr. and Mrs. Suttor must have had in those lawless times.
Ever on the side of law and order, they lived exemplary
lives, training up their children in the nurture and fear of
God. Their farm prospered, and rewarded their industry,
besides being an object lesson to their fellow-colonists.
FOR A RIGHTEOUS CAUSE.
But now real trouble came in the way of persecution
for righteousness' sake. Mr. Suttor had drafted a letter
of protest to the Home authorities, which was signed by a
number of the free settlers. A similar protest appears to
have been sent to the so-called Lieutenant-Governor, and
yet a third to Colonel Foveaux, who had issued orders for
a general muster of the free settlers. The outcome of all
this was that George Suttor, in the year 1808, was placed
at the bar of the Criminal Court, and indicted "with hav-
ing disobeyed Colonel Foveaux's orders, and for having
directed a certain letter to his Honour, the Lieutenant-
Governor, containing contumelious expressions."
Nothing daunted, the offending upholder of consti-
tuted authority, strong in the conviction of a righteous
cause, firmly and respectfully refused to plead. He said:
""Gentlemen, I deny the legality of this Court; you may


-do with myself as you please. My unfortunate wife and
family I leave to the mercy of God, until peace shall be
restored to the colony. I have nothing more to say."
Repeated efforts were made to shake this decision, but in
vain. "All I have to say I have already said. My alle-
giance is due to Governor Bligh, and to Governor Bligh
Sarah Maria Suttor, 1775-1844.
alone; and every drop of blood within my veins prevents
me from ever acknowledging the legality of this Court.
You may do with me as you think proper."
In due course the sentence of the Court was pro-
nounced: "Prisoner at the bar, in consequence of your re-
fusal to plead, you have been found guilty, and sentenced
to be imprisoned six calendar months, and to pay a tine of
-°ue shilling."


PKOUD OF ANCESTRY.
I think that is one of the finest incidents in our Aus-
tralian history. Surely the descendants of this man have
reason to be proud of their ancestor, who, rather than
deny his conscience, was prepared to undergo fines and
imprisonment.
Personally, I am thankful and glad to know that my
own ancestors, an Oakes, a Hassall, and a Shelley, all
signed the letter of protest, and were on the same side as
Mr. Suttor. Rev. Samuel Marsden, representing the
Church, took up the same attitude. Eventually a court
martial was held in England, when the action of the loyal
colonists was vindicated. Major Johnston was cashiered,
and the others who had taken part in the rebellion
punished in various ways. Governor Macquarie was ap-
pointed to take charge of the colony, but in order to vindi-
cate Governor Bligh it was ordered that he should be
reinstated for twenty-four hours.
In reading George Suttor's letters to Sir Joseph
Banks and Governor Bligh we can form some idea of the
disturbed state of the country, and of the very real hard-
ships and privations to which the first settlers were
subjected. For instance, we are told that on the night
of March 4, 1804, between one and two hundred convicts
rushed out from the Government settlement at Castle Hill,
and, having seized the muskets there, practically took pos-
session of the country round Parramatta, plundering and
robbing the settlers. However, a party,of soldiers, under
Major Johnston, arrived from Sydney, when they made
but little resistance, and were soon scattered in all direc-
tions. :
These letters, too, go to show that Governor Bligh was
not the tyrant and martinet he is sometimes represented to
be. Martin Mason, a surgeon, and a man of high charac-
ter, speaks of Bligh in the highest terms. He says: "The
settlers collectively, and without exception, are to a man
decidedly in your favour, and most earnestly wish for an
opportunity to express their loyalty and gratitude." He
thus endorses what Mr. Suttor so often states, that the
opposition to Bligh came from the military, who were
actuated by base and unworthy motives.


Governor Bligh certainly had a strong admirer in
George Suttor, who concludes his letter on the mutiny,
which led to the deposition of Bligh, in the following
terms:—''Whatever fate may attend you, Sir, I shall be
proud to be ranked among the number of your friends,
and my services are ever, both from duty and inclination,
at your command."
The following is a list of persons who went to Eng-
land on the Bligh case to give evidence for the Crown: —
Martin Mason, George Suttor, Francis Oakes, settlers;
Nicholas Devine and James Williamson, Government
officers; Robert Campbell, merchant.
After an absence of some two years Mr. Suttor re-
turned to Baulkham Hills. He says:—'' The greatest care
had been taken by my wife of the live stock, the sheep had
greatly increased, and she had added a horse to our stock,
having purchased a young mare for £9O. This was the
first breeding mare we possessed. The orange trees were
beautiful, and full of fruit nearly ripe."
SETTLEMENT AT BATHUEST.
In February, 1822, Mr. Suttor, with his stock, was
driven across the Blue Mountains by a plague of cater-
pillars. He says: "Millions upon millions spread over the
country round Parramatta, devouring every blade of
grass. This caused the sheep and cows to suffer severely,
and many died.'' The journey to Bathurst occupied four-
teen or sixteen days. "My anxiety was very great for
the safety of my sons' lives, the colonists at that time
being often at war with the blacks."
Eventually the family settled at Brucedale, at the
junction of the Winburndale and Clear Creeks. That is
just a hundred years ago, and, with its subsequent history,
we are all more or less familiar.
We have now with us the great-great-grandchildren
•of this remarkable man, and it is for them to look for in-
spiration to the story of their ancestors.
We can picture the original Suttors —a pious, God-
fearing couple—in their home at Baulkham Hills, with


their children around them, reading the Word of God, and
supplicating the Divine blessing, and thus able to rise
superior to all dangers, difficulties, and privations.
There were eight children —five sons and three
daughters. These were George Banks, Thomas Charles,
William Henry, John Bligh, Edwin Clarke, Sarah Cordelia
(married to W. B. Suttor), Elizabeth Mary (married to
John Kerr, M.D.), and Sarah Ellen (married to Rev. Wil-
liam Lisle).


CHAPTER IV.
Herbert Suttor of Brucedale
Herbert Suttor, of Brucedale, is a typical pioneer.
No man is more widely known, or more highly esteemed in
the western districts. Everyone, metaphorically speak-
ing, takes off his hat when the name is mentioned. He is
a worthy representative of a great Australian family. Too
often we have to admit deterioration from one generation
to another, but that is not so in the present case. Strange
that, with all the advantages they possess, advantages of
education and environment, so many of the descendants of
the old pioneers should have deteriorated! Instances are
by no means isolated or rare where young men have been
equipped with well-stocked stations, unencumbered with
debt; and in a few years the stations have gone to the
banks, and their erstwhile owners have been relegated to
the oblivion of a Government inspectorship, or have joined
the large army of more or less impecunious stock and sta-
tion agents. On the other hand, men who have had to work
hard for every penny they possess have invariably pros-
pered. But it is character that tells in the long run. The
man who has had a soft bringing up, and has always been
impressed with the idea that he has nothing to do in life
but "to eat, drink, and be merry," will lack that necessary
stability of character which is essential to success.
The name of Brucedale is synonymous with that hospi-
tality which is one of the most marked characteristics of
the people of the real Australia. One cannot live long in
the West without being hospitable, because it is one of the
rules of life. A popular author, known as "Jimmy Pan-
nikin," who sometimes wandered into the realms of
poetry, once said:—
The men of the West,
They are the best.


The poetry may not be of a high order, but the sen-
timent is right. The men of the "West are a type quite
distinct from those who dwell in the more congested
centres. Self-reliant, resourceful, and independent, they
develop a broader and more unselfish outlook than that of
the men who are daily struggling with greedy competi-
tors in more cramped surroundings to get ahead of each
other in the battle for pre-eminence. The influence of
environment is the vital force that has created the western
type. Herbert Suttor has gone through every phase of
bush experience. Droving, cattle mustering, sheep draft-
ing, horse-breaking, station improvement, fighting
droughts, escaping from floods, extinguishing bush fires,
and enduring politics are only some of his varied adven-
tures. Mr. Suttor is a strong Nationalist, and has always
maintained that the country has suffered for want of sane
and economical legislation. He was the first president of
the Turon Shire Council, and lias always been a consistent
and enthusiastic supporter of the Bathurst Show, of which
he is an ex-president. His name is pre-eminent amongst
sheep breeders, and lie has won some coveted prizes in
Sydney at the Royal Agricultural Show.
PERSONAL REMINISCENCES.
Mr. Suttor says: "I was educated at Macquarie
Fields, under the Rev. George Macarthur, before he moved
to the present King's School. In 1868, being then eighteen
years of age, I was sent to the Lachlan for station experi-
ence 1 . My father owned two stations, Borambil, at Con-
dobolin, and Willandra, at Hillston. My brother, William
Henry, had charge of these properties. The runs were
unfoneed, and the cattle roamed far and wide, looking for
grass and water. The chief work was cattle-mustering.
Notice would be sent to all the neighbours, and a large
camp, comprising as many as thirty musterers, would be
formed. 1 have seen as many as one thousand five hun-
dred stragglers taken off Borambil after one muster. The
most exciting work was 'moonlighting.' There was one
place on the back of Willandra where the wild cattle came
in at night to water. A mob of quiet cattle would be
taken out, and the most expert riders detailed to round up
the wild bullocks and bring them in to the 'tailers,' where
they would be held till they could be driven into the
station yard.


"My first droving experience was in 1870, when I left
for Melbourne with two hundred fats. I had with me
George Redding, another stockman, a cook, and a black
boy. We travelled by way of the Bland, Wagga, and
Wangaratta, to Flemington. It was a time of drought,
and during the eight weeks we were on the road there was
only one light thunderstorm. I was advised to go
through the Strathbogie Ranges, where some rough grass
could be found, and this led me to call at what I now
believe was the home of the Kellys. One night I called
at a house in search of rations, when I saw a number of
men sitting round a slush lamp in the kitchen. One man,
with a slouch hat, and wearing an overcoat, particularly
attracted my attention. That man, lam now convinced,
was Power, the bushranger, whose subsequent arrest led
to the beginning of the Kelly outrages, and the young girl,
who sold me two dozen eggs, was, I feel sure, the redoubt-
able Kate Kelly. That night, when it was my watch, a
stranger rode up to the camp and advised me to keep a
close watch on my favourite grey horse, as he believed
Power was anxious to get him. I took his advice, and
nothing happened. We made a full delivery at Fleming-
ton, and the cattle averaged £5 a head, which, under such
adverse circumstances, was considered satisfactory.
"I returned to Sydney by water, and the drovers by
land. On their way back they encountered heavy rain,
which was the beginning of the wettest season ever ex-
perienced in New South Wales. That was in January,
and in December of the same year I left Willandra with a
second lot of five hundred fats. This trip was just the
reverse of the former one, and we had the greatest diffi-
culty in finding dry camps. At Deniliquin we were
camped for eight weeks, waiting for the floods to abate,
but we finally delivered the cattle, some at Sandhurst, and
some at Flemington, and they averaged £9 a head. I
made either four or five trips to Melbourne in all, but the
others were uneventful.
THE CENTRAL DARLING.
"Mr. E. H. Acres, who had an interest with my father
in several stations on the Darling and Paroo, took sheep
out from Brueedale, travelling down the Lachlan to the


Murrumbidgee, then to the Murray, and up the Darling
one hundred miles above Wilcannia. He had with him
Andrew, a son of George Banks Suttor, my father's eldest
brother. In 1872, just fifty years ago, I was sent across
to report on these properties, as Mr. Acres wished to dis-
pose of his interest. It was finally arranged that my
father should take Curranyalpa as his portion. That
station has quite recently been sold to Mr. A. B. Triggs, of
Yass, after having been in the family for sixty-six years.
In 1872 my brother, George, and I agreed to lease the run,
and grow wool. There were no fences, and everything
had to be left to the shepherds, and the old fellows were
most unreliable, and difficult to manage. Some of them
were ne'er-do-well sons of good English families, and
they were all more or less eccentric. They lived very soli-
tary lives, and were known as 'hatters.' One of them
once complained that something he wanted had not been
sent. I said, 'Why did you not remind the ration-carrier
when he was out last week?' He was very indignant, and
said, 'Do you think that I would bemean myself by speak-
ing to a dirty ration-carrier! No, indeed!' Next morn-
ing, when we were at breakfast he put his head in at the
door and said, 'You can shepherd your sheep yourself,'
and that was the last we saw of him. We sometimes put two
men together as a matter of convenience, but they could
never agree. One of these one day called at the station,
and said, 'You'd better go out and look after my mate, he
has had a fit and fallen against some slabs.' I took an
overseer and went to the hut, where we found his mate
unconscious, and his head cut open with a tomahawk. We
got him into the station, and nursed him back to conscious-
ness, when he asked for his cheque, went to the nearest
pub., got on the spree, and died within a week, but he
steadfastly refused to give any evidence that would con-
vict his assailant, whom we never saw again. In 1877 wire
fencing was just coming into vogue, and we decided to
put a ring fence round the run, and stock with cattle.
This we carried on for seven years, when we were obliged
to again revert to sheep, which were much more profitable,
and could now, we found, be kept within wire fences.
"The early settlers on the Central Darling, besides
ourselves, were the Bogan River Company, whose man-
agers were Bloxham and Hughes. They took up enormous


tracts of country, including Toorale and Dunlop, after-
wards owned by Sir Samuel McCaughey. Hugh Glass
was at Winbar, afterwards owned by Andrew Tobin;
Bradley, of Cobb and Company, at Yanda, afterwards
owned by D. W. F. Hatten and E. B. L. Dickens; J. and S".
Smith, at Gundabooka; Langloh Parker, at Killara; Field
and Newland, at Marra; E. H. Acres, at Buckanbe; G. and
F. S'uttor, at Cultowa; Joseph Smith, of George's Plains,
at Murtee; and the Bonneys, at Momba. With the ex-
ception of D. W. F. Hatten, now at Bourke, all these old
pioneers are gone, and for the most part forgotten, but
they did their part in opening up a new country, and it
is left to others to complete their work by developing it."


CHAPTER V.
The Stewarts and their
Ancestors.
The following particulars are taken down from a well-
authenticated genealogical table, a copy of which may be
seen in the Mitchell Library. Richard, who was married
to a daughter of the Earl of Mar, was with Richard Coeur
de Lion in the Third Crusade in Palestine about 1191. His
son AValter Stewart, who was the first to take the surname,
led the Scotch Division in the Sixth Crusade. Alexander
Stewart, who married Jean, daughter of James, son of
Angus, Lord of Bute, commanded a Scotch Division in the
Seventh Crusade. Sir John Stewart, killed in the Battle
of Falkirk, fighting under Wallace, was second in com-
mand. Sir James Stewart, - from whom the Dukes of Athol
are descended, led a contingent at Bannockburn, 1314.
Sir John Stewart, Lord of Lorn, adopted th.e unicorn's
head, with a Gaelic motto, which meant "Peace or war,
which ever you please," as the family crest. Alan
Stewart, and his five sons, fought at Flodden, 1513;
Donald Stewart, the grandfather of Major-General
Stewart, of Bathurst, and of Neil Stewart, of Parramatta,
took an active part in support of Charles Edward Stewart
in his claim to the throne of England, 1745.
Neil Stewart was married at Bathurst, 1853, and died
at Newlands, Parramatta, 1913, aged ninety-six. His
sister, Ann Stewart, married James Milson, of Milson's
Point, Sydney, and his brother, William, settled at Athol,
Blayney, where he died in 1868. Of his descendants, Jane
Stewart married Joseph Smith, of George's Plains, a well-
known pioneer squatter, who died on the Lachlan River,
1880. Caroline Stewart married Archdeacon Boyce; Ann
Stewart married Edward Charles Bannister; and George
Stewart married the eldest daughter of the Honourable
George Henry Cox, of Mudgee.




Stewart Milson, a grandson of Neil Stewart, of Par-
ramatta, was killed in action during the late war.
THE LATE MAJOR-GENERAL STEWART.
This old and meritorious officer died at Mount Plea-
sant on April 8, 1854, aged eighty-five years. He entered
the Imperial service as ensign in the 101 st Regiment (by
purchase), in 1794, and in 1830 had attained the rank of
major-general. He saw much active service in the West
Indies, under Sir Ralph Abercrombie, and afterwards in
the Peninsular War, under the Duke of Wellington. As
an evidence of his physical health and strength, it is said
"he was actively and prominently employed in the West
Indies, during a period of seven years, without having
been sick or absent from his duties for a single day." In
the succeeding campaign he commanded a battalion at
the battles of Albuera and Busaco, when in one engage-
ment upwards of four hundred men and eighteen officers
out of twenty-five present were killed and wounded.
Colonel Stewart had his horse killed under him, and was
himself slightly wounded. In recognition of his services,
and in commemoration of this victory, he was presented
by His Royal Highness the Duke of York, then Com-
mander-in-Chief, with a gold medal. In 1814 Colonel
Stewart succeeded to the command of the Ist Battalion of
his-regiment, then serving in America, and was re-called
to Europe in 1815, where he arrived three days after the
Battle of Waterloo, and joined the army of occupation in
Paris, under Lord Wellington. In 1824 he embarked, in
command of his regiment, the 3rd Buffs, for New South
Wales. He was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the
colony, which office he held for two years, being Acting-
Governor between the departure of Sir Thomas Brisbane
and the arrival of Sir Ralph Darling. During this period
he organised the first body of mounted police, better
known as "Stewart's Police," and evinced throughout
ability and administrative talent of a high order. . In 182T
Colonel Stewart was ordered to proceed with his regiment
to the East Indies, and was soon afterwards appointed to
the command of a brigade in the Presidency of Bengal.
In 1830 he received the brevet rank of major-general, and
retired on his property near Bathurst. He left a widow,,
three daughters, and one son, James Home Stewart, who
succeeded to the estate.


<d
-+- i
vx::-:*:-: c
Q


FAMILY MEMOIRS.
In his diary, Mr. J. H. Stewart writes:—"The late
Governor had left five men to be hanged for sheep-steal-
ing, but my father, believing that none should suffer the
extreme penalty, except for murder, reprieved them. He
brought out with him an authority to select three thou-
sand acres of land in any part of Australia, and the land
on the left bank of the Maequarie River, at Bathurst, hav-
ing just been declared open, he took his grant near the hill
which the explorer, Evans, had named Mount Pleasant,
and afterwards purchased from the Government the re-
mainder of the parish, about six thousand acres in all. The
apocliryphal story of the General, hurrying over the moun-
tains, and standing on the mount—'to grant himself every-
thing as far as he could see' —has long since been dis-
proved ; but it is quite possible that the astute old gentle-
man had inside information about the throwing open of
the land, which enabled him to get in first. However, he
had a record of over thirty-five years' active service, and
was entitled to some consideration. He retired from the
Army on half-pay, and was preparing to proceed to Scot-
land to bring out his family when they suddenly arrived
in Sydney, having been sent out by his agent when he
learned that the General had returned from India."
Mrs. W. B. Ranken, in her Memoirs, writes: —"On
July 30, 1858, we started on our long journey over the
Blue Mountains. Mrs. Stewart, who has just returned
from Scotland, formed one of our party, and her presence
added greatly to the enjoyment of the journey. The rail-
way was then finished as far as Parramatta, and we spent
the first night at the Woolpack Inn. We left next morn-
ing with a team of four good horses. I cannot remember
the names of all our stopping places. Pulpit Hill was one
of them, and the Weatherboard another. We stayed a
night at Hartley Yale, and also at Bowenfels. We arrived
at Bathurst on August 2. A cold wind was blowing across
the plains, and we thought the climate worse than an
English winter. Here I parted from Mrs. Stewart, but
this was only the beginning of a lifelong friendship, and
I shall never forget her many acts of kindness and affec-
tion."


The house now known as Strath was there in 1837,
her only son, James, being then ten years old. Only one-
third of the original portion remains, the rest having been
taken down in the seventies. It is now used as a holiday
residence by Mrs. Sydney Jamieson, a grand-daughter of
the General.
FUNERAL OF GENERAL STEWART.
The following account is taken from the local Press
of the period:—
The remains of this gallant veteran were consigned to their
last resting place on the pinnacle of the ever-green hill, which, in
common with the family estate, is known as Mount Pleasant, on
Tuesday last, in the presence of a highly respectable and numerous
body of his friends. Unfortunately, the day was not very pro-
pitious from the great quantity of rain which had fallen on the two
previous days, and still continued to fall, and numbers were, in con-
sequence, deterred from attending. The funeral procession, headed
by a large party of the Mounted Gold Police and Mounted Patrol,
under the command of District Gold Commissioner Green, left the
family mansion about half-past two o'clock. The hearse contain-
ing the deceased, and accompanied by pall-bearers, followed next,
and was supported on one side by Lieutenant Stewart, late of the
Buffs, now the Ceylon Rifles, and Mr. David Kennedy, of the Union
Bank of Australia; and on the other by Sub-Gold Commissioner
Stewart and Sergeant Wilcox, a brave old comrade-in-arms, and
formerly sergeant in the Buffs, under deceased's command. A
carriage containing Mr. James Stewart, the son of the late General,
and Rev. K. D. Smythe, was the next in order, and the more remote
friends of the deceased concluded the procession of those who fol-
lowed his remains to the grave and witnessed the interment. We
understand that it is the intention of the family to erect an obelisk
or tower to mark the spot where, after a long and arduous career
in the service of his country, the bones of the toil-worn veteran
now repose in peace.
Mrs. Sydney Jamieson writes: —"My grandfather
married Anne Sylvia Wolfe, whose father was commis-
sariat officer at Quebec in 1812, and a first cousin of
General Wolfe. When Napoleon escaped from Elba and
the 'Hundred Days' were in full swing, the 3rd Buffs Regi-
ment was sent for post haste to return from Quebec to
England, and reached Portsmouth just too late for the
Battle of Waterloo. My grandmother followed in another
vessel, and saw Napoleon on the deck of the Bellerophon,
next to which vessel they were anchored.


CHAPTER VI.
The Stewarts of the Mount
(continued).
Mr. J. H. Stewart was a typical Scotsman. To say
that he was a self-made man would hardly be in accordance
with facts, but there is no doubt that much of his success
in life was due to his own energy and industry. It is said
that in his younger days he earned as much as £5OO by
carrying firewood to Bathurst in a bullock-dray.
The essentials of his character might be summed
up in the phrase: "Sobriety, piety, and a dis-
like of notoriety." His familiar figure, on his old
black mare, could be seen every Sunday afternoon,
as he rode off to take his class in St. Stephen's Sunday
School, or at Evans' Plains, to be followed by a visit to the
Old Men's Home at Macquarie House, where he would dis-
tribute tracts or read the Bible to the inmates, who looked
forward to his weekly visitations as almost the only break
in their monotonous existence. He outlived the old black
mare, and, in his old age, somewhat reluctantly took to a
motor-car. He could to the last read without the aid of
glasses, and it was no uncommon sight to see him, seated
in his car, reading column after column of the daily Press.
Had he not, when an octogenarian, fallen downstairs while
on a visit to Goulburn, and broken his thigh, he would
almost certainly have completed the century. He was an
enthusiastic fisherman, and was at the time probably on
his annual excursion to some of the southern rivers to-
enjoy his favourite sport. As it was, he was in his ninety-
fifth year at the time of his death. There was a tough
and tenacious strain in the old family fibres, which is;
rarely found in these more luxurious days.


Mr. Stewart was as particular in discharging obliga-
tions as he was in exacting them, and those who smile at
his economic eccentricities would do well to emulate his
systematic liberality. He frequently wrote off half of the-
Major-General Stewart, 1815.
liabilities of his tenants, when the season was unfavour-
able, and insisted 011 treating all alike. He was always
ready to help a good cause, with the one stipulation that,
it could be done quietly and unostentatiously.


Mrs. Stewart was possessed of a remarkably sweet
arid kindly disposition, which won for her the love and
esteem of all classes of the community. Her sister, Lady
Wigram Allen, is said to have been her counterpart, and
to have had the same attractive and unselfish nature. Her
-daughter, Mrs. Sydney Jamieson, has inherited many of
Tier mother's characteristics. She says, "I love the old
•days and ways, and have many manuscripts and letters
which belonged to my father. There is one from Gover-
nor Brisbane to my grandfather, asking him to dinner at
Government House, Parramatta, at half-past six, and to
stay the night, as it was too far from Sydney to come and
go in the same day. There are letters from Governor
Darling and Surveyor Oxley about the taking up of land
at Bathurst, which quite dispose of the fine old hoary tale
that the General went to the mount and claimed all that
he could see. There is a letter from father to Captain
Piper, welcoming him to his new home at Westbourne, and
sending him a lot of legs of mutton to convert into hams.
I seem to live in the past when I go back to Bathurst. Miss
-Jane Piper and Mrs. Busby told me many stories of the
early days. I should like to write down what I know
of almost forgotten things connected with the old homes at
Westbourne, Saltram, and Rainham. Such stories as that
of ,the bushrangers camping at Sawpit Creek, and the
police riding after them in the moonlight, and my father,
hearing their horses turn in at the old house gate, and
mistaking the pursuers for the pursued, waiting with his
gun behind the turreted brick wall to get a shot at them.
Fortunately he discovered his mistake just in time. And
Captain Piper giving his grand dinner at Westbourne,
hospitable to the last. And Mrs. Piper sitting near the
door, lest the convicts should run away with her silver
spoons. Captain Raine, who built Rainham, where Mr.
Neil Stewart, was married to Miss Murray, a relative of
Lawson, the explorer, was one of the early pioneers. There
is a brooch at Rainham with a history. The early his-
tory of Bathurst would supply ample material for a
thrilling romance."
The present mansion at the Mount, now the residence
of Mr. Athol Wolfe Stewart, was built in 1878. The orig-
inal Crown grant was 3,200 acres, afterwards increased
by purchase.


■ • •n'WnffMil
: : »oo»ffM >
•;' |||I|||||II|JM .x"
FIRST POSTAL REGULATIONS.
The original document is in the handwriting of Gen-
eral Stewart, and is dated 1826. The method was discon-
tinued in 1832. In 1824 James Smith and Thomas Fuller
established the first conveyance from Parramatta to
Bathurst, undertaking to do the journey in four days.
The fare was twenty shillings, and letters one shilling
each.
Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Stewart.
(Taken on Mr. Stewart's ninetieth birthday.)
THE < < STRATH GHOST.''
Everyone has heard of the "Strath Ghost." It is as
well-known as the "Spectre of Tappington," or "Fisher's
Ghost" of Campbelltowru Of course, like all other
folk lore traditions, it has different versions, but the indis-


putable basic fact remains that scores of people are con-
vinced that there is at "Strath" a mysterious apparition
that no one has ever yet been able to account for or
explain.
"Strath," it may be mentioned, is the name of the
priginal home of the late General William Stewart. It
-)yas built by him on the banks of the Macquarie River,
.sopie five miles from Bathurst, about a hundred years ago.
writer of these notes has had no personal experience
.of ghosts, and can only speak from hearsay. ]le recently
asked a member of a well-known family, who had lived at
"Strath" for the greater part of his life, whether he had
ever seen the "ghost." The reply was, "I have never
seen it, but I have heard it scores of times. It goes
through the house in the night, apparently slamming doors
and smashing crockery. It seems to drive up to the front
door at a furious pace, and when the door is opened there
is nothing there." It is related that a dour old Presby-
terian minister was once staying at "Strath," and was
very angry with his host for speaking of the ghost as if
he really believed in its existence.
"I am surprised," he said, "that you, a Christian
man, should repeat such nonsense; please let us change the
subject." Next morning Mr. Stewart, who was up very
early, found his guest sitting under one of the river oaks,
where apparently he had been for some time, lie inquired
the cause of his friend's discomfiture, and received the fol-
lowing answer: "Never ask me what I saw and heard last
night, for I can tell it to no mortal man!" The ghost is
said to appear immediately before the death of a member
of the family.
We do not either accept or discard these stories. We
simply give them for what they are worth.


CHAPTER VII.
Captain John Piper and his
Contemporaries.
All the old families inter-married, there was no alter-
native. The fact that they undertook the duties of
matrimony at a very early age will account for the large
families which resulted from these unions. The Pipers,
the Mackenzies, the Hawkins, and the Rankens were all
more or less connected, and became in time one large
family group. Captain Piper once lived in style at Point
Piper, Sydney, where he fulfilled the duties of Collector
•of Customs, receiving all rates levied on goods brought
into the colony, there being then no Custom House. The
• original George Ranken married his cousin, Janet Hut-
chinson, in Scotland, and came out with Colonel Campbell
in a chartered vessel, the terms being eighty guineas for
cabin and forty guineas for steerage passengers.
Besides his young wife, Mr. Ranken brought out seve-
ral servants. The Lusitania left Gravesend early in June,
and reached Hobart Town on October 28, 1821. Mrs.
Ranken writes: "At King George's Sound, where we
: stopped a day, the gentlemen went ashore and brought
back a great variety of flowers. It was my birthday, and
•our men got plenty of rum from George to give to the
sailors and Mr. Campbell's men, and as we lay that night
at anchor they had time to make themselves very happy."
At Hobart Town Mrs. Ranken found the cost of living
much higher than she had been accustomed to in Scotland.
She quotes: Good black tea, 4/-, 5/- per lb.; green tea,
5/-, 6/6 per lb.; butter, 5/-, 7/6 per lb.; eggs, 2/-, 3/- per
dozen; washing is charged at 5/- a dozen. Horses are
very expensive; anything good will cost from £BO to
£IOO. Mr. Ranken went on to Sydney to see the Gover-


nor, to whom he had letters of introduction. On December
Ihe writes: "Arrived after a voyage of ten days. It so
happened that it was on the same day that Sir Thomas
Brisbane assumed command of the colony." Mr. Ranken
decided to settle in Sydney, and leased a property of two
thousand acres from Captain Piper, at Petersham. A
lease for seven years was signed, the rent being fixed at
£2OO per annum. Ilere their first son was born in 1822,
and named George Somerville. This practice of giving
the sons the same Christian name as the father, some-
times makes the family histories difficult to follow. At
Petersham Mr. Ranken was gathering his cattle together
and having secured the services of a Cheshire man. of good
experience, began the making of cheese, which proved a
great success.
CROSSING THE BLUE MOUNTAINS, 1823.
On November 28, 1822 (just a hundred years ago),
Mrs. Ranken writes:—"George has decided upon taking
up his grant at Bathurst, five miles from the town (now
known as Kelso). We find that this place is too near
Sydney. It is getting quite a stage for travellers, and a
drive for the townspeople, so that I am too often taken
from my household concerns. Kelloshiels is to be the
name of our new home. The journey to it will be a very
long one, but I am as strong as ever I was, and look for-
ward to going over those high, steep mountains, with much
pleasure."
Mr. and Mrs. Ranken travelled on horseback, their
child and his nurse were in a tilted cart, and two bullock
drays conveyed all their worldly possessions. Their route
was by Mount York, and they reached the Bathurst Plains
by way of O'Connell. Mr. Ranken selected a grant for
Mr. Icely at Saltram, and one for Captain Piper at Allo-
way Bank. Mrs. Ranken found little society at Bathurst,
Mrs. Hawkins, whose husband was superintendent of con-
victs, and Mrs. Johnson, whose husband was manager of
the Government Farm, being the only gentlewomen who
had preceded her over the Mountains. By degrees, other
settlers and officials took up their residence on the Bath-
urst Plains. Colonel Morrisett was the first Commandant,
and Dr. George Busby the first Government Medical


Officer. Mr. William Cox settled at Hereford, and a large
family of Mackenzies at Dockairne. Mr. William Lee
brought his bride to Wollaroi, and Mr. William Lawson
took up Stoke Farm, on the Fish River, near O'Connell.
In 1823, Mrs. Ranken's second son, William Boswell, was
born. She was attended hy a convict doctor, "an utter
scoundrel, but a skilful surgeon!" In 1824 George Ran-
ken was appointed to the Commission of the Peace, and
took the necessary oaths before Judge Forbes.
The Ranken Coach.
OTHER OLD SETTLERS.
Mrs. Ranken's friend, Lorn Campbell, married
George - Inncs and settled at Capertee, which, some
years afterwards, was sold to Sir John Jamison. Mr.
Ranken's brother Arthur arrived from Scotland and took
up a grant at what is now Cowra, on the Lachlan River,
to which he gave the name Glen Logan. Mr. George Ran-
ken subsequently purchased an adjoining property of four
thousand acres. In 1826 a hunt club was formed at Bath-
urst, the members of which wore proper hunting costume,
their badge being a dingo's head.


VARIOUS ENTERPRISES.
George Ranken was a man who "did things." He'
built a bridge over the Macquarie in 1855, and when some-
one criticised it predicted "that it would stand until the
Denison Bridge came down and carried it away." This
actually happened in the great flood of 1867. It has since
been twice rebuilt. He put a dam in the Macquarie and
cut a millrace two and a half miles in length. He erected
a flour mill and a brewery at Kelloshiels. Both of these
were totally destroyed by fire in 1857—a great loss, as the
insurance policy had through carelessness been allowed
to lapse a short time before. In 1855 the lower portion of
Saltram was surveyed, and laid out in village allotments
and small farms. This land sold very well, some of the
river flats bringing as much as £3O per acre. The village'
was named after the Earl of Eglinton, who on the occa-
sion of Mr. Ranken's visit to Scotland in 1840, entertain-
ed him at a famous tournament, which he attended as a
Killwinning archer. On his return to New South Wales;
he brought back with him five experienced vine dressers,
together with large quantities of the best and most suit-
able vine cuttings, but disease brought the industry to an
end. Another industry was that of boiling down fat
cattle, there being then no market for stock at remun-
erative prices. In addition to the export of tallow, hun-
dreds of tierces of salted beef were sent to the islands,
where they realised better prices than in England. Cheese
making was still carried on at Kelloshiels, a herd of
one hundred and fifty cows being milked there. These
were afterwards sold, and formed the nucleus of the
famous herds of Milking Shorthorns now to be found on
the South Coast. Tobacco was also grown, and manu-
factured with much success, and hops grown of the finest
quality.
MOSTLY MATRIMONIAL AND FUNEREAL I
In 1838 George Ranken purchased Saltram from Mr.
Icely, who settled at Coombing Park, near Carcoar. There
were at this time four sons and four daughters. The
properties at Kelloshiels and Saltram were leased to the
Messrs. Perrier for four years and the children taken to
Europe to be educated, the four sons being placed with
a Lutheran pastor in Germany. Some of the family re-


turned to Australia in 1841 and others the following year.
At least three of the children died during this period, the
climate of Scotland proving too severe for them. Even-
tually William Ranken married the daughter of Colonel
Hugh Mitchell. She had been living at Saltram as an
adopted daughter, and it is from her memoirs that most
of the particulars given in this article are taken. Her hus-
band afterwards leased "Strath" from Mr. J. H. Stewart,
and they lived there for seven years. James Ranken mar-
ried Emma M'Arthur, of Walmer, in 1863, whose cousin,
Emily Hawkins, had been married to Francis Bathurst
Suttor a week previously. When Mr. Ranken returned
from Scotland in 1841 he was accompanied by three
young men, who afterwards became well known in the
commercial life of the country. His cousin, James Blackr
wood, was afterwards a member of the firm of Dalgety
and Blackwood. In 1859 George Ranken, who was some-
what of a mechanical genius, left for England to patent
some improvements he had invented for the screw pro-
peller and paddle wheel of steamers. He died in Kent
the following year. Mrs. Ranken had been summoned
Home, but arrived too late. It is said that the bodies of
two of his daughters who had died abroad were brought
to Australia preserved in spirits, but he himself was
buried in England. The Rankens have now entirely dis-
appeared from the Bathurst district, and their old home
at Saltram, once the centre of so many social activities,
is now nothing but a ruin. There are still many descend-
ants of Captain Piper to be found, and a few years ago a
cricket., team, all bearing the family name, played a match
at Eglinton. Mr. Fitzherbert Hawkins, of Eglinton, is
the only remaining representative of that family. Sie
transit gloria mundi.


CHAPTER VIII.
Personalities of Early
Bathurst.
Mr. Charles Boyd lived at Rainham, Queen Char-
lotte's Valley, for sixty-seven years, and so may justly be
regarded as a Bathurst pioneer. When Captain Raine came
to Australia in one of his own ships in 1832, he called at St.
Helena and brought from there some willow cuttings
which he planted in front of the house. It is said that
all the willows, for which Bathurst is famous, sprang from
these cuttings. .Rainville, near Tarana, was also called
after Captain Raine, and Mr. Tom Raine (of the firm of
Raine and Horne, Sydney) is his grandson.
Rainham is very solidly built, and despite its ninety
years standing, is well preserved. The property was at
one time leased by a Mr. Murray as a market garden, and
a beautiful orchard and vineyard then surrounded it; but
the road to George's Plains now runs close to the house.
The property was bought by Mr. James Boyd in 1855.
In 1838 Mr. Boyd, senior, was married by Dr. Lang to
Elizabeth Kinghorn, whose father was steward on the
estate of Lord Macdonald, on the Isle of Skye. There were
two sons and three daughters, one of whom married the
late C. B. Richardson, well known in the western dis-
tricts. The others remained single, and Mr. Charles Boyd
has recently died in his eighty-first year.
When Ben Hall's gang passed along the Vale-road
after their raid on Bathurst on October 3, 1863, Mrs.
Boyd watched them through a window and heard them
say, "Mrs. Boyd is a widow, we will not interfere with
her," and they passed on, which proves the truth of the
.adage that "there is honor among thieves."


sp * # , 1
tMmf iHH
J||> 19
mil ' *
5M&myyyyyygyygyyyjgsmyp
"' ~~" """ '" "*' "■ lJ "' '■■■■"■M |V
A FAMILY HEIRLOOM.
There is a brooch at Rainham which has an interest-
ing history. It was given to Charles Boyd's ancestress un-
der the following circumstances: When Flora Macdonald
planned the escape of the Young Pretender, Bonnie
Prince Charles, he wore female attire, the clothes being
lent by Mr. Boyd's great-grandmother, and as a souvenir
of the occasion one of the Macdonalds had a gold brooch
Charles Boyd, of Rainham.
Died 1923.
made and given to her. It bears the inscription, "In con-
stancie I live and die,'' and is much prized by the family,
not because it was given for assisting Prince Charlie, but
because not even £30,000, which was the price placed on
his head, would tempt them to betray the fugitive.
When Rainham was first built Captain Raine often
entertained his great friend, William Charles Wentworth,
within its hospitable walls. The walls are still as solid
and the hospitality still as genuine as in those early days.


DROUGHTS AND FLOODS.
A most disastrous drought set in towards the end of
1837, and for two years all crops were put in with a hoe—
the stock being too poor to work. Those who were in
affluent circumstances at the beginning of this period
found themselves almost bankrupt at its close. Sheep
worth a guinea a head in 1837 were sold for half-a-crown
in 1840. As is usually the case, the drought was followed
by floods. The year 1843 was one of great jwosperity;
but in 1844 the colony was visited by severe floods. It
was at this time that George Ranken did a splendid piece
•of rescue work at Eglinton. An old man named Con
Dwyer, with his wife, was hemmed in between the mill-
race and the river. A man named Hollandsworth volun-
teered to swim across with a rope tied round his waist.
Strong man as he was, the current was too much for him,
and he went under. Willing hands dragged him ashore,
but he died three days later. After Hollandsworth's at-
tempt, Mr. Ranken tied the rope round his waist and dis-
regarding the expostulations of the crowd on the bank,
essayed the raging current. After a hard struggle he
reached the cottage and found the old woman with a
candle in one hand and a quart pot in the other. She was
saying her prayers and bailing the water out of the win-
dow at the same time—a very good scheme, as work and
prayer must never be separated. Both the old people
were hauled through the flood in safety, though probably
they swallowed more water than was pleasant. Mr. Ran-
ken, none the worse for his adventure, went to Kehso and
rescued another man from a watery grave the same day.
The flood on the Lachlan was most disastrous. Writing
from Glen Logan, Arthur Ranken says:—
The place is a wreck, the water was four feet ten inches deep
in the house for three days. I found five women and thirteen
young children on the ridgC, without any protection from the
weather. We started to walk to Sloane's in the pouring rain.
Annabella [his wife] was very tired, and on the following Sat-
urday was delivered of a son.
These were the hardships and dangers that the brave
women of the West had to face in the early days. All
honor to them. Words fail to describe their courage and
fortitude. It was in 1867 that a great flood in the Mac-
quarie carried away the bridges at Bat-hurst and Eglin-
ton.


SOCIAL AMENITIES.
There was a good deal of visiting between the dif-
ferent families—the Pipers, Stewarts, Morissets, Lawsons,
Rankens, Streets, and others. Girls did not go to so much
■expense about their clothes as they do now. They would
put their daneing frocks and shoes in a valise and ride
<off to a dance with much contentment, returning home at
-daylight.
Mrs. W. B. Ranken writes of Saltram:—
It was a large and merry household in 1834. There was a de-
lightful family named Heathcote living at Delta Cottage; they
were just out from Scotland and had an interest in the mill. I
remember, at a dance at Saltram, meeting a pretty Miss Brooks,
with fair hair. I saw her many years after as Mrs. Zouche, and a
grandmother.
The Rankens had a tutor, Mr. Darney, and a charm-
ing governess, Miss Taylor, to look after the education of
their children.
"THE SALTKAM LASSIE."
In 1831 Rev. Mr. Thompson went to Bathurst as the
first Presbyterian clergyman. He brought his sister with
him and they lived at Saltram, then owned by Mr. Icely.
The following year Miss Thompson, who was called "The
Saltram Lassie," married Dr. George Busby, Government
Medical Officer. The wedding took place at Kelloshiels,
and a grandson, Dr. Hugh Busby, is Government Medical
'Officer at Bathurst at the present time.
SIE THOMAS MITCHELL.
When not engaged in explorations, Sir Thomas Mit-
chell seems to have been chiefly interested in the fossil
bones of the Boree and Wellington Caves, and there are
many letters from him to George Ranken on this subject.
He speaks of being entertained by "the gentry" at Mrs.
Dillon's comfortable inn, which stood at the bottom of the
hill, near the present Kelso rectory. It was he who chose
the site of the present Denison Bridge and prepared the
plan for the town of Bathurst. On October 15, 1832, he
writes^—
At length the visit to Bathurst is likely to be made by the
•Governor, and I am to go with him. He leaves Sydney next Friday
for Sir John Jamison's; Monday he ascends, not Lapstone, but a


new pass we are making to avoid it. Keep this a secret, as I wish
to astonish you by opening it before the wheat season. That day
we reach Weatherboard, next day Collett's Opening, Mount Vic-
toria; Wednesday to Rainville; Thursday to Bathurst. I hope I
may take the new line, but this is doubtful.
On December 3, 1832, he writes: —
The Governor is determined that you should have a bridge im-
mediately, and directed my attention particularly to the town-
ship. I shall draw a plan and submit it for his Excellency's ap-
proval. There need be no delay in sending it to Richards, who can
make arrangements for any lots desired.
Sir Thomas Mitchell was Surveyor-General, and Mr.
J. B. Richards, Crown Lands Agent. Mr. Richards, after
ten years' service, went to England for his fiancee, whom
he married and brought to Kelso. They lived at "Car-
winyan" for many years, and had a most picturesque'
home.
THE ARTHUR RANKENS.
Arthur Ranken was a nephew of George Ranken.
His father was an officer in the Imperial Army, and was.
killed on active service in Burmah. His wife was a daugh-
ter of Colonel Campbell and a sister of Mrs. George Innes,
of Capertee. He appears to have been "wiped out," as
they say, by the droughts and floods, and in 1847 took a
position as manager for the Australian Agricultural Com-
pany at St. Clair, on the Hunter River. In 1849 five of his
sons, with two of their Saltram cousins, attended The
King's School, Parramatta. Their historian somewhat
naively remarks: "They must have been rather wild lads,
for they got the name of ' the seven devils!' "
MAJOR BOWLER.
In 1837 Major Bowler, who was stationed at Windsor,.
Was ordered to take a detachment of the 80th Regiment
to Bathurst. It took them a week to reach their destina-
tion! The major's first residence was in Government
House, on the banks of the Macquarie, at the foot of
George-street. Soon afterwards he sold out and went to
live at Bellerive, on the Yale-road. He was appointed
police magistrate at Carcoar, and rented a farm from
Mr. Icely. He put his money into sheep, at a guinea a
head, but was ruined by the three-years' drought-


He then removed to The Meadows, a small property four
miles from Orange, now owned by Mr. Thompson, the
well known nurseryman gnd orchardist. Orange then
consisted of a one-roomed store and post office, kept by
Beasley, and a lock-up ! Eventually Major Bowler moved
to Woodside, a small property adjoining Kelloshiels. He
had two sons and two daughters; of the latter the elder,
Julia, married John Bligh Suttor, of Wyagdon, and the
younger, Adelaide, married W. H. Suttor, of Cangoura.
HADST THOU BUT KNOWN! DIDST THOU BUT KNOW!
If those who lived a hundred years ago had known
what we know now, or if we who live now knew what
those who come after us will know a hundred years hence,
what a difference it would make ! If George Ranken, with
his genius for mechanics, could come back and find that
he could ring-up his descendants in Sydney, or if Major
Bowler could take a fly across to Windsor in forty min-
utes, how astonished they would be! Most of the old
homes are in ruins and are past photographing; some of
them have disappeared altogether. There are, of course,
a few exceptions, such as Strath and Rainham. Anyone
with a little imagination could visit these old homes and
meditate profitably on the "vanished pomps of yester-
day," and the uncertainties of to-morrow. Is the future
to be one of progress or retrogression? There is no such
thing as standing still! It is said that an up-to-date
farmer bought a portion of the Saltram estate a few years
ago and took enough off it in one year to pay for it! It
is a case of hit or miss! If Major Bowler had invested his
money in '4l instead of '39 he would probably have died
a wealthy man. If the Rankens had cleared Saltram and
put it under wheat, the descendants of the "seven devils"
would probably have been in possession there to-day. Life
is a game of " If"! Some must win and some must lose,
but we all can leave behind us the memory of an earnest
endeavour to do something worth while. The pioneers of
the past were "doers," and their names must ever be an
inspiration to those who follow after. We shall all be re-
membered by what we have done.
'Tis not in mortals to command success,
But we 'll do more, Sempronius—we 'll deserve it.


CHAPTER IX.
Stories of the " Roaring Days."
The first ten settlers at Bathurst were:—Thomas Kite,
William Lee, James Vincent, John Nevell, Richard Mills,
Joseph Moulder, George Kable, Thomas Cheshire, John
Dargin, John Applett.
Mrs. A. A. C. Boswell has written a good deal about
the early days of New South Wales. It was said of her
"that her lips never uttered an ungenerous word, for the
sufficient reason that her heart never harboured an un-
generous thought." Her husband was connected with the
famous biographer of Dr. Samuel Johnson. On her
mother's side she was related to Sir Colin Campbell, of
Indian Mutiny fame. ITer father (George Innes) married
Lorn Campbell, whose father had sold his property in
Scotland, and come out with most of his children and their
families. George Innes built a cottage and a mill on the
Winburndale rivulet, a . few miles from Bathurst, and
called the. place "Yarrows." The present two-storeyed
house was built later by Thomas Kite for his daughter
(Mrs. Mowbray Forrest).
George Innes had a station at Capita (now called
Capertee) and afterwards lived at Warrangee. Hugh
Hamilton, another friend of the Rankens, who owned
"Tomabil," married a sister of Mrs. Boswell, so that she
was the aunt of the present Judge Hamilton. Sir George
Macleay married another member of the Innes family,
belonging to a younger branch of the family, residing at
Thrumster, in Caithness, Scotland. Major Innes (an
uncle) lived at Port Macquarie, and had a property near
Glen Innes, which was named after him. He was not con-
nected with the family of the late eminent judge, Sir
George Long Innes, which came from Ireland. All these
old families were constantly visiting each other.
JEWEL CASE IN A DAMPEE!
On one occasion, when Miss Innes was staying with
her relatives, the Campbells, of White Rock, near Bath-
urst, a jewel case was stolen by an assigned servant. The


A^'
lb piaisosP
police knew where it was, but though they found the
case, failed to find the contents. Subsequently a woman
travelling in the coach to Sydney produced a valuable
gold watch and asked someone to lend her a key, which
she apparently did not know how to use. This aroused
suspicion, and information being given to the police, the
whole of the missing jewellery was found on her person.
George Ranken.
Arrived in Sydney, 1821.
It then transpired that the stolen articles had been put
into a damper, which was baken in an oven, and for the
time being completely concealed the theft. Had there
been a hungry policeman engaged in the search he might
have discovered the plant; but it is a recognised fact in
criminology that those who are so cunning in some re-
spects are equally stupid in others.


Writing from Saltram on May 15, 1848, Mrs. Bos-
well says:—"Mr. Hamilton, who went to Bathurst this
evening to meet the post, returned with the dreadful in-
telligence of the sudden death of Mr. Willoughby Dowling
at his residence, Gorman's Hill.'' This would probably be
the grandfather of the present Willoughby Dowling, of
"Gumin" station, Coonamble.
In the same year Mrs. Boswell (then Miss Innes)
speaks of many pleasant rides with her sister, Mrs. Ham-
ilton, Mr. Boswell, "handsome" George Sutherland, and
the younger Rankens. They would call at Westbourne,
cross the "General's Ford," past Strath, into Bathurst,
past the parsonage house of Mr. Sharpe, out by Mr. Lane's
park-like residence at Orton Park, then to Rainham, where
Mrs. Murray had a wonderful garden, and so on. Some-
times they went to see the Streets at Woodlands, the Law-
sons at Stoke Farm, the Mackenzies at Millbank, the
Everndens at Littlebourne, the Campbells at Soren Bank,
the Lees at Claremont, and the Hawkins at Blackdown.
Bathurst in those early days was a sociable centre, and the
settlers were practically a family group.
Mrs. Boswell concludes her memoirs with an account
of the excitement that prevailed when William and James
Tom and J. 11. A. Lister discovered gold at Ophir in 1851.
Some years later gold was found on the Rankens' station,
" Bogabigil," on the Lachlan (now 7 Forbes), and in a
ghort time twenty thousand diggers had taken possession
of the property and the cattle were scattered in
all directions. This brings us to the turning point
of the history of the colony, and henceforth everything is
changed. Mrs. Boswell died in Scotland in 1914, aged
eighty-nine years. George Ranken, a grandson of the
original member of the family, is now chief cashier in the
head office of the Bank of New South Wales, and his
cousin (R. L. Ranken) is engineer-in-chief for existing
lines in the New South Wales Government Railway De-
partment.
CUSTOMS OF THE ABORIGINES.
The schoolboy who wwote "manners they have none,
and their customs are beastly" probably knew 7 less about
the aboriginals than Miss Jane Piper, who often refers to


them in her memoirs. There was a large camp near West-
bourne in the 'thirties. Their shelters consisted of two
sheets of bark, under which the black with his gin and
picaninnies slept at night. If they were the happy posses-
sors of mongrel dogs these shared the "gunyah," and
helped to keep the family warm, and incidentally to give
them hydatids. Every blackfellow likes to have eight
dogs—one to lie at his head, one at his feet, and three on
cither side.
The men provided the food, consisting of kangaroos,
opossum, lizard, snake, and other delicacies. The women
cooked it by throwing it on red-hot coals, skinned but not
disembowelled. When cooked, it was laid on a piece of
bark and the man sat down to it on the ground, his gin
seated at his back. He tore the food to pieces with his
fingers, and threw the bones over his shoulder to the gin,
who in her turn gnawed them and then passed them oil
to the dogs!
M hen Miss Piper was eight years old there was a
fight with a hostile tribe not far from her home. Sad to
say, a woman was the causa belli. A gin had been stolen,
and the story of the siege of Troy was repeated on a hum-
bler scale. The weapons used were spears, nulla-nullas,
boomerangs, and womerahs. The blacks prepared for
battle by painting themselves with coloured pigments.
An enterprising European sympathiser persuaded one
blackfellow to allow him to make the warrior represent
the devil! This he did by fastening two bullocks' tails to
the girdle; a thick cord made of grass was tied round the
waist, and regarded as full dress uniform. The man's
hair was plastered down with pipeclay; he had red circles
round his eyes, and red streaks on his body, and must have
made a very creditable representation of the original "old
gentleman.''
Needless to say, Bathurst won! What became of
"Helen" is not related, but the victory cost six lives, with
a few minor casualties. The fallen heroes were buried
with much ceremony, the bodies being placed in a sitting
posture, and the heads bowed on the knees. The war-
weapons of the deceased were placed inside the opossum
rug in which the body was wrapped. During the burial
the gins cried and wailed terribly, the dead man's gin cut-
ting her head and body severely, causing streams of blood


to flow, and the men and women joined in a sort of chant
setting forth the virtues of the deceased. Gins are buried
anywhere. Afterwards blankets were given by the Govern-
ment, they were used at burials instead of the opossum
rug.. On one occasion a blackfellow died the day after he
had received his blanket, and was buried in it. That
night someone dug him up and stole his blanket. That
seems to be about the limit of meanness. To rob a dead
blackfellow of his blanket!
The mystic rites of the "Boro" were frequently car-
ried out, but the secrets were always jealously guarded;
perhaps it was a kind of Freemasonry. When a young
blackfellow was initiated he had his front tooth knocked
out, and was then considered eligible for matrimony.
FEAST AND FAMINE.
Up to 1838 the Bathursf Plains were covered with
luxuriant pasturage; game abounded, and the river pro-
duced cod up to fifty pounds in weight, and the river oaks
sheltered large numbers of bronze-winged pigeons. Then
came the disastrous three years' drought, and all stock
had to travel in search of grass. Milk became a luxury,
and Captain Piper, who had some reserves of fodder, used
to send members of his family round with presents of milk
to the neighbours. He had a generous nature, and was
fond of sending gifts to his friends. ITe also lent his
servants, of whom he had about fifty, whenever they were
needed.
There is a note from Mrs. W. 11. Suttor, of Brucedale,
thanking him for the loan of a "tinman," who had been
over for a few days to do some odd jobs. On one occa-
sion this generosity ended in a tragedy. He had sent a
man with a basket of fruit and vegetables to the landlady
of an inn at Kelso. The man became a little "merry,"
and was arrested by an officious policeman, who tied him
to his stirrup-leather. This was resented by the horse.
The coroner's verdict was "Died by being kicked by a
horse when tied to the stirrup of a policeman, the circum-
stances occurring through intoxication."
There is a tradition that the two eldest sons of a well-
known family, whose descendants have risen to wealth
and honour, in those early days possessed one dress waist-


II
1 .^f
' v •' ft#:< ■ ft Jffi^^^Ki::::::::
<, . f>- -x ; : ;
y i?A * ii
llillMi
«oat —a black velvet one—between them. They took
turn and turn about to wear this to any parties to which
they might be asked. On one occasion both wished to go
to a certain party, but neither would waive his right to the
waistcoat, so eventually, after much discussion, they
agreed to fight for it. The eldest won, but the other put
up such a gallant defence that an interested spectator un-
dertook to lend him what he required, and both were
satisfied.
Captain John Piper.
Died 1854.
"A NOTED "SPORT."
Captain Piper was a typical ''sport." He promoted
horse-racing on the old Hyde Park racecourse, and, when
that was disallowed, formed a course near the junction of
College and Oxford streets, the latter thoroughfare being
then known as the South Head Road. He acted as second
for Mr. John Macarthur in his famous duel with Mr.
Paterson, and was the first to organise a regatta on Port
Jackson. His dinners at Point Piper House were some-


thing to remember. A band played on the verandah, and
servants in livery served the choicest viands and wines.
For some years he was the leader of society in Sydney,
and was a more striking personality than the Governor
himself. He owned Point Piper, Petersham, and several
other properties in and around the capital of the colony.
Then his affairs became involved, and his estates, which
now would be worth millions, were sold for a few thousand
pounds.
Even at "Westbourne," his Bathurst residence, he
did things in style, and when Governor Brisbane came to
stay with him he arranged that a cannon was to be dis-
charged from the verandah, and a band was to play "See
the Conquering Hero Comes." The cannon burst, broke
the gunner's leg, and nearly wrecked the building; but
the undaunted bandsmen still poured forth their melody.
We are told that "His Excellency was much surprised
with his welcome !''
The following inscription, translated from the Latin,
was on the foundation-stone of "Point Piper House":—
By the Blessing of the Great Architect of the Universe,
In the reign of George 111.,
During the Government of L. Macquarie, Esq.,
The foundation-stone of this Mansion,
Erected by John Piper,
Was laid by Edward Sanderson, of Lodge 227.
October, A.D., 1816, of Masonry 5820.


CHAPTER X.
Examples from the Early
Days.
The Maekenzies and Hawkins families inter-married,
and their grand-children and great-grand-children are to
be found widely spread at the present day.
The Rev. Hubert A. Dempster, of St. Mary's, Balmain,
writes:—"My mother's people, on both sides, settled in
Bathurst, the Maekenzies of Doekairne and Millbank, and
the Hawkins of Blackdown and Walmer. My grand-
mother, nee Hawkins, at the age of fifteen, married John
Piper Mackenzie. I have in my possession a saucer which
belonged to a teaset brought from England one hundred
years ago, and on it is written the name of Thomas Eitz-
herbert Hawkins, R.N."
COMING OF THE MACKENZIES
Mr. R. Bayliss Mackenzie, the well-known surveyor,
now of Orange, writes:—"My grandfather, Alexander
Kenneth Mackenzie, arrived in New South Wales in 1822,
and was appointed secretary of the first bank—the Bank
of Australia. He secured the Government grant of two
thousand acres, and called it Doekairne, after his home in
Scotland. He also built the first three brick cottages in
Bathurst, one of which is still standing, and bought many
of the first Crown allotments, on one of which the present
Bank of New South Wales is erected. ITis son, John
Piper Mackenzie, purchased Millbank, and built the home-
stead there, where three sons were born, the second of
whom, now passed ninety-four, lives with his daughter and
son-in-law at Griffith. He amuses himself by sawing
wood and carpentering, and says that if it were not for
that confounded thing (his pipe) he would live to a good


old age. John Piper Mackenzie was afterwards official
assignee. His two boys were sent from Millbank to a
school in Bathurst on a horse led by a man, each in a pan-
nier basket, such as costermongers formerly used on a
donkey for carrying vegetables. Occasionally the horse
got away from the man, and then the fun commenced.
Captain John Piper, who built Alio way Bank and West-
bourne, was my uncle.''
The original Thomas Fitzherbert Hawkins died in:
1837, aged fifty-six. His son, Thomas Jarman Hawkins,
who was chairman of committees in the first Bathurst
Synod in 1873, died in 1885, aged seventy-six. Both are
buried in the family vault at Kelso.
THE VINCENT-NEVELL FAMILY.
James Vincent arrived in New South Wales in 1802,
and was foreman of the- carpenters engaged in building
the first church on Church Hill, Sydney. He had a grant
between the Vale Creek and the Macquarie River, on the
Bathurst side. John Nevell (who married Vincent's
daughter) had a grant at Kelso, adjoining those of Thomas
Kite, William Lee, and Richard Mills. James Vincent
afterwards took up several stations in the Rylstone dis-
trict, the upset price being ten shillings a section. On
on£ occasion he rode to Richmond to vote for William
Bowman, who was elected by a majority of one. Mount
Vincent was named after him.
The Nevell and Mills' families lived and worked
together at Kelso. Only a double furrow separated their
crops, and there were no fences between them, either liter-
ally or metaphorically.
William Ealy Sampson acquired some property at
Bathurst; he also owned the Campdale and Kangaroobie
estates at Orange. He married Mary Ann Mills, and in
course of time Clarence Nevell, now of Chinchilla, Queens-
land, married Fanny Sampson, which reminds us of the
teaching, "Behold how good and blessed a thing it is,
brethren, to dwell together in unity."
A few years ago Mr. Clarence Nevell came to Kelso to-
present the rector and churchwardens with the original
Bible used by Rev. Samuel Marsden at the opening of the


JHp WJMHM
Kelso church. It was subsequently used at the opening
of the first churches at Bathurst, Wellington, and Mudgee.
It is one hundred and fifty years old, and is in a good state-
of preservation. One of Mr. Nevell's ancestors received
it from Rev. John Espy Iveane in exchange for a smaller-
edition. What right Mr. Keane had to part with this his-
toric volume is doubtful, but there is some evidence that
the Nevell family studied it in the fact that three Misses-
Nevell were named Jemima, Kezia, and Kerenhappuch.
Whether, like their namesakes, "they were the fairest in:
the land," I am not prepared to say.
Mrs. George Ranken, of Saltrain..
Some of the Bathurst settlers gradually moved out
towards Mudgee, notably the Cox and Lawson families.
Caigon, owned by the Brown family, has just been sold
after a tenure of ninety years. The Walkers, the Baileys,
the McMasters, the Blackmans were all pioneers in this
direction, and William Lee and his blackfellow discovered
Bylong, which afterwards became famous for its herd of
cattle.


About this time James Vincent crossed the ranges and
settled on the first level country that he came to, and
which he named "Flatlands."
CROWN GRANTS AND CHEAP LABOUR.
The early settlers certainly had many privileges.
They got free grants of land, and as many assigned ser-
vants as they could employ, and provide with food and
clothing. The son of a colonist could apply for a grant
on attaining his majority, and a daughter on the occasion
of her marriage. There were all sorts of grants, including
grants as rewards for capturing bushrangers and other
distinguished services. Richard Mills applied for a grant
for his son, on the grounds that he was the first Bathurst
native
About 1832 the system was abolished, Governor
Bourke having brought out instructions to put an end to
it. The national heritage of future generations was being
handed over to individuals, who sometimes themselves
were not much benefited, and it was time the system was
stopped. Suppose that the Grown lands had been leased
instead of alienated, what a difference it would have made.
The unearned increment would have; been sufficient to
make our roads, build our railways, and carry out all our
public works.
THE LOSS OF STAMINA
Mr. J. B. Martin, whose book of reminiscences was
published in 1884, writes at some length on the deteriora-
tion in physique noticeable in the later generations of the
Australian people. He says:—"The currency lads and
lassies were remarkable for their stature. The men were
tall and well-proportioned, with broad shoulders, muscular
limbs, and general robustness of constitution. The 'Corn-
stalks' of the Ilawkesbury and the natives of Bong Bong
were giants and giantesses compared with the average
men and women of to-day. They also possessed great
powers of endurance, and much personal courage. Hough,
of Windsor, and Ned Chalker, of Mittagong, as champions
of the prize-ring, were both of massive frame and surpass-
ing courage, and, like all brave men, of quiet and unob-
trusive manner. Nothing was then heard of bacteria and


poison germs; there was scarcely any sickness, and the
profession of a physician was the least profitable of any.
The women, too, were full-sized, healthy, and strong, and
proved ideal mothers of exceptionally large families. The
teeth in both sexes were sound, and lasted to a good age.
"One great factor in the development of this
physique, no doubt, was the simplicity in the food and the
habits of the people. A gradual change has been going
on that has been detrimental to the stamina of later gen-
erations."
As old Dr. Geekie used to say, "People nowadays are
more susceptible to climatic influences. If it is too hot,
they do not come, and if it is too cold they do not come,
and if it is a fine night they go for a walk." It is to be
hoped that they have not deteriorated morally and spiritu-
ally as well as physically.
THE FORCE OF EXAMPLE.
Some scientists tell us that the lack of lime in the
water used by children is sufficient to account for their
diminutive statures. Surely it would be an easy matter
to see that the drinking water used by the rising genera-
tion was well impregnated with lime. How to develop
their characters is a much more difficult matter. Perhaps
the most potential influence is that of example. That is
why it is so important that they should be taught to emu-
late the courage, the fortitude, and the moral rectitude of
the early pioneers. Like them, they will have mountains
to cross and difficulties to overcome, but a brave heart and
cheerful optimism must overcome all obstacles, and "He
that overcometh shall inherit all things." The ruling
principles of the early days were, perhaps, summed up in
the formula, "Honour all men, fear God, honour the
King." The spirit of neighbourliness and mutual inter-
dependence was paramount, and the higher obligations
were not forgotten.
May the younger men of the present generation be
inspired by these considerations to get out of the rut of
selfishness, and do something that will perpetuate their-
names and memories.


' . ' ' , : ' :
The Veil Archdeacon Boyce
(A Pioneer of the West.)


CHAPTER XI.
The Webbs and their
Connections.
This family group includes the Toms, the Webbs,.the
Lanes, the Cdassons, the Llanarth-Smiths, the Tempests,
the Barretts, and other well known families, all of whom
have played an important part in the development of the
western districts. The head of the clan was Mr. William
Tom, senior- (popularly known as "Parson Tom"), a man
of great force of character who wielded an influence for
morality and religion which was much needed in the
early days. A party numbering eleven in all arrived in
Sydney in 1823; it included William Lane, who afterwards
built Orton Park, near Bathurst, and John Tom Lane, for
many years police magistrate at Orange. The eldest
daughter of Mr. William Tom married the late Hon. John
Smith, M.L.C., of Llanarth, Bathurst; and the fourth
daughter married the late Hon. Edmund Webb, M.L.C.
Mr. Tom's grant was Tarana; he afterwards lived at Sid-
mouth Valley, Wallaroi and Bosworth Falls, and finally
settled at Springfield, near Byng, eleven miles from
Orange. Mr. Tom had eight sons and five daughters, all of
whom, with one exception, married and had large families.
Members of this family took up many well known
stations, such as Booligal, Boorambil, Guntawang, and
Gunningbland, the latter was sold for £2O and is now said
to be worth £IOO,OOO. All that was necessary to acquire
-a fortune in those early days was to take up good country,
put on good stock, and then "hold on," and the unearned
increment would do the rest. A square mile of country
could be secured for about ten shillings. Still, no doubt
the early settlers had many privations. It is said that Mr.
George Hawke, the tutor at Springfield, during the 1833
drought, walked to Bathurst and carried a bag of flour


home 011 his back, a distance of twenty-nine miles each
way. The blacks were often very troublesome, and gangs
of prowling bushrangers were frequently encountered.
THE DISCOVERY OF GOLD.
The select committee of the Legislative Assembly, ap-
pointed in 1890 to inquire into and report upon the claims
of William Henry Tom, James Tom, and J. 11. A. Lister for
remuneration as the first discoverers of gold in Australia,
agreed to the following decision: —
That although Mr. E. H. Hargraves is entitled to the credit
of having taught the claimants, Messrs W. and J. Tom and Lister,
the use of the dish and cradle, and otherwise the proper methods
of searching for gold, your Committee are satisfied that the Messrs.
Tom and Lister were undoubtedly the first discoverers of gold in
"payable quantity." According to his own evidence, Mr. Har-
graves was not within 100 miles of them when they made their
first discovery of "payable" gold on the 6th May, 1851.
At the same time it is quite clear that Mr. Hargraves
and young Lister did discover gold previous to the above
date in small quantities. Mr. Hargraves appears then,
for the time being, to have abandoned the enterprise.
When the Messrs. Tom and Lister had unearthed about
four ounces of the precious metal which they sent on to
Mr. Hargraves, who exhibited it to the then Colonial Sec-
retary, Mr. E. Deas-Tliomson, and was thus recognised as
the first discoverer of gold in Australia. He was given a
grant of £lO,OOO from the Government of New South
Wales and upwards of £2,300 from Victoria, and in ad-
dition, for many years received a pension of £250 per
annum from this State.
On receipt of the- report, the Parliament of New South
Wales awarded Messrs Tom and Lister a grant of £l,OOO.
The Rev. W. B. Clarke, who also discovered gold in small
quantities in the Winburndale Creek at Brucedale-, near
Bathurst, received a gratuity of £5OO.
LONGEVITY.
The members of the Tom family appear to have been
remarkable for longevity. William Tom senior died at
Springfield aged ninety-two years; his son William was
eighty; Mrs. John Smith died at Llanarth in her ninety-


fourth year; and Mrs. Edmund Webb, born in 1835, is
still in good health and gives promise of completing the
century. They all come of a sturdy stock, and worthily
represent "the Pioneers of the West."
THE FIRST "CRADLE."
Miss Keyes. who has conducted "Pixie Ladies' Col-
lego" in Bathurst for the last forty years, was governess
at Springfield when Mr. E. H. Hargraves stayed there in
1851. She and Miss Tom helped to work the first "cradle,"
which was built under his directions. What is more im-
portant still, she has helped to mould the characters of
hundreds of girls, who have since grown up, and have
gone forth to rock the cradles of many a home in the West
—and the hand that rocks the cradle rules Australia.
EARLY .MEMOIRS OF BATHURST.
The following extract is taken from the Bathurst
Doily Times-.
When -Miss Ivcyes came west in tlie early AO 's a Mrs. Richards
was residing at Kelso. She was the wife of the surveyor who laid
Bathurst out. and who named the streets. The late Mr. W. H.
Suttor told Miss Keyes that Mr. Richards was a great admirer of
King William lIL, and it was after the Prince of Orange that
William-street was named. George-street was named after King
George. Ho wick, Durham, Havannah, Bcntinck, and Lambert-
streets were all named after officers of King William, who were in
England, but most of whom returned later to Holland. Peel-street,
was mimed after Sir Robert Peel. Russell-street was named after
Lord John Russell, and Morrissett-street named after Colonel Mor-
rissett. who was one of the early officers in charge of the military
at Bathurst. Stewart-street was named, as nearly everyone knows,
after the late General Stewart, and Piper-street was named after
Captain Piper.
REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
Miss Keyes has the distinction of having been personally
acquainted with William Charles Wentworth, the father of the
New South Wales Constitution. Miss Keyes can remember well
.John Bailey Darvall and Sir Stuart Donaldson, who were asso-
ciated with Mr. Wentworth in his fight for self-government, and
whose first success was the securing of a representative council
elected by the Governor. The late Mr. Darvall was the legal mind
behind the .constitution, and he has a relative in Bathurst, in Dr.
Darvall Barton. Mr. Darvall's daughter was Dr. Barton's grand-
mother, Sir Charles Fitzroy was Governor of New South Wales


when Miss Keyes arrived in the colony after a trip that started on
New Year's Day and was completed in August.
In those early days in Sydney, Miss Keyes met many interest-
ing and historic figures, including Mrs. Chisholm, the immigrants'
friend and benefactor, who is said to have been immortalised
by Dickens. Miss Keyes has seen many changes in the West. When
she arrived in Bathurst the railway came only to Penrith, the re-
mainder of the journey being negotiated by coach. She remembers
when the suggestion of a railway line across the mountains was
regarded as a joke.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia, by D. S. FORD,
48-50 Sydney


II ljj'911J


