

COMMON WE A u I H
OF AUSTRALIA
Australian Commerce
The Hon. HENRY COPELAND, M.P.
FOE PRIVATE ICIECULATION ONLY.


Political and Official Biography of Mr. Copeland,
extracted from The Year Book of A ustralia.
COPELAND, The Hon. Henry, J.P., M.P.—
Elected to Parliament for the Northern Goldfields,
1877; New England, 1880; Newtown, 1882;
East Sydney, 1883, 1885. 1886 ; New England,
1887, 1889. 1891 ; Armidale, 1894 ; Sydney —
Phillip Division, 1895, 1898.
Member of Mining Board, 1874-77 ; Minister for
Works, January to March, 1883; Minister for
Lands, February, 1886 to January, 1887, and
October, 1891 to August, 1894; Member of
Public Works Committee. June, 1888 to May,
1891 ; President PI arbour Islands and Kuring-
gai Chase Trusts ; Chairman of Land Trustees
of Trades Hall, Sydney ; Gazetted “ Honorable ”
1896.


KERGUELEN ISLAND
Australian Commerce.
The Hon. HENRY COPELAND, M.P.
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
SYDNEY:
John Sands, Printer, 374 George Street








KERGUELEN ISLAND
AUSTRALIAN COMMERCE ,
HENRY COPELAND.
FOR the past twelve or fifteen years my attention has been
strongly directed to Kerguelen Island, as being a place
capable of forming one of the most important bases of
naval operations, from which to either attack or defend our
maritime trade between Australia and the Cape Colonies, as well
as between Australia, Great Britain and Europe generally, via the
Cape route.
At the first glance at a “ Mercator’s Projection,” it may be
thought that this comparatively large island lies so far to the south
as to be safely left out of consideration when looking ahead to
the future development of our ocean commerce. In the earlier
days of Australian trade, when the outward-bound clippers ran
their eastern longitude down well into the “ roaring forties ” so as
to get the full benefit of the strong westerly winds, generally to be
relied on in those comparatively high southern latitudes,
Kerguelen used to be somewhat more in evidence, being not so
far from what was then the regular track of outgoing sailing
vessels. Now, however, that the trade by the Cape route is
carried on mostly by powerful steamers, not dependent on strong
westerlies for their record trips, their usual course lies a few
degrees further north, and Kerguelen is not so often sighted. A
little consideration will, however, satisfy anyone thp.t every knot
per hour added to the steaming capabilities of modern vessels
must likewise add to the strategical value of this well-harboured
island, not only to ourselves, the greatest of maritime nations, but
equally so to an enemy should we happen to have one possessed
with the desire of harrassing our ocean commerce in those parts.
Since the large steamers now in vogue have displaced the
sailing vessels of former days the general practice appears to be
to run the longitude down from the Cape to Australia between
the 37th and 39th parallels of latitude. Consequently, every


vessel trading between Australia and the Cape Colonies, or
between Australia and the mother country, via the Cape, must
cross the meridian of Kerguelen (70° E.) at a point only about io°,
or at the most 12 0 north of that island, which lies in 49 0 south, and
therefore only some 600 to 720 nautical miles south of the direct
track of this branch of our ocean commerce. Here, then, is a
“ Castle Dangerous,” situated midway between our South African
and Australian territories, between which the intercolonial trade
alone must in the course of a few years necessitate a largely
increased ocean service. Moreover, we may safely predict that in
the course of twenty or twenty-five years (a brief period in the life
of a nation) an immensely increased commerce will have
developed between the then population of from ten to twelve
millions of British people located in Australia and New Zealand
and our chief markets in Great Britain and other parts of Europe,
which may continue to be carried on by the Cape route as at
present. The importance of this contention would, however, be
enhanced to an infinite extent if at any time in our future history
the fortunes of war should lose us the control of the Suez Canal,
or should cause the Canal to be either blown up or by any other
means made unnavigable. Should Kerguelen Island, with its
many accessible and safe harbours, have in the meantime fallen
into the hands of a naval enemy, we should then realise to the
full what it meant to have a foreign naval station within a straight
run of less than 700 nautical miles of our passenger and specie
carrying mail steamers, to say nothing of our wool and general
cargo carriers. Assuming the Suez Canal to be closed, a fifteen-
knot fleet could turn out of Kerguelen harbours and in forty-four
hours be thrown right across our best thoroughfare to London,
and our only route to our brothers at the Cape.
That our trade is at present worth protecting, goes without
saying; but what it is likely to develop into in the not very
distant future may be gathered from one or two facts briefly stated.
The superficial area of Australia and New Zealand is officially set
down as 3,077,000 square miles, representing more than one-
eighteenth of the total land surface of the earth. If we deduct from
this area about half, or say 1,500,000 square miles for compara-
tively barren country, we shall then have left a magnificent territory
(on which the British race can increase and multiply) equivalent
to the total areas of Great Britain and Ireland ; Sweden. Norway
and Denmark; Germany, Belgium and Holland ; Austria, France
and Switzerland ; Spain. Portugal and Italy; Greece and Turkey
in Europe. That the future of such a magnificent, compact, and
ocean girt domain in the hands of the Anglo-Saxon race will be
something phenomenal may well be assumed; but while the
development is in progress it would be a thousand pities for this
half-way house of Kerguelen to be converted into a den from
which sea-wolves could sally forth to prey on our unarmed vessels,


and which, in our national interests, would have to be rooted out
at any cost, and probably at a very much greater one than would
be incurred by a present and peaceable occupation of the island,
especially if carried out in conjunction with some practical scheme
of permanent colonization by a section of hardy Britons.
Let us suppose a foreign naval power had possession of this
island—an island consisting of little else than harbours, which are
never ice-bound, and are consequently accessible all the year,
round. Many of these harbours, especially on the lee or eastern
side, would afford safe shelter for any number of warships in all
weathers, with abundance of room for the erection of naval stores,
coaling stations, &c. We may fairly assume that before many
years have elapsed an average steaming power of twenty knots may
be calculated on, which would bring this danger to within thirty
or thirty-six hours of our Cape-Australian traffic ; and, inasmuch
as there are no other harbours, either for refuge or from which to
set up a counter attack, on the whole of this stretch of ocean
extending over fully 100 degrees of longitude, it must be admitted
that whoever holds the harbours of Kerguelen must be the naval
masters of the situation, having a port in which to refit, supplies
from which to replenish their stores, and from whence they could
sally out again fresh for another encounter. Of course, I assume
that any such power would incur the cost of fortifying their best
harbours, and we know from present-day experience that it
would not take long for, say Russia, to give effect to a scheme of
this character, if she took it into her head that her interests
required her to do so, and of course assuming that England
offered no obstruction.
It would be difficult to imagine on what grounds Great
Britain could at present object to any other power annexing this
island while she continues to hold aloof from taking that action
on her own account. It will be seen that France, America and
(to a lesser extent) Germany could each set up some sort of claim
already tc the right of annexation, on account of previous
connection or services rendered —France from her right of first
discovery, America by reason of her vessels having for many years
used these harbours and the foreshores in conjunction with English
ships as a sealing and whaling station, while I suppose Germany
could set up a small claim on account of having surveyed a little
of the eastern coast during the visit of the “ Gazelle ” in con-
nection with the Transit of Venus expedition.
That this large island is worth the having and holding, even
at some little cost, I will endeavour to show later on. In the
meantime I wish to demonstrate as far as possible that it is still
“ open to selection,” and that Great Britain has at least as good a
pre-emptive right to the selection as any other nation; unless
perhaps France, by virtue of her original discovery, which, how-
ever, she has never followed up by actual occupation. British


interests, however, would be conserved infinitely beyond those of
all the other Great Powers combined, through an immediate and
permanent annexation, and to some extent colonization of this
considerable area of country, which, when thoroughly explored,
may yet prove to have valuable possibilities for future develop-
ment. If it could be guaranteed that no other Power antagonistic
to our interests would annex it, then no great haim could arise
through it remaining any-maris-land as at present. But there can
be no guarantee that it will remain unannexed for a single year,
or even a month. While engaged on these notes, information has
come to hand through the Press that Germany has virtually an-
nexed Bear Island, ostensibly for fishing purposes. The two ac-
counts I have read are, however, at variance, one clearly indicating
Bear Island, lying south of Spitzbergen in latitude 74 0 as the new
sphere of German enterprise, the other as clearly indicating the
Medveji or Bear Islands, off the coast of Siberia, near the mouth
of the Kolima River, as the seat of operations, which latter islands
have a latitude of about 71 0 . In either case they are at least
equally as barren and desolate as Kerguelen Land, while the
climate is quite as inclement, only a little more so, inasmuch as
they are both well within the Arctic Circle and surrounded by a
frozen ocean for a great part of the year. If an Arctic latitude
of 74 0 does not prevent the occupation of those islands, even at
the risk of offending Russia, why should the inclemency of a
49 0 south latitude secure Kerguelen from foreign occupation,
especially when all the Great Powers are so busily employed in
acquiring territory, no matter how small or unproductive, and
where they cannot annex they are prepared to purchase ?
Let us suppose for a moment that the present difficulty with
the Transvaal should ultimate in war: Can any man predict
where or when it will cease ? Already we hear that a large
number of Germans have volunteered to fight with the Boers
against the British. It is true the German Government are very
friendly with England at present, but who can foresee what com-
plications may arise when once we begin blood-letting, especially
when our South African territory is sandwiched between German
possessions on the west and Dutch-Boer country on the east? Is
it under these circumstances absolutely impossible that Germany
herself may be dragged into the conflict against us ? What, then,
would be the value of Kerguelen to the German fleet for a strategical
base of operations against British-Australian commerce? With a
large European army operating in South Africa, it is certain that
the fullest resources of Australia and New Zealand would be drawn
upon for meat, breadstuff's, and fodder supplies. But to get those
necessaries of life to South Africa, the meridian of Kerguelen
would have to be crossed, and, as I have previously pointed out,
every vessel might have to run the gauntlet of being chased and
attacked by foreign cruisers if Kerguelen harbours were in the


occupation of an enemy. Of course, as an Englishman I
am not likely to forget the “ British bulldogs ” that would
be let loose to worry marauders on the Queen’s highway,
but our navy, powerful as it is, might possibly have other
occupation rather than convoying store ships from Australia
to the Cape. It would, therefore, be absolutely imperative
at any cost of men and money, to concentrate all our power
in at least endeavouring to oust such an enemy’s war vessels from
those harbours. Would it not, however, be more statesmanlike
to be the first in possession, and hold them as a basis of defence
to our shipping, rather than others should do so as a possible
source of attack? and the cost of our holding them need only be
nominal if time is taken by the forelock.
For many years I was under the impression that Kerguelen
was claimed as British territory. However, in 1889, before
Admiral Fairfax was retired from this station, I took an oppor-
tunity of interviewing him on this subject. But, although he had
visited the island in connection with the Transit of Venus, he
could not state definitely whether the Imperial Government con-
sidered it British territory or otherwise. It must be admitted the
interview was an inopportune one, inasmuch as it was his last day
in Sydney. He was, however, courteous enough to promise to
look the matter up on his arrival at the Admiralty Offices, and let
me know, as I was thinking at that time of making an exploratory
trip to this island, but I have heard nothing further on the subject
from that gentleman.
Some three or four years ago a cablegram appeared in the
newspapers here to the effect that France intended occupying
Kerguelen as a convict station, and purposed removing the
prisoners from New Caledonia to the former island ; but by
inquiry later on at the French Consulate, with a view to my
arranging for a trip down there if any settlement had been
established, I was told they had received no official information
whatever to that effect. Nevertheless such a purpose could. I
suppose, be made quite a sufficient excuse (if she required any)
for France re-asserting her ancient claim, by virtue of her first
discovery of the island. I did not at the time think it either
necessary or prudent to enquire whether France had actually
annexed the island, deeming it better policy to “let sleeping dogs
lie!”
About a year ago, while in Victoria, I happened to notice a
paragraph in one of the newspapers, to the effect that the Nor-
wegian brig “ Edward ” had returned from a sealing expedition to
Kerguelen Island, where she had, during a course of seven weeks,
secured over 1,000 seals, besides some sea-elephants and sea-
leopards, and that the expedition was looked upon as fairly
successful. I thereupon betook myself to the Norwegian Con-
sulate in Melbourne on a little “fishing” expedition. The


Consul, however, who had himself been one of the expedition,
and had, I understood, borne a good share of the expense, was
by no means over communicative. In conversation, however, I
elicited the information that, in his opinion, the island was not
British territory, and he hoped it would not become so. I gently
reminded him that if it were under the British flag the people of
all nations would be able to make use of it on equal terms ;
whereas, if some countries possessed it, this would not be the case.
This statement, however, by no means fitted in with his views,
and, strange as it may appear, he seemed to think John Bull had
territory enough already. Of course there is no accounting for
such hallucinations on the part of people who do not happen to
be Britishers.
On referring to the ownership of Kerguelen a few months ago,
in conversation with one of the highest official authorities on such
a matter, that gentleman informed me that the practice which was
generally acknowledged between nations was that when a Govern-
ment merely took formal possession of territory like the one in ques-
tion, but failed for a long period to permanently occupy it, its title
to possession was usually held to have become void and abandoned.
If such is the recognised international practice, then Kerguelen
must still remain open to annexation, as none of the Powers
appear as yet to have done anything towards permanently occupy-
ing it.
In tracing a brief sketch of the history and capabilities of
this island (or “ Kerguelen’s Land,” as it is frequently styled), I
have drawn my information entirely from published official
sources—“ Cook’s Voyages,” “Sir James Ross’ Voyage to the
Southern Seas,” “The Voyage of the Challenger,” and several
other semi-official accounts, mostly connected with the Transit of
Venus expedition ; while for general ideas I have relied to some
little extent on the account of the “Wreck of the Favourite.” I
have endeavoured to reproduce this information in as condensed
a form as possible, while preserving the strictest accuracy
according to the above authorities.
Kerguelen Island, including all outlying dangers, lies between
the parallels of 48° 27' and 49 0 50' south latitude and the
meridians of 68° 30' and 70° 35' east longitude, and is
estimated to contain 2,050 square miles of land surface,
though probably this is an underestimate. The south-west
coast of the island was originally discovered by Kerguelen,
the French navigator, in the “La Fortune” in 1772; but,
owing to strong winds and his vessel being disabled, he was
unable to prosecute his discovery and returned to Mauritius.
His consort, “Le Gros Ventre” (Captain Saint) appears to have
effected a landing, and taken possession of the island in the name
of the King of France, leaving on shore a bottle containing an
account of his visit. In 1773 Kerguelen was despatched from


France to complete his discoveries, and again sighted the western
side of the island, in December of that year, He then sailed
north, and appears to have traversed (in conjunction with his
former visit) the whole of the western coast, about seventy-five to
eighty nautical miles in length, but personally for the second time
failed to effect a landing. It appears, however, that a boat from
one of his consorts landed in the “ Baie de L’Oisean,” on the
northern extremity of the island, and M. de Rosnevet for the
second time took possession in the name of the King of France,
leaving a bottle containing a statement to that effect, which latter
bottle was afterwards found there by Captain Cook.
When Captain Cook was preparing to leave on his third vogage
he received the following instructions from the Admiralty with
respect to Kerguelen’s disovery : —“ You are, if possible, to leave
the Cape of Good Hope by the end of October, or beginning of
November next, and proceed to the southward in search of some
island said to have been lately seen by the French in the latitude
of 48° south, and about the meridian of Mauritius. In case you
find those islands you are to examine them thoroughly for a good
harbour, and upon discovering one make the necessary observa-
tions to facilitate the finding it again, as a good port in that
situation may hereafter prove very useful, although it should afford
little or nothing more than shelter, wood and water.” Can it be
that Great Britain has less need of a good port in that situation
to-day than she had a dozen years before Australia was settled ;
or am I labouring under a delusion, and the whole of this island
of many harbours is not going begging for an owner, but is already
British territory.
Cook, faithful to his instructions, re-discovered Kerguelen,
and being an experienced navigator, instinctively examined the
eastern or lee-side of the island for safe harbours, whereupon he
entered the “ Baie de L’Oisean,” and having cast anchor (on
Christmas Day, 1776), he dispatched Mr. Bligh, the master,
in a boat to sound the harbour, who on return reported it to be
(< safe and commodious, with good anchorage in any part, and
great plenty of fresh water.” The next morning Cook proceeded
up the harbour, and anchored within a quarter of a mile of
a sandy beach at the head of it, in eight fathoms of water,
the bottom being fine dark sand. “ The head of the harbour
lies open only to two points of the compass, and even these are
covered by islands in the offing, so that no sea can fall in to hurt
a ship. The appearance on shore confirmed this, for we found
grass growing close to high-water mark, which is a sure sign of a
pacific harbour.” Captain Cook having landed and discovered
the bottle left there by M. de Rosnevet on the 6th January, 1774,
and having replaced the French memo, accompanied by one
from himself in the same bottle, “ and having covered the mouth
of the bottle with a leaden cap, I placed it the next morning in a


pile of stones erected for the purpose, upon a little eminence on
the north shore of the harbour and near to the place where it was
first found. . . . Here I displayed the British flag, and
named it Christmas Harbour, from our having arrived in it on
that festival.” Of course Cook was not then aware that this
harbour had previously received the name of the French frigate,
whose boat had been the first to float on its waters. However,
although Cook had not the honour of being the first to sight this
extensive island, his ships were the first that ever anchored in any
of its numerous harbours. Four days later, after replenishing his
supply of water and cutting grass for his sheep and cattle, Cook
left Christmas Harbour and proceeded southward along the lee
or eastern side of the island, naming many of the harbours and
headlands as far as Cape George, on its south-east extremity. It
will be seen, therefore, that while Kerguelen discovered and
traversed the western side of the island, Cook rendered the same
service on its eastern side; and between them the island may be
said to be circumnavigated nearly a century and a quarter ago.
The next official visit was by Captain James Ross with the
discovery ships, “Erebus” and “Terror.” These vessels also
made Christmas Harbour their headquarters, and having estab-
lished an observatory there, their time was occupied in astrono-
mical and magnetic observations, and in further surveying many
of the fine harbours on the eastern coast, from the 13th of May
to the 20th of July, 1840, when they took their departure for
Tasmania.
From the time of Ross’ visit until the cruise of the “ Chal-
lenger,” the island seems to have had no official attention. In
the instructions from the Admiralty to Captain Ross, and, later
on, to Captain Nares, of the “ Challenger,” nothing whatever is
mentioned to warrant any supposition that the island was con-
sidered British territory, and in neither expedition was any action
resorted to, apparently, either as to taking or resuming possession.
It was, in fact, treated as anybody land, and that, I presume, is
the position to-day, and will remain so until some other country
takes it—perhaps Germany, while out on the Antartic expedition
next year. It must be remembered that we as near as possible
lost New Zealand to France in 1840, by the~same careless neglect.
The “ Challenger ” remained at the island from the 7th
January to the Ist February, 1874, engaged in fixing the true
position of a site for observing the Transit of Venus in the
following December, in making topographical surveys, and in
more accurately delineating several of the harbours on the east
and south-east coast. Later on, the German frigate “ Gazelle ”
made further surveys on the east coast, while the “Volage,”
during her attendance on the Transit party, between October,
1874, and February, 1875, “added somewhat to the knowledge of
the southern coast, but all the western or windward side is still


imperfectly explored, and is at present delineated on the charts
from the rough sketches of the whaling vessels.”
Referring to other harbours on the coast of Kerguelen, Sir
James Ross states that “ In March, 1799, many of its numerous
and secure harbours were examined and surveyed by Captain
Robert Rhodes, when in command of the ‘ Hillsborough,’
employed in killing sea-elephants, seals, and whales in the
southern hemisphere. During the time (nearly eight months)
they were at Winter Harbour he explored not less that fifty inlets
or coves in the boats of the Hillsborough, where ships of any
tonnage might ride in perfect safety in the most tempestuous
seasons.” Captain Rhodes gives sailing directions as to a large
number of these harbours, which need not be recapitulated here,
but I will quote a few of his remarks: —
“ Hillsborough Bay.—There is good anchorage in from
seven to nine fathoms of water.”
“ Rhodes Bay.—(Sir James Ross says: There are also
several good harbours in this bay, which I have called Rhodes
Bay, in compliment to this diligent investigator).”
“ Between Port Palliser and Howe’s Foreland is an extensive
bay with two branches that run in a distance of fifteen or sixteen
miles.
“ Between Port Palliser and Cape Henry there are seven
different bays of considerable extent with coves that form good
harbours.
“Whale Bay.—There are here several inlets and coves,
which afford good harbours.
“Winter Harbour.—You will here find a safe and good
harbour, where you may anchor in from seven to nine fathoms.
When the western extreme of the islands bears north by compass
you will then be shut in and entirely land-locked ; here you will
have from fifteen to twenty-five fathoms, on a soft, muddy
bottom.
“ Irish Bay lies to the southward of Winter Harbour, and
likewise affords some very good harbours.
“ Foundry Branch contains many inlets and coves, in which
ships may anchor protected from all winds and weather.
“ Elizabeth Harbour.—There is good anchorage in it in from
four to nine fathoms water. There is a reef in the mouth of it,
which you may pass on either side in perfect safety, and will not
find less than nine or ten fathoms until well within the reef.
“ Betsey Cove, which lies in the head of Accessible Bay, is
an excellent harbour, and has from five to seven fathoms of water
over a tough blue clay.”
“ Christmas Harbour, situated at the northern extremity of the
inland, has (Sir James Ross states) an entrance of nearly a mile
wide, between Cape Francois on the north and the Arched Point
on the south, on which side is a small bay that somewhat increases


the breadth for nearly half the depth of the inlet, when it suddenly
contracts to less than one-third of a mile, and thence gradually
diminishes to the head of the bay, which terminates in a level
beach of fine dark sand, extending quite across, and of about 400
yards in length.”
From the “ Challenger ” notes we learn that :
“ Eleven miles from the entrance of Royal Sound is a well-
protected achorage called £ Island Harbour,’ formed by a group of
four islands —Hog Island, Grass Island, Cats Island, and North
Island, the passages into which are all safe and deep, except that
between Hog and Grass Islands. Island Harbour is the head-
quarters of the whaling vessels at Kerguelen. Here they ren-
dezvous yearly to receive supplies and get rid of their oil; here
they have erected two huts (on Hog Island) for convenience in
boiling down the oil; and from here they start for Heard Island.
From the entrance of the sound to Island Harbour the depths
vary from fifteen to thirty fathoms over a muddy bottom. Above
that harbour the soundings are irregular.
“ Greenland Harbour is a fiord, seven miles in length and a
little over a mile in breadth, which separates the mountain masses of
the Wyville Thompson Peninsula from those of the peninsula next
south of it. At its head is a narrow neck of land separating it from
Royal Sound. Similar low isthmuses, dividing capacious harbours
or inlets from each other, exist in many parts of Kerguelen, and,
from the custom the whalers and sealers have adopted of hauling
their boats over them, are called by these men ‘ haul-overs.’ ”
On the south coast there are several good harbours, including
“Swain’s Bay,” “Iceberg Bay,” and “Sprightly Bay,” with
“Young William’s Harbour” on the west coast, the whole island
being deeply indented with bays and inlets, there being within
most of them an abundant depth of water for safe navigation, and
a good holding bottom to anchor to; which, however, appears to
be very essential, as the most notable production of the island at
present appears to be wind—gales of wind. Yet the shallops of
the sealers manage to cruise about from harbour to harbour with
apparent safety in all seasons of the year, and act as tenders to the
comparatively small vessels, mostly schooners engaged in the
trade. I am, however, inclined to think that the reputation of
the island in this respect has suffered somewhat from the fact that
all the English scientific expeditions have made Christmas Harbour
their headquarters. This harbour, being situated on the extreme
north point of the island, there is only two or three miles of land
at the back, between it and the western coast, to shield it from
the full force of the strong westerly and north-west winds of the
boisterous Southern Ocean. This, however, being always the first
harbour sighted, and an easily accessible one, it has been
patronised considerably more than the equally safe harbours
further south, which have a much greater land shelter at their


back, protecting them from the prevailing winds, and which,
doubtless, secures for them a more genial, or at least a less in-
clement climate than prevails at Christmas Harbour.
That the climate of Kerguelen is cold and boisterous is not
to be denied, but that it is healthy and suitable for a hardy race is
equally certain, provided the residents were comfortably settled in
suitable houses, located in the more protected nooks and valleys.
There is a great power of adaptation to circumstances in the
British people. Just as readily as they play tennis and cricket in
the broiling sun at Singapore on the Equator, so would they be
found tobogganing down the slopes of Kerguelen, and in a few
years I should expect to hear of cheap excursions from Australia
and the Cape to witness the “ Kerguelen Seal Derby,” or a “ Sea-
elephant Steeplechase.” If the Polar charms of Spitzbergen offer
inducements for excursionists why not include in our Australian
summer trips a visit to the glaciers of Kerguelen. It is, however,
an admitted fact by all explorers that the climate of both the
Arctic and the Antarctic circles is excessively healthy, comfortable
quarters and plenty of occupation being the sole requirements, in
addition to a good supply of food and clothing.
In the “Cruise of the Challenger” we are informed that
“ during the sixty-eight days Ross spent in Christmas Harbour in
the depth of winter, it blew a gale on forty-five days, and only
three days were entirely free from snow and rain. In the twenty-
six days spent here by the 4 Challenger' in January, strong breezes
or gales prevailed for sixteen days ; and whilst the ‘ Volage ’ was
at the island attending on the Transit of Venus party (from the
9th October, 1874, to the 27th February, 1875), i n October seven
days gales were registered, in November fourteen, in December
sixteen, in January ten, and in February twelve.” This is
certainly a respectable record for hard blowing, inasmuch as out
of the 141 days it shows fifty-nine on which gales were registered;
but it also shows eighty-two on which they were not. However,
even in Sydney last month (August, 1899) the Observatory records
show that it rained on twenty-one days out of the thirty-one,
giving a total rainfall of fourteen inches ninety points for the
month, and that on six of those days high winds blew, ranging
from twenty-six to fifty-one miles per hour. From the same
authority ( 4£ Cruise of the Challenger”) we learn that 44 the
climate of Kerguelen is much the same throughout the year, the
mean summer temperature being about 45 °, and the mean winter
temperature 36°. Although the thermometer, even in the depth
of winter, seldom descends below freezing point, and the snow
never remains on the low ground more than two or three days at
a time, a heavy fall is of no uncommon occurrence at all times of
the year, even in the height of summer. In spite of cold, wind
and rain, the island is very healthy, the most general complaint
being an excess of appetite.”


Mr. Moseley, the naturalist of the “ Challenger,” states: —
“ I was sorry to leave Kerguelen’s Land, for I enjoyed the
place thoroughly. We had wonderfully good weather, and some-
times the sun was extremely hot. The sunrises and sunsets were
often most gorgeous, and the view in the evening or early morning
up Royal Sound, with its wide expanse of sea dotted all over with
rocky islands, like some large inland lake, and with Mount Ross
towering blue in the distance and capped with snow and glaciers,
is most grand and beautiful.
“ The climate of Kerguelen Land is, as is that of all the
neighbouring islands, remarkably equable. It is never very warm,
never very cold. In the middle of winter, during Ross’s stay
there, the thermometer rarely fell below freezing point, and the
snow never lay on the lower land more than two or three days.
The whalers told us that it was very rarely that ice formed which
would bear; and Sir J. D. Hooker speaks of breaking ice on the
‘ Christmas Harbour Lake ’ only two inches thick, and taking
from under it Limosella in full flower. During our stay the
highest reading of the thermometer was 59 0 F., and the lowest
39.5 0 F., the mean about 43 0 or 44 o—this 0 —this in the middle of
summer, or rather past the middle. The bane of the place con-
sists in the constantly occurring sudden storms of wind.”
Although Kerguelen is at present devoid of flocks and herds,
there is apparently sufficient, and suitable sustenance for a limited
number of both were they permanently introduced there. This
would prove an immense advantage should the island ever be
made a naval station, and that this will happen there can be little
doubt, the only question being whether it will be a foreign or a
British navy. Dr. Anderson, of the “ Resolution,” on Cook’s
third voyage, after describing the Kerguelen cabbage and two
other smaller plants, which were eaten as salad, says, “a coarse
grass which we cut down for the cattle grows pretty plentifully in
a few small spots about the sides of Christmas Harbour, with a
smaller sort, which is rarer ; and upon the flat ground a sort of
goose-grass and another small plant much like it.” It must be
remembered that Cook did not land on the more southern parts of
the island, where there is much more back land to act as a
break-wind, and where the valleys being larger vegetation has
a better chance to develope.
Dr. Hooker, the botanist of jthe “ Erebus ” (Ross’s ex-
pedition), states: “ Though Kerguelen Island is remote and
comparatively bare of vegetation, there are several peculiarly
interesting points connected with its botany. Though now
destitute of even a shrub, the abundance of fossil remains proves
that many parts were for successive ages clothed with trees. . ,
The climate of the island is such that, though rigorous, it supports
a perennial vegetation ; and scarcely any of the plants, even the
grasses, can be called annuals. Of the five plants found


blossoming during December by Captain Cook, four were observed
in the same state in May, and three of them continued so until
the 20th July (their date of departure from the island), and in the
month of June (midwinter) twelve out of the eighteen species
were collected in flower. The repeated snow-storms had little in-
fluence in checking the verdure, and the umbelliferous plant was
the only one actually frost-bitten by severe weather of three days,
continuance.
“ The more general features of the vegetation being thus
cursorily noticed, there remains one plant which demands par-
ticular attention—the famous cabbage of Kerguelen Island. . . .
To a crew long confined to salt provisions, or, indeed, to human
beings under any circumstances, this is a most important
vegetable, for it possesses all the essentially good qualities of its
English namesake, whilst from its containing a great abundance
of essential oil, it never produces heartburn or any of those
disagreeable sensations which our pot-herbs are apt to do.
It abounds near the sea, and ascends the hills to their
summits. The leaves form heads of the size of a good
cabbage-lettuce. . . . The root tastes like horse-radish,
and the young leaves or hearts resemble in flavour coarse mustard-
and-cress. For 130 days our crews required no fresh vegetable
but this, which was for nine weeks regularly served out with the
salt beef or pork, during which time there was no sickness on
board. Two species of grass may also be mentioned as affording
a nutritious fodder for goats, sheep, and pigs.”
“ There is, however, abundance of food for cattle. The
sheep we landed from our ships throve wonderfully on the grass,
and soon got into good condition ; they also became so very shy
that we were obliged to shoot them when wanted for our tables.
One of mine managed to evade our most active sportsmen and
was left there when we took our departure. I regretted I had not
brought with me some useful animals from the Cape of Good
Hope to have stocked the land ” (Ross).
From the “ Challenger ” report we learn that “ the island of
Kerguelen is throughout mountainous, made up of a series of
steep-sided valleys, separated by ridges and mountain masses
which rise to very considerable heights. Mount Ross, the highest,
is 6,120 feet in altitude, Mount Richards 4,000 feet, Mount
Crozier 3,250, Mount Wyville Thompson 3,160, Mount Hooker
2,600, and Mount Moseley 2,400.
“The difference between the amount of rainfall on the
weather and lee sides of Kerguelen is well illustrated by the snow
on the hills, for whilst the main range (the mean height of which
cannot exceed 3,500 feet) is always capped with snow and ice, the
leeward hills, Mount Crozier, Mount Wyville Thompson, etc.
(which exceed 3,000 feet) are entirely free from snow in the
summer season.


“ As the mean winter temperature is nearly the same as that
of the Falkland Islands, where sheep farming has lately been
carried on with much success, and as the sheep landed from the
“ Erebus ” and “ Terror ” in the depth of winter in Christmas
Harbour, and those landed from the “ Volage ” in Royal Sound
in summer, throve exceedingly well and got very fat, there appears
every reason to believe that the breeding of these useful animals
at Kerguelen would prove a commercial success. At the sugges-
tion of Sir George Nares some rabbits and goats were landed by
the Transit of Venus Expedition, and were doing well when the
“Volage ” left the island in February, 1875.”
Mr. Moseley states “ The flat stretch of land at the head of
Christmas Harbour is covered with a thick rank growth of grass,
and a composite herb with feathery leaves and yellow flower. . .
The feature which distinguishes the general appearance of the
vegetation of Christmas Harbour from that of Marion Island is
the presence of the Kerguelen cabbage in large quantities. The
plant grows on the slopes and bases of the cliffs in thick beds.
The cabbage is in appearance like a small garden cabbage, but
often with a long trailing stalk. It is, however, not annual, but
perennial. . . . The cabbage about Christmas Harbour was
either in flower or green fruit, mostly the latter. It was only to
the south of the island, about Royal Sound, that ripe seed was
met with; but then, especially at Mutton Cove, it was abundant.”
I may point out that at Royal Sound there is a stretch of from
fifty to sixty miles of back land to the west acting as a break-wind,
and doubtless somewhat reducing the force of the westerly gales
so prevalent in those latitudes, and of course improving the climate
in proportion.
“ The thick rank vegetation ceases at about 300 feet
altitude, and then becomes more sparse. At 500 feet elevation
a very handsome lichen commences rather abruptly. It is a
very conspicuous plant, being of a mingled bright sulphur-
yellow and black colour, and of large size. It is abundant on the
higher rocks everywhere. Azorella and the cabbage grow up to
about 1,000 feet, the height of the ridge from which the rocky
mass forming the top of Table Mountain rises. Here the cabbage
ceases, but azorella is continued in very small quantities to the
top of the mountain, growing on its very summit, but only in very
sheltered corners between rocks and much dwarfed. At Mutton
Cove and about Royal Sound, a very marked line, at about
1,000 feet separates the green lower slopes from the barren stony
ridges and peaks above.
“About Betsy Cove and Royal Sound to the southward the
valleys are broader, and there is more open flat land than there is
around Christmas Harbour, and there are thus here large expanses
covered with vegetation.”


We have a small British settlement on Falkland Islands,
which are situated two degrees still further south than Kerguelen.
These islands are, however, to some extent sheltered from the
greatest force of the north-west, west, and south-west winds by
the ranges of Patagonia. As, however, the islands are distant
some seven degrees from the coast, there is ample room for a
fully developed breeze to spring up, though, doubtless, the main-
land does, to some extent, break its strongest force. On these
islands cattle, horses, sheep, and wild pigs appear to do fairly well
and provide supplies for the whaling and other vessels.
Stewart Island (New Zealand) has only two degrees advan-
tage over Kerguelen, and, like the latter island, lies fully exposed
in the east, west, and south to thousands of miles of the Southern
Ocean ; nevertheless, there is a fair sprinkling of British and
Maori settlers permanently located there.
When comparing the climate of high south latitudes with
those in the northern hemisphere it is customary to allow a
difference of ten degrees against the climate of the south, and, of
course, the comparison must be with islands occupying an equally
exposed position. Amongst the northern islands inhabited by
our own race, we have the Orkneys in 59° and the Shetland Isles
in 6o° north. Then Denmark has the Faroe Islands in 6i°
to 62°, and still further in the cold they have Iceland in 65
north—a difference of 16 degrees as against Kerguelen, and
situated for a part of the year in an ice locked sea. Yet in all
these groups there is a considerable population, living in reason-
able comfort; and the islands sustain a large number of horses,
cattle, and sheep, though the published accounts show some of
them at least to be quite as rocky and desolate in appearance
and to register a considerably greater degree of cold than
Kerguelen.
That Kerguelen is capable of settlement for the hardier
sections of the British race seems beyond doubt. During the last
hundred years it has been extensively used as the rendezvous
for a considerable fleet of English and American whaling
and sealing vessels, numbers of the men being located in
different parts of the island, for several months at a time pro-
vided only with the most indifferent accommodation. John
Nunn, in his Narrative of the Wreck of the Favourite” on this
island in 1825, states, with reference to the mode of housing
themselves while on sealing expeditions on shore : —“ Here we
turned the boat (the skiff) over, resting it upon one gunwale, and
propping the other up with slabs or masses of turf, building up the
front with similar pieces until we had covered in and secured the
whole of the space left between the boat’s gunwale and the
ground, so arranging the turf as to leave a doorway in front on each
side of which we carried out a wall to defend the entrance from
wind and storms. Whenever practicable, we arranged our boat so


that the bottom was turned to the wind and the opening of this
boat-hut to leeward, which rendered it more comfortable than any
other arrangement. This plan is generally resorted to by the crews
of sealing vessels whilst upon their hunting excursions. 5 ’ Nunn
and his three ship-mates—four English sailors —were inadvertently
left on the island through the wrecking of their shallop. Being
unable to return to their ship (the “Royal Sovereign,” of London),
it was thought they were drowned, and the captain sailed away to
England, leaving them behind. Left without provisions, clothing,
or implements of any kind, except their sealing weapons, these
four sailors managed to exist for two years and three months until
released by another vessel. It is true this happened in the
“ good old days ” when sailors were not accustomed to many
luxuries; yet the fact of these men, under the circumstances
stated, retaining perfect health and obtaining a sufficiency of food,
goes to show that the climate, though boisterous, is very salu-
brious, and though the menu was perhaps not all that could be
desired, yet, what there was, was abundant and very cheap, being
had for the killing. The bill-of-fare on different occasions com-
prised seal-flipper soup, penguin soup, seal, sea-elephant, wild
ducks and birds’ eggs of various kinds. The island is devoid of
quadrupeds other than amphibious ones, including seals, sea-
elephants and sea-leopards, which are always sufficiently abundant
for food purposes, some selected portions of which, especially
when young, appear by all accounts to be both toothsome and
nutritious.
Nothing appears to have been done in the way of examining
the banks outside, or the waters of the bays and the coast for edible
fish, or the foreshores for oysters, crayfish, etc. It may, however, be
confidently expected that, were these waters tested by expert
fishermen, an abundance of fish of the very best quality would
be readily discovered. It would, of course, take a little time
to locate their feeding-grounds, and probably some experiment-
ing as to the best bait. The colder waters generally
produce the best-flavoured fish, and in the greatest numbers, both
in the northern and southern hemispheres. Fishing, however,
like most other occupations, requires experience to become expert.
Captain Musgrave and his men, while “ castaway on the Auck-
land Isles ” for twenty months, tried frequently to catch fish, but
with the very poorest of results, though the French officers of
Admiral D’Urville’s expedition describe the banks on the east
coast of that island as being “ very full of fish.” Moreover, the
harbours literally swarmed with seals of various kinds, whose very
existence depended on catching fish, and that in considerable
quantities. It is true the seals occasionally came round their boat,
and doubtless drove the fish away; but if one or two of them had been
shot or harpooned, the others would soon have given the boat a
wide berth, and the fish would then have returned.


Now, though Captain Musgrave failed to catch fish worth
mentioning at the Aucklands ; yet, when he arrived at Stewart
Island (New Zealand), being only four degrees away to the
north, and only two degrees lower latitude than Kerguelen,
and went fishing with Captain Cross, a resident of Stewart Island,
who doubtless knew the ground and the proper bait; here is the
result :—“ Before breakfast Captain Cross and I went in the boat
to try fishing. We were not more than an hour and a half away,
and returned with six dozen fine codfish. I never had such sport
in fishing; we were hauling them up two and three at a time, just
as fast as we could haul in the line. After breakfast three of us
went to try our luck, and before noon returned with eight dozen
more, chiefly trumpeters.” I have referred to a possible fish
supply in the hope that some day a settled population may be
there, if even a small one, when this question would become of
some importance.
On many occasions trouble has threatened between the mother
country and America, as well as with Russia, over the Behring
seal fisheries. Yet Kerguelen, a recognised first-class sealing
and whaling station, is apparently left without ownership, control,
regulation, or supervision of any kind; and in consequence the
fur seal appears to have been indiscriminately slaughtered almost
out of existence, while the sea-elephant only saves itself from ex-
termination by resorting to the weatherside of the island, where
its would-be captors cannot successfully follow it. In the
zoological notes of Sir James Ross’ voyage it is stated :
“ Of marine animals, the sea-elephant and several species of
seals were formerly in great abundance, and annually drew a
number of vessels to these shores in pursuit of them. They have
now after so many years of persecution, quite deserted the place,
or have been most completely annihilated. One very fine speci-
men of the sea-elephant was shot at Christmas Harbour during
our stay, as also were a few seals. Many sperm whales were seen
during the several days we were beating about upon the Erebus
Bank. Some whales were also seen at the entrance of the harbour,
and by the parties employed in surveying the coast. These
creatures appear still to be found in great numbers, so that in
1843, when we returned to the Cape of Good Hope, we heard
that there were between five and six hundred whale ships (?)
fishing along the shores or in the immediate neighbourhood of
this land ; that most of them were nearly full; that from their
great numbers constant accidents were happening in the thick
fogs which prevail by running foul of each other ; and several
vessels arrived at the Cape in a very shattered state. This fishery
might be most successfully pursued from the Cape of Good Hope,
but it is now chiefly carried on by American vessels.”
Coming down to the cruise of the Challenger, we learn that
“a whaling schooner (the Emma Jane) came into the cove from


Island Harbour, Royal Sound. Her captain said that a barque
called the “ Roman ” was in the neighbourhood, and that there
were two other schooners engaged in the fishery hereabouts The
Kerguelen whale and seal fishery would appear to have dwindled
very considerably since the time of Sir James Ross. At the time
of' the Challenger’s visit (1B74) it employed a barque, two
schooners, and a party of twenty-nine men on Heard Island.
Ihe barque and schooners belong to New London (Connecticut),
the schooners remain at Kerguelen, whilst the barque (the
Roman) keeps up the communication with America, bringing
out supplies and taking back the season’s oil and sealskins. The
“ Roman ” arrives at Kerguelen every year in September, and
meets the two schooners at Island Harbour, Royal Sound. They
then start for Heard Island, and remain in its vicinity until the
elephant seal season is over —about the middle of December—
after which they return to Kerguelen, when the “ Roman ” leaves
for America, and the schooners hunt for whales until the end of
June. Just now another schooner had come to the island fishing
on her own account.”
Mr Moseley, the naturalist on the Challenger, states :
“ There are still a considerable number of fur seals about
Kerguelen’s Land. I killed two ; two others were killed by our
party at Howe’s Foreland, and two others were seen there. Two
of the whaling schooners killed over seventy fur seals on one day
and upwards of twenty on another at some small islands, off
Howe’s Foreland, to the north. It is a pity that some discretion
is not exercised in killing the animals, as is done in St. Paul’s
Island, in Behring’s Sea, in the case of the northern fur seal. By
killing the young males and selecting certain animals only for
killing the number of seals may even be increased. The sealers
in Kerguelen’s Land kill all they can find.
“ The sea-leopard seems still pretty abundant. The sealers
said they intended to visit Swain’s Island, a small outlier, to kill a
herd of 400 of these seals reported to be in a rookery there.
Farther along the coast on the same day I encountered a small
herd of sea-elephants, consisting of four females and two males.
One male was twelve feet long and enormously heavy and fat.
The females were about eight feet in length.
“ There seems little fear of the sea-elephant dying out, not-
withstanding that every one that can be got at is killed and boiled
down by the sealers. I saw myself at Kerguelen’s Land eighteen
elephants, and one at Marion Island. On the weather side of the
island is a beach, where there are thousands of sea-elephants. These
can be got at from land, but shallow water and a heavy surf prevents
the approach of a boat. Hence, if the animals be killed and
their blubber boiled down, the casks cannot be got off to a ship,
nor can they be transported over land. The beach is called
‘ Bonfire Beach,’ because some English sealers made a lot of oil


here, headed it up in casks, and then found they could make no
use of it; so they piled the casks up and set fire to them, in the
hopes of driving some of the elephants to more convenient
quarters. The number of seals at Kerguelen in ancient times
must have been enormous. Their vast old empty rookeries are
still marked by trough-like hollows in the ground where the seals
used to lie.” The latest information of a year ago was : —The
Norwegian brig “ Edward,” having, according to the newspaper
report, secured over 1,000 seals in seven weeks, being an average
of about twenty per day including Sundays.
The indigenous vegetation on the island is not of too cheer-
ing a character. Nevertheless, it would probably be found, on a
nearer and more permanent acquaintance to have much better
qualities than it has hitherto been given credit for. One of the
earliest Australian governors is reported to have advised the Home
authorities that Victoria was so barren as to be incapable of
forming a settlement for white people. We know, however, that
there is scarcely a finer or a fairer country on the face of the earth.
The Kerguelen cabbage is reported to grow abundantly up to the
altitude of x,ooo feet. Now, although none of the reports as to
sheep thriving on the island mention that they fed on the cabbage,
I have little doubt that both cattle, sheep and goats, as well as
pigs, would be found to consume it readily. It would also prob-
ably make good ensilage on which to feed the stock in case of a
heavy fall of snow. It might also be capable of cultivation in the
broader valleys to the south. In some of those valleys lucerne
would probably grow where there was a depth of soil washed from
the disintegrating hill sides. Couch grass, if introduced, would, I
think, readily withstand the not very low temperature, and if the
seed was scattered in a few places it would soon overrun consider-
able areas in the lower parts of the island. In fact, in a continu-
ously moist climate like that of Kerguelen it would probably be
an easy matter to acclimatise several kinds of nutritious grasses
and herbage on which sheep and cattle would thrive if once
introduced. The animals themselves would soon distribute the
seed and improve the pasture by feeding over it. Probably some
suitable seeds could be obtained from the Falkland Group.
A few months ago I visited King’s Island (lying between
Victoria and Tasmania), where a plant locally known as “mellilot,”
a species of trefoil,had by some means been introduced on theisland
though no one knew how or from whence; it was, however, rapidly
spreading and over-running the island by its own inherent powers
of propogation. This plant it was soon discovered fattened cattle
wonderfully, so much so that quite an extensive shipping trade for a
small island was springing up in taking store cattle from the other
colonies to there to be fattened, and then re-shipped to the West
Coast mining towns of Tasmania. The result being that, whereas,
up to a few years ago, the whole island w r as let on lease for a


merely nominal sum for grazing purposes, the land is now being
rapidly selected on purchasing terms by men of small means for
grazing farms, many of whom are cultivating paddocks of mellilot
for seed, so as to distribute it over their holdings. At one farm
400 acres was under cultivation for this purpose.
It is an admitted fact that fully half the troubles and losses in
connection with Australian sheep and cattle farming arise through
droughts : these would at least be absent in Kerguelen. The
wool would be clean and the fleeces heavy in such a climate. If
care was taken to introduce breeds of sheep and cattle from other
cold countries, there would apparently, from Captain Ross’ and
other visitors’ experiences, be no difficulty in acclimatising them ;
and. undoubtedly, the more the land was fed over, the better
would the pasturage become, while after providing for local con-
sumption by residents, by whaling ships, and others, the Cape
colonies ought to make a satisfactory market for the surplus stock,
either in a live or a frozen state. At least it is evident that if
profitable occupations could be found for a reasonable number of
settlers, they need not starve for want of locally grown fresh
meat, so far as the grazing capability of the island is concerned.
One of the greatest difficulties and inconveniences settlers
would have to contend against is the total absence of trees for
firewood, as well as for ordinary timber purposes—building,
fencing, &c. Of course, should a permanent supply of coal be
discovered, that would obviate the difficulty to a great extent as to
firewood, and probably some of the peat bogs when cut and dried
would burn. It would appear that the whole island has suffered
from volcanic action, causing one or more overflows of lava,
which was, doubtless, the chief factor in the destruction of
the then existing forest trees, as well as any seed remain-
ing in or on the ground. The island now is, there-
fore, treeless ; probably not so much on account of the
strong winds and the comparative severity of the climate as
from the fact that no seed was left to germinate. It is
evident that trees of a fair size grew there in past times
when there is no reason for assuming that the climate was more
genial or the winds less boisterous than at present, as fossil wood
was found in several places, one log measuring seven feet in cir-
cumference. In view of the really moderate temperature, which,
according to the published records, seldom descends below
freezing-point, even in winter, it can hardly be doubted that some
of the hardy kinds of Tasmanian and New Zealand timber trees
would grow (though probably somewhat more restricted in size), if
introduced in the more protected parts of the island. The Auckland
Islands, which are fully as much exposed to the strong winds, and
two degrees further south, are sufficiently well-timbered for fire-
wood purposes, while some of the trees would apparently saw into
useful timber, though not of any great length. Campbell Island,


also equally subject to the full force of the westerly winds and
four degrees further south than Kerguelen, is at least supplied
with firewood in the sheltered parts of the island. Captain
Ross, referring to Campbell Island, states The hills, from
being less wooded, have a more desolate appearance than
those of the Auckland Islands, and although there is abund-
ance of wood in the sheltered places, the trees nowhere attain
so great a height as at the Auckland Islands.” Of course,
the re-foresting of the protected parts on the lee side of the
island would not be the work of a day; neither would the occu-
pation of the island, if once secured, be limited to that period of
time —at least, if it is to act as a “ tender ” to Australia, as I
reckon that Australia will begin to be pretty well known
by, say, the year 1999, and we shall require Kerguelen then even
more than we do to-day. It is our natural half-way house,
although a little off the track.
The several small outcrops of coal discovered were ap-
parently of very little value, yet it does not follow that better
seams may not t e discovered at greater depths and free from the
burning-out effects of the volcanic lava. It is evident from the
mere presence of coal that the formation under the superincumbent
lava is of carboniferous age and apparently sedimentary in
character. It would, therefore, be well woith the while of the
Government, should they decide on annexation, to pul down a
few bores in suitable places to test the island for coal.
Sir James Ross, referring to this subject, says;—“A still
more extraordinary feature in the geology of this island is’ the
numerous seams of coal, varying in thickness from a few inches to
four feet, which we found imbedded in the trap rock
Whether the coal is in sufficient abundance ever to be of com-
mercial importance we had not the opportunity of ascertaining;
but at the present day, when steam vessels are traversing every
portion of the ocean, it may not be unworthy a more extended
examination, for in no situation would it be more desirable to have
a coal depot than at this island, lying, as it does, immediately in
the high road to all our Indian and Australasian colonies, abound-
ing with excellent harbours, and at a convenient distance from the
Cape of Good Hope.” Dr. McCormick, the geologist of the ex-
pedition, gives further details as to locality, etc. One outcrop
was four feet thick and forty feet in length, the coal being of a
slaty brownish-black colour with a fracture like wood coal. An-
other seam one foot in thickness, outcropping ten feet in length,
was of a “ light and friable character, with a beautiful black,
glossy fracture, and, like cannel coal, does not soil the fingers.”
Another seam was seen in an adjacent hill “having a slaty fracture
and dull brownish-black colour; it burnt very well, the boat’s crew
having cooked their provisions with it. The bed is two feet in
thickness, and appears again on the opposite side of the water-


course.’ In crossing over to the north-west coast several pieces
of coal occurred scattered about a watercourse, but no seam was
discovered.
Bitumen, or mineral pitch, appears to be a production of the
island, but whether of such quality and in quantity to pay for
shipping is not at present known. John Nunn (wreck of the
“ Favourite”) relates having found a large piece weighing 60 lb.
to 70 lb. on one of the western beaches, which, with other pieces
afterwards found, they succeeded in “paying” the seams of their
shallop. Mr. Laurence, the chief mate of the “ Royal Sovereign,”
who was one of the shipwrecked men, told Nunn he believed it
had been washed from the volcano or smoking mountain in the
neighbourhood of Bonfire Beach, as he had seen some of it there.
He had been ashore at that place near the burning mountain,
and found the water issuing from the springs that are constantly in
a state of activity at the foot of the rocks so intensely hot that he
could not bear his hands in them; and sealers, when con-
veniently situated upon that shore, had resorted to them for the
purpose of scalding the feet or flippers of the seals and sea-
elephants previous to preparing them for soup. He had found
asphaltum or mineral pitch and pumice there. He believed the
smoke which they had always observed proceeding from the
volcano or crater on the acclivity and summit of the mountain
never ceased to issue night or day, summer or winter. This
mountain is near the south-west coast, in the vicinity of Cape
Bourbon.
In the “ Challenger ” notes it is stated that “on the western
side of the island there is still an active volcano, while a mineral
pitch has been met with, and petroleum and hot water springs,
the temperature of which is said to be high, have been found by
the sealers.” I have not seen “ petroleum ” mentioned in any
other reports, but it is quite feasible for it to be found in the same
formation which has produced bitumen. Should either or both
of these hydro-carbons be found of marketable quality it would
probably not be very difficult to ship the produce, as either Sprightly
or Iceberg Bay could apparently be reached from the burning
mountain in about fifteen miles, if that is, as it appears to be, the
locality of the bitumen deposit, if any. In slight corroboration
of the above, I may mention that isolated pieces of bitumen have
from time to time been picked up on the western shores of some
of the islands in Bass Straits, as well as on the south and west
coast of the main land of Australia, and as there are no deposits
of this mineral in those localities the pieces may have drifted from
the coast of Kerguelen, as the prevailing winds and set of the
current would drift them towards Australia. Though it may be
that some vessel trom Trinidad may have become a wreck and
supplied the beaches both of Kerguelen and the other places
mentioned.


Whether Kerguelen contains any metalliferous deposits of
value remains to be proven. It has not hitherto been prospected
so far as is known by practical miners, and until this is done the
question must remain an open one. Captain Cook, referring to
the rocks in the vicinity of Christmas Harbour, states that “ a
red, a dull yellow, and a purplish sandstone are also found in
small pieces, and pretty large lumps of semi-transparent quartz.
Some small pieces of the common sort are met with in the brooks,
made round by attrition. . . . Nothing that had the least
appearance of an ore or metal was seen.” Captain Rhodes, re-
ferring to Foundry Branch Harbour, says it is “ so named from
the great quantity of iron ore and limestone found there.” It is
rather singular that no one else makes any reference to this deposit
of iron ore, or even to the limestone.
It may be thought I am much too optimistic in my advocacy
for the acquisition of Kerguelin, I do so, however, on broad
national grounds. If this island, containing as it does the only
harbours in that vast stretch of ocean between the two large
British continents —South Africa and Australia—could by some
titanic convulsion of nature be removed from its present position
to some 700 miles due north what a mighty scramble there would
be for its possession, notwithstanding its apparent barrenness,
lying as it then would right in the track of commerce, and “seen
of all men.” Well! I have already pointed out that this 700 miles,
though it hides it from the general view, does not amount to
much, when twenty-knot cruisers are the order of the day.
To briefly sum up the whole matter, and state concisely what
I advocate, I think the Imperial Government should take imme-
diate steps to—
1. Annex the whole island.
2. To maintain one small naval vessel there, which could be
employed in completing the survey of the coast and
harbours, and be the means of establishing the island
as a British naval station.
3. To take such steps to create a small British colony there,
as they may deem best —say by granting a concession
of a portion of the island to an English company, on
condition of their introducing a number of British
settlers, who could be employed in raising stock and
other food, in searching for coal seams of good quality,
and in prospecting for other minerals. A permanent
sealing and whaling station could also be established,
under regulations for preserving the seals during breed-
season, such as are adopted in the northern sealing
stations.
To give effect to the above it would be necessary to appoint
a Resident Magistrate, with one or two constables. The captain
of the small naval vessel might during his location on the station


act as Resident Magistrate, with power to enforce the regulations
on ship’s crews visiting the island for sealing purposes.
If by any chance payable gold, diamonds, or other minerals
of value should happen to be discovered no additional induce-
ment would be necessary. A British colony would be established
readily enough, notwithstanding the westerly gales, the low tem-
perature, the treeless mountains, and the desolate appearance of
its volcanic masses. The winds would not disturb the miners at
their work, the temperature would rise considerably, and occasion-
ally might even reach fever-heat; while a cheerful radiance would
emanate from the windows of snug little cottages, dotted here and
there in the sheltered valleys, which would so change the aspect
of the place that neither Captain Cook nor Captain Ross, if they
happened to take a spiritual cruise in the wake of their former
voyages, would know the island again. Witness the case of
Klond) r ke!
Sydney, i s/h September , 1899


ADDENDUM.
Since writing the foregoing I have had occasion to consult
the Statesmen’s Year Book for 1899, for statistical information,
and there, on page 562, to my utter disgust, I find the following :
“ Kerguelen, a desolate island, about 50° S. lat. and 70° E. long.,
was annexed by France in 1893.” So that, for four years after I
drew Admiral Fairfax’s attention to the matter, this highly
valuable island, from at least a strategical point of view, was
available for the taking, and France, from whom we have most
to fear, has had brains enough to see its value, and doubtless with
an eye to future developments, have thereby possessed themselves
of the only harbours for some 6,000 miles between the Cape and
Australia. If the day should ever come that we have again to
cross swords with our ancient and ever-valorous enemy, the people
of Australia will have cause to bitterly regret the apathy of the
British Admiralty in allowing these harbours to pass into the
hands of a naval foe.
The question arises—ls it altogether too late for action ?
Has France actually gone into possession, and of the whole island
or only a part, as there are harbours enough for both. When the
Norwegian Consul for Victoria was there a year ago it did not
appear that France had actually entered into possession, so far
as he was aware, as from the tenor of our conversation I think he
could scarcely have failed otherwise to have intimated as much.
The next question is—lf France should have gone so far
that international etiquede would tie England’s hands in the
matter, would it not be possible before the place assumes any
exaggerated value in the eyes of the French for Great Britain to
endeavour to effect an exchange for some of the many “ blackfellow”
territories where the interests of the two nations impinge on each
other. Surely the vital interests of two great continents like
South Africa and Australia ought to be paramount with the
Imperial Government, especially if backed up by the combined
action and powerful representations of the various colonial
Governments directly concerned. If no action is taken to remedy
our past neglect most assuredly the time will come, and perhaps
at no very distant date, when we shall have to fight for what
might even yet be peaceably obtained by concessions in other
parts.


The object of France is clearly shewn by her also claiming
some sort of title to the two small islands of St, Paul’s and
Amsterdam —two rocks rising sheer from the ocean, without even
an apology for a harbour, though fine-weather shelter may be
obtained under the lee of “ Amsterdam,” as the Waikato did the
other day when re-coaling the rescuing steamer “Asloun.” The
value of these acquisitions lies in the fact that they are im-
mediately north of Kerguelen, and being in latitude 38 S., lie
right on our trade route and midway between the Cape and
Australia.
H C , sth October, 1899.
John Sands, Printer, 374 George Street, Sydney




■
■




■
