

Khaki Christmas
191$.
1 /=


I J ; I 7 J
SYDNEY GAZETTE JPRESSR^
RGUSON L
|FL LIBRARY" JJJ
<4. i
I
■
II


L


KHAKI CHRISTMAS.
MONTH OF DECEMBER = 1918.
Edited by H. Hector Bolitbo,
Editor off 44 Tine Book off the
CI Camp/" and ... 44 Tbe
Eeatberstoim Camp Weekly/'
MMMBB




FOREWORD
mmammmsmssmmm
mUr the preparation for
je JJj Christmas Leave there is al-
KWJM&I ways room a book that
• B^W»f J /*K
" ■ will carry the atmosphere of
Camp to those at home. With this in view, 1
have prepared " Khaki Christmas," hoping
that it will meet with the splendid support given
to my several previous publications.
H. Hector Bolitho, Sergeant,
Featherston M.C.
November, 1918.


"""" " '. ICM C~I .
ToV-\ Ct . Pito^


Kfia&M Chiriis{bim&.
Oiffi.
Carry
(By HAKA.)
When a bighead sowings a blasts
Carry on!
Should a P.T.O. strut past,
Carry on!
And when cursing, in their butts
One of Massey's striped kanuts
Squealing "Hell,, you're rough as guts,"
Carry on!
When you're dopey with the flu,
Carry on!
Don't complain,.it's up to you,
Carry on!
When you land your splash of stew,
Don't forget, here's some old ewe,
Did her bit went west for you,
Carry on!
When a jerker takes a fit,
Carry on!
When he pulls your socks a bit,
Carry on!
When your trilbys start to swell,
And your innards quite rebel,
And you wonder why the, well!
Carry on!
When the O.C. calls you men,
Carry on!
When he thinks you're (? !) then
Carry on!
When you catch your week-end leave,
And to Wellington you heave:
When you meet sweet Genivieve,
Class, SHUN!
Waifo
Purple anemones, for the eyes of women
Weeping.
Crimson anemones, for the blood of soldiers
Sleeping. „
—^PHILISTINE.


f Tf/MEN the United Institute
decided that the
A f iI Concert Hall should be
/*V converted into a skating rink, they
created a new laughter pulse for
Camp. No one place has re-
sounded with good honest mirth
V • r 11 measure as the rink, and
s
/A
XlmM CfiairasihinniaiSo
converted into a skating rink, they
created a new laughter pulse for
the Camp. No one place has re-
sounded with good honest mirth
in so full measure as the rink, and
ever since it was opened, the evenings have seen a stream of skaters —
some with the grace of a swan, and some with the haltings and downfalls
of a child learning to walk.
There have been evenings when the scene
was especially merry, and the skaters have
introduced a certain amount of diversion in
the way of hockey and other games. Sketches
tell more about the humour of skating than
a pen can ever do. The beginner really
gains more pleasure from it than the accom-
plished glider who swerves around with
grace, striking terror to the beginner who is
hovering within reach of the wall.
There has been no such thing as skating
rink etiquette here. Men have appeared in
little—shorts and a shirt—that is all. There
was a good stretch of bare leg between the
rolled up trousers and heavy boots. In the
matter of head-dress, we have seen some
startling exhibitions that well merit being
called creations. Wide spreading Tam-o'-
mtwiwmw


JOn&kii Cfafiisftmaso
Shanters, tied with khaki and
tartan ribbons, and many coloured
balaclavas have appeared in good
numbers. There has been very
little consideration for the sprucely
dressed soldier who would not dis-
card his tunic and puttees. Offi-
cers and N.C.O.'s threw off their
tunics and were "just men" for
the evening, and although no
woman ever glided amongst them,
these merry fellows gained quite
as much —if not more—pleasure
from their skating as those who take to the wheels in the atmosphere of
a city rink.
The keen fun in skating is in failure. There is true humour in a
falling man. He forgets dignity and grace, and concentrates every effort
on saving himself. There is an ungainly figure at an unnatural angle
for just a moment, and then it becomes a scrambling pile of humanity
on the floor. The stream of skaters to the rear needs must join in, and
soon there will be half a dozen khaki heroes struggling for supremacy on
the dusty floor- But they stand up smiling and skate on.
Skates suffer a great deal in the hands of soldiers, and many are
those who retire to the side with one skate in hand for repairs. These
are usually of the haphazard variety, and some of the enthusiasts will re-
join with their skate tied on with lengths of string or a handkerchief.
And so the United Institute people made an offering to the God of
Laughter when they organised this skating rink, and with those who have
joined with me in the fun of the wheels, I hope that the road to Eternity
is of well-laid skat-
ing floor, and that a
good pair of roller
skates take the place
of the customary
trumpet, which I
never could blow if
I tried.


Winy GMs G© Wroiag*
Wainiibiini s> a FrasiacL
It's Hellish, cold,
KfaaM Clhiiriistams.
In the long canteen,
And the noise—lt's rough and it's loud.
I'm a lonely chap, for I've always been,
The colitary one of the crowd.
There's a lump in me throat
An' it ain't the pie,
'Cause I washed that down with me tea,
It's 1 the want of a friend to be sittin' by—
Who'd be understandin' me.
—-"Philistine."


Saymgio
(By R. A. SINGER.)
A lady-help is a woman who is too much of a lady to be any
hCIP The ideal of a politician is-a square man at a round table.
We hardly know the real cause of the fall of man, but we do
know that afterwards Adam didn't give a fig for Eve.
There are two kinds of witnesses —those who do not speak the
truth and those who do. Those who do not speak the truth are
not believed, and those who do are prosecuted for perjury.
To err is human, and therefore to be expected in the speech of
a divine.
Liberty we should strive for, certainly. Unfortunately there
is a tendency to take too much and leave too little.
A pianoforte solo is usually interpolated in a concert m order
to induce the auditors to believe that the other items are really
worth listening to.
An elocutionary item at a concert generally renders' one so
physically uncomfortable that even the ensuing social intercourse
becomes comparatively delightful.
An encore is usually demanded for one or two reasons—either
because the audience did not understand what had been presented,
or because it did understand and therefore concluded that it had
made a mistake.
It is to be remarked that at the start it is referred to as the
marriage knot, and at the time of dissolution as the marriage tie.
Nothing is too good for a woman—and nothing is good enough.
Enough to be a little lower than the angels—beware lest you
venture into No-man's Land.
Actors, lovers and women rival one another in the art of
making-up.
The difference between Galileo and the modern educationalist
is that, whereas the former made the world go round, the latter
makes it go flat.
The modern democratic politician talks at the people, takes in
the people, and lives on the people. His rival talks of himself, for
himself, and generally to himself.
The distinction between the lawyer and the clergyman is* that
the lawyer often endeavours' to make the wrong look right, while
the clergyman frequently strives to make the right look wrong.
And it may be said that whereas it is true that the wise man
never speaks of his religion, many a professional man rarely ever
thinks* of his.
What is unprincipled in a struggling business man is often
called the basis of commercial morality by the successful.


KHnaM Christannias.
lfiL
S@a Girae Starts.
A TO Z.
(By "Haka.")
A All A=ten=SHUN,
In larrikanese it's SHAH!
B Ware, forget your English
Or you wunno where you are.
C A cert for CORPORAL
Whose lot ain't such a lot.
D Digger is DOPEY,
Spare me days Dope makes it hot.
E Is for EXEMPTION.
To get it use your crown.
F Stands for FLAPS OUT,
And in and up and down.
C Guess is GIRLIES
We wish they'd ballot these.
H Is for HOPOUT,
It's a corporal's disease.
I Ike is INFLUENCE
It gets one rotten stunts.
J IsforJERKERS
Who were dopey diggers once.
K Stands' for KITBAG,
Where diggers plant their dope.
L Lumme is LANCE-JACK,
The Army's only hope.
M Is Mr. MACGINNIS,
Mac's on the Spinal Staff.
N Salute! for NURSES,
Of the shooting match they're half.
Oyez O's OYSTERS,
One gets 'em when C 2
Kiwunwiii iiiwii iii« 11 IWNIIWM—IT
gWUMBt


Kfin&M Ghrktam§o
P Poor plurry PRIVATE,
A receptacle for stew.
Q Is for QUININE,
Even makes one's tunic fit.
R Stands for RACES,
Where the civies do THEIR bit.
Sure is SERVICE,
Spell it P A D R E.
T Stands' for TINHUT,
Which doesn't stand for tea.
U Is bald old UNCLE,
Unk's the jerker's daily bread,
V Struth is VICT'RY,
Won by blokes who swing the lead.
W Well it's l WETNURSE
They see we are home and dried.
X Cripes is XMAS,
When the digger's thirsts are tried.
Y Yah! It's* YOUNG SUB.
Who gives a man the gripes.
Z Washout on ZEBRA,
Zeb can line 'em all for stripes.
Th® Tr@@p§Mp SsiflSs T@°M@r3rowo
Oh Christ! they're taking him from me:
To-morrow at dawn he sails';
And this is the night—the last night with him;
Soon comes the hour —the last hour with him.
To-morrow at dawn he sails.
I am his mother, who nearly lost him.
Oh God! those fires of pain!
That came with his birth, that I migh bear him;
And now it is he dies—Why did I bear him,
But to die and leave me again?
I am his' mother; yes, I am his mother,
Yet there's not a tear in my eye.
I feel mad, and my head aches;
Oh God! how my heart breaks,
But I'll smile, when I say good-bye
—PHILISTINE.


Khaki Ckrktoa§o
Lunci@iMi<go
AS the speaker concluded his narrative, his l hearers, hardened
soldiers though they were, could not refrain from shudder-
ing, and one by one, by an almost involuntary motion, they
drew their chairs' nearer the log blazing on the open hearth
for bleak December reigned, and the sighing wind had many
tales of pathos to confide to the poorly-sheltered eaves. It was
a night well fitted to such tales—one of which the ancients' would
relate how the cymbal-clashing Bacchante roamed the lofty moun-
tain tops, inspired by her divinity; or the moderns might be in-
duced to tell of the adventures of the youthful follower of Mars
who, in the fashion of % a Spartan, silently dragged his torn body
through snares and barbed entanglements that he might send to
his doom one of the brood of barbaric Attila.
"You will remember/' said Major X. (whose retiring and club-
like reticence was almost as renowned as that of the remarkable
brother of Shelock Holmes), "the case of Gilbert L'Estrange, whose
strange behaviour caused such a storm of discussion and gave rise
incidentally to such cruel and unjust comment. By a strange
chance a document has found its way into my possession, and I
am glad to say it clears his honour from any suspicion of being a
deserter. He always has been, and shall always remain—in my
estimation—a noble scion of his illustrious France: and when I
have read to you the contents of the document, your opinions as» to
his worth will no doubt coincide with mine. Now for the story.
"Mon Dieu! It was the signal to retire. I grew faint and
confused for a moment —everything passed into a state of nothing-
ness—then the whistle sounded, searing my soul like a red-hot
bar. Yet when I tried to think, the few gloriously horrible days
passed into so many wan and wasted years. Mes pauvres hommes!
Into the eyes of some of my men had descended the calmness of
the Angel of Death; some, like children, shouted in merriment
as they played with their frozen fingers or clawed wildly at the
unreal creatures of their disordered fancies; others again lay
huddled up like dead things'. The moon plunged water-like through
the thick-massed clouds. Wearily I gazed ahead at the sombreness
of the western horizon. . . for all the trees had shed their leaves
and the grass was grey nd lacked life. In the lull, when peace
seemed to reign supreme, Death was imprinting its' icy kiss on the
lips of many men.
A step from behind, a hard'-toned voice startled me from my
sad reverie. "You will get your men together, Lieutenant, and
fall back on Bayenne, where I shall expect you to report at six to-
morrow." The thoughts of my fellow-sufferers were far away,


KHaaikl Qm§taaa§o
perhaps reposing on the threshold of some happy home, perhaps
drifting like clouds across ethereal realms. . . for at my com-
mand they moved like puppets, ghostly and mechanical in the
gloom. Each trudged along communing with his God. A laugh
rang out. . . how it jarred on me! It was as if a glorious
effigy had been profaned and lay broken in the temple of my mind.
It seemed to cheat silence out of its heritage. Two or three of the
men sank down in the mud, overcome with exertion. Onward we
went, like travellers across the golden desert drawing nearer and
nearer to the beautiful palms that shade the cool waters of the
oasis. At last through the half-light loomed the massive grandeur
of a forest where the long low line of pines lifted their branches
in mighty symphony with the sighing wind, and stood out like green
jasper against the blood-red sky in the distance, where a village
was burning. A few moments brought me to the edge of the
wood, and the men as with one resolve sought the warmth of the
long curving grass. An almost drunken restlessness drove me on
through the night. Now and again I would catch a hungry glint
from the fleshy eyes of an owl, and his whoop would make me shiver
and hurry on.
I had reached the end of the forest, when in the darkness
something colossal seemed to tower into the sky, and suddenly a
gleam of light from a casement window showed up the greyness
of the opposite wing. It was an old chateau. I approached into
the courtyard and came to the steps of stone. . . yet all was
silent s the waters of the moat. Tmy knock nobody responded,
but on lending my weight to the massive door it swung open, creak-
ing on its' bronze hinges, and weird sounds echoed shrilly in their
race along the hollow and deserted passages. It was 1 as though
I was in the presence of the dead, and the catacombs had received
me in their midst. A groping des'cent down two flights of stairs
brought me to the source of the light—a huge room, in the centre
of which swung to and fro a burnished silver chandelier suspended
from the ceiling by chains of multi-coloured glas's. In the far
corner was a low Persian divan, which I sought as a war-weary
Sultan the softness of his' favourite's embrace. For one moment
it was exquisite, wonderful: then it satisfied me. . . and I sank
down and went into sleep, and when I awoke the first streaks of
dawn were mischievously coquetting with the pink curtains of a
small alcove. Overhead the silver censer still swayed, and the
yellowed, almost hazard light which came from the oil, seemed
like sinful old age in the presence of the white radiance of youth.
Gradually I distinguished different things about the room; pale
lilac frescoes after Giotto; an ornate-cavred table bearing a load
of pottery brought from the isles of Greece and the hidden depths
of the Aztec mountains ; and a glorious life-size statue of Calliope,
her long artistic fingers clutching the folds of the gown that
covered the lower part of her body. Suddenly a ray of light lit
up the remote corner of the room and my gaze fell upon the por-
r 1 TH ifflnrri nrimmtnriiffrirriiwiiiiiiiMiriifiiiiiiiTiri rimini u iimi iiiiimiii


KhaM Cfiwristaaso
trait of a young girl about eighteen. All her breast was- one clot
of blood. Repelled, yet fascinated, I arose and approached the
picture, at the bottom of which was the word "LUCIENNE."
Never had I seen anything so finely executed. The high intellec-
tual brow, girded by a wealth of thick brown curls. . . hazel
eyes with a touch of sadness that seemed to sound a note of doom
. . . The sharp, finely-chiselled nose of the aristocrat, and the
thin, sensitive mouth, cast over the proud beauty all the sensuous-
ness of the lotus bloom. In the passionate glint of the eyes I read
the message of the artistic soul attempting to cope with the things
of the world.—Ho wlong I stood I know not; but all at once the
veil of mysticism that surrounded the beautiful face was rent by a
harsh, demoniacal cackle—the laugh of a madman. Revolver in
hand, I faced the door in dread expectancy. It came. . . a
staggering, palsied old man, his shirt dirty and torn, his hair white
and ghostly and in many places stuck to the gashes on his face,
his eyes gleaming wildly at some horrible vision dancing before
them—like some wounded beast about to meet the hunter's dart.
Gradually he seemed to overcome his turbulent senses, and this
flood of passion burst incoherently from his lips. . . "Ah, mon-
sieur, it was terrible! We were so happy, Lucienne and I. '. . .
Almost in a twinkling of an eye the boom of guns sounded in our
ears, Master and Mistress looked at each other anxiously: deep
in their hearts they feared that any excitement would be dangerous
to their child Lucienne, whom they loved as the sun a flower. . .
At the sound she hurried in from the grove where she had been
listening to the song of the birds l , and her face was pale, even paler
than death itself. They did everything to reassure her; but com-
munication with Paris was cut off and information reached us that
the enemy surrounded us. The other servants —may heaven curse
them as cowards—deserted us and fled into the woods. They were
so brave, were Master and Mistress. . . but my sweet Lucienne
—ah, my poor Lucienne! I can hear her moan now coming from
the alcove, for shrouded by the curtains she saw staggering up
the drive two drunken officers in their dirty drab grev. Only once
have I seen a look such as she gave us. That was in my first
hunt, when I shot a doe; and it looked at me like that and died.
The two men—no, I will call them brutes—soon found us huddled
together in here. Master stood erect, and demanded an explana-
tion for their insolent intrusion. They leered at him, and grinned.
Lucienne moved over to her mother, and the Lieutenant leaped
towards her. Master rushed to strike him, but the Captain cover-
ed him with his revolver. The German seized her in a powerful
embrace . —. .then a looki of horror spread over his face. He
had cushed the life out of her, as the coils of a serpent crush the
frail beauty of the orchid. She slid on to the floor . . . dead!
Her executioner laughed!! Mistress uttered a s-cream, the like
of which I had never heard before . . . the like of which I shall


KIWM Qhurnstmas.
hear always. There it .s now. . . • Can't you near it, deaf
fool ? Ha! Ha ! Ha !
The old man laughed madly. I succeeded in pacifying him,
and he went on. "I swear, to you, Monsieur, that Monsieur never
moved a muscle of his face. On hearing of the death of his son,
le Capitame D'Abrais, he had looked so . . but th.en there was
tenderness in his eyes. Now they were as hard and as cold as
agate. He lifted up and carried the body of her whom he loved
as Life itself. When he returned, in his hand he carried two bot-
tles of his finest Burgundy, and on his face there was a smile. It
was the first time I had ever seen Master smile, monsieur. At first
the w ne passed in silence for they could not understand the lan-
guage of each other. Then his politeness gave rise to jokes, and
very soon the whole atmosphere was thick with their dirty snatches
of songs. And Master still went on filling their glasses. He
then went down to the cellar, and when he entered again Mistress
was with hm; and she walked proud like the aristocrat she was,
and her eyes were jewels that shone through a crystal ring of
tears. She knew the strength of the restraint that was
with her husband's soul. He handed them their flagons, and they
all touched. Suddenly he stepped forward to wrest a revolver
from its case, but the German was too quick for him and he was
covered in an instant. The brute's vile grin soon changed to a
distorted look) of extreme agony; the shoulders hunched up, the
hand grew unsteady and the weapon clattered to the floor. Then
Master laughed, the laugh of a tortured and racked being when
he sees death approaching to release him from his earthly cares.
And with a laugh on his lips he met the vision, for just then the
Lieutenant propped himself on his elbow, aimed and fired. He
d ! d not miss, and in that at least he was merciful. They are dead,
all dead. . . . And I have no faith in God or man! "But," I
interpolated hastily, for I saw his mind was commencing to wander,
"what of Lucienne's mother?" "I do not know ——I cannot tell.
Why do you ask me such questions ? I heard her laughing and I
saw her face. It was that of a grinning skull devouring ts sunken
flesh. She may be roaming the fields demented l she may be
dead. And I care not
How strong the last of darkening day,
How sweet the kiss of waking night/
Life at best is but Death at bay,
My soul but a bird's stayed flight.
That is my song. Is it not sweet. Those scelerats stole
from me my heart. My voice they could not take. They robbed
me of my mind—me, who taught Master from his infancv; who
managed his estate for three generations; who have conversed
with Alphonse Lamartine, Boileau, Andre Debussy, Due D'Espag-
nol . . . ah, you remember him, for I can see your eyes open


in wonder. On the steps of the Academy he said to me—you
remember the Academy—all the books'—red, green, purple, olive
covers, brown morocco—my Rabelais, Voltaire, Lesage—my . .
my. . . .
I stood entranced by the spectacle. I had seen much horror
in the last few months l ; but the pale yellowed cheeks and russet
hair of the portrait stained with what I now saw to be red wme,
probably flung with a curse by the dying officer, the dread skulk-
ing vision of an aristocrat whose honour was his soul, and then
this old man, aged ten years in a less number of days, wandering
in mind, weary in body under the weight of his unforgettable sec-
rets, fast winding his way into an abyss that yawned a vast
despondency. Perhaps, I thought, I might stay the slowly creep-
ing shadows of insanity if I were to keep his mind fixed on the one
subject with, which it was saturated, until I could get into touch
with someone to care for him.
"Ah! Lucienne!" I exclaimed. "Was she not beautiful
. • . wonderful?" "Nevermore so than she is now!" I
thought I would humour him. "Yes, indeed, she is radiant now.
The morning snn could not appear to smile more warmly than she,
and you she loves more than the warm-hearted grapes adore the
vine to which they are wedded." "But you shall judge for your-
self, he said, follow me." And as some wire-pulled marionette
he jerked himself towards' the door.'
We passed down a passage, on the sides of which gleamed
the corselets of many an ancestor. Brown shadows danced a
ghostly quadrille on the painted breasts' of an Arcadian shep-
herdess, and at our steps the walls laughed a hollow laugh. A
jewelled vizor tumbled from its' accustomed niche with a great
noise, but my comrade spoke no word. Presently we came to a
vault where all seemed to be winter, and its' icy grip made me
realise that I was not very far from death. These miniature cata-
combs were low and crumbling, and in the murky darkness the
dark fungi squelched like an octopus beneath our tread. A shaft
of light showed a large lizard of green-bronze hide wending its
slimy way across the crumbling mortar. 1 wondered if we were
descending into the very bewl§ of the earth like some emerald-
seekers m the caverns of Peru.
A door opened suddenly, and I found myself in a low crypt
ornamented with finely-woven tapestries, and an oil-censer emit-
feeble glem of light. In the far corner was a roughly-hewn
coffin, and in it I saw the form of a young girl. Her eyes were
closed and her face was white and clean-cut as some sculptured
creak on of Praxiteles. In it was all the stillness of a desert night
and all the purity of the Madonna. It was the face of one Who
had realised an ideal in death . . . who had never known what
it was to be old. There was all the beauty of suffering portrayed,
und d.ead as was the body, the while seemed animated by a beauti-
/ul spirit. I stood enchanted, and stared ahead dully like a great


This morning he came again to the vault and cackled hideous-
ly. Nothing I say can persuade him that I am not one of the
German marauders. But Lucienne from her dead-lips has taught
me self-sacrifice —from her dear heart a yearning for the vast un-
known. I have become a lover of Death. Every hour I clear away
more obstacles from Life —every moment the path of eternal sleep
seems to entice me nearer to its alluring winding ways
A* The avenger of his Master came again to-day. I said nothing,
i but he was' as wary as I was weak—he went away and laughed
and wondered if I were really dead. ... I looked at Lucienne
f just now and on her face was the smile of an angel,
f i > * W.E.L.
i 9^
KHaaM ClkirlstaaSo
owl from his leafy haunt stares at the honeyed moon. The cl ck
of the closing door woke me from my reverie, and along the pas-
sage sounded the hoarse insane laughter of a lost soul escaped
from Hell. . . .
Suggested scheme for employing spare Politicians— place them on Home Service
■■■
wmmmmmtKmmtmKMmummtKtmmmtmKmmmmmmammmmmmmmamammmmisaßsamMmHmam


Bill's SeTOpo
(By Ex-B.)
THE simple fact is that Bill lost himself. It was Christmas Eve,
and possjibly he had let his thoughts dwell on the far away
New Zealand that he loved, the old home by the bush, the
garden, the home-paddock and the cows; perhaps his
thoughts had wandered—-thoughts are restless things—over the
spur to "Lannie's," and certain slip-rails, where . . . but there,
it isn't fair to give Bill's young romance away. Whatever was the
reason, he had lost his bearings, noted raider as he was; he had
taken that wrong turn that makes all landmarks useless, worse
than that, indeed, deliberate betrayers; and now.
A harsh and raspmg voice struck on nis ear, from his 1 left
front: You will take these to"—he missed the next few words,
whether by reason of the distance, a slightly low red tone, or his
too slender knowledge of the enemy tongue—"at once." He
strained his ears' but caught no syllable of a reply, yet, in a sort
of temporary clairaudience and clairvoyance, he seemed to hear
the click of the heels, the formal military answer, to see the stiff
salute; more, with a sense of exaltation he perceived that here,
by the veriest stroke of luck, despatches of importance were to be
obtained for the swift, cunning taking. Christmas Eve, home, and
Lannie s slip-rails dropt from hs consciousness' like stones; he was
pure hunter, his quarry, well, not in view exactly.
A pebble rattled, dead in front, and Bill sank, noiselessly as
any shadow, as through the gloom a something gloomier appeared
—blackness in blackness —crossing diagonally to right of him.
He flattened himself to earth and held his breath. The figure
stumbled, but a yard or two l away from him, pitched forward, but
recovered, with what Bill took to be an oath—it had the feel of it,
he told his chum next day. That was' an anxious moment, but it
passed—it passed, and Bill rose to his hands and knees, his feet,
and in a crouching attitude stepped with long, careful paces after
his vanishing prey.
It was assuredly "safe" country the pair were in, for the Ger-
man made no special effort to keep silence; his footfalls were
comfortably.loud ; at intervals he grunted, as though punctuating
not peculiarly rosy cogitations; now and th.en he sang a bar or
two of some quaint folk song—perhaps Christmas Eve was having
its way with him, too, for a space. Once he stopped suddenly,
and Bill's heart leant into his mouth, for he had drawn a trifle
nearer. Would the man look round? But no, with a glance to
right, to left, but never a glance behind him he stepped off


Kfinaki Gbrista&§.
agdin, to be suddenly flung upon hisj face as Bill leapt with his full
weight upon him; to And his arms wrenched back and tied by no
means tenderly wrist to wrist, while a knee bored wickedly into the
protesting back of him.
Bill's work done with most admirable thoroughness, he turned
his) prisoner over, relieved him of his pistol, and an ugly looking
knife, threatening instant death if ever a call passed his lips; and
for a time sat very still, listening intently, and at the same time
thinking hard. He had noted an instinctive motion of the hand
towards a certain portion of the prisoner's tunic just as he caught
it up; his mind was still working at the abnormal rate or he would
not have noted it. He touched the spot lightly as if by accident
yes, he was sure he felt a stiffness no uniform possesses; there
was the despatch, beyond a doubt. His eye fell on a stump of
pencil, thrust into a pocket, and with a happy smile he took pos-
session. "I was just wanting one," he said. But where were his
company's lines, that was the absorbing question of the moment;
in his perplexity he almost asked his prisoner if he knew. They
could not stay there until daylight, that was certain; something
must be done, and well, he was used to taking risks. Ordering
his prisoner to rise—a rather difficult matter for a man with arms
and legs both tied—he warned him once again not to attempt an
outcry; loosened his leg ties to a kind of hobble, and bade him
march, pointing the way he happened to be facing. The German's
face fell, and Bill felt that he had scored. Before long the features
of the landscape under the faint light of a shred of moon, now
risen, took familiar shape. Threading their way by torn-tree
stumps and shell-holes in due time they neared the trenches and
were challenged sharply: "Who goes' there?" to which enquiry Bill
replied aggrievedly: "O, go to hell!" and rolled his man into the
welcomin- arms of a grinning mate.
It was not long before Bill and his prisoner were in the
presence of the colonel. Bill's story was soon told; the tunic was
felt, ripped open; certainly there was a packet, and, oh, how the
prisoner's face fell!
Alas for human eypectation! On examination, it was found
to be a very different despatch from what poor Bill had hoped.
It read as follows: —
Dear Ludwig,—Do not be so foolish. You
know that there is no one else in all the world for
me but you. and that I will gladly wait till this
dreadful war is over. God bless you and protect
you.—Your promised wife, Gretchen.
The colonel's mouth took on a whimsical twist as he said: "I
fear, my man, you have lost your labour," but in a moment he
had turned full face to the crestfallen Bill, and thanked him for his
well-meant effort. "Next time perhaps—eh? What?" he ended,
and the incident was closed.


Bill slept for a few hours, and then, still having a short time
to spare, bethought him of the pencil, the precious pencil, he had
salved—"th,e one satisfactory point in the whole dam business/'
he muttered to himself. He found the lead was broken, sq, fish-
ing out his knife, he began to pare the wood away; at the third
slice something white peeped through the brown. Bill's heart
gave a mighty leap; it might be just a "war" pencil, half stuffed
with rubbish, or it might ... it might . . he hardly
KlWki Cfimstaa&s.
cared to think what it might be. He carefully pried away the rest
of the wood; it yielded, and a tiny cap came off, disclosing a neat
roll. He pulled it out with trembling fingers., partly opened it —
yes, line upon line of finest writing scarce decipherable without a
glass. He couldn't help it, he eased the tension with a yell that
brought a sergeant, and an angry order.
"I couldn't help it, sergeant," said Bill—you see —I think I've
got those papers after all!"
It was not long before Bill found himself again in the presence
of the colonel, to whose "Well, my man?" a little sharply uttered,
Bill rather cheekily said "Next time, Sir!" and offered the neat
little roll half in half out of its pencil camouflage. The colonel
looked at it, unrolled it rapidly, read a few lines. Then followed
orders to the telephone attendant, after which he turned to Bill
with a genial smile and hand extended. "You've done the trick,"
he said, "I'll not forget you." He did not, and in the meantime,
thanks to Bill's scoop, a portion of the German line had a most
unhappy Christmas.
Sketches
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 OUT!
THERE is more force contained in the above line of figures than
any soldier could create by using a sentence of well chosen
words. It is the form ula of the mysterious process of
"counting out," and it is the last resort of the disgusted.
Men in khaki improve their creative powers in a camp, and there
is no doußt that the military mind evolves some of the most remark-
able phrases and customs of which I know. If the picture film
fails, and there is a blank on the screen, the crowd immediately
counts up to nine, in one voice, and then comes a loudly shouted
"Out." It means that the ooerator is forever banished from the
regard of the audience. The demands of discipline are sometimes
disregarded, and) an N.C.O. is treated to a "counting out," and in
fact, whenever fate throws on an unpleasing picture, the khaki
response is i, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 8, 9, OUT!


Sisem-Wimelmnu " *-%
\ tall cliff flung itself athwart Life s
Backward a space the startled f.
water fled; IfsT
rhen, while the poor dam dreamed ww l V Uf/i mF
its foolish dream W I V \\ 1/ gjfl
Scornfully tost it down their / * \ \f x\
ancient bed. L XV t AX /
KhaM Clhinsta&s.
Sweira-Willhidlßnn.
A tall cliff flung itself athwart Life s
stream,
Then, while the poor dam dreamed
its foolish dream
A LABOUR OF LOVE.


Kh&H Clhnsta&So
Y® Pfuni&<e©&„
As I walkt sadly down the street
An odd sight chanced my eyes to meet,
So odd I rubbed them, lookt again,
Feared I was dreaming even then.
Saw I, or seemed I but to see
In big, black, bouncing letters writ
A Legend: these the words of i/t
N.Z. HEALTH BUREAU WHISKIES FREE ?
An officer oni duty said:
"Come hither, Friend, you look half dead;
I guess the Flu
Has collared you ;
Come in, and have a gratis whisky
To buck you up and make you frisky;
We've every single decent brand,
Take which you choose—
Now, don't refuse;
Whisky's the One Real Prophylactic;
The virtue in a drop o' these—
He waved a comprehensive hand—
Confound an honest man's reliance
On auto-stuff and Christian Science,
Bangs all the blinkin' opathies,
And simply Chiro-practic.
Come in, I say, have a drink;
Come in! Eh, what? You do not think—
Your conscience troubles—what's that, what?
Upon your honour you are not
A patient? Let that be no barrier,
The man that hasn't Flu's a CARRIER
That's WORSE, my Conscientious Kid."
His voice grew firm :
"Come, KILL THAT GERM!
ORBY— " I wouldn't have him swear
On my account; it wasn't fair ;
And so as I was bid
I did.
Ex-B.
Some people rush into marriage in much the same manner
they run after a car. They never heed the destination sign
generally catch the wrona tram.— 'Philistine."


KlWkl Chirnstaa&s.
THE THIRD CIGARETTE
IF the match shortage developed until we counted our supply in
single vestas, many soldiers could never be prevailed upon to
light a third cigarette with the same match. Amid the smoky
atmosphere of the picture theatre —in the canteen —and along
the camp roads, I have often seen a group of fellows lighting their
"fags," but only the greenhorn will permit his cigarette to be the
third. What terrible fate awaits this unlucky person has never
been known. It is a superst.tion which lives all through the
British Armies, and its adherents do not treat the ceremony of
blowing the match out as a joke. Quite seriously, and with a
certain amount of awe, the match-holder will throw it aside and
light a new one, before he will awaken the displeasure of the
indefinite God who orders we humans to never light three cigarettes
with one match.
Officers "Youa si Refamed mmn T 9
Dilapidated Oinies 66 Ifessirj, from tine tina


24
■MM
Khaki Chiriistaafio
A S®Ml@ir 9 s Firayeifo
I thanks yer Gawd, for a good woman,
It's 'er letters what keeps me straight.
Thanks for the scrawl of a little child,
An' for the kindness of me mate.
Altho' its the herd I'm livnT with,
An' the ungodly with what I mix,
Beneath the rough grey blankets still,
Is the soothin' of me crucifix.
— PHILISTINE.
"JOE/"
—By Carl Wessman.


Swiimgmg th® Lead
THE orderly corporal opened the door of the hut and admitted
a blast of cold air?. He gazed into tlie gloomy interior
and bawled:
"Any sick in here
There was not a stir from the double lines of blanket-shrouded
figures piled in distorted looking heaps on the stretchers.
"Dunno whether Vm early or not or whether you coves heard
the bugle go, but Are there any sick here?" he bawled again.
Thirty heads shot out from under the blankets and thirty
peevish voices yelled, "Oh, go away and die. The whole damn
lot of us are sick; absolutely fed up." The heads' disappeared.
The corporal turned to the doorway where the cold grey light
of the early morning showed in a dreary patch.. There was a
drizzliqg ram outside and he buttoned the collar of his great coat
tightly around his throat. "Well, just as a parting gift," he said
roughly, "I hope they shake hell out of you at 'jerks' " this morn-
ing. I hear they've a new syllabus on the go and—. Any sick?"
he queried again.
A grey heap half way down the lines 1 stirred itself, and a
towsled head poked from under . cover. A faint voice asked,
"What sort of a morning is it, Corporal?" The figure sat upland
stared at the patch of mist in the doorway. "Ugh! Rotten!'" it
jerked out. "Yep! I'm sick, Corp. Pain in me back. Lumbago,
I think. Number 70383.. Name, Smallbone Thomas; single.
Take 'em down." The latter was rattled off as if the outcome
of long and steady practice.
"Righto!" assented the corporal. "Fall in at 6.30," he directed.
"Great-coat on!" and he buzzed off into the murk outside, while
the patient grinned at his nearby stable-mate, and coughed loosely.
"Might get a day off," he remarked quietly. "Give it a go any-
how. It's a rotten life, a rotten life," he sighed.
The shriek of a whistle sounded, followed by a rasping voice
demanding, "Fall in the sick. Shake it up."
Weary looking figures muffled in great-coats, straggled out
of the adjacent huts and shuffled into two lines on the wet road-
way. Dejected, and of sad mein, came Thomas his
left hand caressing the small of his back. "I'm crook, corp.," he
remarked, and then brightly added, "Who's the doctor, this morn-
ing? Oh, him " and he frowned at the name mentioned, "he's a
hard thing. . . . but Gord, I'm crook," and he winced—pain-
fully.


KUkn CftnirktamSo
"Now then, now then, cover off," interjected the corporal. "Are
you all here?" Righto! Sickj parade. 'Shun; Stand at ease!
Shun. Number! Form fours! Right. By the right, quick
march! Steady in front! Damitall! Sick are you! Steady!
Left of road," and the weary parade drifted along to a low build-
ing at the hospital where a brace of keen-eyed men and some bored
orderlies held sway.
A strong smell of man permeated the place. As the various
sick filed slowly up to the medicos, and were thumped, or daubed
with iodine, perspiring corporals rushed about with blue papers
in their hands and called out names, saluted or were cursed in
undertones by the austere "poultice lancers." Verily a busy scene!
And as time elapsed, into the midst of the throng came Thomas
Smallbone.
Pam in me back, sir! he said in reply to the doctor's query.
Had it for a few days and can't straighten meself up. Lumbago, I
think, sir." *
He was given the usual test. His hairy chest was bared to
the scrutiny of the medico, and it was thumped, tickled, and gently
tapped with an inquiring forehnger. Thomas Smallbone stood the
business well.
"H'm!" grunted the doctor at last. "H'm!" Then he stu-
diously gazed at the sheet of blue paper in front of him, and with
sudden decision put some marks against the name of Thomas.
And the sick hied slowly on.
* * * * *
Half-a-dozen men sat in the doorway of a hut awaiting the
call to fall in. One of them picked his teeth with a pocket-knife,
and gazed sadly at a little square of concrete set in the side of the
footpath. He spat disgustedly.
"What's- wrong, Smallbone?" someone asked.
"Wrong!" repeated Thomas, "wrong. Why everything. Here
am I parading sick this morning, looking for a day off. Blime! it's
rich! Lumbago, I told the doctor, was a family complaint with
us. He tapped me, had a look at me tongue, said H'm'' once or
twice, and what do you think," He gazed round the room for a
reply, but nobody thought anything worth tuppence.
"He gave me two days light duty."
"Well," chorused the crowd, "that's all right isn't it?"
And to-morrow s 1 Saturday, and my turn for Wellington week-
end. Had a date with a tart, too. Lucky! Hell! I'd like half
an hour with; the cove who invented barring all leave to men who
are sick. Anyhow, give's a cigarette. This swinging the lead
ain't always the game it's cracked up to be."
— TE PAN A,
Records Office, Trentham, M.C. Ex-Sergt., N.Z.E.F.


Khaka Clbiirisitinnia§o
Tin® Clock thsit mi©©dis> im<o>
Wlimdlmgo


TELEPHONE 2696.
338-340 LAMBTON QUAY,
P.O. BOX 1117.
AGENT FOR THE FOLLOWING BRITISH MANUFACTURERS:
NICHOLSON S RAIN COAT CO , LTD. MARGETSON A CG CHRISTY A CO, LTD
DEXTER OVERCOATS WELCH MARGETSON A CO- T RESS & CO, LTD.
ZAMBRENE OVERCOATS 4 R MO " LEY LTD BORSALINO HATS.
R. T. PAGE takes this opportunity of thanking
Customers for their generous patronage at
his Branch Shops, Military Camps, combined
with his Civilian Outfitting Establishment,
338-340 Lambton Quay, Wellington.
Stocks of Military Goods on hand are of Standard Quality,
personally selected by Mr. Page, being well designed, con-
forming strictly to Military Dress Regulations.
It is impossible to illustrate a full price list as new goods
are constantly being produced, but we are confident the values
offered will result in satisfactory business.
Tunics Military Hats Badges
Breeches Fox's Putees Buttons
Belts Etc.
And your many necessary requirements
When leaving Camp, can be perchased at
Stage's
Where you will find a complete Civilian Stock.
338-340 Lambton Quay, Wellington, also at Military Camps
Trentham, Featherston, Tauherenikau.
All enquiries will receive prompt attention.


The Fallen Steifo
A TATTERED TALE
HE was not a very spruce soldier that sat at the table in the
empty hut last Christmas morn. A swarm of flies hovered
about him. They almost hid a plate of food garnished by
a wedge of cheese; which was the centre piece of the festive
board. He requested the loan of a cigarette, and volunteered the
information that it was a pretty rotten Christmas.
"I'm of the baggage guard, curse it. Other chaps out in the
bosoms of their families, or nestling in the perfumed arms of a
girl. Curse it."
I bowed in sympathy.
"Would you believe it? . But sit down, sit down," and he
pushed aside the garbage in the tin plate.
"Quite so," he chanted sadly, "not what you are u°ed to, eh?
I understand, I once was as fastidious as yourself. But twelve
months in the army peeling potatoes, polishing up the dixies, scrub-
bing up, scrubbing down, has left me a thing, sir, just a thing.
Believe me, Home Service is not all beer and taxi-cabs." He
waved his arms and scattered bits of food all over the table. "Yes,
sir," continued the remnant, "I am a back number, by the world
forgot. And to think that once"—his voice trailed off into a whis-
per, and moisture gleamed in his eyes. "And I ask you the reason?
Pshaw! Of course you do not know. And in a nutshell, this is
the answer. The ingratitude of the amusement loving public of
New Zealand." His straggling lip whiskers trembled violently as
he continued:
"Know you, sir, that I was the sole proprietor of The Bellbird
Mammoth Dramatic Aggregation,' a galaxy of lady and gentlemen
artists whose sole aim was the production of high class entertain-
ment for the soil tilling people of this Dominion. Our repertoire
was immense and we presented nightly such English successes as
The Bloke and his Tart" or The Pinched Pyjamas,' 'Blood the
Footpath,' and Three Weary Beers.' Business, sir, was rotten from
the outset." He paused, and requested a match. "Art has few
devotees in agricultural areas," he went on. "Poetry, drama, the
muse, mean nothing. Our metropolitan company were sick of the


KSa&M Qms&nms.
business, sir, sick of it. The fates seemed to conspire to destroy
us. Audiences were poor and publicans cold and heartless. As
time went on, the pubs knew us not, and we shed our wardrobe
by degrees. To-day it was Brollkook Glynn's cardigan jacket that
went; to-morrow would see Lottie Limpitt sacrificing her—but
need I dwell on it. The 'ghost' absolutely refused to totter. And
to think that Art should so suffer. We were on Poverty Point when
our aggregation struck Waipaku, a peaceful hamlet where dwell
the milkers for the factory. We decided to stage 'Blood on the
Footpath,' cutting out the third act and substituting a bit of rag-
time. A terrible sacrifice, sir, a terrible sacrifice. But it was all
useless. By seven-thirty the local temple of Thespis was as bare
as a new born babe. Outside, a Maori seemed to hesitate, and
stood gazing into the empty hall space. Then he driftetd down
the road, —and another hope vanished We were just going to shut-
up shop when the fire-bell suddenly pealed. Ever an opportunist,
I was seized with sudden inspiration, and grabbing a hanging lamp,
rushed out into the roadway. The two surviving members of the
Mammoth Dramatic Aggregation came and stood around and
roared like a catastrophe. Attracted by the noise and glare from
the lamp the peaceful inhabitants of Waipaku abandoned the idea
of going to bed and rushed towards the supposed conflagration.
There they found that the Great English, Dramatic Success 1 , "Blood
on the Footpath," was the cause of the hubbub. To all enquiries as
to the whereabouts of the fire we answered as cne man, 'lnside the
Hall—to-night, to-night. The great fire scene. Positively the
last appearance of the 'Bellbird Mammoth Dramatic Aggregation.'
It was. We played to thirty bob. Imagine it, sir, thirty shillings
at the shrine of Art. And next morning we boarded the train for the
city. It was a sad ending to a great career. Just as the carriages
were about to move off a youngster looked in at our window and
inquired:
"Is Horatio Sparks l —that's me—in there?"
"What do you want him for, laddie," someone asked. "Are
you the newsboy?"
nothin', " puffed the kid, "Horatio said he'd give me
'arf a dollar larsnite if I rung the firebell and told the people the
fire was up at the 'all. I'm wantin' me pay." '
"Yes, sir, that was the end. I shook off the fetters of Art, and
for twelve months I've been playing a real part in the big drama.
Peeling potatoes, sir, may not sound heroic, but remember what


BUY
Y ©naif Xmsis Gnifts M@w
While selections are complete. We have the most complete assortment of
Watches, Jewellery, and Silverware ever shown in New Zealand. By pur-
chasing direct and manufacturing ourselves we are enabled to offer you
Supreme Value for your money. If you cannot come and select
P ersonall y> we will be pleased
we will refund your purchase
r\ , • W127 A Beautiful 5 stone
W126 Exquisite iBct. Gold money. Our aim is to give Di ond Ring> lBc £ Gold
Rl g j set pw- 3 Flne Dia ' you Good Service. Send for Mount with Platinum
monds in PI tinum setting o, .
£l2 10 - our Special Xmas Catalogue. £9 10 -, £lO 10-, £l2
Others from £7 10 /- 10 m > £l5 1 ? ~
and upwards.
, . W hi. Exquisite iBct Gold Ring. Plat- Ladies' i5Ct. Gold Signet
Ladies iBct. Gold .ugnet inuin Setting, with 5 diamonds. £25. Ring 30/-
Rmg 3o- Others equa ly beautiful at £lO 7Q- Gentlemen's Rings at 30/„,
Others 21 22 6 each. £l4 10 -, £l6lO -, £2l and upwards 35/-, 45 50 - each.
C 669. Handsome get. Gold Curb Chain Bracelt-t. with Padlock and Safety Chain. 63 -
Size wider and heaver, 72/6. Size narrower, 50/-
.adies' Gold Bracelet Watches, with Expanding Bracelets. The illustration shows the des : gn of a 1
ewelled Lever Watch of h : gh quality in get. Gold Cases with Patent Brittanic Expanding Bracele
Ve are offering this Watch Bracelet at £B. It is absolutely the best value ever offered in New Zealar
Ladies' Gold Bracelet Watches, with Expanding Bracelets. The illustration shows the des : gn of al5
Jewelled Lever Watch of h : gh quality in get. Gold Cases with Patent Brittanic Expanding Bracelet
We are offering this Watch Bracelet at £B. It is absolutely the best value ever offered in New Zealand
It would make a excellent Christmas Gift.
G6367. Exquisite 15CC Gold Brooch, with one C 6753. Dainty get. Gold Spray Brooch, with
Diamond 60/- Pearls 72/6
ORDERS BY MAIL RECEIVE PROMPT AND CAREFUL ATTENTION
Stewart Dawson's, ,ewe,!K


Khaki Chirktaaa§ o
Julius Knight said —'An' army moves on it's stomach'—and potatoes
make a fine binder."
He ran his fingers through his lank hair and gazed reflectively
at the wedge of cheese. "Of -coursje vaudeville is the thing now-
adays, sir," he continued. "The drama is unappreciated. I have
written a neat little sketch, for three performers, under the title of
'The Missing Can.' 'Pertains to the army, sir, and the scene re-
presents the exterior of a hut at 9.40 p.m. There is plenty of
action in the piece, and the final climax, where the tin is discovered
under the bed in Hut 842, makes a great curtain. Some of these
days you will have the pleasure of seeing the presentation." Again
the remnant faltered and gazed into space. "Yes, sir," he sighed
wearily, "a flickle jade is the amusement loving public of New Zea-
land. But for the lack of apprecia tion of the Drama, Horatio
Sparks might have been driving his own chariot to-day. As it is
" He coughed dryly. "Could you oblige me with another
cigarette?"
TE PANA,
Records Office, Trentham, M.C. Ex-Sergt., N.Z.E.F.


*
Jft,'' vPSSpp§s^P%
i CI
'°-*mw


■
'
I
I
I
? ' ;_ ' '• ■ • ■ ■ ■ ' ■ -- >
' '- -' ' . . ' :
