

HYMN.
T EAD, kindly Light, amid the encircling
gloom,
I was not ever thus, nor pray’d that Thou
Shouldst lead me on;
Lead Thou me on;
I loved to choose and see my path; but
The night is dark, and I am far from
now
home,
Lead Thou me on.
Lead Thou me on.
I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears,
Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see
Pride ruled my will : remember not past
The distant scene; one step enough for
me.
years.
TWO MINUTES’ SILENCE.
“DEAD MARCH IN SAUL.”
HYMN.
WBBCT""
A BIDE with me; fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens; Lord, with me
Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass
abide;
away;
When other helpers fail, and comforts
Change and decay in all around I see;
flee,
O Thou, Who changes! not, abide with
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.
me.
I need Thy Presence every passing hour;
I fear no foe with Thee at hand to bless;
What but Thy grace can foil the temp-
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitter-
ter’s power ?
ness;
Who like Thyself my guide and stay can
Where is death’s sting ? Where, Grave,
be ?
thy victory ?
Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, abide
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me.
with me.
So mote it be.
iHemorial
Jlost Gracious idlajestp lUng <®eorgc VI
sa£t <Bvmh Itoter <§ranD Eobge of Cnglanb
€)Mt. 6tfj fthtmxp, 1952
PRAYER by Rt. Wor. Bro. ARCHDEACON BIDWELL, Grand Chaplain.
A LMIGHTY and Eternal God, Supreme Architect of the Universe, Maker and Ruler
of all worlds and of all kingdoms : In Thy Name we have assembled in the character
of Masons with all humility to commemorate the passing of Thy servant, our King and
Governor. On this day of remembrance we give Thee humble thanks for the memory
and good example of our Sovereign, who laid down his life in the service of his Empire
and in the constant, loving care of his subjects. We bless Thee for his courage, for
his devotion to duty, for his love of the high ideals and principles governing his great
Empire. Accept his sacrifice, we pray Thee; let it not be in vain that he has died in
the cause of righteousness, truth, justice, honour and liberty. We humbly beseech
Thee to look in mercy upon us and our Empire at this time of anxiety, distress and
sorrow. Thou knowest that a great King has passed from us, whose memory we
revere and whose loss we deplore.
Guide his successor, Queen Elizabeth 11., and all those to whom Thou hast com-
mitted the government of our Nation and Empire, and grant to them at this time, and
at all times, special gifts of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and strength, that,
supporting what is right and following what is good and pure, they may obey Thy
Holy Will and fulfil Thy divine purpose, and uphold the high standard of rule inculcated
by our late beloved King.
While we sorrow at the heavy blow that has fallen so suddenly, may we obtain
fuller knowledge of that love of Thine which provided for us so great an earthly
blessing and is effectual to supply the place of every gift which Thy wisdom removed.
Grant us all a calm and lowly resignation to Thy divine will, and bestow upon us
the blessing of peace, to the glory of Thy most Holy Name. So mote it be.
So long Thy power hath blest me, sure it still
Will lead me on
O’er moor and fen, o’er crag and torrent, till
The night is gone;
And with the morn those Angel faces smile,
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.
So mote it be.
Rt. Wor. Bro. Rev, J. GRAY ROBERTSON, Grand Chaplain, will read portion of
Holy Writ (Ecc. XIL, v. 7).
ADDRESS by M. Wor. GRAND MASTER.
Solo : “The trumpet shall sound” ( Handel) Bro. Noel W. Warren.
