

3 <T
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF AUSTRALIA
IN VICTORIA
King George U
memorial Service
SCOTS CHURCH, MELBOURNE
Tuesday Evening, 28th January, 1936
The Moderator
(Right Rev. W. Huey Steele, M.A.)
Presiding
Address
Rev. Oilman Johnston, b.a.




"Comfort Ye, My People”
The prophet wrote these words when the people of
Israel were in exile. Jerusalem lay waste. Wild beasts
sheltered in its ruins. Many had ceased to hope for return
to their own land. The people were in despair. At that
juncture, a Divine Voice said to the prophet: "Comfort ye,
comfort ye, my people.”
The reiterated command given to the prophet is appro-
priate to us. We are mourning. There is a dark shadow
on every hearth in the Empire. It seems as if one were
dead in every house. The King is dead. His death brings
home to us in a peculiar way that
"The glories of our birth and state
Are shadows, not substantial things;
There is no armour against fate,
Death lays his icy hand on kings;
Sceptre and crown must tumble down,
And in the dust be equal made
With the poor, crooked scythe and spade.
Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet, and blossom in the dust.”
The event that we feared, and that we prayed might
not happen, has happened. It has caused a solemn hush to
fall on every heart. The tide of a common sorrow has, at
least for the moment, buried all distinctions of class, and
creed, and country.
There have been kings who, when they died, were
mourned only in a formal sort of way, but no heart mourned.
But the mourning throughout the Empire to-day is not
hollow. It is sincere. It is not a mere respect paid to the
proprieties of the occasion. It is the spontaneous expression
of a great multitude of hearts that feel smitten by the blow.
It reminds us of that other royal death of which we read
in Scripture that "all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for


Josiah; and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; and all the
singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their
lamentations.” That is, all classes of the people mourned.
And to-day, throughout the Empire, people of all sorts —
statesmen and judges, journalists and labourers, Christian
ministers and policemen, matrons and maids, Jews and
Gentiles, the wealthy and the poor—unite in lamenting the
death of King George. From France and Germany, from
Austria and Italy, from Greece and Turkey, from Holland
and Spain, aye, and from Russia and India, China and
Japan, from America North and South, from Africa and
from the islands of the sea, have come messages of
condolence.
The fact that our King was trusted in every land, and
held in universal respect, is a comfort to us. Over his
death the nations are as one, a forecast of the time when
misunderstandings shall cease, and every nation shall say
kind things of every other, and the lion, the eagle, and the
bear will be removed from all national banners, and in
their place will be emblazoned the lamb and the dove.
Another comforting thought is this: The King’s illness
and death have drawn the people to prayer. Multitudes
who seldom pray have prayed during those few days when
the King’s life was in the balance.
They did not assume any attitude that we associate with
prayer. They did not use any recognised form of prayer.
But there may be prayer without any special attitude, or
form of words, even without words at all. They felt, "Would
that God might spare the King.” That was prayer. They
said, "God help us.” That was prayer. They cried with
conviction, "God save our gracious King.” That was prayer.
From cathedral and mission hall, from church and chapel
throughout the Empire on Sunday, the 19th January, 1936,
prayer went up to God for the King’s recovery, or, if that
might not be, for a peaceful departure.


For a few hours, it seemed as if God would spare him, as
there appeared to be no further weakening of the heart’s
action. Then came the announcement of the doctors that
'‘the King’s life is moving peacefully towards its close.” It
is no small matter that turns the thoughts of an Empire
God-wards. Whatever calamity has that effect is a blessing,
though it be in disguise.
Another element of comfort is this: The King suffered but
little pain in his last illness. The doctors again and again
reported that he was resting in comfort, or that he was
sleeping peacefully. It is a consolation that, in his exit from
this life, he had but little pain or discomfort. In some
cases, the last stages to the grave are marked by the distress
of breathlessness, or the burning heat of fever, or the
restlessness due to disordered nerves. Sometimes the distress
is mental, due to the knowledge that loved ones are being
left unprovided for, or the fear that little children who
need a mother’s care for years, may fall into unsympathetic
hands. The King had none of these distresses. His life
moved peacefully to its close.
Besides, we believe in God, and that He does all things
well, and therefore we should believe that our King died
at the most fitting time. He had reached seventy years of
age. His successor is a man over forty-one years of age,
who has been well trained in the duties of kingship. We
have our diplomatic difficulties. We always have. But we
are at peace with all the world, and we are determined to
make peace our aim. We have capable and trustworthy men
at the head of the Imperial Government.
It cannot be said that the King’s death was untimely. It
has been a wrench. We have been startled and stunned by
it. We did not expect it. Our minds rebel against the
thought that the King died at the right time. But no time
would be the right time, from the point of view of loyalty.


Yet God’s time is always the right time. He does nothing
untimely.
"When our King resigned his breath,
God controlled the stroke of death:
The keys are in the hand divine;
That hand must first the warrant sign,
And arm the death, and wing the dart
Which brings His message to the heart.”
The King’s death has been no accident, no haphazard
arrangement, no chance or mischance. What we call chance
is but direction we cannot see. God had fixed the limit of
the King’s reign. The King had reached that limit, and all
the skill and experience of medical science could not extend
it by an hour. There was no lack of competent doctors and
nurses. There is no one to blame. All that the Empire
could do was done to prolong his life, but it failed. He is
gone, and all that the millions of his subjects could do, could
not detain him, for his time had come.
Another source of comfort in our national sorrow is the
character of the King. Everything we know about him goes
to show that he was a man of Christian spirit and high moral
character, and a Bible reader. More than once he declared
that it was his habit to read a portion of Scripture every day.
If you will look at a coin, you will see, after the King’s
name, on the side that has his effigy, the letters "F.D.,”
which stand for "Defender of the Faith.” For over four
hundred years every British sovereign has been so styled.
We have had kings to whom the words could be applied
only in derision. But King George V. converted the official
title into a solemn trust, and defended the faith in the best
way possible for him, or for any man, by believing it, and
by adorning it with a Christian example.
His words, whispered shortly before he breathed his last,
"How is the Etopire?” are a clue to the secret of his great-
ness. All through his reign of more than a quarter of a


century, he was the servant of the Empire. He won and
held the confidence of his people by his unsullied character,
his devotion as husband and father, his steadfast attention
to the affairs of State, his unbroken loyalty to the principles
of the British Constitution, his sympathy with distress, and
his good sense in everything.
Has there been a storm that widowed the wives of humble
fisher-folk in their villages, the King’s expression of his
personal sympathy has been the first to reach them. Have
the blinds been drawn in some colliery district, because of
an explosion in a mine, the King’s message was there to bring
a gleam of light into the darkened homes. Has some great
man in statesmanship, or science, or literature, or invention,
or exploration, or in the Christian pulpit passed away, the
King has been swift to recognise the loss, and to send the
bereaved relatives gracious words of appreciation and
sympathy.
His tact and practical wisdom were strong features in his
character. That is a rare gift, the gift of saying the right
word, and of never saying the wrong. The gift of healthy
common sense is not common, and, history being witness, it
is rare among those clothed with authority. Queen Elizabeth,
strong and brilliant as she was, was not much endowed with
it. Her predecessor, of shady memory, sacrificed the little
she had to sentiment and religious bigotry. For want of it,
King Charles I. lost his head. King James 11., because he
was deficient in this respect, lost his throne and ended his
days in exile. But Queen Victoria had it, and so did King
Edward VII. and King George V. He inherited it from his
father and grandmother. By that great gift, and by his
high character, he served the Empire with distinction.
It was these qualities that made him the centre of the
Empire, and the symbol of its unity. Other sovereigns have
divided us. He united us. One, by his stupidity, lost us the
American States. Another, by his conduct, exposed the


throne to contempt. A third had neither tact nor character.
But King George V., for more than twenty-five years, reigned
over a loyal and united Empire. He was not only its head.
He was also its heart. During his reign at least five
European nations dismissed their kings—Spain, Portugal,
Turkey, Austria, and Germany —but our ancient throne still
stands securely in the love of the people. That is due to
the character and good sense of the King.
Another comforting thought is this: The Empire will not
halt in its world-wide mission. More than once in our
history, the death of the Sovereign has meant civil war,
revolution, bloodshed. But the proclamation of Edward
VIII. has caused no disturbance in the calm waters of our
national life. How is it that our new King has come to
the throne as a matter of course, no one having a thought
otherwise? For two reasons, among others. First, because
his father, and grandfather, and great-grandmother reigned
so well. And second, because his mother, Queen Mary,
had so much to do with his preparation for his high office.
"Happy he
With such a mother! faith in womankind
Beats with his blood, and trust in all things high
Comes easy to him; and, though he trip and fall,
He shall not blind his soul with clay.”
Our heart’s desire and prayer to God for King Edward
VIII. is that he may do that which is right in the sight of
the Lord, and walk in the ways of his father and mother,
and decline neither to the right hand nor to the left, and
"That when the thrones of earth shall be
As low as graves brought down,
A pierced Hand may give to him
The everlasting crown.”
Published by the Presbyterian Board of Religious Education,
T. &C G. Building, Melbourne.
