

crA-f = c
MEMORIAL SERVICE
3|ia iUnat (Sranmta iiajeaty
KING GEORGE VI.
(Pint 3Tlmutrg 6, 1952.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
Sunday, February 17, 1952,
at 3 p.m.




THE SERVICE.
Stye Wnnxm
0 God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
And our eternal home.
Under the shadow of thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure ;
Sufficient is thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Before the hills in order stood,
Or earth received her frame,
From everlasting thou art God,
To endless years the same.
A thousand ages in thy sight
Are like an evening gone,
Short as the watch that ends the night
Before the rising sun.
Time, like an ever-rolling stream
Bears all its sons away ;
They fly forgotten, as a dream
Dies at the opening day.
0 God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Be thou our guard while troubles last,
And our eternal home. Amen.


The people shall remain standing for
Brethren, seeing that it is a custom hallowed by use
throughout the ages to commend to God’s gracious keeping
all his servants departed this life in his faith and fear, we are
gathered here to commend our late most gracious Sovereign
Lord King George ; and to remember with deep gratitude
his life of service and devotion to God and the people
committed to his charge ; and to give thanks to our heavenly
Father for the gift through Jesus Christ our Saviour of the
communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, and the
resurrection to life everlasting.
Jesus said : In my Father’s house are many mansions ;
if it were not so, I would have told you : I go to prepare a
place for you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I
will come again, and receive you unto myself, that where
I am, there ye may be also.
All shall then say together
I am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord.
4


After which shall be sung
Psalm 23.
The Lord’s my Shepherd, I’ll not want,
He makes me down to he
In pastures green ; he leadeth me
The quiet waters by.
My soul he doth restore again ;
And me to walk doth make
Within the paths of righteousness,
Even for his own name’s sake.
Yea, though I walk through death’s dark vale,
Yet will 1 fear no ill;
For thou art with me ; and thy rod
And staff me comfort still.
My table thou hast furnished
In presence of my foes ;
My head thou dost with oil anoint,
And my cup overflows.
Goodness and mercy all my life
Shall surely follow me ;
And in God’s house for evermore
My dwelling-place shall be. Amen.
Then shall the people sit for
Psalm 103: 13-17.


Then shall all stand for
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Our Father, which art in heaven . . .
0 God, before whose face the generations rise and pass
away, the strength of those who labour and suffer, and the
repose of the holy and blessed dead ; we rejoice m the
communion of thy saints. We remember all who have
faithfully lived and died, and especially our late beloved
King. Lift us into light and love ; give us at last our
portion with those who have trusted in thee, and have
striven in all things to do thy will. And to thy name, with
the Church on earth and the Church m heaven, we ascribe
all honour and glory ; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
0 God, who givest power to whomsoever thou wilt, and
in whose hands are the issues of life and of death : we thank
thee for the love and courage and devotion of our late most
gracious Sovereign Lord King George. We leave him in
thy gracious keeping, that the good work which thou has
begun in him may be perfected unto the day of Jesus Christ.
And we pray that his labour and sacrifice may not have been
in vain, but that his spirit may live on in us and in the
generations to come; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
Almighty God, Father of all mercies and giver of all
comfort; deal graciously, we pray thee, with those who
mourn, Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, Queen Mary,
the Duke of Edinburgh, and all the Royal Family, that
casting every care on thee, they may know the consolation
of thy love; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Then shall be sung
Wf* %mtt
For all the saints who from their labours rest,
Who thee by faith before the world confessed,
Thy name, 0 Jesus, be for ever blest:
Alleluya !
Thou wast their rock, their fortress, and their might;
Thou, Lord, their captain in the well-fought fight;
Thou m the darkness drear their one true light:
Alleluya !
0 may thy soldiers, faithful, true, and bold,
Fight as the saints who nobly fought of old,
And win, with them, the victor’s crown of gold :
Alleluya !
0 blest communion ! fellowship divine !
We feebly struggle, they in glory shine ;
Yet all are one in thee, for all are thine :
Alleluya !
And when the strife is fierce, the warfare long,
Steals on the ear the distant triumph-song,
And hearts are brave again, and arms are strong :
Alleluya !
The golden evening brightens in the west ;
Soon, soon to faithful warriors cometh rest ;
Sweet is the calm of paradise the blest:
Alleluya !
But lo ! there breaks a yet more glorious day ;
The saints triumphant rise in bright array :
The King of Glory passes on his way :
Alleluya !
From earth s wide bounds, from ocean’s farthest coast
Through gates of pearl streams in the countless host,
Singing to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
Alleluya !


Then shall the people sit for
Aftibreßa.
Then shall be sung
I vow to thee, my country—all earthly things above —
Entire and whole and perfect, the service of my love ;
The love that asks no question, the love that stands the test,
That lays upon the altar the dearest and the best;
The love that never falters, the love that pays the price,
The love that makes undaunted the final sacrifice.
And there’s another country, I’ve heard of long ago —
Most dear to them that love her, most great to them that
know ;
We may not count her armies, we may not see her King,
Her fortress is a faithful heart, her pride is suffering ;
And soul by soul and silently her shining bounds increase,
And her ways are ways of gentleness and all her paths are
peace. Amen.
Then shall the people sit for
GJlj?
Romans 13 : 1-7,
8


All standing, then shall follow
Sritfratum.
Let us pray:
0 Lord, show thy mercy upon us ;
And grant us thy salivation.
0 Lord, save the Queen ;
Who putteth her trust in thee.
Send her help from thy holy place ;
And evermore mightily defend her.
Almighty God who rulest over all the kingdoms of
the world and disposeth of them according to Thy good
pleasure, and who has now called Thy servant, our
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth to the Throne of this
Realm : Let Thy wisdom be her guide and let Thine arm
strengthen her, let justice, truth and holiness, let peace
and love and all those virtues that adorn the Christian
profession, flourish in her days.
Direct all her counsels and endeavours to Thy glory
and the welfare of her people ; and give us grace to obey
her cheerfully and willingly for conscience sake ; that
neither our sinful passions nor our private interests may
disappoint her cares for the public good.
Let her always possess the hearts of her people that they
may never be wanting in honour to her person and dutiful
submission to her authority ; let her reign be long and
prosperous, and crown her with immortality in the life to
come. Amen.
Lord God of our fathers, bless this Commonwealth of
Australia under thy servant our Queen, that religion and
virtue may season all sorts of men, that there may be peace
within its gates, and prosperity within its borders ; in
peace so preserve it that it corrupt not; in trouble so
defend it that it suffer not ; and whether in plenty or in
want, may all things be so ordered that it may patiently
and peaceably seek thy kingdom and thy righteousness, the
only sure foundation of men and states ; so that this
Commonwealth may continue a place and a people to do
thee service to the end of time ; through Jesus Christ our
only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.


(Hlje National Antljem.
God save our gracious Queen,
Long live our noble Queen,
God save the Queen ;
Send her victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us.
God save the Queen
Thy choicest gifts in store
On her be pleased to pour,
Long may she reign ;
May she defend our laws,
And ever give us cause
To sing, with heart and voice,
God save the Queen
(Hite Hleaaing
10




