

Qlljrtat Qlljurtl} (Catljr&ral. Nr uiraallr
memorial
on tl|p urtastmt of tljr of
iSXB ila|pflty,2Cing (&?nrg? 11
rtl| Jffpfaruarg, 1952
TO THE MEMBERS OF THE CONGREGATION.
I. The solemnity of the occasion demands the deepest reverence
from all taking part in this service Will members of the con-
gregation please maintain the greatest possible silence before the
service begins, and at its conclusion.
2. The parts of the service to be said by the congregation are clearly
marked. Please take your full part in the service.
3. No collection will be taken up. Plates will be found at the doors,
in which donations may be placed to cover the expenses of this
service.
4. A Requiem Eucharist will be celebrated in the Cathedral at 10
a.m. on the actual day of His Majesty’s funeral. Further infor-
mation about this will be published at a later date.


The congregation will stand as Choir, Clergy, Dean and Bishop enter. All
being in their places, the following sentences will be read:
Neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.
Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto
the Lord; whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s. For to this
end Chiist both died, and rose, and revived, that He might be Lord both
of the dead and living.
PSALM 90.
(To be repeated by Officiant and People in alternate verses).
Off. Lord, thou hast been our
refuge: from one generation
to another.
People. 2. Before the mountains were
brought forth, or ever the
earth and the world were
made: thou art God from
everlasting, and world with-
out end.
Off. 3. Thou turnest man to des-
truction; again thou sayest.
Come again, ye children of
men.
People. 4. For a thousand years in
thy sight are but as yester-
day: seeing that is past as a
watch in the night,
etc. 5. As soon as thou scatterest
them they are even as a
sleep: and fade away sud-
denly like the grass.
6. In the morning it is green,
and groweth up; but in the
evening it it cut down, dried
up, and withered.
7. For we consume away in
thy displeasure: and are
afraid at thy wrathful indig-
nation.
8. Thou hast set our misdeeds
before thee: and our secret
sins in the light of thy
countenance.
9. For when thou art angry
all our days are gone: we
bring our years to an end, as
it were a tale that is told.
10. The days of our age are three-
score years and ten; and though men
be so strong that they come to four-
score years; yet is their strength then
but labour and sorrow; so soon pass-
eth it away, and we are gone.
11. But who regardeth the power
of thy wrath: for even thereafter as
a man feareth so is thy displeasure.
12. So teach us to number our days:
that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.
13. Turn thee again, O Lord at the
last: and be gracious unto thy
servants.
14. O satisfy us with thy mercy, and
that soon; so shall we rejoice and be
glad all the days of our life.
15. Comfort us again now after the
time that thou hast plagued us: and
for the years wherein we have suf-
fered adversity.
16. Shew thy servants thy work;
and their children thy glory."
17. And the glorious Majesty of the
Lord our God be upon us: prosper
thou the work of our hands upon us,
O prosper thou our handywork.
Off. Rest eternal grant unto him,
O Lord.
People. And let light perpetual shine
upon him.


THE LESSON.
Revelation 21.1.—1 saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first
heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.
And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God
out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard
a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former
things are passed away. And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold,
I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words
are true and faithful. And he said unto me, It is done: I am Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst
of the fountain of the water of life freely. He that overcometh shall
inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.
THE ADDRESS.
By the Lord Bishop of Newcastle, the Ht. Rev. F. de Witt Batty.
HYMN.
1 Brief life is here our portion;
Brief sorrow, short-lived care;
The life that knows no ending
The tearless life, is there.
2 And now we fight the battle,
But then shall wear the crown
Of full and everlasting
A.nd passionless renown;
3 But He, Whom now we trust in.
Shall then be seen and known;
And they that know and see Him
Shall have Him for their own.
4 The morning shall awaken,
The shadows shall decay,
And each true-hearted servant
Shall shine as doth the day.
5 There God, our King and Portion,
In fulness of His grace,
Shall we behold for ever,
And worship face to face.
6 O sweet and blessed country,
The home of God’s elect!
O sweet and blessed country
That eager hearts expect.
7 Jesu, in mercy bring us
To that dear land of rest;
Who art, with God the Father
And Spirit, ever Blest.
THE PRAYERS.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed by thy name; Thy king-
dom come; Thy will be done; In earth as it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them
that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver
us from evil. Amen.
Minister: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord
Answer: For in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
Minister: Grant unto him eternal rest.
Answer: And let perpetual light shine upon him.
Minister: We believe verily to see the goodness of the Lord.
Answer: In the land of the living.
Minister: O Lord, hear our prayer.
Answer: And let our cry come unto thee.


LET US PRAY.
FOR THE LATE KING.
Fulfil, O Lord, the purpose of Thy love in him who is now at rest, that
the good work Thou didst begin in him on earth may be perfected until the
day of Jesus Christ, Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the Holy Ghost,
one God, world without end. —Amen.
FOR THE ROYAL FAMILY.
Almighty God, Father of all mercies and giver of all comfort: Deal
graciously, we pray Thee, with those who mourn, that casting every care on
Thee, they may know the consolation of Thy love, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.—Amen.
FOR THE NEW QUEEN.
O God, who providest for Thy people by Thy power, and rulest over them
in love: Vouchsafe so to bless Thy servant our Queen that under her this
nation may be wisely governed, and Thy Church may serve Thee in all godly
quietness; and grant that she being devoted to Thee with her whole heart,
and persevering in good works unto the end, may, by Thy guidance, come
to Thine everlasting kingdom; through Jesus Christ Thy Son our Lord, who
liveth and reigneth with Thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, world
without end. Amen.
Unto God’s gracious mercy and protection we commit the soul of His
servant George our King, now departed. May the Lord bless him and keep
him; the Lord make His face to shine upon him and be gracious unto him;
the Lord lift up the light of His countenance upon him and give him His
peace, now and for evermore. Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellow-
ship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.
THE DEAD MARCH. All standing.
HYMN.
1 Jesus lives! no longer now
Can thy terrors, death, appal us;
Jesus lives! by this we know
Thou, O grave, canst not enthral us.
Alleluia!
2 Jesus lives! henceforth is death
But the gate of life immortal;
This shall calm our trembling breath
When we pass its gloomy portal.
Alleluia!
3 Jesus lives! tor us He died;
Then, alone to Jesus living,
Pure in heart may we abide,
Glory to our Saviour giving.
Alleluia!
4 Jesus lives! our hearts know well
Nought from us His love shall sever;
Life, nor death, nor powers of hell
Tear us from His keeping ever.
Alleluia!
5 Jesus lives! to Him the Throne
Over all the world is given;
May we go where He is gone,
Rest and reign with Him in Heaven.
Alleluia!
THE BLESSING. All kneeling.
God save our gracious Queen,
Long live our noble Queen,
God save the Queen.
Send her victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us:
God save the Queen.
The congregation will remain standing while the Bishop and Clergy
leave the Cathedral.
