

Xlfrf P
610
Anbmu’a (Eatbfbral
&nlmn S>nmtt
on tl|? oaafiton of
l|la Una! dranoua Haieatg
2Ctitg (gwgp vi
3flriJ»ag, JFfbruarg 15, 1952


O God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
And our eternal home.
A thousand ages in Thy sight
Are like an evening gone;
Short as the watch that ends the
night
Before the rising sun.
Under the shadow of Thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure:
Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
Bears all its sons away;
They fly forgotten, as a dream
Dies at the opening day.
Before the hills in order stood,
Or earth received her frame,
From everlasting Thou art God,
To endless years the same.
O God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come;
Be Thou our guard while life
shall last,
And our eternal home.
ODriifr of irruirr
The Organist will play the Voluntary:
Prelude on a theme of Tallis Harold Darke.
1 Thomas Tallis.
Funeral Music > . , „ n . C 1
j arr. Martin and Geoffrey bhaw.
The following Hymn shall he sung:
O God, our help in ages past, A
Then shall he said the following Sentences:
Our Lord Jesus Christ said:
Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe
also in /Me. In My Father’s house are many mansions; if it were
not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in Me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth
and believeth in Me shall never die.
Then shall he sung the Psalm;
The Lord is my shepherd: therefore can I lack nothing.
He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me forth
beside the waters of comfort.
He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths
of righteousness, for his Name’s sake.
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy
staff comfort me.
Thou shalt prepare a table before me against them that trouble
me: thou hast anointed my head with oil, and my cup
shall be full.


But thy loving-kindness and mercy shall follow me all the
days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be; world
without end.
Amen.
Then shall he read the Lesson:
Hebrews 11:32—12:2
Then the Choir will sing the Anthem:
f ‘G Saviour of the World”
Gncc
Then shall he given the Address:
The Most Reverend the Archbishop of Sydney.
Then shall he sung the King’s favourite Hymn:
Abide with me: fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide:
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, Oh, abide with me.
Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away;
Change and decay in all around I see;
Oh Thou, who changest not, abide with me.
I fear no foe, with Thee at hand to bless,
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness:
Where is death’s sting 1 ? Where, grave, thy victory?
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me.
Hold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies;
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
In life, in death, Oh Lord, abide with me.
The Congregation reverently kneeling the Minister will say:
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name.
Thy kingdom come.. Thy will be done, in earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses,
As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.


A PRAYER OF THANKSGIVING:
O God, Who are not the God of the dead, but of the living,
and Who dost swallow up death for ever, we thank Thee for the
hope of life that is eternal. We bless Thee for the fellowship of
the unseen; for those who are gone into the world of light; who
see Thy face and , serve Thee still. Their heroism and their
sacrifice, their deeds and their endurance, shall be the heritage of
their children’s children. Therefore with humble hearts, with
grateful memories, and lowly pride, we thank Thee for those
who have departed this life in Thy faith and fear; beseeching Thee
to give us grace so to follow their good examples, that, with them,
we may be partakers of Thy heavenly kingdom:
Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ’s sake, our only Mediator
and Advocate. Amen.
A PRAYER FOR THOSE WHO MOURN:
Almighty God, Father of all mercies and giver of all comfort;
deal graciously, we pray Thee, with those who mourn—our gracious
Queen Elizabeth, Elizabeth the Queen-Mother, Queen Mary,
Princess Margaret and all the Royal Family—that, casting every
care on Thee, they may know the consolation of Thy love; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A PRAYER FOR THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH:
Almighty God, who rulest in the kingdom of men, and hast
given to the British Commonwealth of Nations a great dominion
in all parts of the earth: Draw together, we pray Thee, in true
fellowship the men of divers races, languages, and customs, who
dwell therein, that, bearing one another’s burdens, and working
together in brotherly concord, they may fulfil the purpose of Thy
providence, and set forward Thy everlasting kingdom; through
Jesus Christ Thy Son our Lord, to whom with Thee and, the Floly
Ghost be all glory and dominion, world without end. Amen.
THE GRACE:
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the fellowship of the Floly Ghost, be with us all for evermore.
Amen.
The Congregation standing:
The Dead March from Said , will he played.
The Clergy and Choir shall retire in Procession, the organist
playing the Voluntary.
Chorale Preludes . : Bach
(a) Llark! a voice saith all are mortal.
(b) In Death’s strong grasp the Saviour lay.
EDGAR BRAGG 8c SONS PTY. LTD., PRINTERS, 4 BARKER STREET, SYDNEY.
