

THE MEMORIAL
OF
HIS LATE MAJESTY,
KING GEORGE THE SIXTH
ORDER OF SERVICE
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 15th, 1952
The Service will start at 11.80 a.m. and finish at 12 noon,
when the Two Minutes’ Silence will begin.
CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF
ST. PETER, ADELAIDE.
This Order is intended to be as near as possible in spirit
to that of the Burial Service taking place this day in
St. George’s Chapel Royal at Windsor.




ORDER OF SERVICE
When all are standing in their places the Choir shall
sing : —
I AM the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord:
he that beJieveth in me, though he were dead, yet shall
he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall
never die. (St. John 11: 25, 26).
I KNOW that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after
my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God. Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another (Job 19. 25-27).
WE brought nothing into this world, and it is cer-
tain we can carry nothing out. The Lord gave, and the
Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord
(I Timothy 6. 7; Job 1. 21).
Then shall the people he seated for the reading of the
First Lesson from —
THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON, chapter 3,
by THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE.
Then let all stand and sing these verses from Psalm 16 —
Preserve me, 0 God: for in thee have I put my trust.
The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and
of my cup: thou shalt maintain my lot.
The lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground: yea, I have
a goodly heritage.
I will thank the Lord for giving me warning: my reins
also chasten me in the night-season.
I have set God always before me: for he is on my right
hand, therefore I shall not fall.
Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoiced : my
flesh also shall rest in hope,


or why? thou shalt not leave my sonl in hell: neither
shall thou suffer thy Holy One to see corruption.
1 hou shalt shew me the path of life; in thy presence is
the fulness of joy : and at thy right hand there is
pleasure for evermore.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son; and to the Holy
Ghost;
-Vs it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be:
world without end. Amen.
Then shall the people he seated for the reading of the
Second Lesson from —
I CORINTHIANS, Chapter 15.
by HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
Then let all stand and sing —
The King of love my Shepherd is,
Whose goodness faileth never;
1 nothing lack if 1 am his
And he is mine for ever.
Where streams of living water flow
My ransomed soul he leadeth,
And where the verdant pastures grow,
With food celestial feedeth.
Perverse and foolish oft 1 strayed,
7
But yet in love lie sought me,
And on his shoulder gently laid,
And home, rejoicing, brought me.
In death’s dark vale 1 fear no ill
With thee, dear Lord, beside me;
Thy rod and staff; my comfort still,
Thy Cross before to guide me.
Thou spread’st a table in my sight ;
Thy unction grace bestoweth:
And 0 what transport of delight
From thy pure chalice floweth!
And so through all the length of days
Thy goodness faileth never;
Good Shepherd, may I sing thy praise
Within thy house for ever.


Then shall the Priest say: —•
The Lord be with you
And with thy spirit.
Let us pray.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Gl 1 1 FATHER, which art in heaven, Hallowed he thy
name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done; In earth
as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that
trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation;
but deliver us from evil. Amen.
V. Grant unto him eternal rest.
R. And let perpetual light shine upon him.
In the midst of life we are in death; of whom may
we seek for succour, but of thee, 0 Lord, who for our sins
are justly displeased?
Tet, 0 Lord God most holy, 0 Lord most mighty, 0
holy and most merciful Saviour, deliver us not into' the
bitter pains of eternal death.
Thou knowest, Lord, the secrets of our hearts; shut
not thy merciful ears to our prayer; but spare us, Lord
most holy, 0 God most mighty, 0 holy and merciful
Saviour, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not,
at our last hour, for any pains of death, to fall from
thee. Amen.
ALMIGHT \ GOD, with whom do live the spirits
ol them that depart hence in the Lord, and with whom
the souls of the faithful, after they are delivered from
the burden of the flesh, are in joy and felicity; We give
thee hearty thanks, for that it hath pleased thee to
deliver thy servant George out of the miseries of this
sinful world; beseeching thee, that it may please thee, of
thy gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the number
of thine elect, and to hasten thy kingdom; that we, with
all those that are departed in the true faith of thy holy
name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss,
both in body and soul, in thy eternal and everlasting
glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


ALMIGHTY GOD, Fattier of all mercies and giver of
all comfort: Deal graciously, we pray thee, with those
who mourn, that casting every care on thee, they may
know the consolation of thy love; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
0 HEAVENLY Father, who in thy Son Jesus Christ,
hast given us a true faith, and a sure hope: Help us,
we pray thee, to live as those who believe and trust in
the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, and the
resurrection to life everlasting, and strengthen this faith
and hope in us all the days of our life: through the
love of thy Son, Jesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.
NOW unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the
only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever.
Amen.
Now let all stand for the singing of the following Anthem
(written hy Stanley March ani in memory of King
George V) :
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God; and
there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the
unwise they seemed to die. But they are in peace.
THE ADDRESS
THE LORD BISHOP OF ADELAIDE.
Then let all stand and sing: —
Alleluya! Alleluya! Alleluya!
The strife is o’er, the battle done;
Now is the Victor’s triumph won;
0 let the song of praise be snug.
Alleluya!
Death’s mightiest powers have done their worst,
And Jesus hath his foes dispersed;
Let shouts of praise and joy outburst.
Alleluya!
On the third morn he rose again
Glorious in majesty to reign;
0 let us swell the joyful strain.
Alleluya!


Ho brake the age-bound chains of hell;
The bars from heaven’s high portals fell;
hot liyins of praise his triumph tell.
Alleluya!
Lord, by the stripes which wounded thee,
From death’s dread sting thy servant free,
That he may live, and sing to thee —
Alleluya!
Let all kneel for —
THE BLESSING.
After the Blessing the Congregation will stand in silence.
At 12 noon the Two Minnies’ Silence will he announced
by gunfire from the Parade Ground. During the
Silence there will he sounded
THE LAST POST.
At 12.2 p.m. upon the firing of the second gun there will
he sounded
THE IiEVEILEE.
The Congregation will remain standing in their places
until the Viceregal Party and the Representatives of
Official Bodies have left the Cathedral.


