

CITY OF
TOOWOOMBA
Citizens’
itlcmnrial
His Late Majesty
King George V
to he held on the day of
his burial
TUESDAY
28th JANUARY, 1936
AT 8 P.M.
in the
ROYAL AGRICULTURAL SHOW
GROUNDS
610
IRS'


(Brto ai
HYMN. —O God , our helfi.
fW GOD, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Our shelter from the stormy blast.
And our eternal home:
Under the shadow of Thy throne,
Still may we dwell secure;
Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Before the hills in order stood,
Or earth received her frame,
From everlasting Thou art God,
To endless years the same.
A thousand ages in Thy sight
Are like an evening gone,
Short as the watch that ends the night
Before the rising sun.
The busy tribes of flesh and blood,
With all their cares and fears,
Are carried downward by the flood,
And lost in following years.
Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
Bears all its sons away;
They fly forgotten, as a dream
Dies at the opening day.
O God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Be Thou our guard while life shall last
And our perpetual home.
Amen.
I AM the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord
believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he
whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never
John xi. 25, 26.


I KNOW that my Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:
Whom 1 shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another.— Job xix. 25, 26, 27.
WE brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath
taken away; blessed be the Name of the Lord.—
Job i. 21.
PSALM XC.— Damine, refugium.
[The People are asked to read the alternate verses of
the Psalm with the Minister.]
T ORD Thou hast been our refuge; from one generation to
■ L/ another.
2 Before the mountains were brought forth or ever the earth and
the world were made: Thou art God from everlasting and
world without end.
3 Thou turnest man to destruction: again Thou sayest, Come
again ye children of men.
4 For a thousand years in Thy sight are hut as yesterday: seeing
that is past as a watch in the night.
5 As soon as Thou scatterest them they are even as asleep; and
fade away suddenly like the grass.
6 In the morning it is green and groweth up: but in the evening
it is cut down dried up and withered.
7 Lor we consume away in Thy displeasure: and are afraid at
Thy wrathful indignation.
8 Thou hast set our misdeeds before Thee: and our secret sins
in the light of Thy countenance.
9 Lor when Thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our
years to an end as it were a tale that is told.
10 The days of our age are threescore years and ten and though
men be so strong that they come to four-score years: yet is*
their strength then hut labour and sorrow so soon passeth it
away and we are gone.
11 But who regardeth the power of Thy wrath: for even
thereafter as a man feareth so is Thy displeasure.


12 So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.
13 Turn Thee again, O Lord at the last; and be gracious unto
Thy servants.
14 0 satisfy us with Thy mercy and that soon: so shall we rejoice
and he glad all the days of our life.
15 Comfort us again now after the time that Thou hast plagued
us: and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity.
16 Shew Thy servants Thy work: and their children Thy
glory.
17 And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us;
prosper Thou the work of our hands upon us O prosper Thou
our handy work.
HYMN. —Now the Labourer s Task.
XT OW the labourer’s task is o’er,
' Now the battle-day is past;
Now upon the farther shore
Lands the voyager at last.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the tears of earth are dried;
There its hidden things are clear;
There the work of life is tried
By a juster Judge than here.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping
There no more the powers of hell
Can prevail to mar their peace:
Christ the Lord shall guard them well,
He who died for their release.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
Earth to earth, and dust to dust!
Calmly now the words we say;
Leaving him to sleep in trust
Till the Resurrection Day.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
Amen.


LESSON.— I Cor. XV. (from 51st verse).
Behold i show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but
we shall all be changed.
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump:
for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incor-
ruptible, and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality.
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and
this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought
to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
victory.
0 death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.
ONE MINUTE'S SILENCE
" THE DEAD MARCH."
I HEARD a voice from Heaven, saying unto me. Write, From
henceforth blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: even
so saith the Spirit; for they rest from their labours.—
Rev. xiv. 13
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
[The people are requested to say the Lord’s Prayer
with the Minister.]
Our Father which art in heaven. Hallowed be thy name. Thy
kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not
into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.
ALMIGHTY God, with Whom do live the spirits of them
that depart hence in the Lord, and with whom the souls
of the faithful, after they are delivered from the burden
of the flesh, are in joy and felicity; We give Thee hearty thanks,
for that it hath pleased Thee to deliver this our Brother out of


the miseries of this sinful world; beseeching I hee, that it may
please Thee, of Thy gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the
number of Thine elect, and to hasten Thy Kingdom; that we with
all those that are departed in the true faith of Fhy Holy Name,
may have our perfect consummation and bliss, both in body
and soul, in Thy eternal and everlasting glory: through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
O MERCIFUL God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who is the Resurrection anci the Life; in Whom whosoever
believeth shall live, though he die; and whosoever hveth
and believeth in Him, shall not die eternally; Who also hath
taught us (by His Holy Apostle Saint Paul) not to be sorry as
men without hope, for them that sleep in Him, we meekly
beseech Thee, O Father, to raise us from the death of sin unto the
life of righteousness; that, when we shall depart this life, we
may rest in Him, as our hope is this our Brother doth; and that
at the general Resurrection in the last day, we may be found
acceptable in Thy sight; and receive that blessing, which fhy
well-beloved Son shall then pronounce to all that love and fear
Thee, saying, Come, ye blessed children of My Father, receive
the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world:
Grant this, we beseech Thee, O merciful Father, through Jesus
Christ, our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.
OGOD, Who dost hear the cry of 1 hy children, and numbei
their tears: have mercy upon those whom 1 hou hast
afflicted in Thy love, and enable them to bow before Thee
in humble submission to Thy appointment. 1 hou, who didst
weep over the grave of Lazarus, assuage their tears and grant
them grace to submit to Thy Will, knowing that it is a loving
hand which holds the rod; and grant them, when this life of trial
and separation is ended, to find with him who has been taken
from them a joyful entrance into Thy Kingdom; Who hvest and
reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God, world
without end. Amen.
HYMN. —Nearer Nly God to Thee.
NEARER, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to 1 hee!
E’en though it be a cross
That raiseth me,
Still all my song shall be,
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!


Though, like the wanderer,
The sun gone down,
Darkness be over me,
My rest a stone,
Yet in my dreams I’d be,
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!
There let the way appear
Steps unto heaven;
All that Thou send’st to me
In mercy given;
Angels to beckon me
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!
Then, with my waking thoughts
Bright with Thy praise,
Out of my stony griefs
Bethel I’ll raise;
So by my woes to be *
Nearer, my God, to Tfiee,
Nearer to Thee!
Or if on joyful wing *
Cleaving the sky,
Sun, moon, and stars forgot,
Upwards I fly,
Still all my song shall be,
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee! Amen.
ADDRESS.
HYMN —•Abide with Me.
A BIDE with me! fast falls the eventide;
11 The darkness deepens; Lord, with me abide!
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, 0 abide with me!
Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away;
Change and decay in all around I see:
O Thou who changest not, abide with me!
I need Thy presence every passing hour;
What but Thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who like Thyself my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, O abide with me!


I fear no foe, with Thee at hand to bless;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness:
Where is death’s sting? where grave thy victory?
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me!
Hold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes,
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies;
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee;
In life and death, O Lord, abide with me!
Amen.
OGOD, our Heavenly Father, Lord of Lords and Ruler of
all kingdoms upon earth, give Thy Spirit we beseech Thee
to Thy servant Edward our King, now entering upon his
high office, and assist him with Thy constant Presence; that asjhe
has been appointed to rule by Thy Divine Providence, so being
ever enlightened by Thy Wisdom, he may do Thy Holy Will
in all things, and "may "long reign in righteousness and peace.
And upon us Thy pe ■' 1e pour out a spirit of loyalty and sacrifice,
that we forget not tld j 'ommands of the Lord our God, but may
in all things accomp ; e '\ that whereunto Thou hast sent us.
Through Jesus Christ d: r r Lord. Amen.
GOD SAVE THE KING
GOD save our gracious King,
Long h\ ? our noble King,
God save the King!
Send him victorious.
Happy and gffrious,
Long to reign over us,
God save the King!
Thy choicest gifts in store,
On him be pleased to pour;
Long may he reign.
May he defend our laws,
And ever give us cause
To si i g with heart and voice
God save the King! Amen.
BENEDICTION.
j. a crs.
