

| athedrnl of |)t. 1 ndmtr,
S£tmep, January 28tb, 1936.
Solemn
/Ifoemonal Service
®n tbe Oeatb of
Ibio flDost (Bradoue ilDa|eet^
Iking (Beorge ID.
wbo passcb awas at n. 55 p.m.
on /Ibonbas, sanuar£ 20tb, 1936.
otVfp
¥>)o 1
Authorised for Use in the Diocese by the Archbishop of Sydney.




©rbec of flbemorial Service
TCo be used on XTuesbag, January 28tb
Being tbe bate of tbe TRoval funeral in Bnglanb
of our late beloveb Sovereign Xorb
Iking (seorge ID.
The Procession will move up the Nave in Silence.
The Opening Sentences
J AM the resurrection and the life, said the Lord: he that
believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live :
and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die.—
St. John xi. 25, 26.
KNOW that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall
1 see God : whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another. —Job xix. 25, 26, 27.
W E brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we
can carry nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord
hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord. —
1 Timothy vi. 7. Job i. 21.
Domine, refugium. Psalm xc.
Thou hast been our refuge; from one generation
to another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the
earth and the world were made; Thou art God from ever-
lasting, and world without end.


Thou turnest man to destruction: again Thou sayest,
Come again, ye children of men.
For a thbusand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday:
seeing that is past as a watch in the night.
As soon as Thou scatterest them, they are even as
sleep: and fade away suddenly like the grass.
In the morning it is green, and groweth up: but in the
evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered.
For we consume away in Thy displeasure; and are afraid
at Thy wrathful indignation.
Thou hast set our misdeeds before Thee : and our secret
sins in the light of Thy countenance.
For when Thou art angry all our days are gone: we
bring our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten; and
though men be so strong that they come to fourscore years:
yet is their strength then but labour and sorrow; so soon
paaseth it away and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of Thy wrath: for even
thereafter as a man feareth, so is Thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days; that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.
Turn Thee again, 0 Lord, at the last; and be gracious
unto Thy servants.
O satisfy us with Thy mercy, and that soon ; so shall
we rejoice and be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that Thou hast
plagued us: and for the years wherein we have suffered
adversity.
Show Thy servants Thy work; and their children Thy
glory.
And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon
us: prosper Thou the work of our hands upon us, O prosper
Thou our handy-work.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the
Holy Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be:
world without end. Amen.


Then shall follow the Lesson taken out of the fifteenth
Chapter of the former Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Corinthians.
Then an Anthem shall he sung
JF we believe that Jesus died and rose again, ev’n so them
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
Wherefore comfort one another with these words.
I. Thess. IV. 14, 18. —Goss.
J HEARD a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write,
From henceforth blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord: even so saith the Spirit: for they rest from their
labours.
Then the Archbishop shall say
Lord, have mercy upon us.
A nswer
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
OUR Father, etc.,
Special Collects
God, with Whom do live the spirits of them
that depart hence in the Lord, and with Whom the
souls of the faithful, after they are delivered from the
burden of the flesh, are in joy and felicity; We give Thee
hearty thanks, for that it hath pleased Thee to deliver Thy
servant, George, our late King and Governor, out of the
miseries of this sinful world; beseeching Thee, that it may
please Thee, of Thy gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish
the number of Thine elect, and to hasten Thy kingdom;
that we, with all those that are departed in the true faith
of Thy holy Name, may have our perfect consummation and
bliss, both in body and soul, in Thy eternal and everlasting
glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
O MERCIFUL God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who is the resurrection and the life; in Whom whoso-
ever believeth shall live, though he die; and whosoever liveth,
and believeth in Him, shall not die eternally ; Who also hath
taught us, by His holy Apostle St. Paul, not to be sorry, as


men without hope, for them that sleep in Him ; We meekly
beseech Thee, 0 Father, to raise us from the death of sin
unto the life of righteousness; that, when we shall depart
this life, we may rest in Him, as our hope is Thy servant
doth; and that, at the general Resurrection in the last day,
we may be found acceptable in Thy sight; and receive that
blessing, which Thy well-beloved Son shall then pronounce
to all that love and fear Thee, saying, Come, ye blessed
children of My Father, receive the kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world; Grant this, we beseech
Thee, O Merciful Father, through Jesus Christ, our Mediator
and Redeemer. Amen.
Heavenly Father, Whose Blessed Son Jesus Christ did
weep at the grave of Lazarus, look, we beseech Thee,
with compassion upon Edward our King, upon Mary, our
bereaved Queen, and all the Royal Family now in sorrow
and affliction; comfort them, O Lord, with Thy gracious
consolations; make them to know that all things work
together for good to them that love Thee; and grant them
evermore sure trust and confidence in Thy fatherly care;
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
ALMIGHTY God, Who hast knit together Thine elect
in one Communion and fellowship, in the mystical body
of Thy Son Christ our Lord; Grant us grace so to follow
Thy blessed Saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we
may come to those unspeakable joys, which Thou hast pre-
pared for them that unfeignedly love Thee; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
O GOD Who hast called us to be members of the British
Empire, and bound us together under one King and
one Flag, we beseech Thee to endue our Sovereign Lord
King Edward with Thy heavenly grace, that in all his many
and great anxieties for the peace and welfare of his Domin-
ions, he may find rest and strength in Thee, and be always
consoled and supported by the love and loyalty of his people.
We pray that it may please Thee to spare him to us for
many years to come, and to make us responsive to so great
a privilege by faithful allegiance to his person and his
throne. And may we ever follow in the steps of our Divine
Master, even Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


Then shall he sung the Hymn following:
G OD of our fathers, known of old,
Lord of our far-flung battle-line,
Beneath Whose awful hand we hold
Dominion over palm and pine—
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget-—-lest we forget!
The tumult and the shouting dies;
The captains and the kings depart ;
Still stands thine ancient sacrifice,
An humble and a contrite heart.
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget—lest we forget!
Far-called, our navies melt away;
On dune and headland sinks the fire
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
Judge of the Nations, spare us yet,
Lest we forget—lest we forget!
For heathen heart that puts her trust
In reeking tube and iron shard,
For frantic boast and foolish word—
Thy mercy on thy people, Lord!
Übc Sermon.
The Archbishop of Sydney.
All valiant dust that builds on dust,
And guarding, calls not thee to guard
—Amen


Then shall he sung:-
N OW the labourer’s task is o’er;
Now the battle day is past ;
Now upon the farther shore
Lands the voyager at last.
Father, in Thy gracious keeping,
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.
There the tears of earth are dried ;
There its hidden things are clear ;
There the work of life is tried
By a juster Judge than here.
Father, &c.
There the sinful souls, that turn
To the Cross their dying eyes,
All the love of Christ shall learn
At His feet in Paradise.
Father, &c.
There no more the powers of hell
Can prevail to mar their peace ;
Christ the Lord shall guard them well,
He Who died for their release.
Father, &c.
“Earth to earth, and dust to dust,”
Calmly now the words we say,
Leaving him to sleep in trust
Till the Resurrection Day.
Father, &c Amen.
Übe Benediction
'Ebe “Deab /Ibarcb ” shall then he 'played—all standing.
Then shall the Procession return to the West Door in
the same order as that in which it 'entered the Cathedral.
Woluntarg * flbarcbe jpunebre =* Cbopin
*
