

KUNMUNYA
Seeking for Honey.
Issued by Authority of
the Board of Missions of the Presbyterian Church
of Australia


Report and Impressions of a visit to Kunmunya
by Mr. and Mrs, H. R. Balfour.
By Mr, H. R. Balfour.
Fhoios. by Mr. Balfour.


Kunmunya Mission
Port George IV, Western Australia
T N submitting this report of our visit to Kunmunya, I
do so with the hope that it may prove useful, in the
future, to the Committee in furthering the spread of the
Gospel amongst our Aborigines.
My wife and I left Melbourne by train on the sth June
and arrived in Perth on the 9th. Whilst in Perth I learnt
that a wireless set had been presented to Mr. Love, and I
was asked by the Committee to report on wireless generally
at Kunmunya, and this I willingly agreed to do. At
Broome I had several interviews with the chief and other
wireless experts and from them found that wireless along
the whole north-west coast of Australia is very uncertain
and almost useless in the summer, partly owing to the great
lodes of ironstone there. Mr. Love found this to be the
case and his set was practically useless, so has decided to
return it to Perth.
I called on the Protector of Aborigines and he asked me
to send him a private report on Kunmunya about certain
things. I did this, and I am sure that I was able to satisfy
his mind on the points he raised, but I advised him to visit
the station at the earliest possible moment, as up to that time
he had never been to Kunmunya. When in Japan I
received a letter from him asking my permission to place
part of my report before the Royal Commission appointed
by the West Australian Government. Thinking this would
help our Mission I cabled my consent,
We should have arrived at Broome on June 22nd, but
owing to the weather we were carried on to Derby and
then back, reaching Broome on the 24th.


We waited here for the Watt Lcggatt and left by her
on July S. On board we found everything needful kindly
supplied by Mr. and Mrs. Love. The lugger—about 18 tons
—was seaworthy, well found and very neat and trim,
with a crew of four natives and the efficient skipper Alfred
Brown. At all costs we should keep him in the Mission
employ as he is practically indispensable. We also carried
a native and boy returning from Hospital.
The coast line as far as King Sound is most uninteresting
until after passing Cape Leveque, the light there being the
first one to be picked up by vessels approaching Australia
from Java. On one occasion the Watt Leggatf ran short
of provisions here, and called in and got a bag of flour.
Later she again went in to return the flour, but the light-
housekeeper would not accept it from the Mission, saying the
Church has done so much for them by the A.I.M. sending
them so many books.
From then on the coast line is very fine indeed, and most
fascinating, with hundreds of islands, islets, bays, capes,
channels, rocks, inlets, bluffs, etc., and the colourings of the
various strata of the rocks and hills just beautiful and, with
the added colour of the blue water, made a picture never
to be forgotten. In some places there is a tide of thirty feet,
with very strong currents, which meant anchoring on some
occasions, as it is impossible to steer straight or even to
make headway. We landed on Cockatoo Island for an
inspection of the buildings there by the skipper, as our Mission
has the oversight of them. This island is over five miles long
and is composed of over 90 per cent, pure iron ore, with very
deep water near the cliffs, and will some day prove of potential
wealth to Australia, when trade once again improves. The
scenery here reminded one of the Island of Capri, Italy. We


landed on another island to see the reef, with its wonderful
fish life, shells, and coral colourings, etc.
We went into Walcott Inlet and sailed to the head, about
thirty miles inland, where is situated the Government Abor-
iginal Station called Munya. It is worth mentioning that
this inlet is not shown on the British Admiralty Chart ! We
were given a welcome by the Manager and his wife, Mr.
The Staff: Rev, and Mrs. J. R. B. Love.
Mr. and Mrs. W. B. MacDougall.
and Mrs. Reid, and Mr, Heron, the Assistant. We also met
Mr. Merry (who married Miss Beard, late of Port George
IV), as he had brought in peanuts to be shipped by the
'Wait Lcggatt. We stayed here two days and were shown
around by Mr. and Mrs. Reid, and received every kindness.
The reserve comprises over 700,000 acres, and they run
a good many cattle and grow vegetables, peanuts, etc. Most


of the natives belong to the Ngarin-Yan tribe, and many of
these have to "go bush” to get enough to eat, as the Govern-
ment has cut down the allowance of flour and would not
even send five tons of fertilisers to help the peanut crops !
There were several things about this station that struck us
at once. We noticed that there was no such thing as a
church, a school or a hospital. This was the first place
that I had visited where I knew certain spear points would
be made, so I walked a few hundred yards and found the
natives hard at it making them, so I was able to secure photo-
graphs and get samples of their work. I found afterwards
that Mrs. Reid, although she had been living there for years,
had never seen them making these implements, so little
interest had she in the natives !
On account of the tide the lugger was left high and dry
here, but on the turn of the tide we left on Tuesday after-
noon and, after a good run, anchored in Ngogo Creek early
on Thursday morning. This anchorage is very safe and the
luggers lie here during the summer.
After an early breakfast we started to walk to Kunmunya,
a distance of about three miles. A runner having been
sent ahead to announce the arrival of the Watt Lcggatf, we
were soon met by Mr. Love, who gave us a cordial welcome,
and a little later we came to many men, women and children,
whoi at once adopted us by calling us Father and Mother.
Arrived at the station, we were at once attracted by the
beautiful situation of the gardens and buildings on a flat,
with a creek and fine paper bark trees, with hills around.
All was neat and well laid-out, with the Church as the
central feature.
"We were given a great welcome by Mrs. Love and
children, Mr. and Mrs. MacDougall, and Mrs. Merry. We
stayed here about three weeks and entered into the life of the


place and the people, both white and native, and were most
impressed with the whole atmosphere and efficiency o£ things
in general. We inspected the various buildings, huts,
The Watt Leggall in the Creek at Kunmunya.
machinery, etc. The Church is a fine building, and is airy
and roomy, and in good order and in every way suitable.
It is white, and is kept thus by a material obtained from one
of the hills locally.
The Superintendent’s house is in good repair, but his study
is quite inadequate, consisting of only a small portion of


the verandah enclosed. A detached study and office com-
bined should be erected as soon as possible. The Assistant’s
house is good and roomy. After seeing the Mission houses
in Korea, I think at least something should be done to
improve those at Kunmunya.
Some of the more advanced natives’ houses are good, but
could be improved upon, and also the natives’ huts could be
better if more money was available. The houses of the two
skippers were adequate—Alfred Brown’s being specially neat
and tidy. The general farm buildings are being improved
as time and means permit. A new machinery shed was
being built while we were there. The dispensary I consider
too small, and not well equipped, and a new one should be
provided.
The School was being conducted by Mrs. MacDougall very
efficiently. We attended one of the sessions and we found
the scholars (about sixteen) very eager, apt to learn and
surprisingly quick at their lessons, being specially good at
Scripture, spelling, mental arithmetic, and drawing.
The books sent by Rev. H. C. Matthew proved very useful
and were much appreciated.
One afternoon was devoted to a special concert, provided
by the boys and girls, under the direction of Mrs. MacDougall.
The whole affair was a great credit to all concerned, and
we were delighted at the acting, reciting, dancing, etc., but
the "star piece” that startled the old natives was an opera-
tion of removing a heart, carried out in a dramatic style
by the Red Cross Group !
I was distressed to find that the only place for school
was UNDER the Assistant’s house which, while cool, was
badly lighted, and thus trying for the eyesight. After
talking the matter over with Mr. Love, he agreed that the
most pressing thing required on the station was a school


building, and I have agreed to provide this, and Mr. Love
will order the necessary materials on his furlough this year.
There is an old oil engine in use—very often not in
use, because it is always breaking down—which I consider
ia positively dangerous, so that a new one should be provided
without delay. I had even heard of its bad qualities at
Munya, and Alfred Brown, who knows more about engines
chan anyone there, told me himself that he will not let his
The Skipper, Alfred Brown, and His Crew.
children go near the engine, in case it explodes and injures
them. A good engine is required for grinding corn, etc., for
food, cutting firewood, and cutting wood for building
purposes. It would be a great satisfaction to all concerned
if someone could make a gift of a new, or even a good
second-hand one.
There are several wells—all stoned—and one windmill.
Many vegetables, fruits and grains are grown, including
melons, bananas, pineapples, potatoes, paw-paws, peanuts,
tomatoes, millet, corn, etc., and many new varieties are being


experimented with to find the most suitable for soil and
climate. Much fodder is grown for cows’ and goats’ feed,
including the perennial elephant grass, which attains a height
of about nine feet and is a great standby.
Church is held every morning at about 7 a.m., with an
average attendance through the year of seventy. All listen
Mrs. Love Handing Out Dresses.
most attentively. After the service, Mr. Love goes to the
dispensary and attends to the sick, etc. Mrs. Love looks
after the women and really acts as matron to the station.
Mr. MacDougall serves out breakfast to the pensioners,
workers, children and women with babies. This consists
generally of porridge and bread for breakfast and, at the
evening meal, of bread and soup or bananas, peanuts, treacle,
etc. After breakfast, work is the order of the day, and
work well they do. Mr. MacDougall has "a way” with them


and gets quite a lot done without forcing them. Donkeys
are used for ploughing, etc.
We had the privilege of attending a pre-Communion
service, and also the Communion service, at which between
thirty and forty took part, and a very solemn time it was.
More would have been present, but were away from the
The Camping Party.
station. Mr. MacDougall and Alfred Brown assisted Mr.
Love. At Church on Sundays the sermon and one reading
are in the Worora language, and the rest in English.
Mr, Love has three very keen men, who help him each
day with translation work, and it is fine to see the patience
with which all concentrate to get the exact meanings of
the words and phrases. His right-hand man is a Church
member, and is a fine type and is almost indispensable to
him, yet he is the man who at ait early period tried to kill


Mr. Love, so once again is the transforming power of Christ
exemplified.
I attended several "Cobba Cobbas,” and was most interested
in all that I saw and heard of the customs, etc,, especially
of the acts of courtesy shown amongst themselves and even
extended to us. They also invited me to see their sacred
objects, and the cave in which they were kept. I took
some "Cine” pictures of these, and also of stone implements
being made, and Mr. Love suggests that copies of these
should be sent to the British Museum as a permanent record,
as soon these things will be lost to science for ever. I took
many other photographs, which I trust will stimulate more
interest in this branch of our Church’s work.
A party consisting of Mr. and Mrs. Love, my wife and
myself and three natives went camping for four days. We
rode donkeys and other donkeys were used for packing our
gear, etc. We slept under the stars and thoroughly enjoyed
the whole trip. Prayers were conducted each day before
breaking camp. On this journey we saw something of the
extent of the Mission Reserve, which consists of about
240,000 acres. A good deal of the land consists of rough,
stony hills lightly timbered, but there are also many plains
well covered with grass, in places over our heads while we
rode on the donkeys. There is permanent water, and conse-
quently a good many head of cattle could be carried. At
the present time there are only, I think, a little over 100
head, but money should be supplied so that more could be
bought, thus helping to make the place far more self-sup-
porting and at the same time giving more work to the
natives.
If more cattle are run by the Mission, a few horses or
mules will also be required, as it is obviously impossible to
round up any quantity of cattle with donkeys. Again,


horses do not do very well on that country, so that these
would have to be replaced every few years. All the same,
I think this question should be faced in the near future.
At this time the W. S. Holland had been chartered by the
Aborigines’ Department to remove lepers from Broome to
Darwin, and I dicussed the matter with Mr. Love and, on
Waiting for the “Cobba Cobba” on the Sacred Ground.
my return to Broome, with Mr. Ogilvie, I interviewed several
leading people and was thus able to help in various ways
in this very difficult question. * Mr. Ogilvie did yeoman
service over this, and nearly made himself ill worrying about
it. He is very keen on doing all he can to help our Mission
work, and we are very fortunate in having such a capable
agent.
In passing, I might mention that the W. S. Holland is
getting very old and will not he fit for service much longer.


This is to be regretted, as it keeps quite a number of natives
occupied.
As far as the spiritual work amongst the natives is con-
cerned, I need hardly say that this is most efficiently attended
to by Mr. Love, in a wonderful and capable way, by teaching
them the simple, essential facts of the Gospel of Christ,
while not letting them lose any of their age-long customs
that are not bad. Very seldom does a Church member
"fall away,” because none are pressed to join the Church,
but they ask to become members being led by the Holy
Spirit. Apart from the Church membership, there is
evidence that Christianity is permeating the whole tribe.
For instance, it is a significant fact that they are voluntarily
giving up some of their old heathen rites and customs, and
are beginning to live in a Christian way.
As Superintendent, Mr, Love is kind but very firm with
the natives, I witnessed this in one instance, where I was
invited to attend a "palaver,” in connection with a case of
gross insubordination, but this was handled so well by him
that all was satisfactorily settled without physical force
being necessary.
Our Mission staff is a very happy family, and a good com-
bination for work, I would call Mr. Love an ideal
missionary, and Mr. MacDougall exceptionally suited for
industrial work.
On arrival, Mr. Love told my wife and myself that we
could go anywhere without fear, and we found this quite
true, as the natives are frank and friendly. I used to wander
out amongst the camps and sacred places, and sit with the
men, and I found a markedly Christian atmosphere.
There are about 300 Worora natives in touch with the
Mission, and at times other tribes come in also. While we
were here quite a number of Ngarin-Yan natives arrived one


afternoon, and stayed many days and joined in a "Cobba
Cobba” with the Worora tribe, and most of these came to
Church on Sunday.
As they cannot go hunting for food on Sunday if they
attend Church, a supply is issued to them, and one day we
counted about two hundred and fourteen men, women and
children coming in for their evening meal.
Some of the Communicants.
On one afternoon a sports programme was organised,
and over two hundred natives were present. There were
competitions for spear throwing, fire making, etc. The
longest spear throw was about 130 yards, and fire was made
by a woman in 48 seconds, and by a man in 28 seconds. A
keen interest and rivalry was taken in all events. We gave
prizes to the winners and sweets to all present.
There is plenty of room for extension of work amongst
the Aborigines, as there is a Native Reserve of one million
acres, in which no work of any kind is being done for them.
This is inland from Kunmunya, and could be worked from


there, but rather expensively, on account of the distance of
cartage, etc.; but it does seem wrong that nothing should
be done for our own Aborigines living in such a large area.
To show that they are not altogether "wild,” we met a man
who took ill near that territory and was too weak to walk,
so these bush natives, instead of abandoning him to his fate,
made a rough sling and carried him sixty miles over rough
country to a place where he could get attention.
We left Kunmunya on Thursday, August 3, most of the
men, women and children walking the three miles to give us
a good send-off. We were loath to leave, but all good things
come to an end ! We sailed away on a glorious day, and after
a good run, arrived at Broome on the evening of August 6th,
and had to wait for the tide before we could reach the
pier even in the dinghy. We called at several islands en
route, when the weather was good, but the latter part of
the trip was pretty rough.
Looking back on our visit to Kunmunya, we have the
most happy recollections, as we were overwhelmed with
kindness by Mr. and Mrs. Love and others.
We feel our Missionaries are doing an extremely fine
piece of work and worthy of all the support, prayers and
encouragement our Church can give them.
