

KURANDA
NORTH QUEENSLAND
HOTEL FITZPATRICK




KURANDA, North Queensland
HOTEL FITZPATRICK


KURANDA, North Queensland
The Glory of Kuranda
K.URANDA THE BEAUTIFUL. That is the name that
thousands of tourists to North Queensland have given to
the little suburb of Cairns, situated on the Barron River
two miles above the world-famous falls. It is the name
by which Kuranda is known to thousands of others who only hope
to visit it Some day when brighter dreams come true to make
this one a reality. And there is reason for the wish that they
shall never end their holidaying until they have rested a while
beside the smoothly flowing Barron River, have stood in awed
amazement before the cascading beauty of the Stony Creek falls
on. the rail road to Kuranda, have wandered heedless of time
along,the romantic little Jum Rum Creek, or stood at the foot of
the mighty, roaring volume of snow white water that pitches


Veranda Scene, Hotel Fitzpatrick -Ferns and Orchids.


over the rocks into the gloom and grandeur of the Barron Gorge
For these, mark you, are the famous Barron Falls.
No township in the world has such splendor within its en-
virons. No wonder that those who have come there have gone
away to all the corners of the civilised world and sung its
glories; no wonder that journalists, authors, artists and poets
have tried to express in permanent form the emotions which it
has stirred within them.
Tourists' Playground
Every year more and more tourists come Northward, lured
by the reputation of Kuranda. They are not so articulate as the
artist or poet or writer, but they have built up this great repu-
tation for Kuranda in their own unostentatious way. Did >ou
ever know any intelligent person who had been to Kuranda
remain silent in company when the falls were mentioned, when
the track over the Smithfield Range was referred to, or Mr. F. P
Dodd’s astounding collection of moths and butterflies was in
discussion ?


Another View of Hotel Fitzpatrick, showing Tennis Court


There are many who have not seen everything that they
could have seen in Kuranda, merely because they had planned
their visit too short-sightedly, or permitted it to be planned for
them. You cannot sie everything in Kara id a inside one day;
you cannot even benefit by breathing its tonic like,mountain air
unless you are prepared to- rest for a while. It is not fair to
yourself, or to this wonderful sanitaria-like township; to have to
rush in and oat —to rush about at all. Leave the running to the
world behind you. Come to Kuranda for a tonic, for a restate
enjoy the; best mountain air, the most golden sunshine arid
the richest sight of tropical jungle in the Commonwealth.
The Hotef Fitzpatrick
You can make all your arrangements before you leave home.
The Hotel Fitzpatrick has been catering for tourists from the
S iuth and overseas for many year®, and now there is nothing
that the tourist needs that is not provided It is one of the most


Kiesk at Fairyland Gardens, near Kuranda


up-to-date hotels in the North of Queensland. The accommoda-
tion is almost unlimited; double and single rooms may be
acquired and the spaciousness of the balcony provision is
reminiscent of an ocean going liner’s promenade decks.
From these balconies—all round the building—can be had
the happiest views of the lovely basin with its encircling hills.
Or rather the Hotel Fitzpatrick stands upon a hill which, on all
sides, slopes down to a circular basin. Back of that is the circle
of farther hills whose rippling ridges form a line of tropical
vegetation against the China blue of the sky. In one direction
these hills rise behind the most picturesque railway station m
Queensland; in another direction the railway line pushes its way
beside the Barron River that seems to come suddenly out of the
unknown jungle to the west. Another view is of the undulating
hills that stretch to the southward.
tn the Gctrcfen
From this angle the picture is broken near at h< me by a
fringe of pa m trees, paw-paws and bananas that sun funds the


Barron Falls from Bottom— 790 feet


tennis courts of the Hotel Fitzpatrick. This is a magnificent
view from the back of the hotel. In the immediate foreground,
too, is the famous poincianna tree, the branches of which spread
over half an acre of ground. This lovely acacia-like tree of the
North is a marvel to visitors in the flowering season. Its soft
spreading foliage—green always—blazes into a mass of crimson
or scarlet blooms and for miles one tree enlivens the bush with
its brilliance. Ihe tree in the grounds of the Hotel Fitzpatrick,
however, outrivals all others in the district by its size and mag-
nificence. Beneath, is the fenced off ‘ apartments” of half a
dozen kangaroos, always a source of attraction and delight to
visitors. A common sight is that of dozens of children—all
visitors studying or admiring these ’roos at then wired barri-
cade. In close proximity also is the tropical orchard Ton which
the Hotel Fitzpatrick acquired its reputation as “ the Hoteh with
all the fruit.” This was because all the yea tound the “Hotel
Fitz.” is never without a plentiful supply of fruit: '-f the tv. pical
kind granadillas, watermelons and paw-paws especially. Paw-
paws are the most health sustaining fruit m the world and theie


One of the Pets at Hotel Fitzpatrick


is no lack of them at “The Fitz.” A daily supply of fruit salads,
butter, milk, cream, eggs and vegetables is also assured by the
management’s own dairy and garden In fact there is a rule
that has been summarised as “ straight from the garden to the
table.” Everything is fresh and abundant because there is no
need to economise. This is one characteristic of which the Hotel
Fitzpatrick is proud—■« characteristic that is unique.
In other ways the needs and requirements of \ isitors are
anticipated. The smoke rooms and writing facilities are amongst
the best in the Far North, so are the bathroom (hot and cold
water) and septic conveniences.
The Grace of Nature
The approach to the Hotel is admittedly gorgeous by reason
of a rOw of flowering Tulip trees in front. These tropical trees
exert a special appeal to tourists from the South in the streets of
Cairns, but nowhere have they such brilliance as they have
reached at Kuranda. They grow closely, their tops mingling


Railway Station, Kuranda


with each other, and when in bloom their flame-like flowers
blaze with sensational splendor Around their trunks and boles,
clinging to the veranda posts, or swinging in baskets are a
maze of wild North Queensland ferns, shrubs, creepers and
orchids. There are staghorn, elkhorn, tassel and crow’s nest
ferns; there are pencil orchids, Cooktown orchids, golden
orchids and others. One would think that a lifetime of labor had
gone to the making of this natural bushhouse.
No one can paint in words the charming picture of this en-
trance to the Hotel Fitzpatrick. Yet it is merely as it should be.
At the very gates of the hotel commences a tropical jungle full
of these plan f s and ferns. Walk anywhere from the hotel and
you are surrounded by the magnificent wealth of North Queens-
land timbers from which hangs vine, creeper, fern or orchid.
Over the River
Across the river is the old road to Cairns —the fSmithfield
track along which visitors can be conducted on foot or by car
from the Hotel. They may see the Barron Falls from that side


Some of Mr. Dodd’s Wonderful Collection of Butterflies and
Moths, Kuranda


of the river, or they may obtain a glimpse of the Barron Valley
from Kelly’s Lookout. Here is one of the district’s grandest
outlooks. The Barron Valley with its spreadout cane fields, its
chocolate ploughed lands, its scrub and surrounding hills with
the river winding through; then away in the background is the
coastal range, Murray Prior and Cape Grafton, Fitzroy Island
and the Cairns Inlet. At sea are Green Island, Upolu Bank,
Oyster Cay and other islets of the Great Barrier Reef. If you
have the time you should not miss this view ; it is memorable.
You will probably go to Mrs. Dick’s lovely tea gardens at
“ Fairyland,” a short walk along the railway line or you may go
by rail motor or train; but wherever you go, or whatever you
see at Kuranda, you will surely riot miss a visit to Mr. D< dd.
His collection of moths and butterflies is probably as well
known as it ever will be, but there is also his fine tropical garden
to linger in. His gate is immediately opposite the front door of
the Hotel Fitzpatrick.




Cairns Daily Times
Printers
Spence St., Cairns
