





Kurmala
was opened on
SATURDAY. JUNE Bth. 1935.
by
HIS EXCELLENCY, SIR ISAAC A. ISAACS, P.C, G.C.M.G.,
Governor-General of the Commonwealth.




Kurmala
f HIS new and modern hospital for private and intermediate
patients is the latest addition to the services provided by the Bendigo
and Northern Distrid Base Hospital. Administered and serviced as
a distind unit, Kurmala provides accommodation for 40 patients, sur-
gical, medical and midwifery. Its architedural layout, its spacious
accommodation and its equipment represent the last word in
modernity. This magnificent hospital exemplifies the advance in the
methods of hospital service; it speaks expressively of the march of
surgical and medical science.




Ground Floor
HIS plan indicates the layout of the ground floor. In the centre
are the entrance half offices, visitors' waiting room, stair lobby and
lift. On the right is the operating theatre suite. On the left are
wards and private rooms. At the back are the servery and service
rooms. Architectural skill ensures economical and efficient
service. Patients are warded in rooms well separated from the
activities of the theatre suite and the domestic section of the hospital.




First Floor
r he plan of the first floor follows on the lines of that of the
ground floor. The patients are on the left with the wards having
easy access to spacious balconies. The midwifery sedlion with
vice rooms occupies the right part of the floor, showing by the
series and the work rooms the special care that is taken of baby. In
the centre of the floor to the front is the patients lounge, which
opens on to the sun room.


THE ENTRANCE HALL.
The modern entrance hall of Kurmala gives
immediate indications of attractiveness and
utility. The office faces the entrance doors,
which are of polished and bevelled glass, and
to the right of the entrance is the visitors’
lounge, with access to the balcony. A special
telephone cabinet has been provided for
visitors.


STAIR AND LIFT LOBBY.
Silent lifts, running from basement to roof,
keep in line with the work of noise
tion, no little factor in the consideration of
the restfulness required by hospital patients.
This lobby, next to the entrance hall, pnv
vides the means of quick access to the upper
floors.


SINGLE BED WARD.
With its telephone, wireless, dressing
table, easy chair, wall mirror and other
cessories, the single bed ward gives the ap-
pearance of the well equipped sick room at
the home rather than a ward of a hospital.
This ward is directly off the balcony on to
which the patient can be wheeled in the
bed if necessary. Truly a home away from
home.


TWO BED WARD.
For those who desire companionship the
two bed ward provides splendid accommo-
dation. Here again the furniture departs
from the routine hospital type, A choice of
two wireless stations is available for patients
here similar to that of other patients. Here
too, there is seen the special call system that
patients have for an immediate call for nurse.


THE FOUR BED WARD.
Four bed wards are specially provided
for intermediate patients. Separate ward-
robes for each patient, combination dressing
tables, wireless, form portion of the equip-
ment of these wards. If necessary each bed
can be completely screened off from the
others, in fact four separate cubicles can be
arranged at any time. This is accommoda-
tion par excellence for intermediate patients.


THE PATIENTS’ LOUNGE.
The patients’ lounge, with its comfortable
suite, provides that change from the ward
that is essential with convalescent patients.
Again the atmosphere of the home is felt,
allowing for pleasant social chats with other
patients producing mental recreation and
stimulus to hasten the return of health.


PATIENTS’ BALCONY.
One of the five balconies for patients’
use. Broad and spacious, these balconies over-
look Bendigo. Lounges and easy chairs are
there to make comfortable the time that pat-
ients spend enjoying one of Bendigo's glorious
sunny days. These balconies emphasise an-
other measure of comfort for the inmates of
Kurmala.


THE SOLARIUM.
Something special is seen in the solarium.
Completely glassed in, this section of one
balcony provides protection against the cold
winds of Winter, yet allows patients to
feel the warm rays of the sun when it breaks
through Winter’s clouds. This solarium is
reached by lift, and protection against drau-
ghts and wind from ward to solarium is
provided.


THE NURSERY.
The nursery is where baby lies in the
bassinet resting himself and mother too. This
is baby's domain. No visitors may enter
the nursery. They may peep at baby
through the plate glass window, but they
must not disturb him. Baby has a special
balcony all for himself, where on sunny days
he too may enjoy God s glorious sunlight.
Baby is a little king in his own home. In
Kurmala he is also a king.


THE OPERATING THEATRE.
The operating theatre breathes an atmos-
phere of efficiency. The latest and best of
equipment is provided here. A modern
operating table with special appliances,
shadowless lamp, emergency lighting, heat
radiation from ceiling, form part of this splen-
didly equipped theatre. The theatre suite
has been designed and equipped to give the
surgeon the greatest possible assistance.


THE X-RAY PLANT.
The X-Ray is becoming increasingly im-
portant in the work of surgeons and physi-
cians. The Commonwealth Health Labor-
atory with its fully equipped X ray plant is
within the hospital grounds. The advantages
of this Laboratory to patients in Kurmala can
be readily estimated. In addition, a portable
X ray plant will be available for use in the
wards of Kurmala,


THE SERVERY.
The servery is where the appetising
meals for patients will be prepared. Hot
presses, refrigerators, stoves, racks for food
trays, electric food lifts, polished urns for tea
and coffee convey their own messages of
culinary efficiency. This is a department of
its own where experts will cater for the food
requirements of patients. Special diets, in
addition to ordinary diets will be prepared
with skill and care and daintily served.


BOILER HOUSE.
Kurmala requires a plentiful supply of hot
water, of hot and cold sterile water, of hot
water to be pumped through the extensive
system of hot water radiation for heating
purposes throughout the building. The boiler
house conveys some idea of the requirements
of Kurmala. It does convey definitely, that
service in Kurmala has been the foremost
thought in the organisation of this modern
hospital.


THE SUN ROOF.
From here a magnificent panoramic view
of Bendigo can be seen. This promenade
extends the full length of the building, blocked
only in those places where the lift towers rise
above in readiness for further extensions that
will come when the efficiency and service of
Kurmala becomes known in Bendigo and
District,


The March of Progress
Jn 1853 the first Bendigo Hospital was established. It was built on
Hospital Hill, in Mackenzie Street, and was a building of slab and
weatherboard. The pioneers who built it realised that the expansion
which must take place would be impossible with this building, so
in 1858 the foundation stone of the Bendigo Hospital on the present
site was laid. In the following year the Hospital was ready to re-
ceive patients. The selection of the site and the solid foundation upon
which the hospital was built indicated that the pioneers of the Fifties
visualised the hospital requirements of the future. They saw that
the march of time would bring many changes, so with a great spirit
of courage, enterprise and citizenship, they started, for future genera-
tions, the Bendigo Hospital. The Board of Management of the


Hospital, though its personnel has changed with years, has con-
tinued the magnificent work of the pioneers. Members have caught
the enthusiasm of their predecessors and have carried on the work
so carefully and efficiently done in the past. In 1935 the Bendigo
Base Hospital is the surgical and medical centre for Bendigo and the
North. Almost every variety of hospital service is available and it
is classed among country base hospitals as one of the best in Victoria
From a humble beginning it has progressed with the times. It has
given to thousands, during the years, a splendid service. In its 82
years of operation it has kept religiously to its motto :
“ Fidelis.’'


HOSPITAL IN 1860.


HOSPITAL IN 1935.


BENDIGO & NORTHERN DISTRICT BASE HOSPITAL
BOARD OF MANAGEMENT. 1935.
President :—J. A. Walshe. Esq., J.P.
Vice-Presidents:—
B. Hyett, Esq. Mayor of Bendigo. Mayor of Eaglehawk.
Hon. Treasurer: —J. J. Stanistreet, Esq.
Board of Management:—
B. Hyett. Esq.
J. Denton, Esq., J.P.
A. Whitehead, Esq., J.P.
J. J. Stanistreet, Esq.
W. Trevena, Esq.
G. Moore, Esq., J.P.
B. Rogers, Esq.
F. Levy, Esq.
J. Bruce, Esq.
A. E. Wallis, Esq.
J. H. Stewart, Esq., J.P.
Dr. H. R. Catford, M. 8., B.S.
Hon. G. V. Lansell, M.L.C.
J. A. Walshe, Esq., J.P.
Dr. P. R. Slater. M. 8., B.S.
Matron :—Miss A. M. Esler.
Superintendent and Secretary ;—Dr. G. Fenton, M. 8., Ch.B.


KURMALA COMMITTEE.
President: —J. A. Walshe, Esq.. J.P.
Hon. Treasurer: —J. J. Stanistreet, Esq.
Committee: —
J. Denton, Esq., J.P. J. H. Stewart, Esq., J.P. Dr. P. R. Slater, M. 8., B.S.




PR NT E D IN BENDIGO BY
CAMBRIDGE PRESS,
ART PRINTERS,
HARGREAVES STREET


