

Leslie william smith.
...A TRIBUTE




LESLIE WILLIAM SMITH
A Tribute
1899 - 1950




Leslie william smith
A TRIBUTE
1899 - 1950


His Life was Gentle and the
Elements so mixed in him
That Nature might stand up
And say to all the world
“THIS WAS A MAN.”


MR. LESLIE WILLIAM SMITH.
Late Managing Director.




FOREWORD BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RIGHT HON. R. G. MENZIES, C.H., K.C., M.P.
HE request that I should write the foreword to this
brochure is one to which I respond with the greatest
pleasure. Indeed, I feel singularly privileged to have
the opportunity of acknowledging the contribution to
Australian industry made by the man whose initiative established
and developed what has grown to be the largest wool-scouring
plant in the Southern Hemisphere. An industry of such magni-
tude as L. W. Smith Pty. Ltd. must of necessity make its mark
on the economy of Australia and in particular that of Tasmania
where the major part of its plant is located.
That the success of this enterprise was due very substantially
to the fine personal attributes of the late L. W. Smith cannot
be doubted. Although I did not know him intimately, I did
know him sufficiently well to be able to assess his qualities of
leadership which, allied to his ability to know and respect his
fellow men, equipped him to make a success of the enterprise he
directed.
L. W. Smith’s interest in the problems of his employees and
his willingness to hear their point of view, together with his keen
sense of responsibility for their welfare, were big factors in the
happy relations which existed between himself and them. The
fact that from a humble beginning this firm was built up in a
comparatively short time to an annual turnover of millions speaks
well for the pioneering courage and zeal of free enterprise.
Canberra.
sth July, 1951.


DEDICATION
9 I is hardly necessary to erect a monument to the
achievements of my father, as he has already done
so in the form of this industry, which he pioneered
and firmly established from a modest beginning.
I am anxious to shore in some form to his many
friends, clients, and connections overseas, what he
created, and the only practical way is through the
medium of this Brochure, which I wish to be re-
garded as a tribute to his tremendous energy. I, as
his elder son, was at all times closely in contact with
him, and I came to admire immensely his fme sense
of fairness. He was always my father and friend, but
nevertheless treated me as he would any of his
executives or employees and I now endeavour to
carry on from where he left off, completing gradually
step by step the plans for the future so well and
wisely laid by him, and which we had so often dis-
cussed together in the past.
ANDREW F. L. SMITH


MR. ANDREW F. L. SMITH,
Managing Director.
Elder son of Mr. L. W. Smith


Mrs. L. W. Smith.
Director.
MR. A. A. NEWTON,
Director.
MR. NEVILLE TAN SMITH,
Director.
Younger son of late L. IF. Smith.




MR. G. P. SAYERS,
Director.
MR. JOHN KELLETT,
Director.
MR. J. W. J. GRISTON,
Director.


L. W Smith Pty. Ltd
MR. ANDREW THOMSON,
Manager Shipping Division.
MR. S. N. HOUSTON,
Sales Manager.
MR. G. W. MUNRO,
Wool Executive.
CAPT. LAN CARMICHAEL,
Master M.V. “Merino."
MR. NORMAN STRACHAN,
Manager of Brisbane Branch.


Executive Officers 1951
MR. A. S. GEE,
Manager Wool Department.
MR. A. G. TURNER,
Manager of Brick and Pipe
Works at Lai robe.
MR. D. ROBINSON,
Works Manager,
St. Leonards
Fellmongery.
MR. ERIC DUNPIIY,
Secretary.
MR. ROD HOUSE,
Pnrchasing Officer.




LOCATION MAP




A TRIBUTE
T is with pleasure that I subscribe to the printing of
this brochure which is a memorial to the founder of
the firm of L. W. Smith Pty. Ltd.
Industrial expansion to satisfy Australian economy
is a matter that claims the attention of all intelligent citizens and
this brings with it problems which effect the security and liveli-
hood of all Tasmanians.
The late Mr. L. W. Smith grasping its meaning and with
courage and sound judgment set about developing an industry of
magnitude and one of great economic significance and value to
Tasmania, in particular, and Australia in general.
Its development can be truly described as one of the great
romances of industry, starting as it did from a small beginning
and developing in a comparatively few years to one of the largest
wool processing firms in Australia.
Successful industries are built up by men of purpose, in-
genuity, integrity, courage and unceasing energy. The late Mr,
Smith possessed these characteristics in no small measure and his
deeds will carry inspiration for the members of the firm and the
community at large,
Mr. Smith was well known for his generosity to the needy
and his philanthropic outlook generally. Many have cause to
mourn his loss and Tasmania is the poorer at the passing of one
of its most able captains of industry, a man who was rich in
experience of trade and commerce.
It is my sincere hope that the firm will continue to prosper,
and expand, and so ensure a lasting monument to his memory.
Premier’s Office,
Hobart,
December, 1950.
Premier.


A small beginning to a great industrial
achievement.
THE FIRST FACTORY OF L. W.
SMITH PTY. LTD.




THE GREAT INDUSTRIAL
ACHIEVEMENT, 1951.
The modern plant of L. W. Smith Ply.
Ltd., Kings Wharf, Launceston, Tas-
mania, with Company's vessel, M.V.
“Merino,” in the foreground.


AERIAL VIEW OF MAIN WORKS.




LESLIE WILLIAM SMITH
THE art of biography, however briefly called upon, as in the present mono-
graph, insists not only that what is written is strictly relevant to an in-
dividual but that it uses a concept of character based on the facts, and little
by little assembles a true human picture of the subject of the biography. For
life plot (apart from adventitious influence) is almost wholly determined by
character; normal surroundings circumstances are the material which that
character shapes or spoils. Truth is as a preponderance of the facts declares.
History informs us that at rare intervals individuals appear who very
much more than in ordinary identify themselves with life; who are not merely
in life, but of it; who leave their stamp upon it by very force and richness of
character, often to so marked degree that they change the very pattern of
their times. Having an intuition of the latent powers within them they early
hitch their waggon to a star and make its destiny their own. They see what is
to be done, what is within their province and power to do, and this they make
their life task; nor are they to be discouraged or dissuaded, though their
heavens fall.
Such a man was Leslie William Smith, founder of the present-day wool
manufacturing business of L. W. Smith Pty. Ltd., Gleadow Street, Launceston,
Tasmania, and Belmont, Queensland, Australia. Not only did he possess
natural abilities of a very high order, fortified by an intense conviction of his
allotted role in the economic life of the Australian Commonwealth, but, more
rarely still, he was one of those stout souls who nourish feelings of kindly
human sentiment which are hardly ever allowed expression in what is popularly
known as big business. To the end he held fast to tender traits of character
hidden from all but those favoured with that close degree of friendship in every
day association, which alone is able to perceive the inner life behind the mask
of public profession. Because, as has been said, he was of life, no less than
a part of it, he felt the flaws in its fabric every bit as keenly as those less gifted
and fortunate f than himself, and his warm, kindly nature responded invariably
in practical but unassuming terms. No one, perhaps, will ever quite know the


full of his benefactions; for they were, for the most part, anonymous. It was
not enough that he was just and generous to those in his employment; the
fibres of his good will searched everywhere for expression.
Something of all this can be read by the discerning in the likeness of him
in these pages. It is a shrewd, kindly face: the face of a man who could meet
steel with steel, but was eager to sheath the blade when the moment came, and
hold out the hand of friendship. For a captain of industry, indeed, it is an
astonishingly mild face. It seems to hold the mean between the worlds of the
spiritual and the material. Those who knew the man say it is a true portrait.
Alder has said that a genius is a person who has a plus quality with the courage
to use it. On that basis L. W. Smith may take his stand. It is to be read in
all that he did and in all that he looked.
Leslie William Smith was born at Kingston, County Cork, Ireland, on
July 9, 1899, and was educated at Berwick-on-Tweed Grammar School, Scot-
land. His father, Captain F. J. C. Smith, R.N., of Margate, Kent, England,
was a close friend of Sir Henry Galway, who insisted that the boy’s unusual
qualities foreshadowed a remarkable future in the King’s Service. To this end,
he attached L. W. Smith to his staff, on taking up his appointment in 1913 as
Governor of South Australia. On arrival in Australia, the boy continued his
studies uninterruptedly for two years, when World War I intervened. Then
in his eighteenth year, he joined the A.I.F. on July 31, 1916.
Although Sir Henry Galway was inwardly perturbed by this so youthful
essay in adventure, he was outwardly delighted with his protege’s initiative
and courage. As we are told: “The massive gates of circumstance are turned
upon the smallest hinge.’’ In France the young man was wounded and was
sent to England to convalesce. In 1919, presumably approving life in the col-
onies and foreseeing the opportunities there for resolute enterprise, he went
to Tasmania. Here he was invited to join the staff of the Governor, Sir F. A.
Newdigate-Newdigate; and once again the door to advancement in the service
of the Crown was opened to him.
But Leslie Smith refused the opportunity, attractive though it was. He
felt his own peculiar destiny stirring within him, and, while zealously carry-
ing out his staff duties, nevertheless knew that his life task lay elsewhere. He
was impelled to a close study of world economy, with emphasis upon that of
Australia and Tasmania, and eventually came to the conclusion that a future
rich with promise was to be found in the Commonwealth Wool Industry.


Accordingly on February 3rd, 1922, he joined the staff of Wilcox, Mof-
flin Ltd., Launceston, Tasmania, and settled down to master the intimate details
of the wool and skin business. Having served the Company with devotion for
two years, during which time he showed excellent personal results, he commen-
ced a wool and skin partnership business, under the style of L. W. Smith and
G. W. Martin. Appropriately and amusingly, the firm’s first produce was sold
to advantage under the Account Sales name of G. Luck. No happier augury
could have been imagined. The partnership prospered from the first. During
business operations—one might say, more truly, despite them; for this was an
anxious, exacting time of trial and error Leslie Smith, in 1925-26, began the
first of those experiments in fellmongering which were to place his feet firmly
on the ladder of success.
These experiments were continued into the late hours of the night, and,
more often than not, into the early hours of the morning. They were evidence
of the intense conscientiousness which throughout distinguished his exceptional
career, and formed the solid foundation of the present Company’s world wide
reputation for its products of slipe wool,scoured skinwool and pickled pelt. On
the London market to-day, the L.W.S./Tasmania has a name second to none for
its skinwool products; and in the United States, the L.W.S./Tasmania Pickled
Pelt is classed “A” grade in the leather trade. It is perhaps, not too much to
say of these experiments that they were as nearly individual as might be. Genius
must trust in itself; it is not subject to ordinary rules.
In 1928 the partnership was dissolved by mutual and friendly consent,
and Leslie Smith commenced business in his own right and on his own account.
He took modest premises on the Esplanade, Launceston, at the nominal rental
of 7/6d. weekly. Now, for the first time he was free to open wide the windows
of his imagination. Characteristically he prospered.
One is tempted to believe that the Fates sometimes become resentful
of those who storm them too boldly. There came now a testing time. In 1929
the Tamar River flooded its banks. The basement of Leslie Smith’s premises was
flooded, with much damage to the produce stored there. The financial loss
was considerable, since such a happening was rare, and scarcely to be expected,
hence there was insufficient insurance cover. Recovery came only by dint of
tremendous hard work and a studied concentration.
One of the most characteristic traits related of Leslie Smith was his
courage in adversity. In the years immediately following, he taxed to the full
his powers of endurance. He penetrated the rugged mountain districts of Tas-
mania, buying all manner of furred skins, wool, sheep-skins, tallow, and so on,
from the settlers and trappers he encountered. These journeys often entailed


many miles of hard tramping through knee-deep snow to reach his objective.
Genial, but determined, he would drive a hard bargain, and struggle back to his
car with a 60-lb. pack of purchases on his back. He would often make as many
as three such foot journeys in a single night.
Such ventures naturally carried their risks. On one occasion, being un-
able to start up the engine of his car, and endeavouring to find where the
trouble lay, his arms became saturated with petrol, the moisture content of
which remained constant in the snow-cold air of the mountains. In an effort
to be of assistance, his travelling companion thoughtlessly lit a match close
to the bonnet of the car and in a flash the petrol fumes ignited. With great
presence of mind Leslie Smith plunged himself into the snow, but not before
his arms had been badly burnt. He suffered great pain for some time after-
wards, but providentially recovered.
Some three years later, Leslie Smith grasped the first of what might be
called side opportunities offering interest and experience, culminating in an
advantageous sale, in the purchase of the Cooee Tannery. A further example was
his purchase in 1938 of the Johnstone Tanning Company. These operations
not only informed him on the manufacturing side but helped to stabilize his
finances.
Meantime, in 1933, he commenced operations in fellmongering and the
excellence of his products was quickly recognised in Tasmania and on the
Mainland. Throughout he had continued his research and experiment, wholly
on his own lines and initiative, as was his way; in result, he produced a very
wonderful scouring soap which gave to his wool products a beautiful colour and
soft handle. He thereupon launched into a subsidiary company to which he
gave the name, Brycel Products. In 1936 he commenced woolscouring opera-
tions; and, in the year following, he introduced his first carbonising unit.
So far, so good. Despite this steady progress, however, he was as yet only
feeling his way. Already he sensed something of what was to come and with a
sure instinct he began to prepare himself. In June, 1937, L. W. Smith, Wool
Merchant, was formed into a Proprietary Limited Company. The need for ex-
pansion was obvious. His fertile imagination reached out to the years ahead,
when his products would flow from a great modem factory of his own design-
ing into all the countries of the world, with himself at the centre of a flourish-
ing industrial empire. He found his dream site in the unused Rapson Tyre
Factory in Gleadow Street, Launceston; a magnificent position adjacent to the
Tamar River Cargo Shipping, with location on King’s Wharf. Very shortly


his plant was installed in these new surroundings and he moved into produc-
tion anew. He expanded his plant as opportunity offered.
It was well timed. Came 1939 and World War 2, marking the high
tide of life’s occasion. At once he undertook extensive Australian Government
contracts for processing raw wool. In a very little time the undertaking as-
sumed colossal proportions; ultimately accounting for from 1,000 to 1,500 bales
per week, on behalf of the British Imperial Wool Purchase Scheme, through
its Commonwealth of Australia Branch, the Central Wool Committee, and sub-
sequent post-war transitional substitute, the Australian Wool Realisation Com-
mission, acting for, and on behalf of, the Joint Organization or United King-
dom-Dominions Wool Disposals Ltd. It is worth noting that Leslie Smith alone
gave help to the Government in the post-war period, by continuing a major por-
tion of his war production for the treatment of Stockpile Wools, which the
Joint Organisation wished to market to advantage through the recognised Pub-
lic Auction channels. Worth noting, also, that during his firm’s association
with the Imperial Government not one single complaint was received.
On the other hand, eulogies were continually forthcoming. In 1939 Les-
lie Smith had joined the Tasmanian State Wool Committee, which added to
the intimacy of his personal contacts. The late P. J. Murphy, Chairman of the
Commonwealth Central Wool Committee, then Chairman of the Australian
Wool Realisation Commission, frequently sought his advice; he was held in the
highest regard by the late Mr. Norman Yeo, wartime Executive Member of the
Central Wool Committee, and, later, Acting Chairman of the Australian Wool
Realisation Commission. And it is the fact that Mr. F. S. Arthur, General Man-
ager of Joint Organisation, London, considered the wartime association of Les-
lie Smith with the Imperial Wool Purchase Scheme of such significance that
he personally concerned himself, during his visit to the Commonwealth, in the
post-war arrangement of continued contracts in Australia. Such things speak
eloquently for themselves. They imply not merely admiration for his business
genius, but recognition of the rectitude of the principles which his life exhibited
to perfection.
Those principles had found expression in circumstances which might
well have caused the stoutest heart to falter. As in 1929, so in 1943 when
L. W. Smith Pty. Ltd., was just swinging into full war production the Fates
struck another heavy blow; this time, not with water but with fire. The plant
was practically gutted. Damage was assessed at £150,000.
Of the phases through which Leslie Smith passed in these anguished
moments; his sufferings, mental, physical and spiritual; we can but guess. What


we do know is that in his determination to keep faith with his undertaking to
the Government and his country’s need, he girded himself to such effect that sal-
vaged and repaired scouring and carbonising machines were running within
three months. If that were not miracle enough: by the end of the year the
works had been completely built on modern lines. Only those close in his
confidence knew the tremendous personal cost this entailed on him. From this
point his health was permanently impaired. Yet his satisfaction must have been
immense. He had taken up the gauge and come from the battle with flying
colours. We may not question. As has been said of others of his peculiar gifts,
one cannot separate the work of such a man from his motive.
Leslie Smith continued to press forward. Each succeeding year found its
monument to his insatiable energy and restless acumen. In 1946-1947 he built
the modern St. Leonards Factory, some nine miles out of Launceston, overlook-
ing the valley of the North Esk River with its plentiful supplies of good water
for use in the treatment of sheepskins, under a secret scientific process of fell-
mongering and scouring. In the same period, combing and carding machinery
were purchased as a further addition to the Company’s plant.
So, at long last, he fulfilled his ambition to manufacture Wool-tops; a
branch of the wool industry for which he had the utmost respect. He used to
remark that a high standard Wooltop was the very foundation of good spinning
and weaving; it guaranteed the consumer concerning the goods he would ulti-
mately wear in that particular held.
Parenthetically, the facts amply bear him out. The demand for the
LWS/Tasmania Wooltop is constant. It is, indeed, somewhat remarkable—and
particularly in view of the short period of establishment and production to
find how quickly the spinning industry in Australasia, Canada, Europe and
America, has acclaimed it. Bradford, the home of Topmaking, after examina-
tion of this product of L. W. Smith Pty. Ltd., praises it highly in an official re-
port.
In 1948, Leslie Smith established the L. W. Smith Pty. Ltd. Engineering
Department, incorporating Machine Shops and Foundry. This move not only
relieved him of his hitherto dependence on outside sources for his repairs and
maintenance, but actually brought him custom in special work for repair and
manufacture. Achievements here have been outstanding. The set-up of the
modern plant is such that complete carbonising units have been made on the
premises to the extent of 90 per cent, of the component parts involved.
Satisfactory as all this was, an outstanding problem remained, and Leslie
Smith solved it in one of those characteristically wide gestures for which he was


noted. The problem was to overcome the terrific bottleneck in the movement
of wool from the Australian mainland, from which his company obtained most
of its wool for treatment, and from which the question of shipping cargo space
has always been an impossible one. Leslie Smith entered into negotiations for
the building of his own vessel, the M.V. “Merino.” This was unquestionably
the crowning triumph of his career.
The vessel arrived at Inspection Head, Tasmania, from Glasgow, on the
last day of 1949. From that time onwards the freighting disability between
Tasmania and the Mainland vanished, and the products of L. W. Smith Pty.
Ltd. flowed evenly into all avenues of world trade. The name of the vessel
was happily chosen, for the merino sheep, as everybody knows, gave us our
commercial foundations, and Australian merino wool is a world leader in its own
sphere of textile fibres.
Reviewing Australian Wool history, and having before us the relating
achievements of Leslie Smith, an ironical past tempts us to brief retrospect. For
it is on record that when Henry Hopkins, founder of the wool trade in Tas-
mania, arrived in Hobart about 1820, he found that the settlers were in the
habit of burning their wool to get rid of it. Consequently, when he proposed
to purchase it he was able to do so at a very low rate. He shipped his pur-
chases to England and laid the foundations of a large personal fortune.
In 1949, Leslie Smith purchased the Dulverton Brick Works near Laun-
ceston; a further consolidating move, for it brought him building independence
not only in extensions to his works, but enabled him also to erect houses for
his employees, where needed. In this year, too, he forged still another link in
his chain of world wool production by acquiring the Belmont Wool Scour on
the outskirts of Brisbane, Queensland. Here, he had in mind the importance
of supplying the world’s wool trade with the Queensland specialty types of semi-
processed types of merino wool, thus completely balancing the flow into the In-
ternational Wool Manufacturing Trade of all grades of wool, from the coarsest
descriptions up to the softest and finest produced within the Australian Com-
monwealth. He was, in short, determined to give the textile trade semi-pro-
cessed wool suitable for every requirement, from cashmeres to carpets. And so
he planned for the Belmont Works in Queensland a modern plant on the lines
of that at his Gleadow Street Works in Launceston.
Leslie Smith died in 1950. His dreams were destined to glorious fulfil-
ment, and it is idle to speculate on what more he might have accomplished had
he lived. He was a remarkable man, cast in a remarkable role, and he has


left us a real understanding of his labours. He knew fervour, clearness and
energy, and he never consented to falsify his inner nature even in his utmost
travail.
Innumerable tributes have been paid to the late Leslie William Smith,
and typical of which is that from The Tasmanian Chamber of Manufactures,
viz.:
“Mr. Smith was undoubtedly one of the most outstanding men
which this State, and indeed the Commonwealth, has produced.
This State will indeed be fortunate if it ever produces another of
his ability and quality. The whole country is indeed the poorer
by his passing.’’
His mantle has fallen on his elder son, Andrew F. L. Smith, who has
already shown his qualities of leadership, as derived from the precept and prac-
tice of his father.
As years go, Leslie Smith died a young man. And, yet, as the poet
Bailey so beautifully wrote:
“We live in deeds, not years; in thoughts, not breaths;
In feelings, not in figures on a dial.
We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives
Who thinks most-feels the noblest—acts the best
The Wool Trade pays tribute to one of its greatest sons.


L. W. SMITH PTY. LTD.
A Photographic Record
of
Progress & History




CARBONISING SECTION.
VIEW MAIN
CONDITIONING FLOOR.


No. 5 LINE CARBONISING SECTION.
DRYING UNIT CARBONISING SECTION.


INTERIOR—No. 2 BULK WOOL STORE.
No. 2 WOOL STORE-
USED FOR RAW WOOL
AWAITING TREAT-
MENT, AND AWAIT-
ING SHIPMENT.


THE FINISHED CARBONISED PRODUCT.


TOP MAKING GREASY WOOL SORTING DEPARTMENT.
CARDING MACHINES, SHOWING WOOL SLIVER, PRIOR TO COMBING.


NOBLE COMBING MACHINE.
NOBLE COMBING DEPARTMENT WITH
FISISHING GILL BOXES IN FOREGROUND.


INSPECTING FINSIHED WOOL TOPS.


MAIN STEAM GENERATING PLANT.


DRAFTSMEN'S OFFICE.


CASTING IN FOUNDRY.
PLUMBERS' AND METAL WORKERS' DEPT.


AERIAL VIEW OF ST. LEONARDS, showing modern Fellmongery, Manager’s
Residence and adjacent vegetable garden which provisions M. V. “Merino."


SOAKING PITS, ST. LEONARDS, magnificent supply of water drawn from
North Esk River on factory site.


CONDITIONING FLOOR, ST. LEIBARDS FACTIRY.


INSPECTING PICKLED PELTS AT ST. LEONARDS.


MODERN MACHINE SHOP. Engineering Dept., Main Works, Gleadow Street,
Launceston.


THE L. W. SMITH PTY. LTD.
SHIPPING HOUSE FLAG.


MOTOR VESSEL “MERINO.”
The Company’s Modern Wool Cargo Ship


MR. L. W. SMITH AND CAPTAIN CARMICHAEL.
Arrival M.V. “Merino,” Inspection
Head, Tasmania, 31st December, 1949.




CAPTAIN'S CABIN,
M.V. “MERINO.”
VIEW SWITCHBOARD ENGINE ROOM M.V.
“MERINO.”


No. 1 HOLD, M.V. “MERINO.”
OFFICERS' SALOON. M.V. “MERINO"


ST. LEONARDS FARM SUPPLYING POULTRY AND
VEGETABLES TO THE M.V. “MERINO.”


L. W. SMITH PTY. LTD. BRICK WORLS,
DULVERTON.
THE “L.W.S." BRICK.


BELMONT SCOURING AND CARBONISING
WORKS, Brisbane, Queensland, where Specially
Merino types for the world’s market are produced.


BELMONT WOOL SCOURING WORKS.




MELBOURNE OFFICE, 209-11 KING STREET,
M ELBOURNE, VICTORIA. A new era in the history of
the Company's progress teas established in this year
of 1951, when the present Managing Director, Mr.
Andrew F. L. Smith, decided on the establishment
of this office, which represents a tribute of memorial
to the founder of the firm, the late Leslie William
Smith.


OVERSEAS AGENTS
WOOL AGENTS
Belgium - - HENRI LESOIX ----- - - Verviers
Canada - - - FRED. J. TAYLOR & SONS Toronto
Denmark - - GUDM UN D SC HACK - - Copenhagen
Egypt - - - ETS. JEAN E. MESSARA ----- Alexandria
England - - OVERSEA WOOLS LTD. ----- Bradford
Finland - - - SANTO PRODUCTS - - - - - - Helsinki
France - - - EMILE LONCKE & CIE - - - - - - - Roubaix
Germany - - SCHMIDT & LUHMANN - ... Bremen
Greece - C. CARNE/IS ------ - Athens
Holland - - JURGENS TEXTILE Tilburg
Hong Kong - - JARDINE MATHESON - Hong Kong
Italy - - - GIOVANNI SCHNEIDER & CO. INC. - - - - Biella
Japan - - - ZENRIN TRADING CO. LTD. Tokyo
Mexico - - - JUAN DEL CASTRO - - Mexico City
Norway - - - C. B. BARTEI K CO. - ... Bergen
Portugal - - JOHN W. NOLLE LTDA. ... ... Lisbon
Sweden - - - WALTHER VETTERLEINS SONER - - - Stockholm
Switzerland - - RENE ALBERT ----- ... Zurich
Turkey - - - A. PASCALY - - Istanbul
United States of TUPMAN THURLOW CO. INC. - New York
America


PICKLED PELT AGENTS
Japan - - - INTERNATIONALE CREDIET-EN
HANDELS-VEREENIGING
“ROTTERDAM” N.V. Osaka
United States of
America - - C. M. HIBBARD & SONS - .... Peabody, Mass.
MELBOURNE OFFICE: 209-211 KING ST.
SYDNEY OFFICE: LEMPRIERE (AUST.) PTY. LTD., 24 JAMIESON ST.
BRISBANE OFFICE: MR. B. M. CLARK. SIXTH FLOOR, COLONIAL
MUTUAL LIFE BUILDING, QUEEN ST.
L. W. SMITH (LONDON) LTD., 42 GRACECHURCH ST.


WHOLLY SET UP. PRINTED AND BOUND
IN AUSTRALIA BY
The Specialty press limited
174 LITTLE COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE




