

FEDERAL ELECTIONS, 1928
LABOR POLICY
For the Commonwealth
ENUNCIATED AT RICHMOND (VIC)
ON OCTOBER 4th, 1928,
By
J. H. SCULLIN, M.H.R.
(Leader of the Federal
Parliamentary Labor
Party)
Polling Day : Saturday , Nov. 17th, 1928
Carlton:
Labor Call Print, 20 Victoria Street,
1928.




FEDERAL ELECTIONS, 1928
Labor Policy
for the Commonwealth
Enunciated at Richmond (Victoria) on October 4, 1928
By J. H. SCULLIN, M.H.R.
Leader Federal Parliamentary Labor Party
Bearing to-night for the first time the responsibility of
delivering the policy of Labor as its Leader, I desire to place
on record our high appreciation of Mr. Charlton, my prede-
cessor, for his long and invaluable service to the Labor
Movement, and to Australia, as well as of the sincerity and
honesty which he always manifested in that service.
A General Election gives to the people the right once
every three years to pronounce judgment upon their
representatives, and to determine at the ballot box who
shall constitute the new Parliament, and what shall be
the national policy of Australia. The electors are entitled
to receive the fullest information as to the work accom-
plished and that proposed. The great issues which must
be decided enjoins upon every elector the exercise of calm
judgment, free from passion or personal prejudice.
Correspondingly it is the duty of public men to declare
their views clearly and definitely on matters of substance
and above all to refrain from raising false issues to
obscure the true position. At the last election, Mr. Bruce
guaranteed “Sane Government, sound finance, and an era
of prosperity hitherto unknown in our history.” Unfortu-
nately for Australia, these promises have not materialised.
The last Parliament was almost barren of useful legisla-
tion. For sound finance there was reckless extravagance.
Who, save a fortunate few, have enjoyed the “era of
prosperity” so confidently forecasted by the Prime Minister
three years ago.
The ideals of the Labor Party are set out in the fore-
front of the Platform as an objective and as a guide. How


far progress in that direction may be made will depend
mainly on the desires and will of the people.
Our immediate task, however, will be to put into effect
the policy I am about to outline.
PROBLEMS TO FACE.
The outstanding problems to be faced and to be
honestly and firmly grappled with in the next Parliament
are those directly associated with public finance, the
development of Australian industries, and the employ-
ment of our people. With no desire to paint a gloomy
picture, it is my duty to direct attention to our position,
and to utter the warning that, notwithstanding Aus-
tralia’s great natural resources and wonderfully recuper-
ative powers, the present drift cannot be allowed to
continue without fateful consequences. The gravity of
the situation at present is marked by the appalling
number of unemployed. Calculations based on the Com-
monwealth Statistician’s figures indicate that there are
fully 180,000 workers seeking in vain for the means of
livelihood in Australia. The tragedy of unemployment is
a daily experience in so many other-day happy homes.
Contributing causes of this unfortunate state of affairs
are the Government’s failure to provide adequate protec-
tion for Australian industries, its delay in dealing with
tariff amendments, which permitted importers to anticipate
and defeat the increased protection due to be given local
production, and the subversive policy of pledging Aus-
tralian credit to money-lenders abroad, which has accele-
rated the flow of imports, and created a series of adverse
trade balances.
The Treasurer asserts that if the Government
borrowed locally instead of overseas there would not be
sufficient capital available for development. To the
extent of borrowing abroad, however, there follows
inevitably a corresponding amount of increased imports
which operate against local industry and its extension,
and consequently against the normal increase of local
capital, which obviously must increase from increased
local industry.
The late Mr. Pratten, speaking in Parliament, truly
declared that “when we borrow in London we make a rod
for our own backs, place a premium on the importations
of goods, and hamstring our own industrial development.”
The stimulation of Australian industries would increase
employment and wealth production, besides adding to the
nation’s power to raise all its necessary loans fropi within
its borders.
FINANCE.
A review of the financial administration of the Bruce-
Page Government during its six years of office reflects
little credit on the present administration.


Commencing in June, 1923, with a surplus of
£7,400,000 inherited from its predecessor, the present
'•Government drifted into an accumulated deficit of
£2,62*8,000 in June last.
Dr. Page consolingly estimates that during 1928-9 the
receipts from Customs will increase by £1,600,000. If
this is to be realised, last year’s heavy imports will have
to be increased by £12,000,000. Even if that estimate be
correct, we will still have at the end of June, 1929,
.a deficit of £2,615,000.
The Government’s claim that they have reduced
taxation cannot be supported by facts. For the six-year
period, 1922 to 1928, the Commonwealth collected taxation
amounting to £323,000,000, an increase of £98,000,000 on
the taxation collected for the preceding six years. Cus-
toms duties alone gave an increase in revenue of
£77,000,000.
From 1916 to 1922 exports exceeded imports by
£97,000,000, but from 1922 to 1928, owing to the Govern-
ment’s policy of permitting the country to be flooded with
goods from other countries, our imports have exceeded
■exports by £60,000,000. This adverse trade balance is in
a large measure responsible for the financial stringency
and unemployment prevailing throughout Australia.
The Government takes credit for a reduction in the
National Debt, and boasts that the debt due in Australia
has been reduced since June, 1923, by £25,000,000. But
in the same period the debt overseas was inci’eased by
£39,000,000. In consequence, our interest bill abroad has
increased since 1923 from £5,500,000 per annum to
£7,500,000 per annum. That increased interest payment
of £2,000,000 a year to overseas creditors is an additional
drain upon Australian finances.
Last year the Government reduced the vote for neces-
sary public! works by £1,200,000 on the plea of shortage
of money; yet at the same time provided £400,000 for
immigration purposes, and approximately £500,000 relief
in taxation to our large landowners.
Shall this ruinous policy of the Bruce-Page Government
be allowed to continue? In its six years of office, money
has been borrowed and spent lavishly, careless of the fact
that lean years must follow. The tens of thousands unem-
ployed and our secondary industries struggling against the
flood of importations, is the situation due to a great extent
to the rule of the present administration.
The Government’s six years’ record is inglorious,
marked particularly as it is by the creating of big positions
and numerous Commissions. Collecting in taxes nearly
£98,000,000 more than that of the previous six years, and
spending all this with the accumulated surplus of
£ 7,400,000 it started with, the Government to-day exhibits
an empty Treasury and a deficit of £2,628,000.


No provision to meet that deficit. It is just placed in
suspense, and in opposition to sound finance, another
deficit at the end of next June of £2,615,000 is budgeted
for.
The Government’s financial methods have been con-
demned on all sides. The Auditor-General in his last
annual report was impelled to say: “The method of pre-
senting the accounts is such as to obscure the true posi-
tion.”
Mr. Arthur Cocks, Treasurer in the Fuller Nationalist
Government, N.S.W., expressed the same view in stronger
terms. “Again and again,” he said, “has the Federal
Government put forward inaccurate figures and misleading
financial statements.”
Mr. Foster, M.H.R., a former Nationalist Minister,,
speaking in Parliament, said recently:—“Ministerial ineffi-
ciency is responsible for the present unhappy position.
The Government is spending merrily huge sums of
borrowed money.”
Mr. Gullett, Nationalist member for Henty, during the
Budget debate last year, declared; “If Dr. Page cannot
devise a better financial policy the sooner he goes out of
the job the better. He is the most tragic Treasurer
Australia has known.”
In a trenchant article, the Melbourne “Age” said;—
“The Bruce-Page Government is either utterly incapable
or perversely wilful in its handling of national finance. . . .
Throughout its tenure of office it has continued borrowing
and spending in reckless manner There could be no
more glaring evidence of cunning, or of incompetence, than
the Government’s proposed action with regard to the
deficit of £2,630,000. . . . Like the defeated Allan-Peacock
Composite Ministry in 1926, the Bruce-Page Composite
Ministry declines to balance the nation’s ledger.”
The Adelaide “Advertiser” described the Budget speech
as an elaborate, unconvincing apology for the Federal
financial policy of the last six years.
Another Nationalist paper, “The Industrial Australian
and Mining Standard,” referring to the previous Budget,
said: “During the Bruce Government’s term of office heavy
adverse trade balances have been our portion. What
wonder that money has become tight and unemployment
serious. The Federal balance-sheet is nothing short of a
disgrace to its authors.”
These quotations are but a fraction of the criticism
levelled against the Federal Government for its maladmin-
istration of public finance.
If we be returned to power, the whole financial position
of Australia will be reviewed, all unnecessary expenditure
will be cut out, and the expenditure of loan moneys to be
raised within Australia will be restricted to developmental
and reproductive works.


LAND TAX.
The Federal Land Tax Act, passed in 1910 by the*
Fisher Labor Government, was successful in breaking up
large estates, thus facilitating land settlement. In the first
three years large estates to the value of £30,000,000 were
subdivided. By reduction in the rate of tax by the present
Government, and by generous remissions to large land-
owners, the tax has become less effective as a check to land
monopoly. The ten per cent, reduction made in the rates
last year meant a loss to the revenue of approximately half
a million a year. An estimate based on the latest figures
available indicates that the reduction will provide annual
benefits to seventy-five taxpayers, with estates over
£lOO,OOO in value, to the extent of £l,OOO each; twenty-
five taxpayers with estates of over £ 200,000 value will get
reductions of £1,900 each; and five fortunate landowners
with estates valued at £500,000 will each receive reduc-
tions of tax amounting to £3,500. These' reductions do
not benefit working farmers, the Land Tax not touching
anyone with unimproved land value less than £5,000.
Much of the land held by these monopolists should be cut
up and put to better use. We will re-impose the land tax
remitted by the Government, and will immediately set
about collecting arrears long overdue.
UNPAID TAXES.
A rigorous overhaul will be made of taxation machinery
with a view to tightening up the law and its administration,
to ensure that tax-evaders will not escape the obligations
which are imposed upon honest taxpayers. The last
report of the Commissioner of Taxation shows that arrears
of land tax amounted to £1,113,720, and income tax out-
standing £2,176,953 —a total of £3,290,673. We will see,
not only that taxation is equitably imposed, but also that
taxes are unfalteringly collected. All taxpayers will be
required to pay according to just assessment. All will be
subject to penalty for attempts to defraud the revenue.
Under Labor administration there will be no repetition of
that which was disclosed in a certain notorious case, when
persistent tax-evaders on a large scale were able to buy
immunity from criminal prosecution by disgorging large
sums of money fraudulently appropriated to their own use.
TAX ON LIFE ASSURANCE.
Notwithstanding his declaration of no increase in
taxation, the Treasurer brought down a Bill to raise
£ 300,000 a year new taxation from Life Assurance Offices.
There are more than 2,000,000 life assurance policies
in force in Australia, and there are less than 250,000
income tax payers.
Allowing for the number holding more than one policy,
this new tax will bring into the field of income taxation
fully 1,500,000 persons who would otherwise be exempt.


The tax on Mutual Life Assurance Societies is an
'imposition mainly on the dependants of bread-winners.
It is iniquitous to tax the provident funds contributed
to by hundreds of thousands of comparatively poor people.
A Labor Government will repeal the tax on Mutual Life
Assurance Associations.
WHITE AUSTRALIA.
The first plank of Labor’s Fighting Platform is; “The
cultivation of an Australian sentiment and the mainten-
ance of a White Australia.” That has always been a plank
of the Labor Platform, and was unanimously re-affirmed
at the last Interstate Labor Conference, held at Canberra
last year. To that plank every member, and every organis-
ation affiliated with the Australian Labor Party is pledged.
Nationalist and Country Party members profess adher-
ence to the principle of a White Australia. Votes in Parlia-
ment, however, are surer indications of members’ views
than professions on public platforms. To give an illustra-
tion: On 29th January, 1926, a Bill to amend the Navigation
Act was under discussion. The Government’s proposal
was that, under certain circumstances, permission should
be given to ships to trade on the Australian coast, although
not licensed under the Navigation Act. Amendments were
moved on behalf of the Labor Party to insert conditions
providing that the ships receiving the permits should be
manned by white labor receiving Australian rates of wages.
Divisions were taken on the amendments, and every
Nationalist and Country Party member voted against them,
while every Labor member voted in favor of insisting on
the employment of white crews on all ships permitted to
trade on the Australian coast.
PROTECTION.
If Australia is to become the great wealth-producing
nation that we hope, we must resolve to do our own work
in our own country as much as possible, instead of sending
it across the seas to be done for us by others. The applica-
tion of this definite policy correlated to sound financing,
will, I am convinced, do much to lift the present depression
from Australia. A number of urgent tariff matters require
attention. Manufactured goods are flooding this country
from abroad, our industries are languishing, and thousands
of our people are out of employment. The breaches in our
tariff wall should be repaired at once. Labor stands for the
fullest possible protection for all industries, primary and
secondary. Where we can by agreements or undertakings
safeguard consumers as to price, quality, and the ability
of the industry to supply requirements, complete protection
will be given in guaranteeing the Australian market to
Australian industries.
The success of that policy may be seen in the sugar
industry. For years sugar growers struggled against


adverse conditions, crushed as they were in the hands of
a grasping monopoly. By agreement between the Labor
Government of Queensland and the Fisher Labor Govern-
ment, the whole conditions of the industry were controlled.
Under the renewed agreement, importation of black-grown
sugar was completely stopped, wages and conditions of
labor in the industry were controlled by tribunals, whilst
the prices paid to producers and charged to consumers
were also regulated. The result is that the sugar industry
has been stabilised, and what was once a black man’s
industry is now carried on by white labor. That policy, to
be continued with regard to the sugar industry, will, as far
as practicable, be extended to other industries in similar
circumstances.
COMMONWEALTH BANK.
The Commonwealth Bank was established by a Labor-
Government in spite of bitter opposition by many who
to-day claim to have high regard for the Labor Party of the
past. The Bank has fully justified its existence. Its
accumulated profits, together with the profits derived from
the Note Issue, amount to £23,380,000. To the direct
profits of the Bank must be added the indirect gains to
Australia. During the war the Commonwealth Bank was
alone in keeping its interest and overdrafts down to pre-
war rates. It handled the flotation of £300,000,000 war
loans on a commission of 5/9 per £lOO, as against the
average charges of £2/7/- per £lOO charged to State
Governments by private banks for the same service, and so
saving Australia £6,000,000 on commission alone. When
the Bank was created the aim was to extend its operations
as widely as possible, to reach out for new business, and
to increase its usefulness and profits in the interests of the
Australian people. The Bank, backed by the resources of
the Commonwealth, at once appeared a successful com-
petitor with private banks; but the present Government
has limited its operations to that of a Central Bank, acting
as a buttress to the private institutions. It is the Govern-
ment’s boast that they have made the Commonwealth
Bank into a “Banker’s Bank.” A Labor Government, how-
ever, will convert it into a “People’s Bank,” as originally
instituted. Its management will be free from political con-
trol. It will be encouraged to extend its power and
influence as an important factor in our national develop-
ment.
COMMONWEALTH INSURANCE.
The question of insurance, Are and life, is of great
importance. In Queensland, the State Insurance Scheme
has been attended with marked success. It has reduced
premiums materially, and saved the people millions of'
pounds. Commonwealth insurance on similar lines will be-
undertaken.


CONSTITUTIONAL ALTERATIONS.
After 27 years’ experience of the working of the Federal
Constitution, it has become apparent that vital changes
are necessary, if we are satisfactorily to carry on the work
of a progressive nation, and give effect to the will of the
people.
The Labor Party stands for unlimited legislative powers
for the Commonwealth Parliament, and such delegated
powers to the States or Provinces as the Commonwealth
Parliament may determine from time to time. The Com-
monwealth Parliament should have complete legislative
powers, subject only to such limitations as will ensure the
control of Parliament by the people. The overlapping of
legislation and the duplication of administration resulting
from seven Sovereign Parliaments with thirteen Houses
and seven Governors, is costly and cumbersome.
To bring about an alteration of the Constitution, a
referendum of the people must he taken. Mr. Bruce made
a promise in Parliament on 20th May, 1926, that a Con-
stitutional Session would be arranged for the following
year to consider the defects of the Constitution generally.
That promise, like many others, was broken, although a
Royal Commission was appointed to inquire into the work-
ing of the Constitution, and to gather information to assist
members during the discussion in Parliament. The report
of that Commission is nearing completion, and it was the
duty of the Government to have had it discussed, with a
view to submitting to the people at the elections compre-
hensive proposals for the granting of increased powers to
the Commonwealth Parliament. Instead, however, a
Referendum is being submitted for an alteration of the
Constitution to grant to the Federal Parliament increased
power only with respect to State Debts.
STATE DEBTS REFERENDUM.
The carrying of the Referendum will not ratify the
Financial Agreement entered into recently. That Agree-
ment will come before the next Federal Parliament for
acceptance or rejection.
The Labor Party strenuously opposed the withdrawal
of the Per Capita payments from the States, and we have
not changed our attitude in the slightest degree on that
question. The consolidation of Commonwealth and State
debts, and unified control of future borrowing, can be
brought about by agreement without any interference with
the Per Capita payments. The Referendum to be taken
on November 17th is to give the Federal Parliament power
for the control of borrowing by a central authority. To
that proposal on lines so long advocated by the Labor
Party, there can be no sound objection. Let it be clearly
understood, however, that consent to the amplifying of the
powers of the Commonwealth Parliament to make agree


ments does not imply approval of the particular agreement
made. The Bill to withdraw the Per Capita payments from
the States was carried by a majority of only six members
in the House of Representatives, and even that small
majority would not have been secured but for the cracking
of the Government party whip.
We are not opposed to the granting of constitutional
power to the Federal Parliament to make agreements for
the consolidation of public debts and the control of borrow
ing. But in the exercise of that power we will make a new
agreement with the States with respect to debts, and will
restore the Per Capita payments to the States.
COMMONWEALTH AND STATES.
The national policy of protecting home production,
primary and secondary, benefits some States more than
others. Commonwealth finances must therefore be
adjusted to meet the special disabilities of any State.
That principle has been recognised with respect to
Tasmania and Western Australia.
The financial relations between Commonwealth and
States should always be approached from the viewpoint
that we are one people throughout Australia, and that an
injury to one part is the concern of all.
The withdrawal of the Per Capita payments created
feelings of distrust against the Commonwealth which we
hope to allay.
To achieve the best results in the development of Aus-
tralia there must be friendly relations and cordial
co-operation between Commonwealth and States.
ORGANISED MARKETING.
Primary producers are experiencing great difficulty in
obtaining profitable markets for wheat, butter, eggs,
•canned and dried fruits, citrus, wine grapes, rice, cotton,
and other primary products.
It is not the living wage of the industrial worker that
places a burden on the farmers’ shoulders. Their heavy
burden is imposed by monopolists and middlemen. In the
selling of farm produce and buying farm requisites, rings
operate against the producers. High rates of interest,
heavy shipping charges, agents’ commission—these are
some of the exactions that prevent the man on the land
from receiving a fair return for his labor. The Country
Party boasts that it dominates the Composite Government,
but what has it done for the struggling farmer? Land
monopolists have received benefits at the hands of the
Government, but in what way has the working farmer
benefited?
The Primary Producers’ Organisation in Queensland
•created by the Labor Government of that State is doing
■good work for the agricultural and allied industries. Local
'Producers’ Associations with a central authority—the


“Council of Agriculture”—have brought about improve-
ments in marketing conditions. The establishment of an
Australia-wide system would make this work more effec-
tive, and would extend the benefits to farmers in Other-
States. We will invite the growers to a conference for that
purpose, and will pass the necessary legislation to facili-
tate and co-ordinate the activities of State Governments
for the assistance of those engaged in rural pursuits.
COTTON.
While paying a bounty to cotton growers to increase
their acreage under cotton, the Government is allowing:
importers to flood the local market with cotton goods from
Japan, India, China, the United States of America, Great
Britain, and other countries. There is no sense in such a
policy. Practically every bale of cotton produced in
Queensland last year was exported because there was no>
market in Australia, while at the same time the importa-
tion of cotton yarn was equivalent to over 20,000 bales of
cotton lint. That is an anomalous position.
The bounty will be supplemented by effectively protect-
ing the cotton yarn and piece goods that can be made from
Australian-grown cotton.
SHIPPING.
Taking advantage of the nation’s needs during the war,
shipowners charged exorbitant freights and piled up
immense profits. To protect producers and consumers
from this exploitation, the Commonwealth Line was estab-
lished, and for ten years it prevented increases in freights,
and forced upon the combine several reductions.
The Prime Minister (Mr. Bruce) admitted that the fine,
when established, carried Australian wheat for £7/10/-
per ton, while the British ships charged £l3 per ton, and
foreign ships £l5 per ton.
In February, 1921, the Shipping Combine fixed the
freight on refrigerated cargo. A month later, the manage-
ment of the Government Line fixed its rates at approxi-
mately £ 2 per ton less than the rates fixed by the Combine,
and the Combine had to come down to those rates.
A reduction of 10/- per ton on general cargo was made
by the Government Line in 1923. The private companies
were again forced to bring their rates down by the same
amount.
On 11th July, 1926, a further substantial reduction in
freights was made by the Line, and in a statement to the-
press on 13th July, 1926, the Prime Minister said, “It is pre-
sumed that the reductions made by the Commonwealth
Line will also be put in force by the combined steamship
lines.” He went on to say that he estimated that the-
reductions would show a saving in freight on our meat,,
wool, butter, dried fruits, etc., ammounting to £522,006*
a year.


Mr. H. B. Larkin, manager of the Line, on sworn
evidence, said, “It can confidently be stated that the finan-
cial losses of the Line have been compensated by the
advantages derived by Australia from its ownership.”
Practically every progressive nation subsidises shipping
services, but the Nationalist Government has no national
pride. Ships flying the flags of many nations sail into
Australian ports. The Australian Flag, however, is not
amongst them.
The Line, which cost £7,527,000 to construct, was
sacrificed for £1,900,000 to Lord Kylsant, who holds con-
trolling interests in 28 shipping companies, with an aggre-
gate capital of £86,000,000. Australia is now entirely at
the mercy of wealthy sea lords for the carriage of goods
and produce to and from Australia.
GOVERNMENT’S DESTRUCTIVE POLICY.
The Government’s betrayal of the people of Australia
is evidenced by its reckless disposal of their valuable
assets. The sale of the Line is merely a continuation of
what has been the Government’s policy ever sincle it came
into office. It matters not whether public enterprise shows
a loss or shows a profit, such as that made by the Govern-
ment Woollen Mills, it must be sold in order to clear the
way for private enterprise. In this case, the Government is
giving the freedom of the seas to a profiteering combine.
INTERSTATE TRANSPORT.
Realising that there was a responsibility upon the Com-
monwealth to assist in providing interstate communication,
Federal railways were constructed linking up the
mainland States. Owing to her isolated position, Tasmania
has not benefited by this expenditure. Efficient means of
transport are necessary to remove Tasmania’s disadvan-
tages regarding mainland communication. The shipping
service now provided is woefully inadequate. We will
institute an improved service of modern steamers, with
ample space to meet the requirements of passengers and
the shipment of Tasmania’s products to markets on the
mainland. This service, like the Commonwealth Railways,
will be under the complete control of the Commonwealth.
UNIFICATION OF RAILWAY GAUGES.
At the forefront of a progressive works policy will be
the unifying of the railway gauges. This great work of
national importance has been the subject of considerable
investigation. The time has. long since passed when a
practical move should be made to effect uniformity in the
railway system of Australia. Each year of delay is adding
considerably to the cost of this project and further
accentuating the difficulties and increasing costs. When
proceeded with”, this work will relieve the acute position


of the unemployed problem, assist in affording more ready
and expeditious transport, and cheapen freight and trans-
port charges to producers.
ROADS.
State Governments will be consulted for the purpose of
revising the Roads Agreement, and drawing up a well-
considered Roads policy.
Developmental roads and cross roads, to act as feeders
to the railways, must be given due consideration.
The competition of road transport with railways is
becoming a serious problem. And while up-to-date
methods of transport must be recognised as signs of pro-
gress, the co-ordination of the two systems is essential.
Therefore the authorities controlling railways should
have direct control of road construction within their
respective States. Because of its constitutional power to
collect Customs duties, the Commonwealth Government
should continue to make grants to the States for roads
without unnecessarily interfering with the work of con-
struction.
WIRELESS AND TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION.
Overseas radio communications and broadcasting
within Australia should be owned and controlled by the
Commonwealth Government. Steps will be taken to
remove this essential public service from the control of
private companies, so that the services may be improved
and charges reduced.
The possibility of providing more satisfactory broad-
casting of wireless programmes to inland centres by a
scheme of relay stations will receive attention.
Vexatious delays and interruptions in communication
between Tasmania and the mainland are due to the age-
worn and out-of-date cables. The present service will be
replaced with a system of wireless telephony.
Telephone communication will also be installed between
West Australia and the Eastern States.
GOLD.
The gold mining industry was one that suffered most
as the result of profiteering during the war. While prices
of most other commodities were soaring, the price of gold
remained stationary. The action of war profiteers in
adding to the cost of production, reacted adversely upon
the industry. We will confer with the State Governments
on the matter, and will co-operate with them where assist -
ance for the development of existing mines and for the
encouragement of prospectors is found necessary to place
the industry on a more secure foundation.
NATIONAL INSURANCE.
On the eve of the dissolution of Parliament, the Govern-
ment introduced a National Insurance Bill, audaciously


•claiming that in doing so it had redeemed its election
promise.
Quite a number of Bills on the Parliamentary Business
Paper have reached the same stage as the Insurance Bill,
but have not been proceeded with. Not until the Bill is
passed and put into operation can it be truthfully claimed
that faith has been kept with the electors. If in earnest,
why did the Government delay presenting the Bill to
Parliament until it was too late to be proceeded with? Or
why did they not sit a few weeks longer and place it on
the Statute Book? It i$ five years since the Royal Com-
mission on National Insurance was appointed, and nearly
two years since its final report was presented. There ;was
ample time for it to be put into law if the Government so
desired.
The most important need of the community—Unem-
ployment Insurance —has been omitted from the Govern-
ment’s proposal, although it was a prominent feature of
the Prime Minister’s Policy Speech at the last election. In
his Policy Speech, Mr. Bruce made the following definite
promise
“As soon as the report of the Commission is received
legislation will be introduced to have the workers
insured against this deadly cause of anxiety and
unrest.”
That report was presented on 30th July, 1926, recom-
mending the establishment of Unemployment Insurance,
and, although two years have elapsed, nothing has been
done to give effect to Mr. Bruce’s promise. It is a notable
omission from the Government’s belated Bill.
UNEMPLOYMENT.
Earnest efforts will be made by a Labor Government to
grapple with the problem of unemployment. Encourage-
ment and protection will be given to primary and secondary
industries. This will apply particularly to industries using
raw material produced in Australia. We will co-operate
with State Governments and other public bodies to regu-
late public works to the demands of labor. To alleviate the
sufferings of the unemployed, early action will be taken to
establish a system of Unemployment Insurance, the fund
created to be distributed, as far as practicable, in providing
work.
IMMIGRATION.
The Commonwealth Government is spending £300,000
a year loan money to pay the passages of immigrants, and
in addition, is spending £IOO,OOO a year on the adminis-
tration and other expenses in connection with migration.
At the same time, expenditure on public works is curtailed,
•throwing large numbers of Australians out of employment.
During the past six years the Commonwealth Government
sspent £1,620,000 in assisting 170,000 immigrants to come


to Australia. During the same period the excess of arrivals;
over departures of foreign immigrants exceeded 30,000. In
many places preference in employment is given to
foreigners over Australians, particularly in the letting of
contracts where foreigners take the work at lower rates.
An illustration of this was shown to me when I visited
Western Australia. The Postal Department let a contract
for cutting tracks for telephone and telepgraph lines to a
party of foreigners, although large numbers of Australians
were unemployed.
The Labor Party has never taken the stand that this
vast continent should be closed against new arrivals. We
believe there is room for many more people in Australia,
but we hold it to be our duty to provide for those who are
here before inducing others to come from distant parts of
the world.
A nation must limit the importation of workers to its
power to absorb them. How can we ask European
countries to stop their people from coming here on account
of the acuteness of our unemployed problem, while we are
spending £400,000 a year on assisted immigration?
, Artificial aids to increase population are not sound.
The opening up of our resources and the building up of
Australian industries will provide work for our people, and
will attract others to our shores.
INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION.
Recent amendments to the Arbitration Act, instead of
producing industrial peace, are more calculated to increase
unrest. They invite resistance because they are funda-
mentally unjust. The Bruce Government’s legislation has
been almost as prolific in coercive laws against trades
unions, as it has in the appointment of Commissions and
Boards. Deportation laws, followed by a Crimes Act, were
aimed at workers whose actions were not criminal in their
nature. These laws will be amended to apply only to
criminals, and not to decent working men.
Whatever objection may legitimately be urged against
men refusing work under certain conditions, such action in
itself is not criminal, and should not come under criminal
law.
The last Act passed by the Government to prohibit by
regulations unlicensed transport workers from obtaining
employment on the water front is a violation of constitu-
tional Government, and tends to bring Parliament into
contempt.
Strikes and lockouts are obsolete and undesirable.
Reason must be applied to the settlement of disputes and
all parties to agreements or awards should honor decisions
arrived at.
The irritating delays and heavy cost of the present
Arbitration system operate materially against the securing
of industrial peace. Believing firmly in conciliation and’


;arbitration for the prevention and settlement of industrial
disputes, we will revise the whole of the Act to provide for
a system of sound business-like arbitration, freed from the
•entangling legalisms of the Law Court and legal advocates
-—a system framed on the lines of the Industrial Peace Act,
to be handled by men of industrial experience to ensure
•equitable, expeditious, and less costly methods of dealing
with industrial matters.
COMPENSATION ACTS.
A Bill to amend the Commonwealth Employees’ Com-
pensation Act was passed through the Senate last year,
but when it reached the House of Representatives it was
promptly shelved. The present Act, framed in 1912, has
not been altered to meet the changed conditions. Com-
monwealth employees and workmen engaged in Federal
Territories are, in consequence, suffering grave injustice.
The Seamen’s Compensation Act is also hopelessly out
of date.
Those Acts will be amended to bring the amounts pro-
vided for injuries up to modern standards.
The operations of the Public Service Act, the Public
Service Arbitration Act, and the Superannuation Act will
be thoroughly investigated, with a view to making amend-
ments to secure equitable treatment for employees and
the efficient working of the Departments.
HEALTH.
No more important question demands the attention of
the National Parliament than the health of the community.
Divided action hy State Governments will not suffice.
Disease, man’s deadly enemy, must he met by uniting the
forces of the Commonwealth and the States. The heavy
mortality, the suffering, and the great economical loss can
he considerably minimised. Cancer and tuberculosis take
a heavy toll. More alarming still is the huge loss of infant
life. Infantile mortality last year accounted for 7,283
children under one year of age. Large sums are annually
spent in bringing immigrants to Australia while half the
infants who die could be saved under a thorough system
of medical attention. Invalid pensions cost £2,800,000 a
year for 55,000 persons permanently incapacitated.
According to Commonwealth medical authorities, 32 per
cent, of invalidity is caused by the after effects of infectious
diseases.
An adequate National Health Research Fund will be
established, and a vigorous well-organised plan will be
evolved in co-operation with the States, to be carried out
without delay.
PENSIONS AND CHILD ENDOWMENT.
We will amend the Old Age and Invalid Pensions Acts,
to remove hardships and anomalies, and will go thoroughly
into the question of the best means of providing for Child
Endowment.


PEACE.
The pact recently signed by the Great Powers for the-
outlawing of war, under which the contracting parties
renounce aggression, and welcome every pacific method'
for the settlement of international disputes, is a forward
step to the ideal of world peace.
The movement, however, must be extended to include
all nations, and, as a consequence, to achieve general dis-
armament.
Lord Robert Cecil recently expressed the view of the
Labor Party, and of all who desire to end war when he said:
“It is vitally important that there should be in this country
a great and instructed public opinion in favor of disarma-
ment, and not merely in favor, but bumingly in favor, so
burningly as to set the continent of Europe alight. . . . The
public must declare itself. The essence of the whole pro-
blem is that if the people want disarmament, disarmament
they can have.”
We endorse these sentiments because they have always
been our own: They are statesmanlike, humanitarian,
practical.
There is no doubt but that what is most urgently needed-
is an educated public opinion of world dimensions in favor
of disarmament. Every individual can bear a hand in this
great task. To do so is a duty resting on every nation.
Australia, as a young democracy whose manhood has
learned the horrors of war abroad, but whose shores have
not been violated by invasion, should not wait for invita-
tions from other Powers, but should be a torchbearer for
the rest of the world.
The possibilities of another war, in which new scientific
discoveries would be employed to serve the most destruc-
tive purposes, are too horrible to contemplate. Let us,
therefore, turn our minds and bend our efforts to a new
and better order in which the folly and fratricide of war
will have no part.
The Labor Party, if returned to power, will, wherever
possible, make friendly overtures to other nations designed
to create a better understanding of problems of mutual
interest. Thus moving in harmony with the greater
enlightenment of mankind, Australia may see in this or
the next generation the end of the visible proofs of “man’s
inhumanity to man.”
DEFENCE.
Working towards these ideals, and guided hy the prin-
ciples which I have indicated, the Labor Party will be
prepared to assume responsibility for the adequate defence
of Australia against external aggression.
The part the Nationalist Government has played in
defence is a remarkable one. As a peace gesture, and in
conformity with an agreement for the reduction in the-
naval unit, it sank the only battleship Australia possessed..


Shortly afterwards tne Government ordered to be
constructed abroad two cruisers costing £5,000,000. A
little later the same Government sold for £1,900,000 seven
boats of the Commonwealth Line that had cost £7,500,000
to build, and which were specially constructed under the
supervision of the British Admiralty as auxiliary cruisers.
Although defence expenditure since the Armistice
amounts to £50,000,000, there are military authorities who
describe our defence as a sham.
The compulsory training of youths at present in opera-
tion is undoubtedly a sham. It is also a waste of public
money, and will he abolished.
To lighten the burden of the military machine, it will
be our endeavor to apply the necessary means of defence
to the development of our country and the promotion of
our industries. We believe that the defence of Australia
rests, in the first place, on the knowledge of Australia, and
the ability rapidly to adapt the machinery of peace to the
requirements of self-defence. In applying this theory, the
Labor Party will be influenced by the lessons of history as
well as by the advice of experts, whose technical knowledge
and experience will be exploited to the best advantage.
More than in almost any other class of expenditure, the
burden of defence is unproductive. The time is at hand
when this should be remedied as far as practicable.
Defence must be bound up with production and general
development. Let me illustrate: An air service linking the
interior of the continent with our coastal settlement may
be employed in normal times for the transport of passen-
gers, merchandise, and mails, and as a means of drawing
the people together by rapid and effective communication.
If the worst should come and war eventuates, then such
training and experience would be invaluable to the men
engaged in such a service.
If the time has not yet come when we could apply the
words of the Prophet, “beating our swords into plough-
shares and our spears in pruning hooks,” at least our
munition factories should ring in the long days of peace
with the making of machinery necessary for the develop-
ment, alike of our primary and secondary industries.
REPATRIATION.
There will be a general renew of Repatriation adminis-
tration, having regard to the welfare of returned soldiers
and their dependants.
SOLDIERS’ PENSIONS.
Returned soldiers suffering from serious disability,
whose applications for war pensions have been refused,
can only appeal to the same authority that made the
decision against them. Recognising that under that
system injustices were inflicted, the Labor Party, at an
Interstate Conference placed on its platform a plank favor


ing the creation of an Appeal Board to decide all appeals
relating to war pensions. A motion in Parliament to give
effect to this plank was moved on behalf of Labor on 10th
May, 1928. The Government bitterly opposed the motion,
and not a Nationalist or Country Party member voted in
its favor. Now, on the eve of the elections the Appeal
Board is promised by Mr. Bruce. Votes, however, mean
more than promises. We will adhere to the Labor Plat-
form and to the vote recorded in Parliament. A War
Pensions Appeal Board will be created, on which the
returned soldiers will have representation.
WAR SERVICE HOMES.
Advances provided under the War Service Homes Act
are inadequate, and will be raised to meet increased build-
ing costs, and to provide the accommodation necessary for
a family. Applications will be dealt with more expedi-
tiously. Of the 4851 applications made last year, only 2,371
were approved. In many cases applicants have been wait-
ing for periods up to twelve months.
PROTECTION OF ABORIGINES.
Far too long has the Legislature failed to realise its duty
to protect and provide for the Australian aborigine.
Gradually, but surely, has he, with the expansion of white
men’s interests, been pressed back to the extreme distances
of the continent. At present the aborigine has no reserve
of territory that he can truly regard as his possession. The
contact of the aborigine with the white population has in
too many instances left the distinct evidence of his exploit-
ation. While a Labor Government will not seek to segre-
gate Australian aborigines, suitable provision will be
made for reserved territory to meet a nation’s obligation
to its native race. The co-operation of the various State
Governments will be sought to this end.
GOVERNMENT BY COMMISSIONS.
The Government has delegated a large part of its
administrative work to Boards and Commissions, and at a
cost to date of approximately half a million pounds.
The retention of some of these may be necessary, but
in most cases they should be dispensed with, and their
work done by Government departments.
The Federal Capital Commission will be one of the first
to go. The expenditure on Canberra amounts to about
£1,000,000 a year. That responsibility should not be
handed over to a Commission. The Federal Parliament
should have direct control, so that expenditure may be
scrutinised and extravagance checked.
ROYAL COMMISSIONS.
In addition to permanent Commissions, the Government
has appointed numerous Boyal Commissions. Whilst these


have collected considerable information, their reports
for the most part have been ignored. Last financial
year £30,000 were spent on Royal Commissions enquiring
into various matters. Parliamentary pigeonholes are
becoming crowded with their reports.
EXHIBITION.
The proposal to hold an exhibition in Sydney to cost
Australian taxpayers £500,000 provides another illustra-
tion of the Government’s recklessness with public funds.
The Prime Minister, having introduced the Bill in June
last, contemplated the loss of £500,000 quite cheerfully,
despite the grave financial position. Parliament, however,
took a serious view of such a heavy and unwarranted
expenditure, and the attack led by the Labor Party against
the proposal found general support. In fact, not one
speaker in the House was found to support the Prime
Minister. The Bill was eventually withdrawn. Before sub-
mitting the Bill to Parliament, the Government actually
spent £2,271 as preliminary expenses on the proposed
exhibition. That expenditure was not authorised by
Parliament, and wa's a wicked waste of public money.
LABOR JUSTIFIED.
Again it is being repeated that Labor is dominated by
outside bodies. Always have such methods been employed
to discredit the Labor Party. Knowing that intelligent
electors would disbelieve the slanders if made against
Labor members personally, it is cunningly and Unscrupu-
lously suggested that, though Labor members may be per-
sonally honorable, they must bow to the dictates of others.
Not only is such a suggestion utterly baseless, but we
are the only Party against which such a charge cannot be
laid. Our Platform is drawn up by a representative Labor
Conference, a Conference representative of 500,000
members of Labor organisations. That Platform is printed
and published for the information, and we hope the educa-
tion, of all. Labor members are bound in allegiance to
their Party and to the Platform to which they subscribe by
their own choice and of their own volition. Both the
Nationalist Party and the Country Party have paid Labor
the compliment of imitation. Adopting our methods, they
hold their conferences, draw up platforms, and endorse
their party candidates. But behind the operations of this
anparently harmless machinery is the dominant influence
of wealth gathered into the hands of a few masters, who
are the real makers of Anti-Labor policy.
GOVERNMENT’S BROKEN PROMISES.
Promises by Mr. Bruce made without restraint at the
last election held out to everyone most alluring prospects.


There was to be a wonderful scheme for building
Workers’ Homes. Not a home has been erected under the
so-called housing scheme. Unemployment insurance, so
definitely promised has been as definitely cast aside.
National Insurance, declared by Mr. Bruce to be so vital
and urgent three years ago, is still in the promissory stage.
The pledge to give adequate protection to Australian indus-
tries from the products of cheap labor countries remains
unredeemed, and as a consequence thousands of workers
are vainly seeking employment. What has become of Mr.
Bruce’s promise that “employment would be plentiful and
continuous,” and that all would enjoy “an era of
prosperity”?
He promised “sound finance,” and indulged in unprece-
dented extravagance.
Child Endowment and Constitutional Amendments were
passed over to Royal Commissions.
Three years ago Mr. Bruce informed electors that “The
time had arrived when a national scheme must be laid
flown for the development and control of ports and
harbors.” Certainly the time had come to do something;
but nothing was-done.
The connection of Adelaide with Port Augusta by a
railway of standard gauge, so definitely promised by Mr.
Bruce, has been shelved indefinitely.
Mr. Bruce promised to consult the States, with a view
to “immediate action for the carrying out of a great
national health policy.” No action, immediate or other-
wise, was taken for that purpose.
These promises, with variations, will be polished up to
do duty again at the coming elections.
No doubt, also, the same solemn warnings against
Labor will be uttered, and another mandate sought in the
name of “law and order.”
Labor, if given the opportunity, will redeem every pro-
mise made. The laws of the country will be upheld, and to
ensure respect for law and the authority of Parliament,
legislation will be enacted to mete out even-handed justice
to all.
With this practical programme in operation, we will ask
the electors for a renewal of their confidence and for their
endorsement of further proposals for the advancement of
Australia and the welfare of its people.
Authorised by D. L. MeNAMARA,
General Secretary A.L.P.
Trades Hall, Melbourne
Labor Call Print. 20 Victoria-street. Carlton.
