

Labor's
Road to
Freedom
By
Monty
Hiller.
ANDRADE’S BOOKSHOP,
201 BOURKE STREET - MELBOURNE
32 RAWSON CHAMBERS - SYDNEY
SMITHSONIAN BROS.
PRINT


LABOR'S ROAD TO
FREEDOM
BY
MONTY MILLER
ANDRADE’S BOOKSHOP,
201 BOURKE ST., MELBOURNE.
32 RAWSON CHAMBERS, SYDNEY.




CONTENTS.
Foreword ®
Author’s Note I 1
Chapter.
I. —Some Early History 15
11. —The Political Superstition 19
111. —The Necessity of Education 26
IV. —Socialism 35
V. Labor Versus Capitalism 42
VI. The Case for Labor 47
VII. Woman in Industry 50
VIII. The Materialist Conception of History 60
IX. —One Big Union I.W.W 68
X. —Conclusion




FOREWORD
I went to see dear Monty Miller yesterday, and
found him looking weary and frail after a night
of pain. His intellectual energy and memory were
as fresh and keen as ever, though the fires of his
spirit burned with a radiance which lighted his
blue eyes and that grand old face the storms of
time have blasted, but whose features rise from it
in majestic nobility, the lines of pure and sensitive
beauty his character has moulded them to.
In his preface to “Prometheus Unbound,” Shelley
says he takes Prometheus to be “the type of the
highest perfection of moral and intellectual nature,
impelled by the purest and truest motives to the
best and noblest ends.” And Montague Miller, whom
everybody who knows him calls Monty with such
loving reverence, has been a Prometheus of
our time. In these last days, after his long fight
against tyranny and superstition, he awaits his
“unbinding” with serene philosophy, and as he says
himself, “atheistic fortitude,” but dauntlessly
hurling defiance of the Powers of Oppression with
an eloquence as natural, flowing and magnificent as
that which Shelley gives his symbol of the immortal
champion.
When a boy of eighteen, Monty Miller was taking
part in the first organised industrial fight in Aus-
tralia—Eureka Stockade —and at eighty-five was im-
prisoned in Long Bay Jail for association with the
Industrial Workers of the World in their anti-con-
scription propaganda. In all the years which lie
between those ages he has been contending with
the forces of evil—the forces of the Capital sys


tem—on behalf of the workers, and in the interest
of the working- class, not only of Australia, but of
the world. And we are just beginning to realise
that a great man has been among us.
‘‘Montague Miller has a rare and extraordinary
brain,” a Dutch Socialist said to me recently, “i
have met many great men, Engels and William Mor-
ris among them, and Montague Miller stands among
the great men I have met.”
Had this rare and extraordinary brain been spe-
cialised in any department of scientific investiga-
tion, there is no doubt its performances would have
astonished the world. As it was, with no more time
or money to spend on them than a man earning a
living at his trade could have, Monty acquired a wide
knowledge of geology, astronomy, history, anatomy,
chemistry, law, history, philosophy and literature,
and his phenomenal memory enabled him to dispense
sheafs of facts and figures, and pages of quotations,
on almost every subject under the sun.
But Monty Miller has been a great man, not
only by reason of his mental and intellectual cap-
acity, but because his spirit is as great as his brain.
He has not used his abilities to exploit his fellow-
workers—to make them serve his personal prosper-
ity or reputation. He has surrendered all his
powers of thought and service to work for them,
and for freeing of the workers of the world from
the toils of the Capitalist system which wrongs and
degrades them. So we see in him a Titan of the
working class—a man whom honours and wealth
could not tempt to desert the cause of the toiling
masses of the workers, who has suffered persecu-
tion and imprisonment, and who all the days of
his life “defied power which seemed omnipotent,”
for them.
Now, in his age, broken with illness, in the haze


and turmoil of these changing times, this brave and
splendid man is leaving us. The old order, of Capi-
talist society is ebbing before his eyes; he has seen
the in-coming of the tide of the new order of Com-
munist society. Everything is being affected by the
change that is in the air. Ideas and outlooks, en-
gendered by Capitalist society, have to be con-
sidered in their relation to Communist society.
Words are acquiring a new meaning and weapons
new uses. Has Monty realised this, some old
friends have asked. How is he regarding the sig-
nificance which experiences of the revolution in
Russia are attaching to the terms “political ac-
tion” and the Proletarian State?
In this book, “Labor’s Road to Freedom,” Monty
has condemned “political action” —meaning by that
representation of the workers in the Parliaments
of Capitalist States—as the method by which the
system of Capitalism will be destroyed. He has de-
rided the possibility of the overthrow of Capitalism
coming about by any mere Parliamentary represen-
tation of the workers within the Capitalist State.
When he was writing the book he had not en-
visaged a revolution of the workers as “a political
mass action of the proletariat,” nor was he any
more familiar with the wider interpretation and
sphere of influence Communists are giving the
words “political action” than were most of us a
year or so ago.
A little impatient that any one should
ask what he meant by “political action, . or how he
stood to the Proletarian State, Monty said:
“ ‘Labor’s Road to Freedom’ is the review of ex-
periences of a long life. It has to do with ex-
periences under the Capitalist system, and the
words ‘political action’ are used as they have been
commonly used and understood by the workers ot
Australia for many years.


“I have studied Lenin’s speeches and writings,
and in them have realised what is meant by poli-
tical action in Russia, and the necessity for poli-
tical representation of the workers during the period
of transition from the Capitalist system of produc-
tion to the Workers’ system of production. But
Lenin himself has said that even ‘the mass or-
ganisation of the vanguard of the toilers—of the
industrial proletariat’—represented by the political
Soviets ‘is a transition to Socialist democracy, and
to conditions which will mean the beginning of the
end of the State’. . . .
“Of course, political action through ‘a mass or-
ganisation of the workers’ is not the same
thing as political action in a Capitalist Parliament.
• * • 1 1 have this mental reservation in respect to
political action, though. It is not intended to be
penrianent—even within a Proletarian Republic.
When the Republic of the Workers has established
itseJf, every step musjt be towards repression of
the political system. ... I would use the political
machine to destroy itself.”
Eyes flashing, his voice took the organ tones
or his old-time oratory:
~ Emerson says: ‘The less government we have
the better—the fewer laws, and the less confided
power. . To educate the wise man the State
e ? 1S o S J / ind lth the a PPearance of the wise man
ihe State expires.’ . . ’
He went on quoting from Emerson’s essav on
“Politics” and from “Self-Reliance.” 7
I read a paragraph of the manifesto of the Com-
munist Party of Australia:—
“We Communists assert the futility of waiting
for the achievement of our ideal by legislation
through existing legislative institutions, as these
institutions are expressly a part and parcel of
the capitalist system and therefore cannot be


utilised for the purpose of abolish' j that system.
The overthrow of the system means equally the
overthrow of all the political r. j nine of the sys-
tem, Parliament and police, army and navy, etc.
The new machine which will l e established by
organised force of the workers in mass action,
for the protection of the new order in the estab-
lishment of its new economic and social system
will be the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. This
is only a temporary phase in the new order, and
will only exist for the complete establishment of
that new order against the inevitable attempts
of the now possessing classes who will then be
deprived of their property, to reconquer that pro-
perty back again into their private ownership.”
“That’s right,” Monty said. “That’s right.”
We talked of the Third International, and he
said that he accepted its principles and programme.
It has to be remembered, when reading “Labor’s
Road to Freedom,” that Monty’s life and experiences
had brought him to the period of I.W.W. organisa-
tion in Australia. In approving the manifesto of the
Communist Party, he was approving a militant or-
ganisation of the working class. He has read of dif-
ferences between members of the I.W.W. and Com-
munists. But, since his illness, his mental vigour
is not equal to realising them, I think; it frets and
worries him to discuss them. The newly-formed
Communist Party of Australia has his
but it is as an old member of the I.W.W. —an in-
dustrialist—and a materialist, despite his love of
Emerson, we must think of him.
In the dark days ahead, the thought of Monty
Miller—his life of loyal and valiant sacrifice —will be
like a light to urge and inspire those of us who have
known his friendship and who hope to serve with the
workers for overthrow of the Capitalist system.


(Later.)
Soon after the above note was written, and a few
days after he had seen the proofs of this book,
Monty Miller died at his daughter’s home in Perth.
His brain remained clear to the last, although his
poor body was wasted with suffering; the great
spirit burning within had reduced it to white ash and
a boney framework, it seemed.
He had made all arrangement for his last journey,
so that neither priestcraft nor bourgeois pomp might
have anything to do with his going back to earth.
An open lorry bore the plain wooden coffin, draped
with red, on which lay his Miner’s Right of Eureka
days, and the bunches of red and white flowers sent
by women comrades. Mr. T. Walker, M.L.A., an old
friend, read a poem Monty had asked him to read
to the friends, comrades and representatives of
working class organisations who assembled at his
graveside. Mr. Walker’s oration in homage and
farewell, it is said, was as moving and impressive
as Marc Antony’s over the dead body of Caesar. “The
Red Flag” was sung, and many men and women were
weeping when the sand rained on all that was mortal
of dear, brave and splendid Monty Miller. What was
immortal went with them from Karrakatta, in the
memory of his noble character and life of heroic ser-
vice.
Monty himself wished it known that he was dying
“after a long and painful illness borne with atheistic
fortitude derived from the glory of materialistic
philosophy.”
KATHARINE SUSANNAH THROSSELL.
Dec. 4th, 1920.


AUTHOR’S NOTE
The analysis of the great Labor problem con-
tained in this pamphlet, though written to the work-
ing class of Australia, is as applicable to the work-
ing class of the planet Earth, irrespective of latitude,
longitude, or nationality, since their disabilities and
wrongs arise from the same one cause, which, in the
present, as the past, gives existence to all the varied
forms of injustice and oppression that afflict the
great majority of mankind.
It is the intention of the author to portray the
nature of these existing evils, and also the futile
methods that have been devised to cope with and
counteract them, and, further, to point out the path-
way that will lead to a growing immunity from them,
and ultimately to a full emancipation from the pre-
sent iniquitous system of wage-slave production.
At present the workers are not retained so much
by the powers of their oppressors in this wage-slave
condition, as they are by their own supine and in-
effective methods of endeavor to make a great and
invincible army by wise organisation. Up to the
present time this organisation has not been achieved
in Australia, since all the sectional unions, and
Trades Hall affiliation of the same in each State, and
their combination over the Commonwealth in the
A.L.P.—plus its political councils and leagues
inaugurated to secure parliamentary representation
—do not constitute any effective organisation of the
labor army in the Class War for possession by the
workers of the product of their industrial energy.
The achievement of this full and adequate or-
ganisation of the workers is at present in the em-
bryo stage, so far as the mass is concerned, and the


endeavor of a few workers in each State to organise
“Industrial Unionism” based on the teachings of
economic and industrial science as taught in the
writings of Karl Marx, met with a storm of persecu-
tive prosecutions from the capitalistic owners of the
means of wealth. In their effort to stamp out this
method of organisation, the Oppressors of the work-
ers have for a time checked its development, but
they have also revealed their recognition of its po-
tency.
The enemies of Labor only attack that which is
of virile militancy to their nefarious interests as a
class, and the measure of their fear is the drastic
nature of their attack on those who organise in a
manner to carry the class war into the citadel of
capitalism.
Nor has the object lesson of the penalties in-
flicted on this small section of militants in Labor
organisation been lost on the rank and
file of the Sectional Labor Unions and
a few of their leaders, and the result of
the lesson is a conviction that some new method of
solidarity in future organisation must supersede the
effete system of craft unionism. It is this convic-
tion that has raised all over Australia the slogan
of the Industrial Workers of the World, “One Big
Union!”
The oneness and simplicity of such a mode of
organisation is well adapted to the present state of
the working class mind, fogged and obscured by the
multitude of ideas which have been presented to
the workers by Trades Hall Councils, Political Coun-
cils, Wages Boards, Arbitration Courts and Judges,
Union Secretaries and Presidents, Workers’ Educa-
tion Associations, etc., etc. This mental haziness of
the working class mind, which is pitiful to contem-
plate, results from the dependence of the workers on
approved and elected groups of men to do their


thinking for them, and determine their methods and
tactics in action, political and industrial. Happily,
of late years, a spirit of resistance to any form of
official decree, as to lines of thought or action to be
adopted, in political or industrial connections, has
arisen among the workers. Strikes are no longer ap-
proved, discredited or settled by the few as against
the many, and it must be accepted as a sign of ad-
vancing intelligence, when large unions by the
excogitation process of their own brains, determine
their line of action, and move along it, unheeding
alike of officialdom, politicians, the intimidations of
Arbitration Courts, or any other form of law.
Dependence on the leading of a professional class
of officials and political proxies has, by its enervat-
ing influence for over quarter of a century, robbed
the mass of the workers of their original power to
initiate ideas, and work them in the loom of their
collective thought into a new fabric of industrial or-
ganisation.
Careful reading and study of the annals of the
Labor movement in Australia will convince anyone
possessed of the faculty of critical analysis that the
failure of the workers in the past to secure any
measure of radical change in the existing order of
production and distribution, has not been so much
owing to the obstacles presented by capitalism as
to absence of the right application of the invincible
power which resides within themselves, such appli-
cation being the full direction of their splendid force
against weak points in the system of their task
masters.
The author, in writing this presentation of the
Labor problem, is fully aware that it will not be re-
ceived with any degree of approval by the majority
of those to whom it is addressed; still the Truth
must be announced, and the heralds of it must not
be cajoled or allured from their purpose by the glit-
tering iridescence of the bubble of popularity.
MONTY MILLER.




Labor’s Road to Freedom
CHAPTER I.
SOME EARLY HISTORY.
“ Politicians as a class are men who have interests quite
apart from those of the general public, and for this reason are
not to be trusted, and taken as a class, they are, to say the
least, men whose ways are one long step removed from
honesty. And I say this all the more readily, being myself a
politician, and therefore cannot be considered as making per-
sonal remarks that do not apply to myself in common with
others.”—President Abraham Lincoln.
This sweeping- indictment of all politicians by the
greatest statesman of America is in keeping with
the testimony of the finest intellects of his country-
men, and the impeachment holds good in regard to
politicians of all countries, including Australia.
Since the great obstruction to securing a radical
change in the prevailing mode of capitalistic pro-
duction for profit by the system of wage slavery is
the great political superstition, of necessity a fair
amount of the space of this pamphlet must be used
in an endeavor to clear the working class mind of
the false idea that political government can ever free
the workers from the disabilities which impede the
progress of Labor on its road to Freedom.
In the early annals of the Australian Labor
movement, the first great conflicts with Capitalism
were disastrous to the workers.
The first contest of Labor against the master
class on a large scale was that of the Shearers’ and
Bushworkers’ Union, in conflict with the Pastoral-
ists’ Association. The contest commenced in


Queensland, and in rapid succession spread to New
South Wales, on into Victoria, and then to South
AustrsliE#
The conflict was severe, and protracted from
weeks into months, during which the workers suf-
fered all the vicissitudes, from loss of employment
to the ever-culminating distress of famine when
Union funds became exhausted and the financial sup-
port of Unions of other Workers began to dwindle
to vanishing point. To these many privations was
added the persecution of Law, set in motion by the
squatter and banking fraternity, on trumped-up
charges supported by the usual perjured evidence,
resulting in the conviction of some of the strongest
gladiators of the workers’ cause. The charges were
in every case Incendiarism, by burning off the pas-
turage of the pastoralists’ holdings, and more par-
ticularly the destruction by fire of a large wool shed.
The jury was a packed one of financial and commer-
cial magnates, all more or less partisans of the pro-
secuting section, and the final result was conviction,
with sentences varying from three years to twelve
months, all carrying penal servitude. One
of the accused in connection with the charge ot
burning the wool shed proved an alibi of being a
hundred miles from the scene of the fire at the time
of its occurrence. Of no avail, the alibi was rulea
out, as in the case of Charles Reeves, one of the ill-
fated twelve men of the I.W.W.
The next industrial battle against the master
class was the memorable maritime strike of the Aus-
tralian seamen against the “Australian United
Steam Navigation C 0.,” in which all grades of Labor
employed in the shipping industry were engaged.
Again, as in the case of the shearers’ strike, the
Capitalist class, being better financed and organised,
simply refused all conference with the seamen, and
played the waiting game till the workers were re-


duced by famine to the necessity that knows no law,
and were compelled to resume work on the same
terms as they rebelled against.
After this, followed the first Broken Hill mining
strike, in which was repeated the tragic sufferings of
the miners, their wives and children. Again was
the majesty of the law invoked, with the inevitable
result that two of the Miners’ Union officials were
arrested and were committed for criminal trial.
Then was set up the damnable precedent of
shifting the venue of trial from the locality of the
alleged offence. The accused were remanded to
Deniliquin, a pastoral district many hundreds of
miles from Broken Hill, w T here they were cut off from
all communication with their compatriots in indus-
try, legal advisers, and witnesses, while the cost of
their defence was a heavy strain on the Miners’
Union. As usual, and as was intended, the accused
men, Sleath and Ferguson, were convicted and sen-
tenced to years of imprisonment with hard labor.
This repeated victimisation of strikers by the
law gave birth to determination on the part of the
workers to organise a better defence for their in-
dustrial liberty.
Then commenced in real earnest the work of
political organisation, based on belief that the tragic
failures of industrial conflicts were owing to a lack
of political power. Here Labor stood at the parting
of the ways, and had it chosen the straight path-
way of perfecting its ineffective industrial methods,
by building up out of the divided sectional Unions
a solid industrial army with concert in thought, unity
in action, and a clear-cut order of campaign, and had
a wise use been made of all the energy and money
wasted on the long experiments in political attempts
to strengthen and better the conditions of the work-
ing class, we should by his time have had an in-


vincible Labor movement that would be giving ob-
ject lessons to the working classes of the world.
In choosing the political mode of organisation,
the great mistake was made, but it was inevitable—
inevitable because the mental perception of the
working class of that time did not, and could not,
discern the futility of politics as in any degree a
corrective to the wrongs they were enduring.
During all this period of struggle by the Labor
organisations of Australia, the only ideal which ob-
tained was that of the early Trade Union movement
of England, an entirely false ideal arising from the
belief that somewhere along the line of contention
between employers and employees there was a point
at which could be found the meaning of Truth and
Justice for both parties. That belief later on was
expressed in the foolish formula: “A fair day’s work
for a fair day’s wage.”
Actuated by this delusive idea, the working class
entered the political lists to secure political power,
hoping, by Labor government legislative enactments,
to win what they had failed to secure by crude and
unintelligent modes of sectional unionism in the in-
dustrial arena.
The motive inducing the Labor Party to enter
the domain of politics was recognised merely as a
means to an end. The attainment of the means was
a signal success. Labor members in the parliaments
of the various States of the Commonwealth gradu-
ally became an increasing number, till they reached
to such majorities that Labor Governments in suc-
cession from time to time held the sceptre of admini-
stration in all the States with the exception of Vic-
toria.
The means having thus been secured, it remained
to be shown what could be done to bring the desired
end into materialised existence.


CHAPTER II.
THE POLITICAL SUPERSITITION.
“Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of
good repute, these things do really govern politics and save
or destroy States. They save or destroy them by a silent,
inexorable fatality, whilst the politicians are making believe,
plausibly and noisily.”—Matthew Arnold.
Just as when the eminent man of letters wrote
the above sweeping indictment against politics and
politicians, so even at the present time does the
“silent, inexorable fatality” of all the things enu-
merated in the quotation constitute to-day the social,
mental, moral and economic force of the world, in-
cluding the Labor movement of Australia, which
would have developed more rapidly but for the ob-
struction of the politicians, who “are making believe
plausibly and noisily.”
Surely, if there be even one instance of politicians
having saved the people in the mass from some one
of the destroying influences referred to by Arnold,
it could be adduced as a part defence of the cause
of those who still clamor for politics and parliaments
as the one way out from the bondage of darkest
Capitalism.
When Labor in politics became consolidated and
gained the office of administration, possession of the
keys of the Treasury, command of the Police and
Military Forces, and rule of the quarter-deck of the
few war vessels in Australian possession, great
things were expected by the working class.
But nothing of any advantage eventuated, for the
oath of admission sworn to by each representative
prior to taking his seat is of such a constitutional
and loyalty-binding nature as to preclude all possi-
bility of real betterment of the conditions of labor,


save and except by actual felony or treason, since all
the constitutional means prescribed are “devised,
sent and intended to maintain and preserve property
interests,” such interests requiring the abject sub-
mission of the working mass.
When the “Labor” members who had captured
the political machine of the various States (except
Victoria) discovered that the machine had captured
them, there commenced the “making believe, plaus-
ible and noisy,” referred to by Arnold.
Political promises of future legislative enact-
ments to improve the condition of labor and secure
to the workers a larger share of the economic re-
sources they produced became the chief feature in
the “making believe” policy of the various State
groups of representatives of the deluded workers
who had pinned their faith to the skirts of political
institutions and parliamentary representation.
With the inauguration of Federation, the Labor
Party soon gained an ascendancy sufficient to take
administrative control of affairs, but it must be re-
membered that neither in Federal or State Parlia-
ments did they ever have a majority in both Houses.
Here, again, the working class became victims to
the great delusion, the political superstition, that by
sending a majority of proxies to the Federal Houses
of Parliament the passage of law that would be of
material benefit to the working class could be se-
cured. The while they remained sweetly innocent
and densely ignorant of the fact that behind Thrones
and Parliaments there is a power which writes and
places on Statute Books all laws that rule every peo-
ple in every land, and that power is the power of
Wealth —the power of property. As Emerson re-
cords : “Property writes the Law.”
All ideas which take possession of the human
mind in final classification may be resolved into two
kinds—the true and the false. Of all false ideas


there is none can transcend the one which is the
basis of the political superstition, and which befogs
the mind of the rank and file of the working mass
of every land. Be it understood, the term “rank and
file” is used most advisedly, since the political and
official union leaders of the rank and file are fully
aware of the hoax their devotees are under the spell
of, and which induces them to flock like sheep or
cattle to pens (called Polling Booths), there to cast
pieces of paper into ballot boxes as a means of de-
ciding on a selected or elected group of men to be
parliamentary representatives for three or four
years, in State or Federal Parliaments respectively.
The superstition consists in the sincere belief of
the voters that they, in some mysterious way, deter-
mine the nature and choice of laws and provisions
passed or made in the interval of the parliamentary
term, whereas all they have done is to help in deter-
mining which set of men shall act as their proxies,
and they have no more share in the government of
the country by their so voting than those they elect
to represent them.
This ignorance of the true position of Labor in
politics, and of the futility of politics as a means
to industrial emancipation, is the most deplorable
feature in the present working class movement, un-
less it be the inaptitude of the workers, individually
and collectively, to receive right education on the
matter.
“That no two bodies can occupy the same space
at the same time” is a self-evident proposition in
physics, and is as true in the mental domain. No
two sets of ideas, in direct opposition, can occupy the
same mind at the same time.
Nothing makes manifest so strongly the calamity
of false education as this tendency of the subjects
of it to resist the importation of new and true ideas.
Side by side with education must be carried on dis


education to prepare the mind for the reception of
truth in economic and industrial science.
For a quarter century the workers of Aus-
tralia have been leaning against these rotten but-
tresses of political methods, and accepting the false
light and leading of the make believe, plausible and
noisy politicians, and their chief supporters, the offi-
cials of Trades Hall institutions in each State.
The effect of all this is that the rank and file of
the so-called Labor movement have lost the power of
initiation in thought and action, till their helpless-
ness in times of unemployment, strikes, lockouts,
shortening of hands consequent on glutted markets,
is most pitiable.
The long past reliance on parliaments has pre-
vented concentration of the workers on the fields of
industry, with a view to closer and wiser methods
of organisation, on the industrial field only. And
this concentration of the workers on the industrial
field is necessary because the wrongs and many disa-
bilities of the toilers are not political wrongs, neither
are they civil wrongs, nor are they actually, per se,
social wrongs. The root wrong from which all these
proceed is economic, and can only be fought and re-
sisted in the industrial arena, as the battlefield of
the great industrial army of the future, against the
army of Capitalism.
This total inadequacy of parliament to give even
a first instalment of radical alteration in the exist-
ing mode of production and distribution has not been
lost, as an object lesson, on the more intelligent
members of Craft and Trade Unions, with the re-
sult that an industrial world unrest has manifested
itself in unions affiliated under Trades Hall manage-
ment. This feeling of discontent has gone so far
with many of the workers that they have—to use
the expressive phrase of Labor leaders—“got out of
hand,” as witnessed in late mining and maritime


strikes, in which the Unions concerned refused all
political or official intervention. This was largely
the case in the last Seamen’s strike, and a more
r.otable instance is the present Broken Hill mining
strike, which, on the self-directed concert of thought
and unity in action, has stood out against the com-
bined powers of Capitalism for a longer period than
ever before recorded in the annals of Australian in-
dustrial warfare.
The coal workers’ strike against the eight-hour
shift, independent of time expended in getting from
bank to bank, was another instance of direct action
on the part of the workers concerned. “No compro-
mise” was their watchword, and their victory, and
how they won out, are now significant incidents of
industrial history.
This action of the workers in the cases mentioned
is a part abandonment of the old-time reliance on
official and political leaders, and the adoption, in
part, of the principles of Industrial Unionism, with
its leading feature of “direct action” as opposed to
the obsolete sectional unionism, with its spirit of
compromise, as a means of settling strikes—and
simultaneously settling the chances of the workers
to get a step forward on the way to true solidarity
in organisation.
A reference on the part of the reader to the quo-
tation from Abraham Lincoln at the head of Chapter
I. will furnish the opinion of that greatest of Ameri-
can statesmen, on the interests of politicians—
“ Politicians, as a class, have interests quite apart
from those of the general public.” Quite so. The
interests of the politician, Labor or Conservative,
are of a true parity, and that is to preserve and con-
tinue the existing state of things from which their
position is derived and continued. The material in-
terests of the union officials from whose ranks the
magnates of Trades Hall councils are drawn, and


from whose ranks, in turn, politicians are selected,
on behalf of Labor, have no difference in kind, but
only in a slight degree of interest. And, as the
Union president or the secretary gets on to the next
step, the little difference in degree of his material
interests becomes less marked, and when he attains
the top step in the stairway of political ascension,
Trades Hall secretary or president, the slight line of
difference has become so faint that practically his
material interests are identical with those of the re-
presentation of Labor in politics.
Attaining the position of Labor M.L.A., or pre-
ferably that of Senator or M.H.R., may be called
getting on to the landing of the first flight of the
stairway, from which starts the second stairway, at
the top of which is the grand landing, where are the
riches of political fortune. Only the most cunning,
avaricious and unscrupulous have a chance of strug-
gling up this ascent. Any man who is not prepared
to cast off the last vestige of whatever manhood may
still remain to him after reaching the first landing,
need not attempt to place his foot on the first step.
Over the portal of Dante’s inferno was inscribed
the words: “Abandon hope all ye who enter here.”
On this stairway of ambition, lust of power, greed,
and love of pomp, should be inscribed in letters of
Hell-fire: “Abandon virtue who hope to climb this
ascent.”
At the top of the stair are the gifts of high office,
from Government Whip to Premier of State or Prime
Ministership of the Commonwealth. These are the
gilded baits on the traps of ambition, lust of power,
greed of gold, and the lure of titled distinction, for
which men sell their souls.
There is no man who can resist the demoralising
influence of politics; the moral fibre of the noblest
soul would, in time, be sapped and corroded by it.
The writer of these pages, in the earliest days of


the Labor movement, took an active part in building
up the Labor political organisation, and witnessed
with shame and sorrow the defection of Labor poli-
ticians, whose fine integrity of character had in-
duced the belief that their principles could resist all
temptations of place, pay, or power. Where are
these men? Not one of them all has survived the
corrupting influence of politics. Many rose to be
State Premiers, in which position they betrayed the
best interests of the workers, and in many cases
played the part of traitors to large bodies of workers
in strike conflict with Capitalism.
There is not one man to-day in politics who has
remained true to his election pledges to his constitu-
ents on working class principles.
I admit that many fine young men, with sincere
desire to advocate, and fight for, the Labor cause in
the arena of politics, were from time to time re-
turned to State Parliaments, but the nature of the
oath of admission to the House, and the environment
of the party, with the damnably infamous institu-
tion of the Caucus, soon revealed to them the utter
hopelessness of their efforts to give any measure of
relief to those they had left toiling in the pits of
darkness of mining life, and to the workers im-
prisoned within the walls of factories.
The first decadence arising out of this recogni-
tion of the inutility of politics on the part of Labor
members of parliament was evidenced by a giving
way to environment and a settling down to make
the best of a bad job. Securing their own advance-
ment by joining the band of “politicians making
believe, plausibly and noisily,” was a natural conse-
quence of this attitude of mind. A few—very few-
resigned from the debasing position, and saved their
manhood at the expense of the jibes and sneers of
their class, as being faint hearts and white feathers.
One whom the writer knew and respected—aye,


loved as a younger brother —because of the shock of
disappointment to his fine moral sensibility, died
in the flower of early manhood with a broken heart
—a tragic fate, but better than that of the degener-
ates who either filled drunkards’ graves or became
the black-hearted traitors who dealt out “law and
order” with penal servitude to the noblest sons of
Labor’s army.
This impeachment of political institutions and
parliamentary representations of Labor needs no
citation of any particular instances or individuals to
support it, since the treachery of every Labor parlia-
ment, Federal or State in succession, is so well
known. The futility of political institutions has
been so demonstrated as to require no further evi-
dence to clear the cobwebs of superstitious belief
from the working class mind, as to their inefficiency
to realise the Marxian ideal of full social redemption
and economic emancipation of the world’s Working
Class—Humanity.
CHAPTER III.
THE NECESSITY OF EDUCATION.
“The roots of the present lie deep in the past, and nothing
in the past is dead to the mind that would truly understand
how the present came to be what it is.” —Stubbs’ Constitu-
tional History of England.
The full embodiment of the full meaning in and
between the lines of the above statement would re-
quire a lengthy exposition that does not come within
the province of a pamphlet such as this. Neverthe-
less, its distinct applicability to the problem of the
Labor movement makes it essential that a definite
showing of its deep purport should be given.
All of the institutions under which we live, and
which, in their aggregate, we term society, have


their roots in the dim and distant past. Unquestion-
ably in human affairs, society itself was the first in-
stitution.
The genesis or origin of society is found when
primaeval man’s intelligence reached the perception
that in numbers there was a greater security than
alone.
The next stage in social evolution appeared when
the tide of primaeval consciousness had risen to the
idea of the family group—-the Gens. While this
stage of early society prevailed, it was based on the
system of pure communism and an equity sharing
in procuring the means of subsistence and
in its distribution. When increase of popula-
tion began to overlap the respective hunting grounds
of the gens, or groups, conflicts arose from the clash
of rival groups. Then came the next stage in social
evolution—the Tribal State —in which the gens’
groups were absorbed by a number of them linking
together to form a tribe, for security against aggres-
sion by similar adjoining tribes, and, in their turn,
to make aggression. During the transition from the
gens stage of society to the tribal stage there came
into existence two new institutions. When the gens
groups became merged in the tribal system, the af-
finity of the consanguineous link and the sympathe-
tic family bond of communism perforce gave way
to the spirits of self, and the more cunning, greedy
and courageous exacted for themselves the greater
share of the means of subsistence. Any resistance,
or even any objection, to such oppression was, as
to-day, met by the strong arm of the Law—Club
Law.
Here was the appearance of the institution of
property and also, in quick sequence, the institution
of war, to secure and maintain ownership. With
this appearance of private ownership, established by
brutal force, and maintained by such force, there


was brought into being the elementary principle of
militarism—warfare instituted for the acquisition
and maintenance of property.
“Wherever there are soldiers there will be slaves,
and, conversely, where there are no slaves, there
will be no soldiers.” Hence the power of the club
soon brought into existence the institution of Chat-
tel Slavery. As the number of these slaves of pro-
duction increased in excess of their oppressors, re-
volts became frequent. This induced the exploiters
to draw out of the revolting slaves’ ranks. Every man
who had shown himself courageous in spirit and
strong in battle, thus weakened the enslaved class
and added to his own security. The reward of those
who thus basely deserted their class was an exemp-
tion from slave toil and a greater share of subsis-
tence exploited from the remaining weakened and
conquered slaves.
Notwithstanding the frequent suppression of re-
volts, the ever-slowly advancing intelligence of the
oppressed class expressed itself in further revolts on
a larger scale.
This persistence for liberty, or, at least, a miti-
gation of the severity of the task-masters, gave rise
to the necessity of some new device to supplement
military force in keeping in subjection the slave class.
Taking advantage of the superstition of the mass,
who saw in every force of the elements some dread
power to be feared and propitiated, a new set of
hirelings was appointed to divert this ignorance and
fear into the channels of superstitious religious be-
lief, and to impose on the duped slaves, a blind be-
lief that all the forces they dreaded were on the side
of their oppressors, and were expressions of anger
by some great mysterious power who directed and
controlled them. This imposition of ignorant belief
on the mind of the slave mass had a power of in-
timidation which, though begotten of the black ig


norance of the past, yet continues and persists in the
present, with a degree of modification to suit it to
the acceptation of modern slaves, for the same pur-
pose as it was originally devised and intended, viz.,
to hold the mass in subjection by priestly intimida-
tion in the interests, as of old, of the ruling class,
and for the protection of their most unholy and in-
iquitous system of private ownership.
During all the period of this social and industrial
evolution the ruling class held councils to formulate
further methods for consolidation of their power and
property interests, and here commenced the germi-
nal stage that has developed into modem institutions
of civil government, with its codes of law, constitu-
tional, civil and criminal, all respectively and collec-
tively devised and intended to protect the ruling
class in the acquisition and possession of the means
of life, the just and natural heritage of humanity as
a whole.
This brief and simple exposition of the origin of
institutions should make clear to the working class
mind that to expect either State, Church, or poli-
ticians to work out the deliverance of the wage slave
class of modem times, is the strongest mark of the
incapacity of the great mass of the Labor slaves in
every land for wise organisation, scientific organisa-
tion of a great industrial army. Such an army, hold-
ing in contempt Union officialdom, political leaders
(?), master class Courts of Arbitration, and their
legal intimidation, likewise casting off all control of
priest-cultured conscience, and relying solely upon
the splendid power which resides in themselves—
their labor power—and motived by true morality,
could take control of their great and sacred cause,
and, guided by their collective wisdom, move on to
the goal of their sublime ideal, Truth, Justice, and
Freedom for humanity at large. That is the great
mission of the working class.


Of course, the undertaking of this new depar-
ture in industrial organisation requires a common
standard of intelligence which can only be attained
by wise self-culture of the individual members of the
Industrial union.
Since all action proceeds from thought, wise or-
ganisation can only result from education of the
workers in economic and industrial science, which,
like all science, has an elementary basis that can be
imparted to the young of each sex.
But as the institution of our education is also
devised to teach only what tends to induce subser-
vience to the existing order, this most needed item
of instruction is purposely cut out of the curriculum
of State education, and in the place of it and other
lines of useful knowledge, we have Bible instruction
in State schools—or some equally pernicious brain
poison. Therefore, a real healthy education of the
working class must precede organisation on the
principles of industrial unionism expressed through
the One Big Union.
Many of the rank and file of Labor have already
gained a fairly clear perception of what is meant by
this new mode of organisation, and all such have
been branded as extremists by Employers’ Federa-
tions, schools of politicians, Labor officials, and a
great number of reactionary spirits among the timid
and unprogressive workers. Hence these outlaws
are driven to defend themselves and their advanced
Labor ideals by forming small locals of Industrial
Unionism, and carrying on independent and fearless
propaganda against all the obsolete and treacherous
methods of organisation in vogue.
The reception of these bearers of the new evangel
of Labor, which can and will give in its full strength
a complete redemption to Labor from the bondage of
wage slavery, has been a black disgrace to the work-
ing class of Australia. Prior to the inception of “the


Great War,” these advocates and their supporters
of the principles of the Industrial Workers of the
World, better known as the 1.W.W., were assailed
by all and sundry of the slave class, as usual, incited
by politicians of every color, and union officials who
made common cause with them in pouring out on
this small band of Industrial Revolutionists the vials
of wrath, slander and malevolent abuse in an en-
deavor to curse them outside the pale of public at-
tention. . , , , ..
They, the denounced ones, refused to be so easily
disposed of, and attacked the rotten citadels of their
traducers, challenging them to public debate, but
such invitations were invariably met with the dis-
cretion that is proverbially the better part of valor.
When “the Great War” started, the principles of
the I.W.W. compelled its members to oppose mili-
tarism in every form, and to openly oppose them-
selves to the action of a Labor politician of high de-
gree who pledged the “last man and the last shilling”
of Australia to the war on his own ipse dixit state-
ment.
As soon as an attempt was made to throw the
conscription noose around the necks of the Austra-
lian workers, men of the I.W.W. were foremost and
first in opposition to the base attempt. This attitude
of the I.W.W. gave them a splendid opportunity to
vindicate their claim to solidarity, as they remained
in solid phalanx form, opposing conscription till the
lasso of law and order was thrown around them in
every State and the best and strongest advocates
were roped into the sweet seclusion of cell life.
On the other hand, the solidarity of the Australian
Labor Party was revealed by its disruption into two
sections —one of these being dubbed the “National-
ist Labor Party,” and the other the “Official Labor
Party.” The first faction was animated by the false
glamor of loyalty, patriotism, King and Country, and


a bull-headed desire to participate in the wholesale
slaughter going on in Europe, as well as by a burn-
ing desire to find a job in it for all the unemployed
of Australia, and the employed as well. The other
faction opposed itself to conscription, and shared in
the public odium that ever attaches to a minority
with a right idea. With this exception, this second
faction pretty well remains anchored to its old politi-
cal faith, and thereby still hugs the old-time chains
of wage slavery.
Meanwhile, the 1.W.W., subjected to the brutal
persecution of mob law and statute law alike, capi-
talistic in origin and application, have, though bend-
ing to the storm, yet kept rooted to their principles
and propaganda, with the result that the
ideas embodied in the famous preamble, have spread
over Australia, largely consequent on the industrial
unrest—pre-war in its existence, but intensified by
the war, and more strongly by the now current after-
math. These principles are finding acceptance with
such numbers of the sectional unionists as to rouse
feelings of alarm in the dovecotes of Trades Hall
officialdom, and politicians, who are waking up to a
perception, long ago cognised by Capitalism, that
this rejected stone of Industrialism will yet be the
chief corner-stone in the temple of the newer and
better structure of Labor organisation.
The master class of every country, but particu-
larly of America and Australia, soon saw that this
latest method of organisation was potent for danger
to their interests. One of the magnates of the Trust
combine of America said to his fellow Capitalists:
“This new form of workers’ unionism called the
I.W.W. is the thing we must watch closely, and op-
pose, for if it becomes adopted by the working class
as a whole, we shall have a power to deal with that
will imperil our interests to a greater extent than the
combined forces of the present trade unions and so


cialism, because alone! with
pmdpte and t
partments of indusuy, wim industr ial army,
Slcd'ina somewhat similar manner to our own
modelled in a somew nisation> and we must at
accosts crush this rising wherever it makes its ap-
Pea wh‘were the words spoken by J. Schwab, head
of America has . ut al efforts of the trusts to
heart, [ t nce the I.W.W. in every industry
stamp out ot e ;ff^ C p e * en t time 2000 I.W.W. men
in America, at
are in the dung states As a means of strik-
ingtoror into toe hearts of ’ Socialists, their chief,
I.W.W. man, noi sensor 10 yearg> wh; , st the
toe I W.W., William Haywood, is in
head chief of toe of twenty year s.
inflicted on these two gladiators in the lists
E b at 10 000 dollars micT'ltoywood 20,000 dollars,
of imPri^nmeni. being: in both case^J-
temative for the United States
Sssrsvsi srattsaa


&i a]ism / e r re > but the isolation of noble lion-
stTn to Wt l°’ while they walk the Zh, %£
Sty. marChlng ranks of working class Hu!
prison** Vh a+ T b * and Haywood languish in
, h at ls wh y there were in this sunny Austral
li, "' 6 ™ Vi. ue l“ en ’ bravest and best of their dass
the prisorfwalk nf «,° rS penal serv itude behind’
South Wale! I Thft wide scattered gaols of New
Why ! he eolation system, the
treatment, Sbeel mldeTofeeTmore acutdy tte
tortunng spear-thrusts of anguish into hSrt and
the thi f, attempt of tyranny to crush
t.l °t truth in the sacred cause of the World
gr ° WS ?“ d gains strength!
treeoS^^
the day is fast coming when these Tong serf! of the
martyrdoms of Labor will cease, not because ofnnv
th™ P ever°lwlv e r ° f jUStice J " Capitahsm but by
”ng nah!s nC of ( bs d tbey are , ma n y >’ are but the Sow!
proachimr adnlr c/t 1 dho<H i arld indications of ap-
P * s , tature and giant strength,
is chapter has stressed the necessitv of
Sndude C it°with a a d indl ' s ‘ riai - Tt will be fitting^
My%^c ng d^^l wor,d this subli ™
tellectua? of make it^and


but little is gamed while merely one fals ® l^s^ d
plants another. But we must at last, one day and
forever cross the line between nonsense and com-
monsense, and on that day we shall pass from politi-
cal government to industrial administration, from
individualism in competition to individual co-opera-
tion from paternalism, begotten in times of darkest
itrnorance and fetish worship to universal brother-
E of man, from despotism and war in all their
forms to sweet peace and liberty of every shape.
CHAPTER IV.
SOCIALISM.
‘■Workers of the world, unite! You have only your chains
t 0 'Tt ifL th mSn d o^tSworking :d«> to abolish Capi-
talism, and incidentally terminate .wage slavery.
The first quotation is the glorious battle-cry of
Karl Marx summoning to unity all those whose only
Dossession’ of material property is the chains they
wear. The second quotation is from the same great
authority giving his declaration as to the mission,
evlngd or gospel of the workers, and contains the
sublime ideal of present-day socialism—the social
rpdpmntion of the workers from all the
ms working class flesh is heir to under Capitalism,
old The full emancipation from wage slavery. This
sublime ideLl is at the bottom of all the present-day
sections of the Labor movement; but in most cases
those who would make it the fly-wheel or motor cen-
tre to the movement have such a vague and indis-
tinct perception of what it truly means, that they
fail to impart its principles to their methods and
tactics, and thereby are unable to answer practically
the Marxian trumpet call for unity.


i This defect in right perception, of course ore-
nature of thfiotl°*- a C °" e ® t under standing ofttie
nature ot the collective mission of the workers and
f e fl l ndlvl( ? ual . shar . e * n and herein lies the cause
of the supine inaction of many unions.
Austmha m fhp tJ ari 5 U | s ?. cialist throughout
Mat in’ san ?, e def ? ctlve Perception as to whom
manffStprI d in°«, nlt n t Xlsts ’ and the result of this is
manifested m the heterogenous composition of the
membership which is made up of small capitalist
employers of labor and members of the lowS stmta
terests fatff ™s variety of material in-
terests m the membership forms undercurrents of
difference m thought and feeling, and can never lead
th ®. ? olldarit y which are the primary
essentials of Marxian Socialism. primary
Of course, there are as many schools of Social-
ism as there are schools of politicians. They rane-e
from the Fabian Society— quite an academic and re-
spectable group, with Mr. Bernard Shaw, Professor
hvht<2L W a a f d , his wife > Mrs. Webb, as leading
lights—and include various phases of more or
ess radical thought as to the reconstruction of so-
ciety. When Mr. Bernard Shaw was invited to come
to Australia on a Socialist lecturing tour it is said he
replied wifh some asperity: “No Sodalist
afford to pay for my services.” As this ornament of
Fabianism (if still of the cult) is reputed to be a mil-
lionaire, he must be credited with veracity in stat-
price hat n ° S ° Cialist Part y c °uld afford to meet his
Great Britain there are, or were before the
war, fhe “British Socialist Party” and also the “So-
ciahst Party of Great Britain,” a vtry fine discrimt
m 4 ' o " ln . The Scottish groups, especially the
Glasgow Association, appear to be nearer to the
To A d ,f a Tf volu tionary party than the others.
In Australia, there is not a Socialist League, As


■inflation or Federation that can claim to be a re-
Eydney” anflddSde, J
gt2SS?St ,, r s i s £ .
dnstriaiunrest, one party desiring a forward move
in direction of the addition of an element of m-
dustrialism to the old show stock in trade of theo-
retical propaganda, with no side of industrial organ -
reticaipiops ’ e nt. This was the casus belli
in each of three States mentioned. In Adelaide, the
m eacn oi imj , i te d by the almost complete
crisis speedily termmat * Local of the IXW .,
lndustrial Workers, and the adop-
i.e., In^ e ?T r»rin doles of the One Big Union (non-
tl0 v f f n h The old show in Melbourne appears to
Ce saied Us bacon to the influence of ma-
have savea it ainst the one commodity pos-
sessedbyliroletarians, with nothing but'Uheir chains
"Fr bic'C." "resuttefiran £
lemWage°of a four groups, each presumably
with it! own orbital line of principle and its distinct
SPe This~ plurality” parties is of exact
narity with sectional unionism and in like manner,
fs a source of weakness and stagnation; but the in-
herent weakness of Socialism is twofold. 0 ... ,
hG The first cause of the weakness of the Socialist
movement is its failure to organise strictly on the
principles laid down by the most masteily critic o
the system we live under, the world has yet had.
Tib the advent of Marx, all the earlier ideas-of
Owen in England, Fourier and Cabet in France, and
mnneer Socialists of Germany—had failed to
™ Jnt a clear concept of the nature of the contest
between the master class and the slave class; wherein


their wrongs and privations consisted; or to devise
any plan of organisation, and line of action, by which
to combat and redress their disabilities.
Mo IS B T eat work remained for the giant intellect
of Marx to achieve, and in pursuance of his task,
he ascertained that the root wrong of Labor under
Capitalism was the malappropriation of the greatest
portion of the product of the workers as a class,
leaving to them only sufficient for the purpose of a
bare subsistence. This small share allotted to the
worker was not m kind of the product of his labor,
Marx pointed out, but under the wage system, it was
a small stipend of purchasing power, in the medium
of exchange— money—with which to obtain the ne-
cessaries of life, or, rather, such portion of the ne-
f^ an l S i, a !j he wo fker’s too meagre wage would af-
STfh A thlS ,!^ a i th P roduced by labor, minus the
small wage subsistence, Marx termed the surplus
value, and clearly demonstrated that this exploited
Vk UG i-i7 aS th ? of the great Per-
petrated by the capitalistic mode of production on
the toiling wage slaves.
treatment by Marx of the problems of capi-
alism is most comprehensive, and every detail is, in
turn, dealt with exhaustively. The various phases
of Capital, Interest, Rent, Price, and Value—relative
and real—are explained, and his defini-
tion of the term worker leaves no doubt as to whom
hIS a P peal , for umty was m ade, and to whom he be-
queathed his great mission—the abolition of Cani-
talism. That this definition is not, as a rule obvious
merit ?f most . S ° ciali sts, the incongruous ele-
ments of their associations reveal. In his definition
of the worker, Marx has unmistakably indicated the
S e / ty L eSS With but his one com-
modity his labor power/’ to live by, and who is
driven by the iron law of necessity to sell it or die.
ihis is the proletanan, the worker of the Marxian


interpretation, who has no property to risk-only
chains to lose.” If those chains were not a figure
of speech implying and expressing the iron limita-
?inn? of necessity but were veritable chains of iron,
Zne- silver or gold, they would not be the pro-
perty of the slave, but of his master just as cer^
F • i v as the iron collar on the neck of the feudal
serfs y Gurth or Wamba, was the property of Cedric
the Saxon or Wulf the Noman, whose names were
stamped on the collar, as identification of ownership,
° f TsTstated byEmeSom “the conditions of the feu-
i o i ovi<;t and continue in the steep inequalities
d ? nnfnwn times ” It is true the collar and chain
are no the public badge of the toilers’ slavery,
but in their place is imposed upon him the diead and
tragic responsibility of making provision for his sub-
Snce raiment and shelter, through periods of
non-employment, sickness, or the blunder of his mas-
fpr over-production. This modification in the
positron of the Capitalistic wage slave, as compared
with that of the feudal serf, has given rise to the
Vagrant Act, pauperism, and all the horrors of slum
Jife destitution, modern prostitution, and the ever "
rising barometer of what is called crime. In the
maioritv of cases, this so-called crime is committed
hi the exercise of, and in natural right based upon an
immutable law, vindicated and justified by the great
mid wise Cardinal Manning when he declared, dur-
ing the Dockers’ Strike, that a starving man had a
natural right to his neighbours bread.
Rnt all these evils of the Capitalistic mode of
production have had an educative effect on the wage
slaves who, in their endeavors for betterment,, so-
c aHy and industrially, have organised at various
t mes since the transition from feudal production.
After trying many methods, the working class has
now settled down to two fixed lines of organisation,


thio u g h the Socialist movement, and in the indus-
tnal arena; but the workers in these organisations
d i vlde f .They have not achieved a concert
This writer heard a Labor politician quoted as
having said a real good thing in declaring that “the
a a so?d V T-f ° f ustralia was a body without
j et S be f aid > as welI > there is a soul
ready and waiting to breathe its vitalising force its
spiritual fire, into the inert mass of the Labor move-
ment, not only of Australia, but of the earth. That
soul is Socialism, which needs a body in which to
unction, and through which to give force to its sub-
th 4- e h - our of Twhight marries Day
and Night, these twain must become one, and the
quickened powers born of this union will soon trans-
ft^ ls te ar-soddened, blood-drenched, sad and
newEarth arted ° d W ° rld int ° a new Heaven and a
+ . ? his fai . lur ® to incorporate itself with the indus-
lf* aI organisations of the workers is the second de-
fect of weakness m the Socialist movement. In all
ot the various groups of Australian Socialists, when
Joins a Socialist party, whatever his or
h - n v ° f f occu P ation may be, there is no
side to the Socialist movement which can conserve
or protect the industrial interests of such individual
and to secure such interests he must find and join up
with some union that works in defence of his posi-
tion as a worker. p
Socialism, as at present organised, having no
power to administer the industrial needs of workers
re sP ectlve lines of association, is powerless.
Socialism has a sublime ideal, but its work is purely
Sr t ‘ifi or rT ant of P racti( =ally incorporating
and quickest movement to infuse > Permeate!


The literary and propaganda work of Socialism
is truly educative, and vastly beneficial in that re-
spect, but its literary and propaganda power could
be operated within the Labor movement, and for a
volume of benefit to which its present achievement
is insignificant. In any case, two organisations with
the same objective supply a duplication of work that
is a practical denial of, or at least a negative to, the
Marxian mandate: “Workers of the world, unite.”
Of course, the chief obstacle to such a blending of
the forces of these two splendid detachments of a
common purpose is material interest, which has an
evil influence on the Labor Party and on the Social-
ists alike. Any movement that subordinates the
principles which make for its attainment to indi-
vidual material interests can never command suc-
cess, and that those who are at the head of these
two movements are dominated largely by such in-
terests is beyond question.
On the Hudibrasian principle that “He who
drives fat oxen should himself be fat,” those who
are at the head of the A.L.P. and the Socialist
parties should be fully class conscious in thought and
action, since the object of both parties is—profes-
sedly—to abolish class and establish equality of con-
ditions for all men. This really means that ambition
in such leaders must be quenched—ambition for
place with pay out of all fair proportion to the pay
of the working class, ambition for soft jobs with
high salaries, ambition for political preferment in
in the hope of high office and rich emoluments, am-
bition for preferment by governments to posts such
as those of unnecessary Agent Generalships, High
Commissionerships, members of worse than useless
basic wage boards and as equally useless posts in Ar-
bitration Courts. Only one ambition can serve in the
class war against the nefarious and foul methods of
Capitalism, and that one ambition is achievement of


the great sacred mission bequeathed to the working
class by Marx—“to abolish Capitalism and termin-
ate wage slavery.”
Men who accept such positions as detailed above
are not workers. They have seceded from that class,
and are secret foes to it, because they have become
hirelings to Capitalism, are richly endowed by it, and
“no man can serve two masters.” Not even such
men as Watson, Fisher, Pearce, Cook, Poynton, nor
such heaven-born statesmen as Hughes! All those
aiming to climb the stairway of political ascension
must, if successful, become equally traitors to their
class—it is inevitable.
CHAPTER V.
LABOR VERSUS CAPITALISM.
“I am convinced that primitive peoples, such as our own
Redskins, which live without government, enjoy in their
general mass, an infinitely greater degree of happiness than
those who live under European Governments. Among the
former public opinion is in the place of law, and restrains
as powerfully as law ever did anywhere, whereas among the
latter, under the pretence of Government, they have divided
their nations into two classes—wolves and sheep. I do not
exaggerate, this is a true picture of Europe to-day.”
•
Thus wrote Thomas Jefferson, the American
(who drafted the celebrated Declaration of Inde-
pendence), during his later years of calm reflection,
after he had been, in his day, President of the United
States. In this statement he pre-visioned his
“wolves and sheep’' of Europe, the struggle of to-
day which is termed “the Class War”—the great
struggle between the “Wolves of Capitalism” and the
“Sheep of the Labor fold.”


In this perpetual warfare, the two contesting
forces are those of Capitalism and Labor. Each
party has its animating motive, which is the basis
of each system respectively, and it is the intention,
in this chapter, to examine both systems, establish
a demonstration of the nature of each, and furnish
a comparison of the merits and demerits of the one
and the other.
The present system of production of the needs
of human existence in all their varied forms, and the
distribution of such necessaries, constitutes the capi-
talistic system of production. Of course, the dis-
tribution in its two parts, wages and surplus value,
is so enormously out of all proportion to the great
volume of production, that it is scarcely worth con-
sideration as a factor in the examination, unless to
emphasise to the non-class-conscious section of the
workers, that this share of what they produce is, all
things considered, more meagre and penurious than
that awarded to the ancient chattel slave or feudal
Capitalism had its commencement in the transi-
tion from the feudal system to a more efficient mode
of production, just as feudalism had been a longer
transition from the very ancient chattel slave me-
thod of production. And each, in turn, gradually
broke down because of their failure to provide for
human needs. Capitalism is now in its transition
period from the same cause, the failure to provide
sufficient of the needs of life for all.
Compared with the two preceding systems, the
period of Capitalism has been but brief, and its pass-
ing out, which is now in full current, will be more
rapid than either of the predecessor systems. Just
as the break up of feudalism, which was in process,
received a great hurry-up from the Reformation—
a religious revolution —so the passing of the Capi-
talistic system has now received an acceleration from


the recent “Great War”—which was of Capitalism’s
own making—and which is now supplemented by
the world-wide industrial unrest, in many cases ris-
ing to flood-tide height of revolution. This also has
been caused by the increasing provocation of Capi-
talism in its ever-growing greed, and because of the
infliction of even greater injustice and privations on
the slave producers of all the Capitalists’ ill-gotten,
world-wide wealth.
These facts constitute a verification of the state-
ment of Marx that “Capitalism carries the seeds of
its own destruction within itself.” The nature of
Capitalism is such that it has no inner sense or out-
ward sign of shame, remorse, nor compunction for
all the horrors that are the resultant effects of its
ever-increasing greed. The full pressure of rent,
profit, and interest is laid on the back of the only
one producing class, the wage slaves, and it mat-
ters not if a worker is an artist, designer in manu-
facture, a lapidary, a decorative artist, or a
poor toil-worn, bent and prematurely ageing pick and
shovel slave, in a railway tunnel, or in the bottom
of a wet clay trench, with no one below him in the
grades of labor, he pays—the army of wage slaves
pays collectively—the mighty levy of this ever-in-
creasing taxation. The income tax, cunningly de-
vised by Capitalist politicians and submitted to by
the wealthy with an ill-disguised affectation of
growl, grumble, and opposition, yet laughing in their
sleeve, dopes the wage slaves with the belief that
their own burden will be lightened through the pay-
ment of taxes by the wealthy. They do
not realise that the tax will be exacted
from their sweat and waste of tissue; and they
are prevented from realising it by the politicians, in-
cluding their own Labor members, who, like all the
rest, are hirelings of Capitalism, and must function
in its interests or go down and get out. Every de


vice of this sort is but a part of the cunning and
guile of Capitalism to head-off and side-track the
rising sense of wrong and injustice the workers feel.
Capitalism, in its early stage, was responsible for
pauperism, for the Vagrant Act, and the horrors of
transportation, with its hells of Port Arthur, Botany
Bay, Norfolk Island, New Caledonia, Algiers—the
last two products of French Capitalism.
The basis of all Capitalism is robbery on the
great scale by exploitation of surplus value with
violence, robbery under arms on land and sea, on
every highway road, field, factory, mine, railroad,
and on all the peaceful isles of ocean “where every
prospect pleases” and “only Capitalistic man is vile.”
Capitalism is the chiei exponent and inciter of
what it is pleased to call crime. It forges the burg-
lar’s jemmy and all his lock-breaking implements;
it trims and lights his bull’s-eye lamp, with its
eclipse shade, equips him with death-dealing waddy
and loaded pistols, and sends him fort h on his mid-
night mission of the “Night Wolf." Happily, this
fact is one of the seeds which will destroy Capital-
ism, referred to by Marx, and being of the Capital-
ist’s own sowing, is destructive —if not of the Capi-
talist system—yet of the security of plunder, fur-
nishing a rare instance of “Wolf eating Wolf.”
Capitalism is the cause of prostitution, and is the
paramour of the gilded section of this black, hellish
horror of its own creation in its widespread modem
form.
Capitalism is the foul parent of what it brands
as illegitimacy and bastardy, which stigma of in-
tended infamy is its mark of social odium on every
human creature coming through the sacred gates
of Motherhood into this world without a permit from
one of its “God pestilence” mind poisoning hirelings.
Yet, despite all this, Capitalism will take these
poor disinherited of life’s joy of parenthood and re


morselessly throw them into its miles of factory
toil, with no thought but to transmute them in a few
years into cursed gold.
Eleventh century alchemists tortured every sub-
stance they could find in nature in the endeavor to
get a supposed magic talisman, called the “philoso-
phers’ stone,” by virtue and power of which they
hoped to transmute baser metals into gold. They
never found it, though they found out many things
better than gold. For six slow unfolding centuries
it was reserved for Capitalism to find a magic ele-
ment that would transmute, not only base metals,
but gross vegetable and animal fibres into gold.
This wonderful talisman was human flesh and blood,
which, being ground up in their industrial machines
—not known to the ancient Arabian alchemists —
came out of the chutes of these machines in streams
of the Capitalist coveted gold. It is true the pro-
cess was at first slow, and Capitalism to this day
hates “going slow” on the job. It kept the raw hu-
man material in a constant supply to the machines,
and the stream of gold became continuous. As each
man, woman, and child was ground up, the crop of
fresh material, owing to the fostering of Capitalism,
grew like a weed on the earth, and to-day this crush-
ing out of human life, to make the victims bleed gold
at every pore, still continues. And all this atrocious
and unnecessary destruction of life goes madly,
merrily on. Capitalism, either disclaiming all re-
sponsibility, or clad in a cold steel apathy, ignores
all sense of kindly feeling for the misery of its af-
flicted and suffering slaves.
In every land Capitalism has planted cemeteries
thickly with the graves of those who died prema-
turely, of insufficient nutriment, of noxious trade
diseases, or of adulterated food. Men who by phy-
sique and broad chest should have lived to ninety,
have been sent to their graves at from 35 to 40


years, because their food has been robbed of its life-
sustaining elements. Cruel, unscrupulous, remorse-
less, Capitalism, at the moment of this writing, gives
evidence, damning evidence, against itself in support
of this awful but true impeachment of its inhuman
system, by an absolute refusal to lengthen the life
period of the miners of Broken Hill. These men only
ask a lesser abridgement of their period of life by
shortening of the time they are exposed to the noxi-
ous vapours, the foul atmosphere, and the deadly
perils that ever hover over the miner in his hours
of toil.
This truthful indictment of Capitalism could be
extended indefinitely, but the evidence of Broken
Hill facts sufficiently demonstrates that the whole of
the system is based on fraud, pillage, violence to the
point of death, human massacre by land and sea, and
bloody carnage of war. It is motived by sordid
greed to possess the whole earth, to gamer its har-
vests and fruits into the giant depots reserved for
its plunder. It has nearly gained its full measure
of lust of ownership, and it has done so by the foul-
est means—such means as Truth and Justice never
permitted, and the spirit of Righteousness never did,
and never can, sanction.
CHAPTER VI.
“THE CASE FOR LABOR.”
Mr. William Morris Hughes, Prime Minister of
Commonwealth Australia, when a few years ago he
was the adored of the Parliamentary Socialists and
Workers, published a book, with the above title.
The author of these pages has received much
sweet paternalism of government from this gentle-
man (?), but the above heading is the only thing he
is indebted to him—Hughes—for, nor does he—


your author —flinch from this act of plagiarism of
his book title. It suits, and hence is annexed.
The enslaved condition of labor is one that has
existed since man first lived upon his fellow man,
and the condition is one that is an infamy and a
degradation to both master and slave.
The whole of the disorganised Labor movement,
unlike Capitalism, is motived with an objective of a
most noble and virtuous nature, because it has for
its basis Truth, Justice, and Freedom. On Truth,
because it would denounce and expose the false and
guilty phantasy of the ages: “That man can, with-
out violation of all human and natural rights, hold
property in flesh and blood of his fellow man and
fatten in indolence and grow rich from the misery
of his victim.” On Justice, because it will give to
mankind the supreme perogative of each to be mas-
ter of himself, and of no other; and because it will,
out of the present society of injustice, build the
structure of the new social and industrial order, in
which the common interest will be the good of all,
and not, as at present, the ignoble and selfish strug-
gle of each for himself. The objective is also based
on Freedom, because it will abolish Capitalism and
terminate wage slavery, thus achieving the manu-
mission of all who slave with hand and bram in thral-
dom of present conditions.
It is absolutely impossible for the Labor move-
ment to be wrong collectively or individually in any
method or tactic it may adopt in the endeavor to cast
off the chains of its enslavement, as its attitude is
never aggressive but always, in the exercise of na-
ture’s great law, “the right of self-defence. _ Na-
ture,” says Emerson, “is moral. That is true; is, in
fact,' a self-evident proposition to the mind that has
a fair perception of the law of things,” and nature
has given to all her species, from the lowest organ-
ism up to man, some power and means of self


defence against aggression. Aggression is the first
attack to injure, and is a wrong—defence against
such wrong is right, therefore moral. Nature has
equipped each individual of all her species with some
means to exercise this right of self-defence. Even
a rat, with its first line of defence, its swift escape
by some hole, cut off, will, if driven into a corner,
pillar itself for battle as best it can, and will die in
self-defence. And is a man worse than a rat, that
he, under aggression on liberty and life, should re-
frain from his natural right of self-defence? Only
his ignorant compliance with so-called moral codes
which are framed and imposed on him from above
the above being earth’s tyrant rulers and master
class—cause him to refrain from the exercise of his
natural right.
The opponents of Labor and its ideals look upon
every part of its resistance to Capitalistic aggression
as unj ustifiable and immoral, not knowing, and not
truly desirous of knowing, that Capitalistic society
is based on the great immoralities of fraud m its
worst forms and force in its most cruel and murder-
ous methods, and that Labor, in its opposition, being
right, is purely moral. Even where individual indis-
cretion and wildness occur, we must remember the
statement of the Sage of Concord that ; The vices
of individual revolters do not affect the merit ot the
Revolution.”
The portrayal of evils of the Capitalistic system
running through these pages, and the demonstrated
righteousness of the cause of the working class, pre-
cludes all further need of deepening the demarcation
between the plunder and fraud basis of Capitalism
and the basis of Labor and
shown, on the fundamentals of TRUTH, JUS i ICE,
AND FREEDOM—


Don’t grow muscles on your body;
Cultivate them on your brain.
Buck, and throw the men of shoddy
Who, on your backs, would ride to fame.
Heed not politicians’ prattle;
They but bind your chains more tight.
Take your place in class war battle,
And for Industrial freedom fight.
The power you need resides within you;
Link it up with 0.8. U.
Then forward in your myriad millions,
The World and Freedom wait for you.
CHAPTER VII.
WOMAN IN INDUSTRY.
In the history of civilisation it is an accepted
axiom that man’s treatment of woman was the best
criterion of his advancement.
During the matriarchal period in early Egypt, the
condition of woman was that of pre-eminence over
man; she was the administrator of public affairs and
of private life. She did not lose her family identity
by marriage, but her name was the adopted one of
the family line, and she controlled all production and
distribution.
In the age of Pericles, in ancient Greece, when
philosophy, art, and letters made a tide-mark on the
beach of human thought, which has never been ex-
ceeded, the position of woman was one of respect
and dignity. She was High Priestess of the Tem-
ples, and shared with man the elevation to Godship.


The chief and most important of nature’s bounties
and beauties were dedicated to her keeping, en-
shrined in Flora, Pomona, Ceres, Venus, and even
the glory of Greece, her great knowledge and wis-
dom, were represented in Minerva.
On the other hand, as stated by Gibbon, on
Roman jurisprudence: “Experience has proved sav-
ages are the tyrants of the female sex, and the con-
dition of woman is usually softened by the refine-
ments of social life.” Therefore, it is evident, m
barbarism, man has made woman his slave, and, in
the highest civilisation, his object of respect, and
even his goddess. By all standards of comparison, it
is equally evident that, in our utilitarian age of Capi-
talism, woman has become alike the goddess and the
slave of man in the extreme degree—the Goddess of
the Stage, in song and drama, the Goddess of So-
ciety when by nature gifted “with the hook of
beauty and the bait of wit,” and too often, with such
attractions, becomes the possession of some Capital-
ist of millionaire purchasing power.
Under Capitalism, as it developed, when women
and children were drawn into certain lines of indus-
try, there was a breaking-up of the old-time condi-
tion of woman’s one possible vocation, domestic ser-
vice. She worked as a menial till marriage absorbed
her into the duties of wife and motherhood, a posi-
tion usually, as now, little better than her pie-hire-
ling condition. „ . .
With harder pressure of economic conditions in-
tensified by a growing displacement of labor, conse-
quent on the rapid invention of machinery, there
came an indisposition on the part of men to marry,
they being deterred by the fear of making their case
worse by dragging a woman into nineteenth century
civilisation —with the almost certainty of progeny
and no means of sufficient sustenance.
The desire of the master class to enlarge pro


fits induced them to employ women and child labor
to a greater degree, thus enlarging the unemployed
sections of male labor and increasing the growing
distaste of men for marriage.
And out of this there came a new law-giver and
a new law. In the olden time, it was decreed: “If
ye do not work, neither shall ye eat,” a decree limited
in its operation to the working class, past and pre-
sent. But woman was the new law-giver, and gave
the new decree: “If ye do not marry, neither shall
ye work,” and gave effect to her law by taking and
performing the work herself. Of course, in all this
both woman and man were unconscious factors of
industrial progress.
This advent of women in the arena of skilled in-
dustry was met with storms of disapproval by her
male competitors still retained, and with more bitter
vehemence by those displaced. This inevitable pre-
judice continued during the first half of the nine-
teenth century, till woman’s employment spread
from the textile factories to general industries, and
this manifestation of her growing power compelled
her male competitors to see that in division there
was weakness for each and, in combination, strength
for both. Thus, woman, in the face of great opposi-
tion and the odium of unpopularity, fought her way
to full recognition as a true and valiant fighter in
the cause of labor, and began to accept enrolment in
the lists of unionism.
This narrow-minded spirit of craft unionism was
transplanted from Great Britain to Australia, and
the resistance which had been made in the old
country was set up to women and girl labor here.
In such few industries as then existed, mostly in
Sydney and Melbourne, the same bitterness of feel-
ing occurred, till the same perception that unity
meant salvation and competition spelt destruction
dissipated it.


Be it here said to the credit of the working wo-
men of Australia that they, in the first instance,
while under the ban of their brother workers, had
the initiative power to organise for themselves. To-
day woman is in the army of Labor, and has proved
herself an Amazonian warrior wherever the common
interest of Labor is threatened or assaulted by the
great foe, Capitalism.
And yet women are not utilised in proportion to
their powers of service at Councils, Congresses, Con-
ferences, and in deliberative associations for discus-
sion of matters, social and domestic —the great social
evil problem in particular. They are almost con-
spicuous by their absence in these assemblies.
At an Interstate Conference held in Perth this
writer, attending many of its sessions, does not re-
member the presence of a woman delegate, and yet
such problems as above cited require the fine instinct
and deep intuition of the woman mind before they
can ever be treated and properly disposed of, or
rather arranged for such disposal, when the Labor
movement as the administrative power, shall purge
society from the dregs of its Capitalistic horrois.
At an A.L.P. Conference in Sydney during 1919,
amongst some hundreds of delegates, there were but
few women delegates, and the presence of a larger
number would have exercised a much-needed and
salutary restraining effect. That such an influence
was needed must, on calm reflection, be the convic-
tion of all who have memory of the occasion, even
those who were parties to the matters of most angry
controversy. . .. . , ~ ,
The position of woman in the industrial arena,
hustling and jostling with man, for place and pay,
owing to the competition through the very defective
organisation now existing, is a convincing proof of
economic determinism. As Capitalism increased its
possession of industry, it invaded first one then


another source of the single woman's employment.
Clothing factories and the advent of the sewing ma-
chine brought her into competition with male labor
and pushed the tailor from his board. Capitalism
took the hoop and pails from the milkmaid, sent the
dairymaid packing with her pans and churn, and in
steam-driven creameries and butter factories, men
usurped this branch of woman industry. Similarly,
the steam laundry displaced the washerwoman and
her tubs, and at the same time deposed the laundry
maid with her flat irons. In the capitalisation of the
two last-mentioned industries, woman, after a time,
came back into her own, but at the expense of being
more directly a wage slave.
This encroachment of woman into the orbit of
male labor is ever on the increase, and the time is
past for ever when man could exercise the peroga-
tive of reserving this or that class of work to him-
self. The orbits of man and woman industry are
rapidly becoming coincident, and the boss is a power-
ful factor in “speeding it up,” for wherever he can,
with greater profit, employ women, he will do so, and
the introduction of more versatile machinery aids
him in this respect.
It has long been accepted as a truism that “there
is no sex in intellect,” and it would appear that the
time is fast coming when there will be “no sex in in-
dustry.” The statement that “there is no sex in in-
tellect” leads to consideration of the position of wo-
man in regard to Socialism.
It is alleged against woman that she is more con-
servative than man, that she clings to old forms of
belief, that she is the last buttress to decaying old
creeds and churches, that she is longer held in the
leading strings of priest craft, that she does not,
with man, equally throw herself into the vortex of
the world's social and industrial unrest, that she per-
sists in sending her children to the nurseries of child


superstition, Sunday schools, where is instilled into
their budding minds the poison that will render them
mentally torpid in after life. Such are a few of the
many allegations against woman, and, assuming they
are true, even in part, there are scientific reasons to
account for it.
But is it not true of humanity, as a whole, that
it is very conservative in resistance to any attempt
to detach it from the present false ideas, and equally
resistant to the innovation of the new and true.
So true is this of humanity that it is ploughed into
all history and is embodied in many a poetical aphor-
ism, such as Alexander Pope’s—
“ For faith, fanatic faith, once wedded fast
To some dear falsehood, hugs it to the last.”
Therefore, your author believes man to be, in com-
mon with woman, conservative. “No organism is
superior to its heredity and environment”—either
the heredity by new experience of new circumstance,
will, according to its power of “adaptation,” undergo
modification in tendency of action; or, alternatively,
the heredity may have, as a part of itself, a ten-
dency to resist any environment not in conformity
with itself. In this case, the environment, instead
of undergoing modification from circumstance ex-
ternal to the heredity, is altered by the heredity
itself.
The third force is the law of Adaptation. Every
man and woman is the product of those great forces
that are at the back of the evolution of species.
Heredity itself is largely the product of previous en-
vironments of the progeniters of each individual’s
heredity. Woman having had, through long ages, a
more restrictive environment, mental, social and in-
dustrial, than man, has thereby been obstructed in
her evolution of character. She has been denied the
right to think—so has man in a lesser degree—and


her voice has been kept mute as an oyster’s, except
when used to express her tacit assent to what she
was ordered to say or do. She has not been per-
mitted to attend or listen to the deliberations of man
in any matters of concern, though relating to her-
self, and even where the issue of her life or death
was in question. In Roman civilisation, when the
liberty of woman should have been assured equally
with that of man, she was in a condition little bet-
ter than that of the preceding barbarous ages.
It will not be amiss on this point to quote a pas-
sage from Gibbon, in “Roman Jurisprudence,” deal-
ing with “rights of persons.” Speaking of the then
mode of marriage, he writes:—
“But this union on the side of the woman was
rigorous and unequal, and she renounced the name
and worship of her father’s house to embrace a new
servitude, discounted only by the title of adoption.
A fiction of the law, neither at all rational or ele-
gant, bestowed on the mother of a family (her pro-
per appellation), the strange character of sister to
her own children, and of daughter to her own hus-
band, or master, who was invested with the plenitude
of paternal power. By his judgment, or caprice, her
behavior was approved, or. censured, or chastised.
He exercised the jurisdiction of life and death, and
it was allowed that in cases of adultery or drunken-
ness, the sentence might be properly inflicted. She
acquired and inherited for the sole profit of her lord,
and so clearly was woman defined, not as a person,
but as a thing, that, if the original title were de-
ficient, she might be claimed, like other movables, by
the use and possession of an entire year. The in-
clination of the Roman husband discharged or with-
held the conjugal debt, but, as polygamy was un-
known, he could not admit to his bed any fairer or
more favored partner.”


Gibbon also notes the equally unscruplous .exac-
tion of conjugal rights by the preceding Athenian
and Jewish laws.
It may be well to remark here that after the tri-
umph of the Punic wars, the matrons of Rome made
a bold stand for equalisation of all the liberties of
a free and rich Republic. They formulated the terms
of a quite new marriage contract, absolutely declin-
ing the rites of the old nuptials. In this new con-
tract, a woman preserved to herself her name, the
acquisition of property, and the right of its trans-
mission as she pleased. The women of Rome evaded
the annual prescription by an absence of three days
from the city. In this contest for a wider sphere of
freedom, they had the indulgent support of husbands
and lovers, and the dominant force of Cato, the Cen-
sor, entirely failed to defeat them.
If any justification be needed for this fine ex-
tract from the historian quoted, it will be found by
reference to the quotation at the head of Chapter
111., and the average working woman, equally with
man, will then understand her position m the great
Class War, realising how “the roots of the present
lie deep in the past.”
Your author is quite aware that to the students
of Labor problems—and there are not too many of
them—these facts of history are well known. It is
for women workers who, in the fierce struggle for
bread, have had neither time nor inclination for such
study they are brought forward now. The subjec-
tion of woman in the past—which still, in a degree,
continues—accounts for difference in general ca-
pacity with man, for, like him, she is the product of
heredity and environment, but her power of adapta-
tion is quite equal to that of her brother co-worker.
Once woman got fairly established in public in-
dustry, and saw that the first fierce opposition to


her presence was carried into legislation—attempts
being made for her exclusion from common advant-
age with men in pay and better conditions—she saw
the necessity of her own entry into the political do-
main. Women’s Franchise Societies and Women’s
Rights Associations came rapidly into existence.
The womanhood of Australia was well in the van
in all the various (then) Colonies, and, in spite of
the derisive and slanderous opposition of all shades
of politicians, the womens’ cause at length reached
popularity when an Electoral Act, including adult
suffrage, became statute law.
The British suffragette movement developed later
on, and met with such brutally cruel opposition as to
place British legislators lower in the scale of human
feeling than primitive savages.
In the political field, woman has secured but in-
significant representation, except in some of the Eu-
ropean States, especially in Finland. In Australia,
despite many attempts, she has not gained access to
Federal or State Parliaments—a result of benefit
than disadvantage to the Labor cause of wo-
men, judging by the failure of men during well on
for quarter of a century to effect anything in the
way of even an instalment, of radical change in the
Capitalist system of production and distribution.
In the sacred interests of Liberty, if women want
the vote, they should have it, useless as it is for in-
dustrial revolution. Woman has had, and is still
having, the strong light and leading of this failure
of politics to realise the historic mission of the work-
ing class—the abolition of Capitalism and termina-
tion of wage slave production. The strongest fea-
ture of the seething world-wide industrial discontent
is the growing determination of the workers to have
a more militant form of organisation on the indus-
trial field of action. This and the concurrent wan


ing of working class political faith should be enough
to deter woman from any longer wasting her splen-
did energies on political methods, and should spur
her to join forces with her brother man in opening
up the industrial revolutionary highway that will
be Labor’s road to Freedom.
In concluding this chapter on Woman in Indus-
try, the author assures his sister workers in the
sacred class war that the opinions he expresses are
the result of long experience and deep study. As
the poet Campbell wrote: —
“ Tis the coming of age gives me mystical lore,
And coming events cast their shadows before.”
Accept, then, the assurance that when we win
economic freedom, all is won! Mental freedom, moral
freedom, civil freedom, social freedom, and with it
sexual freedom, will in quick succession automatically
follow the victory of our economic freedom. Indus-
trial administration will succeed political govern-
ment, with its villain fraud and brutal force. The
mission of the working class described by Marx will
have been achieved, and the new and true civilisa-
tion, with its radiant light, will make a new morn-
ing in the history of humanity, which the world over
will bathe in the joy of complete social redemption
and full INDUSTRIAL EMANCIPATION.
“Then let us pray, that come it may,
As come it will, for a’ that,
When sense and worth, o‘er a’ the earth,
Shall hear the gree, and a’ that.
For a’ that, and a’ that,
It’s coming still, for a’ that,
When man to man the wide world o’er
Shall brothers be, and a’ that.”


CHAPTER VIII.
THE MATERIALIST CONCEPTION OF HISTORY.
Various interpretations of the Marxian percep-
tion and announcement of the reasons for the great
changes in society and its modifications have been
written, notably those of Labriola and Dogmatist.
The exposition of the first-named is, in the opinion
of this writer, somewhat nebulous and abstruse, and
the latter is preferable as being more clear and de-
finite. But the conviction that there is yet room for
a simple and lucid interpretation by a working class
mind to the working class, justifies its inclusion in
this pamphlet.
Frederick Engels, who was a co-worker with and
a collaborator of Marx, speaking of this quite new
conception of history, said: “To Marx, and to him
alone, must be credited the setting forth, stating and
demonstrating of this materialist conception of the
history of society, with all its successive modifica-
tions.”
As simple a definition as can be given of the ma-
terialist conception of history is, that it attributes
the general condition of any people, in any time, to
the resultant effect of their mode of production and
the distribution of the needs of life, consisting, in
the main, of food, raiment, and shelter. It affirms
also that the institutions of peoples, their laws, cus-
toms, arts, religions, morals, aesthetics and ethics,
are all derived from their mode of obtaining, pro-
curing, or producing the means of subsistence. Just
as a man’s hand, or his face before a mirror, will
give an exact reflection of itself, so society is a coun-
terpart and an exact reflection of the prevailing


mode of production and distribution, and no real
change can take place in such society unless pre-
ceded by a change in methods of producing and dis-
tributing the sustenance of life. This discovery of
Marx is one of the great intellectual advances of the
nineteenth century.
Marx, in his investigations, clearly demonstrated
that the character of society is detemuned oj jhe
mode of economic production of subsistence, and that
this fact is a fixed and natural law just as much as
that of gravitation. The law of gravitation, how-
ever, is co-eternal with matter, while this law of
economic determinism only commenced to operate
with the appearance of organic life, and became
more marked in its operation with the rising scale of
consciousness in organic structure, such increasing
consciousness a£d efery modification in structure be-
ino- but effects of this law of economic determinism.
The lowest organism, even the amoeba or the monad
and all those in the ascending line of de^ el °P, me l^ t
the species, right up to man, were each and alMe-
nendent for existence on their ability to find sum
dent means of subsistence to ensure contamty of
life and the procreation of their species. Failing
comply with this law,an organism ceased to exist,and
by terminating the evolution of s l p ® c ‘ es i t fu ™ower
“ the part of the organism to find or secure the
ST- “«■>*>' -« 5 ■"
the science of evolution as survival of the fit
This is not an exposition of the Darwinian theory
of evolution of species, and the brief foregoing refer-
ence to it has been made to reveal
the “Materialist Conception of with the
most universally accepted theory of Evolution ot


Species." In fact, the discovery by Marx of the root
cause of all successive epochs of society, with their
varying- modifications, ranks in importance with the
announcement of the origin and development of
species by Charles Darwin.
Another definition of the Marxian conception of
history is contained in the statement: “that all the
highest of potentialities and possible development of
man rests hard down on the physical basis of life.”
At first glance this statement appears illogical and
also impossible of demonstration. Nevertheless, it
can be proved by the sciences of biology and phy-
siology, since the difference between “The man with
the hoe” and a Marx, a Darwin, a Shakespeare, or a
Plato is only a difference of environment in economic
conditions and the material basis of life.
If the food material be easily procurable and
plentiful, there will be a large margin of time in
which the attention of the individual can be given to
the exercise of mental faculties on the varied phe-
nomena of Nature. Functions of the brain as the
organ of mind are as dependent on food material as
are the lungs, heart and digestive structures. The
physical basis of life, i.e., food material, is assimi-
lated and transmuted into all the various tissues of
the system, and certain of the elements are in the
blood currents transmitted to the brain, and build
up the waste of thought force expended by the ac-
tion of the medullary matter of the brain, the sub-
stance in which resides the essence or principle of
thought.
Should the economic environment of the indi-
vidual be of such a restricted order as to compel the
whole of his energies to be directed to the procuring
of a most meagre supply of the basis of life, and such
exertion be continued from daylight to dark, there
will be no time to note phenomena and to register
the experience in memory. Insufficient and poor nu


trition will produce a “man with a hoe/’ and the
fuller and easier obtained sustenance will as surely
produce the Shakespeare or the Plato, if not in the
one individual, then in successive generations. Thus,
if the physical basis of life be difficult to obtain and
poor in nutritive value, the potentialities and possi-
bilities will be at zero, whereas, in the case of the
first individual, the possibilities and potentialities
will lie at meridian height. .
The nutrition taken from the material basis of
life by Shakespeare was, in part, transmuted into
thought force and entered into the speculative phi-
losophy of his “Hamlet” —questioning the “To be or
not to be” of all the great problems of life and mmd.
Thus it will be seen that “the potentialities and pos-
sibilities of man’s development rest on the physical
basis of life.” , , _ , . ~ . ,
Food, raiment, and shelter must first be obtained
before man can progress,. and the more easy and
copious the supply, the quicker the progress.
There have been three successive epochs of the
mode of production and distribution of the needs of
life. The first and longest in duration of time was
the chattel slave system. How it came into operation
is explained in the Origin of Institutions, Chapter
111. This chattel slave method of production runs
back into the early ages of history. Such authorities
as the archiologists, Layard and Lepsius, place thia
stage of civilisation in Egypt as far back as fro
4000 to 5000 years 8.C., and others some 2000 years
earlier. Be this as it may, at that early race period,
production by chattel slavery was fully established
and continued through the later civilisations A
Syria, Persia, Greece and Rome. At the break up of
the great Roman Empire there commenced the long
and slow transition from chattel slave production to
the next epoch of feudal serf production. The feudal
system, as a firmly established one, did not eventu-


ate till the tenth century, but the influences that led
up to its maturity as the prevailing mode of produc-
tion, commenced with the conquest of ancient Gaul
by Clovis, the Frank, following the fall of Rome.
The feudal system became established in France
in the time of Charlemange. Certainly, this system
did not get full settlement in England till about the
time of the Norman conquest. Scotland borrowed it
from her lowland neighbours, and at that time it
had become pretty well universal in Europe.
No great transformation of society occurred
when chattel slave production was superseded by
Feudalism; merely a modification took place. In-
deed, nothing more could be expected, as the change
was only from one form of slavery to another.
When Feudalism gave way to the Capitalistic
(Wage) slave system, it was, in like manner, only a
change from one form of slavery to another and, in
many respects, worse for the slave class.
As already stated in a preceding chapter, the
main cause of the passage from the feudal mode of
production to the Capitalistic, was the expulsion of
serf producers from lands on which they had been,
like the animals and trees, property of the Baronial
Lords. The Glebe lands of the British Isles, occu-
pied by thirteen hundred monasteries, were con-
fiscated and gifted by Henry VIII. to the bastard
spawn of Kings, such as the Cecils, the Howards, De
Veres, and Cavendishs. Then commenced the great
driving off from the land of the feudal serf popu-
lation, and thus the way was opened for the next
epoch in production—Capitalistic wage slavery. The
period of this transition from the feudal to the capi-
talistic system was bridged by cottage artisanship,
in which the products were marketed by the pro-
ducers to those who supplied the consumers. The
advent of better machinery, and steam displacing the


old motor power of water, made it possible to-carry
on the work of production within towns and cities,
and ;hese new factors consolidated the power of the
Capitalistic system and made static, wage slave pro-
duction.
Bit no great change for real betterment in social
and moral conditions accrued from this change m pro-
duction of the needs of life, as the new system was,
like its precursors, based on injustice, fraud and
force. It could only give results corresponding to
itself, and thus demonstrated the validity of the
Marxian conception of history, That society is in all
respects a true reflection of the mode of production
and distribution of the means of life.
If there is ever to be a society purged and re-
generated from all the injustice, fraud and slavery
of the mass of the people, it can only be the result of
a complete revolution in production and distribution,
which will give a system based on the principles of
Truth Justice and Freedom in all the relations of
man with his fellow man. Such a system will give
a societv after its own kind, a society in harmony
with the vision of Robert Green
tone-ued modem Cicero of the world, who, witn tne
eve of looking into the future gave this fine
word-painting of the world he saw with his mind s
eye. He said: —
“I look again, but towards the future now.
“The popes and priests and kings have gone; the
altars and the thrones have minglevi with the dust
the aristocracy of land, of birth and _ gold h
perished from the earth, and all th* gods are deafly
A new religion sheds its mankind, it m the
gospel of the world, the religion ■
the heart and brain, the evangel of and K>y.
I see a world at peace, where Labor reaps its true
reward, a world without prisons, without work


houses, without asylums for the insane. A world on
which the gibbet’s shadow does not fall, a world
where the poor girl trying to earn bread with her
needle—the needle which has been called ‘Tie asp
for the breast of the poor’—is not driven to the des-
perate choice of crime or death, of suicide or shame.
I see a world without the beggar’s outstretched
palm, the misers’ heartless, stony stare, the piteous
wail of want, the pallid faces of crime, the lmd lips
of lies, the cruel eyes of scorn. I see a race vithout
disease of flesh or brain, shapely and fair, the mar-
ried harmony of form and use, and, as I look, life
lengthens, joy deepens, fear dies, and love intensifies,
for the world is Free!”
This beautiful word-picture by the great master
of thought and language of America is one that was,
to some degree, in the mind of Plato when he wrote
his “Republic,” which has come down to us through
the slow unfolding of twenty-three centuries. It
was depicted in Campanelli’s “City of the Sun”; Hall,
in his “This and the Other World Unfolded.” outlined
it; Bacon portrayed it in his “Atlantis”; and Thomas
Moore revealed it in his “Utopia.” William Morris,
in his “News from Nowhere,” opened the pearly
gates of the new society, which, in his mind’s eye,
he saw as the yet to be paradise on earth. Whittier,
the Quaker Poet of America, glimpses it in his splen-
did poem, “The Reformer”; Walt Whitman antici-
pates its realisation in his “Great City” and many
such passages of his writings; and Emerson—Sage
of Concord—hails the glad good coming time, “When
the new religion of intellect and love will be built
on the ruins of priest-craft, churches and supersti-
tion.” Every great soul and generous heart, nature
has shrined in human flesh has given to humanity
this concept of a pure, honest, and just society, in
which all the relations of its members will be broad-
based on the principles of material Justice, Truth
and Liberty.


It is impossible that all the noblest souls of our
race—the human race —can have been wrong in their
dream of a society based on Justice, Truth and
Liberty; to the mind of your author it is an un-
thinkable proposition. To start a propaganda on
a black and hopeless basis would be the only possible
infidelity, the one great blasphemy against all that
is righteous, and if it were preached and accepted,
such a gospel of despair would people the earth with
insane, and unpeople it by suicide. It would be a
doctrine or dogma equal to the monstrous one of
“the total depravity of man." But, no, the fair
world and the new society, seen by seers, announced
by the prophets, sung by the poets of every age, is
not false. Bright and glowing as the Ingersollian
vision is, charming and inspiring as are the dreams
of the great ones enumerated, they are in
their joint beauty, these dreams, of being material-
ised into the living reality of existing facts here,
now on this earth. No Redeemer from the clouds,
no Buddha, no Gautama, no Pythagaros, no miracu-
lous Virgin-bom Saviour is needed to accomplish the
transfiguration. It is the mission of the WORKING
CLASS to give real entity of existence to the dreams
of the slaves and seers through all ages.
How the great social and industrial transforma-
tion will be brought about will be the next and con-
cluding chapter. The process has long been m pro-
gress, and is at present in a most advanced stage.
All through the Capitalistic epoch, dark and bitter
as it has been —
“The workers’ world has rolled freedom’s way
And ripened with its sorrow.
Keep heart! Who bear Labor s cross to-day,
Labor's crown shall wear to-morrow.
Shades of Gerald Massey— pardon my poor para-
phrase.


CHAPTER IX.
ONE BIG UNION I.W.W.
The idea of One Big Union, signifying the unity
of all labor on a great scale, and industrial organisa-
tion, international in scope, had its origin in the year
1905, at the Congress of Labor now historically
known as the Chicago Convention.
At that Convention were delegates from various
nationalities of Europe, the British Isles and the
United States. The object of the promoters was to
devise a closer and more effective system of Indus-
trial Unionism, since the ineffective old sectional
craft and trade unionism, initiated in England in the
early thirties of the nineteenth century, had become
an anachronism and quite impotent to cope with the
growing and ever strengthening powers of Capital-
ism.
On the second day of the Convention it became
evident that a number of the delegates were ob-
structionists, mostly representing craft unions of the
American Federation of Labor, of which body Mr.
Samuel Gompers was the head figure, as he is at the
present time. Mr. Gompers was then, and still is,
hostile to any innovation in the effete methods of the
A.F. of L., as he has material interests, identical with
American Capitalism and its political proxies, of
whom he is one.
The earnest and sincere delegates played the
waiting game till the Gomperis snags retired and
made constructive work possible by their absence.
An organisation was formed, entitled the 1.W.W.,
Industrial Workers of the World. After the retire-
ment of the snag element, there still existed two


parties in the Convention, one that favored combin-
ing the political method with the industrial, and one
that knew from experience the futility of politics in
labor. This party gave way rather than imperil the
organisation at the very outset. The constitution
was formulated, and its famous preamble stands
distinctly alone as the masterpiece declaration of the
irreconcilable antagonism of the master class and the
wage slave class. It contains, as well, in concrete, the
full exposition, pith, and marrow of the line of ac-
tion to combat the master class, and specifically
stresses: “That the army of production must be or-
ganised, not only for the every-day struggle with
Capitalism, but also to carry on production after
Capitalism shall have been overthrown. By organis-
ing industrially, we are forming the structure of the
NEW SOCIETY within the shell of the old.
The great brained and generous-hearted men of
the working class, who compiled that preamble, gave
to the working class world the most brief and yet
most comprehensive statement of the claims of
Labor and the order of campaign for their full at-
tainment. In the above-quoted last clause of the pre-
amble there is expressed the necessity of making
the daily battle ground the drill yard of Labor, to
secure its full efficiency of administration and con-
trol of production and distribution on its taking pos-
SeS The greatest* testimony to the value of this pre-
amble is the fact that, in the numerous attempts to
form one Big Union in the several States of Aus-
tralia, the promoters have, m every case, accepted
hp nrinciDles set forth in the I.W.W. preamble.
Some of the so-called 0.8.U.'s have adopted it in
+n+n others have °-one in for a modification or at-
tempted amendments, which have only marred and
crippled the true intention of the original preamble.
Its text cannot be made to fit the sham, pseudo, hy


brid association, falsely termed One Big Union,
springing up into ephemeral mushroom existence all
over Australia, and in every case with a membership
of the most incongruous and conflicting character.
There can be no stability in any organisations of such
composite divergence in membership, many of whose
members have no conception of what Industrial
Unionism really means, what it is intended to
achieve, who, at most, look upon it as a better way
than sectional unionism to secure higher wages, less
work, shorter hours, and who have no true know-
ledge of the sublime ideal and the ultimate end in
view. Most of them are still devotees to the political
fetish, and are sniffing and licking out the political
flesh-pots.
No movement, without a high uniform intelli-
gence of members, with a concert in thought and
unity for action on the industrial field, can ever exe-
cute the mission of the working class: “The aboli-
tion of Capitalism and the termination of wage
slavery." All of these new-born attempts at the
0.8. U. have annexed the six industrial departments
of the 1.W.W., and their divisions and sub-divisions,
which cover every existing industrial occupation,
and this annexing has been committed without any
acknowledgment of the source from which it was
derived—a better word, in the eternal fitness of
things, would be “exploited.”
The political element is too predominant in all
these pretentious imitations of the 1.W.W., Indus-
trial Unionism, 0.8. U., Solidarity and Direct Action,
and the intention of these movements is to capture
the I.W.W. spirit of unionism and utilise it to pre-
serve the material interests of officialdom, political
and industrial.
The small valiant band in each State who have
been the pioneers of I.W.W. Unionism in Australia
would welcome the acceptance of their principles by


the rani! and file of the workers of Australia. All
those who have been cruelly penalised for principle’s
sake, including the twelve prison-entombed victims,
would hail with joy the establishment of I.W.W. or-
ganisation in the great disunited Labor movement of
Australia, but these men are well aware that all
these various so-called 0.8.U.’s are sent and intended
to preserve the existing order of things, industrial
and political.
At all meetings of these latter-day 0.8. U. saints
there is a guarded avoidance of reference to the
I.W.W. and to the two schools of the Detroit and the
Chicago branches of the original foundation party
at Chicago, 1905, the Chicago school being non-
political and the Detroit combining the joint me-
thods. This shirking of reference to the origin of
the half-principles they advocate, this covert,
sneaking fear of an alphabetical symbol (I.W.W.)—
used as the puppet-show bogey of a war-crazed poli-
tician to scare fools —this base fear to speak of an
organisation while practising its principles, is
strongly significant of moral cowardice mid indus-
trial poltroonry. This endeavor to head off the real,
pure Industrial Unionism of the I-W.W., and estab-
lish a hybrid half-way house substitute also, will
delay and obstruct the progress of the workers to-
wards industrial freedom.
At the worst, this half-hearted effort is but a
wasting of time in foolish experiments, m an explor-
ing of exploded fallacies. It is an unnecessary
camping by the wayside, instead of pushing to t e
long promised land that the slaves have yearned for
through the ages, and that is now within measurable
distance, by all the signs of ® ur j lT ? es ' ,
The next stage of work should be to utterly de-
molish this new castle of indolence, to break up this
latest camp of lethargy, to organise the march on
lines of pure industrial unionism, and push on to the


pearly gates of the “Industrial Co-operative Com-
monwealth” which awaits our coming. Capi-
talism has reached the zenith of its power, and
only international I.W.W. organisation is required to
make its knees bend and precipitate its fall, after
which the way will be clear for the next epoch of in-
dustrial evolution—production and distribution for
use and the weal and gain of all mankind.
All roads and paths that have been tried as the
way out of the disabilities and sufferings of the slave
class have only led us into the quicksands of delu-
sion. They are now closed, and before us is the
open highway, the track of which has been blazed by
pioneers who have paid the penalties of imprison-
ment and death. From the seeds of their martyr-
dom has sprung and bloomed the tree of Liberty; it
stands at the end of that open highway, and we can
taste of its glorious fruit of social and industrial
freedom. Onward with the march, then, fellow-
workers ! The road is clear; it is that of the I.W.W.
—lndustrial Unionism.
THE O.B.U.
(Tune: “The Red Flag”)
Come, all, and join our valiant band,
To form the One Big Union,
Till Labor’s sons and daughters stand
In one wide-world communion.
We want all men who know their rights,
And nothing else are seeking;
Who stand for freedom of the mind
And liberty of speaking.
Who battle for their fellow-men,
Both in and out of season;
And ever with their tongue and pen
Give words of clearest reason.


We want no parasites on earth,
Our world shall do without them;
With power of pen, we’ll make them men,
Or else completely rout them.
We’ll strike all fetters from wage slaves,
Their creative powers releasing,
To give to life the light and joy
That make its richest blessing.
We’ll strew the path of Youth with flowers,
Make glad the weak and old,
Erase the black lines of the past,
And Earth’s future write in gold.
We’ll need no priests, we’ll want no kings;
Let them join as working brothers
To win themselves a just reward
By sharing toil with others.
We’ll make this sad world ring with joy
And peals of childhood’s laughter;
Well make ’an Eden of Earth’s Hell
For all who shall come after.
Then come and join our valiant band
To form the One Big Union,
Till Labor’s sons and daughters stand
In one wide-world communion.
F.W.M.
CHAPTER X.
IN CONCLUSION.
As all the epochs of production had their transi-
tion period of longer or shorter duration, so will the
displacement of Capitalist production give way m
such transition to the incoming new mode of pro-
duction for the use and common benefit of society.


Industrial Unionism, expressing itself through the
0.8. U. and its six departments, divisions and subdi-
visions, is the means to the end of bringing in the
Industrial Co-operative Commonwealth. Industrial
Unionism's objective is to organise, educate and drill
a great Industrial Army to gradually subjugate and
finally overthrow Capitalism. This will be done by
a series of pitched battles between the forces of
Labor against those of exploitation.
By way of illustration, the strike of the Seamen’s
Union, or that of the Marine Engineers, or the
Broken Hill Miners, would have been, in the first two
instances, had the organisation of Industrial Union-
ism been in force, a measuring of strength between
the whole of the workers in the transport depart-
ment and the shipping and railway ownerships. And,
in the case of the Broken Hill mining strike, the
whole mining department of Australia would be out
to support the miners of Broken Hill. Would the
Seamen’s strike have been prolonged as it was if the
transport department of industry had ceased work
with the seamen? Would Tom Walsh have been
jailed? Would the mine slaves at Broken Hill have
been kept twelve months in the fiery furnace of a
sectional strike, in which men, women and children
suffer the pangs of famine and all the heart and
brain anguish that is ever the lot of the workers in
sectional strikes, if the mining industry of Australia
was at a standstill with the mines of Broken Hill?
Does anyone who knows Capitalistic inhuman nature
believe that if the gauntlet of departmental industry
were thus thrown down in the arena of conflict, that
Capitalism would accept the challenge by taking it
up? Certainly not.
Industrial Unionism would ensure, for the first
time in the history of industrial conflict, an equality
in the opposing forces of Labor and Capital. Indeed,
the army of industry would be the superior, as it


would hold the key of production of the means of
life. The powers of violence relied on by Capitalism
to suppress sectional strikes would be quite im-
potent, as there would be no congregation of work-
ers in mass meetings. Rather would there be a
segregation of workers at home, or angling, or
botanising, field naturalising, gardening—in fact,
doing anything but massing in crowds. The police
and military forces would have nothing to fight—or,
rather, massacre—and their thin lines spread over
the Commonwealth would average one policeman,
and at most two war slaves, to ten or fifteen workers,
who would act as a recruiting corps to enlist the
defenders of Capitalism in Labor’s army, the army
of their own class. Capitalism and governments
would see very soon what they were up against.
There must be no more compunction, milk and
water sentiment or humanitarian principles on the
part of the Labor army, in its dealing with Capital-
ism, than Capitalism has had for Labor, when, be-
cause of its weakness, Labor was under the yoke and
lash of cold, callous, cruel Capitalism. Society, as a
whole, would participate in the common suffering
which would make itself felt during any trial of
strength between the forces of Labor and the forces
of Capitalism, and this common suffering would be
the one touch of nature that would make the various
sections of people in the community realise their
kinship. The real value and basic importance of
Labor would be brought home to the public mind as
a revelation that all past struggles combined had not
afforded during the long class war.
One of the most important demands of Labor in
each of these trials of strength with the oppressing
class should be a shorter and a shorter working day,
without any stipulations as to wages, as the wage
always has, and always will be, under slave produc-
tion, at the margin of subsistence, and reduced to


the technical jargon of law, is termed, “a minimum
living wage.” The worker will get that for a three
or two-hour day, just as he did for a sixteen-hour
day, and he can get no more; he shall have no less.
These successive defeats—as they would be—of
Capitalism, and the constant abridgement of the
working day, will accelerate the transition of Capi-
talist production, and concurrently usher in that of
the Co-operative Industrial Commonwealth, in which
a two-hour labor day of all members of society over
twenty and under forty-five years of age (when they
will pass out into the field of leisured existence) will
provide all the necessaries and comforts of the com-
munity.
It has been calculated by Prof. Leoni Levi, 1870-
1875, that by such a system of manual production
by all members of society, during the twenty-five
years of life, as above stated, the wealth of the
executive nations of the civilised world could be kept
up to its —at that time —value and volume and give a
remuneration to each worker of one pound per hour,
i.e., £l2 for a six day week of two hours per day.
Where is the Wages Board or master class award
Court that will ever give the worker such a maxi-
mum living wage? The conclusion arrived at by
Professor Levi was published in the ‘'London Times”
of that period, and attracted the close attention of
large labor employers, one of whom, Mr. William
Hoyle, the famous cotton print manufacturer, of
Manchester, made an investigation of the calcula-
tion, expecting to arrive at a negative result, but, to
his surprise, came to a close approximation of Pro-
fessor Levi's conclusion. At the same time, another
manufacturer, Alderman Mechi, of London, also
checked the Professor’s figures, and, like his fellow
manufacturer, came to an almost concensus of
agreement. The question received much comment in
some of the leading magazines of the time, and,


though admitted to be, to a degree, correct, was
stated to be impracticable, the ever-invoked term of
all conservatives, obstructors and reactionaries;
also, it was objected that “you can prove anything
by figures.”
The leading statisticians of England and Europe,
in their showing of the amount of wages as com-
pared with the total wealth production—as an aver-
age rule—make it one-fifth, the other four-fifths be-
ing the Marxian surplus value. In the Industrial
Co-operative Commonwealth, there being no exploi-
tation, the surplus would be added to the fractional
fifth, and it is evident that the increase, as remunera-
tion of the free producers, could be ample. In addi-
tion, it could supply the needs of society in the re-
tired section of workers and in the section of those
under twenty years, being trained in useful know-
ledge, purged of its bourgeois, prejudicial bias. Un-
der such a system of mental, moral, social, and ra-
tional education, what are called the “natural in-
equalities” would be bred out, as they have been bred
in. In the third or fourth generation they would ap-
proach the vanishing point, and this quite new or-
der of mental, moral, and social psychology would
give a race of beings, realising the Ingersollian vision
of: “A race without disease of flesh or brain, shapely
and fair, the married harmony of form and use.”
Such will be the world born of Labor’s freedom, for
where Labor is free, all forms of slavery die for ever.
The author’s preface outlines the treatment of
the problems dealt with in these pages. That pre-
liminary mode of treating the subject has been ob-
served through the various chapters, and your au-
thor has studied to guard against all personalities
bearing on any section, political or industrial, of his
work. It has been his endeavor to treat every sub-
ject on broad and general principles. There has been
also an effort to exclude egoism and the dangerous


first personal pronoun, I. “I, by myself, I,” and the
very objective, “me,” have been banned to give pre-
ference to “this writer” and “your author.” And yet
every page, every line, every letter, IS ME—it is me
in spirit, in thought, in brain, in blood. It contains
the full experience of long, and often painful, impres-
sions of the past; it carries the ideas that have been
promulgated under street lamps, on reserves,
wharves, domains, banks of the Yarra, esplanades,
at Broken Hill, in workshops and meat works.
The imparting of these ideas to my class has too
often been under the baneful shadow of the law,
while harried and driven from pillar to post by the
“move on” clause, or summoned and fined for ob-
structing traffic, where there was no traffic. On prin-
ciple, such fines were never paid—except but once,
when I was special lecturer of a large organisation
with a managing executive, who paid against my
wish. Many of the ideas have been evolved from the
solitude and darkness of the prison cell, a good school
for the mind capable of spontaneous thought on con-
structive and creative lines. “A mind quite vacant is
a mind distressed,” whereas a mind filled with
thought activities is, in a degree, heedless of the pas-
sage of time or flow of circumstance.
In the chapters of this pamphlet, there is no bit-
terness, no acrimonious carping at any section of the
Labor movement, nor could there be, since I am
bound to it in all its parts, regardless of its many
differences in thought, methods, and tactics. These
can be reconciled, since the common ideal and objec-
tive are the same with all. The various view-points
are being reduced in their sharp feeling by the logic
of events during the past decade, more especially the
five years covered by the currency of “the Great
War.” And the now prevailing aftermath is con-
tinuing the rich education the workers have received
the world over.


Labor's gulfs of difference are fast shrinking to
small lines of cleavage, soon to disappear, making
easy the concert of thought and unity in action,
upon which victory depends. All the signs of the
times are propitious and full of good cheer.
May high cost of living increase and, as ever,
wages proportionately failing to meet the cost, cause
more hard times, more discontent, more industrial
unrest, for these are all factors to quicken the two
mighty forces in the great class war.
The portents are all for good; these disorders are
not symptoms of the social and industrial dissolution
of all civilisation. NO, they are parturitive pangs
preceding the birth of the new coming order, the “In-
dustrial Co-operative Commonwealth.” That will be
our heritage when, in measured step, the great army
of the workers marches on the line of Labor’s road
to freedom—lndustrial and Class Unionism.
The End.






ANDRADE’S
FOR
Political
Literature
OF ALL KINDS
201 Bourke St., Melbourne
32 Rawson Chambers, Sydney
Smithson Bros., Print., Warburton Lane, Melb.
