

/
K
LABOUR
BY A..J.0.
JUNE, 1896.
Hobart:
PRICE TWOPENCE,
pi "hS 6$
CAPITAL
Printed at “ The Mercury ” Office, Macquarie Street.




LABOUR
BY A.J.O.
JUNE, 1898.
PRICE TWOPEITCE,
Hobart:
Printed at “The Mercury” Office, Macquarie Street.
f rues
CAPITAL




V^ RARy 0/c
(H3 V56 /R £
y- v
"i - DEC 892
S. /1 .~b J.
*
LABOUR Y. CAPITAL
The great distinctive movement of the age, a movement beside
which all other movements fade into insignificance, is the ever widening’
and intensifying struggle between Labour and Capital. Some say it
should be called the struggle between Labour and Monopoly. Possibly
that is what it ought to be, but that is not what it is. As a matter of
fact, the workman strikes against his employer, who seldom has any
monopoly at all.
Not only is this struggle ever widening and intensifying, but it is
fast changing its whole character. Instead of being, as it originally
was, a series of desultory disconnected risings of this man’s employes,
or of that trade or branch of trade, it is becoming a vast organised
rising of Labour as Labour against Capital as Capital; a rising in
which one trade helps another trade, one county another county, and
even one nation another nation, and which is forcing Capitalists to
form combinations on their side.
Every campaign is now more carefully thought out and planned,
better organised and provisioned, wider extended, more prolonged,
more bitter, and approaching ever nearer to armed insurrection and
civil war. The Broken Hill and the Shearers’ strikes in Australia,
the Carnegie and Chicago strikes in America, and the Hull and Wales
strikes in England are cases in point. The attitude of the upper
classes, of the press that chiefly represents them, and of the economic
authorities generally, is distinctly antagonistic to the workers’ claims,
or to their actions (the only actions by which they can enforce their
claims).
The Economist and the Statesman alike admit that the labourer’s
toil is long and his pay poor, but declare that the Government
cannot help him. Some say that the remedy is in his own hand,
as wages are a matter of free contract, and it is his own business to
insist on better terms; which seems almost like a notice to him to
strike, seeing that no one can be simple enough to suppose that the
employer in these days of intense trade competition will grant more
pay or exact fewer hours merely because the labourer asks for it, or
thinks he ought to have it; others, again, say that it is the result of an
iron law of nature for which there is no remedy, poverty being the
necessary lot of the unfit and the superfluous in the struggle for
existence ; while others again declare that it is all the labourers own
fault for multiplying too fast, for being improvident, for this, that, and
the other thing; but above all for his mad folly in fighting against
Capital, which they declare to be the friend and support of Labour, and
to consist of the requisites of production, briefly expressed by the
terms food and tools.
It is with the last of these declarations that I propose to deal.
3.^2-


Is Capital the friend and support of Labour ? Does it consist of
food and tools ?
Words are but the arbitary signs of ideas ; they have no natural
and inherent meaning; their meaning is determined solely by custom,
the custom of those who habitually use them in daily life. But
the question before us is not as to the meaning of a word, but
as to the nature of a thing, the thing the quarrel is about, the
thing that, rightly or wrongly, the disputants call Capital, and in
the name of which the one party makes a claim and the other
resists it; the thing which, under the name of Capital, rules the market,
buys goods, hires services, starts enterprise ; which the State levies as
taxes, which the rich lend and the poor borrow, which fetches interest;
the thing, in short, which the striker and the locker-out, the
employer and the employed, the producer and the consumer, the
buyer and the seller, the borrower and the lender, the whole working
world in short, without exception, recognises as Capital, and which the
Economist himself, directly he quits spinning definitions out of his
inside, and goes out into the street as a citizen to do business, recog-
nises as Capital, lends or borrows as Capital, receives or pays interest
on as Capital. If the Economist does not mean by Capital this well-
known, universally recognised Capital, but some ideal abstraction
which is dependent on definitions, then it is no matter what he means,
he is merely quibbling about words, he is talking of one thing
when the dispute is about another, and he need not be surprised
(though he is, and shocked, too) to find that the parties to this dispute
pay no attention to him.
He says it is food and tools. If so, then the producer of food
and the manufacturer of tools should be lord of the industrial
world, whereas we constantly find the food-producer with his barns
full of wheat, so cheap by reason of its abundance, that he declares
he can’t live, and the tool-maker with his warehouse crammed full
of unsold tools, both on the verge of bankruptcy for want of this
Capital, and going for it to the man who has neither food nor tools;
that is, no more food than what he buys for his own consumption
from day to day, and no tpol more effective than a penknive or a
walking stick ; and this man, with a mere stroke of his pen, advances
them the Capital they want—on good security and for a consideration.
What is this Capital that he supplies to them ? Obviously the way
to find out is not to sit back in your chair, close your eyes, and spin
definitions, but to take the thing and inspect it, and so looking at it you
will see at once that it is money; not money in its occasional and
restricted sense of mere coin, but in its larger, more general, more
practical business sense of Purchasing Power—of command of the
goods and services of other people—the power to obtain these goods
and services without rendering any fresh goods or services in return—
the power of getting them for nothing, in short, by virtue of a claim
registered in a bank ledger, on a title deed, mortgage, Government
debenture, or scrip of some sort; a claim registered somewhere, which,
for convenience sake, we shall call a bank balance, and which, though
made through some particular person or firm, is really on the general
stock of goods and services, all which claims, if wiped out with a
sponge, would leave the sum total of real wealth, of food and tools,


of goods and coins, of articles of every kind absolutely unimpaired.
(I am not proposing to wipe them out, I am only pointing out
the unsubstantial character of this so-called “ Capital.”)
When a man is said to have <£l,ooo, it is never understood
for a moment that he has 1,000 sovereigns. No one ever has 1,000
sovereigns, or, if he has, he promptly proceeds to “ deposit ” or
“ invest ” them, to get rid of them to some one else, and so convert
his “ money ” into a standing claim on that some one else. The
moneyed man, or Capitalist, never has any sovereigns (worth mention-
ing) ; the sovereigns are all out, circulating from hand to hand among
the people who have “no money.” The Capitalist’s capital has no
substantial existence at all; it is a mere recorded claim on other
people’s earnings: Rothschild’s, on the revenues of certain States,
Colonel North’s, on the proceeds of certain nitrate bods; everybody’s,
on the rent or interest revenues produced by other people. Often it
never had any substantial existence even at the beginning, but
originated in rent, i.e., a claim on somebody for mere permission to
utilise a certain portion of the earth’s surface, a permission (or pri-
vilege to deny permission) which obviously in itself adds nothing to
the stock of real wealth.
Even when it had a substantial existence to begin with, that sub-
stantial existence has long ago disappeared. If it consisted in money-
lent, the money was promptly passed on by the borrower, and is lost
in the general circulation, as it was its function to be. There is no more
of it in consequence of the Capitalist lending it instead of spending
it himself. If it consisted of goods, those goods have long ago
been consumed. If it consisted of work done, then the work was
done, and the results of it alone remain. In all cases alike all that
remains to the Capitalist is his claim for repayment and for interest
till the repayment is made. Neither claim for repayment nor claim for
interest add anything to the general wealth. Yet it is all that the
Capitalist’s Capital consists of.
Capital is food and tools ! What then means this financial crisis,
this check to production and stagnation of business, this cry of “no
money ” ? What mean these insolvencies in all directions for want of
Capital to carry on, these willing workers unemployed for want of
Capital to employ them, and Government and private employer alike
stopping useful works, and bidding men throw down their tools while
the fai'mers are crying ruin by reason of the cheap abundance of
food, and tools gleam unsold in the shops, or rest idly in back
yards ? There is no want of food and tools here; yet all agree there
is want of Capital.
Everyone recognises the owner of a Bank balance as a Capitalist,
therefore a Bank balance as Capital; but no one recognises food or
tools, or goods of any kind as Capital unless they are convertible by
the owner into “ money ” ; unless he can either sell them or put them
to some profitable use. Profitable, mind ; not useful. The usefulness
is neither here nor there. They would be usefully employed in feeding
or assisting poor people who would put them to good use, but could
not pay for them; but that would not be “ profitable.” They might
on the other hand be used to run a totalisator, which merely
facilitates gambling; that would not be useful, but it would be


“ profitable.” Goods that could be put to the latter use would count
as Capital; to the former use, not.
The very expression “realising one’s Capital” shows what is the
meaning of the term, for everyone understands by it turning goods
into money, not money into goods.
The Capitalist’s claim may be quite legitimate, you will say. Pos-
sibly ; but at present we are not concerned with the ethics of the
case, but with the facts. We want first to realise clearly what Capital
is. We are constantly told that Capital is necessary to progress ; but
yet, if it consists of a mere claim by one person on the earnings of
another, it clearly is not necessary, no matter how legitimately such
claim may have arisen.
The Capitalist is resolvable into three types :
Ist. The Landlord-Capitalist; so called to distinguish him from the
landowner who has been compelled to buy the limited area he holds
for personal use, as the only way of obtaining security of possession
and the fruits of his own labour in the future.
Land and Capital, I am aware, are quite different things, and there-
fore the landowner, as such, is not the same as the Capital owner, as
such. He differs from the Capitalist, or money owner, in many im-
portant respects ; in owning that which no one has produced but only
appropriated ; which is not a product of nature but nature herself ;
which is limited in extent and impossible to increase; and which is
the first necessary of life, being the source from which all other
necessaries proceed. Still it belongs to the recognised Capitalist or
tribute-levying class, the class against which Labour is rising; he
makes common cause with the others of that class, and is the ultimate
cause of the failure of all strikes by withholding land and so
producing a class of unemployed whose competition for employment
breaks down Trades Union resistance. He acquires land not for
personal use, but as an investment of Capital, that is, not to use but
with the avowed intention of preventing anyone else from using it
except for the highest rent which the widest and keenest competition
can secure, and with the legal right to hold it back as long as he
pleases, thereby producing an artificial scarcity of land and forcing
up all land values ; and this, notwithstanding that labourers remain
unemployed, tools unused, wants unsatisfied through this denial on
his part of access to the land, the ultimate source of all industry.
His land, in short, is to him a mere investment of his Capital; a mere
plea to demand backsheesh from anyone who wants to use it.
Moreover, land and Capital have been exchanged backwards and
forwards so often that it is a mere chance whether any given
Capitalist at any given moment holds his Capital in land or in money.
The Landlord is the fundamental Monopolist, the owner of the one
monopoly from which all other monopolies proceed, no matter how
apparently unconnected with the land. Still he is a Monopolist, and
a tribute-levier like the rest; he is one of the class against which,
under the name of Capitalism, Labour is rising, and for present
purposes we include him with them, as the world at large does.
The Landlord-Capitalist, then, is one who has invested his Capital
in acquiring exclusive possession of a certain j)ortion of the earth’s
surface, and who makes his income by exacting tribute from others


for mere permission to use it. He exacts this tribute in either of two
ways : By allowing the user to use it as a tenant only, paying him
rent, or as a hired servant only, producing goods which are to belong,
not to him who produces them, but to the landowner who permits or
employs him to produce them, the real producer receiving only
“ current wages.” The Landlord’s income thus rests upon a claim, a
claim to land. He lives by graciously allowing other people to put
the land to use : —for-his enrichment^and great honour is accorded
him for permitting them.
2nd. The Money-Lender. —Of actual coin the money owner, as
we have seen, has next to none; but he has the command of it, and
through it of all purchasable things, by virtue of some registered
claim on somebody else, and his loan of money consists of a mere
transfer to the borrower of power to draw upon this claim (that is,
on that somebody else) to a specified amount. He supplies no coin,
no goods, no tools; it is the “ somebody else” who supplies all these,
but it is the Money-lender who gets paid for them.
3rd. The Investor.— This is supposed to be a Capitalist of a quite
different and superior type to the Landlord and the Money-lender, for
these last clearly contribute nothing that was not already present,
and take no part in enterprise, but only demand tribute, one for the
land which he did not create, but only monopolises, and the other for
the food and tools which he does not produce, but only commands.
But the Investor is looked upon as the very life and soul of enter-
prise, its originator and director, a sort of worker in excelsis, without
whom no work of any magnitude could be attempted.
But the fact is that he only differs from the other two in this :
That they are non-working tribute-leviers, naked and not ashamed,
while he is a non-working tribute-levier masquerading as a worker.
For example: A, B, and C have saved .£I,OOO each. A buys a piece
of laud, and, sitting comfortably at home, lives without labour on his
tenants’ rent; B lends his, and lives without labour on his debtors’
interest; while C takes shares in a railway, and lives without labour
on the profits produced by the employes. Not one of the three pro-
vides or does anything towards producing the rent, interest, or divi-
dends on which he lives.
Take an example from actual life, say, the Broken Hill strike. On
one side were the miners who with their strong arms supplied the
labour. On the other were the investing shareholders who by their
capital supplied—what ?
The food and tools ? Nothing of the sort. The people who sup-
plied the food were the farmers and farm hands who grew it. The
people who supplied the tools were the manufacturers and factory
hands who made them. To work the mine, supplying everything,
two sets of men only were wanted: one to produce the food and
tools, the other using these to extract the ore. The shareholders no
more provided the food and tools than they extracted the ore. They
produced nothing, they provided nothing, they did nothing. The
food-growers and tool-makers on the one hand, and the miners on the
other, provided and did everything; but, unfortunately, they had not the
money, the purchasing power to command their own products. This
was all concentrated in the hands of the Capitalists, and the Capitalists


used it to exploit both sets of workers alike: commanding first the
food and tools produced by one set, afterwards the ore produced by
the other set, and standing ready with the profits so acquired to com-
mand the next enterprise, whatsoever it might be, and by whomsoever
originated and carried on.
Had the Capitalist and his Capital —his accumulated claims com-
manding everything in advance—been carried up to Heaven in a
fire,
nothing necessary to the work would have disappeared ; the two sets
of workers combining could have produced and used the food and
tools (which the Capitalist now commands) to produce the ore (which
the Capitalist now commands), and share between them the profits
(which the Capitalist now commands).
It is a tremendous power, this power of the Capitalist, who pro-
duces nothing, provides nothing, does nothing, but commands every-
thing. It rests upon his sovereign will whether the soil shall be
cultivated, whether the minerals shall be extracted, whether the city
shall expand, whether the labourer shall work or starve. He, the one
useless being, holds the keys of Heaven and Hell, so to speak, and
the millions, who bear all the toil and produce all the wealth, are but
the pawns with which he plays his game.
Never does the labourer get the chance to come into possession of
the fruits of his own labour.
The Capitalist gets credit for many things with which his Capital has
nothing to do. He is constantly being represented as the captain of
industry, the originator and . director of enterprise, But the two
characters, though sometimes combined in the same person, are quite
distinct. In ever increasing degree the initiation and direction of
industry are parting company from the ownership. Large enterprises
are ever swallowing up small ones, and at the same time merging into
Companies and Syndicates, wherein the originators are paid perhaps
by the allotment of a few shares, and the directors and overseers
receive salaries and wages, but the concern as a whole is owned by,
and the proceeds divided amongst, a number of shareholders who for
the most part know little or nothing about the concern, except that
they believe it likely to be agood thing,” and have practically no
more to do with its control than they have with the control of the
British Navy. They buy their shares and they draw their dividends.
That is all they have to do with the matter. It is the mere power of
the purse that commands and appropriates everything, giving nothing
in return.
But the Investor takes the risk (P). Some of it, but nothing to what
the labourer does. If the venture fails the Investor loses so much,
but generally has plenty left to be comfortable on, for few people are
so foolish as to put all their eggs into one basket; while the labourer
loses his employment, his sole means of living, and is often long
before he can find other employment. But apart from this, the
labourer risks life and limb and health constantly. He risks lead-
poisoning in one mine, explosion or suffocation in another, rheumatism
here, mangling by machinery there, disease and accident in a thousand
forms. If he is maimed or killed it is he, not the Investor, who suffers
the pain, and his wife and children, not the Investor’s, who lose their
breadwinner.


But the plea is a sham in every way. Suppose someone else
appropriated the fruits of the Capitalist’s investment on the same
plea that he appropriates the fruit of the labourer’s employment, viz.,
that this “someone else” takes the risk, ensuring the Capitalist
against absolute loss (though the Capitalist does not ensure the
labourer against this by any means, as I have pointed out), and in
return allows the Capitalist just about as much to live on as the
labourer gets, I think the Capitalist would denounce it as both an
impertinence and a robbery. Yet there would be less wrong done in
this case than in the other, for the Capitalist is not compelled to find
investment for his Capital as the labourer is compelled to find employ-
ment for his labour. He can live on his Capital (so long as it lasts)
instead of investing it, and then work like other people, while the
labourer must find employment, and quickly, or starve. The claim of
the labourer for work is the natural and just claim to the opportunity
to earn a living by honest work in supplying the wants of himself and
others, either by direct access to nature, or, if that be denied him,
then by some useful work set him by those who presume to close
nature against him; while the claim of the Capitalist to the oppor-
tunity to get interest or profit is the claim to live on other people’s
labour. Moreover, this claim to take.the risk —and the profit—is
rather a thing to be resented. The labourer will always only too
gladly take the risk if he may have the profit. The prospecting
miner, for instance (almost the only labourer who gets the chance
of taking his own risks), will gladly work for weeks and months, on
and off, as he can find the means, on the mere chance of success, a
chance which (in mining) is always heavily against him; while
Capital is notoriously timid, and always asking for “security.”
As to Capital representing the savings of the Capitalist. What
has he saved P Food and tools P These are what Labour is producing
from day to day.
If the Capitalist could save these he would be doing more harm
than good. To “ put by ” food when people are starving, or tools
when people are idle would be to do a cruel wrong and waste a good
opportunity. Food is produced to be eaten, tools to be used —not put
away. Moreover, food and tools cannot be saved to any appreciable
extent. The food would generally spoil quickly, the tools rust slowly,
both meanwhile lying uselessly idle instead of rendering useful
service.
The Capitalist, however, saves neither food nor tools, nor yet goods
of any kind ;he only accumulates claims on other people. It is
right enough to put by such food and tools as will keep when they are
in excess of present wants, but not otherwise. However, they are not
put by to any extent. Mill has shown clearly that what are called
accumulations of Capital are (in so far as they consist of utilities and
not of mere claims) the result of continuous reproduction, and the
great mass of what is of any age, such as houses, furniture, etc., never
has been “ put by ” at all, but used from the very beginning, only
being of durable materials has outlasted the use. It is the claims
that accumulate and figure as Capital, and the more these claims
accumulate, the heavier grows the burden that industry has to bear.
But, again, it is said that even if Capital is after all only a claim


to take, it is a claim that represents past services rendered, and is
therefore fairly earned.
Capital represents past services! Suppose it did. No conceivable
service could be so great as to give the Tenderer and his successors for
all time this all-embracing, ever-increasing power—this command of
all the opportunities, and the requisites, and the products of produc-
tion from generation to generation, rolling up fortunes that grow the
bigger in ever-rising rents and ever-accumulating interest and profit
the farther they get from the original service-renderer.
And the greatest services rendered never have established such a
power. The greatest service-renderers of the human race have been
the Moral Reformers, the Scientific Discoverers, the Martyrs for
Truth and Liberty ; and such men are never paid in base money, nor
found a race of Capitalists.
The Capitalists’ claims have for, by far, the most part originated in
no service at all, but often very much the reverse. Here and there a
man like Brassey, 6r Geo. Moore, or Edison has made a large fortune
by great gifts usefully applied, but such cases are the brilliant except
tions. Fortunes have for the most part originated from unjus-
Monopoly, by acquiring land and waxing rich on the unearned incre-
ment ; by rings and syndicates, and tricks played with the market;
by inheritance put out to interest and compound interest; by wild
but fortunate speculation ; by heaps of ways conferring no benefit on
society, and often grievously injurious.
But let the original service (where there was any) be never so
great it could not be great enough to win for the successors who
did not render it, as well as for the original person who did, this
tremendous, this crushing power over the workers and command of all
the opportunities and fruits of work.
Meanwhile the Capitalist remains king and lord of all.
Are minerals discovered ? Then they are either on private or on
Crown land. If the former, the Capitalist Landlord claims them ; if
the latter, it is Capital only that can buy up shares in the Company
that has to be formed. Does some worker invent a machine ? He
must find a Capitalist to take it up, and content himself with such
share of the profit as the Capitalist may agree to leave him. So with
a railway or any other enterprise that may be started. No matter
who originates it, who plans it out, who provides the requisites, who
carries on the work, it is the Capitalist, the money-owner as such,
and not the worker as such, who gets more than current wages, who
skims all the cream.
It is the same all through. While it is work that alone produces
real wealth (i.e., goods) it is money that makes money. There is not
an opportunity for work, or a requisite for work, or a product of work
but the Capitalist commands it, virtually owns it, in advance. This
is the grievance that the worker is rising against. He utterly dis-
believes that it is the unalterable law of nature that the proceeds of
work shall go not to the man who does the work but to someone else
who has no hand in it whatever, but who, by some terrible maladjust-
ment of our social arrangements has been allowed to get the command
of everything and to live in idleness on the earnings of others by his
power to practically prohibit all work except by his permission, on
bis conditions, and for his profit.


Pray observe tbat I am not suggesting any new meaning to an old
word; lam only dragging to light the meaning that people already
really have without fully realising it. lam only pointing out that
whatever Political Economists may declare in their definitions the
idea that everyone has in his mind (even the Economist himself when
he means business), when he uses the word Capital is money. Not goods
but purchasing power; not food and tools, but the command by one
person of the food and tools produced by another. And I further
point out that this command and virtual ownership of the food and
tools inevitably gives the command and virtual ownership of the goods
which the food and tools are used to produce.
This Capital, this accumulation of claims commanding everything
(the possession of which, in real life, confers upon its owner the title
and power of a Capitalist) so far from assisting industry actually
hinders it, and in this way : An industry that will simply maintain a
single man (let alone a family) is ipso facto a productive industry,
and as such should be allowed to proceed —may we not say has a just
eight to proceed ? Yet every such industry must be in some place,
that is, on some piece of land, and therefore at some Landlord’s
mercy ; and unless it will not only maintain the worker, but also yield
rent to a Landlord, or interest to a Money-lender, or profit to an
Investor, tribute to some person who does nothing—it is not allowed
to proceed, and the man who could easily and would gladly maintain
himself must wander the country begging for work or charity, living
one way or another on somebody, and therefore at the country’s expense,
bringing down other people’s wages by his eagerness for employment,
and suffering moral deterioration through his enforced idleness, his
acquisition of vagrant habits, his constant receipt of charity, which
break his hope and spirit, and gradually destroys his self-respect.
The Land Nationaliser says that Land Monopoly is the great
enemy. The Socialist says it is Capitalism. Each is right in his own
way. Land Monopoly is at the bottom of the whole business. But
for this so-called right of the Landlord to bar access to natural
resources, to limit the field of employment, and to extort tribute for
permission to work, Capitalism could never have arisen. Land
Monopoly in short begot Capitalism, But the child has outgrown and
devoured its parent. The Landlord, owning the prime requisites of
production, commands the stream of industry at the fountain head,
but the Capitalist now commands him. The great Landowners are
being ruined, the outside Capitalists are buying them up, and com-
bining the two characters in one. Whoso owns land, but not Capital,
will soon cease to own land; but whoso owns Capital can own land
whenever he likes; and often does virtually own it already—by a
mortgage.
The Economist tells us that this tremendous power of the Capitalist
(or of Capital, as he expresses it) is a part of the Economic law,
which is the law of Nature. But we know better. We admit that
the laws of Political Economy are the laws of Nature, but we think
that the laws of Political Economy are one thing, the laws of the
Political Economist another. As for the law of Nature, we know
that it is all the other way. The law of Nature is that the industrious
shall prosper and the idle come to naught; that he who produces


much and consumes little shall have abundance in his old age, while
he who produces little or nothing, but lives luxuriously and waste-
fully, shall starve; and that the more disagreeable, or dangerous, or
unhealthy the work is, the higher the pay that the worker will
expect for doing it. But under existing conditions all this is reversed.
The man who can live luxuriously and wastefully, and yet not come
to want, is the man of “independent means,” that is, the man who
produces nothing, but lives on the produce of other people in rent
and interest, and whose future is thus assured, while those who work
the hardest and the longest, and at the most monotonous and
depressing, disagreeable, or dangerous work, are as a rule precisely
those who are the worst paid. This is neither the natural law (the
law of necessary sequence) nor the moral law (the law of desert), and
the workers are beginning to realise that there must be something
radically wrong in our institutions (though they do not yet see clearly
what it is) to produce such results, and that it is quite possible,
though it may take some time, to set it right.
If Capital consisted of food and tools, of coin, or of goods of any
kind, it could in itself have no power over Labour. If I have access
to land whereon I can make myself a home, grow my own food, and
employ my Labour usefully either in direct supply of my own wants or
in exchange of mutual service with my neighbour, though I may not
become rich, I am at any rate a free man with a sufficiency in the pre-
sent and a hope in the future. If in such case a man with much money
settles on one side of me and a man with many appliances on the
other, lam no worse off but the better; for the one will be able to
pay me with bis money and the other with loan of appliances for
services which each will want, and so long as I have this access to land
I need not take service with either unless they make it well worth my
while.
So LONG AS I HAVE ACCESS TO LAND.
But let either of them get hold of my land and I am a free man no
longer. I can hold my old home no longer except on my Landlord’s
sufferance, and must get him, or someone, to employ me on any terms,
or I die.
The evil, the one great wrong that lies at the bottom of wage slavery
and of the whole industrial difficulty, is Land Monopoly; the cutting
up of the whole surface of the available earth into square pieces, and
allowing the rich to buy it all up and charge the poor for the mere
permission to live by their own labour.
The Economist tells us that far more Labour is employed off the
land than on; in working up and distributing the raw products of
industry than in merely producing them; and the inference he
suggests is that Land Monopoly cannot do so much harm after all.
The statement is true ; the inference is false. It is all the other
way. What the fact really indicates is the enormous power of
obstruction possessed by the man who owns the land, the source of
all these subsequent industries. He stands at • the fountain head of
industry, and can stop the whole stream at any moment as suits his
interest or pleasure.
For 100 men employed in producing iron ore there are thousands
employed in working this up into (say) rails, in transporting the


rails, in laying them, in making the engines and carriages without
which the rails would be of no use, in running the railway, and so
on. And the mineral landowner who, by demanding an exorbitant
royalty, compels the mining company either to throw up the work or
to bring on a gigantic strike by the attempt to force down wages, not
only throws the 100 miners out of employment, but the many
thousands more who would have been employed in making, transport-
ing, and laying the rails and running the railway, besides the
thousands more who were employed by the wages which all these
people spent but which are now stopped.
Future generations will wonder how we, with all our scientific attain-
ments and diffused education and political rights, could have tolerated,
much more believed in, a system which allowed and encouraged the
rich to buy land as an investment, that is, not to use, but with the
sole and avowed purpose of preventing anyone else from using it, ex-
cept on payment of the highest rents that could be got out of him ;
that is, for the utmost he could be got to give rather than go without
the land and have no means of living, and that it was further perfectly
allowable for the purchaser to hold back as much of this land as he
chose, for as long as he chose, either to force up its price or for mere
purpose of sport or any idle whim; that he might forbid the soil to be
cultivated, the minerals to be worked; the city to expand, though land
values were rising all around through the artificial scarcity of land so
produced, and thousands were without work, tens of thousands with-
out homes, and hundreds of thousands forcing down each others wages
or cutting down each others trade profits in their desperate competition
for employment or custom.
Make property in the products of Labour as secure as you can, but
abolish, gradually if you like, but resolutely, all ownership in the
opportunities of Labour—in that which is the ultimate source of all
industry, the land. Secure the user of the land in his possession, in
his improvements, in the fruit of his Labour, but abolish the right of
the irresponsible despot to say to one man, you may be homeless, but
you shall not build here; to another, you may be foodless, but you
shall grow no food here; to a third, you may be without employment,
but you shall do no work here, simply because I am the lord of the
earth—of this part of it, at any rate —and I choose to forbid you. The
man who owns the opportunities of Labour owns its fruits, and prac-
tically owns the men who must live by producing them. He, indeed,
may be over head and ears in debt to other people, and so be none
the better off, but that does not free the labourer.
If slavery may be defined as the power of one class to hold another
in subjection, and appropriate the fruits of its Labour, then slavery is
as rampant now over the whole civilised world as it was in the days
when men and women could be bought and sold like cattle. It may
be changed in form, it may be mitigated in degree, but it is the same
in kind. There is, as before, one above who does nothing but lives on
the Labour of those below, only he is no longer called a slave-owner,
but a Landlord or Capitalist. Under him are others who, for better
pay than the lowest workers, direct the work and extort the wealth
which the big man above receives, only they are no longer called slave-
drivers, but Capitalist tenants, superintendents, or middlemen of one


kind or another. Below are the working millions, who toil for bare
subsistence, and many of whom can hardly get that, though they it is
who do all the hard work, and produce all the wealth.
The new form of slavery is better than the old in some respects,
worse in others. Better in that the labourer can no longer be bought
and sold like a beast, kicked and flogged, nor have his family taken
from him; but worse in that the Patriarchial tie that formed the one
redeeming feature of the old system is gone, and there remains but a
cold-blooded commercial transaction, with the mockery of a free con-
tract.
The law (or custom and public opinion) required the old slave-
owner (at least in recent times) to see that his slaves had enough
food and shelter and clothing, and was expected to keep them in sick-
ness and old age; but the modern Landlord, or Capitalist, has no
responsibility of this kind, and may send his men adrift directly they
cease to be of use to him, not exactly (nowadays) to die, but to be
maintained grudgingly and ignominiously at the expense of the
people.
We may put it that the old slavery was individualistic, the new-
collective ; that is, that under the old system each slave had a recog-
nised master whom he was bound to serve, and who in turn was
bound to maintain him, so that between the two there was a mutual
responsibility ; while under the new system the worker is an ownerless
slave, who is bound to find a master for himself. The Capitalist class
collectively thus owns the working class collectively without any indi-
vidual responsibility for any one of them.
And all this is solely because Labour is denied access to natural
opportunities—to that source of all industry, the land. The worker
may not make himself a home in the neighbourhood of his work,
though land fit for sites and practically unused abounds; he may not
grow his own food, may not find employment in producing and
working up, singly or in co-operation, the grain and the roots, the
milk and the meat, the flax and the wool, the timber and the bark,
the lime and the stone, the gold and the tin, the coal and the iron,
the raw materials in all their countless shapes, all of which come
from the land, and all of which together go to form the countless
utilities and comforts, for the want of which they suffer poverty, but
are thrown upon an “ overstocked labour market ” to scramble for a
master, only too glad if they can get one on any terms; and so wages
are determined, not as they ought to be by the moral law, not as they
would be by the natural law (by the amount the labourer could get
for himself by direct access to natural opportunities), but by that cut-
throat competition for employment which tends to reduce wages, to
bare subsistence, and is fast driving the working-classes into Socialism
and open revolt.
We constantly see the three prime requisites of production left idle ;
Men unemployed, tools unused, land either not put to use at all, or
put to far less efficient use than is required of it. But we never see
raw products lying idle. We never see cotton or wool, wheat sheaves
or sugar cane, bricks or boards, bar iron or sheet copper, silver or tin,
kicking about neglected. There is always a scramble for the privilege
of working these up.


But why should there be a scramble ? Why should there not be
enough of these raw products to keep all hands constantly going
working them up into the countless utilities that are so badly wanted?
It is not that the land will not produce them, and to any extent that
may be required. It is that there is a privileged obstructionist some-
where at the back who prohibits their production, either by a blank
refusal, or by asking such excessive tribute as to be tantamount to a
blank refusal.
Strikes are obstructive and wasteful; they entail suffering and
engender hate; still they are better than war, and even war, cruel
and destructive as it is, is sometimes necessary. Disorder is some-
times the only way to settled order, war the only way to lasting
peace; and what is wanted just now is not Peace but Justice. Till
Justice is obtained it is not desirable to have Peace. Whenever there
is a great wrong there should be agitation against that wrong,
resistance in whatever form may be necessary, even up to war.
I grant freely that the wrong is done unwittingly; that the people
who do it have no idea that it is wrong, and even that many of them
deplore the evils they see around them, and are earnestly seeking a
remedy, quite unconscious that they themselves are the sole cause.
But that is almost always the case with a great wrong. The despot,
under whose tyranny the people groan, is fully persuaded that he is
the instrument chosen by Providence to rule, that he knows better
than his people what is good for them, and that it is the first principle
of law and order that his will be enforced at all costs. The religious
persecutor also fully believes that a right faith is necessary to salva-
tion, that his faith is the right faith, and that it is therefore absolutely
necessary to suppress heresy at all costs. The Southern Americans,
again, were as honest and kind and well-meaning a people as any, and
even noted for their chivalry, but nothing would convince them that
there was anything wrong in slavery, Not only the actual owners of
slaves, but the whole of the superior, the slave-owning race, defended
slavery as instituted by Providence, as necessary to civilisation, and
as being the very best thing on the whole for the slaves themselves.
You will never get the holders of any improper powers or privileges
to recognise any harm in their having these powers or privileges, but
only in the gross abuse of them, and very often not then. At any
impeachment of Capitalism, the Capitalist class—not only the rich
man himself, but all his brothers and cousins and clients and depend-
ents, even if they are not rich —remark contemptuously, “ Capital!
Capital is food and tools,” and the speaker turns away fully convinced
that that settles the matter to any fair-minded man, and that every
labour-leader and agitator is a rogue and his followers fools; and yet
if he would but consider the matter for one moment he would see that
Capital does not in any one’s mind, not even in his own, mean food
and tools, but only the command by one person of the food and tools
produced and used by other people and of the goods they produce with
them.
So with Landlordism, which is merely the pedestal on which
Capitalism stands, and which, if knocked away, would bring down
Capitalism with a crash. You will never get the Landowning class—
neither the Landlord himself, nor his brothers or his cousins or his


menservants and maidservants, or the people who are honoured by his
notice, or who profit by his custom, above all, the Capitalist tenants,
who live by hiring his improper powers —to see any harm in private
ownership of land —that is, in one class claiming all nature as their
private property, to grant or withhold access to her at their soverign
will, and charge other people for the mere permission to live by their
own labour.
This is the wrong you have to abolish. Whatever method of doing
so you may choose (and there are several to choose from), the process
will take time, and meanwhile the Capitalist profits by the wrong as
much as the actual Landowner, and should bear his share of the cost
of emancipation.
It is not fair to throw the whole cost, as the Single Taxers propose,
on the unfortunate who happen by pure accident officially to repre-
sent the wrong at the moment by owning a bit of land for which he
has probably paid full value.
The man who sold land yesterday is deeper implicated, and has pro-
fited more than the man to whom he sold, for land always sells at
prospective value ; and the Capitalist, whether he ever owned land or
not, benefits by the enormous power which Land Monopoly has given
to mere “ Money.”
Therefore it seems to me a progressive income tax, starting from
whatever level may be taken to represent fair earnings, should accom-
pany a land tax, at any rate until the Land Monopolist’s power of
obstruction has been so crippled, and withheld resources so far forced
into use that incomes have ceased to represent tribute to any great
extent, and are coming to represent earnings of work.
A. J. O.
-n?)66 $
M CO?'-/
PRINTED AT “ THE MERCURY ” OFFICE, MACQUARIE STREET, HOBART.




