

LABOUR AND CONSCRIPTION
The Conference called by the United Federation of
Labour, and held in Wellington, January
unanimously adopted the following Manifesto for ~~~~~~
publication:—
This Conference of New Zealand
Labour Organisations, convened for the
purpose of discussing Conscription, is
steadfastly opposed to the spirit of
militarism that made this war possible,
and deplores the loss of human life and
of property and the intense misery
caused by this war, and it expresses its
sincere and heartfelt sympathy with the
relatives of those who have fallen in
the fight.
CONSCRIPTION OF LIFE.
This Conference, representing 87 or-
ganisations of Labour (including all the
Trades and Labour Councils with the
exception of Otago), regrets that a sec-
tion of the community should attempt
to introduce Conscription —a system
that has been consistently opposed by
the working classes in all parts of the
Empire.
We put forward the following conten-
tions against the principle of force
where life is concerned: That where
only some are forced to give their lives
for the country no equality of sacrifice
is possible; that, were all our physi-
cally fit men compelled to enlist, cer-
tain of our primary industries would
be seriously crippled, to the detriment
of the people of the Dominion and of the
Empire ; that, if this is admitted, and
certain men are exempted from mili-
tary service, the doctrine of equality
of sacrifice becomes absurd; that, when
human life is at stake, all men stand
equal, and there can be no means of se-
lection devised that can be considered
fair; and that the policy of insisting on
enlistment for service abroad of single
men and youths is inimical to the best
interests of the nation and the poten-
tialities of the race.
Thousands of our comrades strenu-
ously opposed to compulsion in any form
have gone as volunteers, and while
their backs are turned we must use
every effort to preserve intact the civil
rights our people have won. There
must be no surrender of principles,
which have raised British citizenship
above serfdom.
We are convinced that Conscription
is desired, not so much for the pur-
pose of winning the war as to effec-
tively hold the workers in subjection
when the critical after-war period is
reached. Already the Trade Unions,
which are the bulwarks of our indus-
trial liberties, have surrendered many
cf their privilege® and rights, won
through long years of struggle ; already
our political liberties are being dan-
gerously invaded; and, when the war
is ended, Conscription, if enacted,
would prove an effective power to pre-
vent Labour regaining those lost and
surrendered rights, privileges and
liberties. Therefore, this Conference
declares its opposition to Conscription,
and will resist its introduction to the
utmost.
Writing in the London “Clarion” in
the sunset hours of his great life,


William Liebknecht, the then leader
of the Social Democratic Party in the
Reichstag, warned the British work-
ing men against the menace of Prus-
sian Conscription. He declared:
“Conscription means Militarism, sub-
mission of the people under military
power, the end of Democracy. . . .
The soldier of Conscription has to
obey blindly. Our Emperor, who is
the highest commander of the Im-
perial Army, has himself more than
once emphatically told the soldiers:
‘lf you are commanded to shoot, you
have to shoot even at father and
mother.’ . . . Conscription has for
its principal aim to separate the sol-
diers from the people; to instil into
them the idea that they are beings
of a higher order and caste than the
common drudges without arms and uni-
form, and that the highest deed of
man is to shoot or maim his fellow-
man. The German Magna Charta as
framed by militarism has been con-
densed into the famous dictum; ‘A
German’s duties and rights are to
hold his tongue, to serve as a soldier,
and to pay his taxes.’ Your Magna
Charta would speedily be superseded
by this were you to get under the iron
rule of Conscription.”
“We must,” as Dr. Clifford, the
eminent Baptist minister, says, “guard
our democratic liberties against the
attacks of State absolutism. If we
adopt Conscription we can be Prus-
sianised by our want of insight and
faith in freedom.”
VOLUNTARYISM.
This Conference points out that New
Zealand has fulfilled every pledge in
respect to the number of men the
Government undertook to send in the
Expeditionary Forces. In addition,
New Zealand has equipped and de-
spatched an entire Rifle Brigade, and
has maintained its full quota of rein-
forcements on the highest scale. To
impose Conscription, therefore, would
be a grave and unjustifiable reflection
on the courage of the people of New
Zealand, who have equipped and sent
more men to the front in proportion
to population than any other part of
the overseas Dominions. Always pro-
vided that the men on active service
are sufficiently equipped, maintained,
and remunerated, and their dependants
adequately provided for, the voluntary
system cannot possibly fail while a
majority of men of military age are in
favour of prosecuting the war. There
are thousands of men who are ready
and willing to go to the front, if the
Government would make adequate pro-
vision for their dependants while they
are away and in the event of death or
disablement. Charity and doles from
patriotic funds are not what is wanted.
That the conditions under which men
are asked to enlist are unsatisfactory
is proved by the fact that local author-
ities are paying soldiers amounts from
public fund® which bring their pay
up to the level of their civilian wages,
and in this connection the one shilling a
day separation allowance for married
men and Sunday pay are not com-
puted.
A soldier’® pay should not be less
than that of the Trade Union rate for
the best paid artisans. The pensions
for soldiers and dependants ought to
be made much more liberal and the
pensions to wife and children should
not be mad© a matter of charity but
a matter of right. Under the present
Act, a soldier’s wife and children have
to plead poverty before receiving the
full pension. The Act says: “In de-
termining the rate of pension payable
to a dependant of a member, the
Board shall take into consideration
the property or income from all sources
of the dependant and of all persons
liable at law for the maintenance of
the dependant.”
Voluntaryism forces a Government to
make adequate provision for the soldier
and his dependants before it can ex-
pect to get the necessary recruits. The
abandonment of the voluntary principle,
therefore, which allows men to with-
hold service until reasonable provi-
sion is made for themselves and de-
pendants, will deprive the community


of its most powerful means of securing
the improvements necessary.
The Conference offers the follow-
ing general arguments in favour
of the voluntary principle. Even
from the Militarist viewpoint
volunteering furnishes the best
soldiering material and tends to get
rid of those officers who cannot make
themselves respected by their charac-
ter, ability, tact, and conduct. It thus
guarantees as far as possible under a
military system reasonable treatment
to the recruit. Voluntaryism is the
best protection against the military
abuses so rife in compulsorily enlisted
armies. Conscript armies are cheaper
than voluntarily enlisted armies, and
this explains the financial shirker’s
preference for Conscription. They are
cheaper, however, only for those who
ought to pay. If voluntaryism is dis-
placed by Conscription, the soldiers
and their dependants are certain to
suffer and the financial shirker escape.
COMSCRIPTION OF WEALTH.
To finance New Zealand’s further
participation in the war and the im-
provements in the pay and pensions
of men on active service, Conference
urges drastic taxation, to the extent of
the confiscation to the use of the State
of all incomes in excess of a soldier’s
pay as defined in the terms of this
manifesto. This policy would result
in an even greater rate of enlistment,
and at the same time test the sincerity
of those who are pledging the last man
and the last shilling to the prosecution
of the conflict.
War Loans inevitably mean post-
poned payment with more interest for
the moneyed classes, and greater bur-
dens for future generations, with the
result that the men who fight the
battles will eventually be compelled
to also earn the interest on the debt
and thus pay toll to those who should
have done their share by paying the
cost.
To conscript a man’s wealth is a less
serious invasion of personal liberties
than to conscript a man’s person, and
in a struggle for freedom the conscrip-
tion of wealth must precede the con-
scription of flesh and blood and be
fully tried before the latter is seri-
ously considered.
Conscription of Wealth does not
mean the taxing of tea and sugar and
the borrowing at 4J per cent, free of
income tax war profits filched from the
nation by the patriots who have made
the war an occasion for levying toll
on their own nation. It does not
mean an increase of threequarters
of 1 per cent. in the tax-
ation of persons with £IOO,OOO a
year. It does not mean any mere in-
crease in taxation which leaves the
wealthy wealthier than ever as a direct
result of the war It does mean giving
the people as a whole a real interest
in the ownership of their country and
in the ownership of those main indus-
tries upon which their life and de-
velopment depend. Unless the private
property, which now enjoys privileges
and empowers a small class to lay tri-
bute on the community, is conscripted
to the use of the State —made social
property, that is—national organisa-
tion will remain a myth. The clamor
for conscription simply resolves itself
into the demand of Private Enterprise
for more weapons for its entrenchment
and aggrandisement.
Conscription of Wealth means that
the land, mines, mills, factories, ships,
banks, and all collectively-used means
of wealth production shall be seized
and operated for the collective benefit
of the people during the war and shall
remain the property of the people after
the war.
PEACE TERMS.
In regard to Peace Terms and the
bringing of the war to a speedy con-
clusion, this Conference would com-
mend to the earnest consideration of
fellow citizens the Pope’s appeal to
the belligerents :
“Let it not be said that the mighty
conflict cannot be settled save by force
of arms. Let the mutual will to de-
stroy be laid aside > Be it remembered
that nations die not! Humbled and op-
pressed they bear with quivering impa


tie nee the yoke laid upon them, pre-
paring to renew the contest, and hand-
ing down from generation to generation
a sorry heritage of hate and ven-
detta. Why not weigh at once, with
conscience serene, the rights and just
aspirations of the people ? Why not
begin with willing minds and exchange
of views, direct or indirect, with the
object of taking into account, as far as
as possible, those rights and aspira-
tions, and thus put an end to the in-
tense struggle, as has happened in
other similar circumstances ? Blessed
be he who shall first raise the olive
branch, and shall extend the right
hand to the foe, offering reasonable
conditions of peace. The equilibrium
of the world and the sure and prosper-
ous tranquillity of the nations rest far
more on goodwill and upon respect of
others’ rights c. ud others’ dignity, than
upon the multitude of armed hosts and
upon formidable girdles of fortresses.”
This Conference is strongly of opin-
ion that the time has arrived when
the Allied Governments should publicly
state the terms upon which they are
prepared to bring the conflict to an
end. This is not only due to the peo-
plies of the Allied Nations, but if the
details of the terms recognise the right
of peoples to develop according to their
own genius and reduce the dangers of
Secret Diplomacy and the private in-
terest in armaments manufactures,
they will assist the German Social De-
mocratic movement in creating a larger
peace sentiment in Germany. The war
has reached a stage when the intelli-
gence of the world must assert itself
to extricate humanity from the impasse
into which Military Bureaucracy has
led it. The publication of Peace Terms
will provoke public discussion, inform
the public mind, and thus ensure that
the peoples involved will enter more
fully into the settlement of the war.
In this way will be secured a Peace
Agreement based upon principles
of Humanity and Right rather
than upon the desires of certain classes
for mere economic and military advan-
tage.
J. DOWGRAY,
President.
H. HUNTER,
Secretary.
'“Worker” Print. —1997.
