

'
1891>1923
‘X‘. /J*
T & .<5r
thirty V{ars’ Record
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmEßmmmammamaßEmßmmamammmßmmmmmammmmmmmmmseamßmumamm
OF THE
LABOR PARTY
in South Australia




LABOR’S THIRTY YEARS’ RECORD
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
A SHORT HISTORY OF THE LABOR MOVEMENT
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA, INCLUDING
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF
LEADING MEMBERS
1893-1923
PUBLISHED BY
“THE DAILY HERALD, 8 ' ADELAIDE




PREFACE.
"‘The Unity of Labor is the Hope of the World.”
In 1914 a booklet was published by the “Herald”
under the title “The People in Politics.” It was
described as containing* a “synoptical review of the his-
tory of the South Australian Labor Party." Mr. E. A.
Roberts, then Labor member of the House of Representa-
tives, began the work, and when he died Mr. T. H.
Smeaton, then a member of the Labor Party, completed
the task. The result was an interesting and valuable
booklet, although it was by no means a complete record
of the Labor Party ’s work in this State.
Changes of the Past Decade.
Since the publication of “The People in Politics” in
1914 many vitally important changes have taken place,
not only in local or Australian political affairs, but
throughout the whole world.
So far as the Labor Party in Australia is concerned,
however, it remains, in the main, the same democratic
party as it has always been —the one and only party
which even claims to represent, to defend, and to advance
the interests of the workers.
The awful war, and the conscription issues which
accompanied it, caused many changes in the personnel
of the representatives of the Party, in both State and
Federal Parliaments. Men who, up to that time, had ren-
dered valuable services to the movement, for one reason or
another became disconnected. Some went right over
on the side of Labor’s political opponents, others dropped
out, and some have died, but the movement, as already
stated, remains still the Labor Party. It has’not changed
its name or its policy except, in the latter instance, to
reach out for more of the rights of the workers and to
stand more definitely against Labor’s opponents and the
cruel systems which have since 1914 wrought havoc
throughout the world.


Labor’s Stand Justified.
For having taken a definite stand at critical junctures
during and since the war, Labor came in for much hostile
criticism, but on every hand there is ample evidence in
justification of every stand so taken.
It may be a matter for regret that many men who
figured prominently in the booklet, “The People in Poli-
tics,” in 1914, are omitted from this publication, which
deals briefly with the Labor Party (in this State particu-
larly) from the inception in 1891 to 1923.
The defection of any number of representatives or
adherents must not —indeed cannot —materially affect a
great and humanitarian movement like that of the Labor
Party.
The Grim Reaper takes leaders and staunch sup-
porters whose places it might at the time seem impossible
to fill, but the movement goes on and on. Others leave
through one reason or another, and still the movement
rolls pn.
It may be temporarily checked, but it gathers impetus
again as its sound principles and high and noble ideals
and objective are better known.
It has its “ups and downs,” but it goes on, and will
continue to go on until the objective is achieved—
until the emancipation of the wealth producers is
complete.
Labor has secured the reins of government in nearly
every State, as well as in the Commonwealth Parliament,
and has lost them again (with the exception of Queens-
land), but this is not surprising, having regard to the
comparatively rapid rise of the workers’ party. During
the past ten years conditions have changed very
materially, largely on account of the world disaster which
began in 1914, and yet the outlook to-day is to the
workers’ party more encouraging than it has been at any
time during the past decade.
To have been practically torn to pieces in 1916, so
that Labor’s representation in the State House of As-
sembly was reduced to four, to have since seen the com-
plete defeat of those who failed when the test was
and to have come within reaching distance of the govern-
ment of the State again, is an extraordinary record. It


should stimulate all who to-day are bending their energies
to secure full representation of Labor again in the State
Parliament.
In the Federal Sphere.
The experience in the Commonwealth political arena
was equally thrilling. Reduced to one or two members.
Labor at the 1922 Federal elections secured seven of the
ten vacancies and was “runner-up” in the other three.
In both State and Federal Parliaments practically all who
left the Labor Party have been defeated, and for those
who, out of some idea of loyalty, followed those members,
there is only one course left. It is to return to the Labor
fold. For the Labor Party is the only Party which will
serve them faithfully and well.
No attempt is to be made in these pages to refer
at length to the doings of the past ten years, but it is
hoped the information given concerning the movement,
and those who are to-day prominently connected with it,
may at least be interesting to the members of the Party.
There may be —it is almost inevitable —omissions, and
possibly errors. Some of our best workers may not figure
in this publication. Indeed, the best work in our indus-
trial and political organisations is often, if not generally,
performed by those who do not come into the “limelight”
at all. The" shop stewards, on the industrial side; the
members of the local committees, on the political side,
who attend meetings, collect funds, distribute literature,
do the “door knocking,” and the routine work do not
see their photos, in the press or in this publication, but
from the inception of the movement these people have
been largely responsible for the successes achieved.
At the outset, then, let a full measure of credit be
given to them all. In country districts, as well as in the
metropolitan area, they are the backbone of the Party.
That acknowledgment is freely and gratefully given.
Some of them can never be adequately thanked or paid
for the good, silent, unobtrusive work they have done,
and no representative appointed as the result of that
voluntary work should ever forget the fact that but for
the confidence and efforts of these steady, consistent
plodders they would perhaps never have been elevated to
the positions they occupy.


No movement in the world to-day owes more to, or
depends more upon, the efforts of the “rank and file'
than the Labor movement.
While it is'true that every position in the Labor
movement is open to any member of the movement,
obviously only a few can succeed in securing those posi-
tions, and the essential work must always be performed
by those who comprise the main body.
At our annual Conferences many good and earnest
delegates come from the various parts of the State. They
seriously consider the Party’s position, policy, platform,
and programme, and, having decided the course, it re-
mains for those who appear more prominently in this
little publication to steer the Party along the course set
down bv Conference.
If, then, there are omissions or errors, take a kindly
wiew of the position, and give those responsible for the
publication credit for honesty of intention or integrity
of purpose.
The aim is to encourage all to do their very best in
any sphere in which they are placed, and to achieve that
solidarity which is mentioned in our declaration that—
“THE UNITY OF LABOR IS THE
HOPE OF THE WORLD.”
H. KNEEBONE,
President.
Trades Hall,
September, 1923.
LABOR’S LEADER.
Mr. J. GUNN, Leader of the State Labor Party, and of the Opposi-
tion in the House of Assembly, was born in Victoria in 1885. He took
an active part in the Labor movement in Victoria and Western Australia.
He became prominent in Labor circles in this State in 1910, and occupied
various positions in the industrial arena, including that of secretary of
the Drivers’ Union and president of the Trades and Labor Council. He
was elected to the Adelaide City Council in 1914, and to the State Parlia-
ment in 1915. He resigned in 1917 to contest Boothby at the Federal
Elections, but was unsuccessful, and was re-elected to the State Parlia-
ment in 1918. He became Leader of the Opposition in the same year.


THE LATE W. WELD (“EPSILON”).
First Editor of the “Daily Herald.”


if——*———— 8—nii-n»iiirww*«w—iMiiiiii iiwiiimiiiwiniiiu»m'iwww»t
• <• ' |■ ; -V- ; .::‘ i$* • • :: • wi:
WORKERS’ MEMORIAL PORT ADELAIDE.
On which are inscribed the names of veteran ILaborites of the district.


•X’X'IvXvX’XvXvX'I'XvX-X** ! ! ! !• X-Mv!-X x-XX
v: : : : : x '' • • : : XX.-X . •• • ’ ’ : ; : . :; ;: : :; : ; ; XX;: : . V: : V
MONUMENT OF THE LATE E A. ROBERTS.
At West Terrace Cemetery.




Solidarity and Virility.
An Appeal to Labor.
Never before in the history of our
movement was solidarity and virility
more needed than to-day.
It is the division of Labor that
defeats Labor.
In a few months’ time we will face
a general election.
The price of victory is work.
In past campaigns our opponents
have sought to prevent new reforms.
Now they openly seek not only to pre-
vent new reforms but to destroy what
we have attained.
Their Industrial Disputes Bill was unmistakable
proof of that.
Labor has saved the position to date, but if defeated
in the coming fight the result of the work of twenty
years will vanish in a night.
Therefore we must concentrate upon that which is
essential to winning.
Funds and additional members for Local Committees
are real needs.
Let each one feel that the responsibility is on his or
her shoulders.
If we rise to the occasion as the circumstances
demand we will triumph.
J. GUNN.
Adelaide,
Sept. 10, 1923.


THIRTY YEARS’ RECORD OF LABOR
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Viewed from the political standpoint—for the Labor
Party is to-day a political movement, as well as an
aggregation of industrial organisations—it may be stated
that 1890 was practically the beginning of the Labor
Party in South Australia. Its initial activity sprang
from an industrial upheaval, now known as the Maritime
Strike of 1890, when attention was turned to political
action to supplement the industrial movement. There
was considerable enthusiasm when the Trades and Labor
Council of South Australia convened a meeting of Labor
and Democratic Associations for the purpose of launching
a political campaign.
Soon after a plebiscite was held, and Labor candidates
were chosen to contest the Legislative Council seats. To
have attacked the local House of Lords was, as stated by
if The People in Politics/’ a very bold step. Many of the
facts given here were taken from that publication.
Yet Labor had encouraging success, and Messrs. Charles-
ton, Guthrie, and Kirpatrick were returned as the first
Labor team in the South Australian Parliament.
That was thirty-two years ago (1891), and we have
with us to-day Mr. Kirkpatrick, one of the first trio of
Labor members. He has had a long and fine career, and
still holds a seat in the Upper Chamber. He may be
regarded as the ‘Mather” or “grandfather' ’ of the Labor
Party in Parliament to-day.
In the same year (1891) a vacancy was caused in
the representation of the District of Wallaroo in the
House of Assembly by the death of the Hon. David Bews,
who w T as Minister of Education. (The present President
of the Labor Party was at that time engaged on the paper
at Kadina edited by Mr. Bews.) Labor ran Mr. R. Hooper,
a Moonta miner, and achieved its first success in the


House of Assembly. Many men, active in the movement
to-day, will remember these events, and, keeping in mind
the fact that it is just over thirty years since Labor began
to “function” politically in this State, it must be admitted
that the record is a worthy one.
In 1892, John Abel McPherson, then Secretary of the
Labor Party, defeated Conservative candidate Fowler for
the East Adelaide district.
In 1893 Labor contested all the metropolitan seats,
and secured eight, as follows: —
McPherson, East Adleaide; Archibald and MacGilliv-
ray, Port Adelaide; Batchelor, West Adelaide; Wood,
North Adelaide; Hourigan, West Torrens; Coneybeer,
East Torrens, and Price, Sturt.
In the country districts Hooper retained Wallaroo
and Poynton won Flinders. Thus Labor had a fairly
strong team at the first attempt.
In 1896 (three years later) all these members were
re-elected, with the addition of Carpenter for Encounter
Bay and Roberts for Gladstone.
A year later, J. A. McPherson (who had beer
elected Leader of the Party) died, and Labor sustained
its first serious loss. McPherson’s last message, “Tell
the boys to pull together, ” still rings in the ears of the
veterans in the movement, and is in consonance with
Labor’s present motto, “The Unity of Labor is the Hope
of the World.”
Mr. James Hutchison secured the seat vacated by Mr.
McPherson, and “Ted” Batchelor became Leader of the
Party.
In 1899 Labor held all its seats, and added John
Verran to the number by gaining the second seat for
Wallaroo.
In 1901 Mr. Batchelor left the State to enter the
Federal Parliament, and his seat was lost by the Labor
Party, although it was soon regained and safely held.
The 1899-1902 Parliament altered the Constitution
of the State and reduced the number of members from
24 to 18 in the Legislative Council, and from 54 to 42 in
the House of Assembly.
Mr. Charleston had seceded from the Party, but in
1893 Mr. W. A. Robinson was elected for the Central
District, and in the following year Mr. Gregor McGregor
secured a seat, representing the Southern District, and
Mr. H. Adams won a seat for the Central District.


In the 1896 general elections Mr. Kirkpatrick was
defeated for the Southern District, but in 1900 was re-
turned for the Central District, and Mr. Robinson lost
his seat.
In 1902, at the general elections, Mr. Adams was
defeated, but Messrs. Guthrie and Kirkpatrick retained
their seats.
When, in 1903, Mr. Guthrie went into the Federal
Parliament, his State seat was won by a Conservative,
leaving Mr. Kirkpatrick as the sole Labor member in the
Legislative Council.
In 1906 Mr. David Jelley was elected to keep Mr.
“Kirk ,? company, and Mr. J. P. Wilson secured a seat
vacated by the transfer of Mr. Yardon to the Federal
Parliament. Unfortunately, Mr. D. Jelley 7 s term was
short, for he died within a few months of his election.
The seat was retained bv Labor through the election of
Mr. F. S. Wallis.
Next, in 1908, Mr. Kirkpatrick resigned to take up
the position of Agent-General in London, and a Conserva-
tive won the seat.
In 1910 Messrs. A. W. Styles and E. L. W. Klauer
were elected to the Legislative Council, and two years
later Messrs. J. H. Vaughan and J. Jelley were elected,
so that Labor had thus secured the whole of the seats
for the Central District in the Legislative Council.
While these changes were going on in the Legislative
Council other alterations were being made in the House
of Assembly representation.
The alteration of the Constitution in 1902 reduced
Labor's representation. Mr. Hourigan had died, and
Labor did not regain his seat; while at the general elec-
tion Messrs. Hooper, Hutchison, and Carpenter were de-
feated, reducing the Labor members to one in the Council
and five in the House of Assembly. By the death of Mr.
Handyside Labor gained a seat in the Victoria and Albert
District in the return of Mr. W. Senior. Labor had then
six members in the House of Assembly.
It was during the 1902-5 Parliament that the influence
of outside Conservative forces, led by Mr. John Darling,
became apparent in the Jenkins-Butler Government, and
a section was created called the Independent Liberal
Party, under the leadership of Mr. Peake.
With this section Labor entered into a compact to
oppose the Government at the ensuing elections. The


arrangements were that if they succeeded at the election
the section which secured the larger number of seats
should elect the new Premier.
The election (1902) went against the Conservative
Government. Labor secured 13 seats, the Independent.
Liberals, 11, the straight-out Conservatives 16, and the
Ministerialists 2, so that the'Peake-Price combination had
a majority of six.
Labor secured the following seats: —
Adelaide: E. A. Roberts, W. D. Ponder, and J. Z.
Sellars.
Port Adelaide: W. 0. Archibald, I. McGillivray, and
H. Chesson.
Torrens: P. W. Coneybeer, T. Price, C. Vaughan,
T. H. Smeaton, and G. Dankel.
Wallaroo: J. Verran and A. E. Winter.
Stanley: C. Goode.
Victoria and Albert: W. Senior.
When the House met on July 20, 1905, Mr. Price
moved, “That the House do now adjourn. 7 ’ It was car-
ried, but the Premier (Richard Butler) refused to obey
the mandate, and the motion was presented a second time,
when the Premier gave way and resigned.
Then, on July 26, Mr. Tom Price met the House with
the Government in which Labor stood behind its own
Leader.
That was only eighteen years ago!
It was the beginning of many reforms. In his first
year in office Mr. Price appealed to the country on the
question of the franchise of the Legislative Council.
Labor then stood for the abolition of that Chamber, but
compromised with Mr. Peake’s Party and agreed to the
reduction of the rental value Qualification from £25 to
£ls.
A measure to that effect was twice rejected by the
Legislative Council, and in November, 1906, a general
election took place, as the result of which a dissolution
was granted by the Governor.
The result of the election was the return of all the
members who had supported that action, with the addi-
tion of three Labor members, Mr. D. Campbell for
Victoria and Albert, Mr. Harry Jackson for Stanley, and
Mr. John Newland for Burra.


Mr. J. Z. Sellars died, and on January 26, 1907, Mr.
R. P. Blundell was elected to the vacancy as a member for
Adelaide.
Next Mr. Tom Crouch was elected as a Labor member
for the Northern Territory in place of Mr. V. L. Solomon,
who had died.
In 1908, when Mr. E. A. Roberts resigned to contest
a Federal election, Mr. E. A. Anstey was elected, giving"
Labor a Party twenty strong in the House of Assembly.
It was at the end of the 1906-10 Parliament that
Labor lost its Leader, Mr. T. Price, who died on May 31,
1909. Mr. T. Ryan was elected to the vacant seat on
July 3, 1909.
Then came the election of 1910, which was one of the
most successful yet contested. Not only were all the old
members returned, but Messrs. W. J. C. Cole (Stanley)
and J. Y. O Loghlin ( Flinders) were added, giving Labor
a majority of two in a House of 42. That was the first
election after the establishment of the “Dailv Herald
The first issue was on March 7, 1910, and the elections
were held on April 2.
Mr. E. H. Coombe, who was the sole survivor of the
In dependent Liberals, supported the Labor Party and
gave it a working majority. Mr. John Verran became
Premier of the first complete Labor Government, consist-
ing of Messrs. Denny, Wallis, Coneybeer, Styles, Jackson,
and Wilson.
On February 10, 1912, Mr. Yerran appealed to the
country on the question of the constitutional rights of
the House of Assembly after the Legislative Council had
declined to pass certain measures, but the verdict was
against the Labor Government.
There had in the meantime been a slight change
111 the constitution of the House by the transfer of the
Northern Territory (in 1911) to the Federal Government.
Mr. Tom Crouch (Labor) and Mr. Brown (anti-Labor) *
who were representatives of the Territory, withdrew from
the House.
Ihe actual result of the 1912 appeal was a reduction
in the number of Labor members from 21 to 16, Messrs.
T\ Ryan, G. Dankel, D. Campbell, J. Newland, and J. V.
O Loghlin being defeated, while Mr. J. A. Southwood
gained a seat at Wallaroo.
For the 1915 elections the electorates had been gerry-
mandered to such an extent that it was considered by


opponents Labor would be in the “wilderness £Ol at
least twenty years. The result proved the opposite. The
number of seats had been increased from 40 to 46, and of
these Labor secured 26.
They were; Adelaide, Messrs. W. J. Denny, R. P-
Blundell, and J. Gunn; North Adelaide, B. A. Anstey
and W. D. Ponder; Port Adelaide, I. MacGillivray and
J. L. Price: West Torrens, H. Chesson and T. Green;
Sturt, C. Vaughan, T. H. Smeaton, and T. Ryan: Bast
Torrens, F. W. Coneybeer, L. L. Hill, and J. A. South-
wood; Victoria, P. Reidy and C. Goode; Murray, M. W.
Parish and G. A. Dunn; Barossa, E. H. Coombe; Wallaroo,
-I. F. Herbert and J. Verran; Port Pirie, W. J. C.
H. Jackson; Newcastle, T. Butterfield and A. A. Kirk-
patrick. The Hon. J. Carr was returned for No. 1 Divi-
sion of the Legislative Council, and later in the year the
Hon. W. H. Harvey was elected, vice E. L. W. Klauer
(deceased).
The Labor Government formed comprised Messrs. C.
Vaughan (Premier, Treasurer, and Minister of Educa-
tion) 0 , J. H. Vaughan (Attorney-General). C. Goode (Com-
missioner of Crown Lands and Immigration, and Minister
of Agriculture), A. W. Styles (Chief Secretary), H. Jack-
son (Commissioner of Public Works), and R. P. Blundell
(Minister of Industry, Minister of Mines, and Minister of
Marine).
The “Split.”
A referendum on the question of compulsory service
for overseas was put to the electors by the Federal Govern-
ment in 1916. This caused a split in the Party.
Messrs. Gunn, Hill, and Butterfield also resigned their
seats to contest the Federal elections in April, 1917. At
the by-elections Labor lost the East Torrens and New-
castle seats, and Mr. A. A. Edwards was returned for
Adelaide.
Owing to defections, Labor was left with only four
members in the House, and when Mr. Denny went over-
seas, with only three —Messrs. Kirkpatrick (Leader),
Price, and Edwards. When an adverse motion was
moved by Mr. Peake in July, 1917, the three Labor mem-
bers walked out of the Chamber, with the result that the
Vaughan Ministry was defeated.


The Recovery.
At the 1918 elections Labor secured 17 seats: —
Adelaide, Messrs. W. J. Denny, J. Gunn, and A. A.
EdAvards; Port Adelaide, J. L. Price and J. S. Yerran;
West Torrens, A. J. Blackwell and J. Mclnnes; Murray,
S. O’Flaherty; Wooroora, Alan Robertson; Port Pirie,
L. L. Hill and J. C. Fitzgerald; Burra Burra, H. R.
Buxton and M. R. O’Halloran; Newcastle, T. Butterfield
and W. Harvey; Wallaroo, R. S. Richards and J. N.
Pedler. Messrs. A. A.'Kirkpatrick and T. Gluyas were
returned for No. 1 District of the Legislative Council.
The Hon. J. Jelley was Campaign Leader during the elec-
tions. Mr. J. Gunn was afterwards elected Leader, and
the Hon. J. Jelley Deputy Leader. At these elections the
Liberals and Nationalists (former Laborites) ran as a
Coalition.
In 1921 there were four parties in the field, the
Liberals and Nationalists having parted company, and
the Farmers and Settlers contesting some countrv seats.
Labor secured 16 seats in the Assembly—Adelaide,
Messrs. J. Gunn, AY. J. Denny, and A. A. Edwards; North
Adelaide, F. W. Birrell and S. R. Whitford; Port Ade-
laide, J. L. Price and J. S. Yerran; West Torrens, A. J.
Blackwell and J. Mclnnes; East Torrens, L. C. Hunkin;
Wallaroo, R. S. Richards and J. N. Pedler; Port Pirie!
L. L. Hill and J. C. Fitzgerald; Newcastle, T. Butterfield
and W. Harvey. The Hons. J. Jelley and J. Carr retained
their seats in the Legislative Council. Messrs. Gunn and
Jelley were reappointed Leader and Deputy Leader
respectively.


WHAT LABOR HAS DONE.
It would be much to the advantage of the Australian
elector if he would sit down occasionally and think what
his country would have been had there been no Labor
Party.
When Labor entered the political arena as a virile
fighting force, all the Governments of Australia were in
the hands of politicians whose highest ambitions were to>
mould the country on old-world lines.
It was Labor that fought for early closing, factory
reform, shorter hours, decent wages, one adult one vote,
State enterprises, White Australia, and free~ education.
Had there been no Labor Party, Kanakas, Japanese,
Indians, and Chinese would have been competing with
white Australians in the labor market, and the standard
of our civilisation would have been on the level of the
cheapest labor countries.
One has only to contrast the condition of the workers
here with that of their comrades in other parts of the
British Empire to realise how great and enduring has
been the noble pioneering work of Labor in both the
industrial and political fields.
The Labor Movement has still a gigantic task ahead.
It has to recover the reins of power in State and Common-
wealth, and if the people could only be brought to realise
that Labor, with all its faults, is Democracy 's only hope,
and Autocracy ? s only check, the hour of its triumph would
not be far off.


The Federal Parliament.
Labor Cabinets.
Labor lias played an important part in the Commonwealth ever
since the inauguration «f Federation.
The first Commonwealth Parliament was elected in 1901, and Sir
Edmund Barton was the first Prime Minister.
The second was elected in 1904, and of this Parliament Mi.
Alfred Deakin was Prime Minister, but he held office only until
April 26th, 1904, when his anti-Labor Government was defeated, and
Labor took over the reins of government.
Mr. J. C. Watson became the first Labor Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth, and the first Commonwealth Labor Ministry was as
follows:
Treasurer —Mr. J. C. Watson.
External Affairs—Mr. W. M. Hughes.
Attorney-General —Mr. H. B. Higgins, K.C.
Home Affairs —Mr. E. L. Batchelor.
Trade and Customs—Mr. A. Fisher.
Defence —Mr. A. Dawson.
Postmaster-General —Mr. Hugh Mahon.
Vice-President of the Executive Council —Mr. Gregor McGregor.
South Australia thus had two direct Labor representatives
(Batchelor and McGregor) in the first Commonwealth Labor Govern-
ment. *
The Watson Government was succeeded on August 17, 1904, by
the Keid-McLean Administration, but the latter only held office until
July 4, 1905, when it was displaced by the second Deakin Administra-
tion, which remained in power till November 12, 1908.
Labor ’s second Government, led by Mr. Fisher, then came into
office, but was destined to have only a short tenure, for the third
Deakin Administration followed on June 2, 1909.
Mr. Fisher’s first Government comprised the following:
Treasurer —Mr. A. Fisher.
Attorney-General —Mr. W. M. Hughes.
External Affairs —Mr. E. L. Batchelor.
Home Affairs —Mr. H. Mahon.
Postmaster-General —Mr. J. Thomas.
Defence —Mr. G. F. Pearce.
Trade and Customs —Mr. F. G. Tudor.
Vice-President Executive Council —Mr. Gregor McGregor.
Honorary Minister —Mr. J. Hutchison.
In April, 1910, the second Fisher Government was estabished as
the result of Labor’s great win at the polls. This Government created
a record in world politics, by holding office for the full term and
carrying into legislative effect every plank of the platform on which
it was elected. There were several changes in the personnel of the
Government during the three years, and those who held Ministerial
for various periods were as follow: —
Treasurer —Mr. A. Fisher.
Attorney-General —Mr. W. M. Hughes.
External Affairs —Mr. E. L. Batchelor (died October. 1911).
Mr. J. Thomas (from 14//10/1911).


Postmaster-General —Mr. J. Thomas (to 14/10/]911).
Mr. C. E. Frazer (from 14/10/1911).
Defence —Mr. G. F. Pearce.
Trade and Customs —Mr. F. G. Tudor.
Home Affairs —Mr. King 0 ’Malley.
Vice-President Executive Council —Mr. Gregor McGregor.
Honorary Minister —Mr. E. Findley.
Mr. C. E. Frazer (to 14/10/11).
Mr. E. A. Roberts (from 23/10/11).
The Cook anti-Labor combination followed in 1913, and held
office from June 24 of that year till September 17, 1914, when the
third Fisher Government made its appearance, and controlled affairs
until October 27, 1915. Mr. Fisher’s third Cabinet comprised the
following:
Treasurer —Mr. Andrew Fisher.
Attorney-General —Mr. W. M. Hughes.
Defence —-Mr. G. F. Pearce.
Trade and Customs —Mr. F. G. Tudor.
External Affairs—Mr. J. A. Arthur (died December, 1914).
Mr. H. Mahon (from 14/12/14).
Home Affairs —Mr. W. O. Archibald.
Postmaster-General —Mr. W. G. Spence.
Minister for Navy —Mr. J. A. Jensen (from 12/7/15).
Vice-President Executive Council —Mr. A. Gardiner.
Assistant Ministers —Mr. H. Mahon (to 14/12/14).
Mr. J. A. Jensen (to 12/7/15).
Mr. E. J. Russell.
When Mr. Fisher resigned in order to accept the position of
High Commissioner for Australia in London there was a rearrange-
ment of Ministerial positions, Mr. Hughes became Prime Minister
with the following colleagues as Ministers: —
Prime Minister and Attorney General —Mr. W. M. Hughes.
Defence —Mr. G. F. Pearce.
Trade and Customs —Mr. F. G. Tudor (to 14/9/16).
Mr. W. M. Hughes (from 29/9/16).
Treasurer —Mr. W. G. Higgs.
Minister for Navy —Mr. J. A. Jensen.
Home Affairs —Mr. King O’Malley.
External Affairs —Mr. H. Mahon.
Postmaster-General —Mr. W, Webster.
Vice-President Executive Council —Mr. A. Gardiner.
Assistant Minister —Mr. E. J. Russell.
This was the last Labor Government in the Federal Parlia-
ment. It was practically wrecked over the conscription issue. Mr.
Tudor, Mr. Mahon and others resigned, and on November 14, 1916,
Mr. Hughes established his second Administration from those in
the Federal Parliament who had left the Labor Party to follow
him. In February of the following year Mr. Hughes was com-
pelled to find room for Liberals and others and he formed what
was known as the Australian National War Government, which
held office from February 17, 1917, to January 8, 1918. Then came
other changes, with Mr. Hughes still at the head and Sir Joseph
Cook, Lord Forrest, Mr. Watt, Mr. P. McM. Glynn, and other
prominent anti-Laborites in his “win the war” Government.


Mr. Hughes was defeated at the general elections in 1922 and
a straightout anti-Labor Government, composed of Liberals and
Representatives of the Country Party, with Mr. Bruce as Prime’
Minister, assumed control of the affairs of the Commonwealth,.
Labor at the 1922 elections made a substantial recovery after
having been split by the conscription issue and by the various,
tactics of the anti-Labor forces led by Mr. Hughes. The “ Chinese
puzzle” system of election for the Senate practically deprived
Labor of representation in that Chamber for the 1918-1922 Gov-
ernment, but in spite of that system Labor won eleven seats at
the 1922 elections.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA'S PART.
The South Australian branch of the Labor Party has beem
well represented in the Federal Parliament from time to time.
Labor secured one of the six Senate seats for South Australia
at the first election and two of the seven House of Representatives-
seats. Gregor McGregor was the first Labor Senator for South
Australia and Messrs. E. L. Batchelor (Boothby) and Boynton
(Grey) were the first two South Australian Laborites to secure
election in the House of Representatives.
At the second Federal election Messrs. G. McGregor, R.
Guthrie and W. Storey were elected to the Senate and Messrs.
Batchelor (Boothby), Poynton (Grey) and M. J. Hutchison for the
House of Representatives. It was after this election that Mr.
Watson formed the first Labor Government.
In the 1907-1910 Commonwealth Parliament Labor in South
Australia gained the fourth seat in the Senate by the elections
of Senator W. Russell.
Mr. Dugald Crosby, a Labor nominee for the Senate, obtained
a majority of 17 on the first count. Mr. Yardon demanded a
recount with the result that Mr. Crosby was placed 34 votes behind
and Mr. Yardon was declared elected. Mr. Crosby died soon after
and then it was discovered that votes had been wrongly declared
informal. An appeal was made to the High Court. A recount
was ordered, but in the meantime many ballot papers had been
destroyed, still the remaining votes were counted and the Court
held that Mr. Crosby should not have been defeated. The election
was declared void, and to fill the vacancy there was a joint sitting
of the two Chambers of the State Parliament. Mr. J. Y. O'Loghlin
was chosen. Mr. Yardon next appealed to the Court of Disputed
Returns against Mr. O'Loghlin 7 s election and Mr. O'Loghlin
was unseated. At the next election Mr. Yardon gained the seat.
On the death of Mr. C. C. Kingston in May, 1908, Mr. E. A.
Roberts was elected as the member for Adelaide in the House of
Representatives and held the seat until his death.
On December 6, 1908, Mr. Hutchison died and his place wag
taken by Mr. W. O. Archibald.
In 1911 Mr. **Ted" Batchelor died and his seat (Boothby) was
gained by the opponent of Labor.
In 1912 Senator Russell died and a combined sitting of the
State Houses selected Mr. J. W. Shannon.
In 1913, Messrs. J. Y. O 'Loghlin, J. Newland and W. Senior were
elected as nominees of the Labor Party to the Senate and prominent


anti-Labor candidates like Sir Josiah Symon, Mr. J. Yardon and
Mr. J. W. Shannon were defeated.
Mr. George Dankel secured the Boothby seat again for Labor
with a tremendous vote.
It was in the first session of this Parliament that Mr. E. A.
Roberts died suddenly at Federal Parliament House. Mr. G. E.
Yates was elected as a successor and as member for Adelaide in the
House of Kepresentatives.
In 1914 the Double Dissolution again proved the growing in-
fluence of Labor. Senators J. Newland, J. Y. O’Loghlin, R. S.
Guthrie, W. Senior, and W. H. Story were returned with increased
majorities. Owing to the death of Senator Gregor McGregor after
the day of nomination and before the day of polling, Labor was
unable to have a complete team or six candidates, and to avoid a
confusion in the distribution of Labor votes for the sixth candidate,
which may have effected the defeat of the five remaining Labor
nominees, it was decided to support one particular Liberal candidate,
and Mr. J. W. Shannon was selected. At this election no change
was made in the personnel of the South Australian delegation to the
House of Representatives.
In 1916 Messrs. A. A. Poynton, G. Dankel, and W. O. Archibald,
also Senators J. Newland, W. H. Story, R. S. Guthrie, and W. Senior,
seceded from the Australian Labor Party.
In 1917 the only change effected was the election of Mr. James
Rowell to the Senate in the place vacated by Mr. W. H. Story, who
successfully contested the Division of Boothby in the Nationalists 7
interests.
In 1919 Senators J. W. Shannon and J. Y. CFLoghlin were
replaced in the Senate by Messrs. Benny and Wilson. Senator
Newland secured re-election. Changes were also effected in the House
of Representatives. Mr. G. E. Yates was defeated by a narrow
margin for the Division of Adelaide by Mr. R. P. Blundell. Angas
was secured to Labor for the first time in Federal politics by Mr.
J. M. Gabb, and Mr. W. O. Archibald was required to make way for
Mr. Norman Makin in Hindmarsh.
In 1921 Senator R. S. Guthrie died as a result of a serious tram
accident in Melbourne. Mr. E. Yardon was selected by the South
Australian Parliament to fill the vacancy thus created.
In 1922 Labor again made substantial gains, securing the three
Senate seats with Messrs. A. A. Hoare, C. S. McHugh, and J. Y.
O’Loghlin, having defeated ex-Senators J. Rowell, W. Senior, and
E. Yardon. Mr. G. E. Yates defeated Mr. R. P. Blundell for
Adelaide. Mr. A. Lacey summarily dismissed Mr. A. A. Poynton,
who had represented the Division of Grey since the inception of the
Commonwealth. Boothby also changed its representative from Mr.
W. H. Story to Mr. Duncan-Hughes. In Barker Division Mr. J.
Livingston, who had held the seat from 1906, was succeeded by Mr.
M. Cameron. At this election Representatives Gabb and Makin
substantially increased their majorities.


TEN REASONS
Why All Workers Should Join a Branch of the
Australian Labor Party.
1. The Australian Labor Party (A.L.P.) is the workers'
recognised Political Organisation.
2. It is the only Party with a definite political pro-
gramme designed to protect the people from exploita-
tion.
3. Control of the Political Machine by the enemy of
Labor has meant the cruel oppression of the masses
for centuries.
4. Bitter experience has convinced thinkers in the'
Labor Movement that, if economic freedom is to be
won, Political action is as necessary as Industrial
action.
5. Political Organisation is therefore essential, and'
everyone should take part in the good work.
G. A worker who refuses to join a Union, yet accepts
the benefits it wins, is despised. Is it not equally
unfair to participate in the advantages that come 1
from Political activities without assisting the Political
Organisation.
7. All then should share the work and responsibilities,
as well as the benefits.
8. Every member has a voice in framing the policy and
determining who shall represent Labor in all govern-
ing bodies.
3. Those who stand aloof and criticise do not help, but
often hinder.
10. Fellow-workers, if you would be real genuine'
Laborites, link up with your mates politically andl
industrially.


Federal Platforms.
(1901 TO 1914).
The election of representatives to the first Commonwealth Parlia-
ment was fought by the State Parties on Platforms practically
consisting of those planks in the State Platforms which had a
bearing on conditions that came within the purview of the
superior Legislature.
In South Australia that platform was short, but inclusve of
great national issues. It provided for: —
A White Australia.
Old Age Pensions.
Federal control of railways and navigable rivers.
Non-alienation of Federal Territory.
The fiscal question was left open.
In December, 1902, a conference of delegates from all the States
was held in Sydney to draft the first official Platform of the Com-
monwealth Labor Party, and the document is submitted as a model
of brevity and inclusiveness, in dealing with issues of high national
importance.
(Adopted at Commonwealth Labor Conference, Sydney).
December, 1902.
FIGHTING PLATFORM.
1. —Maintenance of a White Australia.
2. —Compulsory Arbitration.
3. —Old Age Pensions.
4. —Nationalisation of Monopolies.
5. —Citizen Defence Force.
6. —Restriction of Public Borrowing.
7. —Navigation Laws.
GENERAL PLATFORM.
1. —Maintenance of a White Australia.
2. —Compulsory Arbitration to settle industrial disputes, with pro-
vision for the exclusion of the legal profession.
3. —Old Age Pensions.
4. —Nationalism of Monopolies.
5. —Citizen Military Force and Australian-owned Navy.
6. —Restriction of Public Borrowing.
7. —Navigation Laws to provide (a) for the protection of Aus-
tralian shipping against unfair competition; (b) registration
of all vessels engaged in the coastal trade; (c) the efficient
manning of vessels; (d) the proper supply of life-saving and
other equipment; (e) the regulation of hours and conditions
of work; (f) proper accommodation for passengers and seamen;
(g) proper loading gear and inspection of same.
8. —Commonwealth Bank of Deposit and Issue and Life and Fire
Insurance Department, the management of each to be free from
political influence.
9. —Federal Patent Law, providing for simplifying and cheapening
the registration of patents.


10. —Uniform industrial legislation; amendment of Constitution to
provide for same.
No revision of the Federal Platform took place until the General
Conference of State delegates, which was held in Brisbane in July,
1908; but in November, 1906, a manifesto, which was to all intents
and purposes a platform, was issued above the signature of Mr. J.
C. Watson, Chairman, and Mr. Frank Tudor, Secretary of the Federal
Parliamentary Labor Party, dealing discursively with the policy
This document reaffirmed the Platform of 1902, with the addition
of two planks dealing with —
(a) Tariff Eeferendum.
(b) Progressive Tax on Unimproved Land Values.
The 1908 Conference made very little alteration in the platform
only adding two planks, viz.:
(a) New Protection.
(b) Commonwealth Bank.
(Adopted at Conference, Hobart, January, 1912).
OBJECTIVE.
1. —The cultivation of an Australian sentiment based upon the
maintenance of racial purity, and the development in Australia
of an enlightened and self-reliant community.
2. —The securing of the full results of their industry to all pro-
ducers by the collective ownership of monopolies and the ex-
tension of the industrial and economic functions of the State
and Municipality.
PLANKS MADE LAW.
1. —White Australia.
2. —Old-age and invalid pensions.
3. —Graduated tax on unimproved land values.
4. —Citizen defence force, with compulsory military training and
Australian-owned and controlled navy.
5. —Commonwealth Bank.
6. Eeform.
FIGHTING PLATFOEM.
1. —Maintenance of White Australia; and
2. —The Graduated Tax on unimproved land values.
3. —Effective Federation.
4. —The New Protection.
5. —Nationalisation of Monopolies.
6. —Arbitration Act Amendment.
7. —Navigation Laws.
8. —Commonwealth Freight and Passenger Steamers.
9. —Eestriction of Public Borrowing.
10. —General Insurance Department.
11. —Commonwealth Sugar Eefinery.
GENEEAL PLATFOEM.
1. —Maintenance of a White Australia.
2. —Maintenance of graduated tax on unimproved land values where
estates are over £5,000 in value.
3. —Effective Federation: The inclusion in the Constitution of the
powers asked for on April 26, 1911.


4. —The New Protection.
5. —Nationalisation of monopolies.
6. —Arbitration Act Amendment.
7. —Navigation Laws to provide—
(a) For the protection of Australian shipping against unfair
competition.
(b) Registration af all vessels engaged in the coastal trade.
(c) The efficient manning of vessels.
(d) The proper supply of life-saving and other equipment.
(e) The regulation of hours and conditions of work.
(f) Proper accommodation for passengers and seamen.
(g) Proper loading gear and inspection of same.
(h) Compulsory insurance of crews by shipowners against acci-
dent or death.
8. —Commonwealth freight and passenger steamers.
9. —Restriction of public borrowing.
10. —General insurance department, with non-political control.
11. —Commonwealth Sugar Refinery.
12. —Civil equality of men and women,
13. —Naval and military expenditure to be allotted from proceeds
of direct taxation.
14. —lnitiative and Referendum.
15. —Uniform laws of marriage and divorce.
Federal Platform and Constitution.
Adopted Brisbane Conference, October, 1921.
OBJECTIVE.
The socialisation of industry, production, distribution, and
exchange.
METHODS.
Socialisation of industry by —
(a) The constitutional utilisation of industrial and Parlia-
mentary machinery;
(b) The organisation of workers along the lines of industry;
(c) Nationalisation of banking and all principal industries;
(d) The municipalisation of such services as can best be
operated in limited areas;
(e) Government of nationalised industries by boards, upon
which the workers in the industries and the community
shall have representation;
(f) The establishment of an elective Supreme Economic
Council by all nationalised industries;
(g) The setting up of Labor research and Labor information
bureaux and of Labor educational institutions, in which
the workers shall be trained in the management of the
nationalised industries.


FIGHTING PLATFORM.
1. —The cultivation of an Australian sentiment, the maintenance
of a White Australia, and the development in Australia of an
enlightened and self-reliant community.
2. (a) Complete Australian self-government as a British
community.
(b) No Imperial Federation.
(c) Unlimited legislative powers for the Commonwealth
Parliament, and such delegated powers to the States or
Provinces as the Commonwealth Parliament may deter-
mine from time to time.
3. —Nationalisation of Banking and Insurance.
4. —New Protection.
5. —Nationalisation of Monopolies.
6. —Arbitration Act Amendment.
7. —Navigation Laws.
8. —Commonwealth Freight and Passenger Steamers.
9. —Restriction of Public Borrowing.
10.- —Electoral Reform.
31. —Initiative and Referendum.
12. —Abolition of State Legislative Councils.
13. —Abolition of State Governors.
14. —Abolition of Senate.
15. —Amending Workers’ Compensation Act.
16. —National Monopoly of Assurance, including Sick, Accident,
Life, and Unemployment.
17. —Endowment of Motherhood.
18. —Amendment of Defence Act.
CONSTITUTION AND ELECTORAL REFORM.
1. Complete Australian self-government as a British community.
No Imperial Federation. Administration on advice of Aus-
tralian Ministers only, subject to the control of the
Commonwealth Parliament. All legislation, except such as
appears inconsistent with Imperial treaty obligations, to be
assented to on the advice of Australian Ministers only. No
further Imperial honors to be granted in any circumstances
to Australian citizens. The Commonwealth Constitution to be
amended to provide:—
(a) Unlimited legislative powers for the Commonwealth
Parliament, and such delegated powers to the States
or Provinces as the Commonwealth Parliament may
determine from time to time.
(b) The Commonwealth Parliament to be vested with
authority to create new States or Provinces.
(c) The Senate to be abolished.
(d) The High Court of Australia to have final jurisdiction
in all Australian causes.
(e) The principle of adult suffrage to be embodied in the
Constitution.
2. Maintenance of a White Australia.
3- Adult Suffrage to be made part of the Commonwealth Con-
stitution.
4. Amendment of tlie Electoral Act to provide for compulsory
voting.


5. —-Initiative and Referendum.
6. —Abolition of State .Legislative Councils.
7. —Abolition of State Governors,
8. —Abolition of Senate.
FINANCE AND TAXATION REFORM.
1. —Commonwealth Bank of Issue, Deposit, Exchange, and Re-
serve, with non-political management.
2. (a) Maintenance of Graduated Tax on Unimproved Land
•' Values where estates are over £5,000 in value.
(b) Amendment of existing Land Tax Act to provide that
the graduation shall not apply to the different portions
of the values of large estates. That the maximum of the
tax be not less than 1/ in the pound, while maintaining
the present exemption of £5,000.
3. —Naval and Military expenditure to be allotted from the
proceeds of direct taxation.
4. —The New Protection.
i). —Restriction of Public Borrowing.
6. —Income Tax. —All incomes from personal exertion up to £2OO
exempt from Income Tax, with a further deduction from the
taxable income of £lOO for a taxpayer ’s wife and £6O for each
child and others wholly dependent on the taxpayer.
INDUST HI AL REFORM.
1. —Amendment of Workers’ Compensation Act to provide com-
pensation for sufferers from industrial disease (such as miners’
phthisis), and the securing of adequate benefits for injured or
disabled workers, the scheme to be based on the compulsory
assurance of all workers.
2. —Commonwealth Mines and Regulations* Act.
3. —Arbitration Act Amendment.
SOCIAL REFORM.
1. —Civil Equality of Men and Women.
2. —Uniform Laws of Marriage and Divorce.
3. —Widows’ and Children’s Pensions.
4. —lncreased Old Age and Invalid Pensions.
5. —Endowment of Motherhood.
I). —Abolition of Capital Punishment and Flogging.
NATIONAL WORK.
1. —Nationalisation of Banking and Insurance.
2. —Nationalisation of Monopolies.
3. —Commonwealth Sugar Refinery.
4. —Nationalisation of Shipping.
5. —National Assurance, including Sick, Accident, Life, and
Unemployment,
b. —Nationalisation of Public Health.
NAVIGATION.
1. —Navigation Laws to provide—
(a) For the protection of Australian shipping against unfair
competition.
(b) Registration of all vessels engaged in the coastal trade.
(c) The efficient manning of vessels.


(d) The proper supply of life-saving and other equipment.
(e) The regulation of hours and conditions of work.
(f) Proper accommodation for passengers and seamen.
(g) Proper loading gear and inspection of same.
(h) Compulsory insurance of crews by shipowners against
accident or death.
DEFENCE.
Amendment of Defence Act to secure —
(a) Deletion of all clauses relating to compulsory training
and service.
(b) Abolition of trial by court-martial where civil courts are
available; any sentence imposed by court-martial to be
subject to review by a civil court.
(c) No penalties to be imposed except in pursuance of explicit
enactments of Commonwealth Parliament.
(d) Intended regulations to be publicly advertised, and
regulations to have no effect till before both Houses,
either of which may veto.
(e) Limitation of professional soldiers to necessary instruc-
tion and administrative and working staff.
(f) Abolition of military oaths.
(g) Abolition of distinction between commissioned and non-
commissioned officers.
(h) Eecognition of principle of election of qualified candidates
as officers.
(i) Salute and other useless discipline to be abolished.
(j) No employment of or interference by soldiers in industrial
disputes. Punishment of Ministers and other persons
responsible for breach of this provision.
(k) Citizens, on completion of training, to retain arms de-
livered to them during training.
(l) Defence Acts to require annual renewal, as in England.
(m) No raising of forces for service outside the Common-
wealth, or participation or promise of participation in any
future overseas war, except by a decision of the people.
REPATRIATION.
1. —Repatriation Scheme for returned soldiers to be definitely
brought into operation, the first instalment of £22,000,000 to
be placed in the hands of the Board of Repatriation Trustees
forthwith.
2. General expansion of employment to be carried out and
encouraged through the Commonwealth undertaking works
necessary to make Australia a self-contained nation.
3. Commonwealth training establishments to be provided and
equipped foi the education of returned soldiers, and that a
Labor Bureau in connection therewith be established, and
iade Unions, employers, and soldiers be represented
thereon.


State Labor Platforms.
1891.
1. —Protection for the purpose of encouraging local industries and
the further development of the resources of the colony.
2. —Progressive tax on land values, or failing this, an increase on
the present tax, with exemption on small holdings.
3. —Liens Bill, for the better protection of workmen’s wages.
4. —Workshops and Factories Act, for the purpose of securing ade-
quate breathing space, to regulate and limit the hours of labor,
limit the age at which young persons may be employed, and pro-
vide sanitary arrangements in all buildings used as workrooms
and factories.
5. —Steam Boilers Inspection.
6. —Free education.
7. Part XIX.
8. —Tax on Goods and Passengers carried intercolonially in Foreign
Vessels.
9. —Amendment of the Railway Commissioners Act.
10. —Establishment of a Department of Labor.
11. —Redistribution of Seats on the basis of population.
12. —Adult Suffrage.
13. —Reform of Legislative Council in the direction of shortening
the term of election.
14. —Establishment of a State Bank.
15. —An Act to secure to tenant farmers just compensation for im-
provements.
16. —Working Men’s Blocks and Loans to Blockers.
17. —Trades Hall Site.
18. —Eight Hours Bill.
19. —Removal of duties on tea, coffee, cocoa, and kerosene.
20. —Opposed to Free and Assisted Immigration.
1893.
When the platform was revised prior to the General Sessions in
1893, the following items were added to the list of reforms neces-
sary: —
21. —Stopping further sale of Crown Lands.
22. —Amendment of Electoral Laws giving greater facilities for
transfer of electors’ names.
23. —Restricting candidates’ expenses at elections.
24. —Making permanent the Absent Voters Bill.
25. —Early Closing Bill.
26. —Amendment of Mining Act.


27. —Amendment of Marine Board and Navigation Act.
28. —Repeal of the Indian Immigration Acts. '
29. —Prohibiting the influx of Asiatics and restricting the introduction
of immigrants bound to service before arrival in South Aus-
tralia.
30. —The Referendum.
31. —The establishing of a State Export Department.
4 *'' ' ’ .•; . . , « {' ( i p
1896.
1. —Stopping any further alienation of Crown Lands, and substitut-
ing instead a system of leasing.
2. —The remission on the duties on tea in bulk, raw coffee, cocoa,
kerosene, and upon articles which are not grown nor produced
in the colony ; any resulting deficiency to be made up by increas-
ing the tax on land values.
3. —Amendment of Land Values Assessment Act of 1893 (known
as Part XIX.) on the lines of Mr. F. J. Hourigan’s Bill of 1895.
4. —Encouragement of local industries and the further development
of the resources of the colony.
5. —A Steam Boilers Inspection and Registration Bill, an Early
Closing Bill, reform of the Shipping Laws, amendment of the
Employers’ Liability Act, amendments of Liens Act of 1893,
a minimum rate of wages and maximum hours of labor in
Government contracts and works.
6. —Amendment of the Electoral Laws by giving greater facili-
ties for the registration and transfer of electors, and a re-
distribution of seats on a basis of population.
7. —Reform of the Legislative Council in the direction of short-
ening the term of membership, and liberalising the franchise
to leaseholders and occupiers.
8. —The extension of the Department of Labor.
9. —The extension of the functions of the State Bank.
10. —State ownership of all railways.
11. —Repeal of the Indian Immigration Acts, and prohibiting the
influx of Asiatic and servile races, and restricting the intro-
duction of immigrants bound to service before arrival in
South Australia.
12. —The introduction of the referendum on the lines of Mr. E. L.
Batchelor’s Bill of 1895,
13. —The extension of the State Export Department for wheat,
wool, wine, and other agricultural and horticultural produce
by giving assistance in the shape of advances and facilities
of transit, so that producers may be able to obtain the full
benefit of foreign markets.
14. —Mortgagors’ Liability Limitation Bill.
15. —Encouragement and development of the mining industry.
16. —Federation on a Democratic basis.
17. —ln favor of any equitable and reasonable claims of women
for the advancement of the laws.
Three neve and important planks added, viz.:—
1. Abolition of Distress for Rent.
2. State Insurance.
3. Old Age Pensions.
Nos. 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 12 revised as follows: —
5. —A Steam Boilers Explosions Bill, Early Closing Bill, Work-


men’s Compensation Bill (including seamen), amendment of
Shops and Factories Act, fixing a Mininum Rate of Wage
and Maximum Hours where practicable, amendment of Work-
men’s Liens Act.
6. —Amendment of Electoral Laws and a Redistribution of Seats,
by an alteration of the Boundaries upon a population basis.
7. —Household Suffrage for Legislative Council, and shortening
the term of membership.
10. —The State Ownership of Railways, and State or Municipal
ownership of tramways.
11. —Repeal of Indian Immigration Acts, prohibition of the influx
of Asiatic and servile races, and restriction of the introduction
of immigrants bound to service before arrival in the colony.
12. —The introduction of the Initiative and Referendum.
STATE PLATFORM.
Fighting Platform.
1905.
1. —Progressive Land Tax on the lines of New Zealand.
2. —Abolition of the Legislative Council; failing that, Adult Suff-
rage for both Houses.
3. —Compulsory Conciliation and Arbitration Bill.
4. —Public Ownership and Control of all Railways, Tramways,
and Wharfs.
5. —Cessation of Borrowing, except for (1) Conversion of Loans,
(2) Completion of Public Works already authorised, and (3)
Works which will show Interest on Capital borrowed and
provide for a Sinking Fund.
6. The right of the Government to Resume Land for Closer
Settlement and Public Purposes on the valuation accepted by
the owner for taxation purposes, plus 10 per cent.
7. —Stopping further Alienation of Crown Lands.
GENERAL PLATFORM.
1. —Abolition of the Legislative Council; failing that, Adult
Suffrage for both Houses.
2. —The Initiative and the Referendum.
3. —Progressive Land Tax on the lines of New Zealand.
4. —The right of the Government to resume land for closer settle-
ment and public purposes on the valuation accepted by the
owner for taxation purposes, plus 10 per cent.
5. —A more Equitable System of Alienation of Crown Lands.
(5. —Stopping further Alienation of Crown Lands.
7. —Compulsory Conciliation and Arbitration Bill.
8. —Extension of Wages Boards, to prevent sweating,
9. —Steam Boliers’ Inspection Bill, to make the user of steam
responsible for the inspection of his boiler.
10. —Amendment of Workmen’s Liens Act.
11. —Amendment of Workmen’s Compensation Act.
12. —lnspection of Scaffolding.
13. —Public Ownership and Control of all Railways, Tramways
and Wharfs.


14. —Conservation of Murray River Waters for Irrigation and
Navigation.
15. —Extension of functions of the State Bank.
16. —Extension of the State Export Department.
17. —Minimum Wage of 7/ per day for all Adult Males employed
by the State or on State Contracts.
18- —Amendment of Land Values Assessment Act.—Part XIX.
19. —Abolition of Plural Voting in Municipal Elections.
20. —Cessation of Borrowing, except for (1) conversion of loans,
(2) completion of public works already authorised, and (3)
works which will show interest on capital borrowed and pro-
vide for a sinking fund.
21. —Maintenance and Extension of present system of Education.
22. —Old Age Pensions.
23. —Amendment of Food and Drugs Act, with a view to better
safeguarding the public health.
24. —Mortgagors’ Limitation Liability Bill.
25. —Encouragement and Fuller Development of the Agricultural,
Pastoral, and Mining Resources of the State.
26. —Amendment of Landlord and Tenants Act, to place all credi-
tors on an esual basis.
(Revised October 3, 1910).
1. —Stopping any further alienation of Crown Lands.
2. —Amendment of Land Values Assessment Act.
3. —Conciliation and Compulsory Arbitration Bill.
4- —Encouragement and fuller developing of the Pastoral, Agri-
cultural, Mining, and other resources of the State.
5* Minimum V age of 7/ per day for all adult males employed
by the State or on State Contracts.
6. —Steam Boilers’ Bill; amendment of Early Closing and Work-
men’s Liens Acts; Extension of Wages Boards and Work-
men’s Compensation Act.
7. Adult Suffrage for Legislative Council and shortening the
term of membership.
8. Amendment of Electoral Laws and a Redistribution of Seats
upon a more equitable basis.
9. —State ownership of all Railways, and State or Municipal
ownership of Tramways and Wharfs.
10. —The Referendum.
11. —Extension of the functions of the State Bank.
12. Extension of the State Export Department.
13. —Mortgagors’ Liability Limitation Bill.
14. —State Insurance.
15. —Old Age Pensions.
10.—In favor of any equitable and reasonable claims of women
for the amendment of the laws.
1909.
FIGHTING PLATFORM.
FRANCHISE.
Adult Suffrage for the Legislative Council, with the object of its
ultimate abolition.


INDUSTRIAL.
Compulsory Arbitration.
LAND SETTLEMENT.
Progressive Tax on the lines of New Zealand.
The right of the Government to resume land for closer settle-
ment and public purposes on the valuation accepted by the
owner for taxation purposes, plus 10 per cent.
FINANCE.
Cessation of borrowing, except for (1) Conversion of Loans, (2)
Completion of Public Works already authorised, and (3)
Works which will show interest on capital borrowed and pro-
vide for a sinking fund.
TAXATION.
(1) Abolition of income tax on land or produce of land; (2) Rais-
ing exemption on incomes derived from personal exertion to
£3OO per nnum; (3) Reduction of railway freights; (4) In-
creased Road Grant to districts not served by railways; (5)
Deficiency to be made up by an all-round tax on Unimproved
Land Values; (6) Increased taxation of absentees.
GENERAL PLATFORM.
CONSTITUTION.
Adult Suffrage for the Legislative Council, with the object of its
ultimate abolition.
The Initiative and Referendum.
Effective Deadlock Provisions.
LAND.
Progressive Land Tax on the lines) of New Zealand.
The right of the Government to resume land for closer settlement
and public purposes on the valuation accepted by the owner
for taxation purposes, plus 10 per cent.
A more equitable system ol allotment of Crown Lands.
Stopping further alienation of Crown Lands.
Increased taxation of absentees.
Advances to workers to build homes for themselves on the lines
of the Advances to Settlers Act.
INDUSTRIAL.
Compulsory Arbitration Bill.
Steam Boilers ’ Inspection Bill.
Amendment of Workmen’s Liens Act.
Amendment of Workmen’s Compensation Act.
Minimum wage of 8/ per day for adult males employed by State
or on State contracts.
PUBLIC WORKS.
Establishment of Graving Dock.
Public ownership and control of all Railways and Tramways.
Conservation of Murray River Waters for Irrigation and
Navigation.


Extension of the State Export Department.
State Ownership of Wharfs.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Extension of Land Values Assessment Act. —Part XIX.
Abolition of Plural Voting at Elections.
FINANCE.
Cessation of Borrowing, except for (1) conversion of loans, (2)
completion of public works already authorised, and (3) works
which will show interest on capital borrowed and provide for
a sinking fund’.
State Bank of Issue, Deposit, Exchange, and Reserve.
GENERAL.
Education —(a) To extend free education to all citizens of the
State up to and inclusive of Universities; (b) School books and
requirements for children to be free.
Mortgagors’ Limitation Liability Bill.
Encouragement and fuller development of the Agricultural, Pastoral,
and Mining Resources of the State.
Amendment of Landlords and Tenants Act, to place all creditors
on an equal basis.
A more vigorous policy of Reafforestation.
Office of State Governor to be abolished.
Unification of Australian States.
1913.
CONSTITUTION.
Adult Suffrage for the Legislative Council, with the object of its
ultimate abolition.
Effective Deadlock Provisions.
The Initiative and Eeferendum, and the Eecall.
Proportional Eepresentation.
LAND.
The right of the Government to resume land for closer settlement
taxation purposes, plus 10 per cent.
Stopping further alienation of Crown Lands and any further leasing
or sale of park lands which may deprive the public of free access
at all times to the same.
Increased taxation of absentees.
(a) The allotting of land to applicants of whom the Land Board
has approved to be decided by ballot; (b) no person who holds
under any tenure such area of land as, in the opinion of the
Land Board, is sufficient for the maintenance of himself and
family, shall be eligible to take part in any ballot; (c) person
who is successful in any ballot and subsequently transfers or
subleases his land shall be disqualified for a period of five
years from taking part in any ballot; (d) the establishment
of a Land Court of Appeal.


INDUSTRIAL.
Amendment of the Arbitration Act.
Amendment of Steam Boilers’ Inspection Act.
Amendment of Workmen’s Compensation Act.
Min'mum wage of 9/ per day for adult males employed by State or
on State contracts.
PUBLIC WORKS.
Establishment of Graving Dock.
Public Ownership and control of all railways and tramways.
Conservation of Murray River Waters for irrigation and navigation.
Extension of the State Export Department.
State ownership of wharfs.
Establishment of a Government line of steamers to trade between
all ports of the State.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Extension of Land Values Assessment Act.
Abolition of plural voting at elections.
FINANCE.
(a) Immediate transfer of State debts to the Commonwealth in ac-
cordance with the Federal Constitution; (b) Cessation of borrow-
ing except for completion of public works, and for works
which will show interest on capital borrowed; (c) provision for
adequate sinking fund; (d) all moneys received from the sale
of Crown Lands to be placed to the credit of a loans re-
demption fund; (e) borrowing by the State to be conducted
through the medium of the Commonwealth.
(b) Abolition of income tax on income derived from land and pro-
duced by personal exertion; (b) raising exemption on incomes
from personal exertion to £3OO per year; (c) reduction of rail-
way freights; (d) increased road grants to districts not served
by railways; (e) deficiency to be made up by an all-round tax
on unimproved land values; (f) increased taxation on land
owned and incomes derived by absentees; (g) increased pro-
b-ite and succession duties on a progressive scale on estates over
£2,000 in value; (h) remissions of income tax not to apply to
holdings that do not pay land tax.
State Bank of Issue, Deposit, Exchange and Reserve.
AGRICULTURAL.
(a) Provision for the prevention of the existence of
understandings’’ in connection with wheat transactions; (b) a
board to fix standards of wheat according to quality—farmers,
buyers, and the Government to be represented; (c) registration
of wheat merchants and agents with a view of conserving the
interests of farmers; (d) farmers to derive the benefit of any
reduction of freights on produce; (e) the _ full equipment of
railways and ports for bulk handling of grain; (f) erection of
storage sheds where required.
GENERAL.
Education. — (a) Compulsory age of attendance at schools to be
raised from 13 to 14 years; (b) extension of free education to
all citizens of the State up to and inclusive of Universities; (c)
school books and requirements for school children to be free.


Mortgagors * Limitation Liability Bill.
Encouragement and fuller development of the agricultural, pastoral,
and mining resources of the State.
Amendment of Landlord and Tenants* Act, to place all creditors on
an equal basis.
A vigorous policy of reafforestation.
Office of State Governor to be abolished.
Provision for State or municipalities to erect and let dwelling houses.
Provision for State or municipally owned depots for the supply of
pure milk.
Early closing of liquor bars.
1916
The only alterations made at the 1916 Conference to the 1913
was under the heading i ‘ General, ’ ’ when the following items were
added: —
Abolition of classes on suburban railways.
State flour mills and bakeries.
Life, fire, and industrial insurance.
In the event of death or desertion by a father the State to pay
to the mother or other relation of children so deprived
of their father the amount paid to licensed foster mothers.
1917
There were additions to the 1916 platform at the 1917
Conference.
The objective then was: —
To secure the adequate representation in Parliament and on
other public bodies of organised workers and producers
for the purpose of securing to each person the full result
of his or her labor by the collective ownership and demo-
cratic control of the means of production, distribution,
and exchange, and to ensure to each person full religious,
political, and social freedom.
Under the heading “Constitution” the following planks were
added: —
Reduction of House of Assembly to 21 members, the Federal
Divisions to be utilised, each returning three members.
Combined State and Federal roll.
Under the heading “Land” there was an addition providing
for a Land Court of Appeal.
Under the heading “Industrial” a plank “Equal pay in all
trades and callings where persons of both sexes are employed”
was added.
Under the heading “Home Government” planks providing for
“Adult Suffrage” and the “Amendment of Land Values Assess-
ment Act” were added.
Under “General” the “Abolition of Capital Punishment”
was placed.
Under “Finance” and “Agricultural” the following were
added:—


FINANCE.
(a) Immediate transfer of State debts to the Commonwealth
in accordance with the Federal Constitution); (b)
cessation of borrowing except for completion of public
works and for works which will show interest on capital
borrowed; (c) provision for adequate sinking fund; (d) all
moneys received from the sale of Crown lands to be placed
to the credit of a loans redemption fund; (e) borrowing
by the State to be conducted through the medium of the
Commonwealth.
(a) Abolition of income tax on income derived from land and
produced by personal exertion; (b) raising exemption on
incomes from personal exertion to £3OO per year; (c) re-
duction of railway freights; (d) increased road grants to
districts not served by railways; (e) deficiency to be made
up by an all-round tax on unimproved land values;
(f) increased taxation on land owned and incomes derived
by absentees; (g) increased probate and succession duties
on a progressive scale on estates over £2OOO in value;
(h) remissions of income tax not to apply to holdings that
do not pay land tax.
State Bank of Issue, Deposit, Exchange, and Reserve.
AGRICULTURAL.
(a) Provision for the prevention of the existence of “honor-
able understandings ’ ’ in connection with wheat
transactions; (b) a board to fix standards of wheat
according to quality —farmers, buyers, and the Govern-
ment to be represented; (c) registration of wheat
merchants and agents with a view to conserving the
interests of farmers; (d) farmers to derive the benefit of
any reduction of freights on produce; (e) the full equip-
ment of railways and ports for bulk handling of grain;
(f) erection of storage sheds where required.
1920.
Adopted at 1920 Conference and used at 1921 elections.
OBJECTIVE.
To secure the adequate representation in Parliament and on
other public bodies of organised workers and producers.
Emancipation of human labor from all forms of exploitation,
and the obtaining for all workers the full reward of their industry
by the collective ownership and democratic control of the collec-
tively used agencies of production, distribution, and exchange,
and to ensure to each person full religious, political, and social
freedom.
CONSTITUTION.
Adult Suffrage for the Legislative Council, with the object of
its ultimate abolition.
Reduction of House of Assembly to thirty-five members, each
vote to have an equal value.


Effective Deadlock Provisions on the lines contained in the
British Constitution.
The Initiative and Referendum, and the Recall.
Proportional representation.
Compulsory enrolment and compulsory voting at btate
elections.
Combined State and Federal roll. _
That the salaries 6f State members of Parliament be toOU per
a nn uni.
LAND.
Establishing a Land Valuation Act for the following
purposes: — „
(a) To assess the unimproved values of all lands tor an
purposes of taxation within the State.
(b) To establish a Land Court of Appeal.
(c) The right of the Government to resume land for closer
settlement and all public purposes on the valuation under
this Act for taxation purposes, plus 10 per cent, and the
value of improvements.
Stopping further alienation of Crown Lands, and any further
leasing or sale of park lands which may deprive the public of free
access at all times to the same.
Increased taxation of absentees.
(a) The allotting of land to applicants of whom the Land
Board has approved to be decided by ballot; (b) no person who
holds under any tenure such area of land as, in the opinion of the
Land Board, is sufficient for the maintenance of himself and
family, shall be eligible to take part in any ballot; (e) every person
who is successful in any ballot and subsequently transfers or sub-
leases his land shall be disqualified for a period of five years from
taking part in any ballot.
INDUSTRIAL.
Amendment of the Arbitration and Factories Acts.
Amendment of Steam Boilers Inspection Act. :
The Scaffolding Act be amended to provide for the inspection
of painters ’ scaffolding, including step-ladders, trestles, and
ladders, the Act to apply to the whole of the State of South
Australia.
Amendment of Workmen’s Compensation Act to make pro-
vision for females.
(1) Living wage to secure and maintain a reasonable standard
of comfort for a family of two adults and three children.
(2) That the State pay an amount above the living wage for
every additional child under fifteen years of age.
"(3) Reduction in cost of living by establishment of State
enterprises.
Eight-hour day and forty-four hour week.
Equal pay in all trades and callings where persons of both
sexes are employed.
PUBLIC WORKS.
Establishment of graving dock.
Public ownership and control of all railways and tramways
and other public utilities.


(a) Extension of the functions of the Produce Export Depart-
ment to provide for the distribution within the State and, when
necessary, export of all classes of produce derived from primary
production.
(b) Water conservation for irrigation and all purposes of
settlement.
State trawlers and sale of fish.
Establishment of a Government line of steamers between all
ports of the State.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
Adult suffrage.
Control of main roads to be vested in a central authority.
The District Councils Act be amended to give power by poll of
ratepayers, or otherwise, for taxation on unimproved values to
apply to district councils.
FINANCE.
(a) Immediate transfer of State debts to the Commonwealth
in accordance with the Federal Constitution, (b) Restriction of
public borrowing. (c) Provision for adequate sinking fund.
(d) All moneys received from the sale of Crown lands to be placed
to the credit of a loans redemption fund, (e) Borrowing by the
State to be conducted through the medium of the Commonwealth.
(a) Assessment of income for taxation purposes derived from
land and produced by personal exertion to be made by averaging
the income on the previous three years, (b) Raising exemption
on incomes from personal exertion to £3OO per year, (e) Reduction
of railway freights, (d) Increased road grants to districts not
served by railways. (e) Graduated tax on unimproved land
values, (f) Increased taxation on land owned and incomes derived
by absentees, (g) Increased probate and succession duties on a
progressive scale on estates over £2,000 in value, (h) Extension
of State Bank, acting in co-operation with Commonwealth Bank,
to assist primary producers.
AGRICULTURAL.
(a) A board to fix standards of wheat according to quality —
farmers, buyers, and the Government to be represented,
(b) Wheat pooling system to be continued, (c) Farmers to derive
the benefit of any reduction of freights on produce, (d) The full
equipment of railways and ports for bulk handling of grain.
(e) Erection of storage sheds where required.
GENERAL.
Education. —(a) Compulsory age of attendance at schools to
be raised from thirteen to fourteen years, (b) Extension of free
education to all citizens of the State up to and inclusive of
universities. (c) School books and requirements for school
children to be free, (d) That immediate steps be taken to secure
for the children of South Australia better facilities for education
in all classes, including the University.
Mortgagor’s Limitation Liability Bill.
Encouragement and fuller development of the agricultural,
pastoral, and mining resources of the State.


Amendment of Landlord and Tenants Act, to place all
creditors on an equal basis.
A vigorous policy of reafforestation and establishment of State
sawmills.
A Fair Eents Court to be established in South Australia, on
the lines of New South Wales and Queensland.
Scientific research and advice to primary producers.
State manufacture and distribution of all primary producers’
requirements.
State importation of all primary producers’ requirements
which cannot be manufactured in the State.
Effective legislation for the destruction of vermin to be
administered by the Government.
Provision for medical attention in outlying rural districts.
Adequate facilities for education in all rural districts.
Office of State Governor to be abolished.
Provision for State or municipalities to erect and let dwelling-
houses.
Provision of State or municipally owned depots for the supply
of pure milk.
Early closing of liquor bars.
Abolition of classes on suburban railways.
State flour mills and bakeries.
Life, fire, and industrial insurance.
In the event of death or desertion by a father the State to pay
to the mother or other relation of children so deprived of their
father the amount paid licensed foster-mothers.
Abolition of capital punishment.
That the Criminal Law be amended —
(a) To provide that the use of leg irons and other barbarous
methods of punishment of convicted persons be
abolished.
(b) To provide a mandatory penalty of imprisonment for
. life for all sexual offences against children.
All prisoners to be profitably employed, and their earnings
applied for the sustenance of their dependents, and in the case of
single men and women to ensure them the opportunity of a fresh
start in life; and the deferred sentence system to be applied to all
first offenders for minor offences entailing imprisonment.
The abolition of all passes, pensions, and privileges to highly-
paid servants, such as judges and other highly-paid officials.
The right to work.


MUNICIPAL AND DISTRICT COUNCIL PLATFORM.
Adopted at Annual Conference, 1917.
1. —Land Values Assessment.
2. —Adult Suffrage.
3. —Public ownership and control of tramways, lighting, markets
(including fish markets), wharfs, quarries, abattoirs, and
baths,
4. —Establishment of central depots and distribution of milk under
Municipal control.
5. —All adults employed by Municipalities and District Councils or
on Municipal and District Council contracts, shall not receive
less than the union rate of wage recognised in the trade, with
a minimum of 11/ per day.
6. —All employees of Municipalities or District Councils to be
allowed a fortnight’s holiday, exclusive of all public holidays,
on full pay.
7. —That on all Municipal or District Council works the day labor
principle to be observed.
8. —That on all Municipal or District Council works, all things
being equal, preference of employment to be given to
unionists.
9. —Greater Adelaide.
10. State maintenance of main roads.
11. —All Municipal Corporations’ and District Councils’ accounts
be audited at least once a year by a Government auditor.
12. —A system of townplanning, having due regard for the necessity
of recration reserves.
13. —Council meetings to be held in the evenings.
14. —Free ferries.
RULES FOR MUNICIPAL AND DISTRICT COUNCIL
ELECTIONS.
1. Secretaries of Local Committees shall call a meeting, by
advertisement, of all members of the Party within the municipality
or district council.
2. At such meeting all matters concerning the running of
candidates for municipalities or district councils shall be decided.
3. All candidates shall be selected by p l ebiscite.
4. Each Ward having a properly constituted Committee shall
have the right to select its own candidates if it so desires.
5. Each candidate shall sign the municipal and district council
platform and pledge.
6. All selections shall be subject to ratification by the Council
of the Party.
7. In the event of there being no selected Labor candidate
contesting any municipal or district council election it shall be
competent for any member of the Party, upon receiving the en-
dorsement of the Council, to contest any such election as a Labor
candidate; and no member of the Labor Party shall contest a
municipal or district council election as a Labor candidate without
the endorsement of the Party.
8. Meetings for the selection of candidates for positions on
public, municipal, or district council boards shall be called by
the Secretary of the South Australian Branch of the Australian
Labor Party. Such meeting shall be composed of Labor members
in metropolitan municipalities and district councils.


What the Labor Party Has Done!
A Splendid Record.
GENERAL.
1. —Adult Suffrage, 1894.
2. —Affiliation Law, 1898.
3. —-Children’s Protection, 1898-9, 1904.
4. —Colored Alien Immigration Restriction, 1891, 1896 (latter was
reserved for assent and shelved by British Government).
5. —Consolidated Stock and Sinking Fund, 1896.
6. —Constitution Amendment, 1901.
7. —Electoral Code, 1896.
8. —Free Education, 1891.
9. —Health Act, 1898.
10. —Land Values Assessment (Part XIX.), 1893-4, 1900.
11. —Married Women’s Protection and Property Acts, 1896 and 1898.
12. —Money Lenders Act, 1903.
13. —Probate and Succession Duties, 1891-3.
14. —Progressive Land Values and Absentee 1894.
15. —Village Settlements, 1893, 1895, 1901.
16. —Education Act, 1905, 1916.
17. —Murray River Works, 1905 and 1910.
18. —Tramways Act, 1906.
19. —Constitution Amendment, 1907.
20. —Protection from distress for rent, 1907.
21. —Advance to Settlers, 1908, 1916, 1917.
22. —Licensing Amendment, 1908 and 1910.
23. —Metropolitan Abattoirs, 1908.
24. —Advances for Homes, 1910, 1916, 1920, 1921, 1922.
25. —South Eastern Drainage, 1910.
26. —Protection for Aborigines, 1911.
27. —Women Law Practitioners, 1911.
29. —Control and Care of Inebriates, 1913.
30. —Prices Regulation Commission, 1914.
31. —Renmark Irrigation Trust, 1914.
32. —Prohibition of Use of White Phosphorus in the Manufacture
of Matches, 1915.
33. —River Murray Waters, 1915.
34. —Metropolitan Abattoirs, 1916.
35. —Public Service, 1916.
36. —Pensions and other Benefits to Members of Police Force, 1916,
1920.
37. —Electoral Code (joint rolls), 1920.
38. —Townplanning and Development, 1920.
39. —Offenders’ Probation, 1913.
40. —Lands for Public Purposes Acquisition 1914.


MINING, PASTORAL, AGRICULTURAL.
I. —Agricultural Holdings, 1891 (compensation to tenant farmers
for improvements).
2 Closer Settlement (Land repurchase), 1897, 1901, 1902.
3. —Crown Lands (known as Reduction of Rents Act), 1898.
4. —Butter Bonus, 1893.
5. —Exchange of lands and reduction of rents, 1894.
6. —Fertilisers, 1894, 1898, 1900, 1903.
7. —Pastoral Lands, 1898. *
8. —Seed Wheat Acts (6).
9. —State Bank, 1895-6-7, 1901.
10. —State Export Department, 1893.
11. —Taxation Act Amendment, 1900 (reassessment of taxable values
following reduction in rent or purchase money).
12. —Various amendments of Mining Acts, all tending to greater liber-
ality and assisting legitimate mining on private and public
lands.
13. —Vermin and Vermin-Proof Fencing Acts (7).
14. —Working Men’s Blocks and Loans to Blockers (under different
Homestead) Blockers’ Loans to Blockers, Crown Lands, and
Closer Settlement Acts.
15. —Reclaimed Swamp Lands, 1908.
16. —Regulation of Sale of Fertilisers, 1911.
17. —Power for Settlement of Returned Soldiers on Crown Lands,
1915.
18. —Returned Soldiers Settlement, 1915, 1916.
19. —Wheat Marketing and Transportation, 1920.
INDUSTRIAL.
1. —Conciliation, 1894 (largely inoperative owing to absence of
compulsory clauses).
2. —Early Closing, 1900, 1901, 1903, 1912.
3. —Factories Acts, 1894, 1900, 1904.
4. —Liens Act, 1893, 1896.
5. —Railway Appeal Board, 1903.
3.—Factories Acts, 1894, 1900, 1904, 1906, 1907, 1908, 1915.
7. —Workmen’s Compensation, 1900, 1904, 1911, 1920, 1922.
8. —Shearers’ Accommodation, 1905.
9. —Scaffolding Act, 1907.
10. —Steam Boilers Inspection, 1912.
11. —lndustrial Arbitration, 1916.
12. —Technical Education of Apprentices, 1917, 1921.


State Flections, 192 1.
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
CENTRAL DISTRICT No. 1.
CARR 8,306
ATELLEY 8,726
Leal 6,222
Noble 5,911
CENTRAL DISTRICT No. 2.
Cole 2,768
Cooke 7,042-
EENTON 3,442
Prosser 6.642
Tuckett 1,828
Wallis 1,706
WARD 3,583
MIDLAND DISTRICT.
Not contested.
NORTHERN DISTRICT.
Bice 6,138
Gale 1,308
Lewis 5,533
McHUGH 3,190
WOODS 3,090
SOUTHERN DISTRICT.
Cowley 2,346
McCailum 6,007
Melrose 6,026
Yon Dousa 3,799
HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY.
ADELAIDE.
DENNY 7.021
EDWARDS 6,503
GUNN 7,150
Mitchell 2,352
NORTH ADELAIDE.
Anstey 3.898
BIRRELL 4,486
Butler 4,195
Ponder 2,522
WHITEORD 4,288
PORT ADELAIDE.
Colley 3,860
Lambert 4,281
PRICE 9,319
YERRAN 8,769
WEST TORRENS.
BLACKWELL 8,437
Chesson 5,888
Bring 5,236
McINNES 7,868
STURT.
Anthoney 8,366
Blunden 4,672
GREALY 6,474
HOWARD 6,282
Hussey 8.396
KNEEBONE 6,849
Morris 2,918
Richards 8,803
Smeaton 4,865
Vaughan 4,494
VICTORIA.
McHUGH 3,718
Petherick 4,527
Reidy 4,677
SHEPHERD . . . . , . 4,078
EAST TORRENS.
Buttery 3,683
Coneybeer 5,548
FLAHERTY 6,491
GEORGE 6,715
Hamilton . . .. . . . 7,827
Harper 7,386
HUNKIN 7,115
Jolly 3,805
Sutton 6,988
ALBERT.
Angas 1,995
KNUCKEY 1,479
Mclntosh 2,111
McMillan 2,105
0 ’Connor 2,103
PEDLAR 1,514
ALEXANDER.
Purler 1,192
Hudd 4,197
HUNT 1,657
Laffer 4,291
Ritchie 4,344
FLINDERS.
Chapman 2,427
Frick '. .. 1,130
Lindsay 1,332
LYONS 1,159
Moseley 2,582
MURPHY ] ,218
STANLEY.
Aughey 719
Bar well 3.874
GEORGE 1,828
Nicholls 4,050
Sargent 800
SMITH 1,474


BAROSSA.
Butlei . . . 4,264
COOKE 3,817
Crosby 4,649
Hague 4,766
HOPKINS 3,549
Nairne 1,091
PARHAM 3,317
WOOROORA.
Bower 841
Butler 4,137
James 929
McArthur 2,971
McLaclilan 4,303
ROBERTSON 3,303
Robinson 3,595
TONKIN 2,884
WALLAROO.
PEDLER 3,359
RICHARDS . 3,465
Yerran 3,020
PORT PIRIE.
Blight 1,548
FITZGERALD 3,074
HILI 3,490
MURRAY.
Daniel 1.295
Godfree 3,749
HOARE 2,807
O’FLAHERTY .. .. 2.881
Randell 3,647
STANIFORD 2,948
Young 4,100
BURRA BURRA.
BUXTON 3,739
Craigie 816
Dickson 3,985
Hawke 4,315
Jenkins 4,214
McDonald 1,480
O ’HALLORAN . . . . 3,804
WILCOTT 3,611
NEWCASTLE.
BUTTERFIELD . . . . 2.396
HARVEY 2,241
Smith 1,554
Twopenny 1,699
YORKE’S PENINSULA.
Not contested.
Federal Elections.
THE SENATE RESULTS.
1903.
McGregor 31,082
Guthrie 28,376
Story 23,083
1906.
Symon 33,597
Russell 31,796
Yardon 31,489
1910.
McGregor 58.955
Guthrie 57,733
Story 55,170
1913.
O’Loghlin 96,750
Newland 96,179
Seiiior 94,222
1914.
Shannon 190,590
Newland 112,569
O-Loghlin 112,282
Guthrie 111,774
Senior 109,975
Story 108,263
1917.
Guthrie 106,408
Senior 103,332
Rowell 102,700
1919.
Benny 95,282
Newland 93,775
Wilson 83,183
1922.
Hoare (Labor) . . . . 68.606
McHugh (Labor) . . 68,197
O’Loghlin (Labor) . 69,075
First Preference.
Hoare . 55,818
McHugh 2,687
O ’Loghlin 6,590
Chesson 10,230
Senior 2,426
Verran 10,655
McLachlan 28,918
Rowell 4,916
Vardon 9,872
Andrews 2,100
Informal 13,699


HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES—I 922 ELECTIONS.
ADELAIDE.
Yates 10,714
McLeay 5,872
Blundell 4,123
ANGAS.
Gabb .. . . 11.192
Ritchie 8,090
BARKER.
First Preference.
Cameron 7,861
Hunt 2,791
Shepherd 8,066
Second Preference.
Cameron 9,789
Shepherd 8,929
HINDMARSH.
Makin 15,111
Hayter 6,925
BOOTHBY.
First Preference.
Duncan-Hughes . . . . 7,793
Kneebone 7,775
Story 4,179
Second Preference.
Duncan-Hughes . . . . 10,804
Kneebone ‘ 8,943
GBEY.
Lacey 9,778
Poynton 8,425
WAKEFIELD.
First Preference.
Foster 8,288
Stokes 7,076
Queale 3,941
Second Preference.
Foster 10,680'
Stokes 8,625
Commonwealth Referenda.
ALL WERE DEFEATED.
On April 26, 1911, two proposed laws for the alteration of the
Commonwealth Constitution were submitted to the people. They were
(a) the Constitution alteration (Legislative Powers), 1910, and (b)
the Constitution alteration (Monopolies), 1910. If in a majority of
the States a majority of the electors approved of the proposed laws,
or if a majority of all the electors voting approved of them, they
w r ould have been presented to the Governor-General for King's
assent; but in neither case was the proposed law approved of by the
people.
The voting on the Legislative Powers Alteration was:
For—Commonwealth- 483,356
South Australia 50,358
Against—Commonwealth 742,704
South Australia '. . 81,904
The voting for the “Monopolies" Alteration was:
For—Commonwealth 488,668
South Australia 50,835
Against—Commonwealth 736,392
South Australia 81,479
At the general elections on May 31, 1913, the question of altering
the Constitution so as to extend the powers of the Commonwealth
was again submitted to the people, and again they turned down the
proposal, the voting being:
TRADE AND COMMERCE.
For—Commonwealth 958,419
South Australia 96,085
Against—Commonwealth 982,615
South Australia 91,144


CORPORATIONS.
For Commonwealth 960,711
South Australia 96,309
Against —Commonwealth 986,824
South Australia 91,273
INDUSTRIAL MATTER.
For —Commonwealth 961,601
South Australia 96,626
Against —Commonwealth 987,611
South Australia 91,361
RAILWAY DISPUTE.
For —Commonwealth 956,358
South Australia 96,072
Against —Commonwealth 990,046
South Australia 91,262
TRUSTS.
For —Commonwealth 967,331
South Australia 96,400
Against —Commonwealth 975,943
South Australia 90,185
NATIONALISATION OF MONOPOLIES.
For —Commonwealth 917,165
South Australia 91,411
Against —Commonwealth 941,947
South Australia 86,915
MILITARY SERVICE REFERENDUM.
Conscription.
A special referendum was held on October 28, 1916, when the
following question with regard to military service was submitted to
the people; —“Are you in favor of the Government having in this
grave emergency the same compulsory powers over citizens in regard
to requiring their military service for the term of this war outside
the Commonwealth as it now has in regard to military service within
the Commonwealth ?’ ’ In New South Wales, Queensland, and South
Australia the majority of the voters were not in favor, and in Victoria,
West Australia, and Tasmania the majority were in favor; but the
net result was a majority of 72,476 votes against the proposal. The
voting was as follows:
For —Commonwealth 1,087,557
South Australia 87,924
Against —Commonwealth . 1,160,033
South Australia 119,236
A further referendum was held on December 20, 1917, the
question then being: —“Are you in favor of the proposal of the
Commonwealth Government for reinforcing the Australian Imperial
Forces overseas'?” The proposal was that while voluntary enlistment
was to continue, compulsory reinforcements should be called up by
ballot to make the total reinforcements up to 7,000 per month. In
New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia the
majority of voters were not in favor, and in sVest Australia,


Tasmania, and the Federated Territories the majority were in favor,
the net result being a majority of 166,588 votes against the proposal.
The voting was as follows:
For —Commonwealth 1,015,159
South Australia 86,668
Against—Commonwealth 1,181,747
South Australia 106,364
LEGISLATIVE POWERS AND MONOPOLIES.
Referenda were taken on December 19, 1919, regarding the
Constitutional extension of the Commonwealth Powers in Legislation
and the Nationalisation of Monopolies, and again the proposals were
defeated. The voting was as follows:
LEGISLATIVE POWERS.
For —Commonwealth 911 357
South Australia 40 ? 520
Against—Commonwealth 924*160
South Australia 119,789
NATIONALISATION OF MONOPOLIES.
For —Commonwealth 813.880
South Australia 33 503
Against—Commonwealth 859 491
South Australia 112,259
‘Biographical Sketches.
In the following pages, giving photographs and
biogiaphical sketches of prominent members of the
Party, it has been impracticable to classify the infor-
mation. It has also been impossible to include all.
In many instances, although all were invited, mem-
bers neglected to forward either facts or photos. In
other instances only the photo-blocks already in
possession of “ The Herald ” were available for use.


MR. RAMSAY MACDONALD.
Leader of the British Labor Party and of the 'Opposition in the House
of Commons'.


MR. PHILLIP SXOWDEN, M.P., a prominent member of the British
Labor Party and one oi the ablest members of tlie House of Commons.


RIGHT HON. ANDREW FISHER, P.C..
Labor Prime Minister of trie Commonwealth on several occasions.


THE LATE FRANK G. TUDOR, late Leader of Hie Australian Labor
Party. Labor Member in the Federal Parliament fi'om tne inception of
federation till his death


THE LATE HON T. J. RYAN.
Who was Labor Premier of Queensland and subsequently Deputy Leader
of the Party in the Common wealth. Parliament.


ME. M. CHARLTON.
Leader ot i.he Federal Labor Party.


‘ AAA 01. V ' : A v • •• A'. A ~
■ • ■ '' . _ -.f ;•
HBm.'i' A e . •-',. v-'*/ ?
I , , - -, * r.„*, '< ,. ,> v'|/" - % 11 (2
i >.,' '■ ; '
: y
~ * - - M m \ S$5|
I ' * iSil >
" rnrW$ , , v'#M 1 «gii
”' / > w *
' •*' " * ' '
:: .. A
{H|Ht : 1; A'
• '~jgg> ■■"'■ •■'l^.'-- : :■
IK
. < JpP : ,||^AiA
mmmKk' r AW
WSm .:■. ,P->
. ■ ■•
. '
' '■ ■' •■
Q>±_. v.' ; ' -•/’ .-. * ‘ ' • ~- '■.- ; .-% < J-'? ■ /-^Jfeg|pgi
|k, # ’
..■.■■ ■" •
»
■; :. ;■;■■■:
■■ ; AA: : 4 ' A;
:.aaa
': , ' ' t \ ' \ ■ /. , - . ’• • AA. * A; A-A-’'*A ' ■.■',',•'
MR. J.UMN GUNN.
Leader of the Labor Party and of the Opposition in the State Parliament


Delegates at Australian I
Brisbane, Oc
.Front Row—J. H. Catts, M.H.R. (N.S. W.), R. S. Ross (W.A.), J. Kean (Vic.), Mr
Demaine (Qld.), W. J. Riordan, M.L.C. (Qld.), E. U. Theodore, M.L.A. (Old.),
(S.A.), M. J. Murphy (S.A.)
Middle Row—J. Cunningham. M.L.C. (W.A.), W. Carey (N.S.W.), W. Lambert, J\
L. McDonald, M.L.C. iQld.), H. Kneebone (S.A.), M. M. Hlackiburn (Vic.), F.
E. Williamson (official reporter. Qld.)
Hack Row—E. C. O’Dea (N.S.W.), D. L. McNamara. M.L.C. (Vic.), J. H. Scull in (
. M.L.C. (Tas.), J. Hannan (Vic.), G. Callanan (W.A.), L. Halvorsen (W.A.), J.


Party Conference
tober, 1921
Mrs. K. Dwyer (N.S.W.), Arch. Stewart (general secretary, Vic.). W. H.
i.), W. McCormack, M.L.A. (Qld.). U. K Yates (S.A.), S. K. Whitford, M.P.
M.H.R. (N.S.W.), P. Cosgrove, M.H.A. (Tas.), A. H. Panton, M.L.C. (W.A.).
v. Withers (W.A.), C. S. McHugh (S.A.), J. Speedy (minute secretary, Qld.),
i (Vic.), J. L. Price, M.P. (S.A.), D. Weir, M.L.A. (Qld.), J. McDonald,
). M. Power, M.L.C. (N.S.W.)


I
, ,
MR. 11. KNIEEDONE.
State President ] 922 —3.


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
ANDREW ALEXANDER
KIRKPATRICK (M.L.C.)
■was born in London, Eng-
land, in 1848. He went to
work when nine years old.
Arrived in South Australia
in 1860; went to night
school and was apprenticed
to the printing trade; took
an interest in politics when
cpiite young, and was one of
the founders and first Presi-
dent of the National Liberal
Reform League. Elected to
the Legislative Council for
the Southern District in
1891, defeated in 1897, and
again elected for the Central
District in 1900. Mr. Kirk-
patrick was Chief Secretary
in the Price Administration
from 1905 until he retired
to take up the office of
Agent-General in England in
1909, where he continued till
1914, when he returned to
South Australia. In 1915
he was elected to the House
of Assemblv for He District
of Newcastle In 1 918 he
was again returned for the
No. 1 Central District for
tlic Legislative Council, wnieli position lie still holds, and has been
selected to contest it again at the next elections. Mr. Kirkpatrick
has filled almost every office of importance in connection with the
Trades and Labor Council and with the Labor movement in general.
R. S. RICHARDS, M.P. One of the
Labor members for Wallaroo. Vice-President
F.M.E.A., 1916. When that body amalga-
mated with the A.W.U. in 1917 he was elected
President of the Mining Section of the
A.W.U., and has held that office continuously
since. President, Yorke’s Peninsula Eight
Hours’ Celebration Union, 1917, 1918, 1919.
President, Wallaroo Electorate Committee,
1917 to 1923. Elected to Parliament 1918
and 1921. Vice-President, S.A. Branch,
A.L.P., 1920. Resigned before end of term
owing to industrial trouble in his electorate.
Vice-President, A.L.P., 1922. Member of
Federal Executive. Vice-President, Y.P.
Football Association, P.C.R. of the 1.0. R.
(South Australian District).


MISS E. R. HANRETTY
(Assistant Secretary) lias
been a member of the Labor
Party since 1905, when she
joined the North Adelaide
Local Committee. In Sep-
tember of that year a
Women’s Trade Union was
formed, which was known as
the Women Employees’
Mutual Association, and of
which she became a member
and occupied every executive
position on that body in
turn, and represented it on
the Labor Day Celebration
Committee and the Adelaide
Trades and Labor Council
for a number of years. Miss
Hanretty was a representa-
tive of employees on the first
Laundries Wages Board, and
in 1911 was appointed by
the Trades and Labor Coun-
cil as one of its representa-
tives on a Royal Commission
appointed by the Govern-
ment to enquire into the
Shortage of Labor. In
June, 1913, she was the
founder and first President
of the Women’s Political
Educational Association. In April, 1914, she was appointed
Organiser of the A.L.P., and held that position for 18 months, during
which time Labor was successful in returning a Federal Labor
Government, with Mr. Andrew Fisher as Prime Minister (September,
1914) ; and in March, 1915, the State Party defeated the Peake
Government by securing 26 seats out of 46 in the House of Assembly.
In 1916 Miss Hanretty was Vice-President of the Anti-Conscription
League, and in April, 1917, was appointed Assistant Secretary of the
A.L.P. She is at present Vice-President of the East Adelaide Local
PAST PRESIDENTS OR THE LABOR PARTY (S.A. Branch).
1899—1900 A,. A. Kirkpatrick,
M.L.C.
] 900—1001 'GL Dank el
W. O. Archibald.
1902 1904 V. P. W. Gilbert.
1904 — 1905 A. A. Kirkpatrick,
M.L.C.
1905 — 1906 H. Chess on.
1906 D. Jelley M.L.C.
1907 E. A. Roberts,
M.H.R.
1908 — 1909 C, V anglian.
1909 — 1910 J D. Brown,
A 910—1911 E. L. W. Klauer,
M.L.C.
1911 — 1912 H. Jackson.
1912 R. P. Bhmdell.
1913 1914 J. Off. Vaughan.
1914 1915 E. A. Anstey.
1915 W. C. Melbourne.
1916 (to February) 1917 H.
(Gilmore.
1917 (February to September)
F. W. Lundie.
1917 L. L. Hill, M.P.
1918— X. J. O. Makin,
M.n.R.
1919 — 1020 S|. R. WhlitfordL
M.P.
1920 M. J. Murphy
1921 — 19*2(2 C. S. IMcHugih.
M.H.R.
1922 — 1923 H. Kneebone.


FEED C. HAHN.—One
of the veterans of the move-
ment. Thirty-three years ago
a meeting of Operative
Bakers was held in the Sel-
borne Hotel, Pirie Street,
Adelaide, at which it was
decided to form a union—
the present Operative
Bakers 7 Union. Ever since
then he has been connected
with the industrial move-
ment, and almost since its
inception has been occupying
some official position. He
was Trustee, Vice-President,
President (for two and a
half years), and Assistant
Secretary to Comrade George
Mellor. Elected in 1897 to
position of Secretary, he has
held the position ever since.
Has represented the Union
on the Trades and Labor
Council for many years;
Vice-President, President,
and Past President United
Trades and Labor Council.
Delegate to Eight Hours
Celebration Committee in
1891. Meetings were then
held at the Bristol Tavern in
Franklin Street, and later at the Selborne Hotel; then at the Trades
Hall. In 1906 and 1907 was Vice-President of the Eight Hours
Celebration Committee, and President in 1908-9 and Past President
in 1910-11, thus serving for a continuous six years. As Vice-President
of the Bakers 7 Union he attended the first meetings of the trade union
executives held in the Selborne Hotel, the outcome of which was the
formation of the United Labor Party. He has represented the Union
for several years on the Council of the Party and at the Annual
Conferences, at which he was elected Trustee. Was a member of the
East Torrens Local Committee until he moved to Lower North Ade-
laide, where a Local Committee was formed and he became Secretary.
Was later Secretary Adelaide Electorate Committee, and for ten years
Secretary Prospect Local Committee. Has been Secretary of Labor
Regulation League for many years; member Trades Hall Management
Committee, Trustee, and Chairman for years. Represented unions
and afterwards the shareholders on the “Herald 77 Board of Manage-
ment. Was Chairman of the Board for five years. Has represented
the bakers at Conferences. Was member of the first Wages Board
appointed for the trade. On the formation of the Federation of
Bakers was appointed Federal Secretary (in 1913), a position which?
he still holds.


■
WILLIAM JOSEPH DENNY was born
at Adelaide, South Australia, ou December 6,
1872. He served articles in the legal protes-
sion' with His Honor Sir John Gordon, and
began to practise on his own account some
years later. He is now practising in partner-
ship as Messrs. Denny, Daly & Travers. In
1888 he was elected to the Corporation ot
Adelaide. In 1900 he was returned for the
District of West Adelaide. He sat for that
electorate until 1902, when, on the rearrange-
ment of districts, he was defeated. He was
returned in the Labor interest at the general
election of 1905 for the District of Adelaide,
and has held his seat continuously since
then. He filled the office of Attorney-General
iii the Yerran Ministry from June 2, 1910, to February 10 1912.
In 1915 he enlisted for active service, and served m Egyp and
France. He was wounded at Ypres and aw aided the Milita y
Cross. He retired with the rank of captain. He wrote The
Diggers’ 7 (published by Hodder & Stoughton) and A Digger
Abroad. 7 7
NORMAN J. O. MAKIN, con-
tested State District of Barossa in 1915. Re-
presented S.A. at Federal Conference held in
Adelaide, 1915; toured State during con-
scription campaigns. Contested Federal
Division of Wakefield in 1917. Represented
S.A. at Federal Convention, Perth, 1918, and
at Sydney, 1919. President A.L.1., 1918-19.
Contested Federal Division of Hindmarsh.
1919, winning by a majority of 916. Re-
elected in 1922 with a majority ot B,lBb.
Member Parliamentary Labor Party Execu-
tive and representative for Party on Joint
Public Accounts Committee. These positions
he holds in conjunction with that of tem-
porary Chairman of Committees in the House „ M
of Representatives. On the industrial side, President of the
Eight Hour Celebration Committee during 1916-17.
A. A. (BERT) HO ARE, Senator. Secre-
tary Rosewater Local Committee for five
years. Minute Secretary, Port Adelaide Elec-
torate Committee, seven or eight years. De-
legate to Council of Labor Party ten yeais.
Seconder of first resolution against conscrip-
tion in Port Adelaide. Delegate to Confer-
ence for a number of years. Unsuccessfully
contested Murray at 1921 State elections.
Member A.W.U. for twenty-six years. Elected
to Senate in 1922.


"*■<* *
u '\w. \ , - , '"v ' ' >
« . >f ,„ .
MBBBBBB«u
I
G. E. YATES represents Adelaide
in the House of Representatives, a
position to which he was elected when
Alf Roberts died. For one term the
seat was lost to Labor, but in 1922 it
was regained by “Teddy” Yates. Mr.
Yates was State Secretary of the Party
on two occasions, and resigned when
he was re-elected to the House of Re-
presentatives last year. He is also one
of the State 7 s representatives on the
Federal Executive. He was recently
partially compensated by the Federal
Parliament for serious and misleading
statements made by anti-Labor mem-
bers of the Federal Parliament regard-
ing his war services. “Teddy” Yates
was born at Bradley, Staffordshire,
England, on May 14, 1871. Came to South Australia in 1878;
educated at Flinders Street Public School. Entered the employ-
ment of Messrs. Simpson & Sons as a boy, and remained with the
firm for 27 years, first as a iapanner and then as a commercial
traveller.
A. G. RANKIN has taken an active part
on both the industrial and political sides of
the Labor Movement, and has held offices on
both sides, including those connected with
the Eight Hours 7 Celebration. He has been
a Labor candidate for the State Parliament
in the metropolitan area. His “recreation’ 7
is conducting dances to raise funds for the
movement.
CHAELES S. McHUGH was
elected, with Senators Hoare and
O 'Loghlin, at the recent Federal
elections. He is a past State Presi-
dent of the Party, and has been a
candidate for the State Parliament
on more than one occasion. “Char-
lie ’ ? is a natural fighter, always keen
and alert. For years he has been
actively connected with the Party,
and has not confined his cativities
to State and Federal politics, but,
like Norman Makin, Alf Blackwell,
Frank Lundie, Stan Whitford, Bert
Edwards, and many others, he has
represented Labor in municipal poli-
tics having been councillor and alderman for his municipal dis-
trict. He was one of the State delegates to the Federal Conference
in Brisbane in 1921.


M. E. O’HALLOEAH is one of the
Party’s 4 4 country 7 ’ productions, and is a
living testimony to the fact that the Labor
Party’s policy *is in the interests of the
genuine primary producers. A successful
farmer, a practical, energetic young man,
Mr. O’Halloran is a keen exponent of Labor ’s
ideals. He has already represented his dis-
trict in Parliament (with Mr. Harry Bux-
ton), but was defeated at the last State
elections. He has been selected again as one
of the team of three for the Burra (O’Hal-
loran, McHugh, and Hawke, all men from the
Burra electoral district), and his re-entry to
the State Parliament will strengthen Labor,
particularly as his experience on the land
(with men like Mr. Tom Butterfield and others) will enable the
Party to carry out its policy for the encouragement of primary
production.
FREDERICK F. WARD is the State
Secretary of the Party. It would take a
whole book to describe his activities. Few
men in the movement have given more of
their time to the movement than the present
Secretary. For many years he has held
important honorary positions, both on the
Executive of the Party and in the district
of Port Adelaide, where he resides. Nothing
is impossible in the mind of Fred Ward, and
if everything he attempts could be done as
readily as he describes it there would be no
room for complaint: Labor would achieve
all it desires and deserves. He does not
understand why everybody else are not as
keen and enthusiastic as he is. Absolutely
indefatigable and undaunted, Fred Ward has been a tower of
strength to the Party. He has been a Party candidate for muni-
cipal and State honors, and deferred success in his case does not
in any way check his ardour.
“TOM” BUTTERFIELD,” like M. R.
O’Halloran, Jack Pedlar, and others, brings
to the Party and to Parliament the benefits
of years of practical experience on the land.
Tom knows what it is to do the hardest kind
of work as a wage-earner, and afterwards as
a farmer on his own account. He knows vari-
ous parts of the outlying portions of the
State, as well as his own particular district,
as well as any man in Parliament, or out, and
has the ability to state the case for the man
on the land on all occasions. He has been
a Labor member for several years, and was
a member of Labor’s Senate team on one
occasion. No district in the State (whether
represented by Labor or anti-Labor) has two
more genuine, practical, and persistent members than Tom Butter
field and his colleague, “Bill” Harvey.


A. A. EDWARDS is one of Labor’s trio
(Denny, Edwards, and Gunn) representing
the City of Adelaide in the House of Assem-
bly. While Jack Price, Jack Carr, and
others might delight in calling Port Adelaide
the ‘ ‘ Gibraltar of Labor,” “Bert” holds
that West Adelaide is more entitled to that
•distinction, tor several years JVir. Edwards
has been a member of the City Council, and
with Councillors Lundie and Whitford forms
Labor’s trio there also.
ALLAN ROBERTSON is a typical
tanner. He is known from end to end of the
'‘‘‘‘Strict in which lie resides, and which lie
represented in Parliament as a Labor mem-
ber tor one Parliament. He is more at
home amongst the farmers or at the country
sum yards, where his experience and advice
are often of value to his fellow-settlers. A
man of few words, but one of the sort in
which tanners place unlimited confidence. He
will be a candidate again at the next elec-
tion, and nobody would be more welcome than
Allan among the members of the House of
Assembly. He has spent his life in rural
industries, and lias been successful.
A. A. J. TONKIN was a Labor candidate
at the last State elections, and though not
successful made a very creditable debut. He
is chosen again for tlie coining contest. Air.
Tonkin, as a returned soldier, lias been pro-
minent in connection with soldier settlements
and, living at Cadell, in the centre of settle-
ments of primary producers, he knows their
i equii ements, and could be relied upon to see
they received a “fair spin” if elected on
this occasion.
J. J. FLAHERTY has rendered years of
valuable service to the Party in an honorary
capacity. A keen student and an enthusiast
in reform matters, he has not limited his
action to the political field, although he has
been a candidate, but for years he has
participated in municipal affairs in the dis-
trict in which he resides. He fully recog-
nises the fact that Labor can accomplish
much good in that direction, and believes the
Party does not pay as much attention as it
should to that important phase of public life.
He is a strong advocate of co-operation, a
“live” friendly society man, a good or-
ganiser, and a member of the Party with a
vision extending beyond local affairs.


jpf&’: ' v llpfe . - g|a
S. W. O’FLAHERTY. Native of Silver-
ton, N.S.W. Became prominent in Labor
Movement in the newsagents’ trouble in 1906
as committeeman. Committeeman on the-
Lockout of 1908 of A.M.A. Secretary, Shop
Assistants ’ Association of Strathalbyn, which
won early closing for that town in 1909.
Vice-President, Renmark Branch of the
U.L.U. during the fight for Bs. a day in the
orchards. Secretary, Local Committee, Labor
Party. Secretary and manager, Renmark Co-
operative Society, which provisioned the
strikers. Organiser of the ILL.IT., 1911 De-
legate to Conference which decided to amal-
gamate with A.W.U. Delegate to Labor
Party Conferences, representing U.L.U., ML
Gambier A.W.U., and Murray Bridge, Tweedvale, and Angas Local
Committees. Prominent in anti-conscription campaign. Contested
Angas against P. McM. Glynn. Defeated by the use of the
soldiers’ vote from overseas. Selected for Murray in 1918. Mem-
bre of the Finance and Rural Committees in 1919 and 1921. Mem-
ber Central Executive for two years. President, Balhannah Local
Committee.
A. W. LACEY (M.H.R.)
was born at Terowie October
19, 1887. Worked in Port
Pirie Smelting Works till
1916, when he was appointed
Organiser for the A.W.U.,
which position he held until
1922, when he was elected to
the House of Representa-
tives. Joined the A.M.A.
(Port Pirie Branch) in
1910. President in 1916.
President Port Pirie Trades
and Labor Council three
times. President Port Pirie
Electorate Committee three
times. Delegate to Labor
Party Conference every year
since 1913 with the excep-
tion of 1917. Elected Port
Pirie Municipal Council in
1920. Resigned in 1923 on
account of Parliamentary
duties. Defeated A. Poynton
for the Division of Grey.
Mr. Poynton has held the
position for 21 years and
was Postmaster-General at
the time. The voting was:
Lacey, 9,778; Poynton,
8,425.


F. W. BIRRELL (M.P).—
Born North Adelaide August
27, 1869. Member Typo-
graphical Society over thirty
years. President for four
years. On Wages Board 11
years. Member Board of
Management, Chairman
Trustees, Representative at
Annual Conferences and
Council of A.L.P. and
Trades and Labor Council
for many years. Member
‘ ‘ Herald ’ ’ Board Manage-
ment. Treasurer A.L.P. for
six years; Acting Secretary
and Secretary for four
years. Member State Child-
ren’s Council and Executive
S.A. Branch League of
Nations Union, representing
Adelaide Trades and Labor
Council on the latter body.
Contested Wooroora District
1915. Elected North Ade-
laide 1921. Contested Mac-
Donnell Ward in Adelaide
City Council four times,
securing a majority of resi-
dential votes on three
occasions, but being defeated
by the plural vote.
J. E. STEPHENS is one
of the best known among the
industrialists at Port Ade-
laide as Secretary of the
Drivers’ Union. He directs
Lis attention more to the in-
dustrial than to the political
sirle and lias ably represented
In's organisation in the In-
dustrial Court.


I-? '*?v ■
■;_ . "■ •; /
He resumed organising for
the A.AV.U. in January,
1918, and is still in that
position. In 1919 he con-
HAROLD QUIETER
JAMES PEARCE. —Organ-
iser for the A.R.U. for two
and a half years. Editor
A.R.U. “Gazette.” Ahce-
President Port Adelaide
Branch A.R.U. Represents
A.R.U. on A.L.P. Labor Day
Celebration Committee and
"Trades and Labor Council.
President Adelaide Trades
and Labor Council. Trustee
Labor Day Celebration Com-
mittee. Prior to becoming
Organiser w r as employed in
S.A. railways. AVas member
Timber AVorkers’ Union and
member Drivers’ Union dur-
ing the drivers’ strike. Took
part in great railway strike
in Great Britain during
1919 while on active service.
Member of National Union
of Railwaymen in 1919.
CHARLES L. GRAY was
born in the U.S.A. in 1874.
He went to South Africa in
1899, and was for several
years in the Traffic Depart-
ment of the Natal railways.
He went to New Zealand at
the end of 1904, and after
several years in New Zealand
went to Queensland, and
came to South Australia in
1911. He became a member
of the U.L.U. Executive and
Delegate of that Union to
the Trades and Labor Coun-
cil and the A.L.P. Council.
He was elected Organiser for
the U.L.U. early in 1912,
and was largely instrumental
in bringing about the amal-
gamation of the U.L.U. with
the A.W.U. AVith the amal-
gamation of the two unions
in 1914 he was appointed
Organiser of the A.AV.U.
He served with the Austra-
lian Forces, and was in-
valided to Australia in 1917.


MISS MITCHELL’S first
position in the workers ’
movement was when she ac-
cepted a position on the
Board of Management of the
Early Closing Association.
She next represented the
North Adelaide Democratic
Association on the Labor
Party Council, and became
Minute Secretary of the
Women’s Central Organising
Committee, Vice-President of
the Adelaide Electorate
Committee, Secretary Wo-
men ’s Mutual Association,
Delegate to Trades and
Labor Council, Trustee
A.L.P., Auditor, Secretary,
and Organiser of the Wo-
men ’s Social League, Dele-
gate to A.L.P. Conference
for ten years, Organiser for
the Party from Pt. Augusta
to ML Gambier and from
Moonta to Morgan, and
Member of the Anti-Con-
scription Executive. These
are only a few of the many
positions Miss Mitchell has
held in the Labor movement,
and in all she has displayed
exceptional ability, energy,,
sincerity.
A. G. WOEDLEY ap-
peared for tlie first time on
the metropolitan plebiscite
this year. He is a keen
Laborite and more should be
heard of him in the future.
There is ample room in the
movement for young, active
workers.


T. W. G REAL Y. Born Brighton, Decem-
ber 6, 1883. Labor candidate for Parliament
hi interests of Labor, 1910 (Alexandra), 1915
(Alexandra), 19.17 (East Torrens), 1918
(East Torrens), 1919 (Senate), 1920 (Alex-
andra), 1921 (Sturt). Delegate to 16 State
Conferences, three Interstate Conferences
(1916, Melbourne; 1918, Perth; 1919, Syd-
ney). Member State Executive for 31 years,
for two years Vice-President. After Mr. Bir-
rell resigned as secretary in 1920 was ap-
pointed Acting Secretary until Annual Con-
ference. Was Organiser for Party at 1921
elections. Secretary, Anti - Conscription
League in 1916. Toured State against con-
scription in 1917. Secretary, Mylor Local
Committee in 1907. President, Alexandra Electorate Committee,
1911-12. Acting Secretary, Mitcham and Hawthorn Local Com-
mittee. Member, Organising Committee: delegate to Council of
Party. Candidate for Sturt at the coming State elections.
L. A. HOPKINS. Born Rosewater, 1891.
Joined Port Pirie Local Committee, and par-
ticipated in local political contests until he
left Port Pirie for the city in 1921. President,
Port Pirie Local Committee and Trades and
Labor Council. First President of Grey Elec-
torate Committee. Councillor for Solomon-
town in Port Pirie Council. Contested
Barossa at 1921 State elections. Vice-Presi-
dent Tramway Employees’ Union.
'‘MICK ” MURPHY is one of the best-
known members of the Party in this State.
Like several other stalwarts, he was con-
nected with the United Laborers’ Union
until it amalgamated with the A.W.U., and
with the latter body he has been a prominent
member and official. In the Labor Party he
has filled most of the official positions, includ-
ing a term as President. He was one of the
State delegates at the Federal Conference in
Brisbane in 1921, and was a Labor candidate
(with the late Tom Lyons) at the last State
elections. "Mick” is a fearless speaker,
keen debater, and a tower of strength to the
Party at all times.


FRANK W. LUNDIE. There is no
iiuine more widely known in the Labor Move-
ment of South Australia than that of Frank
Lundie, He has for many years been pro-
minent in connection with the A.W.U., and
has filled the position of General President
of the A.W.U., the largest union of workers
in Australia. While always fighting in the
industrial field, Frank has not neglected the
political side. He has been one of Labor’s
candidates for both State and Federal honors
before, and is one of the team chosen by
Labor for the metropolitan area at the com-
ing elections. As a member of the Adelaide
City Council, Frank may be relied upon to
take up the cudgels for the “bottom dog.”
A lifelong teetotaller, a hard worker, a fearless fighter, Frank has
a fine record.
JAMES BLACK was born at North
Adelaide on February 12, 1885, and was
educated at Flinders Street Public School.
He has taken a deep interest in the Labor
Movement, believing that if any betterment
is to be achieved for the workers it could
only be brought about by the activities of
Movement. As an employer, he be-
lieves in good wages and conditions for
employees. When Labor became divided
over the conscription issue, being an anti-
militarist, he took part in the campaigns of
1916 and 1917 against conscription. He stood
in Labor’s interest for the Southern District
of the Legislative Council in 1918. He has
held position as Vice-President and Trustee
of the Party, and was also the selected
candidate for the District of Sturt, 1921
election, but withdrew.
J. J. DALY, one of Labor’s team to con-
test the Legislative Council at the coming
elections, is one of the younger division of
the Party’s leaders, but has already estab-
lished a good record. With the advantage of
a legal training, Mr. Daly has been of great
service to the Movement in industrial mat-
ters particularly. He is a member of the
firm of Denny, Daly & Travers, but a busy
legal career has not prevented him from
participating in municipal, State, and Fede-
ral politics in the interests of the Party.
Like many other Laborites, he is a keen
‘ ‘ sport, ’ ’ football being his favourite. He
was manager of the South Australian football
team which played against Victoria in Mel-
bourne in August.


jaSji
\ jgjgSgSe
GEORGE COOK, one of the old school, was
connected with the Labor Movement away
back in the early days. He has 4 'organised,
agitated, and educated” in more than one
State, and in late years has been settled on
the land in this State. He has been a stan-
dard-bearer for Labor at State elections, and
by his practical experience has been able to
explain Labor’s policy to the man on the
land in such a way as to secure substantial
support, although he has not succeeded (in
Conservative districts) in ousting the reac-
tionary members.
JOHN CARR, M.L.C., like many other
Labor representatives, was educated or
trained in the hard school of labor. At Port
Adelaide he was for many years a steady,
solid worker, chiefly in the industrial field
as a member and officer of the Working
Men’s Association (or branch of the Water-
side Workers). At the same time he recog-
nised the value of political action, and was
eventually chosen as a candidate for the
Legislative Council. He has been one of the
Labor leaders in the Upper House for several
years, representing the district in which he
has lived practically all his life. He is a
member of the 11 Herald” Board of Manage-
ment.
ARTHUR McARTHUR, a member of the
State Executive, has been connected with the
Party in this State for about ten years. He
became prominent early in the conscription
campaign, when he travelled all over the
State addressing meetings as a member of
the Anti-Conscription Council. He has taken
an active part in State and Federal politics,
and was a candidate for Wooroora at the last
State elections. Mr. McArthur is Chairman
of the meetings of the Labor Ring, Botanic
Park, on Sundav afternoons.
' * >
JOHN MeINNES, M.P. One of the
sitting members of the West Torrens District.
Elected Secretary of the Government
Workers’ Association in 1905; Vice-President,
Trades and Labor Council in 1907, President
in 1908; Secretary, Liquor Trades’ Employees 9
Federation in 1912, General Secretary in
1914. Elected to Parliament in 1918, and
returned again in 1921. Selected to contest
same district at the coming elections.


St Hlk
gmm. *
J. N. PEDLEE, M.P., was born at Salis-
bury, January 25, 1870. He was for eighteen
years President of the Kadina Local Com-
mittee, A.L.P. He was a member of the
Agricultural Hureau, .Kadina, and for two
years was President. He was for ten years
a member of the District Council of Kadina.
He has taken a keen interest in friendly
societies, being P.C.K. of Hope of Paskeville
Tent, 1.0. R. He is President of the Kadina
Technical School Council and Vice-President
of the Kadina Branch of the A.W.U. He
was returned to Parliament in May, 1918, for
the Wallaroo District.
MES. EOBEETSON
and MISS NYDIA
THOMSON, who are
President and Secretary
respectively of the
Moonta Ladies’ Com-
mittee, A.L.P. They
are daughters of Mrs.
M. L. and the late Wal-
ter G. Thomson, late of
Kadina. They were
elected to office in Eeb-
rua r y, 1918, an d have
held those positions con-
tinuously since. At elec-
tions, both State and
Federal, they have worked strenuously to secure votes for Labor.
They are both delegates to the Wallaroo Electorate Committee and
to the Workers’ Property Committee. Miss Thomson is also
Hon. Secretary to the United Workers ’ Social Committee and the
-Social Committee of the Ladies’ A.L.P., which has been responsible
for manv line gatherings and has helped to solidify the forces of
Labor at Moonta.
EVAN GEOEGE has been a Labor can-
didate for a country electorate before. At
the last election he contested Stanley, with
Comrade Smith, against the Liberals in the
stronghold of the Premier. In view of the
deservedly unpopular, un-Australian, un-
democratic, or ultra-Conservative policy of
the Harwell Government even Stanley elec-
tors should speak up and demand a change
when the next opportunity conies. Mr. George
is another member of the Party who knows
the country and its requirements. Indeed,
it is a feature of Labor’s leaders that a very
large proportion are closely in touch with
•country life, and are able to champion and
•defend the workers there.


' »?i'
MARTIN COLLATON is a burly cham-
pion of the workers’ cause. Although mainly
concerned with the industrial side and always
closely watching the interests of the members
of the union of which he is Secretary, Martin
was chosen as one of the Labor team for the
metropolitan area at a previous State elec-
tion. He generally represents his union at
the annual Conferences of the Party.
F. T. MARTIN was for a time pro-
minently connected with the Labor Party,
industrially and politically, but lately has not
been so prominent.- He was a Labor candi-
date for North Adelaide several years ago,
was Secretary of one or two unions, and of
the Trades Hall, and was a member of “The
Herald ” Board of Management for several
terms.
LEX WILCOTT has been one of the
“live wires” for the Party in the country.
At the last State elections he stood, with
Messrs. 0 ’Halloran and Buxton, but was
narrowly defeated. He is young, energetic,
and practical, and more may be heard of him
later on.
W. WOOD has been more prominently
connected with the Labor Party by his muni-
cipal activities in the western suburban dis-
trict, but is always ready to do his share for
the Party in the wider fields of State and
Federal politics. He has filled civic posi-
tions, including the mayor’s chair as the-
direct representative of the Labor Party.
JIM CAVANAGH came into prominence
particularly during the strenuous days vatu
the Labor Party opposed conscription, an
attitude which was twice endorsed by the
majority of the people of Australia who
exercised their votes. He was the Laboi
candidate for Hindmarsh at the Federal elec-
tions during the war.


/ , ■HpBI
TOM EDWARDS was born in Cornwall 47
years ago, and came with bis parents to South
Australia. He started work at 13 years of
age with W. Thomas & Co., millers, of X oil
Adelaide; received the usual 12s. per week
for 10 hours per day, and about 3d. an hour
overtime. He was a member of the Port
Adelaide Labor Committee, and also Com-
m tteeman, Port Adelaide Co-operative
Society in 1908, when the late Mr. Boon was
manager. He was also a member - ol the
Port Adelaide Democratic Club, and at that
time contested West Ward, Port Adelaide, im
the interests of Labor. Later he was a mem-
ber of the Gawler Local Committee. He Avas
a delegate (with the late Mr. E. H. Coornbe)
at Conference in 1916, and was also a delegate in 1917. He stood in
the interests of Labor (when Mr. Coombe died) foi Baiossa and was
defeated. He next stood with Messrs. Gabb and Cooke. He w r as--
President of the Angas Local Committee and Returning Officer when
Mr. Gabb was selected for the Angas seat.
J. MOSES GABB, M.H.R., did his first
work for the Labor Party about thirty years
ago, when he used to take * <r lhe Weekly
Herald ’’ to the Labor people in Glenelg. He
has held position of Secretary for three years
of the Alberton Local Committee, Vice-Presi-
dent of the Rosewater Democratic Associa-
tion and Waterside Workers’ Association. Ho
assisted in both anti-conscription campaigns,
and was Labor candidate for Barossa (State,)
in 1918, when he was defeated by 42 votes,
and for Angas (Federal) in 1919, when he
was successful and beat Mr. Glynn by 241
votes. He was also re-elected for Angas in
1922, beating Mr. Ritchie by 3,171.
M. B. WOODS was born at Manoora, and
has spent practically all his life in the north-
ern areas. He has alw T ays taken a keen in
terest in public affairs, being a member of
the Hawker District Council for upwards ot
seventeen years, during which time he occu-
pied the position of Chairman for an extended
period. He was President of Hookina Local
Committee for many years, and also a dele-
gate to Newcastle Electorate Committee and
to the Conference for many years. He was
the first Labor representative elected to Haw-
ker District Council. For about two years
he was Hon. Secretary of Sturt Electorate
Committee and a Council delegate. He con-
tested the Northern District, Legislative
Council last general election, and has been selected as a candidate
for the coming elections.


FBAXK J. XIEASS is a native of Hind-
marsh, having been born at Bowden in 1886.
Two years later his parents moved to East
Street, Brompton, where he has resided for
the past 34 years. He was appointed General
Secretary of the A.G.W.A. in 1914. The
growth of the A.G.W.A. in the past nine
years is an indication of Mr. Xieass’s work
and popularity. For years he has been con-
nected with the Hindmarsh Local Committee
and the Party generally, having been Secre-
tary and President of that Local Committee.
He contested Wooroora in the Labor interest
in 1918.
FBAXK GBOVES is a well-known figure
at Labor Conferences and other gatherings of
the workers, including those held from time
to time at Islington, where he has worked
for a number of years. Comrade Groves’
•“recreation” is band music. There are a gold
medal and all sorts of golden opinions wait-
ing for the worker who can successfully estab-
lish a Labor Band in this State. Most of the
musicians in all the bands are workers. Why
not a Workers’ Band?
E. W. SLAVEX lias devoted practically
the whole of his attention to industrial
matters. He has been an active member of
the A.G.W.A. since its inception 16 years
ago, and has held practically every respon-
sible office in the Association. He has
also taken an interest in the Eailway
Hospital Fund, of which he was an active
member for some time, eventually being
Vice-President and then President, He was
Vice-President of the A.G.W.A. for two or
three years, and was elected President two
years ago. During the proceedings of the
Eailway Tribunal Mr. Slaven performed
yeoman service for the employees.
A. E. SMITH, of Clare, has not figured
so prominently in the movement as many
others. He is also essentially a country-
man, and with Evan George attacked the
Harwell Government at the last election. He
is one of those solid, unobtrusive supporters
who form the backbone of the movement, and
more may be heard from him later on. He
would be an acquisition to the country repre-
sentatives of the Party in any Parliament.


v ", v ’ *
/
f lli |
JAMES JELLEY, M.L.C., born October
1, 1873, at Patna. Scotland. Joined the
Labor Party in 189 i, being Secretary of the
Woodville Committee in that year, President
in 1908, 1909, 1910, 1911, and 1913. Repre-
sented S.A. Furniture Trade on Federal Con-
vention held in Melbourne in 1910, also at
Hobart in 1913, when he was elected Presi-
dent of the Federated Furnishing Trades
Society of Australasia; Past-President of the
State Branch; life member of the Furnishing
Trades’ Union since 1919. Elected to Central
District, Legislative Council, on February 10,
1912, Elected Leader of the Labor Party
for 1918 elections. After elections was elected
Deputy Leader and Leader in the Legislative
Council, which position he still occupies.
L. E. FENTON is an active,
aggressive member of the Party,,
who is in evidence at Council meet-
ings and Conferences. Down Thebar-
ton way he works for the Party
whenever and wherever there is a
fight on. In either the Municipal,
State, or Federal arena, Comrade
Fenton may be relied upon to ‘ 1 put
in.” If he has any “weakness” it
is in his outspoken attitude when
dealing with questions affecting the
Movement. Rightly or wrongly, he
will trounce anybody anywhere, if
he thinks the occasion warrants,
and this sometimes leads to un-
pleasant situations. has been a standard-bearer for Labor
at State elections. At the 1921 election was a candidate (with
Secretary F. J. Ward) for the No. 2 Division of the Legislative
Council, and at the last Federal election he was Organiser for the
Party for some time.
E. J. SHEPHERD hails from Mount
Gambier, where he is connected with the
commercial side of life. He has been chosen
twice as a standard-bearer for Labor. At
the last State elections he put up a good
performance, and at the more recent Federal
election he made further progress, although
not successful. If he contests his native
district at the coming election he should suc-
ceed in regaining the seat for Labor. Mr.
Shepherd is a young man, wdiose education
and outlook were considerably broadened as
the result of his experiences overseas during
the war.


\
/ /f|
v Jfa**
H. J. GEORGE has been an active
-member of the A.L.P. over thirty years,
lie has been a member of the S.A. Loco.
Enginemen, Firemen and Cleaners’ Associa-
tion since 1891, and has represented that
organisation on many important interstate
conferences. He was elected to the position
of General Secretary in 1912. In 1919 he
was appointed as Advocate for the Union on
the Government Workers’ Tribunal, and sub-
sequently represented the employees on the
Government Locomotive Running Board, in
accordance with the provisions of the Indus-
trial Code Act. He was President of the
Eight Hours’ Celebration Committee in
1922-23. In 1918 and 1921 he was one of
STANLEY J. YERRAN has represented
the “Gibraltar of Labor’ ’ (Port Adelaide),
with Mr. J. L. Price, in the House of As-
sembly for several years. Both are sons of
previous Labor Premiers, and are compara-
tively young men into whose lives years of
useful experience have been crowded.
“Stan,” like another “Stan,” comes from
Moonta, but has “travelled” and has
worked in various States, so that he knows
the needs of the workers. He has been Secre-
tary of the Parliamentary Labor Party for
some time.
Labor’s standard-bearers for the District of East Torrens for the
House of Assembly, and although unsuccessful was only defeated
by a comparatively small majority. He has been selected as one
of the Labor candidates for that district at the next State elec-
t ons. For several terms he was a member of the Board of
Management of “The Daily Herald.” He occupied the position
of President of the West Adelaide Local Committee, has been a
representative on the Council of the Labor Party for a numbei
of years, Treasurer of the Party at the present time, and a member
of the Board of Management of the Trades Hall.
LESLIE C. HUNKIN regained one of
the seats for East Torrens at the last State
elections, and at the coming elections will be
one of the team of three for that district. In
the industrial field, Mr. Hunkin has for years
been recognised as one of Labor’s ablest
advocates. Up to his election to Parliament
he was connected with the Storemen and
Packers’ Union, and had represented that
body, as well as others, in the Arbitration
Courts and elsewhere. He was also pro-
minent in the proceedings for fixing the
“living” wage or the cost of living. Latterly
lie has filled the position of Secretary of the
Public Service Association.


HARRY R. BUXTON was for many
years a worker at Islington, and then, with
Mr. M. R. O’Halloran, he succeeded in repre-
senting the Burra District in the House of
Assembly. He was defeated at the last
State elections, and has since resided in
Victoria.
LIONEL L. HILL served the Party in
various capacities before he became a mem-
ber of Parliament. He was Assistant Secre-
tary of the Party years ago, and has since
filled the Presidential chair and has repre-
sented the State on the Federal Executive.
He was one of Labor’s Senate team during
the war-time election and has been a member
of the State Parliament for years. He repre-
sents the industrial centre of Port Pirie
with Mr. Jack Fitzgerald. He was one of
the few Labor members who stood firmly with
the Party when the “split” was caused over
the conscription issue. In the industrial field
his chief work has been with the tramway
workers, and in addition to being State
JOHN C. FITZGERALD represents
Ririe with Lionel L. Hill, and is Mayor of
that important municipality. ‘‘Jack ’ ’ is
another member of the Party who has ac
quired a fund of knowledge concerning the
workers ’ movement by having worked in
various States and in various industries, not
excluding the work of a primary producer
on the land. He is a rugged, strong, and
fearless representative of the worker all the
time, a sound industrialist, with advanced
views on the rights and power of organised
Labor.
Secretary he has been Federal President of the Tramway Em-
ployees ’ Federation.
A. J. BLACKWELL, one of the Party’s
State members for West Torrens, has rendered
valuable services to the Party in the various
fields of activity. Industrially, he has been
connected with the meat industry workers;
municipally, he has filled the mayoral chair
for portion of the district which he now
represents in Parliament. “Alf M Blackwell
is a steady, plodding, sincere Laborite.


T. P. HOWARD was born in Gilbert
Street, Adelaide, on March 13, 1880, and was
educated at the Christian Brothers’ College.
In 1907 Mr. Howard for the first time at-
tended the Annual Conference of the A.L.P.,
and has represented his union (the Painters)
on this body ever since. In 1908 he was
appointed a delegate to the A.L.P. Council, a
position which he still retains. Mr. Howard
was chosen as one of Labor’s candidates for
the District of Sturt in 1918 State Assembly.
He was again chosen by the Party to contest
the same seat in the 1921 State elections, and
on this occasion he increased his vote by
2,000. In 1909 he occupied the position of
President of the Painters’ Union, and was
elected Secretary in 1912, a position he still holds. He has repre-
sented the painters at several Interstate Conferences, and is a
Federal Councillor of his organisation. He has been a member of
the Painters’ and Decorators’ Wages Board since 1910, and has
acted as Advocate for the Union in the State Industrial Court and
on the Government Workers’ Tribunal. Mr. Howard has repre-
sented his union on the Trades and Labor Council since 1912, and
has occupied the position of President of the Council, and was one
of its Trustees until he resigned when elected Secretary of the
Council in 1920. In the stormy days that marked the conscription
campaigns Mr. Howard threw himself into the contest. He was
elected by the Trades and Labor Council delegates to represent
the Council at the Interstate Conference of Trades Unions, which
was held in Melbourne in 1916 to deal with Labor’s attitude to-
wards conscription. He also represented the Council in the same
year in Hobart at the Conference of the Trades and Labor Councils
of Australia. During the first conscription referendum he acted
as Day Secretary of the Anti-Conscription League. On the Ad-
visory Council of Education, created under the Education Act of
1916, Mr. Howards represents the Trades and Labor Council, and
also represents the Council on the State Industrial Commission
appointed by the Federal Government in 1918. Together with
Messrs. J. Gunn, M.P., and F. McCabe, Mr. Howard was appointed
an Advocate by the Trades and Labor Council to assist in conduct-
ing the Basic Wage Enquiry of 1921, and again in 1922 with
Messrs. J. J. Daly, J. Gunn, M.P., and J. Murphy (of the A.W.U.)
to conduct the Basic Wage Case before the Board of Industry.
As Secretary of the Trades and Labor Council’s Disputes Com-
mittee he has rendered valuable service in the settlement of several
industrial disputes. On the Labor Day Celebration Committee he
has been an active delegate, acting as Sports Secretary, Trustee,
Acting Secretary in 1921, and Secretary in 1922, and was elected
unopposed again in May of this year to carry out the jubilee year
celebration for ±923. He represents the committee on the Trades
Hall Managing Committee as Trustee. He is a member of “The
Daily Herald” Board of Management, and Secretary of the Shop
Assistants’ and Warehouse Employees’ Federation, and a mem-
ber of their Federal Council. He is also a member of the Shop..
Assistants’ Wages Board.


E. PxVEHAM forms one of the country
team of Labor candidates. He has been con-
nected with the movement for years, and has
been a standard-bearer for Labor. On the
next occasion it is hoped he will succeed.
His wide personal experience and close ac-
quaintance with country requirements would
make him a valuable member for a country
district.
TOM LYONS has gone “West.” He
was a sturdy battler for the workers. Beared
in tlie school of labor, he acquired his educa-
tion by practical experience, and was, as the
result, an enthusiastic industrialist. He was
an organiser of the A.W.U., and with an
equally keen Laborite (Mr. “Mick” Murphy)
he was a standard-bearer for Labor at the
hist State elections. But the dread disease
which has robbed too many homes of the
breadwinner had gripped Tom, and he was
unable to conduct an active campaign. Soon
after he succumbed, genuinely mourned by
all who knew of his fine, manly qualities.
“JOSH” PEDLAR’S connection with
the Workers’ Movement goes back to the
boisterous days of the old U.L.U, when there
was generally “something doing.” He went
to the war, and on his return took up work
on the soldiers’ settlement. He was a can-
didate for the Party at the last State elec-
tions.
H. S. B. HILL’S untimely death a few
years ago removed from the ranks of Labor
one w’ho as a young man seemed to have a
life full of promise. He was a keen Laborite,
always ready for a contest, and his death
at an early age was regretted by many mem-
bers of the Party who had known him well as
a cheerful, consistent member of the Party.


E: L. STOKES is well
known on the Peninsula as
an industrialist, and as a
Labor candidate for the
Wakefield Division of the
House of Representatives on
two occasions. Although not
yet successful he increased
his votes on the last occasion
and has shown that even the
comparatively conservative
division which is still repre-
sented by the reactionary
‘‘ Wobbly” Foster, may yet
be won by Labor. Mr.
Stokes spent years working
among the farmers and
knows their needs as well as
those of the wage earners.
FRANK STANIFORD is
no stranger to the Party.
On more than one occasion
he has carried on the fight
for Labor in the country
districts as a candidate. He
is a regular attendant at
Labor Conferences, a thor-
oughly sincere and able ex-
ponent of Labor ’s ideals, and
having been again chosen as
a candidate for the coming
election it is hoped the Party
will have the benefit of his
assistance in Parliament
when the elections are over.
As a fruit growet-gardener
in the hi Is Frank knows all
about the obstacles and dis-
abilities under which those
engaged in that industry
labor and if returned he
would be the right man in
the right place.


J. L. PRICE (M.P.)
elected to Parliament on
March 9, 1915, for the Dis-
trict of Adelaide, which
Constituency he has con-
tinued to represent. From
1917 to 1921 he was Secre-
tary of the Parliamentary
Labor Party. He has served
as an Executive Officer of
the A.L. Party, and at the
1922 Annual Conference was
elected Senior Vice-Presi-
dent. In 1922 the Annual
Conference also elected him
one of the Delegates to the
A.L.P. Conference in Bris-
bane. He has served as
Secretary of various local
Committees in the State. He
is a Past President of the
Port Adelaide Electorate
Committee of the A.L.P.
He has taken an active part
in industrial affairs, and has
occupied the position as
President of the Port Ade-
laide Trades and Labor
Council, and for two years
was General President of
the S.A. Goverent General
Workers’ Association. He
takes a keen interest in municipal affairs, and for the past seven
years has served the Port Adelaide Municipal Corporation, first as
a Councillor, and now an Alderman.
FRANK McCABE was for years a regu-
lar contributor to “The Daily Herald” and
“The Worker.” He it was who initiated the
discussion at Conference which led to
Socialism being made the objective of the
S.A. Branch of the A.L.P. At the 1917 Con-
ference of the Party he had carried the fol-
lowing; “That the Industrial Court have-
power to fix a minimum standard of living,
irrespective of money terms, and that the
rate be periodically adjusted with the in-
crease of prices.” Mr. McCabe was allowed
extension of time to further explain the idea,,
which was then new but has since been put
into practice by the Commonwealth Court.
He was a delegate for the Federated Storemen


'v^WvXvX
11115
and Packers’ Union, and lias attended every Conference since.
In the anti-conscription fights he wrote in prose and rhyme much
that was helpful in argument. He was Organiser of the union
from 1917 to 1920, and in the latter year became Secretary, on
Mr. L. C. Hunkin’s resignation. In 1921 he was entrusted by
the Trades and Labor Council with the conduct of its case in the
Living Wage Enquiry before the Board of Industry, of which body
he is now a Commissioner. For two years he has been a membe?:
of the Executive of the A.L.P., and during the past term was
President of the United Trades and Labor Council.
JOE HUNTER’S first
•connection with Labor started
when an apprentice, walking
'with procession of his shop-
mates in the year that
Batchelor and Kingston beat
Beer for West Adelaide, and
they, McPherson, and others
elected. Soon after he
shifted to Peterborough,
'where he assisted on com-
mittees to push along Labor
in all its work. He was
Secretary of the Railway As-
sociation, which position he
relinquished on being trans-
ferred to Adelaide. On
making his home in Pros-
pect, he assisted Labor. He
was elected Secretary of
Amalgamated Engineers
(Adelaide North Branch) on
its formation, and has been
Secretary every since it
started (12 years), barring
the years 1917 and 1918,
when he went to England on
munition work. While in
Manchester he was Secretary
for Australian Munition
Workers, and had a big say
in influencing the members
to vote against conscription when the vote was taken in England.
Returning to S.A. he resumed his position of Secretary to the Amal-
gamated Engineers, and was also elected first Secretary to Returned
Munition and War Workers’ Association (S.A. Branch). He was
Committeeman for A.E.U. Political Committee (Norman Makin,
Secretary) on its start six years ago, and is still an active member.
He represented his Society on the Trades and Labor Council, and is at
present a Delegate on the Iron Trades Council. He was a Delegate
at the last Conference of the Labor Party.


1
J. WOODS, who contested
the Labor plebiscite for the
selection of two candidates
for Wallaroo recently, is one
of the mainstays of unionism
on the Peninsula and a solid
supporter of the Party. As
Secretary of the Wallaroo
branch of the Waterside
Workers , Federation he has
arduous duties to perform
and succeeds. He has repre-
sented his organisation on
industrial and political con-
ferences for years, although,
as yet a young man with, it
is hoped, many years before
him in which to render fur-
ther valuable services to his
fellow workers.
D. WHITE is another
member of the younger
school. He entered enthu-
siastically into Labor politics
when he was nominated for
the general plebiscite this
year, and began by reviving
the Local Committee in his
part of the district and by
addressing meetings at Bo-
tanic Park land elsewhere,
during which he dispalyed a
general knowledge of the
bread and butter problems.
As a railway worker he has
acquired much information
which should be valuable to
him and the Party in the
years to come.


also Secretary of the Liquor
Trades Employees’ Union for
several years. He organised
the Hotel, Club, and Restaur-
ant Employees’ Union and
the Tanners Employees’
Union, and while holding
these positions, and that of
Secretary of the Bucknall
Juvenile Lodge of Druids,
all honorary positions, fol-
lowed his occupation at the
Walkerville Brewery for six-
teen years.
J. W. SHARLEY was a
nominee on the metropolitan
plebiscite this year, but so
far he has directed most of
his attention to the industrial
side of the workers’ activi-
ties. He recently resigned
from the position of General-
"Secretary of the Australa-
sian Society of Engineers to
take up the post of Secretary
of the Railway Officers, As-
sociation.
F. M. STANDI SH first
joined the Local Committee
at Hindmarsh, and has since
held every office in it, from
Tyler to President. He was
Secretary three or four
times, Treasurer twice, and
President several times.
He has represented his
Society (the Liquor Trades
Employees ’ Union), on the
A.L.P. Conference for a
number of years, and has
been delegate to the Council
of the Party for that body.
He represented the ratepay-
ers of Brompton Ward on
the Hindmarsh Council for
four years, and held the
position of Alderman in the
same Council for a similar
period. In industrial mat-
ters he has taken his part,
having occupied the position
of President of the Trades
and Labor Council and Presi-
dent of the Eight Hours ’
Celebration Committee, and


111^^
■~wiMnwyiCMoaq—— ——n
F. SPARSHOTT was for
years connected with the
East Adelaide section of the
metropolitan area and in
State, Federal, and Muni-
cipal politics took his part.
He was also chairman of the
School Board. Latterly he
has moved to Goodwood and
linked up with the Goodwood
Democratic Association.
ALWYN G. EGBERTS
was born at Kapnnda
February 25, 1883. Edu-
cated Marryatville Public
School and Way College. He
first took an active part in
the Labor movement about,
1902, when an endeavor was
made to secure the return of
Mr. Cornelius Proud to Par-
liament in favor of the
Nationalization or Munici-
pilization of the Tramways.
He has represented Labor in
the Thebarton Council for
two years as Councillor, and
two years as Alderman.
Last year he was the selected
Labor Nominee for the posi-
tion of Mayor. He was a
Delegate to the Federal
Conference of the Australian
Clerical Association in 1917,
when the question of the
amalgamation of the two
opposing Clerks 7 Unions in
New South Wales was de-
bated, and resulted in the
amalgamation being brought
about. He is at present
Vice-President of the Aus-
tralian Clerical Association.


He is the President of the Thebarton Local Committee of the A.L.P.,
and also President of the West Torrens Electorate Committee of the
A.L.P. He has been a Delegate to the Council of the A.L.P. for
Thebarton for a number of years, and was recently appointed by the
Council as one of the members on the Organising Committee. He has
been appointed by the Council of the A.L.P. as one of the candidates
to contest the next State Elections for the Legislative Council No. 2
District.
Mr. Roberts has also taken a keen interest in Friendy Society
work. He has been President of a Branch of the Australian Natives r
Association * also a member of the Board of Directors of the A.N.A.
He was also one of the original movers in connection with the Friendly
Societies’ Medical Association, and has taken a prominent part in
connection with the Thebarton Institute, recreation etc.
Mr. Roberts has also been associated with the Workers’ Educational
Association (W.E.A.) University Tutorial Classes for some years, and
is a member of the Council and also a member of the Executive.
STANLEY R. WHIT-
FORD was born at Moonta
June 5, 1878. He started
work at 13. He visited
West Australia in 1899 and
returned in 1900. He worked
in the Yelta Mine, Moonta,
until 1904, when he returned
to W.A. He, travelled ex-
tensively in that State. Re-
turning again to South Aus-
tralia in 1908, employment
was found at Wallaroo
Mines. In 1910 he joined
the S.A.R., and was ap-
pointed to Port Augusta.
The railway was quitted in
1917 in order to contest
Barker in the House of
Representatives. Wherever
he has been stationed
“Stan" has taken an active
and prominent part in local
government, industrial, and
political affairs, holding
positions in all the local
organisations. He has been
President of the Party, is
now a member of the
Executive, and has repre-
sented the Party on State
and Interstate industrial
and political conferences for years. He was several times a candidate
for State and Federal Parliaments, and was elected for North.
Adelaide in 1921. He was elected to the Adelaide City Council in
1922, and is President of the Workers' Educational Association for
1923-4.


He was returned for the
Newcastle District in 1917,
and has held the seat ever
since.
A. R. G. HAWKE.—Secre-
tary Kapunda Local Com-
mittee, 1917. President
Peterborough Local Com-
mittee, 1921. Selected to
contest Burra with Messrs.
O’Halloran and McHugh in
1924 elections.
W. HARVEY (M.P. for
Newcastle), Native of
Newcastle, N.S.W. At any
early age lie migrated to
Western Australia, and was
elected at 19 years of age as
President of the Gwalia
Miners’ Union. He also
held various other executive
positions in the movement in
that State, including Presi-
dent of the Eastern Gold-
fields District Council of the
Australian Labor Federa-
tion. He arrived in South
Australia in 1910, and took
an active part in the move-
ment in this State. He was
elected Organiser for the
U.L.U. in 1911. After the
amalgamation of the U.L.U.
and A.W.U. he took up
organising work for the
A.W.U. (South Australian
Branch), President of the
Grey Electorate Committee,
and President of the New-
castle Electorate Committee.


FRANCIS McINTYRE, Secretary of the Adelaide Section of the
Drivers ’ Union, is a “live” secretary directing the destinies of a
“live” union. He is full of energy and enthusiasm, and as keenly
alive to the political as to the industrial side of the workers ’ move-
ment. “Frank” has figured on a Labor plebiscite, but has not yet
succeeded in winning his way to a candidature. When that time
comes, as no doubt it will, he will be a good representative of Labor
in politics as he is in the industrial sphere. A well-known figure on
the conferences, an out-and-out champion of the “Herald,” who has
been backed by his union every time he puts the case for the Labor
paper before his members, Frank Mclntyre worthily fills an important
post in the movement. The Drivers have been fortunate in having
men like John Gunn and Francis Mclntyre to attend to their secre-
tarial work.
W. ROWAN has been connected with the Labor Party, indus-
trially and politically, for many years. He has been a regular
attendant at annual conferences and the Council of the Party. He
was on the last plebiscite for the metropolitan area. Among the
positions held on the industrial side has been that of President of the
Port Adelaide Trades and Labor Council.
W. C. MELBOURNE, Secretary of the South Australian Branch
of the Printing Industry Employees ’ Union of Australia (the men
who produce all the papers, magazines, etc., and who perform an
important part in the industrial world), is becoming one of the
veterans of the movement. The expansion of the printing industry
has increased the membership of his union very satisfactorily, and
this, with his connection with the Federal controlling body, occupies,
most of Mr. Melbourne ’s time. He is, however, an active participant
in local industrial and political matters. He has been a plebiscite
candidate on more than one occasion, is connected with industrial
tribunals, has represented industrial organisations on cost of living
and other investigations on the Workers ’ Educational
and in this and many other ways has unostentatiously rendered very
valuable services to the whole movement.
THOMAS W. E. HALL has been a member of the Norwood
Section of the Labor Party 24 or 25 years. He subsequently went to
Western Australia, and there became active in Labor ’s interests. On
the W.A. goldfields he was a member of the A.M.A. Returning to>
his old district in this State joined up with the Hackney Local Com-
mittee, and became President of the Committee, which he represented
on the Council for several years. He has been Secretary of the
Committee for years, and is also President of the East Torrens
Electorate Committee. He has taken a prominent part in municipal
matters also, having been for years a member of the local Municipal
Council. Into everything he takes up connected with the Labor
Movement he imparts a good deal of energy and natural ability.


„f"* JL ' ■•■■■■ .■;;;;.:. : . : '
I v- v “ -*•
'[ ' ’ V - ■’ £ -, ,, .V igiM ' * “ ■>' -. .; . • !
y<
!■:: : ! ? ,/■
FRANCIS MeINTYRE.
W. C. MELBOURNE.
W. ROWAN.
THOMAS W. E. HALL


MRS. T. PRICE, widow of the late Labor Premier, Tom Price,
and mother of John Lloyd Price, M.P., one of the Party’s Vice-
Presidents, was prominent during the life of “Tom,” but has been
in retirement since.
J. S. MARNER, one of the candidates chosen for a country
district, is regarded by those who know him best as a promising
standardbearer for Labor. “Promising” in this instance is not used
in the political sense. As a practical worker in the country he knows
what is wanted and what Labor in power could supply, so that he
will not promise any more than Labor will be able to give.
WALTER LODGE is Secretary of the South Australian Branch
of the Australian Railways Union, and holds an important position
-on the Federal Executive of that organisation. Walter is one of the
*“old school” who has kept pace with the times, and sees with his
fellow-workers the great power which the railway workers of Aus-
tralia could exert if they were all bound together in one body. The
■same power is vested in all other industries and utilities, but the
workers in too many instances are slow to appreciate the strength
they possess. Mr. Lodge has a long and creditable record as an
industrialist, and does not entirely neglect the political side.
TOM KEAN is always in his place, whether it is a meeting of
his Union, of the Eight Hours Committee (of which he has been
President), of the Labor Party Council, or of the Municipal Council,
of which he has been a member. He is one of the sturdy sort who
take a defeat and fight on, not discouraged or disheartened. A con-
sistent Laborite all the year round, a regular Delegate to Conference
who speaks rarely, but always has something to say when he speaks.
M. J. KEEGAN is a “new comer” in the movement here, but
he has had considerable experience in other States, and is apparently
a keen champion of the workers 9 rights. He was on the Metropolitan
Plebiscite, and has been instrumental in directing attention to matters
like the price of gas, tramway fares, and other problems which concern
the workers.
J. FLANNERY is perhaps best known by his connection with
the A.W.U. as an Organiser. He is also a good worker for the Party,
however, and is a well-known Delegate at the Annual Conference. He
was one of the 50 or more on the Metropolitan Plebiscite.
B. S. POUND is another member who was on the recent
-Metropolitan Plebiscite. As an organiser on the industrial side he
has done good work, and on the political side it is hoped he will do
-equally good work in the future.
E. O. MATTHEWS was a candidate on the Metropolitan
Plebiscite. An active worker in his industry (Metal Workers), he is
mot yet sufficiently known in the political arena.


v y '•.<•.•.•:.
£«4 . MMmmm
«*& .wS:
MW: > w
MRS. T. PRICE.
J. S. MARKER
WALTER LODGE.
TOM KEAN


5 life p I
jjj
J. FLANNERY.
W. J. KEEGAN.
E. O. MATTHEWS.
B. S'. PImJND.


V- .ap' ■•X-.‘-!-!v^f!8 !;&»B^^aj.-
HR f MmMmmam
HHn
**" *’• '• *• VS \ |;|| I 11
mm I
Mig li Si i! I I
: fc-vj §8 i §? :g:
. . .■■ \ .••;.:" . : , ; : ■•;...:;; ; • . ; •. • ;•;....'....
’.•••. . ” .. 1 •■ ■•■••■ .■•■■ ' •: .'■■■■ ;:: ...'' .''. •'•'';. ;• : '" •-
. - I*
• : i| ;
;C' !: 4bN*v V
:> immMm
fJBSBBm
C. J. BURGE
FRANK CONDON
JAMES SC AIDES
A. P. DAVIES


G. P. BURGE is closely connected with the industrial side by
reason of his position as Secretary of the Timber Workers’ Union,
and has been actively engaged in me Courts, chiefly in Melbourne,,
where his organisation has made progress in the direction of reducing:
the hours of labor, and has been called upon to defend rights obtained
in this way.
FRANK CONDON is one of Port Adelaide’s leading industrial-
ists. In addition to being the Secretary of the Mill Employees’'
Union, he has taken a hand in every movement at the Port in the
interests of the workers. He represented the workers on the Prices.
Regulation Commission, and although recently his health compelled
him to limit his activities, he still does his share, and his success at
the recent Metropolitan Plebiscite is an indication that his work has
been appreciated. He should be an acquisition to the Parliamentary
Labor Party after the next elections.
JAMES SCALES is a stalwart Laborite best known in the
country, and particularly in the district which is responsible for the
presence of Sir Henry Barwell in Parliament (Stanley). He has been
a Labor candidate, and the day will come, it is hoped, when the benefit
of his extensive country experience will be obtained by the Party and
the State by his election as a Labor member. So far he has not
been announced as a candidate for the coming elections.
JIM CONNELL, from Mount uambier, is a Labor landmark in
that part of the State. Every Laborite who has visited the Mount,
and every Labor candidate who has stood for that district, must have
been impressed by Jim’s sincerity with regard to the Labor Party.
He has been a prominent figure at conferences, was conspicuous during
the conscription campaign, and is always ready to help the Party
along.
FRANK YOUNG, like Jim Connell, may be regarded as one of
the guardians of Labor’s interests in the South-East. At Mount
Gambier he carries on from year to year, election after election, and
no doubt both Frank and Jim will consider themselves well repaid
for their efforts wdien they see their district again represented by
Labor in the State Parliament. Judging Comrade Shepherd’s
showing at the last Federal elections, the winning of the Federal
seat by the Labor Party is well within the realm of political possi-
bility. These two stalwarts are well supported by local Laborites
whenever there is anything doing in the form of an election.
A. W. SCOTT. —Born Stirling East 1886. Member of Party at
Mannum 1908. Settled Murray Bridge 1910. Member Local Com-
mittee 1912. When “ split” came, took over the Secretaryship and
held position for four years. President Eight Hours Celebration in
1920. Selected as Labor candidate for 1924 elections.
A. P. DAVIES was a Labor candidate at the last State elections,
and subsequently ran on his own account for a by-election for the
Alexandra district.


||||^fc|^ : v ||||||
* i, -v ,; • rotfe* • _ x»:■• *
* .' •'*•’'vSk*’’ /j^%^<^8gSSOTQMwS'M8c
THE LATE W. Ml I.N'K.
THE LATE PERCY BROOKFIELD
LATE MRS. E. A. ROBERTS.
THE LATE E. H. COOMBE


W. MILNE was not spared to serve the Party very long. He put
up a good performance as a member of the Labor team for Barossa,.
and claimed that he won a seat, but the electoral authorities were
against him. He succumbed to the dreaded influenza epidemic a few
years ago.
The late MRS. E. A. ROBERTS was a great helpmate to her
husband when he represented the Party in both State and Federal
Parliaments. Unfortunately “Alf’s” death was an almost unbear-
able loss, and Mrs. Roberts did not long survive her husband.
Although PERCY BROOKFIELD was not a member of the
Party in South Australia, he was frequently here on his way to the
N.S.W. Parliament, where he represented Broken Hill as a Labor
member. He was well-known to many members of the Party, and his?
tragic death (when he was shot in attempting to capture a lunatic at
Riverton) caused a gap in Labor’s band of fearless champions.
E. H. COOMBE was for many years connected with the State-
Parliament, and eventually joined the Labor Party. He was for a
time editor of the “Herald.” It was the great strain upon his?
constitution, caused by his attitude during the anti-conscription cam-
paign. when he toured the State and wrote columns for the press,
together with the harsh treatment meted out to him by the military
authorities or the Federal Government, which no doubt hastened his?
end. He was particularly well known in the Gawler district, having
been connected with that part of the Slate most of his life. His death
was a serious loss to the whole State.
D. ROSS, a candidate on the Metropolitan Plebiscite, is a member
of the Party from whom valuable services may be expected in the-
future. There are many men in the movement who could, if they
would, do much more than they are doing at present for the only
party which wall protect and advance the interests of the workers.
A. E. PITTMAN has been one of the Party’s auditors for years.
He is Secretary of the Coachbuilders ’ and Saddlery and Leather
Workers’ Unions, and devotes most of his time to industrial matters.
Industrial activitv without equal activity in the political field cannot
be entirelv satisfactory under the existing system. Union secretaries;
should be workers and leaders in both.
E. J. WILKINS, one of the contestants in the Metropolitan-
Plebiscite. may be relied upon to do his share in the routine work at
election times. A member of the A.W.U. and a City Council em-
ployee (as a gardener), he is in close touch with the movement.
J. G. McNAMARA is first a Union Secretary and one of the most
popular men in the Trades Hall On the political side he is a staunch-
supporter of the Partw but, like many other good industrialists, it
is possible that he might infus° a little more activity in the political
activities of the Party. This is not stated in any derogatory sense.
Too many trades unionists are apt to undervalue the importance of
political effort. On the other hand, some union secretaries reply that
if they are too prominent in political affairs it may be said they are
simply “pushing for a seat in Parliament.” Mr. McNamara has-
been prominent in the Eight Hours Celebration movement for years,
and has been President of the Eight Hours Committee.


ijli
J|BB|P: .jf)'" :
"*~"—””—— 111 i^^P^^' : "
•v«w//a **'^s>Xx&I5?^
ySEvKffi jy-'«WW> ‘ J^iloflMK
-x ' ., Mf.
' % f\ -^^P
■ . ’ v
' \ \ ■
::: >»»&4&: : $S888888gg»S»»
||
«a • J- ' • •
shp?
mm
D. BOSS.
A. E. PITTMAN.
F. J. WILKINS.
•j. g. McNamara.


J. MURPHY joined the Adelaide Shearers’ Union in 1885, when
it was better known as Ives’ Union. Ives’ Union was still in
existence in 1887, when the Australian Shearers’ Union sent out its
organisers, and Comrade Murphy joined the A.S.U., which eventually
became the Australian Workers ’ Union. In 1890 the A.S.U. organised
the General Laborers’ Union, consisting• of the shed hands and general
pastoral workers. This was run in conjunction with the A.G.U.,
-although a separate organisation. During the ‘‘nineties the two
bodies were put into one and then became the A.W.U. _ He has
been a continuous member of the organisation since its inception,
and in its early stages acted as representative at various sheds. He
has been a member of the Branch Committee for oyer 20 years, and
has been Branch President for nearly the same period. He has also
occupied the position of Organiser for a long period.
H. KNEEBONE was born at Wallaroo Mines in 1876. He
joined* staff “Coolgardie Miner” and was foundation member (and
afterwards Secretary) of Typographical Society. In 1897 he was a
member of the Western Australian Workers’ Association and of the
Local Labor Party. In 1911 he was appointed Editor of the
“Herald ” In 1912 he was appointed Australian Journalist on
High Commissioner’s staff. London. In 1916 lie resigned his position
in London and returned to Adelaide to become Managing Editor,
“Herald.” In 1922 he was elected member Executive Australian
Labor Party (S.A. Branch), elected Vice-President Labor Party in
1921 and President in 1922-3. Delegate first All-Australian Con-
gress, Delegate Federal Conference Australian Labor Party.
ARCHIBALD McINNES was born in Hamilton, Scotland, in
1876. He was apprenticed to boilermaking, and served with the
Union Engineering Company. He joined the Boilermakers’ Society
in 1897 and became interested in Trade Union work. He held the
position of Assistant Secretary in the Boilermakers’ Society for 18
years, and took an active part in the formation of the present
Federation of Boilermakers. He was mainly responsible for the
inauguration of the Mortality Fund connected with that body. He
has held the position of Secretary for five years, and is also Assistant
Secretary of* the Council of the Boilermakers’ Federation, which
position he has held for nine years. He was Secretary of the Metal
Trades Federation of South Australia for a period of six years, and
worked hard for the amalgamation of the Iron Trade Unions. He
conducted the case for boilermakers in Federal Arbitration Court in
connection with the East-Wbst railway dispute successfully, and was
selected by representatives of all Unions concerned to conduct the
negotiations of their behalf at the uonterences held at Port Augusta
with the officers of the Commonwealth railways. He pioneered the
scheme of technical training now in operation for apprentices in
Government service, and drew up curriculum for a three-year course
for boilermakers. He is a member of Technical Committee of School
of Mines.
“Labor alone gives an opportunity of carrying into politics
Christian ideas. It is the only party that has begun the leal
work of peace, and can build a true League of Nations. Rev.
George E. Thompson, M.A.


SENATOR LIEUT.-COL. THE HON. JAMES VINCENT
O’LOGHLIN.
Senator J. V. CCLoghlin was born at Gumeracha on November
25, 1852. Educated at the Kapunda Classical and Commercial
Academy, subsequently engaged in wheat buying, and becoming
connected with the Adelaide Milling Co., ho became manager of
that company at Gladstone, and had been engaged with it for
several years when elected to represent the Liberal interests for
the Northern District in the Legislative Council in 1888. During
the fourteen years which Mr. O ’Loghlin served in the Legislative
Council at this time he was Chief Secretary and Minister of
Defence in the Kingston Administration for four years, and
Leader of the Council. In 1907 Mr. O’Loghlin was selected by
the South Australian Parliament to fill a vacancy in the Senate,,
but was unseated on appeal by Mr. Vardon to the Court of Dis-
puted Returns and the High Court of Australia. In 1910 he was
returned to the House of Assembly as one of the members for the
District of Flinders, but was not re-elected at the penal dissolution
in 1912. In 1913 he was elected to the seat in the Senate of the
Commonwealth Parliament, and again in 1914. He was for many
years connected with the press as editor of “The Southern
Cross. ’ y He was the first South Australian legislator to volunteer
for active service in 1915, and the only member of the Senate, as
then constituted, to join the Australian Imperial Forces. Senator
O’Loghlin was one of the victims of the Labor debacle at the
Senate election in 1919, but in 1922 was again elected to the
position he now holds.


GREGOR McGREGOR was born at Kilmun, Scotland, on
October 18, 1848. Arrived in South Australia as a young man, and
quickly became prominent in trades union circles. One of the
first to be selected by the Labor Party to contest a seat in the
Legislative Council. He was elected in May, 1894, and sat con-
tinuously until he resigned to contest a seat for the Senate of the
•Commonwealth Parliament. Elected to the Senate in 1901, and
re-elected at each succeeding election. Mr. McGregor was Presi-
dent of the United Labor Party, 1893-94; Leader of the Labor
Party in Senate in 1901, and for ten years; Vice-President of the
Executive Council, Watson Ministry, April to August, 1904; Vice-
President of the Executive Council, Eisher Ministry, November,
1908, to June, 1909; Vice-President of the Executive Council,
second Eisher Ministry, April 10, 1910, to June, 1913.
DONALD CAMPBELL was born at Robe, South Australia,
September 16, 1866. Served apprenticeship to engineering at
•Government Workshops, Adelaide; later engaged in various pur-
suits at Renmark and in the South-East. Was District Council
Clerk for a number of years, and owned and edited the Millicent
•* < Times. ” Elected to represent the District of Victoria and
Albert at the election following the dissolution of the House of
Assembly in 1906. He was re-elected in 1910, but defeated at
the election following the dissolution in 1912. In 1912 Mr. Camp-
bell was selected by the Eisher Government to represent Australia
on the Imperial Trades Commission. While in Parliament, Mr.
Campbell studied for admission as a practitioner of law, completed
his course with honours, and secured his LL.B. degree at the
Adelaide University. He now owns and edits the Bordertown
* i Chronicle. 77
THOMAS GEORGE CRUSH was born at Essex, England, 1865.
Lived for many years in the Northern Territory, and was returned
in the Labor interest on December 5, 1908, on the death of the
late Hon. V. L. Solomon. Re-elected as senior member in 1910.
His membership of the South Australian Parliament ceased at the
passing of the Northern Territory to the jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth in 1911. Died at Port Darwin, August 27, 1913.
EGERTON LEE BATCHELOR was born at Adelaide, April
10, 1865. Educated at State schools, and became a pupil teacher.
For health reasons he was subsequently apprenticed in the South
Australian Government Engineering Shop, and remained there
until elected to the House of Assembly in the Labor interest for
the District of West Adelaide, on April 15, 1893. Mr. Batchelor
held his seat continuously until he resigned in 1901 to contest a
seat for the District of Boothby in the House of Representatives
•of the Commonwealth Parliament. Successful in this, he held the
••seat continuously until his death, on October 8, 1911. Mr. Batche-
lor became Leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party at the death
of Mr. McPherson in 1897, previously to which he acted as Secre-
tary to the Party. In 1899 he joined the Holder Ministry as
Minister of Education, holding that office until his retirement from
the House of Assembly in 1901. Mr. Batchelor held office in the
Watson Commonwealth Ministry, from April August, 1904, and
iin both the Fisher Ministries, until his death in 1911.


I J
Mr. Wallis was President
of the Typographical Society
for three years, and Secre-
tary of the same body for
nearly 22 years. He lias oc-
cupied nearly everv official
position in connection with
the Trades and Labor Coun-
cil and kindred bodies, and
was Secretary of the Council
for 12 years.
THOS. SEXTON was well
known to many workers in
the metropolitan area, and
particularly at the Mile End
railway works before his
name appeared on the gen-
eral plebiscite recenty. He
has since made many more
friends, and if he perseveres
will no doubt have an oppor-
tunity of using his talents in
the interests of the workers.
FREDERICK SAMUEL
WALLIS, born at Maccles-
field, South Australia, and
served apprenticeship to
printing with the late J. H.
Lewis, and was afterwards
employed at the ■ ‘ Register ’'
as compositor until the strike
in 1888. Selected by the
Party to contest several
seats in the Legislative Coun-
cil and the House of As-
sembly, he was not successful
until 1907, when on March
2nd of that year he was re-
turned to the former Cham-
ber for the Central District.
From March 27 to June 5,
1909, he held the offices of
Chief Secretary and Minister
of Industry in the Price Ad-
ministration, and from June
3, 1910, to February 17,
1912, he was Chief Secretary
in the Verran Administra-
tion, and Deputy-Chairman
of the Parliamentary Labor
Party.


Mr. W. E. ERRINGTON
has for many years been
a staunch supporter of the
Party at Wallaroo, and has
represented it in the
Mayoral chair of the town
in which he is an honored
citizen.
GEOKGE A. CAKTEK is
Secretary of an industrial
union made up of men and
women workers who stitch,,
stitch, stitch, and the in-
dustrial side keeps him
busy. At the same time
he is a consistent worker
for the Party.


•e
WALTER CLOUGH is
one of the veterans in the
movement. He recalls
eaiiy-day incidents con-
nected with the Party, and
his years of experience
must have been of great
benefit to many younger
workers in the movement.
There are many (fine sup-
porters of the Party
throughout the country dis-
tricts. Tlwo names are
well known dn the North,
those of -Messrs. Hat Kelly
and A. W. Lindblom. Mr.
Kelly was for a time Chair-
man qf the Hookina Local
Committee, and although
now a retired farmer in the
town, he is a keen and con-
sistent supporter of the
Party, LBiilil” Lindblom is
well known from Port Aug-
usta to Oodnadatta as a
stalwart Laborite. He left
the North to reside further
,south, but after twelve
months’ retirement return-
ed to the Newcastle district
and resides at Carrleton,
P. J. RYAN is one of
Port Adelaide’s sturdy
fighters for Labor. He has
been connected with the in-
dustrial side of the move-
ment for years, filling many
positions, including that of
President of the Port
Adelaide Trades and Labor
Council.
J. A. SOUTH WIOOD was
born at Kadina. A com-
positor by trade, he was
one of the original members
of the _ Barrier Typographi-
cal Society. He served Kad-
ina as Councillor and May-
or. In 191 A he was returned
to Parliament as the Labor
representative for the Wal-
laroo District, and Subse-
quently represented East
Torrens. He is secretary of
the Theatrical Employes,
Association.


|i||
% .-SXv'-X!. .. ' .
•* W- :
;||| : "^p;|
WALTER MOOD was
born in Yorkshire, Eng-
land, in 1885. Served ap-
prenticeship to butchering
trade at Harrogate. Went
to Canada. Worked in
mining and lumber camps
in that Dominion and in
Alaska and the Yukon, also
in the principal meat-
packing works in the
United States of America.
Worked on trading boats
in the South Seas. First
came to Australia in 1907;
joined the S.A. Branch of
the Australasian Meat In-
dustry Employees’ Union
in 1908; appointed Or-
ganiser in 1916, and
Secretary in 1918; member
of Federal Council since
1916; Federal President
from 1921 to 1923; now
Yice-P re si d e nt. Rep re sent s
Branch on A.L.P. Council
and Trades and Labor
Council. He supports
industrial unionism as
against ‘ ‘obsolete trades
unionism,” and advocates
One Big Union. Critical
of political methods, believing that the success of the political wing
of the Labor movement depends upon the class consciousness and
the solid organisation of the industrial wing. He has refused
nomination on A.L.P. plebiscites several times, as political work
would interfere with union activities. He thinks Labor in Austra-
lia would be more progressive and solid were more tolerance shown
by those in the movement holding conflicting opinions. The
Labor Party should be big and broad enough to hold all those who
have at heart the welfare of the working class, no matter to what
school of thought they subscribe.
T. J. D. BARKER, one of the Party’s
Auditors, is also Vice-President of the
A.G.W.A.. He is a regular attendant at Con-
ference and Council as a Delegate from the
organisation of which he is a Vice-President.


| |
:;-^88xSS®8xS8fi8»S:
L. A". HUNKIN, brother
of Leslie C. llunkin (Mem-
ber for East Torrens), has
been an industrialist for
years connected with the
furniture trade. He was on
the Metropolitan Plebiscite
(for the Legislative Coun-
cil).
L'EQST iSAMPSOiX hails from
Moonta, and has been con-
nected with the workers
and the Workers’ (Move-
ment all his life. iHe is
Secretary of a section of
the Enginedrivers, and ds
also (Secretary of the Trades
Hall. A recent illness near-
ly put tan end to iLen’s
■career, he has completely
recovered, and it is hoped
he will he able to devote
many years to the Labor
Movement, industrially and
politically.
J. D. JONAS is one
of Labor’s leading workers
at Port Adelaide. In ad-
dition to his Secretarial
duties as a Union official,
he is Secretary of the Port
Adelaide Trades and Labor
Council and of the Port
Adelaide Electorate Com-
mittee. He is an untiring
worker in Labor’s cause.
No account of Labor’s re-
cord an tb ts_ State would be
idomplelte without reference
to the years of isitrenuous
self-sacrificing work on be-
half of the iParty by Mrs.
A. GRAY (Unley), Mrs.
RADFORD (Adelaide), Mrs.
BLOCK. (Norwood), and
Airs. GILCHRIST (Port
Adelaide). They have set
fine example to other
younger women (and men)
an the movement.


T. E. KNUCKEY was a candidate for a
country district at one election, although he
has not been prominent for some time.
TOM GLUYAS, one of
Labor’s team in the Legis-
lative Council, has been a
lifelong unionist, and since
members there also help to
do it, they might decide to
his election to the Upper
House has become one of
the best known of the
Labor members. His broad
frame and equally broad
smile, happy temperament,
and boundless optimism
make him popular with all
sections. He knows by
actual experience the hard
track over which the
workers travel, and does
his best to make it as
smooth as possible. In
Queensland, where the
Labor Party abolished the
useless Second Chamber,
the Labor members of that
House who effected their
own political extinction (as
members of that Chamber)
formed what was called
the Suicide Club. When
Labor in this State is able
to abolish the Legislative
Council, too, and the Labor
S. McHUGH. Bom 1892. Has been a.
member of the Labor Party since he was IT
years of age. Secretary, Quorn Local Com-
mittee, 1917. On returning from the war was
re-elected Secretary in 1919. Eepresented
Quorn at Labor Conferences in 1920 and 1922„
Contested Northern Division of Legislaitve
Council in 1921. Selected to contest Burra
District at 1924 elections.
do as their Queensland comrades did, and “Tom” Gluyas would
be a very cheery president of such a club. “Tom” stands for the
abolition of the Legislative Council, but is a firm advocate of get-
ting the very best possible out of this life.


IV
Z'*'
THOMAS PRICE was born at Brymbo, North Wales, January
19, 1852. His parents settled in Liverpool twelve months after
Iris birth, and his childhood and early manhood were spent in that
city. Educated at St. George’s Church of England School, and
•afterwards served apprenticeship to stone cutting. Came to South
Australia in May, 1883: Worked at his trade until appointed clerk
of works over buildings in connection with the Government Rail-
way Workshops at Islington in 1891. Elected to Parliament as a
Labor member for the District of Sturt in 1893. He continued to
represent it, with the District of East Torrens attached, until he
<lied on May 31, 1909; having also occupied the office of Premier,
Minister of Education, and Commissioner of Public Works from
July, 1905. Mr. Price was a member of the Order of Reehabites,
and had occupied the highest offices in the Order. For many years
he was a lay preacher in connection with the Methodist Church.
He took a deep interest in all questions affecting the education of
the young, and was an enthusiastic supporter of literary societies.
Mr. Price was first Secretary, and subsequently President, of the
Stonecutters’ Union, and held many offices in connection with the
U.L.P.


ERNEST ALFRED ROBERTS was born in London, educated
in Guernsey, and went to sea for four years before arriving in
Australia in 1886. First going to Queensland, he eventually
settled at Port Pirie, in South Australia, where he worked on the-
wharves for a number of years before standing for Parliament.
He first contested the District of Gladstone in 1893, but was not
successful. At the general election in 1896 he was elected for the*
District of Stanley, and continued to represent it until 1902. In
1905 Mr. Roberts was elected to represent the District of Ade-
laide in the House of Assembly, and held the seat continuously
until he resigned in 1908 to contest the same district for th&
House of Representatives in the Commonwealth Parliament, on
the death of the Right Hon. C. C. Kingston, P.C. He represented
the District of Adelaide until his tragic death on December 2*.
1913. Mr. Roberts enjoyed the confidence of his Party and com-
rades to such a degree that, within three years of election to the-
Commonwealth Parliament, he was appointed an Honorary Minister
in the Fisher Government. He held many offices in connection
with the Labor Movement, amongst others that of Vice-President
and subsequently President of the U.L.P. He was also for some
years editor of “The Weekly Herald.”
The late Hon. E. L. W. KLAUER, M.L.C., was born at
Adelaide, South Australia, and educated at public school. Served
apprenticeship as engineer at S.A. Government Workshops. Held
office as Chairman, Adelaide Branch S.A. Railways Association,.
1897; President, Adelaide Chemical Fertilizers 7 Union, 1911; Pre-
sident, Australasian Society of Engineers, Adelaide Branch, 1909;
Secretary, Australasian Society Engineers, Adelaide Branch, 1911;
President, Federal Council, Australasian Engineers, 1913; Presi-
dent, S.A. Musicians 7 Union, 1912 and 1913; Vice-President, S.A.
Labor Party, 1909 and 1910; President, S.A. Labor Party, 1911.
Served the town of Thebarton four years as Councillor and two
years at Alderman. Elected to the Legislative Council, January r
1912. Died 1915.
WILLIAM RUSSELL was born at Glassford, Scotland, Octo-
ber 20, 1842, educated at his native place, and later followed
agricultural pursuits. Arrived in South Australia in 1886, and
immediately began farming at Alma Plains. Latre, when settled
at Caltowie, Mr. Russell served five years in the District Council,
and subsequently he was Chairman of the Carrieton District Conn-
cli for three years. In 1893 Mr. Russell successfully contested an
election for the District of Flinders in the House of Assembly as
an advanced Liberal, and in 1894 he was equally successful in an
election for the North-Eastern District in the Legislative Council.
Retaining that seat for six years, he was defeated at the general
election. In 1901 he succeeded to the seat in the House of
Assembly for the District of Burra, vacated by the late Sir
Frederick Holder, on that gentleman’s removal to the Common-
wealth Parliament. Two years later he tried again to enter the
Legislative Council, but was defeated, and in 1904 he was again
defeated when standing in the Labor interest for the District of
Burra. In 1906 Mr. Russell was returned in the Labor interest
to the Senate of the Commonwealth Parliament, and died in
harness on June 28, 1912.


ALFRED E. WINTER was born at Macclesfield, South Aus-
tralia, where his father was schoolmaster. Educated at public
schools, and afterwards followed commercial pursuits, ultimately
settling in Kadina, where in 1906 he was selected to contest the
District of Wallaroo for the House of Assembly. Successful on
that occasion and at the succeeding general election. He deter-
mined not to seek re-election after the dissolution in 1912.
FRANCIS JOHN HOURIGAN, born in Limerick, Ireland,
1852. Arrived in South Australia with his parents in 1859. Served
apprenticeship as tanners’ beamsman with the late Mr. John
Dench, at Hindmarsh, and continued to work there until his elec-
tion to the House of Assembly for the District of West Torrens in
1893. Mr. Hourigan was successful in retaining his seat at each
subsequent election, and died, practically at his post in Parliament,
on December 1, 1901.
J. Z. SELLAR was born at Yauxhall, England, on November
4, 1830, and arrived in South Australia in 1849. Worked at the
Burra Mines as a mechanic for some years, but went to Victoria
during the gold rush in 1852. Being successful there, he returned
to South Australia and established a wholesale and retail tea
business, which he continued for forty-four years. Was a true
democrat from his early manhood; much interested in public affairs,
and a prolific writer to the press. Associated with the Labor
Movement in South Australia from its earliest stages. Founder
and first President of the Adelaide Democratic Club; Secretary
and Committeeman of “The Herald” Newspaper Company; Coun-
cillor for Young Ward in the City Council for many years.
Elected to the South Australian Parliament as a member for the
House of Assembly, 1905.
JAMES HUTCHISON was born at Aberdeen, Scotland, April
20, 1859. Learned the trade of printer, came to South Australia
in 1885, and worked at his trade until elected to Parliament on
January 2, 1898, as member for the District of East Adelaide, in
succession to the late Mr. McPherson, at the death of that gentle-
man. Mr. Hutchison was defeated at a subsequent election, but
was returned to represent the District of Hindmarsh in the House
of Representatives of the Commonwealth Parliament in 1902. He
died in Melbourne during the sitting of Parliament, on December
6, 1900. Mr. Hutchison filled many offices in connection with the
U.L.P., and was editor of “The Herald” for some years, when it
was issued as a weekly paper.
W. H. CARPENTER was born at Swindon, England, April 5,
1863. Selected by the Labor Party to contest the old District of
Encounter Bay in 1896, and was successful in winning a seat*
re-elected in 1899, but defeated in 1902 on the re-arrangement of
districts. Mr. Carpenter subsequently sat for a Western Aus-
tralian constituency in the Commonwealth Parliament in the
Labor interest.


The late Hon. DAVID JELLEY, M.L.C., was born in Penn-
sylvania, U.S.A., on January 16, 1872. He arrived in South Aus-
tralia in 1890, and joined the Labor Party in 1891. He was Pre-
sident of the Gawler Ironmoulders ’ Society in 1893; President,
Trades and Labor Council, Adelaide, 1903; Vice-President, Eight
Hours * Celebration Union, 1906-7; and Past President Iron and
Brass Moulders ? Union of S.A. Mr. Jelley represented the Central
District in the Legislative Council, October 20, 1906. Died Janu-
ary 27, 1907.
JAMES ABEL McPHERSON, born at Aberdeen, Scotland, on
January 25, 1860. Arrived in Australia in 1882. He was elected
a delegate of the Typographical Society to the Trades and Labor
Council. Eor two years he was President of the Typographical
Society, and Secretary, Trades Hall Building Committee; 1886,
Secretary, Trades and Labor Council; 1890, first Secretary, United
Labor Party; 1891, Secretary, United Labor Party Organising
Committee. He was elected to Parliament at a by-election for
East Adelaide in 1892, and was the first Leader of the Parlia-
mentary Labor Party, in 1893. He was also Chairman of the
Co-operative Printing and Publishing Works, and the first Secre-
tary of the Working AVomen’s Trades Union. Mr. McPherson died
on December 13, 1897.
COMRADE E. T.
KEANE, who died as the
result of an accident during
the year, Avas a lifelong
Labor stalwart. In muni-
cipal, as well as in indus-
trial and political, matters
he was always ready to do
his share of the Avork on
behalf of the Party, and his
death robbed Labor of a
fine worker. His comrades
and others, recognising his
services in the cause of
Labor, took the practical
course of expressing that
recognition by raising a
substantial sum to help the
AAudoAv and family to bear
the burden which the sud-
den loss of a good husband
and father means to a
worker’s family.


INDEX
Page
T. J. D. Barker 106
E. L. Batchelor 102
F. W. Birrell, M.P 67
J. Black 71
A. J. Blackwell 79
P. Brookfield 98
G. P. Burge 96
‘‘Tom’’ Butterfield 64
H. R. Buxton 79
D. Campbell 102
W. H. Carpenter 11l
J. Carr, M.L.C 72
G. A. Carter 104
J. Cavanagh 74
M, Charlton 54
W. Clough 105
M. Collaton 74
Commonwealth Referenda . 46—48
F. Condon 96
J. Connell 96
G. Cook 72
E. H. Coombe 98
T. G. Crush 102
J. J. Daly 71
A. P. Davies 96
Delegates at A.L.P. Conference,
Brisbane 56—57
W. J. Denny 62
A. A. Edwards 65
T. Edwards 75
W. E. Errington 104
Federal Elections 45
Federal Parliament . . . . 18—21
Federal Platforms 23—24
Federal Platform and Consti-
tution 25—28
L E. Fenton 77
Hon. Andrew Fisher, P.C. . . 51
J. C. Fitzgerald 79
J. J. Flaherty 65
J, Flannery 92
J. M. Gabb, M.H.R , ?5
H. J. George |sflo7B
E. George
T. Gluyas W. . 108
Charles L. Gray 68
T. W. Grealy 70
F. Groves 76
John Gunn 55
Page
Fred C. Hahn 61
T. W. E. Hall 90
Miss E. R. Hanretty 60
W. Harvey, M.P 89
A. R. G. Hawke 89
H. S. B. Hill 81
L. L. Hill 79
A. A. (Bert) Hoare 62
L. A. Hopkins 70
F. J. Hourigan 11l
T. P. Howard 80
L. C, Hunkin 78
L. Y. Hunkin 107
J. Hunter 84
James Hutchison 8
J. Hutchison ill
Introduction 10—16
The late Hon. D, Jelley,
M.L.C 112
J. Jelley, M.L.C 77
J. D. Jonas 107
T. Kean 92
E. T. Keane 112
W. J. Keegan 92
A, A. Kirkpatrick, M.L.C. . . 59
The late Hon. E. L. W. Klauer,
M.L.C 110
H. Kneebone 58
H. Kneebone . 100
T. R. Knuckey 108
A. W. Lacey, M.H.R 66
W. Lodge 92
F. W. Lundie 71
T. Lyons 81
N. J. O. Makin, M.H.R 62
J. S. Marner 92
F. T. Martin 74
E. O. Matthews 92
W. C. Melbourne 90
9B
Miss Mitchell* 69
Monument of- the late A. E.
Roberts ..1 7
W. Mood . . 1 106
Municipal and District Council
Platform . , 41
J. Murphy . 100
‘‘Mick” Murphy 70


Page
A. McArthur 72
F. McCabe 83
Ramsay McDonald 49
G. McGregor 102
C. S. McHugh 63,,
S. McHugh 108 A
A, Mclnnes 100
J. Mclnnes, M.P 72
F. Mclntyre 90
J. G. McNamara 98‘
J. A. McPherson 8
J. A. McPherson 112
F. J. Nieass . . . . 76
S. W, ,o’Flaherty 66
M. R. O’Halloran 64
Hen. J. V. , O’Loghlin . . . , 101
E. Parham . , . . 81
Past Presidents of the Labor
Party . . .’. 60
H. Q. J. Pearce 68
J. N. Pedler. M.P 73
‘‘Josh’’ Pedlar 81
A. E. Pittman 98
B. S. Pound 92
Preface I—4
J. L. Price. M.P 83
Mrs. T. Price 92
T. Price 109
A. G. Rankin 63
R. S. Richards, M.P 59
A. G. Roberts 87
The late Mrs. E. A. Roberts . 98
E A. Roberts 110
A. Robertson 65
Mrs. Robertson 73
D. Ross 98
W, Rowan , . . ; . 90
W. Russell 110
P. J. Ryan 105
The late Hon. T. J. Ryan , . 53
Page
L. Sampson 107
J. Scales 96
A. W. Scott 96
J. Z. Sellar 11l
, T. Sexton 103
' J. W. Sharley 86
E. J. Shepherd 77
E. W. Slaven 76
A. E. Smith 76
Phillip Snowden, M.P 50
Solidarity and Virility .... 9
J. A. Southwood 105
F. Sparshott 87
F. M. Standish 86
F. Stamford 82
State Elections. 1921 44
State Labor Platforms . . . . 29—40
J. E. Stephens 67
E. L. Stokes 82
Ten Reasons 22
Miss Nydia Thomson 73
A. A. J. Tonkin 65
The late Frank G. Tudor , . . . 52
S. J. Verran 78
F. S. Wallis . . 103
Frederick F. Ward 64
W. Wedd 5
What Labor Has Done . . . . 17
What the Labor Party has
Done 42—43
D. White 85
S. R. Whitford 88
F. J. Wilkins 98
A. E. Winter 11l
L. Wilcott 74
W. Wood 74
J. Woods 85
M. B. Woods 75
A. G. Wordley 69
Workers’ Memorial Pt. Adelaide 6
G. E. Yates 63
F, Young . . 96


Hi J||| | W
||| ' -' " t C * jifijifji^frOijiffl^
||;| ..^*.
.. :-XM‘*~ '•'* ~— ™y-:v^^
- r!^ • is^ljj^B^SAl *• f*y*.
f : i — |Bg Br ; | || JfiL H gpi||« ■pHK^^■
m%im$?' y%@m%%& : ... *«;, -~ *wf>SEi.. |s|ps|sf fflWfMf _ rnKTraWr - - !,■■' .flf - WhH HffiHB WXW 5
BsL jsw||| Sp!:v| - v Jyttr il&§K aBBHt nB 9k sF S iSk J||||B - j <•■• jH B.—•“JhBbJ’
:• lilpii&M mSStt/r "■ * iBBBliP * -#; «|i|l *. JB
* WMMmm* - • |pBi»l .. m 1 lKBHI^ li I
■;v w, 'v ' W v, * : *!». ,M :^^^n3tjlMiMB: Jm%y j k, -]g JHHa «
iHr w« ' -■ x.t ..i I
I .JBL <- «li ;;::t j ?:■ ...:<» ■ ,]| Mlilg.. i" wilf iSiii (T i • inMBi i(w wr IllTMF IT if 1M1 * *• MSBBiSsSm I
Some of the Delegates at the 1923 Conference of the Labor Party
i*itOWT HOW (from left .» iigiit; H. J. George, W. L. 'iuoai,son, M. Cox, N. Spry, C. Smith, 11, .1. Jones, T. D. J. Barker, E. J. Stephens, c. wl«l*pi«t, F. J. Molutyre, F. Owens, W. r. Clayton, W. Bailey, H. X. Hansford J. L. Council P. Grafter W Polkinghornc E Forbes
SECOND ROW-Miss Hauretty, N. Makin, H. i£iny, T.“ Mrs/ J.'T' Walsl GUnD ’ Labor Party), «. Kneebone, (Present), J. L. Pnce (Vice President), V S. Richards (Vice President),
THIRD ROW—IA. Lacey, M. J. Gabb, M. J. Murphy, E. H. Griffiths F. Hahn, s] R. Whitford, J. Pedier, V. W. Birrell, J. Keegan, W. Parker, T. Kean, j. Oittmge, J. Duckford, J. V, O'Log hlin, W. J, Buttery, J. C. Lockhart, J. Stock ie A A Angell W G Clough - O'Connor
R. Willis, F. StaiKiish, J. Jelley, M. J. Stanley. ’ v
FOURTH ROW—J. D. Jonas, W. Haggerty, R, Gallagher, J. Isabell, J Bayes, W, J. Parkinson, E. Bell, F. J. Walsh, J. Mitchell, J. Mclnnes, J. Scales, J. (Hunter, J. McNamara, R, J. Black, J. M. Connell, W. Harvey,
FIFTH ROW—E. E, George, T. D. Whitford, P. Ryan, J Hilditoh, E. J, Barnes, P. Killoran, A. McArthur (Executive), A. G. Roberts, A, 0, Flicker, A, E. Cook, T. R. Smith, A, W. Dadsworth, J. Flannery, J, B. Pollard.
SIXTH ROW B, Kearney, L.Hopkins, T. Sexton, B. S. Pound, A, J, Blackwell, M. J, O’Halloran, T. H. Hindmarsh, &, McHugh, F. Staniford, M. B. Woods, W. J. Williams, G. (H. Sharpe. BACK ROW A. A Davies J Kern


National Library of Australia Copy B |
NLA 143
I ip 1
_ nrniihiiirln
~ „ NATIONAL
Uate JJue library of Australia
- 9 JAN ZUi4 I
HJ \7W'/vo$JL H-
Yia*.
1 s * 1
—
1 UbLU I IN
* COPYRIGHT ACT.
■
3 1508 00667376 3


Che Daily BeraM
PRINTERS
GRENFELL STREET
ADELAIDE
