

WORKMAN SOCIAL REFORM SERIES.
Third Edition. Price, One Penny.
LABOR IN POLITICS.
THE HEW SOUTH WALES LABOR PARTY;
What It Did and What It Prevented.
(BY GEORGE BLACK.)
Tr ; HAVE not sat down to pen an apology
for my political self, nor for the party
to which I belong. Like all other
parties, it has blundered (if we were perfect
we wjJuld not be representative), but that
none 'of our errors have been of such
magnitude as to call for our extermina-
liou, an an entity from politics is capable
of proof I use the word “entity” be-
cause I have reason to believe that the bulk
of the Labor members would be returned at
the next general election were they cowardly
or unprincipled enough to secede into th
ranks of the factions now wrangling to
and retain the sugar-barrel of office. Clearly,
Labor must maintain its isolation on the
cross benches, until it has forced the Tories
on both sides to coalesce. Therefore, Labor
members at next general election must again
pledge themselves to neutrality.
I write chiefly in defence. If time and
space permitted, I would devote more atten-
tion to attack, for it seems to me that of late
Labor in politics has not been sufficiently
aggressive. We have passively allowed all
the blame for wasted time and other Parlia-
mentary shortcomings to begrime our raiment
without attempting to expose the really
guilty, or to confute the biased and unjus
mud-slingers of the daily press, conveniently
blind to the errors of the plutocrats, and
always ready to suppress or distort democrati
speeches. * From the first, more prone to
misrepresent than to report, when most
damage can be done by silence, these holders
of the people’s ear know how to say nothing
Over and over again have the best speeches
of a debate been dismissed, because of their
source, with a curt, “ Mr So-and-so also
spoke,” or, “after further discussion, the
motion was, &c.” Democracy has long had
full and free expression on the platform, of
late its power has been extended to Parlia-
ment, but the voice of the people will never
truly be the voice of God until the press-gag
is taken from its lips. The people’s heart is
warm, their brain is clear, their lungs are
sound, but their voice is'faltering, its tones
are muffled, its language inarticulate, because
the press medium of communication is anta-
gonistic and unjust. Nor will the voice of
those who speak on behalf of the people bo
fairly and fully heard until the barriers
erected by class journalism are hewn down.
When the trinity of representation—Parlia-
ment, Platform, and Press—is complete, then
the claims of the Disinherited will have some
chance of being attended to ! Now,
Only the very silly and extremely dis-
honest will venture to assert that Labor
should not be “directly” represented. We
are continually told by Editor Curnow of the
privately-owned Herald , Editor Brient, of
the shindy kit-seized Telegraph , “ Koko ”
Epps, of the National Ass., George Pile,
burst-boom auctioneer, John Bergan, of the
one-raan-and-a-boy rope factory, and W. E.
Abbott, the rejected and green-eyed monster
of the Upper Hunter, “ that the failure of
Labor party is occasioned by the fact that it
represents only a section of the community.”
Leaving my readers to sort out at will these
accusers, under the qualifying heads of
“ very stupid,” and “ extremely dishonest,”
while denying the allegation of total failure,
I assert that, even if the “class repre


ting the working-classes to a share in the
representation. A great many ideas, a great
many feelings have gathered among artisans
—a peculiarly intellectual life has sprung up
among them. They believe that they have
interests which are misconceived or neglected;
that they know something which others do
not know ; that the thoughts of Parliament
are not as their thoughts. They ought to be
allowed to try to convince Parliament; their
notions ought to be stated as those of other
classes are stated ; their advocates should be
heard as other people’s advocates are heard.
. . . As long as a great class, con-
gregated in political localities, and known to
have political thoughts and wishes, is without
notorious and palpable advocates in Parlia-
ment, we may prove on paper that our repre-
sentation is adequate, but the world will not
believe it. ... It is vain to demon-
strate that the working-classes have no
grievances: that the middle-classes have done
all possible for them, and so on, with a crowd
of arguments which I need not repeat, for
the newspapers keep them in type, and we
know them by heart. But so long as there
are no evident, incessant representatives to
speak the wants of artisans, there will be a
diffused dissatisfaction. Everybody must
say now, “ our representative system must
be imperfect, for an immense class has no
members to speak for it.’ . . . . The
sentation ” description be fair, that it con-
tains nothing that we need be ashamed of.
We were elected as a protest against purely
class representation by that section of the
community on which all the others are
built up, in order that barbarous laws might
be repealed ; in order that the “jobs,” by
means of which the people’s rights and terri-
tory were yearly circumscribed, might be
exposed and defeated; in order that mea-
sures might be passed for the protection of
human life, as well as of private property,
and to compel strabismussed governments to
cease aggregating huge estates by land alien-
ation, while building gaols for the confine-
ment of men made criminal by the cruel con-
ditions of a class-ruled society.
Admitting that we have partially failed
our failure is by no means due to the weak-
ness of our cause. It is due partly to the
fact that we are not sufficiently numerous,
but chiefly to circumstances over which we
have no control, that is, an illegally-govern-
ing force altogether outside the arena of our
operations and influence. As to the paucity
of our numbers—it being admitted that Par-
i ament can only only be deemed complete
v. hen representation is general and voting on
an equality, then it must be conceded that as
the wage-earners, and those whose interests
are indissolubly bound up with theirs, con-
stitute 80 per cent, of the community, that
Labor cannot be fairly represented with
less than 112 out of 141 members. Since the
secession of Sheldon, we have numbered
thirty-one.
Year after year, the daily papers have sat
tamely by, without a word of protest, while
lawyers introduced measures to make it more
difficult to become a member of that close
corporation, and to increase the cost of liti-
gation. They have quietly seen landlords
log-roll through laws which placed tenants
more completely at their mercy ; merchants
and manufacturers legislating for their own
aggrandisement, owners of barren acres
voting for unpayable railways, to increase
th' value of their property, and charging the
state that thus enriched them £25 an acre for
the use of land that had recently cost 20s an
acre. Only the other day, they witnessed in
silence a Ministry, largely composed of bank-
shareholders, introduce a measure which
made the State responsible for the solvency
of a number of insolvent banking institu-
tions. In they saw the personally-
interestt d on both sides of the House unite to
make this measure law. and yet no word was
said against “ Class Legislation.” It was
one of the strong points in the American Con-
stitution—the work of Franklin, Jefferson,
Washington, Paine, and other noble men—
that no bank-Jirector, nor holder of bank-
stock, should sit in either branch of the
legislature, but in New South Wales, bank-
directors and bank shareholders can control
the legislature for their own selfish ends, and,
in place of condemnation, the class-animated
papers praise their patriotism, while the
leading spirit is testimonialised by the chief
participants in the robbery. In short, the
“ governing classes ” —2O per cent, of the
community—might go on till doomsday,
legislating for their own benefit, and the
Telegraph , et hoc genus omne would find no
words of condemnation. But no sooner did
the too long voiceless multitude (80 per cent,
of the whole population), open their lips in
Parliament, than a shriek of execration went
up from every boodle-governed, pence-grab-
bing organ professing to be representative of
“ the respectable portion of society.” It was
right and proper that 20 per cent, should rule
80 per cent., but subversive of law and order
that the latter should a ttempt to assist the for-
mer to govern. Yes, we represent a class—a
class so great that its woes and wrongs, aspira-
tions and needs, rights and demands, are those
of all humanity. It refuses longer to be trod-
den on and robbed in silence. The Labor
party represents its protest.
Says Walter Bagehot, a correct and care-
ful writer on Constitutionalism, whom no
Conservative, however ignorant, would accuse
of being an agitator or a Socialist:—“ Par-
liament should know what each section in
the nation thinks before it gives the national
decision. This is the true reason tor admit-
way to stop the complaint that artisans have


no members ib to give them members—to
create a body of representatives, chosen by
artisans, believing, as Mr Carlyle would say,
‘ that, artisanism is the one thing needful.’ ”
To quote from a very different source, one of
the American Knights of Labor states that:
—“ Labor has never assumed governmental
control because it believed its cause just and
its means of securing justice adequate. The
cause remains just, but the means have
failed. A political party, organised for the
express and specific purpose of permanently
settling the difficulties existing between
capital and Labor, without any alliances or
entanglements with any other party, will not
only be certain of success, but will be of in-
estimable benefit to peace and social per-
petuity.”
Such arguments will fall dully on the ear
of the Fat Man and the greasy rags that
champion him. The latter will never bo
accessible to reason, will always uphold the
rights of properly against the rights of human
life , until the publication of a Labor-owned
daily compels the use of more circumspection
in the interests of a falling circulation.
So far I have dealt only with attacks from
the outside: attacks have been made from
within. The conceited and ignoiaut—an-
noyed possibly at not being personally selec-
ted to represent labor—denounced our apathy
and cowardice. They have bragged that, if
sent to Parliament, they would have achieved
more than have all the Labor members com-
bined. Having heard several small and dis-
jointed utterances from these ill-ballasted boas-
ters, I feel confident that not one of the pre-
sent Labor members has shown such a terrible
disproportion between his personal valuation
of his qualifications and that set on them by
the House as would have fallen to the lot ot
these critics had they been returned. It is
easy for t he irresponsible to make vague charges
and strong assertions out of doors. In Par-
liament it is necessary to create opportunities.
That difficulty got over, the denunciator is
confined within narrow limits by the rules of
debate and, finally, if his charges be not sub-
stantiated by facts, they will be listened to
with scant attention and doubtless forgotten
ere he has ceased to speak. Nothing would so
speedily let the gas out of these cock-sure
critics as to be pulled up a dozen times inside
ten minutes on “ points of order ” or by the
Speaker, whilst a notice to discontinue speak-
ing would probably reduce them to their
proper political level in brief space. As
Holyoake puts it, the citizen who thinks he
knows everything from the beginning and
previously, will grow pale in Parliament with
dying purpose on discovering how slowly the
mills of the gods grind—when he turns the
wheels. - .
We art also charged with “ living on the
game.” Possibly certain Labor members
never before earned £5 16s per week —to be
fairly exact as to amount. It is just as true
that no Labor member had ever before so
many calls on his weekly wage. The expen-
diture for stamps, telegrams ; expenses of all
night sittings ; donations to charitable insti-
tutions, “ society ” picnics, concerts and
“ socials ” for the relief of the suffering and
the indigent; subscriptions to football, row-
ing, cricket and other clubs ; the daily calls
from widow and orphan ; the hourly appeals
for monetary aid from the man who “ hasn’t
slept in a bed for a week and hasn’t had a
meal lor twenty-four hours ; ” are apt to run
away with half the total sum. That is, unless
the man thus besieged be as hard as
flint and callous as a bank-director. This
charge of “ living on the game ” was never
heard until Labor members got into Parlia-
ment, and would not have been heard so often
since if they had swallowed the baits of the
“ right-thinking persons ” who pull the
wires of the other parties. Now we are told
that it might have been right to pay the
rich, but is decidedly wrong to pay poor
representatives, and so, after two years’ trial
of a Parliament elected on payment of mem-
bers, it is pronounced a failure for not achiev-
ing all that forty years of the gratis system has
left undone. The gratis system is responsib'j
for the lawyer who makes Parliament a
machine to advertise hia business and collect
his debts; for the man who has used it to
get the information that has enabled him to
dummy all the best land in the country ; for
the men who used filthy language to each
other across the table of the House, and who
fought on the floor of the Assembly, in the
lobby and in the gutter outside; for the
expelled larrikin; the self-convicted ‘‘drunken
liar ” and the gentleman who chews tumblers
up in private bars with his teeth ; for the
crowd who used public money to improve
their own estates; for the legislator who
quarters all his poor relations and his small
creditors on the public service; and the
“jobber” who allows the Government to
resume his land and charges them 600 p( r
cent, above even its boom value for resump-
tions. All these things went on during
many years and no paper, save the Bulletin ,
objected, but Oh ! what a difference when a
number of men were elected who didn’t seek
office, who showed their disinterestedness by
refusing seats on the Public Works Commit-
tee, who never wasted time by moving motions
of censure or trying to engineer political jobs
through the House. They were at once
denounced because they took State pay for
their i ervices, while the other crowd who also
took pay, and in addition paid themselves by
the promotion of monstrous public swindles,
were never mentioned. It is wrong to be
poor, live within your income, and pay your
debts ; right to seem rich, live beyond your
means, and pay nobody. Therefore, the
Labor member is brayed at by the National
Ass. and flouted by the Employers’ Union,
while Parkes and Dibbs with a host of others
are testimonialised.


Hero, by the way, I may refer to the
charge of Epps and Co., that it was through
the dread of a general election on the part of
Labor members (they make no distinction
between the many who voted for dissolutions
and the few who didn’t) that the country
hasn't been appealed to before now. I have
no hesitation in styling this a deliberate lie,
and want to know why the National Associa-
tion has not denounced Wilkinson of Balran-
ald (one of its members and a pronounced
freetrader) who by his vote and his abstention
from voting assisted to save the Government
on the occasion of the Broken Hill and Parkes
motions of censure. I might also enquire
why “Koko” Epps has refrained fromattack-
ing Messrs. Booth, H. H. Brown, E. G.
Brown, Gillies, Want and others, elected as
freetraders, whose votes absolutely saved the
Dibbs Government from defeat and dissolu-
tion on several occasions ? Everyone knows
why they are not thus attacked and why Labor
members are. It is simply because the politi-
cal behaviour of the latter throughout has
been so irreproachable that charges against
them had to be manufactured.
That we split is undeniable, and it would
be sheer hypocrisy to deny that a similar split
exists outside. (We had evidence of it when
Mayor Manning was returned for South
Sydney ) Labor members would be more
than human if they could remain united when
these who returned them are divided. To-day
we are told that Sectariani-m is dead in New
South Wales, but as a matter of fact it only
masquerades under another name. As a
Labor member said to an interjeotor not long
ago, “I’ve heard your accent; you needn t
tell me your politics.” Here I assert that
the man who takes his political opinions from
either parson, priest or the boss of a sectarian
society is just as much a slave as if he walked
to the hustings in leg-irons at the point of
the bayonet. The body can never be free
while the mind is shackled, and the man who
fails to leave his religious differences at the
shrine of his faith is at once a slave and a
slave-driver. He will neither free himself
nor permit others to be free.
“ The workers’ cross is disunion.” True,
and if one arm of the cross be Sectarianism,
the other as truly is Distrust. When the
ordinary toiler is told that someone has
spoken or written on his behalf, he too often
begins to question the motives of the writer
or speaker. This distrust is part of a heritage
for which its heirs are not wholly responsible;
from which even the more intelligent workers
are not free. The other day I heard a promin-
ent unionist say of a man who was devoting
all his time and ability to the cause of Labor
in return for a sura that would have been
quadrupled had he thrown his energies into
the other scale : “ Oh, I know his game ; he
wants to .get into Parliament.” It is such
suspicions that dishearten many who espouse
the cause of Labor from conviction. The
workers have been often deceived by mere
self-seekers, but that any number of them
should distrust those who have given up
all to stand on their side, and should attempt
to sow the seeds of suspicion among others,
furnishes more reason for despair than all the
attacks that come from the camp of the
enemy. The foe can be faced, the false
friend may hand over the keys of the citadel
when its defenders depend on him to keep
watch. Curiously enough, the workers most
thoroughly doubt men of their own class.
Thus the workers’ cause is crucified on a
cross of disunion, constructed of the sectarian-
ism and distrust that arise from ignorance.
As J. W. Sullivan, of the “Twentieth Cen-
tury,” wrote me months ago : “If the work-
ers had a tithe of the brain and backbone of
the exploiters, the world would be reformed in
twenty-four hours.” Whilst ignorance and
suspicion go hand-in-hand, the Labor party
cannot do too much propaganda work. Con-
fidence will follow in the wake of enlighten-
ment.
The Labor party has been unceasingly ex
horted to take pattern from that best known
of all third parties—the Home Rule party—
aud select a Parnell. It would, doubtless,
have been well had our party been as ably
and autocratically led as was the Irish con-
tingent by its distinguished champion. It
must not be forgotten, however, that the
leadership of Parnell —coming long years after
the party was a recognised entity—was more
the result of his undisputed annexation of the
position than of his election by the rank aud
file. Having demonstrated his fitness, the
death of Butt settled the matter. Had any
man in our camp displayed a similar capacity,
allied to a like iron-handed ambition, our
leader would long ago have elected himself.
In view of the unsparing, and oftentimes
venomous criticism that wa have unceasingly
encountered from both friends and foes, every
likely leader ought to be thankful that he was
not chosen as the scape-goat to bear the sins
of the multitude. Moreover, the battle is not
won even when the man takes hold of the
marshal’s baton. In every army are malcon-
tents. Self takes precedence of the cause with
many a patriot. To some Home Rulers even
Parnellooraoy was so irksome that they rent
his kingdom in twain, and discrowned him on
the first pretext. The dethronement may
have killed Parnell; it did not kill—scarcely
retarded, Home Rule. Split into factions
which, at the last election, “fought like devils
for conciliation, and hated each other for
the love of God,” the Home Rule party is
to-day, notwithstanding, nearer its Promised
Laud than at any moment during the many
years of its existence. Does not this furnish
a proof that when the justice of a cause is
recognised by the body in power and adopted
as their policy, that an accredited leader is no


longer an absolute necessity for the party of
initiation ? It’s mighty little we do be hear-
ing of Messrs. Blake, M’Carthy and Redmond
in these latter days.
The N.S.W. Labor party did not need to
wander wearily through a desert of divisions
and a wilderness of political non-recognition
for forty long years, while miraculously sus-
tained on the Heaven-sent manna of volun-
tary contributions, until they arrived within
sight of Canaan. Moses Parkes and Joshua
Dibbs, in turn, have led them on. Legisla-
tive avowal that our claims were just fol-
lowed quickly on the heels of our swearing-
in. It is not our fault, but our misfortune,
that we have since been fruitlessly besieging
our Jericho —the Legislative Council. Nor
do its walls show any signs of tottering,
although the ram’s-horn of Dibbs is appar-
ently pitched in a similar key to our own.
Most of us shrewdly suspect, however, that
Dibbs would not be quite so democratic were
there no Council in existence, and believe
that his open threat that ho would get the
Menindie Irrigation Bill killed in the Council
because of the insertion of the leasehold prin-
ciple was a result of the confidence commu-
nicated by their prior stranglings, accord-
ing to his wish, of numerous measures of
Reform. We will never fully achieve our
ends until this, the stronghold of class sel-
fishness, is overthrown. Nevertheless, inside
two years, we have done more than the Home
Rulers have accomplished in fifty years. I
do not wish to depreciate their splendid
struggle, nor to magnify our feeble attempts.
Our difficulties were fewer, our opportunities
greater—that is all.
Here I cease to trace any parallel between
the two Parliamentary parties, in order to
show the N'S.W. wage-earner what a splen-
did example is set him by the never-failing
trustfulness and magnificent self-denial of the
Irish people. Already many of those who
returned us are dissatisfied at our apparent
want of success, and disheartened because we
have not been able to reform the whole social
system in twenty-four months. It was not
thus in Ireland. Ignorant and priest-ridden
in some cases, often-times poverty-stricken
and plague-persecuted, these people, un-
daunted by long-continued failure, have,
generation after generation, not only cast
their votes for Home Rulers but also fur-
nished their champions with the sinews of
war. Their pence was given as freely as their
votes. Needless to say that their trust in
their representatives was full and free. They
were not misled by the misrepresentations,
distortions and suppressions of an antagonistic
press ; they had faith in the justice of their
cause and in the sincerity of their leaders
when all the world doubted both. Are the
wage-earners of New South Wales cast in an
inferior mould ? Have they less de'ermina-
tion, less courage, less heart? Shall the
negative success of twenty-four months do
more to dishearten them than over twice as
many years of positive failure had power to
do in Ireland F The next general election will
show.
On the success or failure of the local ex-
periment depend even weightier issues
than the partial autonomy of Ireland. Our
bloodless solution of the Labor difficulty
would make the world’s parliaments ring
with the demand, “Emancipate us also! ’
Our failure would simply sound the knell of
Government by representation, and give the
energies of Labor s best and noblest to whet
the sword of revolution and light the fuse of
anarchy.
Were the toilers to assert their rights as
freemen and make a united effort on election
day, they would no longer be the governed
but the governing body. When the workers
of New South Wales understand that they
can never gain their political, social, and in-
dustrial salvation by self-crucifixion, the
future is theirs. Barrabas will suffer
instead.
There is little doubt that Labor members
coming before their constituents during re-
cess and at the next general election will be
asked, “What have you done?” It was
only the other day that one of the bogus
working-men who write on the note-paper
supplied by the National Association, defied
with fine scorn anyone to show anything that
had been effected by the. Labor party during
their brief existence. With far greater
reason he might have asked the Freetrade
Association to name anything of legislative
value done directly during a similar period
by Messrs. Reid, M'Millan, Bruce Smith,
Want, or any other prominent freetrader.
Their record is even more barren of result.
Our services, like theirs, must be estimated
chiefly by what we’ve made other people do
or refrain from doing. To begin with, we
have exercised an educational effect on this
Parliament which can only be gauged by
future political events. Coming into Parlia-
ment we got from Parkes a stronglv-exnressed
belief that it was no part of the duties of
Government to find work for those unable
otherwise to obtain it. Eighteen months
later he tabled resolutions, in which the
Dibbs’ Government was strongly censured for
neglecting the unemployed question. Other
instances might be given. For instance, I
have heard Messrs. Dibbs, Lyne, Copeland
and Suttor oftentimes declare that they had
no belief in assisted settlement and would
never give away the lands of the country for
such Utopian schemes. As all the world
knows, they have since made room for co-
operative and assisted settlement on the
Statute Book. I might enumerate other in-
stances, but will now give a carefully tabu-
lated list of measures introduced by the Labor


Bills Killed or Blocked bt Labor Partt
Bill.
Introducer.
Fate.
Australian Banking
Dowell
Slain outright
Co. of Sydney
Disorderly Conduct
O’Connor
Blocked
Suppression Bill
(in Council)
(with fl o k sr i n g
clause)
Sydney Elect ric
Garrard
Slain outright
Lighting Bill
Australian Gaslight
Humphrey
Slain outright
Co.’sElectric Light-
(in Council)
ing Bill
Crookwell Railway
Rose
Blocked
Bill
party ; of measures introduced in consequence
of the Labor party, and of measures killed
through the agency of the Labor party: —
Introduced
by THE
Labor Party,
Introducer.
Workmen’s Combi-
nation Laws Act
Amendment Bill
Employers Liability
Act Amendment
Bill
Langwell
Thrown out by
Council
Marine Board B
construction Bill
Eight Hours Bill
Small Debts Recov-
covery Act Amend-
ment Bill
Apprentices Bill
Conciliation and Ar-
bitration Act
Amendment Bill
Cattle and Sheep
Driving Bill
Trades Union Act
Amendment Bill
Municipal Wharves
Bill
Kelly
Davis
Schey
Edden
Houghton
Cann
Introduced
Bavister
Conciliation and A:
bitration Bill
Electoral Bill
Early Closing Bill
Fitzgerald,
J. D
Clark, E.M
through the
Distress for Rent
Abolition Bill
Coal Mines Regula-
tion Bill
Mining on Private
Property Bill
Introducer,
Parkes
Elections Bill
Trades Hall Bill
Elections Bill
Conciliation and Ar-
bitration Bill
Labor Settlements
Bill
Workmen’s Combi
nation Laws Decla-
tion Bill
Inspection of Boilers
Bill
Asiatic Races
triotion Bill
Mining on Private
Property Bill
Coal Mines Regula-
tion hill
Conspiracy and Pro-
perty Protection
Bill
Reduction of Cost
of Litigation Bill
Made Law after
amendment b y
Council
Thrown out by
Council
Thrown out by
Council
Assented to after
Amendment by
Council
Hung up in Coun-
cil
I might fairl;
ax and other
Parkes
Walker
Withdrawn
Withdrawn in
Council
Assented to
Labor Party.
S. Smith
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Thrown out by
Council
Withdrawn
Lapsed
8. Smith
Withdrawn
2nd Session
Barton
Thrown out by
Council
Slattery
Barton
Barton
Copeland
Willis
Copeland
Slattery
Wise
Walker
Assented to
Assented to
Assented to
Assented to
Hung up in As-
sembly
Hung up in As-
sembly
Hung up in As-
sembly
Thrown out by
Council
Hung up by Coun-
cil
Hung up in As-
sembly
Thrown out by
Council
fairly add to this list the Graduated Income
ather Bills too numerous for enumeration,
wwever, not a history, but merely a sketch.
This is, however,
And many others of equal danger to the public.
During last Session the House sat for 117
days—five more than in the previous Session
—and never was counted out. An entirely
new experience for the Parliament of New
South Wales, whose sittings, under the old
regime, often lapsed because there was not a
sufficient attendance. The average duration
of each sitting was about nine and a half hours,
and, as figures prove, after 10 at night the
House was kept together, almost without ex-
ception, by Labor members. No doubt, if
payment of members were abolished, some of
the Labor members would endeavor to retain
their seats ; that they could also maintain as
regular an attendance to their duties is im-
possible. They would be compelled to adopt
other means of getting a livelihood and,
ceasing to be “ professional politicians ” —the
name given by the capitalistic press to those
who devote all their energies to the
country’s work—would become, like the
others, “ commercial politicians.” It is the
constant practice of the commercial politi-
cian to give all his best forces and abilities
to his own business, reserving for the country
what remains after he can do no more for
himself. He usually comes late to the House,
wearied with one’s day toil, done on his own
behalf, and goes away early to recuperate for
another. Payment of members ensures the
regular attendance of the “professional”
politician, but does not exert a similar bene-
ficial influence over the “ commercial politi-
cian.” The abolition of payment of mem-
bers would not cause the latter to attend more
frequently, and would inevitably compel the
former to attend less frequently. If there be
anything in deductions drawn from undenia-
ble facts, the conclusion to be arrived at is
not that payment of members should be
abolished in order to expel those who place
the country’s welfare first, but that payment
should be continued and votes so given in
the future that a greater number of “ profes-
sional ” and fewer “commercial” members
shall be returned. The man who takes
politics up either as a diversion or as a means
of furthering “private industry,” and who,
while regularly pocketing his pay for doing
nothing, complains because these people who
really do all the work are paid, should be


thrust forth into the outer darkness, where
no one is forced to accept £3OO per annum
against his will. That such men should object
to receiving money for doing nothing shows
that they are not utterly callous; that they
should object to those who do the work re-
ceiving it, is proof positive that they
are utterly conscienceless. If they were sin-
cere in their denunciations of payment of
members they would, after drawing their
allowances, pay them into the Consolidated
revenue.
Here follows an attendance list. There
were altogether 436 divisions taken during
last session—3oo in committee and 136 in the
House. The same men head the list as at the
end of last session.
M^SS-llglS.
p-fl Cri XST & P u C-< -
§«l S 2*l | P
.:*... *j&.... ?
:::::;►_ i . • : • B
°iw ’ *
. 3 ; & 5;. .
B
O'
ct>
>-i
Its
CO
8
wCO eg 05 CO CO CO 05 CO CO CO it*. If*, it*.
2SS S BS2BB 88 g
tibsospopogow
?s? s n
® g“'H§'S‘E' pi
s>Ji B Q * ?
g'fl. S
IXI —p° S M S°
to
to i" - j-* §
2 : .
a i
to ro to to to CO Co CO
O'^cSocDrotoc^.
VJ> 05 CD 0( O to CO r
mhhmhhmhh
CX)<Jos^»^osto*-‘OCOCX)<JOSC^^ fc 'osbo»-‘
sa.s£.
I i §•* i SoST I - s-war
-s s - w- B §■§ ®> b ms-
-9 oo c-m Btd m t -1 9 i' 1 ?- S- J
S !?l Si 6«
8* 1 a--
: st » : : : : : B ■ Wffi :
p -p. ’ a ' ’ g.
ST'S H
2 2 ts , ®
* B * Pj
2 u
B . .
I::::;::;:::::: ms : :
03COfcOQtO»Q»piC5Cnc^-<J*^COCDCDQDCOO
-‘JCOtC^^OSCC^GOCOCKQOr-O'OiODCiew
K
p
■
o
o
3
3
m
3
£-
hj
f rom this list are omitted the names of four
rotectionists and one Freetrader who, fa
point of attendance, are entitled to rank
among the first twenty; also the names of
three Protectionists and four Freetraders,
who from late election, illness and the as-
sumption of official duty, would be unjustly
enumerated among the lowest twenty. How-
ever, as Mr Bavister pointed out in the Tele-
graph. 60 per cent of the constant attenders
are Labor Members, while on the low vote
45 per cent are lawyers. Excluding from the
list of Labor Members Messrs Donnelly,
Gough, Sheldon and Vaughn, either seceders
from or erroneously accounted of the party,
and including Messrs Langwell and Schey
than whom none have better claim to be
included, it will be found that the thirty-one
members thus classified gave 8842 votes, an
average of 285 votes per man. The 109
members remaining—omitting the Speaker
in the House and the Chairman in Committee
—giving 18 096 votes, a fraction over 165£
votes per head. This shows an average excess
per man of 119| votes given by Labor
Members over those given by the other
sectione of the House. It is perfectly true,
as the Telegraph explains in an elephantinely
humorous manner, that though G. D. Clark
has voted nearlyfivetimesasoftenas Sir Henry
Parkes that he is not, by so much the more,
an intellectual and expert Parliamentarian,
but, inasmuch as the country’s legislation is
preceded by deliberative discussion and vote-
taking, he is by that proportion so much
more faithful in the performance of the duties
he has sworn to carry out. Everyone who
has attended late at Parliament House knows
that the work of the country has been done
throughout by not more than fifteen mem-
bers—including the Ministry—besides the
Labor Party.
It was stated by Mr E. W. O'Sullivan on
the floor of the Assembly that it was entirely
owing to the assistance of the Labor Party
that he and others were enabled to reduce the
Estimates by £600,000. It has been asserted
by Mr Houghton and others that it was
owing to the stand made by the Labor Party
that Dibbs’ £lOOO was paid into the Trea-
sury (without interest), by the “ patriotic
gentlemen.” The first assertion is capable
of proof ; the second is highly feasible. IJ
space served similar cases might be cited.
Opposing legislation whose ostensible
reason was “ to provide employment ” bul
whose real motive was to exploit the nationa.
estate and monopolise privileges that (Tight
to be retained by the community, th«
Labor Party has been so roundly abused bj
the Government and the capitalistic-con-
trolled press that certain of its members havt
lost faith in one of its basic principles. As ]
stated in the House, we might almost as
reasonably have supported proposals to burn
down Sydney on the plea that its rebuilding
would give work, as some of these measures
As the Bulletin points out, the Government’s


doublefacedness in securing support on this
.--pecious pretext was evidenced when they
used every discreditable dodge known to
legislators to block the Meuiudie Irrigation
Bill after Mr Langwell'r leasing clause was
inserted. The promoters were satisfied with
the alteration, three of the Ministers—Cope-
land, Kidd and Suttor, had voted for it, but,
nevertheless, Dibbs—once an opponent of
land alienation—and “Private Enterprise”
Lyne, were determined not to establish the
principle. They preferred to bolster up de-
clining revenue by raising £30,000 through
the sale of 25,000 acres at 25s—though the
Minister of Lands admitted, with the experi-
ence of Mildura fresh in his memory, that
the promoters might, at no distant period, be
enabled to retail these lands to others at £3O
an acre—rather than retain them as a constant
sonrce of revenue under State control. Their
motive was not wholly the raising of
revenue. It has been roundly asserted that
Mr Lyne is now hatching a Murray River
irrigation scheme and feared that his clutch
by this means might be addled. “ There are
wheels within wheels ” as Copeland once
sagely remarked, but it can never be deemed
right for ihe Labor Party to do an everlast-
ing wrong for the sake of a tempory benefit.
I have already in these columns advocated
an abbreviation of the Labor platform in
order that there may be fewer points of dis-
agreement and a clearer statement of prin-
ciples without attempt at the enumeration of
details. I feel sure that such a course would
widen our influence and have an attractive
and cohesive influence. It is necessary that
it should be understood we are striving for a
betterment of the circumstances of all wage-
earners and that the head-worker’s condition
is just as much an object of solicitude to us
as that of the hand-worker. Brain and
brawn are to-day somewhat at variance.
One section of the wage-paid despises and is
distrusted by the other. White hands and
brown do not often meet in the grip
of brotherhood. When they make com-
mon cause then a new era will dawn.
Meantime, the fat man in his greed continues
to bite off more than he can swallow and can
only be temporarily rescued from choking at
State expense and by the tracheotomy of
Bank Issue Bills and kindred expedients.
The Labor Party has come to stay. All
over the world the principle of direct Labor
representation is established. In New Zea-
land there are 22 Labor members out of 72 ;
in South Australia, 16 out of 54 ; in Queens-
land, 17 out of 72 ; in America, the People’s
Party has established a sure foothold and in
Germany, the Socialists largely control politi-
cal feeling. As Wilhelm Weitling, a Ger-
man Communist, said many years ago :
“There will be neither equality nor justice
so long as those who toil are poorer than
those who govern.” To this I would add
that those who toil always will be the poorer
until they govern for themselves. The
bourgeoisie and the capitalists dread the
coming of that day, but in the countries
where it has to some extent arrived nothing
but good has resulted. For instance, a late
D. T. cable from New Zealand tells us that:
“ The prosperity of the colony and the sur-
plus are unparalleled. That New Zealand
has not been affected by the recent financial
panic is a proof of the prudence displayed in
conducting public and private finances.”
Furthermore, the Ministry are so satisfied
with the success of their efforts to legislate
for human lives and not wholly for property
that they intend to introduce legislation of a
more Socialistic character. There is a rift
in the cloud and sunshine begins to break
through. As an American writer states, it
was by the efforts of a few much abused men
that a movement was started there which
only ceased with the abolition of racial
slavery ; three years after a working man
opened the campaign against Chinese immi-
gration to the States, it was suspended.
Those who fight to abolish white slavery
have an equally good cause. The Labor
Party cannot become dominant until jealousy
and distrust are overcome, its principles
thoroughly understood and its elements
fully harmonised. Ere that day arrives all its
present components may have faded into an
oblivion, possibly merited, but the cause, be-
ing that of Humanity, must eventually
triumph even though all the powers of earth
and hell be arrayed against it.
Printed at the “ Workman ” Office, Bathurst Street, Sydney.
