

NIP&
Z-/?/
DEPARTMENT OF ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
BOOK OF THE COMMUNITY
LAJAMANU
A brief description of the physical, social and economic situation of the
Lajamanu community, Northern Territory 1977.
-
J (B g;
rO


DEPARTMENT OF ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
BOOK OF THE COMMUNITY
LAJAMANU - HOOKER CREEK


INTRODUCTION - PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Hooker Creek (Lajamanu) is a government sponsored community
approximately 610 kilometres south-west of Katherine and
situated on an Aboriginal Reserve of some 2188 square
kilometres. Access to the community is by 95 kilometres of
gravel road from Wave Hill (which is washed out in the Wet) and
by gravel airstrip up to DCS landing specifications. The
township is located in the extreme south-east corner of the
Reserve. The community is called Lajamanu by the Aboriginal
people (the name of a wallaby who in the dreamtime camped in
this place).
GEOGRAPHY
The area of the Hooker Creek reserve varies in topography. The
southern extremity of the reserve is desert country, undulating
and sandy with vegetation comprising a variety of spinifex
grasses, mallee scrub and snappy gum interspersed with


turpentine and wattle scrub. Hooker Creek runs from the
north-west to the south-east corner of the reserve and provides
770 square kilometres of fair to good grasses under snappy gum,
silver leaf,box and bloodwood trees. A number of other creeks
join Hooker Creek in this undulating red and grey soil country.
North of the Hooker is generally hilly country well interlaced
with water courses and frequent open valleys grassed with
mitchell, blue and panicum species. There is only one
permanent waterhole on the reserve - Catfish hole on the
Victoria River to the north. Most of the species of animals,
birds, reptiles and insects which inhabit the area were eaten
by the Aboriginal people although some were more valued than
others (eg. kangaroo, goana, emu, anteater, honey ant). The
monotony of the desert landscape belies the variety of floral
forms which exist and were exploited for food, medical purposes
and implement manufacture.
CLIMATE
Most of the Hooker Creek Reserve lies within the 240-300
millimetres rain belt. The summer (November - April) winds
from the north-west are the main rain bearing winds. This low
level of rainfull (and consequent lack of dependable surface
water) and the extreme variations in temperature, contribute to
the harshness of the Hooker Creek environment. Temperatures
range from 40 degrees celcius plus in the sultry heat before
the breaking of the rains to below 10 degrees celcius at night
during the "winter". These winter months (June/July) are found
pleasant by Europeans with daytime temperatures around 20-25
degrees celcius but the Aboriginals dislike the cold niahts.
However, persistant dust-laden easterly winds often offset
these agreeable conditions.
HISTORY
The Hooker Creek settlement had its beginnings in 1948 when the
Native Affairs Branch of the Northern Territory Administration
proclaimed the area an Aboriginal reserve, after the grazing
lease on Vesteys Catfish block expired in 1945. The N.A.B.
proceeded to transfer members of the Warlpiri tribe from
Yuendumu settlement and the Granites to Hooker Creek.
Traditionally the Warlpiri occupied an area of between 91,000
and 104,000 square kilometres east from the W.A. border to the
Stuart Highway and south from Winnecke Creek to the Stuart
Bluff Range. The unattractive nature of this country meant that
the Warlpiri's association with Europeans was comparatively
limited and the tribal disintegration suffered by the Kaiditj
and Aranda, did not occur to the same extent in the Warlpiri
tribe.
A combination of factors brought about the initial drift of the
Warlpiri from their nomadic desert life to the N.A.B. ration
depots established after World War II which have become the
settlements of today. Older Hooker Creek residents remember
the drastic effects which the 1928 Conistan massacre and other
white "punitive measures" had in scattering members of the


traditional communities. The droughts of 1924 and 1928 also
forced many of the Warlpiri to live on cattle stations or near
the mining ventures which sporadically appeared in their
territory. Hooker Creek settlement was established in 1948 to
accommodate 400 Warlpiris from Yuendumu but it was established
outside of traditional Warlpiri country and in Gurinji
Territory. There had always been fairly strong ceremonial and
trading links between the two tribes and also there were
Warlpiris living at Wave Hill which may have facilitated the
acceptibility of this arrangement to both tribes. Subsequent
years have seen the gradual transfer of the land as the
newcomers are given the ceremonies related to the area by the
Gurinji. Discussions were held between the tribes during the
Woodward Commission meetings and the Gurinji are content to
allow the Warlpiris to occupy and use the land. This report
was endorsed by the Central Land Council in its submission to
Woodward.
The tribal group at Lajamanu is Warlpiri (as mentioned above).
It is a community therefore, which is traditionally - orienated
and culturally, geographically, socially and economically
homogeneous. It should be remembered that it is scarcely a
single generation since the Warlpiri were a desert dwelling
nomadic people. The Warlpiri are probably the most numerous
and virile of the inland Australian tribes and have a strong
sense of their own identity.
It has been established that there were four regional
sub-groups of the tribe within traditional Warlpiri country -
Ngalpari in the eastern "country" the Warnayaka in the north,
the Walmalla in the south-west and the Ngaliya in the south.
Despite dialectical differences and a mild local ethnocentrism
in each group, the residents of all the "countries" still
thought of themselves as members of the Warlpiri tribe, which
was distinct from all other tribes. The importance of these
community divisions was evidenced in the early days of Lajamanu
when the camping arrangements reflected orientation to the
residents countries - Warnayaka camped to the north of the
settlement area, Ngaliya to the south and Walmalla between the
two, while visiting Warlpiri stayed in the camp appropriate to
their country.
The adults still seem to recognise two broad groups - the
Waneiga and the Ngaliya (the Walmalla being included in the
latter) but this distinction is not reflected in local
residence patterns. Residence is determined largely by kinship
ties and years of local intermarriage have produced a situation
in which Warnayaka and Ngaliya camp together in both of the two
camps. Known as Mingkirri (antbed) and Wampana (wallaby) which
presently exist at Lajamanu. Visitors to these camps should
wait at the outskirts until invited to enter by one of the
residents.
THE PEOPLE
1976 Census
Population; Approx. 650


SOCIAL ORGANISATION AND CULTURE
Walpiri social organisation, like most other Aboriginal tribes,
is extremely complex. Within each of the geographical
sub-groups of the tribe are represented all the sub-sections
and kinship categories which form the basis of the Warlpiri
social structure. The Warlpiri tribe is divided theoretically
into two halves for social and ceremonial purposes. These two
moieties are each divided into four sub-sections (or "skins").
Every member of the tribe is allocated a sub-section from birth
this depends indirectly on the mothers sub-section
(illustrated in the table on Page 5). In the Warlpiri social
structure a person cannot marry a member if his/her own moiety.
The "skin" system provides special marriage rules and also
groups relatives in different ways. The Warlpiri kinship
system further defines that a man should find his wife among
the women who are his classifactory (not actual) mothers
mothers brothers daughters daughters ie. "second cousins". It
is the kinship systen rather than the sub-sections which is the
dominant feature in Warlpiri social interaction.


Skin Names and Marriage Patterns in the Warlpiri Tribe
Husband
Jakamarra.
Jupurrula
Jangala
Jampijinpa
Wife (First preferred)
Napaljarri
Napanangka
Nungarrayi
‘Napangardi
Children
Ju/Napurrula
J/Nakamarra
J/Nampijinpa
J/Nangala
Japal jarri-
Japanangka
Nakamarra
Napurrula
Nangala
J/Nungarrayi
J/Napangardi
J/Napaljarri
J/Napanangka
Jungarrayx-
Japangardi'
Nampijinpa
Other marriages are allowable under tribal law but are much
less common - these are indicated by arrows on the table. When
the preferred marriage rule is followed,male members of some
sub-section have their actual and classificatory (same skin)
fathers and sons in only one other sub-section. Father-son
couples are thus formed in the following way
Jampijinpa/Jangala; Jakamarra/Jupurrula; Japaljarri/Jungarrayi;
Japangardi/Japanangka.
These father-son couples are important in the religious/ritual
basis of Warlpiri culture as every totem or "dreaming" belongs
to one or more of these couples and their cult lodges who are
the "bosses" of its ceremonies. Warlpiri dreaming embrace all
living things, natural phenomena and artefacts as well as human
culture heroes. The local reference of a Warlpiri dreaming may
be a track (yirdiyi) or country (nguru) where the dreamtime
beings travelled or resided, making topographical features,
performing ceremonies, giving law and depositing their
spiritual essences (kurruwarri). Although the "dreamtime" was
an epoch which preceded the historical past, the totemic beings
still exist and directly affect Warlpiri society today - their
kinship and sub-section systems, their law and customs and
especially their religious and ceremonial activities. The
people believe that by performing the appropriate rituals and
songs, living men can actually "become" these beings and so
maintain their intimate relations with the dreamtime.
Ceremonies take place all year round at Lajamanu but the long
ceremony known as the Kajirri is the focal point in the year
when the spiritual bond which the Warlpiris have with the land
they once occupied is renewed. It is also a time when the
novices, youths and young men are introduced to and instructed
in the totemic rites they will be expected to perpetuate.
During these times of intensive ritual activity, municipal
affairs are pushed very much into the background.
Each member of the tribe also has a conception - dreaming
depending on where the parents were camped when theKurruwarri
of that place entered the mother's womb. (ie. when the child
was conceived). The conception - dreaming "countries" have no
economic or residential implications rather these are foci of
religious and ritual significance. At Lajamanu now, children
are conceived within a limited radius of the main camp so share
the same small number of conception - dreamings in the area.


Thus almost all the children born at Lajamanu have either
mosquito or wallaby conception dreamings. This may have served
to strengthen identification of the settlement as a community
by the Warlpiri.
The Warlpiri kinship system with the tribal sub-group, skin
system and totemic/spiritual affiliations, identifies people in
Warlpiri society and guides their behaviour towards one
another. For example, a Warlpiri man must aavoid his
mother-in-law at all times. Some other taboos operate within
this system ie. dead peoples names should not be spoken; people
who have the same name as a person who dies, change their name
immediately. The kinship system also involves reciprocity and
close kin can make physical, moral and material demands on each
other wchich will be fulfilled. Kinship obligations (and the
dependences this entails) and the Warlpiris spiritual bond with
their country and kinsmen, form the basis of an extremely
complex social structure and culture which Europeans must
understand in their relations with the people of Lajamanu.
Illustrations by Mick Japaljarri. The top drawing tells of the
journey of the big kangaroos through the sandhills and their
trip from waterhole to waterhole where they lie and sleep for
the night. that the men are back to back. This tells that men
passed on the trip were of skin groups that were not allowed
any form of social intercourse with strangers.


language
The language of Lajamanu is Warlpiri, one of the Western Desert
group of languages.
Common Vocabulary in the Warlpiri Language
man - ngarrka
woman - karnta
head - jurru
eye - milpa
possum - janganpa water - ngapa
tree - watiya see - nyanyi
a fly - yimangi look for - nyanyirla
sun - wanta take - mani
nose - mulyu
mouth - lirra
moon - marilpikirutangi go - yani
fire - warlu speak - wangkami
kangaroo - marlu smoke - kunjuru
Some minor variations occur between the different sub-groups of
the tribe but these are not significant. Ngaliya vocabulary
includes many Pitjantjara words while the Warnayaka frequently
use words derived from eastern Kimberly languages.
Kinship Terms
Father (F.M.8.5.) - kirdana
Mother (M.sis) - ngati
Husband (sis H) - karutiya
Wife - kalyakalya
Elder brother - papardi
Elder sister - kapirdi
Son, Daughter - ngalapi
Wifes brother - ngumparna
Wifes mother - malirdi
Mother's brother
(F. Sis. H., M.M.8.5.)
ngamirni


Lajamanu Community
Council
President: Mr Lindsay Herbert
Inc.
Jungarrayi.
(including Housing
Association)
Vice President: Mr Lionel James
Japanangka
Executive Officer; Mr Maurice
Luther Jupurrula
Community Affairs; Mr Jerry
Jangala
Wampana Progress Ossoc. Inc.
President; Mr Graham McDonald
Japaljarri
MAIN COMMUNITY ORGANISATIONS AND GROUPS
Principal Office Bearers/Members
The Lajamanu Community Council is elected by Aboriginal methods
to "represent" the community. Traditional authority in the
Warlpiri tribe was difficult to identify as these were not
"leaders" as such. Particular individuals or groups were the
"bosses" in different spheres eg. religious/ceremonial
knowledge, but their authority was clearly limited. The older
men, although having the greatest ritual knowledge, did not
have the same status in other spheres of activity (eg. hunting
and fighting) because their ability declined as they grew
older. Authority appeared to be based more in the kinship
structure rather than in a group of tribal "leaders". The
present Council appears to be a balance of young articulate men
and older ritual leaders who have a mutual respect for each
others authority in the different fields.
LOCAL RULES / BY-LAWS OF THE COMMUNITY
The main local by-laws of the community relate to the need for
liquor permits for those who wish to imbibe; these are issued
by the local D.A.A. Area Officer. Also, requests to visit
Lajamanu should be directed to the Council for its approval,
whether the person(s) are on business or social calls. It is
essential that Non-Aboriginals recognise themselves as guests
in the Community and regard the Community Council as the
relevant source of authority.
Non-Aboriginals should be aware of sacred sites identified by
the Aboriginal people to be of tribal and ceremonial importance
and should avoid these areas. People should not attend
ceremonies unless they are invited to do so by the tribal
leaders concerned.
Some other rules of social behaviour should also be observed.
Using Aboriginal names shows courtesy particularly when
speaking to older people. It is preferable to ask another
Aboriginal the name of someone unknown rather than ask the
person directly. When approaching a group of people or camp,
the visitor should wait some distance away until he/she is
approached or invited to come in. Photographs should not be
taken without permission; ceremonies and fights should not be
photographed.


ECONOMIC BASE
The main sources of income for anu community are
Covernment/Departmental wages, Socie Securit\ payments and
Grants in Aid. In 19 7 d more than U ' >2 n were employed by
various Govt. Departments ' 7 lx * \' ors, Health,
Education and Police) and other organ 1 sax- > 0 r.s in the community
(Council, Social Club, Housing Association etc).
Since October 1974, the La Umanu Count* 1 has taken over
responsibility for a number of functions from the Department;
these include aarbage collection, maintenance of rubbish dump
and toilet/ablution blocks, street - uning, repairs to town
boundary fences, development of parks, gardens and tree
nurseries and town beautification. Government policy aims to
reduce the D.A.A. indu. t * ’ award ► tat la shment by
transferring positions for Aboriginal workers to the Council as
it assumes more and more functions.
The Grants in Aid scheme provides funds for Council employment,
housing enterprises, town management and public utilities
programmes and cultural, recreational and sporting activities.
A market garden is operated under this scheme.


The Wampana Progress Association runs the local store although
there is constant risk of interruption of supplies through bad
road communication. A transport enterprise is also conducted
by the Progress Association carrying stores for Hooker Creek
and for other Government installations in the Victoria River
District. The committee which controls the Association is
comprised of both Aboriginals and Europeans although there is
provision for an all-Aboriginal executive.
The Housing Association employs a manager and several
Aboriginal workers on a full and part-time basis. An all
Aboriginal executive committee is the controlling body.
It is hoped that the Government cattle project will be
transferred to Aboriginal ownership in the near future. The
project has a potential carrying capacity of 3500 head and
could become a profitable concern. This would give a greater
degree of economic independence to the Lajamanu community.
SERVICES AT LAJAMANU
HEALTH
A new health centre was constructed in 1976 comprising of two
bed ward emergency facilities and treatment room. The centre
is staffed by 2-3 sisters and 5 Aboriginal staff some of whom
are receiving Aboriginal Health Worker training.
Patients requiring 24 hour nursing care are evacuated to
Katherine or Darwin Hospital. Radio contact is maintained for
consultations with a Darwin doctor. (Two schedules daily 8.30
am and 2.15 pm) on the hour for emergencies.
Dental facilities are available at the health centre for the
visiting dentist. The Aerial Medical Services visits every
three weeks.
EDUCATION
A new school complex was completed in July 1975 including a
pre-school, arts and crafts centre and domestic science centre.
Other buildings include the old school block of 4 classrooms,
store rooms and office, one Dowsett type classroom (infants), a
resource centre/library, audio visual room/staff room and a
Manual Arts Workshop. Overall the school is well equipped with
some 4-5000 books in the library and a useful range of audio
visual equipment. The range of school facilities extends from
pre-school to post primary; children from the ages of four to
seventeen. Enrolment is approximately 190. Teaching staff
number 12 with an ancillary staff of 14 including Aboriginal
teaching assistants.
The bi-lingual program operates in the pre-school and was
extended to Grade lin 1977. It is unlikely to be extended
throughout the school for several years. Maths and English are
taught on a sequential basis with quite structural guidelines
for each group. Staff accommodation consists of 3 bedroom, 2
bedroom and 1 bedroom houses.


Housing and Accommodation
♦Staff residences
3 bedroom
23
2 bedroom
4
1 bedroom
6
single quarters
2x4, 2x5
♦Aboriginal Housing
Stage 1 (1 room
kingstrand)
9
Stage 3 (2/3 bedroom)
20
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - Power
Power is supplied by two 212 kilowatt GM Detroit Vl2 units,
both of which are used to full capacity. A new powerhouse was
included on the 1977/78 Design List and construction commenced
in the 78/79 financial year. Once completed. The needs
of the community will be adequately catered for.
Water
Upgrading of the water supply ($500,000 programmed 76/77) will
be completed in June 1978. Two bores are currently in
operation and two more will be equipped in the near future.
Sewerage
A sewerage system is in operation and extentions to
reticulation and the pondage system ($400,000 programmed 76/77)
will be completed in June 1978. This will service the needs of
This will service the needs of
the community in the foreseeable future.
The Housing Association has completed eleven houses since its
incorporation in July 1974 as well as a group of nine
humpy-style dwellings for aged people, and other buildings (eg.
ablution blocks, joinery shop and store, brickmaking shed,
workshop). * Figures are for July 1977
CHURCH ACTIVITIES
The Baptist Church has maintained a resident pastor at
Lajamanu, Mr Ivan Jordan, and Church services are held
regularly. A full time Y.M.C.A. worker has been at Lajamanu
since January 1976 and has had considerable success in
motivating the community and organising sports and recreational
activities. A new football oval has been constructed, sites
have been chosen, cleared and levelled for basketball courts
and the old kitchen has been converted for a club and basic
gymnasium.
OUTSTATIONS
There is one outstation from Lajamanu situated at the junction
of Winnecke and Parnta Creeks some 50 kilometres south of
Lajamanu. Mr Peter Blacksmith is the leader of the group.
Obvious efforts have been made to set up a permanent
decentralised community with the assistance of an original
SIO,OOO grant. The area is of tribal significance to Peter


Blacksmiths patrilineal group and is in close proximity to
three sacred sites which are the responsibility of this group.
A sizeable area has been fenced, cleared and cultivated and a
market garden is being established.
It has been evidenced that this type of decentralising movement
away from the main community, as well as being based on the
desire to return to traditional "countries", is a response to
tensions arising from fundamental social problems existing at
Ljamanu (and many other Aboriginal Communities) - problems of
alcohol buse, juvenile delinquency, lack of power to enforce
social discipline. European personnel should be aware of these
problems, their effect on Aboriginal society and the attempts
being made to resolve them. It is essential that Europeans
recognise their advisory and supportive role in working for
an Aboriginal community. Some understanding of that community
and its people is therefore necessary.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs
1977


MEGGITT,
M.J.
Desert People (University of Chicago
Press 1965)
FRANCIS,
S.H. et al
The Ecology of Aboriginal Child Health
(Aboriginal Infant Morbidity Research
Project, Yuendumu 1969-71)
CAPPELL,
A.
"The Warlpiri through their own eyes"
in Oceania Vol. 23 pp 110-32 (1952)
BRANDL, M
< •
"An introduction to Australian
Aboriginal Society and Culture for
Teachers".
(Education Department Handbook, 1974)
MARSHALL,
C.
"Self determination - A study of the
introduction and effectiveness of
community development procedures at
Hooker Creek" (unpublished Report 1973)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Information for the Lajamanu Community Book was collected from
a variety of sources including Departmental files and resource
materials and books from the Aboriginal Affairs Library.
Main sources of information were:
