

LAKE
BALLYROCAN
STORAGE
and Water Conservation Schemes
on the Lachlan River
WATER CONSERVATION AND
IRRIGATION COMMISSION OF N.S.W.


SITUATION AND DESCRIPTION OF LAKE BALLYROGAN STORAGE
Lake Ballyrogan is situated at the foot of the Lachlan Range, on
the south side of the Lachlan River, midway between the towns of
Hillston and Lake Cargelligo. To make it suitable as a reserve
storage for the needs of the lower Lachlan certain earthworks and
concrete structures have had to be built.
A diagram showing the works comprising the storage appears on
outside cover of this leaflet. They consist of—
(a) concrete diversion weir in the Lachlan River,
( b ) an earth dam across the Lachlan River downstream
of, and adjacent to, the diversion weir,
(c) inlet channel from the river to the lake storage,
about 5 miles long,
(d) outlet channel 11 miles long from the lake back
into the river, releasing water some miles downstream
of the intake,
(e) regulators and bridges on channels,
( f ) embankments to j —rrrfl undr r
shallow depth in places.
Showing construction of access bridge
tor over inlet channel.


Mixing and pouring concrete for access
bridge and regulator.
The storage at full supply level will contain 108,000 acre feet of
water. Each acre foot contains 43,560 cubic feet. The area of
the storage at full supply level will be 15,400 acres. The maximum
depth of the storage will be 11 feet.
The work involved the shifting, by the latest improved heavy
earth-moving plant, of about 1,250,000 cubic yards of spoil, and the
placing of 6,000 cubic yards of concrete.
The inlet and outlet channels are each provided with a regulator
and access bridge. Other structures consist of one main road
bridge, one access bridge, a subway in Mountain Creek and a pitched
drop at the junction of the outlet channel with the Lachlan River.
T
The face of the earth embankments subject to wave action has
been pitched with stone spalls amounting to 14,000 cubic yards.


LACHLAN RIVER
Discovery of lachlan river and early proposals
The Lachlan River was discovered on 27th May, 1815, by Deputy-Surveyor
G. W. Evans, at a point between North Logan and Cowra. Two years
later Surveyor-General John Oxley made an extensive exploration of the
river, starting from the Belubula River junction and reaching the
marshes.
Schemes for conservation of water on the Lachlan River have been under
consideration for many years, and an estimate of cost of the Wyangala
storage was submitted as long ago as 1909 by the late Mr. L. A. B. Wade,
M.lnst.C.E., then Chief Engineer for Irrigation and Drainage, but no
further action was taken at that time, although it had been announced
some years earlier that the Government proposed to refer the Lachlan
Scheme to the Public Works Committee as soon as the Murrumbidgee
proposal had been dealt with by that body.
Basin of lachlan
The Lachlan rises in the Cullarin Range near Gunning. Above Wyangala
Dam its principal tributaries are the Crookwell and Abercrombie Rivers ;
below Wyangala the Boorowa and Belubula Rivers. The total length of
the river from its source to its junction with the Murrumbidgee River
is 921 miles, of which about 797 miles are situated below Wyangala.
The Lachlan is remarkable for the manner in which its volume decreases
as the distance from its source increases.
At Cowra, for instance, where the level of the highest flood is over 50 feet
above the river bed, a bridge over 1,000 feet in length is required to span
the river, whereas at Oxley, 738 miles below Cowra, the river is crossed
by two small beam bridges with a total length of 180 feet, the area of flood
at this place being only about 7 per cent, of that at Cowra. The reason
for this condition of things is that a large proportion of the flow breaks
out into effluent channels, where it is lost by evaporation and absorption,
only a small proportion being returned to the river.
In times of higb river these effluents, whose total length is estimated to be
not less than 320 miles, carry flood waters far and wide—some of them
returning to the river, while others lose themselves in the plains.
Some regulation of the river was, therefore, carried out even before the
building of Wyangala Dam, finished in 1935. Weirs, cuttings and
regulators have been constructed in or near the river and its effluents in
order to provide a more equitable distribution of the natural flow.


LACHLAN RIVER SYSTEM
Catchment area
The catchment area of the whole river and its tributaries is considerable*
though the watershed between the Lachlan and other rivers is not well
defined in the lower reaches, where the rivers flow through the western
plains. At Lake Ballyrogan the catchment of the Lachlan River is not
less than 17,000 square miles but the catchment at Wyangala Dam, whence
most of the flow is derived, is only 3,200 square miles.
The average slope of the river bed drops from over 14 feet per mile at
Wyangala to under 4 inches per mile from Oxley to the junction with the
Murrumbidgee.
Geological features
The watershed upstream from Wyangala Dam is very hilly, and composed
of ranges up to 3,000 and 4,000 feet above sea level. All this area
contributes to the flow, and a very high “ run-off ” occurs. The
Department of Conservation is taking steps against erosion of the
catchment so as to prevent siltation of the reservoir.
Alluvial flats of limited size are developed about 20 miles downstream
from Wyangala and about Cowra.
These flats gradually merge into an extensive plain of alluvium, which,
below Forbes, is broken only by an occasional rocky outcrop. Apart
from the flow provided by the Belubula and Boorowa Rivers, which join
the Lachlan between Wyangala and Forbes, and a few creeks whose flow
is intermittent, this area of the watershed is non-contributing, the loss due
to percolation and other agencies is great, while still further to the west,
evaporation is probably the greatest source of loss.
Existing development of rural water supplies
For many years there have been licensed pumps along the Lachlan and the
landholders are authorised, under the provisions of the Water Act, to draw
water from the river for stock supplies and, in the majority of cases, for
some irrigation also.
The chief primary industries developed by private diversions for irrigation
have been the production of fruit and vegetables, associated with the
canning industry, in the upper reaches, lucerne for grazing and fodder
conservation, fodder crops, cereals and pastures.


There is much good land in the Lachlan Valley and the demand for water
is increasing. Each month the Water Conservation and Irrigation
Commission receives additional applications for licenses and, in all cases
where the right to divert can be given without wrongfully interfering with
the rights and interest of other landholders, the Commission issues the
desired licenses.
From a weir in the Lachlan River some little distance downstream of
Forbes, water is diverted to the Jemalong and Wyldes Plains Domestic
and Stock Water Supply and Irrigation Districts. The total area of the
two Districts is 225,196 acres and they are served by about 180 miles of
canals. Wool, sheep and lambs, wheat, oats, lucerne and cereal hay are
the principal items of production, the total value of which for the year
1947-48 was estimated at £763,000,
Along the lower reaches of the river the main need for water is for the
purpose of stock supplies. There is not a great amount of irrigation
downstream of Condobolin, but many grazing properties depend on the
Lachlan for domestic and stock requirements and some of the landholders
of adjoining properties have combined to form water trusts for which works
have been constructed, consisting of pump, dams, weirs, regulators, cuttings
and levees, to suit each particular case, and improve the supply of water
from the river and effluent creeks. There are five such trust districts and
the total area of the holdings comprising them is over 500,000 acres.
Water storages
Water is conserved in Wyangala Dam, the storage capacity of which is
303,900 acre feet, and is released to provide a regulated flow during the
summer and autumn months. Whenever possible water is also conserved
at Lake Cargelligo whence it is released, early in the summer, to serve the
river from that point down to Booligal. The total storage capacity of
Lake Cargelligo is, however, only 29,430 acre feet and of that amount only
15,496 acre feet are available for release to the lower river, it having been
agreed many years ago that the balance was required for the needs of the
lands around the storage and for the town of Lake Cargelligo, The small
quantity thus available is sufficient to serve the river for only a few weeks.
When it is exhausted it is necessary, under present conditions, to send
down from Wyangala water which has been conserved by that work.
Need for additional storages
The increasing demand for water and the necessity to safeguard the
valuable assets which have been developed along the Lachlan River in the
form of pastures, orchards and gardens render it essential that additional
storages be provided so that more water may be conserved during times
of plenteous flow.
The Commission at a later date proposes to provide a storage on the
Belubula River, probably at Cranky Rock, and possibly also at Murga on
Mandagery Creek, but further investigations into these proposals are
necessary and will be carried out when conditions permit. However, it
was found possible to provide a storage for flood waters in a natural
depression near the Lower Lachlan, and the New South Wales Parliament,
early in 1946, authorised construction of Lake Ballyrogan storage, and
work on the project was commenced by the Water Conservation and
Irrigation Commission during the same year.


Showing construction of outlet structure under Block Dam.
Operation and purpose of storage
During periods of ample flow in the Lachlan, water will be diverted into
this new storage to be held there until required later for use along the lower
reaches of the river. When it is so required its release can be controlled
through the outlet channel front the storage.
Although of direct benefit to riparian lands between Hillston and Oxley,
Lake Ballyrogan will be instrumental also in improving the position as
regards water supply to lands above it. It will do this by relieving the
drain on Wyangala Dam which, on account of the small quantity available
from Lake Cargelligo, has been called upon in the past to send down
conserved water for the requirements of practically the whole river valley.
This in itself would not present any serious difficulties if rainfall over the
Wyangala catchment area were sufficient and reliable. Unfortunately,
as in the case of so many of our western rivers, it is not and, consequently,
there is a definite limit to the supply potential of dams such as Wyangala.
The twofold benefit that can be expected from Ballyrogan is, therefore,
apparent. It will enable more of the stored waters of Wyangala to be
retained for use as required on the better quality lands along the upper
reaches of the river while from its own reserves most, if not all, of the
demands of riparian landholders between Hillston and Oxley can be met.
The new work is one of the projects included under the long-range plan of
water conservation and utilization adopted for this State. Built by the
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission within a period of three
years its cost will be in the vicinity of £300,000 ; a small sum when
compared with the benefits that will be derived from it.
