

37VF>
6? o




LAMBETH IN
LINCOLNSHIRE
being a Guide or Programme
of the Tour of Five Bishops
visiting the County, previous
to their attendance at the
Lambeth Conference, in order
that they may see something
of the work and life of an
English diocese and that the
diocese may learn something
about the Church overseas.


A Prayer for the Lambeth Conference.
Almighty God, who art the fountain of all wisdom
and dost send out thy light and thy truth that they
may lead us; we beseech thee so to illumine the minds
and hearts of thy servants the Bishops to be assembled
at Lambeth; that in thy light they may see light and
proclaim with power thy saving truth; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.


The first Lambeth Conference arose out of a
resolution passed in 1865 at a meeting of the Synod of
the Canadian Church, urging that means should be
adopted “ by which members of the Anglican Com-
munion in all quarters of the world should have a
share in deliberations for her welfare.”
Two years later 76 Bishops met at Lambeth
Palace and there have been six other conferences
since, the most recent occurring in 1930, when Arch-
bishop Lang presided over a great gathering of 307.
In July next the Conference will meet again
with a still larger body of Bishops, revealing the world-
wide influence of the Anglican Church, and before the
Conference opens we are to have the pleasure of ex-
tending a welcome to Five Bishops from other lands
who are coming to spend a long week-end amongst us.
The following pages show how fully they are to be
occupied ; they will see much of our diocesan life ;
I am sure that the diocese will show its appreciation
of their visit and will seize every opportunity of hear-
ing what they have to say about the life and problems
of the Church elsewhere.
I hope that there will be flags flying and bells
ringing as they pass over wold and cliff and fen, and
that all our church people will try to be present at
whatever services or meetings are within reach ; in
particular does this apply to the opening meeting of
the Diocesan Clergy on Friday, 11th June, when there
will be an opportunity not only of hearing all five in
the Chapter-house at Lincoln, but also of enjoying
more personal contact with them at Tea in the garden
of the Chancery afterwards.
This visit is an event of major importance in the
history of the Church in this diocese and I trust that
from start to finish we all shall show that we fully
realise our responsibility.
MAURICE LINCOLN :


OUR VISITORS
THE ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY
The Most Rev. H. W. K. Mowll, was educated at Cam-
bridge, and after ordination worked for nine years on the staff
of Wycliffe College, Toronto. He served as an Army Chaplain
in the first war ; in 1922 he was consecrated Bishop in Western
China and was elected Archbishop of Sydney in 1933. He is
Primate of Australia and Tasmania and his visit to the County
where Banks had his home and where Bass, Flinders and
Franklin were born makes him a specially welcome visitor.
THE BISHOP OF NATAL
The Right Rev. L. N, Fisher, is a brother of the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and has his cathedral at Pietermaritzberg,
which is linked up with the City of Lincoln. After serving
a curacy in Yorkshire, he went to work in South Africa for four
years ; returning to England, he became Vicar of a church at
Hull ; in 1921 he was consecrated Bishop of Lebombo, and in
1928 he was translated to the diocese of Natal.
THE BISHOP OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
The Right Rev. H. E. Sexton, was educated in Australia,
at Oxford and in Toronto. He was ordained in Adelaide and
served as a Chaplain in the first war ; in 1925 he became
curate of St. Margaret’s, Westminster, and was for eight years
Vicar of All Saints’, Upper Norwood. He was consecrated
Bishop of British Columbia in 1935.
THE BISHOP OF UGANDA
The Right Rev. C. E. Stuart, began his clerical life as a curate
at Hornsey Rise ; he became Chaplain of Ridley Hall, Cam-
bridge, and then went out to join the staff of Government
College, Achimota, in West Africa. In 1930 he went as a
C.M.S. missionary to Uganda and became Bishop of Uganda
in 1934 ; his wife is a grand-daughter of Canon Blenkin, who
was vicar of Boston for more than 40 years.
THE BISHOP OF SHANTUNG
The Right Rev, J. Wellington, served as a curate in Salis-
bury, and then for 18 years was an S.P.G. Missionary in China.
From 1936 to 1940 he served as a vicar in Bedford and was then
consecrated Bishop of Shantung, succeeding a former Lecturer
of Boston. He was interned by the Japanese in China, and his
diocese has suffered considerably in the recent activities of
Chinese Communists.


Photo by J. Dixon-Scott
The Cathedral from Vicars’ Court


THURSDAY, 10th JUNE
The Bishops arrive in Lincoln.
The Bishop of Lincoln entertains them to dinner.
FRIDAY, 11th JUNE
8 a.m. Holy Communion at the Cathedral.
Celebrant : The Bishop of Lincoln.
12 noon. Civic Reception at the Guildhall by the
Right Worshipful The Mayor of Lincoln
(Councillor J. W. Lawson, J.P.), who will
entertain the Bishops to Lunch.
2-30 p.m. Meeting of the Clergy of the Diocese
in the Chapter House, to be followed by Tea
in the Garden of the Chancery.
8 p.m. Public Meeting for the City of Lincoln, at
the Co-operative Hall.


The Cathedral Cross
to be sent to the Cathedral in Pietermaritzherg


SATURDAY, 12th JUNE
Holy Communion at the Cathedral.
Celebrant : The Bishop of Uganda.
a.m. The Bishops will visit the Cathedral.
.m. Meeting of Diocesan Youth Organisa-
tions at Eastgate Hall.
Evensong at the Cathedral.
The Bishops and their Chaplains will robe in
the Longland Chantry. After Evensong the
Bedel will lead the procession out by the Galilee
Porch in order that shots may be taken for the
Cathedral Film.
The Association of the Friends of Lincoln
Cathedral will entertain the Bishops to Tea
in the Cloisters. Afterwards the Dean will
formally welcome them to the Cathedral and
will present to the Bishop of Natal the old Stone
Cross from the eastern pinnacle, to be placed
on the Cathedral at Pietermaritzberg.
m. The Bishops will leave for Butlin’s Holiday
Camp at Skegness ; they will travel through
Horncastle and Spilsby.
m. Dinner at Skegness.
8


w
Pm
3
K
C>
Pm
g
◄
Cfi
HH
ij
H
&
m


SUNDAY, 13th JUNE
7-30 a.m. Holy Communion in the Camp Chapel,
Celebrant : The Bishop of British Columbia.
8-30 a.m. Holy Communion in the Camp Chapel.
Celebrant : The Archbishop of Sydney.
11 a.m. The Camp Service.
2-30 p.m. The Bishops of Natal, Shantung and
British Columbia leave the Camp for Lincoln,
where the Bishop of Natal will preach at the
Cathedral at 6-30 p.m.
The Bishop of Shantung will be taken from
Lincoln at 4 p.m. for Gainsborough, via Marton
and Lea, to preach at All Saints; the Bishop
of British Columbia will leave at the same time
for Scunthorpe and will preach at St. John’s
Church at 6-30 p.m.
The Archbishop of Sydney and the Bishop
of Uganda will conduct the Children’s Service
at the Camp, and afterwards will leave for
Boston, where they will have tea at the Vicarage.
5-30 p.m. After tea the Vicar of Spalding will convey
the Bishop of Uganda to preach at his church
at Spalding. The Archbishop will meet the
Mayor of Boston under the Tower of the church
at 6-10 p.m., and will lay a wreath below the
Memorial to the early explorers of Australia
and will preach at Evensong.


Boston Church




MONDAY, 14th JUNE
Holy Communion at the Cathedral.
Celebrant : The Bishop of Natal.
The Archbishop of Sydney leaves Boston for
London.
a.m. Four Bishops will arrive at the R.A.F.
College at Cranwell, where they will be received
by Air-Commodore R. L. R. Atcherley, C.8.E.,
A.F.C., Air-Officer Commanding R.A.F. Cran-
well and Commandant, the R.A.F. College ;
they will be conducted over the Station and
College and will be entertained to lunch.
m. Public Meeting for adults in The Mart at
Sleaford, arranged by representatives of the
Kesteven Agricultural Committee, the National
Farmers’ Union, the Agricultural Workers’
Union and local Business Interests.
Public Meeting for Senior School Children in the
Church Hall.
The Bishops will be entertained to Tea, leaving
afterwards for Grimsby Vicarage.
Public Meeting at Grimsby in St. Andrew’s
Church.
13




TUESDAY, 15th JUNE
The Bishops return to Lincoln, the Bishop of Shantung
catching a train to London.
11 a.m. The other Bishops will visit Schools in the
City.
The Bishop of Uganda, the City School.
The Bishop of British Columbia, South Park
High School.
The Bishop of Natal, St. Andrew’s Senior
School.
12 noon. The Bishops will be conducted to the
Diocesan Training College, where Miss Stewart
will entertain them to lunch.
2-15 p.m. Meeting of the Diocesan Mothers’ Union
in the Nave of the Cathedral.
5-30 p.m. The Bishops will bid farewell to Lincoln
and travel by the Cliff Road to Grantham
Vicarage.
7-30 p.m. Public Meeting at Grantham Parish
Church to be followed by a Reception at
Grantham House.
WEDNESDAY, 16th JUNE
The Bishops will catch their trains to London.






BUDDOCKS
