

cic'Ustcvn Australia.
ten
Pe&vj,
LAND REGULATIONS
FOR THE
KIMBERLEY DISTRICT,
Being all that portion of the Territory of Western Australia
lying to the Worth of the parallel of
19 deg. 30 min. South Latitude.
Proclaimed 29th November, 1880.
PERTH:
AUTHORITY; RICHARD PETHEK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1880.


\
0
I
)


LAND REGULATIONS
FOE THE
KIMBERLEY DISTRICT.
Proclaimed 29th November, 1880.
1. —All that portion of the territory of Western Aus-
tralia lying to the North of the parallel of 19° 30'
South Liatitu.de shall henceforth be designated and
known as “The Kimberley District.” The Southern
boundary of the Kimberley District shall henceforth be
the North boundary of the Northern District of
Western Australia.
2. —Except as herein is specially provided, the Land „ ,
Regulations of the fourteenth of September, one alter-
thousand eight hundred and seventy-eight, shall apply e d present
to the Waste Lands of the Crown in the Kimberley Regulations
District. to apply.
As to Freehold Lands.
3. —The minimum price of Rural and Suburban Land
in fee simple shall be ten shillings per acre. The mini- PrICG
mum area of Rural Sections shall be two hundred acres, Sec- 166 "
Sections of less area when so shut in by private lands tions. Mode
or other bounds as not to contain two hundred acres of Sale,
may be purchased in fee simple at a price not less than
ten shillings per acre; and all such land may be sold
by auction or private contract as the Governor in
Council may from time to time approve.
4. —Rural Sections shall, if possible, be right-angled
parallelograms, with a frontage on a lake, river, or feliaPe-
main stream not exceeding one-third of the average
depth.
5. —The application for the purchase of any such
land in fee simple shall be accompanied in each case Applications
1 for I urenase.


with a sketch of the boundaries, which shall be fixed,
wherever possible, with reference to some natural or
permanent artificial object, and also showing the
position of the land with reference to any lake, river,
or main stream, and also to land held by or in the
occupation of any other person; and also showing all
permanent water holes and springs within its area.
Such applications may be made at any time before a
permanent survey shall have been made by the Crown.
The expenses of survey shall in all cases be borne by
the applicant, and in the event of his becoming the
purchaser be repaid to him by the Crown, at rates to
be fixed by the Surveyor General, or his deputy in the
District, but not exceeding in any case one-half the
amount of the purchase money. And the boundaries
of lands fronting on lakes, rivers, and main streams
shall be limited in every case where possible by straight
lines, which shall be plainly marked on the ground by
Surveyors.
6. —Access to water holes and springs on such land,
with roads leading thereto, may be provided for in the
deed of grant. If at any time after these Regulations
shall come into force, any portion of such land may be
deemed by the Governor in Council necessary to resume
for the purpose of being included within the limits of a
township, such land may be resumed for that purpose,
and notice thereof shall be published in the Government
Gazette. Upon such resumption the owner of such land
shall be compensated for such resumption, either by a
grant of the fee simple of land in the District equal in
area to that resumed, or to a refund of the original
price of the resumed portion. And in the event of any
improvements having been made on the resumed por-
tion he shall be entitled to compensation, to be assessed
in manner provided by section 69 of the Land Regula-
tions of the fourteenth day of September, one thousand
eight hundred and seventy-eight.
7. —If at any time within one year from the date
when these Regulations shall come into force any one
person, firm, or company shall apply for the purchase
in fee simple of land in the District, and at the same
time notify his intention of growing thereon tea, sugar,
coffee, rice, cotton, tobacco, or any other merchantable
tropical or semi-tropical product, and such person, firm,
or company shall, within five years from the date of
such application being approved, prove to the satis-
faction of the Governor in Executive Council, or officer
appointed on that behalf, that such products or any of
them have been grown on such land, in any one year,


and exported from the District, and have been sold for
a snin not less than five hundred pounds, he or they
shall be entitled to have from the Crown a grant of the
fee simple of five hundred acres of rural land, to be
selected in the first instance in immediate contiguity to
the land on which such products shall have been grown,
and if there shall be no such land, then from any rural
land in the district. Such selections shall be made
within three calendar months after such satisfaction of
the Governor in Council shall have been notified in the
Government Gazette. „
8. —The first two several persons, firms, or companies p re f eren ti a i
who shall prove that he or they respectively has or p onus<
have effected such sales in manner aforesaid, shall be
each entitled to a similar grant of one thousand acres.
As to Leaseholders.
9.—Leases of blocks of Pastoral Land shall be in the p eages Q f
form shown in the Schedule hereto; and, unless with p as toral
the special permission of the Governor in Executive Lands.
Council, shall not contain less than fifty thousand acres
when on a frontage nor less than twenty thousand acres
when any part of its boundary shall not be on a front-
age ; and shall be held for a term not extending beyond
the thirty-first day of December, one thousand eight
hundred and ninety-three. The Lessee of any frontage
block may, with. the approval of the Governor in
Executive Council, obtain a lease of any contiguous
Pastoral Land, to the extent of not less than ten
thousand acres, on the same conditions and for the same
term as his original block.
10.—A frontage block shall be such as has its lesser p ron t a g e
boundary on a lake, river or main stream, or other Blocks,
water channel, or on an estuary or the sea shore. Its
boundaries shall be rectangular so far as the area and Boundaries,
the shape of the land allows, and its mean depth shall
not be less than three times its mean breadth.
11.—No Lessee shall have any pre-emptive right of
purchase, but he, his allowed assigns, or under-tenants
shall be entitled to claim the fair value of any lawful rights,
improvements on the land, as is provided by the
General Eegulations with reference to first class pas-
ture lands in the events therein specified.
12. —The minimum rental of all pastoral lands within
the Kimberley District shall be ten shillings per annum ' ticntai ‘
for every one thousand acres and fraction of one


thousand acres payable in advance. And every lease
shall be subject to the condition, whether expressed in
the instrument of lease or not, that before the expiration
of the second year of the term the land comprised
therein shall have on it at the rate of at least two head
of large stock or twenty sheep, the actual property of
the Lessee, for every one thousand acres, and that such
proportion of stock and sheep shall not be diminished
during the said term, and that in default the said lease
shall be thereby absolutely forfeited to the Crown, and
such forfeiture shall be forthwith notified in the
Government Gazette, whereupon the land comprised in
such lease shall be open for selection.
13. —Every tenant shall make and send yearly, to the
officer named by the Governor for such purpose, a
return verified by declaration under the 18th Victoria,
Eo. 12, of all cattle, horses, and sheep, and other stock
his property, depasturing on his Pastoral Land, with a
full description thereof, including ownership and brands ;
and any person making a false return shall forfeit all
his Pastoral Lands in the District, and be debarred
from having any further application approved for such
land.
lie turns of
Stock.
14. —Eo Lessee shall assign or sub-let the Avhole or
any portion of his land to any person or persons with-
out the consent in writing thereto endorsed on the
Lease by the Commissioner of Lands, or his Deputy
for the District, for which consent a fee of ten shillings
shall in each case be payable.
No assign-
ment or sub
letting.
except with
consent.
General, and as to Reservations.
15.—1n addition to the powers of resumption by the
Crown of land for public purposes, and of cutting and
taking away indigenous timber, and of searching and
digging for building and repairing materials, and to
the reservation of mines of gold, silver, and other
precious metals in and under lands to be granted by
the Crown, with all rights of entry, the Governor in
Council may, from time to time, by order under his
hand, direct whether any of the precious metals existing
in the form of alluvial deposits, or any inferior
metals, or any gems or jewels, shall be in like manner
reserved to the Crown, in which case the forms of
Deeds of Grant will be modified accordingly. The
Governor in Council may also grant licenses from time
to time to any person or persons on such terms and
conditions as may be deemed sufficient, as well for the
purposes of such Licensee as for the protection of the
If Grants of
Fee-simple
reserve
metals.
jewels, &c..
Governor
may exempt
any such
from such
reservation,
and make
regulations.


interests of the owner or occupant of the land to he
entered on, to enter on any lands, freehold or leasehold,
to stay on and examine the said land, and to search,
dig for, and carry away such metals, gems, or jewels;
and the Governor in Council may also in like manner
sell by auction or private contract, in whole or in
part, the subject of any reservation not being gold or
silver.
16. —The names of Lessees and a description of their jy ames 0 f
lands shall be from time to time notified in the Govern- Lessees to be
ment Gazette as soon as practicable after the approval of published in
applications. Government
Gazette.
17. —The Governor in Council may from time to time,
by order under his hand, to be published in the
Government Gazette, prescribe the forms of deeds of sale
and leasing, or other instruments requisite for carrying f or ms of
into effect the above regulations; and also by like order Deeds, &c.
regulate the cutting and disposal of timber, and other
trees, shrubs, and plants, whether for internal con-
sumption, or for exportation, living or dead, being or
growing on the lands in the District held otherwise than
in fee simple.


PASTORAL LEASE, No.
FIRST CLASS,
District of Kimberley, Western Australia,
YICTORIA, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, &c., &c. To all to
whom these presents shall come. Greeting : Know Ye that We, of Our
especial Grace, and in consideration of the sum of to our
Collector of Revenue for the Colony of Western Australia, already paid
by in the said Colony, the Lessee in these Premises,
and also in consideration of the rents hereinafter reserved on the part of the
said Lessee, h Executors, Administrators, and allowed assigns to be paid,
and in exercise of the powers in this behalf to Us given by an Act of the
Imperial Parliament, intituled “An Act to repeal the Acts of Parliament
“ now in force respecting the disposal of the Waste Lands of the Crown
“in the Australian Colonies, and to make other provisions in lieu thereof,”
and by certain Regulations for the sale, letting, disposal, and occupation
of the Waste Lands of the Crown within the said Colony, proclaimed and
published by Our Governor of Our said Colony, made in pursuance of the
provisions of the said Imperial Act, do by these Presents demise and lease
unto the said Lessee, All That piece or parcel of land described in the
Schedule hereunder written, with the appurtenances; Except and always
reserved to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, full power during the term hereby
granted, from time to time to sell to any person or persons all or any unsold
portion of the said demised Premises, subject to any claim for improvements
that may be lawfully made in pursuance of the said Regulations ; also full
power and absolute authority, at any time during the continuance of this
demise, to make grants or sales of all or any part or parts of the said
demised premises for public purposes, and also to except from sale, and
reserve to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, or to resume and enter upon or
dispose of in such other manner as for the public interest to Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, may seem best, such part or parts of the said demised
Premises as may be required for Public roads, or other internal communica-
tions by land or water, or for the use and benefit of the Aboriginal inhabi-
tants of the Country, or for purposes of Military defence, or as the sites
of places of public worship, schools, or parsonages, or other public buildings,
or as places for the interment of the dead, or places for the recreation and
amusement of the inhabitants of any town or village, or as the sites of
public quays or landing places on the sea coast or shores of navigable
streams, or for the construction of railways or railway stations, or for the
purpose of sinking shafts, and digging for gems and jewels, and for coal,
iron, copper, lead, or other minerals and metals, or for any other purposes
of public defence, safety, utility, convenience, or enjoyment, or for otherwise
facilitating the improvement and settlement of the Colony; and also
permanently or for temporary use to lay out, declare open, and make public
roads into, through, and out of or over any part of the said demised
Premises; with liberty to Ourselves, Our servants, agents, and workmen,
to enter upon the said demised Premises, and dig for, quarry, and take
away any indigenous produce, rock, soil, or other material required for
public purposes; and to fell, cut, and remove all or any timber, sandalwood,
or other woods growing or being thereon, and to issue licenses to any person
or persons, authorising him or them to cut, remove, and cart away the same,
with full and free liberty to such licensed persons, at all reasonable times,
of ingress, egress, and regress, for such purposes; also to sell any mineral
land comprised within the said demised Premises; and subject to any rights
of the Lessee aforesaid, to license to occupy, or to sell any other portion of
the said premises at any time, and with a right of immediate entry; also to
depasture on the unenclosed or enclosed but otherwise unimproved portions
of the said demised Premises, any horses or cattle in the employment of
the Government, working on or passing over the said demised Premises;


also for any person or persons to enter, pass over, through and out of
any such part of the said demised Premises, while passing from one part
of the country to another, with or without horses, stock, teams, or other
conveyances, on all necessary occasions ; and full right to the Aboriginal
natives of the said Colony at all times to enter upon any unenclosed or
enclosed hut otherwise unimproved part of the said demised Premises for
the purpose of seeking their subsistence therefrom in their accustomed
manner; and also full right to any person or persons to enter on any part
of the said demised Premises to examine the mineral capabilities thereof,
and to do all things necessary for the purpose of effectually making such
examination, but paying, nevertheless, full compensation for any damage
arising therefrom. To Have and to Hold the Premises hereby demised
(except as aforesaid, and subject to the powers, reservations, and conditions
herein and in the said Eegulations contained, and with all the rights,
powers, and privileges conferred by such of the said Eegulations as are
applicable hereto), unto the said Lessee, h Executors, Administrators,
and allowed assigns, for the term of to be computed from the
first day of 18 , Yielding and Paying the sum of
for the same, always in advance, during the said term, unto Us, Our
Heirs and Successors, on or before the first day of March in each year,
without deduction, except such deduction as the said Lessee, h Executors,
Administrators, or allowed assigns may be entitled to under the present
existing or any future Land Eegulations; the first of such annual payments
to be made on or before the first day of March next, and all of such annual
payments to be made to the Collector of Eevenue of Our said Colony, at
Perth, or to the Sub-Collector of Eevenue residing nearest to the said
demised Premises. Provided, nevertheless, and it is hereby declared, that
if the said rent be not paid in advance as aforesaid, on or before the first
day of March in each and every year, then, and in all or any of such cases,
these presents shall become void, and the term hereby granted shall be
absolutely and indefensibly forfeited; and it shall thereupon be lawful for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, into and upon the said demised Premises, or
any part thereof in the name of the whole, to re-enter, and the same to have
again, repossess, and enjoy, as if this deed-poll had never been executed,
without making any compensation to the said Lessee, h Executors, or
allowed assigns. Provided that the said Lessee, h Executors, Adminis-
trators, or allowed assigns, may at all times during this demise, on any part
of the said demised Premises, fell, cut, and use any timber for h domestic
and farm purposes, or for the construction of any buildings, fences, stock-
yards, or other improvements, and use any other materials for the like pur-
poses, but so, nevertheless, that the said Lessee, h Executors, Adminis-
trators, and allowed assigns shall not sell the said timber or material, or use
the same, or suffer it to be used, except on the said demised Premises.
Provided, and it is hereby declared, that the term hereby demised shall not
be transferable without the written approval of Our Commissioner of Crown
Lands, and unless such transfer, when so approved, shall be made, in the
form endorsed on these presents ,• and that any transfer made or attempted
to be made, without such consent, or in any other form than last aforesaid,
shall be altogether inoperative at law and in equity, and shall not confer any
right or interest to or in the said demised Premises upon the transferee.
And that We, Our Heirs and Successors, are not, nor shall be liable or
responsible for any error in the descriptive boundaries or quantity of land
hereby demised, or in respect of any claims which may be set up by any
other person or persons to any part or parts of the said demised Premises.
Provided, lastly, and it is hereby declared, that We, Our Heirs or Successors,
shall not be liable to compensate the said Lessee, h Executors, Adminis-
trators, or allowed assigns, for any loss or damage arising from the exercise
of all or any of the powers or rights hereby reserved to Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, save and except in so far as the same may be provided for by the
said Eegulations.


SCHEDULE HEREIN REFEREED TO.
In witness whereof We have caused Our Commissioner of Lands to affix
hereto his seah and set his hand, this day of 18
Commissioner of Crown Lands,
FORM OF TRANSFER.
I hereby transfer all my right, title, and interest in Pastoral Lease
No. of acres in the District of Western
Australia, to
Dated this day of 18
Witness
Signature.
Received the Fee of Ten shillings on this Transfer.
.Commissioner of Crown Lands.
I approve the said Transfer.
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Authority: Hichahd Pethee, Government Printer, Perth.


6


%
#
