





v^fric
610
H, 7
LANDON • FAIRTHORNE
"He builded better than he knew."
A Family Story of 100 Years
846
946
With the Compliments of
L FAIRTHORNE & SON PTY. LTD.
Managing Director




LANDON FAIRTHORNE
Founder of the Firm
Born St. Albans, Herts., 13th February, 1823.
Died Launceston, Tasmania, 17th August. 1890.




LANDON FAIRTHORNE
The story of Landon Fairthorne is the record of a
notable pioneering- achievement in the history of Australia.
As the first registered druggist of the British Empire he
made a contrioution of outstanding value to the
development of medicine and science in the colonies.
He was the son of Thomas Fairthorne, barrister, of
Lincoln’s Inn, London. Born on 13th February, 1823, at the
Abbey House at St. Alban’s, Hertfordshire, he was the
seventh son of a family of twelve boys and one girl. It was
the wish of his father that he should enter the legal pro-
fession. Accordingly, he went into his father’s law office
soon after leaving school. His decision to go to Australia
shortly after his fifteenth birthday was probably influenced
by financial losses sustained by his father. He came to the
conclusion in 1838 that “there were too many in the
family.”
In October of that year, having obtained his parents’
consent, he embarked on the “Platina,” a barque of 303
tons, bound for the Antipodes. His destination was South
Australia, where his elder brother, Thomas, had established
a cattle station near Adelaide. There were eighty-four other
passengers. Shut in the confines of the small vessel for four
months and a half, he became friends with a youth of
about his own age. This was William Bickford, also intent
on seeking his fortune in the colonies. Perhaps the two
boys exchanged ideas and hopes for the future. Strange
to say, both were to become the founders of two of the
most noted drug houses of Australia.
i oung Landon Fairthorne celebrated his sixteenth
biithday as the Platina sailed along the Australian coast.
He landed at Adelaide on 15th February, 1839. His
parents had provided him with £l5O to start him in life
in Australia. Apparently he lent a fellow traveller £IOO
and, when his creditor departed suddenly for Van Diemen’s
Land without repaying the money he was left with little


funds. He determined to save enough to enable him to
follow this person to recover his money. For a time he was
engaged in pastoral pursuits with his brother. Tiring of
this life, he moved to Adelaide, where he obtained work in
the office of a well-known firm of solicitors. After three
years, when he had sufficient funds for the venture, he took
passage for Van Diemen’s Land. This was towards the end
of 1842.


What must he have felt at the first sight of the
country which was to become his home? Sir John Franklin
was the lieutenant - governor, and the island was being
flooded with convicts. Transportation to New South Wales
had ceased in 1840 and Van Diemen’s Land remained as
the principal penal colony. The Legislative Council, which
formed part of the administration, then consisted entirely
of Crown nominees. There was no municipal government.
Roads had only begun to be metalled. Much of the colony
had still to be opened up. A few villages had been estab-
lished along the North-West Coast. The North-East Coast
awaited development. In the South interest was being
taken in a new area called the Huon, to-day one of the
great apple-producing districts of the world. The island
was garrisoned by detachments from the 96th Regiment
of Foot. Bushrangers roamed the countryside. Armed
guards had to be placed on the mail coaches because of
their activities. In fact, it was not safe for travellers to
ride the highways alone. The files of a Launceston news-
paper of 1842 disclosed that the bushrangers were becom-
ing increasingly daring. One report of that year discloses
that three of them held up thirty men on a farm.
The year of Fairthorne’s arrival witnessed several
notable events in the history of the country. The first
Bishop of Tasmania (Rt. Rev. Dr. F. R. Nixon) was
appointed; Hobart Town was created a city, and the
Roman Catholic Diocese was formally constituted with
Dr. R. W. Willson as Bishop. In the North a new journal
was established. This was “The Examiner.” Founded by
J. W. Aikenhead, its first editor was the Rev. John West.
The latter was to become a relative of Landon Fairthorne
by his marriage some years later. After some thought,
the young newcomer decided to settle in Launceston, then
a thriving township of about six thousand inhabitants.
Its chief official was the military commandant, who at that
time was Lieutenant-Colonel Cumberland of the 96th
Regiment. He was the last of the military commandants,
as the post was abolished two years later. The lieutenant-
governor had an official residence where City Park is now.


The exact site was about the south-east corner. Sir John.
Franklin was the last of the lieutenant-governors to reside-
nt Launceston.
Landon Fairthorne managed to secure an appointment
as clerk in the law offices of Gleadow and Henty. One of
his employers was a brother of Edward Henty, the founder
of Portland, the first permanent settlement in Victoria.
The Fairthorne business has had the same solicitors and
banking connections since 1842.
After a lapse of several years he resigned to take up
an appointment as book-keeper for Doctors William R.
Pugh and James Grant. They had their consulting rooms,
in a building at the corner of Frederick and St. John
Streets, Launceston. Later he became their dispenser, and
he probably was associated with St. John’s Hospital, which
was opened at the corner of Charles and Frederick Streets
on Ist September, 1845. Doctors Pugh and Grant were
the medical officers. This new interest caused young,
Fairthorne to take up the study of chemistry seriously.
Through the kindly interest of Doctor Pugh he resolved to
seek admission as a druggist under an Act of the
Legislative Council of 1842. This required that pharmacists
should pass an examination before being allowed to set up
in business. The examining body was the Court of Medical
Examiners appointed by the Crown under the first act of its-
kind adopted in the British Empire. This statement is sub-
stantiated in Volume I, No. 11, of the journal, “The Chemist
and Druggist of Australia,” published on Ist November,
1886. In reporting the first inter-colonial conference of
pharmacists, it is stated that the Tasmanian Act antici-
pated the English one by some years and by thirty years-
the other colonial pharmacy acts. This means that Landon
Fairthorne, who qualified as a pharmacist early in 1846,
was the first legally registered druggist of the British
Empire.
He had to satisfy the Court of Medical Examiners in
materia medica, chemistry, pharmacy and latin. On sth
January, 1846, he received his diploma, here reproduced:


— , — m - -V\
J vm k>
I ii'vWr Wi ii& frrui- JAvvvJ(hM vj (-fvc ftocuct-
[J
it
l'
:
,)
j vAVwA 'i / Cw SsSAui- Cvow«- d-tu^
(Jj owd
||1 i\\a Po-vvi^iovvtulj
11
|| CWvd- W H'Wv pC©
4o IWid
ii w vw (Wuj j _
Wv- WtVVO C^va^“
j yVvw/V5 W jW
| iiw Vn-w i^-
1
S
Jj itvkci- Iw —v_ pCtyy v£ -.——
e
/j HwvuiWt«l- mjAl- {vwvt<Wt pvwpt- jirvh^
I
1
(i
j
11
m ISL
j
i
|l /
i
{
4


The signatures on this diploma are those of Doctor
John Robertson, principal medical officer of the colony, as
president; Doctors E. S. P. Bedford, Robert Officer (later
knighted) and Cornelius Gavin Casey (grandfather of
Major R. G. Casey, lately Governor of Bengal).
The young druggist then moved to Longford, a grow-
ing township. The historic Christ Church, with the clock
presented by King William IV., had just been completed.
Here his fiancee resided. She was a niece of the Rev. John
West, first minister of Prince’s Square Congregational
Church, Launceston, one of the most celebrated figures of
the Victorian era. Champion of the colonies in their fight
to achieve the cessation of transportation of convicts, West
was also the author of the well-known history of Tasmania
which he published in 1852.
On his arrival at Longford, Landon Fairthorne, who
was twenty-three years of age in February, 1846. was
married. He opened up a business of his own in the
township. In the following December his first son,
Frederick Kirk Fairthorne, was born. In 1847, on the
advice of Doctor Grant, he moved to Launceston. His first
shop was in Charles Street. It was in that year that
Doctor William Pugh, one of his benefactors, made medical
history. On 7th June, he used ether as an anaesthetic at
St. John’s Hospital. He had constructed his own apparatus
from illustrations in the “Illustrated London News.” This
was the first recorded use of anaesthetics in the colonies.
Probably, he consulted Landon Fairthorne in the produc-
tion of the necessary apparatus.
Before 1850, Landon Fairthorne found that his
Charles Street shop was too small to meet the require-
ments of his growing business. He managed to secure
more suitable premises at the corner of Charles and York
Streets. Although this was outside the town proper, he
showed his wisdom and foresight, for Launceston was
growing rapidly. A partially elected Legislative Council
was granted to the colony in 1851. This was followed by


cessation of transportation of convicts and the jubilee of
the colony in 1853. Both events marked historic milestones
in colonial development.
The following advertisement, taken from “The
Examiner” of Bth July, 1848, is of interest:—
.Next ..wor to the custom taoose.
j >
-•3,
P-
-12
in
Kalydor
Odon to
Tooth, nail, and hair brushes
Best Turkey sponge
English lozenges
Fine Bermuda arrowroot
Patent and common trusses
Family and sea medicine chests neatly
and expeditiously fitted up
Prescriptions carefully dispensed
L. Fairthorke,
Chemist and Druggist.
Charles-street, July 4.
* r rx / '' VG inr rlrpcal- SllCC l '
Family medicine chests
Drugs and chemical preparations
Patent and tamily medicines
Assorted perfumery
Rowland & Son’s M,acassar oil
fo r
dir
Loi
si»i
Me
soli
€
str
As the town expanded round his shop, Landon Fair-
thorne’s business grew. He increased his staff and before
long had taken in another qualified chemist. This was to
enable him to pay more attention to outside interests.
A report published in “The Examiner” of 9th April,
1853, of the meeting of shareholders of the New Mersey
Coal Company, shows that Landon Fairthorne was one of
the first directors.
Much of his spare time was taken up in developing
his estate at Mount Edgecumbe, about thirty miles down
the River Tamar. Bushrangers visited his Mount Edge-
cumbe homestead during his absence and when only his


wife and women servants were there. The women were not
molested, but the bushrangers stole a whaling - boat and
made the voyage to Western Port, Victoria. In 1855 the
colony was granted responsible government and the name
was changed from Van Diemen’s Land to Tasmania. This
was the nomenclature used in the proclamation of the
Church of England Diocese in 1842.
Fairthorne became interested at this time in the
expansion of commerce. He founded an inter-colonial ship-
ping service. He bought the “Mariposa,” “Lorenzo Sabine,”
the “Clutha,” and chartered other vessels. These operated
between Melbourne, Sydney, New Zealand and Launceston.
His interests in pharmacy, however, soon demanded his
whole attention. He disposed of his ships and in the late
’sixties was able to open his first branch shop in Brisbane
Street, Launceston. This is still a pharmacy and is now
owned by F. Warland Browne and Son.
On 22nd March, 1871, Landon Fairthorne’s son,
Frederick Kirk Fairthorne, qualified as a pharmacist. He
had been educated at Horton College, Ross, and the Church
Grammar School, Launceston. It was soon after this that
his father took him into partnership. From that time
the firm never looked back. As L. Fairthorne and Son it
expanded its activities to many country centres. Branches
were established and more attention was given to the
development ot the wholesale side of the business.
With his son to help in the management, Landon
Fairthorne devoted some of his time to community work.
In 1880 he was elected an alderman of the town council.
On sth February, 1883, he was made a justice of the
peace. In the same year premises were acquired in St.
John Street, where the firm is now located. These were
added to and improved. An old print in the possession
of the firm shows the St. John Street building at the time.
It also indicates that there were then branches at
Brownell’s Building, in Liverpool Street, Hobart, and in
Scottsdale, Beaconsfield and Formby (later joined with
Torquay) as the township of Devonport.


42-48 ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON
1883
In 1884 Landon Fairthorne was elected Mayor of
Launceston. The same year saw the foundation of the
Launceston Pharmaceutical Association. In 1886 he was
chosen as the delegate from Northern Tasmania to the
first Pharmaceutical Conference in Australia. This was
held at Melbourne from 27th to 29th October. On the
motion of one of the New Zealand delegates (Mr. Pond),
Landon Fairthorne was elected president. Striking tributes
were paid to his qualifications for office as the senior
pharmacist at the conference.
In 1888 he retired from active direction of the firm,
leaving it in the capable hands of his son. Early in the
following year he left Tasmania on a visit to England.
Being unable to stand up to the cold winter at home, he
returned to Launceston in June a very sick man. Afflicted
with an affection of the heart he had also contracted other


minor ailments. A severe illness followed. For months he
was in a critical state, but he rallied to resume active work.
However, in April, 1890, he found it necessary to have an
operation in Melbourne. This was followed by a further
decline of health and he collapsed and died on 17th
August, 1890. Thus, at the age of sixty-seven, passed one
of the pioneer chemists of the British Empire.
At the time of his death he was a director of the
Cornwall Insurance Company and the Mount Bischoif Tin
Mining Company. In fact he had taken an active interest
and played a prominent part in gold and tin mining from
the opening-up of the first fields in Tasmania.
His heir and successor in the management of L. Fair-
thorne and Son, Frederick Kirk Fairthorne, was to follow
his father’s example in business and public life. He had
already taken an active part in defence matters, having
been lieutenant and adjutant of the Launceston Rifle Regi-
ment from 1881 to 1887. Promoted to the rank of captain
in January of that year, he retired shortly afterwards.
This was prompted by increased demands on his time by
the business.
On 10th March, 1893, he became a justice of the peace
for Launceston. He was elected president of the Pharma-
ceutical Society of Tasmania in 1894, holding office until
1897. In that year he accepted nomination and success-
fully contested a seat on the City Council. He was elected
to the highest civic office, that of Mayor of Launceston, in
1900 and held office for two terms. He was a member of
the Marine Board from 1902 to 1905.
At this time vast changes were taking place in Aus-
tralia. The proclamation of the Commonwealth of Australia
and the visit of Their Royal Highnesses, the Duke and
Duchess of Cornwall and York, were but two of the out-
standing events. In 1905 and 1906 his two sons, Landon
Cooper Fairthorne and Frederick Falkener Fairthorne,
joined him in the management of the firm. Frederick Kirk


Fairthorne continued as a member of the City Council
until 1908. The extension and development of the firm
made it necessary for him to withdraw from municipal
activity.
He maintained his father’s interest in mining and was
a diiecuor of a large number of companies. The most
impoitant of these was the Mount Bischolf Tin Mining
Company, which distributed over £2,500,000 in dividends.
The outbreak of war on 4th August, 1914, had its
effect on the business as much-needed supplies for civil
use had to be curtailed. Frederick Falkener Fairthorne,,
second son of the head of the firm, joined up with the
A.I.F. He enlisted on 18th August, 1914. Mentioned in
despatches, he served overseas for more than four years.
He gained his commission and was promoted to the rank
of captain.
When Fi edeiick Kirk Fairthorne died on 14th Novem-
ber, 1919, he was seventy-three years of age. It was
foitunate, however, that his two sons in the business were
qualified by experience to assume the direction of what
had aheady become a vast undertaking for Tasmania.
On Ist July, 1921, the firm became a proprietary
company. Six years later, on Ist December, 1927, the
retail section was sold. It continued thereafter for many
yeais as the only solely wholesale drug house in Tasmania.
With the passing of years Fairthorne’s became a name
known throughout Australia. Their products found their
way to markets far afield. The business continued to
progress and prosper and, in 1942, extensive alterations
were carried out to their headquarters in St. John Street,
Launceston, which were enlarged and modernised.
To-day, Fairthorne’s stands as a monument to the
pioneer who built for the future. One wonders whether
Landon Fairthorne could have dreamed of the day when
his him would stand as one of the great drug houses of
Australia.


When Frederick Falkener Fairthorne, Jimr., son of
F, F. Fairthorne, the managing- director, joined the firm in
1945, he made the fourth generation of the one family to
be employed in the same undertaking. He was wounded
while serving with the Australian Imperial Forces at El
Alamein in 1942. Thus did the great grandson of Landon
Fairthorne exemplify the spirit of the pioneer founder.
Landon Fairthorne had braved the perils of almost un-
known seas to start life in Van Diemen’s Land, but had
never lost his love of England. It was not surprising,
therefore, that when the call to arms came his descend-
ant was among the gallant young Australians who
responded.
This year, His Majesty the King has seen fit, on the
recommendations of those in authority, to recognise the
public services of F. F. Fairthorne, managing director and
grandson of the founder. He was created a Commander
FREDERICK KIRK FAIRTHORNE
(1846-1919)




of the Order of the British Empire. During World War 11.
he was actively associated with the conduct of the civil
defence organisation in Tasmania. He served for a period
of two years as Chief Air Warden of Launceston. Associated
with many war-time and patriotic activities in Launceston,
he participated in the foundation of Launceston Legacy.
In the disastrous Launceston flood of 1929 he was honorary
controller in organising rescue and relief work.
He is a life member of the Fathers’ Association. It
was fitting that in the centenary year recognition should
have been given to the working head of the firm. It was a
tribute to the pioneer chemist of the British Empire who
founded it, and to his son, grandsons and great-grandson,,
who have followed him in the conduct of a noted Australian
enterprise.
Landon Cooper Fairthorne joined the firm in 1905 and
is a director of the company. He is a rejected volunteer of
the Great War and has played an important part in his
company’s welfare and progress.
A third son of Frederick Kirk Fairthorne, Gordon Col-
lingwood Fairthorne, joined the firm in 1909. He enlisted in
the A.I.F. in 1915 and was discharged in 1917 medically
unfit. He died the same year.
Founded early in the reign of Queen Victoria, the
Fairthorne business has grown up over a period which has
seen four monarchs on the throne of the British Empire.
It has played its part in the expansion of Tasmania from
a penal colony into an integral part of the Commonwealth
of Australia. The events of the past century brought such
changes that it is almost impossible to believe that they
could have taken place in the time of one firm’s history. In
the days of 1842 coaches were the principal means of con-
veyance between the scattered settlements of Tasmania.
The trip from Launceston to Hobart Town usually took the
best part of two days. Even messages that were trans-
mitted by means of the primitive semaphore system, in-


augurated in 1818, took time to be delivered. Compare all
this with the use of radio and aeroplanes to-day. Letters
and travellers now take less than six days to reach Laun-
ceston from England. Radio messages are exchanged
simultaneously with all parts of the world. The same
hundred years has seen the growth of Launceston into one
of the key cities of Australia. The members of the family
of Landon Fairthorne have played their part in its develop-
ment. The firm has every reason to be proud of what has
been achieved in the century passed. As one of the few
firms which have grown up from the days of the pioneers,
Fairthorne’s occupies a unique place in Tasmania’s history.


I Set Up and Printed by I
J W. R. Rolph & Sons Pty. Ltd., !
! “The Examiner,” I
! 71-77 Paterson Street, Launceston, [
Tasmania.






TTIEJUIEIPJHfOWJE S-?l
<512*48 @X. jTOlHtr* STBEET
LaiUNCESTON
!P.O. IBIOSC WO. 239 !Bi
iLftUPSCESTON
ff/dc
irflv@R'irmrs?if a\
7th October, 1946
Mr. Justice J, A. Ferguson,
c/- Judges' Chambers,
Industrial Commission,
Queens Square,
SYDNEY
Dear Sir,
In reply to your letter of the
3rd inst. we are sending you under cover
of registered post a copy of the brochure
"Landon Fairthorne". We have packed the
brochure flat between cardboard in accordance
with your suggestion.
We would like to say that the
brochure was compiled by Mr, Basil Rait,
the official Tasmanian historian, and all
the facts mentioned in the brochure are
historically correct.
Yours faithfully,
L. FAIRTHORNS & SON PTY, LTD.
MANAGING DIRECTOR
