

Leaflet No. I (Second Series.) Price—is. 6d. per 100
Freetrade Democratic Association of Victoria.
OFFICE 325 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
LAND VALUE TAX versus
CUSTOMS DUTIES.
r Vbih
It is gradually becoming clear that a tax upon the unimproved value of
land is inevitable. The only question as yet unsolved is, whether this tax
shall be added to existing customs duties, or whether these shall be
abolished gradually and a tax on land values substituted for them. Pro-
tectionists advocate the former process ; Freetraders the latter. Convinced
as Freetraders are of the benefits which a tax on land values will confer
upon the community, they look for this benefit mainly through a shifting
and lightening of the burdens of taxation, and they are convinced that most
of the benefits will be lost unless other and more oppressive taxes are
removed simultaneously. The Freetrade Democratic Association, there-
fore, advocates a tax on land values in substitution for present burdens;
but it will oppose such a tax if it is proposed in addition to existing burdens.
This leaflet is designed to show the advantages which would accrue to
the community, and especially to the farming community, from a substitution
of a tax on land values for customs duties.
In order to expose the burdens which the customs duties inflict upon
the tax payers, it is necessary to show how their nominal amount multiplies
before they reach the people who ultimately pay them.
The total revenue which the Government derives from all duties (duties
on intoxicants and narcotics excepted) averages in round
numbers. This sum is every year paid by the importing merchants to the
Government, before they can sell the goods which they have purchased
abroad. They pay interest on that sum, and as it forms part of the cost of
their goods they must make their average profit on it.
These importers, however, sell to storekeepers, who mostly do not even
know by how much the cost of the goods to them has been increased by
customs duties. They also must make their average profit on the whole
cost. It has been ascertained that the expenses of importers and store-
keepers are so heavy that the former must make an average gross profit of 20
per cent, and the latter of 337}- per cent, in order to make a net profit of 5
per cent. The calculation therefore stands thus : An importer who could
sell his goods for if no duty had to be paid, but who has to pay ,£lOO
duty on them, will now sell them to the storekeeper for The store-
keeper would sell them for if no duty had been paid. But he is now
compelled to sell them for and both importer and storekeeper have
made no higher rate of profit than if there were no duty. While the Govern-
ment got only, the price of goods has been increased to the public
by and at this rale the public repays to the traders ,£1,440,000 a year
for the £900,000 which they pay to the Government.
There remains to be considered the amount which the public pay to the
protected manufacturers. These gentlemen charge higher prices for the
protected goods than the latter could be bought for in the absence of
protective duties, and not one penny of this extra price reaches the Govern-
ment. It is purely a bonus which the public pays to private persons.


(Except duties on Intoxicants and Narcotics.)
Government Revenue ~ . . .. .. ~ £9OO 000
Profit of importers and storekeepers thereon . . .. ..
Increased price charged by protected manufacturers .. .. oqo
Importers' profit on one-half thereof .. .. ..
Retailers’profits on two-thirds thereof .. .. .. 000
Total Cost .. .. £4 964 000
In order that the Government shall get a revenue of from the
Customs House, the people have to pay of which sum over
goes into the pockets of private people. On an average,,
therefore, every Victorian —man, woman and child—pays £4 4s. a year
in customs duties; or, every father of a family pays on an average a
year, taking a family to average six persons.
While this is the average for the colony, it is often contended that the
average for farmers is less because they are so poor, that they consume less
goods than the rest of the people. T here is some truth in this objection,
but it overlooks the fact, that while the bulk of the people pay duties on
their personal and household expenses only, the farmers pay duties on the
instruments of their trade as well. All farming implements, most of the
machinery, buggies, carts, barbed wire and other such things are dutiable,
and it follows, therefore, that the average taxation of farmers cannot well be
less than the average for the whole community. In order to meet all objec-
tions, however, we will place it at instead of for a farmer’s family.
There is, however, another consequence of customs duties to be taken
into account which affects farmers alone. The object of Protection is to
reduce the quantity of foreign goods coming to our shores, and Protection
succeeds in this object. If, however, less goods come here, less ships are
required to carry them, and therefore less ships are available to carry our
farm produce. Consequently there is less competition between ship
owners and the ocean freight on our farm produce is higher than it
would be under freetrade conditions.
The following quotations will prove this fact. The Age, in August, 1895,
wrote ; —“ The great difficulty (in the way of the live cattle trade) is, of
course, the question of freight. There are plenty of cattle boats to be got,
if only there could be secured for them an outward freight. . . With
the reduced volume of goods now being shipped to Australia this is a very
difficult matter, but until it is done no head-way can he made.”
The Argus , of April 14, 1896, reports: —“Freight from Sydney to
London is to-day 15 - per ton, while from Melbourne to London freight
is 22 6 per ton.”
This increase of freight reduces the price which our farmers get for their
produce; not only for that which is exported, but for all of it. For the
price of all produce at a Victorian farm is—years of scarcity excluded —
dependent upon the London price. If, for instance, wheat brings 4/- a
bushel in London, and it costs 1- to take it there, the highest price our
farmers can get for any wheat is 3 - per bushel. But if it costs 1/6 to take the
u.
0
m
Ml
h
<
Q
5
z
<
Q
{£
o
M.
Ul
h
O
>
CO
z


wheat to London, the highest price in Victoria is 2/6 for any wheat. Ever ■
increase of freight, therefore, reduces the price of produce in Victoria, and
any reduction of freight increases it.
How much our farmers Jose in this manner through the action ot
customs duties can be approximately ascertained. For, some years ago, the
import-reducing action of customs duties was largely counteracted by
borrowing. When we borrow we never get money, but always get goods.
Even when we were borrowing most we were exporting gold. This is now
admitted by the Age itself, which paper has at last dropped the false cry that
“Protection keeps the money in the country.” At that time, say 1889,
therefore, ships were more plentiful in our bay, and freights were conse-
quently lower. The following is a comparison of the average freight (as
given by the leading shipping brokers in Melbourne) paid on wheat then
and during the last season, when the borrowing had ceased and the
import-reducing action of protection was in full swing:—
1889. T 895. Increase.
Tons. Tons. Tons.
Steamer... ... ... 10/- 19/6 9/6
Sailing ship (full cargo) ... 21/8 25/6 4/2
This gives an average increase in freight of 6/10 per ton of wheat.
During these years, however, freights have fallen largely in all other parts,
and specially wheat freights. The Age, of February 22, 1896, reports that
while the average freight paid on all wheat landed in England was 29/-
V a ton in 1882, it had fallen to 15/- a ton in 1894. This is a fall of 14/- a
ton in 13 years, or for the period of 6 years which we are considering, a fall
of 6 5 per ,ton. There can be no doubt that there would have been a
similar fall in the rate of freight from Victoria if Protection had not stopped it,
The real increase of freight caused by Protection may, therefore, be 13 2 a ton,
and cannot be less than 10/- a ton. The latter rate is equal to per
bushel, and a farmer who has 1500 bushels of wheat to sell, or any other
produce of similar quantity, therefore, loses ,£2O a year. He would get £2O
more for his produce -under freetrade conditions than under protective
conditions whatever the world's price for produce might be.
The total cost of the customs duties to an average Victorian farmer,
therefore, is as follows :
In increased prices of the goods he buys ... ... £2O
In reduced prices of the goods he sells ... ... ... £2O
Total loss ... ... £4O
This sum ot £4O every farmer loses on an average every year, and the
whole revenue of the Government, thus obtained, is, as already stated, only
£900,000. If we want now to know how much farmers would save by the
substitution of a tax on land values for these customs duties, we must first
ascertain what loss of revenue will arise from the abolition of the customs
duties. Numerically, as already shown, it is ,£900,000. As, however, the
abolition of these duties will enormously stimulate the agricultural, mining
and other industries, the experience of other countries will be repeated
here, and it will be found that other sources of revenue will become more
lucrative as these duties are gradually removed. This will be especially
the case with railways, post and telegraphs and the territorial revenue, and
even the lowest estimate would not place this increase at less than 10 per
cent, of the remaining revenue, or say ,£500,000 a year. Nevertheless we
will place it at ,£250,000 only, and the revenue to be raised by the taxation
of the unimproved value of land would thus be ,£650,000 a year.
The unimproved value of the alienated land of Victoria (in cities, towns
and country) is stated by the Government Statist to be £130,569,620.
Th : s, however, does not include the value of the franchise of city streets,
granted to gas, electric, tram and similar companies. This value may safely
/VSS^/^yCeh


Loss from customs duties ... ... £4O o o
Payment under tax on land values ... £2 13 4
Saving ... £37 6 8
By the substitution of a tax on the unimproved value of land for the
present system of customs duties, every farmer on an average would thus
save close upon £4O a year, and the Government would nevertheless
obtain a larger revenue than at present. '
This enormous saving to the farming community arises from the following
causes; —
1. Saving of loss on ocean freights.
2. Saving of the revenue of £4,000,000, which customs duties divert
from the Treasary into private pockets.
3. The farmers, while they own a large area of land, own little in land
values, as compared with squatters, and especially as compared with city land-
lords. These two classes pay very little in customs taxes, but they would pay
the bulk of the tax on land values, as the following table shows ;
CONTRIBUTIONS TO TAX ON UNIMPROVED VALUB OF LAND—Rate of lid in £.
Total Amount of
Assessments. Connibution.
£ £
62.187,570 388,667
57,324,405 358 277
16,057,645 100,360
135,569.620 847,301
ss than 12 per cent, of th
ian 12 per cent, to the re
ie many millions now wa
to the whole people. By
for customs duties, therefoi
Per cent of
Contribution.
Cities, Towns and Boroughs ...
v Squatters and Country Townships
Farmers
r
45.88
42 28
100.00
\j. The farming community, owning less than 12 per cent, of the unimproved
value of land, would contribute less than 12 per cent, to the revenue actually
per cent, to the revenue actually
received by the Government and the many millions now wasted would be
saved and would form a positive gain to the whole people. By substituting a
c-tax on the unimproved value of land for customs duties, therefore, the taxation
■ (V paid by the whole people would be enormously reduced, and the remainder
would be re-distributed in a manner strictly in accordance with justice, but to
i fN, the enormous relief of the farming community. A great impetus would thus
be given to the farming industry, and the resulting prosperity would be felt
in every nook and corner of the land would give employment to labour,
trade to the merchants and work to the manufacturing industries.
The Beacon Newspaper Company Limited, jajCsllins Street, Melbourne.
