

a
a
a
a
a. f.
a
a
a
fr
M a
a
ft fj
PTI pPTfllilTYt 13 V3lin
It a
y
ILU
Tlutiuui JUuUu T uAuuiu
1L a
y
fir
llfj “
g|
M
a
a
a
a
a
a
■A. -A- -A- -A.
A • 4 A AAA AA A A 4 A AAA4
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
y
a
a
a
a
a
e
E
E
E
B
E
No Betterment—No Tax.
a
a
*
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
/
E
a
E
a
E
a
a
(BY A. H. SAMPSON.)
B
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
E
a
B
a
—- —
B
a
E
a
E
a
B
a
E
a
E
a
E
m
TaMWORTH:
a
yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyay
Q
“ TO EVERY MAN HIS OWN !”
y
y
y
y
y
a
a
a
a
0 TODD & HOOKE, (GENERAL PRINTERS, “OBSERVER” OFFICE. 13
a u
1 1895. g
a y
EEBEEBBEEBEEEEEEECEEaaaaaaaSEEEEEEEEEEEEBEEEEB




“ TO EVERY MAN HIS OWN !”
|ani IsttemM taxation
No Bettermeut —No Tax.
(BY A. H. SAMPSON.)
Tamwopth
TODD & HOOKE, GENEBAL PRINTERS, “OBSERYEE” OFFICE.
1895-




jr/O
1 - 1 'll
“TO EVERY MAN HIS OWN.”
(NO BETTERMENT-NO TAX.)
[By A. H. SAMPSON.]
Upper Manilla, 2nd September, 1595.
LAND TAX.—Mr. Moore presented a petition from certain land-
holders and residents of Upper Manilla, in the Bitigara Electorate, in
public meeting assembled, representing that, in the opinion of the
meeting’, it is economically unsound, and therefore unjust, to-levy a land
value tax upon the amount paid, or contracted to be paid to the State,
but that a betterment tax, or tax upon the unearned increment of land,
is economically sound and just; and praying the House to give effect to
such betterment tax by making it the law of the land.
Petition received.
The above is quoted from the Yotes and Proceedings of the
Legislative Assembly of the 28th August, 1895. Ought the prayer
•ot this petition to be granted ?
I was present at two public meetings, one at Upper Manilla,
the other at Manilla, at which this question was discussed, and
although at these meetings there were men of all shades of political
thought—freetraders and protectionists, federationists and anti-
federationists, local optionists and cojppensationists—men opposed
to each other in so many other ways, yet, on this question they
were cheek by jowl, hands joined, unanimous and enthusiastic;
•every man in the room on each occasion signed the petition. Of
the 52 farmers, 7 graziers, and 25 of other occupations, only 4i—prob-
ably but 3—would have to pay anything under Mr. Keid's land tax
measure; though, under the betterment system, nearly all of them
would have to pay something. Clearly, then, there is no effort on


their part to escape their just contribution to the State, and make-
“the other fellow” pay; and it.,spems to me that even their
opponents must admit the strength of the bond of justice which
can so unite such otherwise opposing elements.
Probably some of our profound* political economists, who con-
stantly exhibit such profound entanglement of thought, yet are so
cock-sure that they only are right, may sneer at the easily impressed
bucolic intellect giving unanimous assent to so “deep a subject.” The
subject is no. more complex than the demonstration concerning the
square of the hypothenuse, which, although thought by Pythagoras
to be a revelation from the gods, is now' daily mastered in our
public schools by boys and girls of 14 years of age. The subject is
made deep, only by reasoning—often honestly enough, as in Mr.-
Bruce Smith’s case from alleged first principles which are in
reality only faulty deductions from first principles; and, also, by
specious reasoning—often interested —which clouds the issue
between right and wrong. We may pass by the scoffers, then, with
the simple statement that there is in most men a substratum of
honesty, sufficient, when properly appealed to, to give a righteous
verdict on questions of fair dealing. The present writing may be-
cited as an instance, seeing that the expense of its publication wilL
be defrayed by men who are not rich, who, under Mr. Beid’s system
of exemptions would escape taxation, but, who, under the Better-
ment sj'stem would not escape.
Under promise by the editor of the “Daily Telegraph” that
space would be accorded, the following letter was written on the
2nd of April last, and handed by me to him on the follow ing day:
STRENGTHENING THE UPPER HOUSE.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ DAILY TELEGRAPH.”
Sir, — A plank in the platform of the Freetrade, Land and Reform
League is “ Reform of the Upper House.” How difficult it will be to
effect this, owing to the Socialistic course of recent legislation in the
Assembly, has been ably shown in the leading columns of the “Daily
Telegraph.” The Socialistic view that all the means of production
and distribution should be taken by the State implies that the State can
do better with the individual’s earnings than he can himself ; and there
is a clear line of cleavage between these who assert this, and those who
say that “ That which a man earns is his against the whole world.” As.


between these two the principles aie opposing and the issues clear; but
when we find various sections of politicians who disclaim any sympathy
with Socialism, taking by taxation, under this pretext, or that, the indi-
vidual earnings of some of the people to subsidise other of the people,
many are misled, by their professed antagonism to Socialism, to believe
that these agressions are not of it, as in fact they are. What difference
■other than of degree is there between State Socialism, and Mr. Lyne’s
pipe contract, Mr. Young’s minimum wage, Mr. Schey’s penalising of
labor, and Mr. Reid’s exclusion of Victorians from our public works? Is
"there not in each case the assumption that the State can do better with
-our earnings than we can ourselves ? But, bad as these agressions are,
they are as nothing in the abandonment of principle, involved in the pro-
posal to tax those who have purchased land from the State on the amount
paid or contracted to be paid for it ; and it is with deep regret I find
Mr. Frank Cotton, who has been one of the foremost in proclaiming
“That what a man earns is his against the "whole world” supporting
it. What would Mr. Cotton say if a man, having sold him a piece of
land yesterday, called upon him to-day for a rent for it ? Probably he
would call a policeman. If the man, objecting to the policeman, said,
■“ Well, the land is worth £1 a week, but I don’t want the full rent, give
me half-a-crown,” he would still call a policeman. Why ? Because the
man would be attempting to rob him. Would such a demand for rent be
any less a robbery because done by the State ? Surely not.
Speaking in support of the proposal to tax on the amount paid, Mr.
■Cotton says:—“The real question at issue between Mr. Wise and the
Single Taxers is this : Can any legal bargain justify a moral claim on
the labour of generations yet unborn? Can any ‘payment’ made
yesterday, or a century since, to any one man or set of men, give a
moral right to take from quite another individual, or set of individuals,
the products of his or their labour without giving equal present value
to the full extent of present service ?”
The answer to each of these questions is “No.”
Again he says: —“It is no use Mr. Wise endeavouring to prove that
in some remote time somebody paid the Single Taxer’s great grand-
father, or somebody else’s grandfather, or the Government of the day,
for the right to levy tribute upon him. His reply is, ‘ Nobody paid !vie
and if I can help it nobody shall take the products of my labour.to-day,
unless he is willing to give me the products of his labour in exchange.’
In the famous words of Jefferson the Single Taxer contends ‘ The land
belongs in usufruct to the living, and over it the dead can have no
power’.”


If it were true, as implied by Mi. Cotton, that the purchase of
State-made value to the date of purchase, but not one moment beyond,
gave the purchaser, or those who inherited from him, power to levy
tribute to the extent of one single farthing on the labor of others, then
Mr. Cotton’s position would be unassailable ; but, fortunately, it is wholly
untrue. If the man of the future could truthfully use the words Mr.
Cotton puts into his mouth, and say “Nobody paid me” Mr. Cotton
would be right, but here again, the assumption is wholly erroneous ; he
has been paid in advance to the uttermost farthing. To show this, let us
take as an example a Central District selection, unimproved, of 2560 acres.
Keeping in mind what Mr. Wise’s followers insist on, that future values
can not equitably be sold, what is it that the purchaser buys ? Clearly
the State-made value to date, and nothing else. For £2560 worth of
State-made increment he gives £2560. What becomes of the money ? At
4 per cent it is worth £lO2 8s per annum ; and, if it is held simply as
money at interest, it passes on to the man of the future for his use just
as completely as its use goes to the man of to-day : it belongs to him,,
as to us, in usufruct. How then can he truthfully say “ Nobody paid
me.” If the money is used to improve the country, and make it yield
more wealth for less labor, as every expenditure of capital, every im-
provement does, is he not paid to the utmost in having his labor made
so much more effective ? How can this exchange of value for value give
anyone power to levy tribute on him ? The truth is that the argument
that it is so is based upon false premises ; and no such power will exist
except through his own ignorance.
Limit of space prevents me saying much on the position of the man
who has bought his land from a private individual; suffice it to say that
two wrongs cannot make a right, and it betrays the most abject mental
poverty to say that because A has been allowed to plunder B, who has
bought from him, therefore, the only way for the Government of the coun-
try to do equal justice to its people is to step in and plunder all who have
bought land from it. The idea will certainly be scouted throughout the
country, and no enemies of land value taxation and other reforms could
wish for anything better than for such a proposal to be sent to the Upper
House, where it will meet the fate it deserves ; but at the cost of streng-
thening that House in the future, as against reforms that are just.
Well may that House, knowing how it would be supported in
rejecting such a proposal, say to the Assembly, “ You have no mandate
from the people to inflict upon landowners such an injustice.”
I would refer any of your readers, who wish to follow this subject
up, to Mr. Wise’s article in the current No. of “ Cosmos ” entitled
“ Land Betterment Taxation versus Land Property Taxation.”


One of the last positions I would seek is that of accuser of a
great daily paper. The position is an unenviable one, in that, every
■day and in a thousand different ways it can harass you, while your
opportunities of reply are exceedingly limited; and, beyond this, it
must be regarded as deeply deplorable that the cause of truth,
renders such a course a necessity. But what was there in the letter
quoted which induced the “ Telegraph ” to delay its publication ?
(It was handed in on the 3rd April, and, not appearing, was with-
drawn on the 22nd April.) Was it not of sufficient merit? It
would be presumptuous in me to say it was; but, this I may say
without any presumption, that, not twelve months previously, the
“ Telegraph ” referred to me as one of the best exponents of land
value taxation in the colony. Then, if this were true, I was justly
entitled to be heard; surely they did not wish some incompetent
person to reply, who could be demolished in one act. But, perhaps,
it was not “ expedient” to publish it. We may venture to assume
that this is the answer, because the “ Telegraph ” assures us “ that
principle must sometimes be sacrificed to expediency.” But what
teaching l The poor girl, hesitating as to the street, may believe
that such a mode of life is not quite in accord with moral principle ;
yet think it very inexpedient that she should be ill-clothed and ill-
fed. How shall she decide between principle and expediency?
Shall she read the “ Telegraph ” to ascertain ? Indeed, as Mr.
Herbert Spencer says, “ there is no crime on earth that may not
be sanctioned by this doctrine of expediency.” Sometimes,
however, the “ Telegraph ” is as vehement in its advocacy of
principle as the most earnest of us could wish; the trouble is that
it leaves us in a dilemma as to when we should adopt principle and
when expediency. Was it, for instance, expediency or principle
which induced it to usher in Mr. Carruther’s Land Bill with pseans
of praise, although it contained a proposal, which, after being
eliminated by the Assembly, and reinstated by the Upper House,
was declared by the “ Telegraph ” would be a curse. Brought
forward by Mr. Carruthers it was splendid; but brought forward
by the Upper House it was infamous. I refer to the clause amended
by Mr. Ashton re periodical revaluation.
Speaking on taxation the “ Telegraph ” says :
“ There can be no just claim by the community on any man for ai
portion of his earnings any more than there can be by any individual


upon a portion of what can be plainly classified as public earnings.
This is unexceptionable; but, what shall be said of the
following passage ? v; .. < *.
‘ The idea on which taxation of incomes is founded is simply that
because men are able they can be compelled to pay towards public
revenue. The income tax is a class tax on persons who are assumed
to be able to spare the amount asked by the State from them with-
•out greatly feeling the loss of it. There is ho principle underlying
this tax; there is no question at stake, only this of the ability of
the person levied upon to pay.”
Just so : these were the principles on which Gardiner, the bush-
ranger, acted. As he had determined to rob some persons, he
decided to rob only those who had “ ability to pay,” and let the
poorer ones go free. Robberj r , however, it was all the same, and,
lowever laudable such ethics were, in the bushranger, some of us
would prefer to see a somewhat higher standard adopted by the
Government of the country and by the press which supports it.
Again, tlie “ Telegraph ” says
“ The chief purpose of a tax on land values is to adjust the payment
of public revenue to the requirements of equity. It does not take,
as other forms of taxation do, any part of the earnings of
individuals.* It only takes, as compensation to the public, a
percentage of the value given to privately-owned lands by public
expenditure. It is regulated, not by the ability of the person on
whom it is levied to contribute to State expenditure, but according
to the benefit the landowners have already reaped in the solid form
of increased land values; The making of railways, telegraph lines,
roads, bridges, and every other public improvement which tends to
afford greater facilities for national development and expansion,
specifically benefits one class of the community—the
These improvements increase the value of land. And while the
•owner of land stands only in the same relation to the Government,
which thus confers on him a particular advantage, as does every
other taxpayer, it is evident than even-handed justice is not being
done. If the approach to it, which land value taxation attempts, is
to be worthy of the name, every pound’s worth of value contributed
by public expenditure to private landowners should pay ita
percentage to the Treasury. Political expediency may over-ride


-political principle in this matter, and the earnest advocates of land
value taxation may have to accept the tax with some measure of
exemption, but it may be taken for granted that their efforts in the
future will be directed to the repeal of these exemptions.”
Novr if these words are applied to the taxation of the unearned
increment of land values they are essentially true; but if they are
applied to the taxation of land values, inclusive of the amount paid
or contracted to be paid to the State, they are just as essentially
false. Which method of taxation does the “ Telegraph ” advocate ?
Let the reader scrutinise the paragraph, and note well on which side
the argument is advanced; for, not even political expediency could
demand any exemption even to the smallest holder when he is asked
only for a portion of that value which has been given to his land by
the State. Take, for instance, the case of our smallest selector, the
40 acre man. Under Betterment how would he be treated ? For his
40 acres he pays £4o—his earnings—that is not touched ; his im-
provements —also his earnings—are not touched ; but, if the State, by
means of a railway, or other improvements, or mere increase of
population, add to his land another £4O, he is asked for a portion
of that. How- is he injured by being asked for a contribution of
40 pennies, or 3s 4d, out of this £4O which he has not earned, but
had given him by the people ? Is he not, in fact, better off than the
non-landholder, seeing that he pockets £39 odd which he has not
■earned? Ap one farmer remarked on this subject “ As often as ever
you like to add £4O in value to my farm I am willing to give you 3s 4d
a times a week if you like —for, even should the betterment
tax be increased by successive steps until the whole of it was returned
to the State that gave it, I should still be as well off as the man who
had to earn his £4O with his team or in some other way ; but, in
the meantime, I am better off, because I pocket the difference
between what the State gives and what it takes; and, while you
leave my earnings alone, I cannot be ruined or driven off the land.
But, under Mr. Reid's system of taxing our earnings, that is on the
.amount which we have paid, I might be ruinpd by any unscrupulous
or Socialist ministry who happened to have a majority. They could
by successive steps under his system take all my earnings to be
.used by the State as the Socialists avowedly desire.” Compare the
language of this farmer with the following intemperate and illogical
•expressions of Mr. Reid’s :


MR, WISE’S EXEMPTION.
‘ Mr. Wise here comes flashing across the scene, and in effect
says:— ‘ This exemption to save the small man is atrocious. Let
us have this kind of exemption,’ says the wily member for
Flinders, ‘ let us take off all the money paid by these enormous
estates which were bought by auction from the Government.’'
(Laughter.) Just fancy my chance of carrying a land tax if I had
deducted the millions paid by the large owners at £1 an acre- —not
taking a penny off the struggling farmer, but taking millions off the
big landed estates. (Cheers.) That is the sort of help Mr.
gives me. (Laughter.) He knew well that if he could put his=
system in my bill —no exemptions for the struggling selector, every~
exemption for the big landed estate man—the whole system would
fall to pieces. (Cheers.) You see lam a little bit too clever evert
for Mr. Wise. (Cheers, and laughter.) ”
Does the farmer suffer in this comparison ? Again, place Mr_
Reid’s language in juxtaposition with what I have already quoted
from the “ Telegraph ” “ that there can be no just claim by tlie-
community on any man (observe any man) for a portion of his earn-
ings any more than there can be by the individual upon a portion of
what can be plainly classified as public earnings. It (the land tax)
does not take, as other forms of taxation do, any part of the earnings
of individuals.’ Aet, Mr. Reid would levy on the earnings of a
Central Division selector, who had paid £2560 for his selection, to-
the extent of taxing him on £2085, if his land were worth £1 an
acre ; and the man who had earned £20,000, and paid it to the State
for land, would have £19,525 of his earnings taxed. Does not this
savour somewhat strongly of the “ ability to pay ” morality of our
friend the bushranger, to whom I have already alluded ?
Personally I hare as little reason to love the Banks and other
great financial institutions, about whom Mr. Reid raises such an
outcry, as perhaps anyone else. I know their power only too well.
I once refused to shake hands with a bank manager, and the next
day had my overdraft called up. I know that you may enter the-
bank parlour, arrange your overdraft to your complete satisfaction,,
and, upon the strength of it, regulate your business and obligations,,
and still have the whole thing tumbled about your ears in a
moment without any redress. Many, indeed, have been ruined bjr
their arbitrary power. But, will two wrongs make a right? Is it-


right to try and work up popular feeling instead of popular reason;
—to stir up class hatreds instead of class sense ? It appears to me-
that in discussions of this nature, personal, or even class, feelings
should have no place : justice, and that alone, should guide us ; for r
we may rest assured that, in the end, injustice will come home to
roost. What if some of the banks’ millions do escape taxation ?
Have we not got these millions ? Are we not using them to make-
our country more productive, to make the workman’s labour yield
him more wealth than before? I know many will say, “ Yes, we-
have got the millions, but they are not being used for the benefit of
the worker; they are going back to the landowner.” ’Well, whose-
fault is it if it is so? Are we to punish innocent people for our own
want of sense ? What answer is it to the selector on the Mclntyre,
a portion of whose £2085 of earnings Mr. Reid proposes to abstract,,
and, who tells you he has given you full value for the value you
have given him, what answer is it to him to say that all im-
provements eventually go to benefit the landowners ? His
reply is “Yes, to the benefit of the landowners as a whole,.
I admit, and therefore, you should take from them in pro-
portion as they are benefited; but, if you take £IOO from me
and expend it in Sydney, I may get a fractional benefit, while a
Sydney landowner will get a large benefit from my money : this is
not justice.” Strangely enough, too, Mr. Reid half recognises the
injustice of his own proposal, since, above the £475 exemption, he
would tax the man whose land was worth £1 an acre on that £i
worth, notwithstanding that the State was receiving the full rental
value of the land in the shape of interest on the money ; yet, if the-
State were leasing this same land at its rental value, Mr. Reid
would not tax the lessee. Why not ? Why should he, in the one
case, take the rental value only, and, in the other, take the rental
value and then demand a further rent in the form of a tax ? The
name, whether tax or rent, under which you take a man’s money
amounts to very little ; the essential thing is that you deprive him
of it. But, after all, is there not a great deal of either sham or
ignorance about Mr. Reid's big estates cry—meaning, thereby, large
estates of country lands ? We do not hear much outcry about big
estates consisting of one acre of bare land in Sydney, and which
draws its revenues from the country at large ; but let us turn the
tables a little, and quote the following from a letter recently
publishe4 in favour of land value taxation, or rather of land-


Betterment taxation, for, although the term betterment is not used,
the argument would not apply except to betterment: —
“It is those men who cannot get homes for themselves who
are the chief sufferers through the absence of a land tax which
would enable them to get them.
At the present moment the landlord squeezes out every
-shilling of rent that he can get ; he could get no more no matter
what land tax were imposed. The land tax would have to be paid
out of rent. Dr. McLaurin, in his speech against the land tax,
showed this clearly enough when he argued that the tax would
reduce rents by one and eightpence in the £. It is well to examine
this point. Not long ago less than half an acre of lanl in George-
street, Sydney, was sold for £124,000, or at the rate of £250,000 an
acre. Dr. McLaurin argues upon rent at a basis of 5 per cent, of
the capital value of land ; but let us be more moderate, and put it
at four per cent.; then this one acre of bare land would cost
£lO,OOO a year for rent. Looking at this we may well ask, ‘What
must be the enormous amount of rent paid on all the thousands of
acres in and around Sydney, and who pays it? There is no wealth
produced without labor; therefore it is we, the farmers and
working men, who produce every copper of it. Farmers do not live
on rent; they are rent-makers. Their strippers, ploughs, harrows,
everything they use, even to their pocket knives, pay rent in
Sydney before they get them. They send their wool or their wheat
to Sydney, it pays rent; they cannot even shoot a kangaroo or a
possum but part of the value of the skin must go as rent to
Sydney ; everj'tliing they eat, drink, or wear, their wives’ dresses
and medicine, their babies’ socks pay rent. And what do they get
in return for all this wealth which they give away? Dr. McLaurin
■says the rich men employ many servants and people to supply their
wants. Quite true. But who finds the money ? And what do we
get in return? The answers are: We find the money, and our
Teturn is permission to use the Creator’s gift—Port Jackson—a
beauteous gift which we (by coal digging) seem disposed to begrime
with our own dirtiness, and thus erect a monument of leprous greed
and ignorance for posterity to point to with pity and contempt.
“ These rich men may live in Europe or elsewhere, and employ
■many people to wait on them, but we, the producers and workmen


here, find the money. This is why we want a land value tax —a little
less rent for these landlords, and a little more of the wealth we
produce to go into our own pockets.
“ Many men think that because they never actually paid money
directly as rent, therefore they do not pay rent. Let them ask
themselves : ‘ Where do the merchants of Sydney get the enormous
amounts of rent which they hand over to the Sydney landowners?’
Is it not added to the price of their clothing and everything they
use ? Let us not mistake ; every worker is a producer, and there is-
not one of us who escapes.”
Thus it will be seen that an acre of land in Sydney, may be a
very “ Big Estate ” —an estate equal to one of 250,000 acres of gooch
country land ; yet, when land value taxation is demanded by the
people, so as to reach some of this enormous city betterment, the
cry goes up, “ Leave out the incorporated areas.” How short-
sighted are country municipalities who echo this cry, while most
of their energies are absorbed in the great octopus of Sydney better-
ment' If we ask for a railway, to which we are justly entitled, we
are informed that it must be built on the betterment system. I wish
it were so—on the true betterment system, which would take the
betterment wherever it arose.
But this is not what our informants mean. They mean take
the betterment at the country end of the railway and leave the
Sydney end alone. “ Leave out incorporated areas.”
Some writers, who quote Mr. Herbert Spencer on the inequity of
private property in land, say that we should be taxed on what the
State has received for it, because, otherwise, private property in-
land is sanctioned up to the amount of the purchase money; and,
they cite as an analagous case that of the purchase of slaves. As
the position taken is supposed to be one of pure equity, not law,,
let us examine it from this standpoint. Then, in neither the case of
the land, nor that of the slaves had anyone ever any right to sell.
So much may be granted. But, does not the analogy end here ?
The State would infringe no principle of equity in leasing land; but
it would infringe its very first principles in leasing slaves. Further,
the “ presence and needs of the community ” increase land, values—
give a betterment —are in fact communal earnings, and, if taken by


anyone other than the earners, wrong is committed but the “ pres-
ence and needs of the community ” would give no more value to
the slave than they would to any piece of machinery. If you left
apiece of land idle in George-street for fifty years there would be a
large State-made value or unearned increment attaching to it, but if
you left the slave there for fifty years he would probably be dead.
There is no unearned increment about a slave.
But let us test this matter a little further. Suppose the State,
having the power,, should say to a citizen, “ Here is a slave whom
I will sell to you for £1000.” The citizen agrees, and pays the
money. As soon as the State gets this money, it turns round and
says, “ You are a fool; I had no moral right to sell that slave,
therefore he is free.” “ Very well,” says the citizen, “I do not
object to his freedom ; so hand back my money.” If the State
says “ No, I intend to keep that,” where is the equity ? But the
case as to land is even more inequitable than this : it is as though
the State, having sold the slave and ; confiscated the purchase-
money, coolly turned round and leased the slave at a rent amount-
ing to the interest of the purchase money, thus getting a double
rent for him, first as interest, second as rent.
Little need we concern ourselves about shibboleths. As to the
words “private property in land” it may be said that when we
lease land we sanction private property in it to the extent of the
lease and the amount paid as rent. The question at issue is not one
of names but of realities ; and, what we have to concern ourselves
about, is that this ownership shall not be absolute and uncondi-
tioned, but that under it justice shall be meted out to every indivi-
dual. This granted, we may and ought to fairly put to ourselves,
at this juncture, the following, questions : Would the community
or any of its members be wronged under Mr. Beid's system of taxa-
tion? The answer seems to. me to be emphatically yks. Would
the community or any of its members be wronged under the better-
ment system of taxation ? The answer comes just as emphatically
no. Then, in the name of justice and commonsense let us adopt
that from which no human being will suffer.
I bare no doubt whatever but that this article will be by some
considered highly “ inexpedient." Personally it may fce so ; cer-
tainly I do not suppose it would help me to a place on the staff of


the “ Daily Telegraph ” or obtain me much favor with the Banks or
the Socialists, which, in view of the ruination weather now upon us,
is a consideration not to be lightly overlooked. Well, I cannot
help it ; the issues are too grave. That we are face
to face with land value taxation in some form nothing
but the sheerest infatuation can deny. Tens of thousands
■of men will not daily walk the streets of Sydney and see land made
worth millions by their exertions, and, which, in many cases, cost
its owners but a couple of gallons of rum, contributing nothing to the
State, while they, the earners, have to bear all the burden of taxa-
tion. It is not in human nature that they should; and, therefore, the
■question is of the utmost moment to us as to whether this land
value taxation shall be upon lines that are just or upon lines that
are unjust.
That the most strenuous efEorts will be made to prevent land
Talue taxation of any kind for State purposes goes without saying;
history furnishes but too many precedents for us to believe other-
wise—too many instances of that blind infatuation which can never
recognise danger until it is too late; but, assuredly, to attempt to
stop it is to emulate the feat of Canute. If the currents now
uniting and setting in this direction could be dammed back for a
time, it would be only to give additional impetus to the pent-up
forces which, when at last they surmounted the earthworks, would
•carry all before them in one great flood of devastating State
Socialism.
Note. —As before stated (page 6) limit of space prevents the
■discussion of the question of the purchaser from a private indivi-
dual. That must stand upon its own merits : no alleged wrong to
A can form a valid reason to wrong B.


■f *n.- v'
r. '{
it




