

Perv h
. / *
LAND SYSTEM
VICTORIA:
EMBODIED IN
A LETTER
ARCHIBALD MICHIE, ESQ., M.L.A.
IN WHICH THE LAND SYSTEM OE BRITISH NORTH AMERICA,
SLIGHTLY MODIFIED, IS SHOWN TO BE APPLICABLE
AND NECESSARY IN THIS COLONY.
FREDERICK COSTER,
BAEEISTEE-AT-LAW OE NEW BEUNSWICK, 8.N.A., ATXOENEY OF THE
SUEEEME COUET.OF VICTOEIA.
MELBOURNE:
JAMES J. BLUNDELL AND CO.
1857.




A LAND SYSTEM FOR VICTORIA.
To Archibald Michie, Esq., M.L.A.
The time lias arrived when every colonist of Victoria should come
forward who can contribute anything 1 , either of original conception
or acquired knowledge, to aid the g*reat movement now commencing
to free the soil of his adopted country from the hideous monopoly
which at present paralyses every branch of industry, whereon its
independence and greatness mainly depend. I therefore take
the liberty of requesting you to read this letter. I address myself
to you, because you are one of the men to whom the people of this
part of the colony look, for the fearless enunciation of the language
of truth, on the great question of the Settlement of tbe Public
Lands. You will not find much original thought expressed in this
letter, but it may sug’gest to you some ideas, which you may con-
sider worth while to endeavour to apply in practice, in the construc-
tion of the future land system of this colony.
The plan for the future disposal of the Crown Lands which I
present to your notice in the following pages is, in a great measure,
a modification of the British North American Land System. I
speak as if the same regulations prevailed, by arrangement, through-
out all the Northern Colonies. This is not exactly the case. Each
colony has its peculiar scheme ; but the leading principles on which
the various systems are based are identical, and are being gradually
carried into practice, not only in the British Colonies, but through-
out the United States.
The Canadian regulations are of a very liberal and simple nature.
Under their just and beneficent influence, more than from any
other aid, a mighty nation is gathering together on the shores of
the St. Lawrence, rivalling the power of the Northern States of
the Republic in every branch of public and private enterprise, and
competing with them successfully in the great market which they
offer to the surplus labour and capital of the old world. That young
and vigorous nation now produces native intellect and ability to
maintain its position, and proves to the world, that the highest
aspirations of human liberty can be realized in the development of
the expansive principles of modern British colonization. Great
Britain herself acknowledges the genius and power of her young
descendant, and opens the path to imperial honours and emoluments
in favour of the successful native statesmen of her northern colonial


empire. Have tlie Australian Colonies yet taken the first step in
the g'reat path of progress which the American Colonists have so
successfully trodden ? I assert that they have not. In this
Colony we have a Constitution;, but we have not yet a country;
and we never shall have one which we can truly call our own, until
the Legislature has affirmed the principle, that every colonist has
a right to purchase a home for himself in any part of the colony, to
which his inclination or his interest may lead him.
The greatest obstacles to the progress and prosperity of this
Colony, at present, are —1. The undefined rights of the Squatters.
2. The restraint which the Surveyor-General imposes on the sale of
land, for the purpose of upholding- the Squatters. 3. The absence
of any system by which the inhabitants can, under equitable regu-
lations, obtain land, at whatever time and place, and in whatever
quantity, they require it. I have given my best attention to the
proceedings in the Legislative Assembly during the discussions on
the Surveyor-General’s resolutions, and I very much fear that the
Government will succeed in their design of perpetuating the fright-
ful monopoly of land which the Squatters now enjoy, and which
wars with such desolating effect on the progress of immigration,
industry, and enterprize in this country.
If the principle of the Bth resolution be affirmed by the House,
and be embodied in a law; or if power be given to the Govern-
ment to demise land to the Squatters for an acreag'e rent, without
restraint as to area, the doom of this Colony is sealed. Every
man who sets any value on his exertions, or depends on them for
his success in life, had better leave this country until the next
general election j for with such a law as that, carried out by an
arbitrary Surveyor-General, progress would be impossible. Emi-
gration from the Colony would necessarily commence very soon
after it were handed over to the Squatters ; and those will fare best
who get away first. If the Government do not intend to leave the
runs to the Squatters, as at present, why do they ask for the
power ?
In these resolutions, not a word is said about settling the country
by affording facilities for the purchase of land. The object appa-
rently is, not to sell the country, but to lease it. We shall see
before long how much of the Colony will be leased, and how much
sold.
I have always heard it said in North America, that the greatest
curses which can afflict any country are —privileged classes, land
monopoly, and the laws of primogeniture and entail. In this
Colony we have the two last. Pass the Bth resolution into law,
and we shall soon have the first!
The duty of counteracting the desperate aggression on the rights
of the people of this Colony, of which the Resolutions are the first
step, devolves on the Liberal party in the House of Assembly.
That party, although powerful in talent, contains but few men of
thoroughly liberal and progressive principles, and even these few
do not seem to unite on the great subject of the Crown Lands. I


will contribute the contents of these pages to the public interest,
and whether they are accepted by you or by the people as of any
value or not, I shall feel satisfied that I have performed a duty in
entering 1 my protest ag - ainst the framing 1 of a law on the principle
of the Bth resolution.
In my opinion, Sir, the first thing to be done in framing the new
land system is to settle the Squatting question, by leasing to the
Squatters a CERTAIN AREA of pastoral lands.*
I hen make Land Regulations, throwing open the remaining part
of the entire Colony to selection and sale, on the principles herein-
after set forth.
I can scarcely say which of the British American systems I pre-
fer. In Canada, town allotments are sold by auction, and country
lands by selection and sale at upset price, without auction. In
New Brunswick, all Crown Land is sold by auction. The right of
selection—that is, the right of every colonist to put Crown Lands
in the market—prevails throughout America. As I am more
familiar with the system of New Brunswick (my native colony)
than any other, I shall enter at once on the consideration of its
Land Regulations ; and lam sure I shall have no difficulty in
showing 1 you, Sir, that the most important provisions of the British
American Land Regulations are perfectly applicable to the circum-
stances of this country, and ought to form part of the Victoria
Land Scheme, I may remark here, that there is no positive law
regulating the disposal of the Crown Lands in New Brunswick,
The Executive manage them by Orders in Council. The advantage
of this plan in America is, that the Orders can be relaxed or altered
to suit the exigency of any particular case more readily than the
provisions of a statute. The colonists have full confidence in the
liberal and progressive spirit of their Government; and the right
of selection being recognized, they are not afraid of their rulers mis-
applying the great powers which this arrangement places in their
hands. Cases which require especial provisions are noticed in the
15th clause. <
I cannot introduce the subject better than by reciting the pre-
amble to the Regulations. The consideration of “ saving trouble
and expense” to purchasers will be thought, by our rulers here, a
very extraordinary reason for the New Brunswick Government to
alter their Regulations :
“ Regulations for the Disposal of Crown Lands in the Province of New
Brunswick. (By order of His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor in
Council.)
“ Wheeeas it is considered that much expense and trouble will be saved to
persons who are desirous of purchasing Crown Lands, especially in remote parts
of the province, by authorizing local sales thereof to be held in convenient
places; and as it is expedient to prescribe certain regulations respecting ap-
plications for, and sales of, such Crown Lands, it is therefore ordered,
♦ It will embarrass the subject to discuss this question here, and I there-
fore take up the Land Regulations first.


•t 1 st. That in future public sales of Crown Lands will be held, as occasion
may require, on the first Tuesday in every month, by a deputy surveyor there-
unto specially appointed for each county.
“ 2nd. That all applications be addressed by petition to His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor, and transmitted either by the applicant or by the local
deputy, under cover, to the Surveyor-General, and accompanied by a report
from the local deputy describing the land, and setting forth whether it is
required for actual settlement, together with such other information as he may
deem necessary to be communicated.”
The regular monthly sales are an immense advantage over the
system of sales by special advertisement at irregular times. If the
former plan were adopted in Victoria, at present, many persons would
attend the sales regularly, and the lands would acquire a fixed
value according to their situation; and if the selection of lands were
permitted to take place at these periods, many lots would betaken
up which are now left on the hands of the Government, merely
because it is too expensive a proceeding to go to Melbourne to
select them.
The quantity offered at each safe need not, and ought not, to he
restricted by the actual number of acres applied for.
“ 3rd. That if the application be approved of, and the land applied for be not
already surveyed, a warrant will forthwith issue to authorise the survey to be
executed, on guarantee to the surveyor for the expenses of survey, according to
such regulations, and at such rates, as may be prescribed for surveys in the de-
partment of the Surveyor-General; and where the applications for land in any
locality may be numerous, care will be taken that the charges be proportionately
reduced.”
The Deputy-Surveyors are not paid by salaries, and therefore
the stipulation for payment of the expenses of survey is made. It
has also the effect of checking fictitious demands for land, and, in
this respect, is a very salutary provision.
“ 4th. That on the return of the survey duly executed, the description of the
land, the time and place of sale, and the upset price, will be announced in the
'Royal Gazette, and also by handbills, to be publicly posted in the county
where the land lies, at least twenty days previous to the day of sale ; and the
charges for all such surveys shall be paid down by the purchaser, or his agent,
at the time of sale, in addition to such part of the purchase money as will be
required, or the sale to be deemed null and void.
“ sth. That if the land applied for should have been previously surveyed, the
like notice of the time and place of sale, &c., be forthwith published, and three
pence per acre, survey' money, paid down by the purchaser, or his agent, at the
time of sale, in addition to the part of the purchase money required as before,
or the sale to be null and void.
“ 6th. To facilitate these arrangements outline maps of the several counties
are to be made as soon as practicable, for the use of the surveyor-general and
deputy-surveyors, and for the information of the public, on which are to be
recorded the situation and limits of the lands when surveyed and advertised for
sale.”
This 6th clause is the mainspring of the whole system, and a simi-
lar one ought to have a prominent place in the new Victorian Regula-
tions. The object of the New Brunswick Government is to people
the interior —to make mar upon the wilderness —to send immi-
grants out of the towns as fast as possible, and induce them by
every means at once to go on the land—their own if possible —hut


at all events to apply their industry where it is most wanted,
and where they will best preserve their means and their health.
Most immigrants to America nowadlays have friends already settled
in the colony to which they come. They proceed at once to them,
and settle down, either in service at first, or on the new land to
which they are directed by their Mends and the deputy-surveyor.
They have no hesitation about leaviing town at once, knowing that
their wants are provided for at the jplace of their destination. What
a different system prevails here! —and without the shadow of a
reason, except the positive determination of the Government to
obstruct the settlement of the counrtry as much as possible. There
is nothing to prevent local survey (offices being established in all
the principal towns in this Colony, even under the present system.
Plans might be exhibited, information afforded—purchase-money
paid —lands selected and paid foir, and deeds issued without a
shilling of additional expense, except the rent of a room.
The plans got up in the survey office in this country are very
superior to those in use in America. Properly employed, they
would be of great service to intending purchasers. At present, the
plans of this district (Kilmore) which have been sent up, are used as
ballast for a topheavy bookcase hn the Police-Office, and a few
others to keep the draught from blowing on the magistrates
through a window. There are a few hundred weight on hand.
If I were asked to advise an immigrant how to proceed to get
a farm in the Kilmore district at th is time, I should not know what
to tell him, although I have been concerned in nearly every land
sale which has taken place here simce May, 1853. In that month I
sold for the Government, in one day, land to the amount (not value)
of £20,000; and I have sold, and. helped to sell, many thousand
acres since. I am constantly asketd to assist in procuring the sale
of land, and have drawn up several petitions, and sent them to the
Surveyor-General, who, after the usual correspondence and lapse
of time, promises the land, and puds it up for sale by the time the
applicant has got tired of waiting, and has embarked his money in
something else.
The object of the new system oiught to be, to enable every person
to know, with reasonable certainty, when, where, and at what
price, and of what quality, he cam get a piece of land in any part
of the Colony which he may prefer;. Such information no man can
possibly get in this country, except at Melbourne. If he dances
attendance on the Survey Office there, he will be shown the return
of lands for selection, and will alsco be told the price, which is not
very inviting, as it is always an aimount of which some person else
has paid 10 per cent, to get clear of his bargain in the previous
purchase. In the absence of any description of, or information
respecting, the land mentioned in tthe return, our selector does not
think the chances of getting a good bit of land much in his favour.
The colonist of experience incurs Just as much difficulty and ex-
pense as the new comer. The costt of his journeys to Melbourne is
a serious addition to the price of tlhe land, and added to the uncer-


tainty of getting tlie land at all, deters many persons from at-
tempting it.
I could mention many instances of persons with and without
families who have come to this country with capital sufficient to
purchase land, and establish themselves in the interior, but
who have been deterred by the difficulties of obtaining land,
and have left the country. Six families from my native
colony, with whom I am well acquainted, landed in Victoria —be-
came dismayed at the prospects —and, after a few weeks, sailed
for New Zealand, where they are now prospering. But it is a
waste of time to illustrate by example the apparent and inevitable
consequences of a bad law.*
“ 7th. The upset price of all Crown lands for actual settlement is to he not
less than three shillings per acre, exclusive of the charge for surveying the same.
Twenty-five per cent, of the sale price to be paid down, and the remainder to
he payable in three equal annual instalments, to be secured by bond of the pur-
chaser ; each instalment to bear interest at six per cent, per annum from and
after the day the same becomes due. Purchasers who may pay down the full
purchase money at the time of sale will be allowed a deduction of one-fifth for
prompt payment. —(No person is allowed to hold more than one hundred acres,
payable by instalments.)
“ Bth. That in the future no consideration or allowance whatever will be made
on account of unauthorised improvements on Crown lands which shall not have
been commenced or made on or before the Ist day of May in this present year ;
but the allotments, with such improvements, will be sold in the same manner as
other Crown lands.
“ 9th. That in cases of the sale of land where improvements may have been
made prior to the Ist of May, and where the occupier is not the purchaser, the
surveyor-general or deputy-surveyor will value the same, subject to an appeal
by petition to the Governor in cases of objection to such valuation ; and the
purchaser shall be required to pay such valuation on the day of sale to the per-
son entitled thereto, or, in case of appeal, to deposit the same, in addition to the
purchase and. survey money, as hereinbefore provided.”
The 7th clause, relating to the upset price and payment by in-
stalments, is not in my opinion applicable at present to this country.
Its provisions are designed in N. B. to hold out additional induce-
* Having made a general charge against the Survey Department, it is only
fair that I should specify. I refer to the Pyalong and Sugar Loaf Creek land,
applied for nearly twelve months ago, and to the land on the No. 3 Creek, ap-
plied for in August, I think. Nine square miles were applied for, and there
are five persons in Kilmore who would have purchased six sections of 640 acres
each. The land was promised in answer to a petition, but has not yet been sold.
One of the parties who would have purchased two sections, is now negotiating
for the purchase of a public-house—having despaired of getting the land. I
intended, jointly with another person, to have taken a section; but I could not
afford to keep the money idle for ever. I allude also to the application of the
late Matthew Kelly for half a section on the Upper Goulburn. This land was
promised by the Surveyor-General in June last, but has nevertheless been with-
held by him ever since. During his life, Kelly experienced a relentless perse-
cution from the Crown Land authorities to deprive him of his land, of which
he had been some years in possession; and his widow and children have inherited
the baffled animosity of these potentates. A Select Committee of the Assembly
is now engaged in investigating the matter, and, I hope, will do what is just
respecting it.


merits to immigrants, and they accomplish the purpose in America.
But here, the Government are not called upon to push the sale of
land. If they will only permit it, tlhe people will be satisfied. The
upset price is not too high for agricultural land, from which the
return is quick, and as the price of the land would naturally fall
to something near the upset price, iin consequence of the increased
quantity in the market, if the land! of the colony were free, there
would be no scarcity of cash purchasers, and no dissatisfaction
would be felt by those who have pmrchased under the present cash
system. The Kilmore Examiner newspaper, which I assist in con-
ducting, some months ago advocatedl dividing the lands of the colony
into two classes, one at £1 per acre, tlhe second class at 10_s., and that
credit should be given for a limited number of acres, in addition
to a quantity paid for in cash. I tlliink the time will come when
this arrangement may be carried ouit to advantage; but I think it
unnecessary for the present.
The rules in this country, corresponding with those in the above
Bth and 9th N. B. regulations, are fair enough. The Bth clause
would be harsh in this country.
« loth. That all local deputies making sales under these regulations he re-
quired to make a return thereof fas well ais of all instalments received within
the previous month for sales formerly miade by such deputy) to the surveyor-
general, within fourteen days after such sales respectively, and of all bonds
which he may have taken for securing the payment of instalments.
“ nth. That every such deputy be also required to transmit, within fourteen
days after such sales respectively, a duplicate of the said return to the Receiver-
General, and to remit to him all monies rceceived on account of sales (and also
for instalments on former sales made by hiim, and surveys made at the expense
of the Crown), except the sums paid for surweys and deposited for improvements,
of which he is to render an account; andl he will be allowed to retain foy his
remuneration a commission of five per cemt. of the purchase money so received
—such a per-centage in no case to exceed the sum of .£IOO per annum. And
the Receiver-General shall, within six days after his receipt of such return and
remittance render to the Surveyor-Generail a copy of the return duly authen-
ticated. , ~
« i2th. That where the purchase-money has been paid down under the con-
ditions of the 7th clause, a grant will immediately pass to the purchaser ; but
in other cases an occupation-ticket will be; issued to him on the day of sale,
signed by the Surveyor- General; such ticket will not give any power to the
occupant to cut and remove from his allotment any timber or logs until all the
purchase-money is paid; but all timber and logs so cut shall be liable to seizure
unless paid for according to existing regulations for the disposal of Crown
timber and lumber; in which case the aimount so paid shall be carried to the
credit of the purchaser, and towards the lliquidation of the instalments which
remain due or unpaid for the said allotment!:. . .
“ 13th That every deputy authorised to perform the foregoing duties will be
required to give a bond to the Queen, with two approved securities, in the
penal sum of £4OO, conditioned for the faitthful performance of his duty.
“ 14th That no deputy shall be permiitted, either directly or indirectly,
during the continuance of his official employment, to purchase or be m any
manner interested in any Crown lands whatsoever.
The 10th and lltli clauses need mot be noticed here. The 12th
clause has also a peculiar local application. The great value of
the North American timber, which is one of the chief exports ot
the country, renders it necessary fror the Government to protect it


from waste. The object of the regulation is to prevent persons
from purchasing' land under pretence of settlement, and then cut-
ting- and selling the limber, and moving off before the instalments
become due. No such clause is required here.
The 13th and 14th clauses might with great propriety be embo-
died in the new system of this colony.
“ 15th. That where large parties of settlers may associate and make applica-
tion for the purchase of tracts of wilderness lands in situations distant from
any settlements already formed, or in progress, and to which communications
may not have been opened through the forest, they will set forth in their peti-
tions, and the surveyors in their reports, all such particulars; and when
the difficulties to be overcome may require greater facilities than are provided
for in the foregoing regulations, the case will he reserved for the special con-
sideration of the Lieutenant-Governor and Council; and when such parties may
engage to defray the charges of surveying their locations, and also of the bye-
roads required to be opened to and through their settlement, and to which they
are willing to apply their own labour, the deputy-surveyors will be authorised
to execute such surveys. In laying' out such locations, the surveyors are to
attend to the 6th clause of the Regulations of the 2nd of December last, in re-
serving lines of road, and allotments for schools and places of worship, which
reserves will not be allowed to be broken or sold.”
It is in carrying out the 15th clause that a patriotic and pro-
gressive Government will be able to display their zeal and energy
in pushing on the great work of civilisation. The Colonial Go-
vernments of America have many opportunities of doing so, from
the very contingency for which the above rule provides. It fre-
quently happens that large bodies of settlers combine together,
and take up a tract of country, and simultaneously establish not
only farms, but churches, schools, and branch societies for various
religious and benevolent purposes. They carry with them their
minister and their schoolmaster—their tradespeople and their ser-
vants, and in a few short months the howling wilderness becomes
the abode of comfort and independence; “ the desert” does in-
deed “ blossom as the rose; and tlie valleys stand so thick with
corn that they laugh and sing.” These associations of settlers are
not only formed in the colony, but arrive in it from other countries,
some of them complete in members, others consisting of a few
leaders, who recruit the band, and push on for the new settlement.
Parties of Germans have come, and given their national names to
the districts in which they are settled. Lubeck and Lunenberg,
in Nova Scotia, are thriving places, and not the only instances of
successful settlement by this industrious people. The English,
Scotch, Irish, and Dutch settlements of New Brunswick, are ex-
amples of similar combination. What a field this colony presents
for such rapid and systematic progress, under the protection and
care of a liberal and patriotic Government!
I wish now to notice the petition of the Victoria Land League,
which has just been published. This movement is a striking sign
of the times, a signal note of preparation for a great and success-
ful contest for a free soil. It is indeed (as Mr. Fulton said at
Astley’s Amphitheatre) to be regretted that the Government should
have rendered such a meeting necessary in the year 1867. The


land question is, in truth, just where it was. Mr. Fulton professed
himself “ the stern advocate of taxation upon all unoccupied
lands.” ( Argus, Jan. 20.) If all Mr. Fulton’s ideas on the land
question are as sound as these, he is a man to be looked to by the
people. This tax is indispensable, as a protection to the actual
settler ag’ainst the speculator. It exists in Canada, and was pro-
posed in New Brunswick, and would have been introduced, had it
not been discovered that in the competition with the farmers, the
speculators burnt their lingers. Tire actual settlers were prepared
to give the Government as much as the land was worth, and spe-
culators were obliged to out-bid them, in order to get the land.
They only bought to sell again, and could only sell to farmers,
who, of course, would not deal with them, when cheaper land, and
plenty of it, was to be had. In some instances the speculators
made money, but they were soon choked off, and it was found un-
necessary to impose the tax. I think, however, that in this country
at present, the speculators would be more than a match for the
actual settlers, and that the tax should be imposed.
I assent to the first five clauses of the League petition.
The sixth cannot be defended. This and the two following
clauses, in my opinion, will never work. The system proposed
to be substituted is, that “ the actual settler be permitted to
enter, at his own free choice, upon any other unalienated
lands of the State not yet brought to sale, wherever they may
be situate, and whether they have been surveyed or not, and to
occupy the same to such moderate extent as may constitute a
substantial agricultural farm, say 160 acres; and that such settler,
having shown by affidavit, registered at the nearest land office,
that he has executed a reasonable amount of improvement on such
land, and that it is his homestead, may thereupon acquire the right
to purchase the same, without auction, at the general upset price,
whenever the district in which the same is situate may be brought
to public sale.”
In the first place, all new settlers do not want to become far-
mers, neither would 160 acres be sufficient for a substantial agri-
cultural farm. Some settlers will want much more, and others
much less. But the great fault of the League proposition is, that
it does not provide for two or more settlers wishing to obtain the
same, or part of the same piece of land. One man might want
only 50 acres, another might want 200 or 300 acres, on the same
spot. This collision would as inevitably happen, as the accident
of rival bidders at an auction. The League very properly asks
that all actual settlers may be permitted u freely to select their
own farms from the unalienated public domain, on their own
choice and judgment, and in any region of the colony, without
reference to, or control by, the judgment of any Government
officer.” The sale by auction, after selection, as provided by the
first four N. B. regulations, is the only way to prevent disputes,
to exclude “ reference to,” and control of, the Government officer,
and to ensure to the public treasury the fair value of the land.


The object and benefit of the practice of selection is to point out
to the Government the extent and locality of the demand for land,
and to indicate the course and progress of settlement. It is the
absence of any authorised and convenient mode of determining the
demand for land, and of enforcing the sale, which is the great
curse of the present system in this colony. Petition after petition
is sent to the Surveyor-General, which he may never receive,
which may be burked, or which he may shove into a pigeon-hole
till further orders. It is tins which enables him to get up in the
House, and, with a gravity of face worthy of a better cause, tell
the representatives of the people that he has satiated the public
with land, and point with complacency to his return of Lands for
selection ! The Kilmore district is essentially an agricultural one,
and I shall feel obliged if he will show me 50 acres of reasonably
good land in it, open for selection at anything’ like a fair price, and
not rendered impossible of cultivation by some natural cause, or
difficulty created by his own surveyors. He cannot do this; but I
can show him some hundreds of acres of worthless land, which
has been bought and paid for, on which the unfortunate pur-
chasers are struggling to make themselves comfortable, while
thousands of acres of splendid agricultural land, on which a sheep
or beast is never seen, are lying waste, close by, because he neg-
lects or refuses to put it up for sale.*
The selection plan proposed by the League is apparently an imi-
tation of part of the system of the United States of America. The
League plan contains the abuses of this system, without its g’ood
points. In September, 1841, a permanent pre-emption law was
passed, by which the occupants of the public lands are secured
in their possessions ; and every person being the head of a family,
widow, or single man, over the age of 21 years, a citizen of the
United States,"who shall make a settlement on the public lands in
person, and inhabit and improve the same, and erect a dw elling'-
house thereon, shall be authorised to enter a quarter-section of
160 acres, or a less legal subdivision, at the land office of the district.
Those lands not entered under the pre-emption law, are offered
at public sale, previous to which no other person, not having a
pre-emptive right, can purchase. After they have been offered at
public sale, they are open to every purchaser at private sale. In
the year ending Dec. 1, 1844, 6,693,368 acres of new land were
offered in the market, besides a great amount that was then on
hand that had been previously offered. Of this amount 1,747,158
acres were sold, mostly in small subdivisions of 80 and 160 acres.
In 1843, the number of acres sold was 1,605,264.f When shall
we, in this colony, see 5,000,000 acres of land offered, in excess of
a fair demand ? It speaks little for the free selection principle,
* Since this was written, it is proposed to have a Land Board, to determine
when and where the people want land ! Why not as well have a Sugar Board,
a Tobacco Board, and a Salt Board ?
Bradford’s Notes on the North-West.


that it interfered so little with tlie regular sales. The value of
the respective titles will stand no comparison with each other.
The pre-emptive system was adopted, not so much for the pur-
pose of inducing the settlement of the public land, as to legalise
and regulate a practice which the Government could not prevent.
The tide of emigration to the west preceded the establishment of
regular authority, and the Government, being unwilling, as well
as unable, to turn out persons who had settled themselves on the
land, were content to allow them a small pre-emptive right, and
credit for the payment of the purchase money, and thus make
them debtors to the general Government. In many instances
this arrangement only altered the nature of the difference between
these squatters and the Government. The squatters became
largely indebted, and often set the government at defiance. In
the debate in the Senate on the Pre-emptive Bill, in January,
1841, Mr. Preston alludes to this difficulty. It was proposed to
cede the public domain to each of the states respectively within
whose territorial limits they lie. The states, and not the squat-
ters, to become responsible to the general Government.
“ We all remember,” said Mr. Preston, “the large amount of debt which
was once accumulated under the credit system of sale of the public lands; you
remember that the debtors declared that they could not pay, and would not.
The very same spirit which prompts men to take the land without a legal
right prompts them to stand out for the money they ought to pay for it. Cir-
cumstances made it difficult, perhaps impossible, for them to pay; and I well
recollect the terror with which the politicians of that day looked to the results
of such a state of things. I remember with what anxiety, not to say terror,
Mr. Monroe contemplated a debt of nineteen millions owed by one section of
the Union. Congress looked with dismay at the mass of debt due from settlers
on the Lower Mississippi; and in contemplation of the mischievous effects
arising from the credit system in relation to the public lands, you determined
to alter your terms of sale; and it was wisely decided to sell, in future, for
cash alone. But if a scattered debt, due from individuals, be an evil of so dan-
gerous a character as to excite their terrors, how fearful it will become when
this debt, instead of being dispersed among a number of individual settlers, is
consolidated into one mass, and owed by a section which has already, from time
to time, made claim to an indefeasible title in all this land ! Can you collect
it ? You cannot drive your debtors from the land. Will you call out the
force of the country,—send your army, —sell the land under them, and take
possession of it for the United States ? It cannot be done. To individuals, in
such a case, you can afford to yield, and make a compromise; but how will you
stand when you have made states your debtors ? The amendment establishes
the relation of debtor and creditor between this Government and entire states
—with neighbouring, with contiguous states—with a mass of states, all having
one common interest in the question, one common character, and one common
debt. Do you expect from a debtor like this to collect your debt by any pro-
cess ? The thought is idle. I estimate the honour and fidelity of the states
as much as any man; but what have we heard for the last few years from the
other side of the senate, but wild denunciatious of state extravagance—state
profligacy—and the dear, blessed people to be taxed to pay state debts ? Sup-
pose there comes a short crop, or an Indian war, or any other of the like con-
tingencies, would it not be urged as an excuse for not paying the state debt ?
And would you venture, under such circumstances, to call upon them for your
money F You dare not. Gentlemen have told you, in one breath, that you
cannot protect your land from the squatters either by your tipstaves or your
soldiers; and in the very next breath they say you can force old states to comply


with their contracts by the power of the judiciary ! Your army cannot remove
a handful of individuals, and yet you are going to drive the states liy your
judiciary ! You cannot turn off a poor squatter, who has no sort of title, or
evidence, or pretence of title; and yet you are, by the most nugatory provisions
of this bill, to oust a citizen of a state, having a deed from the state in his pocket,
and the whole state power interposed between him and you! You never can
enforce your contract; the judiciary is utterly incapable of it. The remedy
which the amendment provides for the case is utterly inefficient. Why, as 1 have
said, with no deed at all, the settlers have stood out against you, and you have
been forced to yield, over and over again; think you that, with a state deed to
show, and the state authority to shield them, they are going to march off their
farms at the bidding of your marshal ? He would be a bold man who would
carry a process there. I say, then, that there is great danger in your esta-
blishing the peculiar relation of debtor and creditor with the States. If they
cannot pay, what will you do ? They will resist in masses.’’
The 9th clause of the League petition is good, so far as the
pushing forward the survey of the whole country is concerned j
but I do not think the blocks of square miles with roads run-
ning round them will answer. It cannot he expected that, for
very many years, we shall have turnpike roads throughout the
agricultural districts ; and I therefore think, that the main lines
of road should first he laid out according’ to the capability of the
ground for traffic at all seasons, and the surveys be made conform-
able to them. This would avoid the necessity contemplated in a
subsequent clause of breaking into purchased land to make roads,
a proceeding very certain to cause disputes. The petitioners ask
for a whole district—say 200,000 acres—to be put up at once ;
twelve months’ notice to be given. But, in the meantime, thou-
sands of acres might be in demand in different parts of the Colony,
and, if the League scheme of selection were acted upon, would be
in actual occupation. The petition objects to a few lots only being
sold at each sale, and I do not see how these different processes
can be made to work in harmony. Unless the whole colony were
put up at once, or small lots sold, each district must go up in its
turn, and the land, in some parts, might be several years in occu-
pation before sale. Persons might use it for various purposes of
profit, and decamp without buying at all, to the greater injury of
the country than allowing the Squatters to keep it. The “ official
discretion” of which the League is so justly afraid, would inevi-
tably determine the districts to be first surveyed and sold; and if
the u official discretion” is to be of the sort we have hitherto expe-
rienced, the country will be settled very slowly. I think the sys-
tem of occupancy, as proposed by the League, will be ruinous to
the country. It will be very unjust to the present holders of land,
and will awaken their determined opposition. It will accumulate
on the public lands an idle and adventurous lot of people, who will
live by plunder and nefarious practices, all the while stripping the
land of whatever it contains of value, and moving away without pur-
chasing it, or else remaining to be driven out by those who do. Oc-
cupants may die, and their families be unable to purchase or to move
out; and, in short, endless embarrassment will constantly be felt.
If will reproduce, in its worst form, the abuses of the Squatting


times in the Northern Colonies and the Western States of America,
where the Squatters refused either to pay or go out, and, in many
instances, successfully evaded and tdefied the law.
The advantage of the New Brunswick plan over this is manifest.
The land office is open in every couinty or district. Selection and
survey constantly going on. The monthly sales, where rival selec-
tors may either bid against each otlher, or take the next piece ; at
all events, the dispute is fairly settlled, without “ reference to offi-
cial discretion.” Favoritism is nowhere; purchase-money paid,
and grant issued. What can be miore simple ? The lands cannot
be said to be locked, when every rman carries a key in his pocket
which fits exactty, It will require but little preparation to set
this system on foot here, as all the machinery is in existence and
at work in the Colony, although mot enough of it. As I before
remarked, the only thing- wanted,, in addition to what we have
now, is a room for an office in each district.
I think, Sir, I have now put yam in possession of the leading
points of my argument. But it willl at once occur to you that, if the
system I advocate were in operation, the sheep and cattle farming
business, as now carried on, would be at an end. The selection
and sale of a few farms in the middle of a run would, indeed,
effectually stop the operations of the sheep farmer. But, Sir, I
contend that the Legislature ought immediately to tell the Squat-
ters what they are to expect. I maintain that the Squatting
question should at once be definitely settled. It is unworthy of an
elective Government, in a British country, to keep so great and
vital a public question open so long. Let it be boldly taken up
and fairly disposed of. I submit tlhe following as the principle on
which it ought to be settled.
The sheep and cattle business of this country is a great
commercial interest. It produces not only a large revenue to the
Colony, but it also produces the great necessary of life—animal
food. Owing to the uncertainty of the effect of the approaching
legislation on the subject, the prod uce of this business is declining.
The colony of Victoria is now sending away money to purchase
sheep and cattle —the very articles which she ought to export!
This is commercially wrong, and imjures the Colony. If a sudden
death-blow were to be given to tine pastoral interest, it is impos-
sible to appreciate the distress which would ensue. It will be
some years before the agriculturists will be able to contribute
much to the supply of animal foodl of the country, to say nothing
of the export of wool, and meat wmuld become scarce and dear.
I am as determined an enemy off land monopoly as ever existed.
I would risk everything, even life iitself, to overthrow such a tower
of iniquity and corruption as restrains the free settlement
of this country; but I will never join in a party-movement to
destroy a great branch of industry, a fruitful source of wealth and
revenue, a productive power of one of the chief necessities of life,
the occupation of thousands of industrious persons, and the em-
ployment of a resource which is perfectly worthless for any other


purpose. I maintain tluit the pastoral interest ought to he pre-
served—not by any means to the extent, and in manner, as it now
exists; but in such a manner as will preserve it, without in the
slightest degree interfering with the most extreme liberality and
freedom in the selection and sale of land in this country for many
years to come. You, Sir, have shown the people the value of the
Orders in Council as the basis of a legal claim on the part of the
Scpiatters. No one now —not excepting the Squatters themselves
—believes that they have the ghost of a claim to protection by any
law except that of general policy. But I think they should, on
grounds of public advantage, he offered the chance of continuing
their business by a regulation on the following principle.
It cannot he disputed that there is a vast extent of land in this
country unfit, both from quality and situation, for any agricultural
purpose. Tracts of this kind of land are spread in patches over
the whole Colony, and are totally unsuitable for any hut pastoral
occupation. The ranges, with the steep gullies and narrow flats
between them, never could he cultivated. This district, which is
in general an agricultural one, abounds with such tracts. It is
self-evident that, if these lands were fenced, they would carry a
third, if not twice as many sheep or cattle as they do now. Seve-
ral runs in this district are already fenced, and many extensive
paddocks. I have always heard it estimated by farmers and set-
tlers that, in general, the fenced land in this district will carry a
sheep to the acre. The paddocks about here of 400 to 500 acres,
carry a head of cattle to every five acres. The runs in this dis-
trict may vary in size from 50,000 to 100,000 acres in extent.
The runs of the Colony are not half stocked, hut the Squatters
manage to make themselves pretty comfortable, notwithstanding
their diminished flocks. Now, Sir, I propose that a tract, varying
in size from 10,000 to 20,000 acres, according to situation and
quality, should be laid off from each run in actual use, and rented
by the Government for pastoral pursuits for eight or ten years,
according' to situation. That these tracts should be laid out so as
to include little or no agricultural land, hut with sufficient water
supply, and then offered for lease by auction, without preference to
present occupiers, except as regards the pre-emptive section of 640
acres. Their position would give them quite sufficient advantage
over every one else in the competition for these runs.
It may seem to many persons that ten or twenty thousand acres
is a large quantity to he reserved from sale for so long a period;
but it is a very small portion of an ordinary sheep run, and is a
mere speck on the surface of the Colony. I believe such portions
might be laid out and leased without impeding the settlement of
the country during the present generation, still less for the dura-
tion of the lease. I believe that, from some runs in this district,
three or four such portions might be leased without prejudice to
the agricultural interest, and with great benefit to the revenue of
the country, and to the land itself. The land would greatly im-
prove in its productive powers by being fenced.


It is on such a principle as this that I think the Squatting
question should be dealt with. Much of the land now under pas-
toral license is unfit for any othe;r purpose. The present holders
are certainly best prepared to csccupy it • and I think that if a
Squatter, with his pre-emptive section and homestead, has an
opportunity of taking- a lease of ten, or fifteen, or twenty thousand
acres of land, for a certain term of eight or ten years, at its market
value, he has very little to complain of. He would be able to
fence his land and to recover from his neighbours half the expense.
The runs on the Sydney road actually support many hundred head
of cattle more than they are returned as capable of doing, because
the teams of working bullocks, some thousands of which .are always
on the road, are successively depasturing on the runs through
which they pass. I venture to say, no Squatter mentions them in
his estimate of the capability of his run! Why should a large
extent of country be withheld from sale and leased to one man by a
tenure which forbids him to fence, while he can only occupy a
small piece in the centre of his run, or small patches in localities
undisturbed by the traffic of the country ? Confine the settler
within the bounds of a tract of land, within a specified area, and
let him hold it by a tenure which will make it worth his while to
fence it in • charge him a fair rent for it, and throw open the rest
of the country for selection and sale on the Canadian and New
Brunswick principle. Some Squatters might consider themselves
harshly dealt with, but not nearly so much so as those whose runs
have been already cut up ; and lam confident that many of them
would be greatly benefitted. lam sure that even a greater num-
ber of runs could be laid off' and leased without restricting the settle-
ment of the country during the existence of the leases. But even
if the Squatters were obliged to curtail their business, they have
no more right to complain than the business men of other colonies,
who have been obliged to concede rights more vested. The Planters
of the West Indies were compelled to surrender their Slaves, in
obedience to the will of the British Government. The timber
merchants of North America were obliged to submit to the with-
drawal of protection, and the shipowners were obliged to allow
foreign vessels to participate in the carrying trade. The policy of
the empire rendered these concessions necessary, and they were
made. The undeniable rights of the people of this Colony, and
the exigency of its position, require a concession of the land, and it
must be made. Class interests cannot stand in the way of the
common welfare.
I believe, Sir, that if the Land Question were settled on the prin-
ciples which I have here submitted to you, an impetus would be
given to every branch of trade and business, which would surpass the
expectations of the most patriotic colonist of Victoria. Pive-sixths
of the land of the Colony would be instantly thrown into the market.
But unless the Government be restrained inthequantity of land which
they shall be at liberty to lease to the Squatters, the present system
of favoritism and obstruction will continue. If the Squatters are


to have as much land, and in whatever place, as they can occupy
with their sheep and cattle, paying- only £25 per thousand for
them, agitation and clamour will never cease till the system is
abolished. The Government may say they pay rent; but the rent
is no object. It is put forth as a blind, but it requires no great
sharpness to see through it. No amount of rent can compensate
for the injury which a land monopoly would inflict on the
country.
The Squatting question is still as unsettled as ever. The House
of Assembly have authorized the Government to licence the runs to
the Squatters till the land is wanted ! How is the demand to he
ascertained , unless the colonists are allowed to select ? The con-
flict between the Squatters and other classes will be as sharp as
ever. The Surveyor-General will do as he has always done—viz.,
favour the Squatters, and keep back the land. The power which
this one man will exercise over the destiny of this country will be
enormous. He can sell the land or not, just as he pleases. He
will have power to license to the Squatters every unoccupied inch
of the Colony, and he himself is the sole judge as to whether there
is a demand for its sale or not! He can obstruct, by “ official dis-
cretion,” the great wave of civilization, and say to it, “ Thus far
shalt thou go, and no further!” He can dictate the course of
settlement and of trade and business, and hold in his hand the for-
tunes of thousands. What a deity he will be among the Squat-
ters ! He can either destroy or preserve by the magic of “ official
discretion.” In short, his power over the property of the Colony
will, in my opinion, be such as no House of Representatives of the
People ought, in justice to their constituents, to delegate to any
one man. It is the People who have a right to the land, and they
have also a right to say —when and where they require it.
I beg to subscribe myself, Sir,
With great respect,
Your obedient servant,
FREDERICK COSTER.
Kilmore, Jan. 30th, 1857.
Gvodhngh Jc Hough . Printers, Flinders Lane Easi.


r
ft


i
