

{Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi.)
*
I ;
\
■ \ ‘
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
LANGUAGES of some NATIVE TRIBES of QUEENS-
LAND, NEW SOUTH WALES and VICTORIA.
Corres. Memb. Antlirop. Soc., Washington, U.S.A.
[Head before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, September 3, 1902.']




LANGUAGES OF some NATIVE TRIBES of QUEENS-
LAND, NEW SOUTH WALES and VICTORIA.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Oorres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc., Washington, U.S.A.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, September 3, 1902.']
Synopsis. —Prefatory. Grammatical structure of the following Aus-
tralian languages :
Queensland —1 Yualeai. 2 Pikumbil.
N. 18. Wales —3 Kawambarai. 4 Wongaibon. 5 Kurnu. 6 Tyake or
Mystic Language. 7 Dyirringan.
Victoria —8 Yotayota. 9 Bureba.
Comprehensive Vocabularies of Kurnu, Yualeai and Yotayota words.
In the following pages it is intended to exhibit the gram-
matical structure of the languages of some tribes in
southern Queensland, in the central districts of New South
Wales, and in the northern frontier of Victoria, the whole
being the result of my own personal researches in the
camps of the natives. It is hoped that work of this char-
acter will be found of some value to philologists by enabling
them to compare the aboriginal tongues of Australia not
only among themselves, but with others in different islands
of Polynesia, Melanesia, and various parts of the Pacific
Ocean.
lii two papers 1 recently contributed to this Society I
have described the constitution of the native tongues in
the south-east corner of South Australia, the whole of
Victoria, and the south-east coast of New South Wales
1 “The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” with Vocabularies. —Journ.
Koyal Soc., N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvi., pp. 71 - 106. This paper explains
the grammatical constitution of six Victorian languages.
“The Thurrawal, Gundungurra, and Dharruk Languages,” with Vocab-
ulary, op. tit., Yol. xxxv., pp. 127-160.


from Cape Howe to the Hawkesbury River. The article
now submitted is representative of the speech of the
aboriginal tribes from the northern frontier of Victoria
through a wide zone of central and western New South
Wales, extending into the southern portion of Queensland
at least as far as Maranoa and Burnett Rivers.
The system of orthoepy adopted in this paper is the same
as that in my article on “ The Aboriginal Languages of
Victoria,” with the following exceptions :
In the present paper, when the long sound of a , e and m,
might be uncertain, these letters are marked thus, a, e, u.
In certain cases also where the short sound of u might be
doubtful if unmarked, it is shown thus, u. As far as pos-
sible, however, these vowels are not marked.
The usual arrangement of words in a sentence is to place
the subject first, then the direct object, and lastly the
verb. The indirect object often follows the verb. An
adjective qualifying either the nominative or objective,
follows the noun. A native speaker puts himself in the
time of the event he is narrating; and when it is necessary
to quote some person’s statement, instead of saying, for
example, “Tom told me so and so,” he changes the tone
of his voice, and repeats the other man’s words as nearly
as he can. An assertive sentence does not differ in form
from an interrogative one, but the distinction is indicated
by the modulation of the voice of the speaker.
There are no words, properly so called, corresponding to
the English articles a and the. A blackfellow does not
trouble about the abstract idea of a man, a tree, and so on.
He speaks of some definite man or tree. The demonstra-
tive pronouns in their various forms supply the place of
the definite article. The adverb here and its variants,
except when used predicatively, is treated in native speech


as a demonstrative, and is then another substitute for the
definite article.
I—The1 —The Yualeai Language.
The natives speaking this language are located upon a
tract of country in southern Queensland, including the
Bokhara. Birrie, Narran, Ballonne and Moonie Rivers, and
extend some distance within the New South Wales frontier,
where they are met by the Kamilaroi nation. The Yualeai
have the same initiation ceremonies as the Kamilaroi, con-
sisting of the Bora and its impressive rites, which have
been fully described by me in several scientific journals. 1
The social organization among the Yualeai is also the same
as that of tlieir Kamilaroi neighbours. The people are
segregated into four divisions called Murri, Kubbi, Ippai
and Kumbo, which intermarry in conformity with prescribed
regulations. Details of this organisation have been given
by me in various publications. 2
Mr. E. M. CJurr, published vocabularies of some dialects
in this part of the country in his work. 3 No author has,
however, hitherto attempted to promulgate the grammar
of the language.
Nouns.
Nouns have number, gender and case. ,
Number. —There are three numbers, the singular, dual,
and plural. Wan, a crow; wangali, a couple of crows;
wanburala, several or many crows.
Gender. —In the. human family gender is distinguished
by using different words : —Ure, a man ; inar, a woman.
Men 'collectively are called den. Birralidyul, a youth ;
1 “The Bora or Initiation Ceremonies of the Kamilaroi Tribe,” Journ.
Anthrop. Inst., Vol. xxiv., pp. 411 - 417; Vol. xxv., pp. 318 - 339.
2 “ The Kamilaroi Class System, etc.,” Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc., Queens-
land, Vol. x., pp. 18 34. “ Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Proc. Amer.
Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, Vol. xxxvii., pp. 152- 154.
3 “The Australian Race,” Vol. hi., pp. 258-268.


meadyul, a maid; wambundul, a child of either sex. Among
animals, mundaia signifies a male, and gunidyarba a female
—these words following the creatures’ names.
Case. —The principle cases are the nominative, causative,
genitive, dative, ablative, instrumental and accusative.
Nominative. —Gareme, a camp; burran, a boomerang;
baura, a kangaroo.
Causative. —Ureu madbai bume, a man a dog beat.
Genitive. —Uregu burran, a man’s boomerang; inaru
dhibai, a woman’s yamstick.
Dative. —Dhainhaia garemo, come to the camp.
Ablative. —Nhaia garemi, go away from the camp.
Instrumental. —This takes the same suffix as the causa-
tive : —Ureu wan burrndu gaiawi, a man at a crow a
boomerang threw.
Accusative. —This is the same as the nominative.
It will be observed that the suffixes fluctuate according
to the termination of the word to which they are attached.
For example, ure takes gu in the genitive, whilst inar takes
u only, for the sake of euphony.
Adjectives.
Adjectives succeed the nouns they qualify, and take the
same inflexions for number and case.
Nominative —Ure burul, a man large. Uregali burulali,
a couple of large men, and so on.
Causative. —Ureu burulu burran wannunni, a man large
a boomerang threw.
Genitive —Uregu burulu burran, a large man’s boomerang;
bauragu burulu dliun, a large kangaroo’s tail.
Owing to the euphonic variations referred to in the
declension of nouns, the suffix to burul in the two last


examples, is the same in the nominative as in the genitive,
but any ambiguity which might arise from this cause is
obviated by the differences in the suffixes to ure.
Dative.—Dhainhaia urea burula, come to the man large.
Ablative. —Nhaia uredyi buruli, go away from the large
man.
Adjectives are compared by saying, Gubba nha —guggil
murra, good this —bad that.
Pronouns.
Pronouns are inflected for number, person and case, and
contain two forms of the first person of the dual and plural.
Singular.
Nominative. Possessive. Objective.
Ist Person Ngaia Ngai-i Ngunna
2nd ~ Nginda Nginnu Nginnunna
3rd ~ Ngu Ngungu Nha
Dual.
Ist Person i Ngulli Ngullingu Ngullinya
1 Ngulliyu Ngullingubla Nungullinya
2nd ~ Ngindale Nginalengu Nginalinya
3rd ~ Yuwari Yuwaringu Bulanga
Plural.
Ist Person l Ngeane Ngeanengu Nganninno
I Ngeaneyu Ngeninyella Nganigunnunga
2nd ~ Ngindeyu Nginaingu Nginnanya
3rd ~ Gunnugu Gunnungu Guununga
The full forms of the pronouns given in the above table
are chiefly used in response to interrogations, as for example
“Who is here?” and some one answers “Ngaia.” “Whose
boomerang is this?” may elicit the reply “Ngai-i.” Again,
the question, “ Whom did the kangaroo tear?” might be
answered, “Ngunna.” In ordinary conversation pro-
nominal suffixes are employed.
Interrogative Pronouns. —Who (singular) ngana? Who
(dual), ngananuinma? Who (plural), ngangananumma ?


Whom belonging to, ngangu? What, minya? What for,
minyagu ?
Demonstratives.—This, nha. That (near), ngule. That
(farther), yuari. That (yonder), yurma. That (in front),
murra. That (behind), murrabu. The demonstratives are
many and diverse, and can be declined for number and
case. A native will frequently indicate the position of
anything by giving its compass direction from a tree or
other known spot.
There are forms of the pronoun meaning “towards me,”
“ away from me,” etc. There is also a causative form, as,
Ngaiala, I (will do it).
Verbs.
Ginye appears to have the meaning of “am,” and can
be used as a substitute for the English verb, “to be,” by
taking an adjective, wallun, or other suitable word, as in
the following example. Dhu is the pronominal suffix repre-
senting “I” or Ngaia:
Present Wallundhu ginye, strong I am
Past Wallundhu gillani, strong I was
Future Wallundhu gigi, strong I will be
Imperative—Be strong! Wallun ginga.
In the subjoined conjugation of the verb buma, to beat,
the present tense is given in full; but in the past and
future, the first person only of the singular is taken :
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
| Ist Person I beat, Bumuldunnadliu
Sing. 2nd ~ Thou beatest, Bumuldunnindu
( 3rd ~ He beats, Bumuldunnangu
Ist Person I We, bicl., beat, Bumuldunnali
I I We, exel., beat, Bumuldunnaligu
Dual 2nd ~ You beat, Bumullundliale
( 3rd ~ They beat, Bumulbulaia
Ist Ppi son i We, i nc l*> beat, Bumuldunnane
| ’ I We, excl., beat, Bumuldunnaneu
Plural 2nd ~ You beat, Bumuldunnadai
( 3rd „ They beat, Bumuldunnagunnagu


In the past and future tenses there are forms of the verb
representing differences in the time of the performance of
the action. Examples in the first person singular of each
tense will illustrate the principle of the inflexion.
Past Tense.
I beat a while ago, Bumulngenyedhu
I beat yesterday, Bumulmaianidhu
I beat, say a week ago, Bumulenyedhu
I beat long ago, Bumulawailunnedhu
Future Tense.
I will beat presently, Bumullidyu
I will beat tomorrow, Bumulngedyu
I will beat sometime, Bumullingwullidyu
Imperative Mood.
Beat, bumulla! Beat not, wal bumulla !
Conditional Mood.
Perhaps I will beat, Ya bumulliadyu.
There is no special form for the passive voice. The
phrase, “ a boy was stung by a scorpion,” is expressed in
Yualeai by the paraphrase, “A scorpion stung the boy.”
Middle Voice —Indicative Mood.
Present I am beating myself, Bumulngildunnadhu
Past I was beating myself, Bumangildunnidyu
Future I will beat myself, Bumangilidyu
Imperative Mood.
Beat thyself, Bumulngilia.
Reciprocal —Dual.
Present We are beating each other, Ngulli bumullellunna
Past We were beating each other, Ngulli bumullellunni
Future We will beat each other, Ngulli bumulle.
Plural.
Present We are beating each other, Ngeane bumullellunna,


and so on. All the persons of the dual and plural take this
inflection, by using the requisite pronoun.
There is an inflexion of the verb in several expressions
to indicate whether two or more persons or things are
spoken of, thus:
A couple talking, Gwallellunna
Several talking, Gwallawabuldhunna
A couple sitting, Illauingillellunna
Several sitting, Illauawabuldhunna
A couple running, Bunnagangillellunna
Several running, Bunnagawabuldhunna
A couple lighting, Bumullellunna
Several fighting, Bumullawabuldhunna
A couple standing, Wurringillellunna
Several standing, Wurriwabuldhunna.
There are forms of the verb to express beating going
along the road, beating before some event, after some event,
after eating, and many others.
To beat again, Illaialu bumullui
To beat frequently, Ilia bumuldhe
Adverbs.
Yes, nga. No, wal. Now, ila. Yesterday, gimmeauni.
Tomorrow, ilagingi. Bye and bye, ilaia. Long ago, ilalu-
wangan. Always, ilalu. How, gullar? How many,
minyangi? Where (singular), minyaia ? Where (dual),
minyaianda ? Where (plural), minyaiandai ? Here, nhe.
There, ngare. Nhengaia, here I am.
Prepositions.
In front, bunnidya. Behind, ngaiga. Inside, muddhuga.
Beside me, mirrunda. Outside, wuggidya. Between,
biddyunda. Down, nguddali. Up, ngurribali. Other side,
gundar. This side, nuggili. Through, woanha.
Exclamations.
Yah ! calling attention. YVai! look out. Winnungga !
listen. Ngarrarbang! pity.


Numerals.
One, millan; two, builar ; several, burala.
See the vocabulary of Yualeai words at the end of this
article.
2 —The Pikumbil Language.
The Pikumbil tribes are located on the Weir and Mac-
intyre Rivers, Queensland; they adjoin the Yualeaiontlie
east, and speak a dialect of the same tongue. Their
initiation ceremonies 1 and divisional systems 2 are the same
as the Kamilaroi, who adjoin them on the south.
I formerly resided some years in Goondiwindi, Queens-
land, in the Pikumbil territory, and had exceptional facili-
ties for studying the geographic range of the dialects of
their language. Travelling on one occasion from Goondi-
windi to Miles, Gayndah and Maryborough, and returning
by Ipswich and Leyburn, I found the fundamental elements
of the native speech throughout was essentially the same,
although differing more or less in vocabulary.
The initiation ceremonies 3 of the Dippil, Turubul and
other tribes in the country just referred to are described
in a paper contributed by me to the Anthropological Society
at Washington, U.S.A. Particulars of their social organi-
zation 4 are given in articles I communicated to this Society
in 1898, and also to the American Philosophical Society at
Philadelphia the same year. Rev. Wm. Ridley gives a
brief vocabulary of Pikumbil words. 5
1 “The Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes,” Proc. Roy. Soc., Victoria, Vol.
ix., N.S., pp. 137-173.
2 “ The Totemic Divisions of Australian Tribes,” Journ. Roy. Soc.
N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxi., pp. 156-171.
3 “ The Toara Ceremony of the Dippil Tribes of Queensland,” American
Anthropologist, Vol. n., N.S., pp. 139- 149.
4 “ Australian Divisional Systems,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol.
xxxn., pp. 81-82; “Divisions of Queensland Aborigines,” Proc. Amer.
Philos. Soc., Vol. xxxvii., pp. 328-331.
4 “ Kamilaroi and Other Australian Languages,” (Sydney, 1875), pp.
59 - 60.


A few examples of nouns, adjectives, pronouns, verbs,
and adverbs are given below :
Nouns.
The number, gender and case of nouns are so nearly the
same as the Yualeai and Kamilaroi that little remains to
be said. Mial, a man; thamar, a woman. Miallu mirri
bumea, a man a dog beat. Mirrigu dliun, a dog’s tail.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify and
are declined for number and case. Comparison is effected
in a manner similar to the Yualeai.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the singular, dual and plural numbers
and are without gender. There is an inclusive and exclu-
sive form of the first person of the dual and plural. The
singular number of the nominative and possessive pronouns
are as under:
Ist Person I, Nguttha Mine, Nger
2nd „ Thou, Nginda Thine, Nginnu
3rd ~ He, Nhumbo His, Nhumbaga
Interrogatives—Ngana, who ? Minya, what ?
Verbs
Verbs have the same numbers as the pronouns. There
are modifications of the verb-endings to express recent
and more remote periods of past and future time, the same
as in the Yualeai and Kamilaroi. One example in each
tense is given:
Present Tense.
Singular Ist Person, 1 am beating, Bumunguttha
Past Tense.
Singular ( 1 beat j ust now ’ Bumuguttha
i«t Pp,. Brt n ) 1 beat tllis morning, Bumulganibattha
( I beat recently, Bumulbyentha


Future Tense.
y , | I will beat presently, Bumulluttlia
1 . f ll | gU al I will beat tomorrow, Bumulngetha
s ei son j j w -jj | )eat some time, Bumulngurritlia
Adverbs.
Yuka, no. Pika, yes. Wanda, where ? Certain adverbs,
nouns and prepositions of the Yualeai, Pikumbil, and
Kawambarai, are subject to inflexion for number and per-
son, in tlie same manner as in the Wongaibon.
Numerals.
Diiarrar, one. Buta, two.
3. —The Kawambarai Language.
This dialect of the Kamilaroi language is spoken on the
Barwon River about Bogabilla, Boobera, and Tulloona,
New South Wales. The Pikumbil people adjoin the Ka-
wambarai on the north-west, and the Yukumbil 1 on the
south-east. The Kamilaroi tribes meet them on the south.
Nouns.
The number, gender and cases of the nouns are so nearly
identical with the Kamilaroi, that they will be omitted.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are inflected for number and cas'e like the
nouns with which they are used.
Pronouns.
As the pronouns resemble the Yualeai, an example of the
nominative case only is given :
| Ist Person I, Ngaia
Singular 2nd ~ Thou, Ngindu
( 3rd ~ He, Nguru
Ist Person l We ’ incl ” Ngulli
j isl ierson ) We, excl., Ngullinguru
Dual 2nd „ You, Ngiudale
( 3rd „ They, Ngurugale
1 See my “Yookumbil Language,” Queensland Geographical Journal,
Vol. vii., pp. 153 - 67.
J—Sept. 3,1902.


lst Person <f We ’ incL ’ N S eane
f j We, excl., Ngeaneyel
Plural 2nd ~ You, Ngandai
( 3rd ~ They, Ngurugunnugu
Verbs.
The principal parts of the verb bumulla, beat, are repre-
sented in the following conjugation. An abbreviated form
of the pronoun is added to the verb stem, to indicate num-
ber and person. The whole of the present tense is given,
but only parts of the others:
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
{lst Person I beat, Bumuhladhu
2nd ~ Thou beatest, Bumuldandu
3rd ~ He beats, Bumuldanguru
j We, incl., beat, Bumuldali
( rerson | We, excl., beat, Bumuldalinguru
Dual 2nd ~ You beat, Bumuldandale
( 3rd ~ They beat, Bumuldagale
i«t Pp,.«nn i We » incL > beat ’ Bumuldane
i 1 l We, excl., beat, Bumuldaneyel
Plural 2nd „ You beat, Bumuldandai
( 3rd ~ They beat, Bumuldunnugu
Past Tense.
/1 beat, indefinite
Ist Person 1 I beat this morning,
Singular i I beat yesterday,
v I beat recently,
Bumidhu
Bumulngaindhu
Bumulmiendhu
Bumullendhu
Future Tense.
. p i I will beat presently, Bumullidyu
e y S ° n - I will beat tomorrow, Bumulngedyu
bmgu ar | j indefinite Bumullingurridyu
Imperative Mood.
Bumulla, beat!
If we direct one or more to do tlie beating, we could say,
Bumullandu, beat thou ! Bumullandali, beat you two!
Bumullandai, beat you all! The prohibitive expression
would be, Kurria bumulla, beat not. For the dual and


plural the suffixes in the last example could be used. Or,
these suffixes could be applied to the negative instead of
to the verb, thus: Kurriandu bumulla, beat thou not!
Kurriandale bumulla, but not you two! Kurriandai bumulla,
beat not any of you !
Conditional Mood.
Perhaps I will beat, Bumulliyadhu.
Reflexive.
I will beat myself, Buinaingilidyu.
Reciprocal.
We, dual, excl., are beating each other, Bumullellangura
We, plural, excl., ~ „ Bumullellaneyel.
Adverbs.
Kawam, no. Yo, yes. Tliulla, where ? Yelladu, now.
Yirralo, by and bye. Ngurago, tomorrow. Yawawunna,
perhaps. Kullier, quickly. Muru, well. Ngana, who?
Minya, what? Minyangai, how many? Ngua, here.
Nungarregi, there. The adverbs “ here ” and “ there ”
often have the meaning of “this ” and “that.” When used
in such sense, they serve the purpose of the definite article.
Prepositions.
Biddhun, between. Wurre, in front. Boadhe, behind.
Kubbarunda, on top.
Interjections.
Ngibai, surprise ! Ngurragadhul, pity. Burre, to break
wind, (flatus per anum), is often done as an interjection
in the middle of a conversation, and provokes merriment
among both sexes of all ages.
Numerals.
One, mal. Two, bular. Three, guliba.
4. —The Wongaibon Language.
The territory of the Wongaibon tribe extends from about
Booligal up the Lachlan River to Uabbalong; thence to


Nyngan, Cobar, Paddington, and Ivanhoe. Their initiation
ceremonies are of the Burbung type in force among the
Wiradhuri tribes, who adjoin them on the east, compre-
hensive descriptions of which have been given by me else-
where. 1 The Wongaibon community is divided into four
sections in the same manner as the tribes last mentioned,
and similar laws regulate their intermarriages. 1 have
explained the Wiradhuri organization in previous papers
to this and other Societies. 2
Nouns.
The number, gender and case of nouns are as follows: —
Number. —The dual and plural are shown by suffixed
particles : Singular, murrawe, a kangaroo ; dual, murra-
wegale, a couple of kangaroos: plural, murrawebunggo,
several kangaroos.
Gender. —Gender in the human family is denoted by
different words. A man, thurgala. A woman, wirringga.
A small girl, winnarga. Burai, a boy. Warm, a child of
either sex. Men collectively are called maii. In speaking
of animals, sex is distinguished by the addition of separate
words for male and female respectively. Bidyer, a male;
gunal, a female; papa, a cock ; gunni, a hen. These words
are placed after the name of the animal whose sex they
indicate.
Case. —-The cases are the nominative, causative, genitive,
accusative, instrumental, dative and ablative.
1 “ The Burbung of the Wiradhuri Tribes,” Journ. Anthrop. Inst., Vol.
xxv., pp. 295 - 318; op. cit., Vol. xxvi., pp. 272-285. Proc. Roy. Soc.,
Queensland, Vol xvi., pp. 35-38. “The Burbung of the Murrumbidgee
Tribes,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Yol. xxxi., pp. 11l -153. “Initi-
ation Ceremonies of the Wiradjuri Tribes,” American Anthropologist,
Vol. hi., N.S. pp. 337 -341.
* “The Wiradjuri System,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S. W., Yol. xxxi., pp.
171 - 176. “Australian Class Systems,” American Anthropologist, Vol.
ix., pp. 411 - 416 ; Yol. x., pp. 345 - 347.


Nominative. —Ngura, a camp. Mirri, a dog. Warn, a
crow. Guragi, an opossum. Bulga, a boomerang. Kunni,
a yamstick.
Causative. —Thurgalagu warm gumi, a man a child beat.
Guragandu gira dhurra, an opossum leaves eats. Mirrigu
guragi guttlie, a dog an opossum bit.
Genitive. —Thurgallanggu ngura, a man’s camp. Gura-
ganggu dhun, an opossum’s tail.
The possessive case of some nouns is shown by suffixing
a particle corresponding to the person and number required
as in the following table, which exhibits the inflection of
ngura, a camp.
I Ist Person My camp (camp my) Nguranggadhi
Singular ■ 2nd ~ Thy camp Ngurangganu
' 3rd „ His camp Nguranggalugu
Ist ( Our, incl., camp, Nguranggaligi
i Person (.Our, excl., camp, Nguranggaligini
Dual - 2nd,, Your camp, Ngurangganula
( 3rd „ Their camp, Nguranggullagula
Ist / Our, inch, camp, Nguranggangenigi
c Person ( Our, exch, camp, Nguranggangenigini
Plural ' 2nd,, Your camp, Ngurangganugal
(3rd ~ Their camp, Nguranggahigugal
The foregoing words also have the meaning of “at my
camp,” etc.
Dative. —Thai nguranggu yanna, the camp come to.
Ablative. —Ngurandi yannaidhi, the camp go from.
If two or more of any tiling be claimed, the inflexion of
the noun would be : —Mirridhi, my dog ; mirrigaledlii, my
two dogs; mirribunggodhi, my several (logs ; and so on
through all the persons and numbers as above.
Adjectives.
Adjectives have the same numbers and cases as the
nouns, and are placed subsequent to them: Thurgala bittlii,


a man large, Buppir, a very large man or any other thing.
Thurgalagu bitthigu murrawe gumi, a man large a kangaroo
struck. The suffix is often omitted from one of the words,
leaving the noun only, or the adjective only, to indicate
number or case, as, mirri bitthigu guragi gutthe, a dog
large an opossum bit. Thurgallanggu bitthilalanggu bulga,
a large man’s boomerang.
The comparison of adjectives does not follow the same
rules as in European languages, but one article is compared
to another in this way: Yuttama nginya—wurrai ngunnai,
good this —bad that. There are modifications in the case-
endings of nouns and adjectives, depending upon the ter-
mination of the word declined.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the nominative, possessive and objective
cases as in the subjoined table. There are two forms in
the first person of the dual and plural —one in which the
person or persons addressed are included with the speaker,
and another in which they are exclusive of the speaker.
Nominative.
Singular.
Possessive.
Objective.
1st Person
Ngadhu
Ngutthi
Dili
2nd ,,
Ngindu
Nginnu
Nu
3rd „
Nyillula
Igula
Lugu •
1st Person
f Ngulli
Dual.
Ngulligi
Liggi
[ Ngullina
Ngulligina
Liggina
2nd ,,
Ngindunyula Nginnula
Nula '
3rd „
Nyillubulu
Igubala
Lugula
1st Person
( Ngeana
Plural.
Ngeanigi
Ngeanaga
1 Ngeanuna
Ngeanigina
Ngeanagina
2nd „
Ngindugal
Nginnugal
Nunggal
3rd „
Nyillugala
Igugulla
Nyuggala


Demonstratives. —Nginya, that. Nginyaga, that (in
action). Nginyame, that (acted upon). Tlie demonstra-
tives are very numerous and varied, representing different
gradations of meaning, depending upon the position of the
object referred to in regard to the speaker, and also to the
points of the compass. All the pronouns of the third per-
son are in effect demonstratives, which accounts for their
irregularity and diversity.
Interrogatives.—Ngandi, who ? Ngangu, whose ? Minya,
what ? Minyunggulmai, how many? Widdyundugai, what’s
the matter ? Widdhundu, how ?
Verbs.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, with
the usual persons, tenses and moods. The verb stem and
a contraction of the pronoun are incorporated, and the word
thus formed is used in the conjugation. There is an inclu-
sive and exclusive form in the first person of the dual and
plural.
The following is a brief conjugation of the vferb ngeli,
to speak:—
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
Sing. Ist Per. I speak or talk,
Ngeradhu
~ 2nd ~ Thou speakest, Ngerandu
~ 3rd ~ He speaks, Ngeralula
Past Tense.
I I talked, Ngelgaidhu
o• , I I talked this morning, Ngelngurrinyedliu
1,. 1“ ] I talked yesterday, Ngelngunnidhu
j I talked recently, Ngeldhumbirradhu
l I talked long ago, Ngelgumbirngaldhu
Future Tense
(I will talk, Ngelagadhu
Singular J I will talk presently, Ngeladhullungadhu
Ist Person i I will talk tomorrow, Ngelngurriagadlm
11 will talk in tlie future, Ngelwandliagadlm


Any person or number in each tense can be shown by
using the necessary pronominal suffix.
Imperative Mood.
Singular Ngea, Speak (thou).
Dual Ngealadha, Speak (you).
Plural Ngealagadugal, Speak (you).
Conditional Mood.
Perhaps I will talk, Ngelagaiadliu
Reflexive.
I am talking to myself, Ngedyillingadhu.
Reciprocal.
We, (dual incl.) talk to each other, Ngelinnangulli
We (plural incl.) talk to each other, Ngelinnangenna
If space permitted, all the above examples could be
illustrated through the different persons and numbers.
Some verbs take a special inflection for number, which
applies to actions in which two or more persons can take
part, as in sitting, fighting, throwing, playing, etc., as in
the following example :
Two talking, Ngeallanunnala
Several talking, Ngeallanunnuggal
The negative form of any verb is obtained by prefixing
kurria, thus, Kurria ngea, speak not.
There are numerous modifications of verbs to express
different shades of meaning, as : Wingurrimunnadhu, I sat
all the time. Birrumburrayambuldhu, I throw (as a boom-
erang) in play.
Adverbs.
Yes, ngarbu. No, wongai. Now, dhallungurra. Yester-
day, kumbirrangurra. Tomorrow, kumbirragulli. By and
bye, dliallunggogulli. Long ago, ngurgambungarru. How,
widdyu? How many, minyangalmai ? Where, wundlia?
Where art thou, wundhalindu ? and so on.


Prepositions.
Ngunagangura, behind. Willidya, in front. Waiangadha,
around. Mugama, inside.
Some prepositions, like the nouns and adverbs, admit of
inflexion for number and person, by affixing an abbreviated
form of the pronoun :
Ist Person My left (left of me) Miradhi
2nd ~ Thy left Miranu
3rd ~ His left Miralugu
All the persons in each number can be inflected.
Exclamations.
Wai! take care ! Yah! calling attention. Chuh! silence.
Any vocative can be inflected for number.
Numerals.
One, mukku. Two, bulagar. Several, bunggo.
As the Wiradhuri and Wongaibon are dialects of the
same language, it will be interesting to introduce here a
portion of the conjugation of the Wiradhuri verb b ( uma, beat.
A contracted form of the pronoun is suffixed to the root of
the verb to show number and person. The present tense is
given in full, but the first person of the singular will be
sufficient to illustrate the past and future tenses.
Indicative Mood—Present Tense.
* ( Ist Person I beat, Bumarradhu
Singular j 2nd ~ Thou beatest, Bumarrawindu
(.3rd ~ He beats, Bumarralula
Ist Per 1 We, inch, beat, Bumarrali
I * ( We, excl., beat, Bumarraliguna
Dual 2nd ~ You beat, Bumarrandubla
3rd ~ They beat, Bumarragwainbula
Ist Per I We, Bumarrane
l I We, excl., beat, Bumarraneguna
Plural | 2nd „ You beat, Bumarrandugir
' 3rd „ They beat, Bumarragwainbulella


Past Tense.
Singular I * beat tllis morning, Bumulngurridyu
Ist Person ) 1 beat ’ y esterda y Bumulguandliu
( I beat, indefinite Bumaidhu
Future Tense.
Singular I * w * b eat » indefinite Bumulgiridyu
Ist Person j 1 will beat soon ’ Bumulyamagiridyu
( I will beat tomorrow, Bumulngurrigiridyu
Imperative.
Buma, beat! Kurria buma, beat not!
Reflexive.
Bumungadyillindyu, I am beating myself.
There are also reciprocal and other forms of the verb,
but as I am preparing a grammar and vocabulary of the
Wiradhuri language, no more will be said upon the subject
at present.
s—The5 —The Kurnu Language.
The native tribes speaking the Kurnu language are
located on the Darling River from about Tilpa up the river
to Bourke, and also up the Warrego River as far as Ford’s
Bridge. Dialects of the Kurnu are spoken along the course
of the Darling River from Tilpa downwards, via Wilcannia
and Menindie, to Wentworth, a distance of about 350 miles.
The Kurnu language extends, with some modifications,
from the Darling River to Torawotta Lake and the Barrier
Ranges, as well as up the Paroo River as far as the
Queensland boundary. The social organization and initia-
tion ceremonies of these tribes were described by me in
a former article to this Society. 1 The following elements
of the language have been gathered by myself in the Kurnu
territory, from reliable old natives.
1 “The Group Divisions and Initiation Ceremonies of the Barkunjee
Tribes,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N.S. Wales, Vol. xxxii., pp. 241 -250.


Number. —Nouns have three numbers —the singular, dual
and plural. Thurlta, a kangaroo; thurlta pakula, a couple
of kangaroos ; thurlta gutthalagu, several kangoroos.
Gender. —Wimbadya, a man. Burraka, a woman. Kut-
tyungga, a young boy. Karnkali, a young girl. Mun-
dlianggura, a baby of either sex. The gender of animals
is shown by affixing words indicative of male and female,
as thurlta dhuladya, a male kangaroo ; thurlta wambukka,
a female kangaroo.
Case. —The following are some of the principal cases :
The nominative indicates anything at rest, and is with-
out flexion, as, kulli, a dog ; wimbadya, a man.
The causative represents the subject in action, and takes
a suffixed particle, as Wimbadyawa waku burtatyi, a man
a crow killed; kulliwa yerrandyi dhuttadyi, a dog an
opossum bit.
Genitive. —Wimbadyana gattheri, a man’s boomerang.
Kullina gurni, a dog’s tail. Burrakana kurnka, a woman’s
yamstick. The remaining cases are omitted. '
Adjectives.
These follow the nouns they qualify, and take the same
inflexions for number and case. Wimbadya wurta, a man
large. Wimbadyana wurtana gattheri, a large man’s
boomerang. Wimbadyawa wurtawa gattheri ngartatyi, a
large ‘man a boomerang threw.
Comparison of adjectives is effected by such expressions
as “this is good—that is bad,’’ and so on, in a similar
manner to those of the Thoorga. 1
Pronouns.
Pronouns have number, person and case. There are
“ inclusive ” and “ exclusive ” forms for the first person of
1 “TheThoorga and Yukumbil Languages,” Queensland Geographical
Journal, Vol. xvii., pp. 49 - 73.


the dual and plural. The following table exhibits the
nominative of the singular, dual and plural:
( Ist Person I, Nguppa
Singular j 2nd ~ Thou, Ngimba
‘ 3rd ~ He, Wuttha or gittliu
Ist Person ( e ' incl , uBi . ve -
I I We, exclusive, Ngullingulu
Dual •< 2nd ~ You, Ngup tngalu
( 3rd ~ They, Wutthawula
ut Ppr«nn I We ’ inclusiv( b Nginna
C 1 \ We, exclusive, Nginnanda
Plural •] 2nd ~ You, Ngurtana
(3rd ~ They, Wuttheda
The possessive and objective pronouns are as under:
j Ist Person Mine, Ngari Me, Ngunnha
Singular 2nd ~ Thine, Ngoma Thee, Ngumma
( 3rd „ His, Watthunegi Him, Wutthana
There are modifications of the objective pronouns to
mean “towards me,” “away from me,” etc., as in the
annexed examples :
q. i J Ist Person Towards me, Ngunnhari
® 1 3rd „ Towards him, Gitthunari
Dual Ist ~ Towards us, inch, Ngullinari
Plural Ist ~ Towards us, incl., Nginnanari
0 . , j Ist Person From me,
Singular \ 3rd (i From
Ngunnarndu
Gitthanarndu
Dual Ist ~ . From us, incl., Ngullinarndu
Plural Ist „ From us, incl., Nginnanarndu
With me, or close to me, is Ngariri.
In each of the foregoing examples, the inflections can be
applied to all the persons of the singular, dual and plural.
Interrogatives.—Who (singular), windyaka. Who (dual),
windyula. Who (plural), windyi-windyi. Whose, windya-
kunnagi. What, minnha. What for, minnhamundi.
Demonstratives. —This, giki; that, wutthana.


Verbs.
Verbs have the same numbers and persons as the pro-
nouns, with the usual tenses and moods. Tables of conju-
gations of verbs are omitted for want of space, but a toler-
ably full list of verbs will be found in the vocabulary.
There are two forms in the first person of the dual and
[dural —the “ inclusive ” and “ exclusive.”
Adverbs.
Yes, ngi. No, ngatthu. Here, kungara. There, wurra.
Yonder, wurrityalinnaga. To-day, kailpominka. Yesterday,
yillana. To-morrow, wambinna. By and bye, kunnidilli.
Long ago, kundindyi. In the future, windhuru. First,
mirriga.
Where art thou, windyarra ngimba. Where goest thou,
windyawarra dhani ngimba. How, nunguna. How many,
ngulthurra.
Prepositions.
In front, mirrika. In rear, nguuda. Between, bukkulu.
Beside, gungo. Down, baikabika. Up, wunggalu. Inside,
ngunggaru. The other side, murlaka. Outside, dhurna-
murlaka. At my back, dhurna ngariri.
See the vocabulary of Kurnu words at the end of this
article.
6— I The Tyake, or Mystic Language.
I have on several occasions reported the existence of a
secret or cabalistic language used only by the men at the
initiation ceremonies of several native tribes in New South
Wales. 1 While the novitiates are away in the bush with
the elders of the tribe, they are taught a mystic name for
1 Jouru. Anthrop. Inst., (1396) Vol. xxv., p. 310. Proc. Royal Soc.,
Queensland, Yol. xvi., p. 37. Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phili., Vol.
xxxix., p. 471. Journ. Royal Soc., N.S. Wales, Vol. xxxii , pp. 249, 250.
C'ongres Internat. d’Anthrop. et d’Arche'ol. prehist., Compte Rendu, 12me
Session, p. 491.


surrounding natural objects, animals, parts of the body,
and short phrases of general utility. The language varies
in different communities.
On the present occasion I am furnishing the names of
several animals and a few other words, in the mystic
language used among the initiated men of the Kurnu tribe.
The English words are given in the first column; the
ordinary native equivalents in the second; and the secret
or mystic words in the last column,
English.
Kurnu.
Kangaroo Thurlta
Black Opossum Ngalkika
Bandicoot Burakum
Burakunya
Porcupine Yarrali
Dog Kulli
Grey opossum Yerrandyi
Padamelon Murrinya
Murrinya
Kangaroo-rat Gulatya
Eaglehawk W urrigu
Black dpck Ngultha
Curlew W illaru
Scrub turkey Lauan
Diver Ngurtadya
Teal duck Kultaba
Wood duck Gunali
Emu Kulthe
Crow Waku
Ground iguana Burna
Tree iguana Gugar
Jew lizard Gani
Black snake Kullali
Carpet snake Bulthamuddyera
Penis Wira
Testicles or scrotum Mulu ,
Vulva Bfilli
Copulation Bainngullana
Anus Dhitti
Mystic.
Burnki
Kulla-niltillinya
Wanganyalui
Kurlu-burlkali
Munnidi
Nguraninninyi
Yalengga
Burndali
W undamurra
Barrimbarri
Kapimuku
Mendhimugga
Burrakamuku
M ipperu
Wundammur
Thittigilyu
Wakuburnki
Miirnibungu
Munkamurra
W urrangura
Waiwai
Kadhu
Mendiburnki
Kurlu-burlkali
Kurla
Baingulla
Dhittimukku


It will be observed that some of the mystic names in the
above list are formed from the common, by means of an
additional word; thus, burnki is added to waku, the com-
mon native word for crow, to form the mystic name of that
bird. Again, the porcupine is distinguished by the same
name as the human scrotum. I have before observed
obscenity connected with the porcupine in other tribes.
The following is a short list of words from the mystic
language of the Kamilaroi tribe, which I collected when
attending the Bora ceremony held at Tall wood in 1895 1 : —
English. Kamilaroi. Mystic.
Kangaroo Bundar Ungogirgal
Opossum Mute Birredburraburai
Dog Buruma Gungumoal
Eaglehawk Thirril Dhindhurringa
Emu Dhinoan Ungodhulli
Tree iguana Yurundiali Birridhunbillirnga
Carpet snake Yabba Milngulli
Penis Dhun Dhunburringa
Testicles Buru Burumbunna
Vulva Yangal Wungodhe
Copulation Thadha W unggogurrilli
Anus Nyi Murumburnge
Head Koga Kubbadhirba
Forehead Ngulu Ngulumblal
Hair of head Kah Budhubudhulnga
Eye Mil M illungga
Nose Muru Murunggun
Ear Binna Binneyulaui
Mouth Ngaih Ngaimballumbu
Thigh Dhurra Gunnimbar
Foot Dhinna Gunsru
©
Teeth Yira Yirambunna
Fire Wi Buddhamur
Smoke Thu Thugabil
1 “The Bora of the Kamil-iroi Tribe,” Proc. Roy. Soc., Victoria, Vol.
ix., N.S., pp. 137 - 173.


English. Kamilaroi Mystic.
Water Kolli Wungothubbil
Boomerang Burran Wanggaribul
A stone Yarral Wallamari
Father Baina Muddhamunna
Elder brother Daidhi Muddhunga
Clever man, Wirringan Gundaidhar
A man Giwir Maimba
A woman Inar Winnilwanga
Behold! Ngummilla Unggomilli
Camp Wullai Nyimarai
In ordinary Kamilaroi conversation, kutthabulda is the
noise made while copulating, and burrabunda means
emission. If anything remarkable or jocular is being nar-
rated, one or more of the hearers will exclaim “ Kuttha-
bulda ! ” or “ Burrabunda!” or perhaps both words will be
interjected by different persons. They are used indis-
criminately by men and women.
7 —The Dyirringan Language.
The remnants of the Dyirringan tribe occupy the northern
half of the county of Auckland, on the south-east coast of
New South Wales. They are bounded on the north by the
Thoorga-speaking people, whose language I have elsewhere
dealt with. 1 On the south are the Thawa and other tribes,
whilst the Muddhang and Ngarrugu occupy the country to
the west. Stretching southerly along the sea-coast from
the Dyirringan territory to Cape Howe, and onward into
Victoria as far as Anderson’s Inlet, into which the Tarwin
River empties, in the county of Buln Buln, all the languages
are similar in grammatical structure 2 to the Dyirringan,
although some of them dilfer considerably in vocabulary.
I have also observed here, as in other districts, that two
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, Yol. xvii., pp 49-60.
3 See my “Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S.
Wales, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 71 - 106.


dialects may differ widely in intonation, although the
changes in vocabulary are comparatively slight, which
gives the superficial observer the impression that they are
altogether unlike.
The initiation ceremonies of the Dyirringan are described
in an article which I communicated to the Anthropological
Society at Washington, U.S.A., in 1896. 1 In common with
certain other tribes, their intermarrying laws, and the
Kudsha ceremony, are also dealt with by me in a previous
article to this Society in 1900.' 2 The Dyirringan is one of
an aggregate of tribes whose sacred songs I have learnt
and published, with the accompanying music, in a paper
contributed to the Royal Geographical Society of Queens-
land. 3 These are the first sacred songs of the Australian
Aborigines which have ever been set to music.
Nouns.
There are three numbers —singular, dual and plural.
Number. —Baiil, a man; baiilwula, a couple of men ;
baiilma, several men.
Gender. —Mulidya, a woman. Baiil, a man. Burru
biangwa, a male kangaroo. Burru ngigwa, a female
kangaroo.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, accusative,
causative, genitive, instrumental, dative and ablative. The
nominative simply names the subject at rest, as, Baiil
bagama, the man sits. The causative indicates the agent
of a transitive verb, as, Baiillu wingal wammaba, a man a
child heat.
1 “The Bunan Ceremony of New South Wales,” American Anthro-
pologist, Vol. ix., pp. 327 - 344, plate vi.
2 “ The Organisation. Language and Initiation Ceremonies of the
Aborigines of the south-east coast of New South Wales,” Journ. Roy
Soc , N. S. Wales,” Vol. xxxiv., pp. 263 - 264, and 276 - 281.
3 “ Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies,” Queensland Geo-
graphical Journal, Vol. xvn., pp. 61 - 63.
K—Sept. 3, 1902.


The possessive case is represented by a suffix to the name
of the property as well as to that of the owner. Baiilla
mirrigangwa, a man’s dog. Mirriga wingalangwa, a dog’s
puppies. Anything over which possession can be exercised
is subject to inflexion for number and person:
( Ist Person My camp (camp my) Badhaldya
Singular - 2nd ~ Thy camp Badhalnyi
( 3rd ~ His camp Badhalwa
and so on through the dual and plural numbers.
Instrumental. —Wannungala yerrabandya warrangandu,
who threw at me a boomerang. The accusative is the
same as the nominative. Dative. —Ngurani, to a camp.
Ablative. —Nguradyan, from a camp.
Adjectives.
Adjectives follow the nouns they qualify, and take the
same declensions for number and case. They are com-
pared as under: Jummaga nyan —dhauat nyanya, good this,
bad that. Jummagumma nyanya, this is very good.
When an adjective is used as a predicate, it can, by
applying the proper postfixes, be converted into a verb, as
in the word mundur, strong:
Ist Per. I am strong, Mundur-gaiamungga
Singular j 2nd ~ Thou art strong, Mundur-gaiadyamung
(3rd „ He is strong* Mundur-gaiadyama
This inflexion extends to all the persons of the dual and
plural, and to the past and future tenses.
Pronouns.
There is a distinctive form of the first person of the dual
and plural, according as the individual spoken to is included
or excluded:
C Ist Person I, Ngaialu
Singular < 2nd „ Thou, Indigal
(3rd ~ He, Waralu
Indigal
Waralu


Ist Person! We ’ inclusive ’ Ngaianga
f h 6 l We, exclusive, Ngaiangulu
Dual <; 2nd ~ You, Indigumbul
13rd ~ They, Waraligimbula
Ist Person ! We ’ iliclu sive, Ngaianyin
f lst . erson ) We, exclusive, Ngaianyilla
Plural { 2nd ~ You, Indiganyu
13rd ~ They, Waraligima
The following are the possessive pronouns of the first
person singular —the other numbers being passed over:
t Ist Person Mine, Ngaialunggulal
Singular < 2nd ~ Thine, Indigunggulal
( 3rd ~ His, Waraliminyawa
There are two sorts of possess!ves —those which have
just been mentioned, and those which are suffixed to a noun
as badyaldya, my camp, exemplified in a previous page.
There are forms of the pronoun signifying “ away from
me,” “towards me,” etc., which need not now be particu-
larised.
Demonstratives. —This, nyan; that, nyanya. These and
other forms are very numerous, and are inflected for num-
ber and case, as in the Thurrawal and Thoorga, thus: —
Singular—Baiil mundur nyanya, man large that.
Dual —Baiilwula mundurwula nyangimbula,men large those
Plural- —Baiilma mundurma nyangima, men large those.
Interrogatives.—Wannunggal, who ? Wannunggulal,
whose? Minya, what? Minyane, what for?
Pronominal suffixes, in abbreviated forms, are used in
great number and variety in the declension of nouns,
adjectives, verbs, prepositions, adverbs, and interjections;
examples of which are given under these parts of speech
in the present paper.
Verbs.
The verb “to be” has apparently a substitute in the word
gaia, which is inflected for number and person. 1 If an
1 " The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S.
Wales, Vol. xxxvi., pp. 71 -106.


adjective, adverb, or other suitable word be taken as a
predicate, we get the example given in an earlier page,
under the head of “Adjectives”: Mundur-gaia-mungga,
strong am I, and so on.
Following is the conjugation of the principal elements
of the verb wamma, to beat or strike:
Indicative Mood —Present Tense
f Ist Per,
Sing. { 2nd „
13rd „
Ist Per,
Dual 2nd „
13rd „
Ist Per,
Plural ■{ 2nd ~
13rd „
f Ist Per
Sing. <( 2nd ~
3rd „
lst Per
Dual <( 2nd „
13rd „
, Ist Per
Plural <j 2nd ~
13rd „
f Ist Per.
Sing. { 2nd „
13rd „
Per.
Dual < 2nd „
13rd „
I beat,
Wammamungga
Wammamangi
Wammama
Thou beatest,
He beats,
j We, inch, beat,
( We, excl., beat,
You beat,
Wammamunga
Wammamungalu
Wammamumbul
Wammamumbula
They beat,
j We, incl., beat,
( We, excl., beat,
You beat,
Wammamunyan
Wammamunyilla
Wammamunyu
Wammainundya
TJiey beat,
Past Tense.
I beat,
Wammabagga
Wammabangi
Wammaba
Tliou beatedst,
He beat,
I We, inch, beat,
( We, excl., beat,
You beat,
Wammabanga
Wammabangalu
Wammabambul
Wammabambula
They beat,
( We, inch, beat,
( We, excl., beat,
Wammabanyan
Wamraabanyilla
Wammabanyu
Wammabandya
You beat,
They beat,
Future Tense.
I will beat,
Wammayabulla
Wammayibulla
Wammabulla
Thou wilt beat,
He will beat,
f We, inch, will beat, Wammangabulla
) We, excl., will beat, Wammangiilabulla
You will beat, Wammulbulla
They will beat, Wammulabulla


Ist Per i We, incl., will beat, Wammanyanbulla
f c ' I We, excl., will beat, Wammanyulabulla
Plural ■{ 2nd ~ You will beat, WammanyubuJla
t3rd ~ They will beat, Wammandyabulla
A negative meaning is given by means of an infix, na,
between the verb stem and the abbreviated pronoun :
Wamma-na-mungga, I beat not, and so on, through all
the parts of the verb.
Imperative.
There are affimative and negative forms of the verb: —
Singular Beat, Wamma
Dual Beat, Wammul
Plural Beat, Wammanyu
Beat not, Wammanyawi
Beat not, Wammanyawul
Beat not, Wammanyanyu
Conditional.
Perhaps I will beat, Wammayabulla-wanda, and so on
for the rest of the persons and numbers.
Reflexive
Present I am beating myself, Wammullimungga
Past I did beat myself, Wammullibagga
Future I will beat myself, Wammulliyabulla
This inflection applies to all parts of the verb
Imperative-reflexive.
Singular Beat, thyself, Wammulli
Dual Beat yourselves, Wammullul
Plural Beat yourselves, Wammullunya
Reciprocal.
This form of the verb is of course restricted to the dual
and plural:
Dual.
We, incl., are beating each other, Wammullidyagunga
We, excl., ~ ~ ~ Wammullidyagungalu
Plural.
We, incl., are beating each other, Wammullidyaganyan
We, excl., „ ~ „ Wammullidyaganyilla


Imperative-reciprocal.
Dual Beat each other, Wammadyagalul
Plural Beat each other, Wammadyagalunyu
There are numerous modifications of the verb to convey
different shades of meaning, a few examples of which may
be given : —Wammabandya. struck me; wammaguban,
struck thee. Warranganwai yellindyarria, a boomerang
bring to me. Yellinyilliwai, bring this direction. Yelli-
mungga, I carry or bring.
The verb takes an inflection for the same number as
the object noun :
Burru nyambugga, a kangaroo saw I.
Burrula nyabugalu, a couple of kangaroos saw I.
Burruma nyabugana, several kangaroos saw I.
Prepositions.
The equivalents of our English prepositions are in some
cases separate words, but are also frequently expressed by
a verb. A few short sentences will illustrate the applica-
tion of these rules :—Burru, between, or in the middle.
Wurrananggi, the other side. Nguluwan, in front. Gar-
ranggan, behind. Irritgundi, inside. Nguttandya, outside.
Gurrano, up (a river). Wullungurri, down (a river etc.).
Nyaninggo, close.
The following verbs convey a prepositional meaning :
Dhumala dhuratyububugga,scrub through went I. Bungguri
dhullibumungga, hill up go I. Bungguri nyirrumungga,
hill down go I. Bungguri bullawugungga, hill on the side
of go I, or Igo on the side of the hill. Ngugangga yendi-
nyellima, water across comes he.
Some prepositions can be inflexed for person and number:
f Ist Person In front of me, Nguluwandyia
Singular { 2nd ~ In front of tliee, Nguluwandyin
13rd ~ In front of him, Nguluwanguug
and so on through the dual and plural numbers.


Adverbs.
The following are a few of the more commonly used
adverbs : —Yes, ngawe. No, thuggail. Today, munnago.
Perhaps, wanda. By and bye, bulla. Long ago, warralingo.
From yonder, warrabiggidyan. How, yua. Whither, wan-
dyinni. Whence, wandyidyin. Soon, yunggo. How many,
yuagailuma. What is the matter, minyanggundu.
Certain adverbs can be inflected for number and person:
( Ist Person Where am I, Wandyia
Singular 2nd ~ Where art thou, Wandyawili
( 3rd ~ Where is he, Wandyawanni
and so on through all the persons, numbers and tenses.
Conjunctions.
The general absence of conjunctions is attributable to
the numerous modifications of the verbs and pronouns, by
means of which sentences are brought together without
the help of connecting words. We sometimes find an
intrusive letter or syllable used between words, to prevent
hiatus, which serves the purpose of a conjunction.
Interjections and Exclamations.
These parts of speech are not numerous: —Calling atten-
tion, yai! in the singular ; yaiawul! in the dual; yaianyu!
in the plural.
Numerals.
One, mirdindhal. Two, dyirriba. Three, turungadya.
B—The8 —The Yota-yota Language.
This language is spoken by some small tribes on the
Murray River, from Cobram for some distance below Ecliuca
extending into Victoria as far as Shepparton, and into New
South Wales to Deniliquin. On the south they are bounded
by the Thaguwurru nation, 1 and on the north by the
1 “The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S.
Wales, Vol. xxxvi., pp. 71 -106.


Wiradhuri, but the Yota-yota people have apparently kept
their language distinct from those of their neighbours. On
this account it is important from a linguistic point of view,
and I consider myself fortunate in being the first to report
its grammatical structure. Considerations of space will
however, render it necessary to deal only with the funda-
mental elements of the language.
Mr. E. M. CJurr, gave vocabularies of some tribes in this
region in his work, 1 but he left the grammar of the language
untouched.
The ceremonies of inauguration and the laws of inter-
marriage of this tribe, among others, are described in an
article I contributed to the Anthropological Society at
Washington, U.S.A., in 1898. 2
Nouns.
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual and plural.
Buttya, an opossum ; buttyal, a pair of opossums; buttyau,
several opossums. Winyar, a woman; winyandyal, a
couple of women ; winyanboga, several women.
Gender. —There are two modes of indicating gender—by
using different words for the masculine and feminine, or by
adding words meaning male and female respectively. Yiyir,
a man. Winyar, a woman. Nunyunbunna, a girl. Nya-
woga, a maid. Dhuddhiwa, a girl. Who has just attained
puberty. Yiyirram, a boy. Malnega, a youth. Gudhupka
or yarka, a child of either sex. Bukka nhalma, a male dog.
Bukka nliana, a female dog. Baiamal nungea, a cock swan.
Baiamal nliana, a hen swan.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative,
genitive, dative, ablative, instrumental and accusative.
1 “ The Australian Race,” Vol. hi., pp. 570-539.
2 “ The Victorian Aborigines : their Initiation Ceremonies and Divis-
ional Systems,” American Anthropologist, Vol. xi., pp. 326 - 330, with
map showing distribution of the native tribes of Victoria.


Nominative. —Wunya, a boomerang. Kangupka, a perch.
Nukkin, the tail of an animal. Dungula, a river. Manung,
a camp.
Causative. —Yiyirril wunya munnin, a man threw a
boomerang. Winyarril kangupka mummun, a woman a
perch caught. Bukkal buttya yinnin, a dog an opossum bit.
Genitive. —Yiyirrin wunya, a man’s boomerang. Win-
yarrin nunyir, a woman’s yamstick. Buttyan nukkin, an
opossum’s tail.
Dative. —Dungulung, to tlie river.
Ablative. —Dungulin, from the river. Manungyin, from
the camp.
Instrumental. —Ngango yiyir wiinyal munin, I at a man
a boomerang threw.
Accusative. —The same as the nominative.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are declined for number and case, and are
placed after the qualified noun. Yiyir dunngidya, a man
large. Yiyirral dunngidyal, a couple of large men. Yiyar-
rau dunngidyau, several large men. Yiyirril dunngidyil
buttya tuttain, a large man an opossum killed. Yiyirrin
dunngidyin wunya, a large man’s boomerang.
The remaining cases are declined the same as the nouns.
Comparison of adjectives is effected in a manner similar to
that employed in the Thoorga. 1
Pronouns.
Pronouns have three numbers and the usual cases. The
first person of the dual and plural contains two pronouns,
the first of which includes both the speaker and the party
addressed, but the second excludes the party spoken to.
These are marked “incl.” and “excl.” respectively. Some
1 “ The Thoorga Language,” Queensland Geographical Journal, Yol.
xvii., pp. 49-73.


of the nominative and possessive pronouns are as here
tabulated:
( Ist Person I, Ngango Mine, Ngini
Singular <( 2nd ~ Thou, Ngunnungo Thine, Nguni
I.3rd ~ He, Nha-ungo His, Dinnin
Dual.
1«t Pprcmi / We ’ inc1 *’ Ngalngingo Ours, inch, Ngalungun
1 ! We, excl., Ngullungo Ours, excl., Ngullan
2nd ~ You, Bullungo Yours, Bullan
3rd ~ They, Ngamulngo Theirs, Damalinya
Plural.
l«t Ppronn i We ’ inc1 -’ Ngundiugo Ours, inch, Nguandan
11 ) We, excl., Ngannango Ours, excl., Ngannan
2nd ~ You, Nhoorango Yours, Nliuran
3rd ~ They, Ngamungo Theirs, Ngamunyin
The third personal pronoun has various forms, and is
often used as an ordinary demonstrative. There are pro-
nouns meaning “me,” “myself,” “towards me,” “from
me,” etc., the same as illustrated by me in dealing with
other languages. There are also causative forms of the
nominative pronouns which must be passed over for want
of space.
Interrogatives. —Ngani, who (singular). Nganibula, who
(dual)? Nganinhura, who (plural)? Nganinguddha, who
for ? Nganinnat, who from ? Nganinarak, who with ?
Minnlie, what? Minnhetgudda, what for? Minnhalda,
what with ?
Demonstratives are used in great number and variety,
exhibiting niceties of expression in regard to the location
of the person or thing spoken of. These demonstratives
include the different points of the compass.
Verbs.
Verbs have the same numbers, persons, tenses and moods
as those of the Thurrawal language, 1 and although the
1 “The Thurrawal Gundungurra and Dharruk Languages,” Journ.
Royal Soc., N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxv., pp. 127- 160.


suffixed particles differ, they are applied in a similar man-
ner, as represented in the following conjugation of the verb
mullin, to beat:
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
T Ist Person I beat, Mullinnga
Singular 2nd ~ Thou beatest, Mullinnginna
13rd ~ He beats, Mullinda
Iqt Pprqnn i We ’ incl *» beat ’ Mullinngalngin
f ) We? exc i M beat? Mullinngulla
Dual 2nd ~ You beat, Mullinbullak
13rd ~ They beat, Mullindamulu
Ist Person I We ’ incL ’ beat ’ Mullin y uandak
f ) We, excl., beat, Mullinyanak
Plural <J 2nd ~ You beat, Mulliuhurak
13rd ~ They beat, Mullindamnak
One example each in the past and future tenses will be
sufficient: —
Past Tense.
Singular Ist Person I beat, Mullennga
Future Tense. »
Singular Ist Person, I will beat, Mulliaknga
Imperative Mood.
Beat, Mullel. Beat not, Kuddhagana mullel
Condition Mood.
Perhaps I will beat, Yotadyin mulliaknga.
Reflexive.
I am beating myself, Mullinnganyen.
Reciprocal.
We (dual) are beating each other, Mulledhanngulla
We (plural) ~ ~ ~ Mulledhanyanak
Ad verbs.
No, yota. Yes, ngowi. Today, kannanngur. Tomorrow,
barpirrik. Day after tomorrow, yiyirrak-kanangar. Now,
yimmalang. By and bye, dyinyanguna. Long ago, pappura-


bunnarak. I don’t know, ngai. Perhaps, yotadyin. Where
waga ? Where abouts, wannhul ? Whither, wannhalmuty ?
Whence, wiinyin ? How, wannhalum? When, wummir?
There, nhullai; there, farther, dungubbera ; there, farther
still, ngungabunnarak. Yonder, dhumnala.
Numerals.
One, iawa. Two, bultyobal.
See the vocabulary of Yota-yota words at the end of
this article.
9 —The Bureba Language.
This native tongue is spoken on both sides of the Murray
River, from Swan Hill upwards till met by the Wainba-
wamba, Giani-giani, Yabula-yabula and Yota-yota. Below
Swan Hill, and extending right down the Murray to Went-
worth, are several small tribes, such as the Watti-watti,
Latyu-latyu, Muti-muti, Nyerri-nyerri, Darti-darti, and
some others. Towards the north-east these tribes are
met by the Birraba-birraba and Itha-itha communities,
whose languages have been described by me elsewhere.
All these triblets speak dialects having the same constitu-
tion as the Bureba, bearing also strong affinities to the
Tyattyalla, but they differ more or less among themselves
in vocabulary. Considerations of space will preclude more
than a cursory outline of the chief elements of the language.
The social organisation and “ man-making ” ceremonies of
all the above mentioned tribes are described by me in an
article to this Society in 1898. 1
' Nouns.
The number and gender of nouns are on the same principle
as those of the Tyattyalla. 2 Although the dual is generally
1 “The Group Divisions or Initiation Ceremonies of the Barkunjee
Tribes/’ Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, Vol. xxxii., pp. 240 - 250 with map.
g “ The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales
Vol. xxxvi., pp. 71 - 106.


used, a trial is often met with in some of the languages
mentioned in the above paragraph.
Case. —The nominative and accusative are not declined,
as wan, a boomerang; laiur, a woman.
Causative. —Laiuru bupu dhaka, a woman a child beat.
Every object over which ownership can be claimed is
subject to inflexion for number and person: —
i Ist Person My boomerang, Wanak
Singular < 2nd „ Thy „ Wanin
3rd ~ His ~ Wanuk
Dual, Ist Per. > ° ur - tocl ." boomerang, Wanal
( Our, excl., ~ Wanallung
Plural, Ist Per. j 0 1,r ’ iaol ;’ boomera "«’ Wanangura
I Our, excl., ~ Wanangandang
There are also case-endings for the instrumental, dative
and ablative.
Adjectives.
Adjectives follow the qualified noun, and take the same
declensions. They are compared like the Gundqngurra. 1
Pronouns.
Pronouns are inflected for number, person and case, and
contain two forms in the first person of the dual and plural.
The following examples of the nominative and possessive
cases, in the singular number, will be sufficient to exhibit
their inflexion:
Ist Person I, Yetti Mine, Yettiuk
Singular <J 2nd „ Tliou, Nginda Thine, Ngindeuk
13rd „ He, Malu His, Malgung
Who, winyar ? What, nganyu ? This, ginya. Tiiat,
malu. The demonstratives are numerous, and of various
forms, frequently taking tlie place of pronouns of the third
person in all the numbers. This accounts for the great
1 See my “ Gundungurra Language,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila.,
U.S.A., Vol. xl., pp. 140-148.


diversity of the third personal pronouns, which have little
or no etymological connection with the others.
Verbs.
Verbs have the same numbers, persons, tenses and moods,
as the other languages treated in this article. In the first
person of the dual and plural there is a variation in the
suffix of the verb indicating the inclusion or exclusion of
the person spoken to. An example of the present tense of
the indicative mood only will be given.
fist Person I sit, Ngangan
Singular -<! 2nd „ Thou sittest, Ngangar
13rd ~ He sits, Nganga
Itjt person I We ’ inc1 *’ sit ’ Ngangangul
f I We, excl., sit, Ngangangullung
Dual < 2nd „ You sit, Ngangangula
13rd „ They sit, Ngangabullang
let Person <f We ’ inc1 *’ sit ’ Ngangangur
f I We, excl., sit, Ngangandhang
Plural ■{ 2nd ~ You sit, Nganganguta
13rd „ They sit, Ngangandhana
Adverbs.
No, bureba. Yes, ngungui. Here, gingga. There, nyua.
Where, windyella.
Prepositions.
Prepositions may be either separate words, or they may
consist of modifications of other parts of speech to express
a prepositional meaning. Several prepositions are subject
to inflexion for person and number:
f Ist Person At my back, Warmadhak
Singular < 2nd „ At thy back, Warmadhangin
13rd ~ At his back, Warmadhanyuk
Dual Ist Per *At our ’ back, Warmadhangul
!At our, excl., back, Warmadliangullung
pi . 1 t p (At our, incl., back, Warmadhangurra
'\ At our, excl., back, Warmadhangandak


Numerals.
One, yuaia. Two, bulle.
Conclusion.
In the foregoing pages I have endeavoured to record and
preserve the elements of nine aboriginal languages and
dialects, all of which are now published for the first time.
Only those who are acquainted with the difficulties atten-
dant upon the collection of information from uncultivated
races can understand the labour and time and patience
which have been expended in gathering the materials for
the preparation of this article.
It is perhaps too much to expect that the details of so
many languages, and the materials of three vocabularies,
should be free from omissions and mistakes, especially
when we remember that the seat of investigation comprises
about three-quarters of New South Wales, the northern
frontier of Victoria, and an extensive region in southern
Queensland.
The whole of this work has been done by myself, with-
out the assistance of any person, either in collecting the
particulars, or in arranging the grammars. It is hoped
that these efforts may prove at least of some value as
bases of future operations, and render the further study of
Australian languages comparatively easy. Should this end
be achieved, the labour and outlay of the author will be
abundantly rewarded.
Vocabulary of Kurnu Words.
The followiug vocabulary, containing about 220 of the
most important Kurnu words in general use, has been pre-
pared from notes taken by me from the mouths of old men
and women in the native camps.


English.
Kurnu.
The Family.
A man, wimbadya
Married man, burrakulli
Small boy, kutyungga
Youth, wilyarrungga
Novitiate, kulta
Initiated man, munkamura
Father, ngambadya
Elder brother, kukkudya
Younger ~ bulludya
A woman, burraka
Married woman, yupparilla
Young girl, karnkali
Marriageable girl, kumbulla
Child (neuter), mundhanggura
Mother, ngamugga
Mother-in-law, gulirri
Elder sister, kunnittya
Younger sister, wurtuka
The Human Body.
Head, milpirri
Forehead, pikku
Hair of head, bulki
Beard, wukkubulki
Eye, mainmurra
Nose, mindyumulu
Neck (throat), bunba
Ear, yuri or munga
Mouth, yulka
Lips, mimnai
Teeth, ngundi
Breast (female) ngumma
Navel, wirngu
Belly,
munda
English. Kurnu.
Tongue, dhurlunya
Chin, wukka
Back, dhurnu
Arm, wunye
Hand, murra
Thigh, mungga
Calf of leg, thiltya
Knee, dhinggi
Foot, millinya
Blood, muppurla
Fat, korai
Bone, birna
Penis, wira
Erection, wandhadya
Testicles, mulu
Vulva, billli
Nymphse, dhillin
Hair on pudendse, murtubulki
Copulation, baingullana
Masturbation, burtaburtamuntha
Semen, burdifl
Urine, kippurra
Excrement, kilkua .
Venereal, mikkali
Inanimate Nature.
Sun, putyi
Heat of sun, windhura
Moon, dhintyanni
Stars, buli or ngunyaga
Pleiades, gumbalpirri
Thunder, butangutthu
Lightning, birnde
Chain lightning, nimuddheri
Rain,
ngunburu


English. Kurnu.
Fog, kukuma
Frost, yillingurra
Hail, buntara
Fresh water, thilburu
Ground, mundi
A stone, yunda
Sand, gurrinya
Light (of day), bafibukka
Darkness, ngamutabuttyi
Heat, wunyuru
Coldness, bundinyulla
Rainbow, kurindherri
Moonlight, boityoa
Shadow, guindyirri
Camp, mulye
Grass hut, muthuguli
Bough hut, dhurtuguli
Bark hut, guippurra
Smoke, dhoaro
Food (flesh), wunga
Day, kalkirri
Night, marka
Morning, dhungkonka
Evening, warragalka
Hill, • mukku
Sandhill, dhunna
Grass, muthu
Leaves of trees, girra
Birds’ nest, wanginya
Egg, burti
Honey, bumbulu
Path, yutheru
Shadow of tree, goilburra
Tail of animal, gurni
L—Sept. 3, 1902.
English.
Kurnu,
Mammals.
Native cat, blk. , _ ...
i i., > bunduli
and white J
Native cat, yel. ) ,
j 11-. r kikunya
and white ) J
Rock-wallaby, wangulu
Flying-squirrel, dhillipuru
[See mammals under “Mystic
Language.”]
Birds.
Laughing-jackass, gurrugaga
Native-companion, buralga
Pelican, wirrianungkura
Peewee, baiindhal
Plover, rittha-rittha
Swan, yungguli
Crane, baraga
White cockatoo, gullibuga
[Other birds are under
“Mystic Language,” supral\
Fishes.
Perch, gunbali
Cod, dhuburu
Catfish, bundali
Silverfish, binnabuga
Black bream, bunngulla
Reptiles.
Bubbur snake, bundindyura
Brown snake, dhinga
See “Mystic Language,” supra.
Invertebrates.
Locust, wurtu
Blow-fly, winguru
Louse, ngutu


English. Kurnu.
Nit of louse, butti
Centipede, gilga
Mosquito, ngiindhi
Scorpion, dhunga
Weapons.
Tomahawk, wukkaga
Koolamin, dhinye
Yamstick, kunga
Spear, wood, gabaga
Spear-lever, wommer
Spear shield, baiawulli
Waddy shield, gunba
Club, fighting, birra
Club, hunting dhuttu-birra
Boomerang, gattheri, wanna
Small club, bungurdu
Adjectives.
Alive, gilla-bukamulla
Dead, bukada
Large, wurtu
Small, kutthalaga
Tall, baluru
Low, mukadya
Good, gundyalga
Bad, dhulugalla
Red, ngalgirga
White, butha
Black, kukindi
Full, nguppalangadu
Quick,
Slow,
Blind,
Deaf,
gira-gira
bolanyi
mainmurra
urimuko
Strong,
muttyerra
English
Afraid,
Right,
W rong,
Tired,
Lean,
Cold,
Angry,
Sleepy,
Glad,
Greedy,
Sick,
Stinking,
Pregnant,
Die,
Eat,
Drink,
Sleep,
Stand,
Sit,
Talk,
Tell,
Walk,
Run,
Bring,
Take,
Make,
Break,
Strike,
Fight,
Wound,
Arise,
Fall down,
Kurnu.
nguyalangaba
gundyalka
dhulugalla
binnamundhulla
gen-nga
nindadya
bundinyulla
burnbamurka
gunhulla
gilpuri
buri
gullulla
buka-buka
mundabuka
Verbs.
bukamulla
gaila
dhundyali
imagala
dhurri
ngingga
gulpa
gulperri
gani
gulyera
gandi
wurragandi
dindala
yaka
burta, bulka
muyalla
mirlpa
dhingeri
nganggala


English. Kurnu. English. Kurnu.
Book, bummila Shine, bainburti
Hear, dhurli Suck, dyungdyalla
■Give, nguga Swim, iga
Bing, bukkinyulla Search for, wagari
Weep, ngira Spit, tupala
Cook, nguala Smell, para
.‘Steal, mirndala Throw, ngarta
Request, ngandyerri Roast, ngoala
Blow with breath, bupa Whistle, gwilpi
•Climb, binnari Pretend, burlinya
Conceal, wirnki Kiss, murmundya
Jump, benburri Vomit, mundulla
Laugh, ginda Dance, bukka
Scratch, mirra Dive, nguppoagalla
Send, karndi Sting, bunda
Vocabulary op Yualeai and Yota-yota Words.
The following vocabulary contains about 365 English
words with their equivalents in the Yualeai and Yota-yota
languages, thus making a total of 730 native terms. Every
word has been carefully written down by myself from the
lips of the native speakers.
English. Yualeai. Yota-yota.
A man # ure yiyir
A husband gulire winyanbunayir
Old man thunningurri dhamiyirr
Very old man dyirribung
Clever man wiringin ngaraga
Small boy birradyul mulnigaptya
Youth, before initiation malnega
Youth, partly initiated wonga
Youth, after extraction of tooth gogamulga
Youth, fully initiated dyibbauga
Elder brother dhaia panyupa


English. Yualeai.
Younger brother kullaminga
Elder sister boadhi
boadhi
Younger sister boannga
A woman inar
Old woman mamigulla
Woman during menses
Wife gi
gulir
Small girl meadyul
Young woman
Time of first menses
Maid at first menses
Father boadyir
Mother gunidyir
Child of either sex birralidyul
Head dhaigal
Forehead ngulu
Hair of head bullundhur
Beard yerri
Eye mil
Nose muyu
Back of neck
Throat
wuyu
Ear . . udha
Mouth ’ ngaih
Lips illi
Teeth ia
Breast, female ngummo
Navel
wirrigal
ngalir
Afterbirth
Belly
Back
Arm
baua
bungun
ngunuga
Elbow
Yota-yota.
panyip
dhaigip
pugika
winyar
dhamawinyar
kartubulla
The Human Body
wmyar
nyauwoga
dhuddiwa
durguggimuty
maia
nhungui
nhannha
guthupka
boko
ngunyer
bukan
moandhiuring
me
kauwu
wunnawurra
dyia
marmu
kutta
wuru
dirrixn
baiyi
kagadha
nyittawa
bulli
bunnuth
bornu
ngunangga


English. Yualeai.
Shoulder
Hand
Thumb
Thigh
mubbun
Knee dhinbir
Foot bubbur
Heart
Liver
Blood
go-oi
Fat wammo
Bone buia
Penis dhun
Erection gilwurri
Testicles buru
Hair on pudendse buthe
Sexual desire nginn;
nginngin
Copulation thadha
Masturbation kaiaiabilla
Sodomy nididharri
Noise made in copulating, kutthabul
Semen barri
Emission burrabunda
V ulva yangal
Nymphse binnunggal
Anus
Excrement guna
Urine kil
Venereal babadi
Moon
Stars
Orion’s belt
Pleiades
birri-birrai
memeai
Yota-yota.
kuttir
tyirtyirran
nhana
tyunna
ngungwura
bortha
mawa
wallaktya
lilluma
nukkin
taiu
budyanga
yimiii
dyillu
dhanin
dyillufi
dhanadhair
dhungo-dhungo
bulla
dyityin
bunufi
muttya
gune
gumufi
bewa
Inanimate Natural Objects.
yiai yornga
bain yora
goburrai tutufl
ngurgaty irrimna
yukun


English.
Sunshine
Thunder
Lightning
Rain
Rainbow
Dew
Frost
Hail
Water
Dirty-water
Ground
Mud
Stone
Sand
Light
Darkness
Heat
Camp
Bark hut
Grass hut
West-wind
Whirlwind
Dust storm
Mirage
Pipe-clay
Red ochre
Fire
Smoke
Food, meat
Food, vegetable
Thirst
Yualeai.
dhulumai
dhungera
yaluwiri
gugil
dhundhar
dhaian
gungun
dhemar
biddyai
maiama
gumbogan
dhuiai
bullui
buler
bullia
garema
dhadhar
ngunna
giger-giger
buli
maira
yerradher
wuyugil
bunna
dhuar
Yota-yota
yuradha
dhuddyauar
munnara
tyirngawan
gorgurra
yawa
yanggawa
yungaba
nyinnuga
walla
muppagoa
wukka
muppun-
bunga
watyaga
yinya
dhulla
nataty
bolkaty
manmun
manung
tarnga
putthbga
pitya
thoanga
mullan
thanga


English.
Yualeai.
Night
bulwi
Morning
Evening
A splinter
Hill
gibabu
bulului
Sandhill
Grass
Leaves of trees
Bird’s nest
garil
gareme
Eggs
Honey
A tell-tale
Grub in box tree
Grub in gum tree
Grub in ground
Bloom on trees
Pathway
yuruwundul'
dhuddin
Shadow of tree
Shadow of man
Tail of animal
Summer
mulluwil
dhun
yaiba
W inter
dhundarba
Native'bear
Dog
madhai
mude
Opossum
Kangaroo-rat
gunhar
Native cat, black ) , ~
aid white ; bu «S“ ndl
Native cat, yellow I
at, yellow I
and white )
Bandicoot guyu
Small kangaroo-rat bilba
Water-rat gumai
muyandhudufi
dhuyul
gumbogandul
bunu
thalla
yawa
yelbuga
malnha
dawaru
manung
warrungunna
dhubanmulligu
Animals — Mammals.
guda <
budyanga
merin
balaga
kuka
bowurring
dana
mulawa
nukkin
gurbur
bukka
buttya
ngurnuada
miya
burraty-ba
thalwa
Yota-yota.
kananngur
wammudyamulloga
burpa


English.
Porcupine
Kangaroo
Platypus
Flying-squirrel
Ringtail opossum
Birds collectively
Crow
Laughing jackass
Curlew
Mallee-hen
Plain turkey
Native companion
Pelican
Swan
Woodduck
Bat
Quail
Eaglehawk
Emu
Common magpie
Black magpie
Black duck
Mopoke
Bronze-wing pigeon
Lark
Rosella parrot
Parrokeet
Common hawk
Kingfisher
Peewee
Plover
Crane
White cockatoo
Yualeai.
biggibilla
baura
Animals — Birds.
dhiggaia
gugurgaga
u-i-an
waggun
gumbulgubbin
buralga
gulambula
baiamal
ngarradhan
mullean
dinnawan
buragalbu
budhanba
burrindyin
baldhurradhurra
gurraga
muyai
Yota-yota.
burra
wannagapippua
birranga
bindyarama
tyoanda
dungami
durdyulapka
billuoba
inandya
kunugudula
dhaiilipnha
turnupnha
kunyugoa
mumianga
borkir
wanmirr
biggarumdya
korngafi
benia
dolma
kokok
mungoburra
dhuddadudda
dudutya
dekula
pittyinna
nurnamamdatba
tyilloanga
timmulbornya
kalmuka
tyarring


English.
Yualeai.
Black cockatoo
Weejuggler
guggilarifi
wulla
Fish-hawk
Heron
durrun
gilla
Galah
Bowerbird
wida
Perch
Cod
gudu
gaigai
yuaya
birnga
Catfish
Frog
Silverfish
Yellow-belly
Bream
dhuggai
bunngulla
Trout
Ground iguana
Tree iguana
Sleepy lizard
Small lizard
Shingleback
mungungali
übun
gudda
kurbali
murubi
yubba
Death adder
Carpet snake
Brown snake
Black snake
Tiger snake
Jew lizard
ngundhaba
wuyubului
bubbur
Wood lizard
wallubal
Locust
Blow fly
Louse
Mother-louse
Nit of louse
gubbul
gaiai
A nimals — Fishes,
kungupgah
burmanga
A nimals — Reptiles.
biwi
dhungoba
wurthumurra
bungame
baryebala
biltyimdya
bombala
mutirr
mamell
mingurinya
woala
Animals — Invertebrates.
ngurrulla dyunna
gummu-gummu dyendyura
muni muna
timmin
Yota-yota.
nyanang


English.
Bull-dog ant
Centipede
Jumper ant
Maggot
Common house fly
Grasshopper
Spider
Mosquito
Scorpion
Greenhead ant
Mussel
Any leaning tree
Any dead tree
A hollow tree
Any large tree
Ti-tree
Willow, wild
Myall
W attle
Pine
Cherry-tree
Red-gum tree
White box
Yellow box
Honeysuckle
Bullrushes
Yam
Desert pea
Sandalwood
Whitewood
Beefwood
Brigalow
Yualeai.
buyugu
milbawai
mugufi
bunbun
murgamurgai
mung-in
guna
baiar
munggi
Trees and Plants.
bundhirri
burngifi
bungil
maial
bailifi
guraua
gillunggara
buddhar
burbul
m umbo
kulbai
Yota-yota.
gudyidya
thiiltin-gin
tutula
wawunya
yunadya
betha
tilla
buma nebula
diddling-er
kandyima
dauwir
durdabulla
dyealna
dyima
ngortya
ganga
ngummara
waw-lulla
barttya
dharnya
baiuna
beruga
bitthin
maiyilla
maiyilla


English.
Yualeai.
Tomahawk kumbo
Koolamin, wood binggui
Koolamin, bark welbun
Koolamin, for honey wirri
Yamstick dhibai
Spear, wood billar
Spear, reed
Fishing spear
Spear lever wommurra
Spear shield burin
Waddy shield
Fighting club bugu
Hunting club inurula
Boomerang burran
Net bag
Canoe
Large bag
Paddle
Headband
Alive
Dead *
Large
Small
Tall or long
Low or short
Good
Bad
Thirsty
Red
White
murrun
ballune
burul
budyen
guyar
buyadyul
kubba
guggil
bullal
kwainburra
bulla
Yota-yota.
Weapons, Utensils, etc.
dutyimba
Adjectives.
nunyer
dyikura
kama
wunnaga
yolwa
bornyir
mulka
burrunggala
ban-ga
wunya
murra
muttha
kunki
kagadya •
ngoreh
dhoana
kokuil
dunngidya
ying-arna
dyurrungunna
thuluka
kalinya
mutthe
thang-um
moamaty
pet-tyaity
mu rrungngulling
kunnedhula


English.
Mad or crazy
Black
Quick
Slow
Blind
Deaf
Strong
Afraid
Right
W rong
Tired
Blunt, edge
Blunt, point
Sharp edge or point
Fat
Lean
Hot
Angry
Sleepy
Glad
Sorry
Greedy
Sick
Stinking
Baldheaded
Pregnant
Die
Eat
Drink
Sleep
Stand
Yualeai.
womba
bului
ngaibo
burrai
bullua
muga
wumba
wullanba
giel
maiu
walmaiu
inggil
mugur
wamino
bilga
dhubiai
bullia
yuar
kubbayul
kuggilyul
dhurin
dhalane
nhui
wuggiba
yuleai
Verbs.
ballugigu
dhulligu
ngaugigu
dunduigu
wurrai
Yota-yota.
dhullanun
wurumaty
wunyuwula
thurramdyuba
raoadhaty
nhubbada-marma
dunngolodya
dyiuman
kalnirrin
muddhindhun
murralatyamaty
manha
nhurupka
buggadhulliii
walitya
walibulla
boalkuty
koalyunan
ngulyen
w ullanhan-bukkaba
dunngalaty-dyumity
dyirnyaua
ittyumuty
didyumura
gulnyaoga
bulleana
kukufl
dutyim
dhangun
nunnha
dana


English.
Talk
Tell
Walk
Run
Bring
Take
Make
Break
Strike
Beat
Wound
Arise
Fall down
See
Look
Hear
Listen
Give
Weep
Cook
Steal
Request
Blow'with breath
Climb
Conceal
Jump
Jump over
Laugh
Scratch
Scratch with claw
Forget
Stare at
Yualeai.
illawai
gwalligu
dhubanmulla
nhawanna
bunnagaigu
dhaigang-a
gang-a
gimbilli
gummulligu
bumulligu
bumulligu
gurrilligu
wurraia
bundang-a
ngurrilla
winnunggulla
wuna
bauilla
illamulligu
munnamulligu
dhaialli
bubilli
gullie
dhurimbulli
baia
bane
gindamaia
moangilli
nimmulli
udhummur
bunbun-ngurrilla
Yota-yota.
garwul
loatbaty
ngariaty
yarwul
yumma
yukkorma
mumma
buiima
kunga
nyinna
mullin
kuthana
kumbinna
taten
nhanha
nhawul
ngarnhung
ngarwul
ngunu
ba-i-ya
dunhu
thurra
biddhanda
minnamda
boama
wurwaty
nhurka
yarkabuk
karebak
yerka
nhubbadamarm
nhattyillim


English. Yualeai.
Send urmulla
Shine wialdhunna
Suck as a child ngummugi
Suck a wound
Swim gubigu
Bathe
Search for ngawillunna
Spit dhulan
Smell ngauia
Throw forcibly gaiawi
Pitch wunnunga
Roast dhomulli
Whistle wile
Pretend wage
Kiss ngaigale
Vomit gawiligu
Dance yorme
Corroboree
Dive ung-ai
Sting dhuni
Hunt on ground
Hunt in trees
Go naia
Come dhainaia
Burn gailamurra
Bite kutthera
R. H. MATHEWS
Yota-yota.
wotyan
walwu nmuty
bama
yarwa
maryibuk
yamuty
thupen
ming-a
munna
yung-a
thurra
leta
ngungeandha
thume
yakalum
kurradhan
tumman'muty
durtya
mumulwa
wawallu
ymmn




