

(Reprinted from. Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales , Vol. xxxvn.)
LANGUAGE of the BUNGANDITY TRIBE, SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Associe etranger Soc. d’Antlirop. de Paris.
[Bead before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, June 3, 1903.']
1




LANGUAGE op the BUNGANDITY TRIBE, SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Associe etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
[Bead before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, June 3, 1903.]
Synopsis —Prefatory. Orthography. Grammar of the Bungandity
Language. Vocabulary.
The Bungandity tribe occupied the country around Mount
Gambier, County of Grey, South Australia, and extended
easterly into Victoria as far as the valley of the Glenelg
River. This tribe was typical in language, customs and
social organisation, of an aggregate of about half-a-dozen
small tribes, the limits of whose territory may be indicated
approximately by a line drawn from Kingston to Border-
town, and thence southerly to the sea coast. Having on
different occasions during recent years visited this part of
South Australia and the adjacent portion of Victoria, I had
the good fortune to find a few surviving members of the
Bungandity tribe, from whom I obtained the materials of
the present treatise.
It has fallen to my lot to be the first author to investi-
gate the constitution of the Bungandity language and
supply the elements of its grammar. The whole of this
article has been prepared by me from notes taken down
by myself from the lips of the aboriginal speakers, and I
am alone responsible for the information contained. When
the difficulties encountered in obtaining the grammar of
any language which is purely colloquial are taken into
consideration, I feel sure that all necessary allowances
will be made for any imperfections of my work.


In the Bungandity language, inflection for person and
number is not confined to the verbs and pronouns, but
extends to many of the nouns, adjectives, prepositions,
adverbs and interjections, a peculiarity which was reported
in detail by me in certain aboriginal tongues of New South
Wales, 1 Victoria, 2 and Queensland. 3
A feature of the genitive case in the Bungandity tongue,
not reported by any previous writer as existing in the
aboriginal languages of South Australia, is that the pro-
prietor and the property both take a possessive affix. I was
likewise the first author to report a similar double form of
the genitive case in the languages of New South Wales, 4
and Victoria. 5
In every part of speech subject to inflection in this
language, there are two forms of the first person of the
dual, trial, and plural, one of which includes, and the other
excludes, the individual who is spoken to. This peculiarity
has not hitherto been reported in any of the native
languages of South Australia. '
In consequence of my visit through the territory of the
Bungandity people and their congeners in 1898,1 contributed
to the Anthropological Society at Washington, an article
dealing with their social organisation and initiation cere-
monies, 6 for particulars of which the reader is referred to
the publication in question.
1 “Thurrawal, Gundungurra and Dharruk Languages,” —Journ. Eoy.
Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxv., pp. 127 -160.
a “The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” —Journ. Eoy. Soc. N. S.
Wales, xxxvi., pp. 71 -106.
3 “ Languages of Some Native Tribes of Queensland, etc.” —Journ. Eoy.
Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxvi., pp. 135- 190.
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, xl., p. 143.
4 Journ. Eoy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxvi., p. 78.
6 “The Victorian Aborigines—their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional
Systems,”—American Anthropologist, xi., pp. 331 336, with map of
Victoria.


In 1880, Mrs. James Smith published a vocabulary and a
few fragments of grammatical rules of the language of this
tribe, whose name she erroneously gave as Booandik. 1 Mr.
E. M. Ourr, in 1886, also published a short vocabulary of
this language, 2 but its grammatical structure was left
untouched.
In a sentence the subject is usually placed first, then the
direct object, and the verb last. The indirect object often
follows the verb. An adjective qualifying either the
nominative or objective, follows the noun. An interroga-
tive sentence does not differ in form from an assertive one,
the distinction being indicated by the tone and accentu-
ation of the speaker’s voice.
It should be stated that in all the expressions illustrating
the several cases of nouns in this article, the demonstrative
pronouns are purposely omitted, for the two-fold purpose
of saving space, and of avoiding confusion by introducing
any more words than are really required to exhibit the
declension. We will take an example from the instru-
mental case of nouns, where I have said, “a man beat a
dog with a boomerang.” This would be expressed by a
blackfellow something as follows :—“ This-in-front man
beat yonder-in-the-rear dog with that-over-there boomer-
ang.” or such other demonstratives as the subject might
require.
All the South Australian tribes about Lake Eyre, Oodna-
datta, Alton Downs, and Innamincka, and thence southerly
over all the intervening country to Port Lincoln and Mount
Gambier, are divided into two pliratries —the men of each
*0
phratry marrying the women of the opposite one. In some
districts these two phratry names are Kurogity and
1 “The Booandik Tribe of South Australian Aborigines,” (Adelaide,
1880).
* “ The Australian Race,” hi., pp. 462 - 465.


Kamaty, in others Matturri and Kirraru, in others they
are Kulpirro and Thinnawa, and again in others Kukudyiba
and Kuchibinga. For particulars of these systems of inter-
marriage, and the laws regulating the descent of the off-
spring, the reader is referred to an article I communicated
to the American Philosophical Society at Philadelphia,
U.S.A., in 1900. 1 The boundaries which separate the tribes
who practise circumcision, and splitting the male urethra,
from those tribes among whom neither custom is in force,
is described in the article referred to, and delineated upon
an accompanying map of South Australia.
Within the geographic limits mentioned in the preceding
paragraph, the grammatical structure of the native tongues
in its fundamental principles closely resembles that of the
Bungandity language. From enquiries I have made it is
found that the cases of nouns and their qualifying adjectives
are declined by similar postfixes. That in all parts of
speech subject to inflection, there is an inclusive and
exclusive form of the first person in the dual and plural
numbers. An abbreviated form of the pronoun is affixed
to the root of the verb to indicate number and person. In
the genitive case of nouns the property and the owner are
both inflected.
Friends who have visited Alice Springs and Arltunga
during the last couple of years, to whom I had previously
submitted a number of questions for investigation, inform
me that the double form in the dual and plural of the first
person, to include or exclude the party addressed, is per-
sistent in all the languages of the native tribes from Alice
Springs along the overland telegraph line to Port Darwin,
1 “ Divisions of the South Australian Aborigines,”—Proc. Arner. Philos.
Soc., Yol. xxxix., pp. 78-93, with map of South Australia. It may be
mentioned here that I was the first author to discover and report the
existence of the phratries Kulpirro and Thinnawa, and also Kukutyiba
and Kuchibinga above referred to.


reaching thence easterly into Queensland,*and also westerly
into West Australia.
Orthography.
Eighteen letters of the English alphabet are sounded,
comprising thirteen consonants —b, cl, g, h, k, l, m, n, p, r y
t, w, y —and five vowels — a, e, i, o, u.
The system of orthoepy adopted is that recommended by
the circular issued by the Royal Geographical Society,
London, with the following qualifications:—
It is frequently difficult to distinguish between the short
sound of a and u. A thick sound of iis occasionally met
with, which closely resembles the short sound of u or a.
As far as possible, vowels are unmarked, but in some
instances the long sound of a, e , and u are indicated thus,
a, e, u. In a few cases the short sound of u has been
marked thus, u.
Gis hard in all cases. R has a rough/trilled sound, as
in hurrah! W always commences a syllable or word.
Ng at the beginning of a word or syllable as ngu in ngu-ro ,
thou, has a peculiar sound, which can be got very closely
by putting u before it, as ungu', and then articulating it as
one syllable. At the end of a syllable it has substantially
the sound of ng in “ sing.”
The sound of the Spanish nis frequent; at the beginning
of a word or syllable I have given it as ny, but when ter-
minating a word the Spanish letter is used. Yat the
beginning of a word or syllable has its ordinary consonant
value.
1 See my “ Yualeai and Pikumbil Languages/’—Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.
Wales, Yol. xxxvi., pp. 137 -145. Also my “Murawarri Language,”—
Queensland Geographical Journal, Vol. xviii., pp. 52 - 68. These three
languages are spoken in Queensland.


Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “that,” with a slight
sound of d preceding it. Nh has also nearly the sound of
th in “that,” but with an initial sound of the n. A final
li is guttural, resembling cli in the German word joch.
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k, in
most words where these letters are employed. Ty and dy
at the commencement of a word or syllable have nearly
the sound of j or c/i, thus dya or tya closely resemble ja
or c ha. At the end of a word or syllable, ty or dy is
sounded as one letter ; thus dity, the last syllable of Bung-
an-dity, can be pronounced exactly by assuming e to be
added to the y, making it dit-ye; then commence articu-
lating the word, including the iy, but stopping short without
sounding the added e. Dy at the end of a word can be
pronounced in the same way, the sound of d being substi-
tuted for that of t.‘ In all cases where there is a double
consonant, each letter is distinctly enunciated.
The Bungandity Grammar.
Articles.
The place of the English article is supplied by various
forms of the demonstratives representing “ this ” and
“that,” which are declinable like the noun. If it be desired
to definitely say that only one object is meant, the numeral,
wandho, one, would be employed.
Nouns.
Number —Nouns have the singular, dual, trial and plural.
Drual, a man. Drualara, a couple of men. Drualwawung,
three men. Drualaban, several men.
Gender —Drual, a man. Bulle-bulle, a woman. Mur-
ungal, a boy. Barraty, a girl. Among animals sex is
distinguished by words meaning “ male ” and “ female,”
respectively, thus, guramu mamung, a buck opossum.
Guramu ngurtung, a doe opossum.


Case. —To form the cases, nouns take additions by means
of postfixes :
Nominative —This case merely names the thing spoken
of, and is without flexion, as, gal, a dog ; gettup-gettup, a
boomerang; gure, a kangaroo ; kanna, a yamstick ; wirin,
a waddy.
The causative, or nominative-agent, represents the sub-
ject doing some act, as Drualla gal winan, a man a dog
beat. Gala guramu ngutthan, a dog an opossum bit.
Instrumental. —This case takes the same affix as the
causative. Drualla gal winan gettup-gettupa, a man beat
a dog with a boomerang. Bulle-bulla murungal winan
wirinya, a woman beat a boy with a waddy. Sometimes,
in such expressions as these, the causative suffix is omitted,
and the instrumental only employed.
Genitive. —The owner and the chattel are both declined,
but the affix to the former differs from that to the latter r 1
Drualangat gettup-gettupmung, a man’s boomerang. Bulle-
bullangat kannawung, a woman’s yamstick.
Personal property of any description can be declined by
possesive suffixes to the noun, thus:
f Ist Person Gettup-gettupmain, My boomerang
Singular -l 2nd „ Gettup-gettupmun, Thy boomerang
„ Gettup-gettupmung, His boomerang
and so on through the remaining numbers.
If two or more articles be claimed, an infix is inserted
between the noun root and the possessive affix, thus:
Dual Galaramain, My two dogs
Trial Galawawungain, My three dogs
Plural Galabanain, My several dogs.
1 See my “Tharuinba Language,”—Queensland Geographical Journal,
Vol. xviii., pp. 58 - 61,


Another way of expressing ownership of two or more
articles is to annex the suffix of number to the name of the
thing possessed, and then use the possessive pronoun, as
Galara ngatthowat, dogs two mine. Galaban ngatthowat,
dogs several mine, and so on. The accusative is the same
as the nominative. The other cases are omitted in this
paper.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify, and
are similarly declined for number and case. They are com-
pared by making two positive statements, such as, “ this
is large —that is small.”
There are euphonic modifications of the suffixes in the
declension of all the cases of nouns, and also of the qualify-
ing adjectives, depending upon the termination of the word
declined. Occasionally the suffix of the noun is left out —
at other times that of the adjective—being regulated by
the euphony of the expression. Certain adjectives, when
used predicatively, admit of inflection as intransitive verbs.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have number person and case as in the follow-
ing table. There are inclusive and exclusive forms for the
dual, trial and plural of the third person, as shown in the
table below. The trial forms of the pronouns, and also of
the verbs, are obtained by adding the word wawung to the
plural, in the same way that baiap and kullilc are employed
in other languages reported by me last year. 1
With the exception of a few remarks by myself, 2 no pre-
vious author has discovered the existence of the trial
number in any part of speech in the languages of South
Australia.
1 “The Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” —Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S.
Wales, xxxvi., p. 74.
2 “The Wuttyubullak Language,”—Queensland Geographical Journal
xviii., p. 61.


The following table exhibits the nominative pronouns:—
( Ist Person I, Ngattho
Singular -i 2nd „ Thou, Nguro
(3rd ~ He, Nuang
rut Person / We ’ inc1 ’’ Ngatthohal
j lsi rerson ex(jL> Na tthowillal
JJual j 2nd „ You, Ngutpul
„ They, Nunggul
p P j.ann I We ’ inch ’ Ngatthohewawung
„ . ( n j We, excl., Ngatthowillewawung
ria j 2nd ~ You, Ngutpuerwawung
,, They, Nungba wawung
rut Person 1 We ’ incl *’ N S atthohg
[ ist i-erson We? excL> Natthow ille
riurai < 2nd „ You, Ngutpuer
„ They, Nungba
The singular number of the possessive pronouns will show
their formation:
( Ist Person Mine, Ngatthowat
Singular < 2nd „ Thine, Ngatthowin
(3rd „ His, Nuangat
Also see the possessive forms of the demonstrative pro-
nouns further on.
The foregoing full forms of the pronouns are employed
chiefly in answering questions. In ordinary conversation
the natives use the pronominal affixes illustrated under the
heading of “Verbs.”
The objective pronouns, me, thee, him, etc., are not
found separately, like the nominative and possessive, but
consist of pronominal suffixes to verbs, nouns, or other
parts of speech :
Ist Person (Someone) speaks to me, Lanandhanan
2nd ~ „ speaks to thee, Lanandhanun
3rd „ „ speaks to him, Lanandhawung
and so on for the other numbers. See also the example


under “ Prepositions.” There are forms of the pronouns
meaning “with me,” “towards me,” “away from me,“etc.,
and also causative forms, as Ngatthowir, I (did it).
Demonstratives. —The demonstratives in this language,
by the combination of simple root-words, can be made to
indicate distance, direction, position, size, number, person,
possession, movement, etc. Only a few examples will be
given at present: —This, nu. This perhaps, numiu. That,
nuana. That (yonder), gwalluburu. That (person), dhaiu.
That, (up there), gannu. That, (down there), wannu. This
is mine, ngunnahain. This is thine, ngunnahun. This is
his, ngunnaliung. See also possessive affixes to nouns in
an earlier page.
Many of the demonstratives are likewise used as pro-
nouns of the third person, which explains the great number,
irregularity, and lack of etymological connection found
among such pronouns in the several aboriginal languages
whose grammars I have promulgated. There names
for the different points of the compass, and a native will
frequently indicate the position of anything by giving its
compass direction from some well known tree or water-hole.
Interrogatives. —Who, nganuin. Whose, nganungat.
What, nunh. What for, nunnagaii. How many, nuppur.
Verbs.
Verbs have the same numbers and persons, with inclusive
and exclusive forms, as the pronouns. The principal moods
are the indicative, imperative and conditional. Number
and person are indicated by pronominal particles added to
the verb stem, as exemplified in the conjugation of the verb
“to speak.”
Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
r Ist Person I speak, Lanha
Singular <1 2nd „ Thou speakest, Lanin
13rd „ He speaks, Lan


Dual lst Person <! We ’ incl ” Speak ’ Lan g ul
Dual Ist rerson w e? exc]>? gpeaki L^nga
Trial Ist Person 1 We ’ incL ’ Speak ’ Lang wawung
inai ist rerson excL? speak? Lanungewawung
Plural Ist Person I We ’ incl ” speak ’ Lan ®
lural lst er son -j We> excl#j speak? Lanunge
In the above example, the whole of the singular, and the
“ double we” of the dual, trial and plural, have been given,
omitting the second and third persons for want of space.
In the past and future tenses, the singular number only
will be illustrated :
Past Tense.
f Ist Person I spoke, Leanha
Singular <j 2nd „ Thou spokest, Leanin
I.3rd „ He spoke, Lean
Future Tense.
f Ist Person I will speak, Langunga
Singular < 2nd ~ Thou wilt speak, Langungin
13rd ~ .He will speak, Langu
Imperative Mood, Speak, Langga.
Conditional Mood, I will perhaps speak, Langungamiu.
Reflexive.
The reflexive form of the verb describes an action which
the subject executes directly upon himself: —
I am talking to myself, Lanandhan,
and so on through all the persons and numbers.
Reciprocal.
There is a form of the verb to express that two or more
persons are reciprocally doing the act described :
Dual —We are talking to each other, Lanandhawanul.
Trial —We are talking to each other, Lanandhawanewawung
3. Plural —We are talking to each other, Lanandhawane.
The second and third persons in each number are sim-
ilarly inflected. Q


There are forms of the verb to indicate that the speak-
ing was done just now, some time since, or long ago ; that
there was a repetition or a continuance of the speaking,
and many other modifications which will be passed over.
There is no special form for the passive voice. The
sentence, “a man was kicked by an emu,” is expressed in
Bungandity by the paraphrase, “an emu kicked a man.”
Adverbs.
Yes, nguh. No, ngan. To-day, kerdu. Yesterday,
w r urdu. To-morrow, deab. In a few days, deaba. By and
bye, gidlio. Long ago, mangian. Where, na. Where is
thy camp, na ngulangun. Certain adverbs can be declined
for number and person. Where art thou, na-ungin. Where
are you two, na-ungut, and so on.
Here, nu, There, nuana. Yonder gunnaua. “ Here ”
and “there” have the meaning of “this” and “that,”
with which they are interchangeable.
Prepositions.
i
In front, kauiyung. Behind, wurdung. Other side,
mianhung. This side, nuanhung. Between, brawol. Up,
kunmannha. Down, wiyua. Through, bureanha.
Many prepositions can be inflected for person and number
thus: Behind me, wurdungan. Behind thee, wurdungin.
Behind him, wurdungung, and so on through all the numbers.
Interjections.
Kai! exclamation calling attention.
Numerals.
One, wandlio. Two, bo-aty. Three, boaty-ba-wandho.
Several, kullaity.
Vocabulary of Bungandity Words.
The following vocabulary contains about 245 of the most
commonly used words in the Bungandity language, with
their English equivalents. Every word has been noted


down carefully by myself from the old men and women in
the native camps, and much time and care have been
bestowed upon the work.
English. Bungandity. English. Bungandity.
The Family.
A man, drual Mother, ngate
Husband, marmbil Single woman, wiatgur
Father, marm Maid, thutmirt
Initiated man, bapputha Girl, barraty
Youth, murungal Elder sister, tyatti
Boy, kabunga
Younger sister, nyuiyur
Mother-in-law, krinnung
Elder brother, wirraguli
Younger „ nyeri Child, either sex, bopop
A woman, bulle-bulle Child, crawling, wimbungarn
Wife, maha Baby, kongaparim
Parts of the Body.
Head, bupe Hand, murra
Forehead, ginne Thigh, gurrep
Hair of Head, ngulla Knee, parrafl
Beard, ngullangunna Foot, dhinna
Eye, mir
Nose, gawu
Ear, wah
Mouth, lu
Lips, wuru
Tongue, dhe
Teeth, dhung-a
Mammae, female, bap
Umbilicus, bi
Abdomen, bui
Back, bunnu
Heart, luh
Liver, buth
Arm, woafi
Shoulder, wurt
Elbow,
dhalin
Blood, kamar
Fat, murnbui
Skin, murn
Bone, beh
Penis, wirranhung
Prepuce, munaninyung
Scrotum, burungan
Pubic hair ngullunhung
Y ulva, ngunnunhunj
ngunnunhung
Copulation, dhanun
Semen, bullinyi
bullinyung
Anus, mummung
Excrement, gunanhung
Urine, thalubung
thalubung
Yenereal, warn bail


English.
Moon,
Stars,
Thunder,
Lightning,
Rain,
Rainbow,
Dew,
Frost,
Hail,
W ater,
Stream,
Earth,
Stone,
Sand,
Hill,
Light,
Darkness,
Coldness,
Mammals.
Dog,
Wild Dog,
Opossum,
Native-cdt,
Kangaroo,
guramu
gih
Birds.
Laughing Jackass, gwaddung
Crow, wa
Plain turkey, lah
Pelican, par
parangal
Swan, gunawar
Eaglehawk, ngirri
Emu, kauir
Bungandity. English. Bungandity.
Inanimate Nature.
kurru Camp ngulu
dhunngam Fire, warnap
dhumman-dhum- Smoke, bulufi
murndal [man Food, bungang
birdung-murndal Day, kurru
gauafi Dawn, murranan
turafi Dusk, mungifi
tharak Night, munginya
wa-art Morning, kunyia kurru
bat Evening, kabinha kurru
purri A splinter, lirt
wa-un-purri Leaves of trees, yirra
mirret Egg, kua
murre Honey, minnhung
mullang Pathway, warri
bulity Tail of animal, wirra
yap Shadow, wul
mol Grass, burdu'
mot-mot Cave, yulang
gal Grey kangaroo, goaii
ganatyum Porcupine, willangga
W ombat, more
Bandicoot, wian
Bat, ngunr
ngunnin-ngunnin
Native Companion, wandi
Black duck, burne
Mopoke, dhuni-dhunity
Plover, p&ttherat
White cockatoo, ma
Corella, kurogity
Lowrie parrot, turt


English. Bungandity. English. Bungandity.
Fishes.
Fish collectively, tirto Trout, durktirt
Eel, guia
Reptiles.
Ground iguana, vuro Carpet Snake, binggal
Turtle, turunggal Prog, dennab
Snakes collectively, gurgang
Invertebrates.
Blow-fly, dhuratta Bulldog ant, mun
House-fly, yual Maggot, dhuratto
Louse, murna Leech, dulung
Nit of louse, guirung Mussel, wardarro
Jumper ant, bitbitmula
Trees and Plants.
Peppermint,
She-oak,
Tea-tree,
Stringybark,
Wattle,
Cherry tree,
Tomahawk,
Koolamin,
Yamstick,
Jag spear,
Reed spear,
Spear lever,
Boomerang,
Spear shield,
Alive,
Dead,
Large,
Small,
Tall,
Short,
ngurrittha
ngering
wiriu
mirre
kurra
tharam
Weapons,
gurgaii
dhurung
kunna
kwiun
der
gumbafi
gettup-gettup
kirram
White gum tree, leng
Red gum tree, bial
Blackwood, mura
Ferns (bracken) me-e
yule
nuan
wurung
Mushrooms, edible, barringgut
Utensils, etc.
Waddy shield, mulkar
Hunting club, wirifl
Fighting club, kunnak
Head-band, maragalafi
Kilt, kunal
Net bag, warak
Canoe, mirammun
Adjectives.
Strong,
Yaliant,
Afraid,
binne
murugity Right,
wurum W rong,
mermeran
yinban
mude Tired,
martung
wlrang
thulban
F—June 3, 1903.


English.
Good,
Hungry,
Thirsty,
Red,
White,
Black,
Jealous,
Quick,
Slow,
Blind,
Deaf,
Bungandity.
martung
wirang
dirtban
gurnanaft
gannhurrung
wadyunyea
wulu
mullaiammun
binnangungea
beraungift
munyifl
binniwa
Die, gido
Eat, taift
Drink, tatthifl
Sleep, wi
Stand, gardiii
Sit, nyiwiii
Talk or speak, lawiil
Tell, gabbamum
Walk, yawifi
Run wa-ih
Brin" wambawe
Take, mana
Break, wirgunga
Beat or strike, wina
Arise, kangia
Fall down, lumawa
Shine or glitter, mirnanmun
Hear, wanga
Give, wua
Sing, newia
Weep, hmgga
Steal, gulima
Ask or beg, waia
Blow with breath, buinba
Climb,
gungea
English. Bungandity.
Sour, gillat
Sweet, minnhung
Warm, ba-a-wan
Cold, mudin
Angry, guli
Sleepy, wity
Glad, memmirun
Sorry, yerban
Greedy, ranglu
Sick, gunngurin
Stinking, bie
True, tu-arn
Verbs.
Conceal, gulia
Jump, yunggea
Laugh, wia
Scratch, girta
Forget, wanggaramun
Send, wula
Suck, as a child, dhadhun
Suck a wound, baba
Scold, mo-i-a
Swim, yunggia
Fly as a bird, minda
Search or seek, wibbun
Spit, thukipa
Smell, ngadhifi
Throw, yanda
Whistle, wungoa
Pretend, kalea
Vomit, kramboifi
Dance, wirrawa
Bite, nguttha
Touch, tinba
Call, kurnda
Come, wattai
Carry, ginnipa




