

Government Sanatorium
LARA
for
Alcohol and Drug Inebriety
11593. By Authority H. J. Green Government Printer, Melbourne.


VIEW OF YOU YANGS FROM THE BALCONY.




Lara Sanatorium for Inebriety.
DEPARTMENT OF THE HONORABLE THE CHIEF SECRETARY.
Inspector of inebriates institution:
Dr. W. ERNEST JONES.
Jttebicat Officer:
Dr. CLARENCE G. GODFREY.
<Snperintenbent;
T. S. DONNE LEAN.


VIEWS OF LAKE.


Inebriates Act 1904.
DEPARTMENT OF CHIEF SECRETARY.
Establishment of an Inebriates Institution.
jxJIS Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor of the State of Victoria, by
and with the advice of the Executive Council thereof, doth by this
Order, made pursuant to the provisions of Section 17 of the Inebriates
Act 1904 (4 Edw. VII. Xo. 1940), establish, as from the Ist day of July.
1907, the premises known as the Lara Homestead, situate at Lara, in the
parish of Woornyalook, county of Grunt, together with all that land
comprising allotments 19 and 20, section C, of the parish and county
aforesaid, containing six hundred and thirty-seven acres two roods
thirty perches, more or less, as a place for the reception, control, and
treatment of inebriates, to be styled the
“LARA INEBRIATES INSTITUTION.”
ROBERT S. ROGERS,
Clerk of the. Executive Council.
At an Executive Council held at the La tv Courts,
Melbourne, the 21st June, 1907.




INEBRIATES INSTITUTION,
LARA.
Under Government Management.
This sanatorium for the treatment of cases of alcohol and
drug inebriety, opened on the ist July, 1907, is situated about
35 miles from Melbourne, and within a mile of the Lara rail-
way station, on the Melbourne to Geelong railway line. It
comprises a spacious mansion, standing in its own grounds of
640 acres of park lands and gardens, and is situated in a
healthy and picturesque spot at the foot of the You Yangs
Mountains. Formerly known as the Lara Homestead, it was


ENTRANCE HALL.


NEW WING.


acquired by the Government, and has been adapted to the
requirements of a first-class sanatorium, and is the only one
of its class conducted under State management in the Com-
monwealth. The rooms are spacious and lofty, and well fur-
nished throughout.
The Lara Sanatorium is neither a hospital nor asylum, but
is rather a hygienic home or health resort.
The accommodation has been increased by the erection of a
new building adjoining the mansion, with the most modern
sanitary arrangements. The grounds are extensive and
secluded, with beautiful plantations, and laid out with lawns,
shaded walks, and picturesque avenues. The privacy of the
patients is secured by the extensive area of the property and
the situation of the buildings, and there is nothing to distin-
guish the sanatorium from that of any private country resi-
dence. There is an excellent orchard, and also an extensive
artificial lake, from which is obtained an unlimited supplv of
water, the purity of which is secured by treatment through
modern filter beds, constructed on the Monier concrete system.


THE AVENUE.


How to obtain Admission.
No person can be admitted except under a statutory order,
which may be obtained from a Judge of the Supreme Court, a
Judge of a County Court, the Master-in-Equity, or a Police
Magistrate.
Voluntary Admissions.
The applicant should first procure a medical certificate (see
Appendix A), certifying as to the inebriety, and then present
himself before any one of the before-mentioned officials, who
will deal with the application privately, and, if satisfied, will
issue an order (see Appendix B) for anv period not exceeding
re months, upon the production of which the patient will be
admitted for treatment forthwith.
Compulsory Admission.*
Where the patient is unwilling to submit himself to treat-
ment, the person applying for the order should present a
*To eliminate any feeling of detention, voluntary admission
is the more desirable from the stand-point of recovery.


OPEN-AIR TREATMENT.


medical certificate (Appendix A) in person to any of the before-
mentioned officials, who will then cause a notice to be served on
the alleged inebriate to appear on some fixed dMe, when the
case will be heard in private.
If the alleged inebriate do not appear, and the Judge,
Master-in-Equity, or Police Magistrate has obtained “ proof to
his satisfaction that the person in respect of whom the appli-
cation is made is an inebriate,” the order for admission may
be issued notwithstanding.
A further direction may be given to some person to convey
the inebriate to this sanatorium, if necessary.
T reatment.
The medical side of the work is under the direction of a
physician of special experience in the treatment of inebriety.
The management generally is carried out by officials of
experience.
It is now generally recognized tihat inebriety must be
regarded as a disease in many cases, the chief symptom of


THE DINING ROOM


which is the inability to refrain from taking excessive doses
of alcohol or narcotic drugs. In such cases, the desire for
alcohol becomes overpowering and uncontrollable, and a mere
effort of the will becomes, in many cases, quite ineffective,
unless assisted by complete removal from temptation and the
building up of the bodily and mental condition by scientific
therapeutics.
A thorough system of hygiene, combined with hydropathic
treatment, suitable out-door occupation and amusements, are
included in the remedial measures. Every case is studied,
and dealt with on its own merits, with full regard to the
physical condition of the patient, and each day’s progress
watched carefully. The institution is equipped with require-
ments for successfully applying these methods.
The treatment in detail is as follows: —
Total abstinence from all alcoholic liquors is insisted on
from the time of admission, except in cases where symptoms of
distress render it necessary to administer a definite amount for




a few days. As a rule, there is no difficulty or risk in
abstaining completely from the commencement of treatment.
At regular and specified hours during the dav, medicines are
administered hypodermically and otherwise; the remedies are
varied according to the circumstances, and are exhibited to
combat the craving as well as to restore the general strength ;
hot air and vapour baths, hot and cold shower and plunge
baths, physical exercise and mental recreation.
The specific medicinal treatment is continued over a peaiod
of six to eight weeks, or longer, followed by a general hygienic
course.
In certain selected cases, treatment by “ suggestion ” will
also be made use of.
The medical officer will be pleased to furnish, privately,
any member of the medical profession with exact details of
the medicines used.
It is found that bv adopting this treatment improvement
begins at once; the patient is noticed to eat and sleep well in
a few days, the mental and bodily vigour quickly returns to




the normal, gradually all craving for alcohol entirely ceases,
the will power is built up, and at the end of a period, varying
in individual cases, the patient feels confident of his ability to
entirely abstain. A wise provision is made in the regulations
whereby the medical officer is empowered to permit any patient
to leave the institution on probation at am time during the
currency of the order. This enables a patient to be tested at
the conclusion of his specific treatment, while at the same time
it retains in the hands of the medical officer power to return
him to the institution at anv time up till the expirv of the
order.
Amusements and Occupation,
for the outdoor and indoor amusements of the patients
are provided :
A fine billiard-room, containing a full-sized table (Alcock’s
Imperial, low cushions, &c.), and complete in every detail ; a
reading-room and library, stocked with good classical and
modern novels; cards, chess, &c. ; an excellent piano (Steinway
grand); tennis court and cricket ground; fishing, quoits, Indian
clubs, dumb-bells, Szc.




Drug Excess.
Cases of drug inebriety are treated at the sanatorium under
the same provisions as the foregoing.
Maintenance.
In cases where patients have any property, power is
given under section 7 of the Inebriates Act to the officer issuing
the order of detention to direct the amount to be paid for the
expense of the care, charge, and maintenance of such patients.
In all cases where no such direction has been made, the In-
spector and Superintendent are empowered, under the regula-
tions, to determine the charges according to the treatment pre-
scribed, or the necessities or the means of the inebriate.
It should be borne in mind that the treatment is costly, by
reason of expensive drugs, heavy maintenance charges, &c. ;
consequently, patients whose means will permit it must be pre-
pared to pay full fees.
All communications respecting patients are treated confi
dentially.


THE DRAWING ROOM.


Patients are restricted to the grounds of the estate, and are
not permitted to leave the boundaries without special per-
mission.
To prevent disappointment, it is advisable before obtaining
admission orders to communicate with the Superintendent, as
the accommodation is limited.
Note. —lt is necessary to point out that no convicted nor
disreputable person, can be admitted to this sanatorium.


SITTING ROOM.


APPENDIX “A.’
Inebriates Act 1915.
(No. 2669.)
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE.
T THE UNDERSIGNED, being u legally qualified
J ■ medical practitioner, hereby certify that I, on the
day of 1!) ,
at(l) personally examined
(2) of (3)
and that the said< 2 )
is an inebriate as defined by the Inebriates Act J91o, and
that I have formed this opinion upon the following
grounds:—
(1) Facts indicating inebriety observed by myself G)
(2) Other facts (if any) indicating inebriety, and
communicated to me by others ( s )
Dated this day of I!)
(Signed)
Address
(1) Here insert
particulars of
the place of
examination, as
the street,
number of the
house, or other
description.
(2) Name.
(3) Insert resi-
dence and
profession or
occupation.
(4) Here state
the facts.
(b) Here state
the facts and
the informants.


LAWN AND GARDENS.


APPENDIX "B.”
lii the mutter of
of
in the State of Victoria, an inebriate,
and
in the matter of the liichriate* Act
1915.
UPON application this day made to me by
of that be be
placed in the Institution established by the Government for the
reception, control, and treatment of inebriates at Lara, in the said State,
and upon reading the certificate of
a legally qualified medical practitioner, dated the
day of 19 , and upon hearing the corrobora-
tive evidence of of
and it appearing to me that the said
is at the time of this application sober, and that he fully understands
the nature and effect of such application, I do find that the said
is an inebriate, and I do hereby
order that he the said he placed in
the institution at Lara for the period of months.
(Signed)
Dated this dav of 19 .


CORNER OF ORCHARD.


H. J. GREEN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
