



WITH „ vV vV
LUXURY COSMETICS


These days, beauty is made, rather
than born. To create an illusion of
beauty, to accent your good features
and keep your drawbacks well in the
background, is possible to any woman.
But beauty must not look artificial. To
this end, Lournay presents this very
complete beauty book, which has as its
aim the acquisition of faultless grooming,
which is to-day’s accepted standard of
beauty. Remember, too, that in addition
to regular skin care, clever make-up and
-rfect grooming, a happy face is
ndred times more beautiful than an
‘ K
ill-tempered or bored one.
2


ftOinS7|R
nj^jos
} y'r , .•
0% &'
,£«fi
w P [ ‘V\
■ s/fs/s/
<7 S 1
One of the first lessons in the school
of skin care is the study of your individual
type. You cannot efficiently tackle a
problem unless you know just what that
problem is.
Skin varies in the same way that finger-
prints ’vary, although they come, more
or less, under the four distinct types
identified on the following pages.
Beauty is fighting a constant battle against
three powerful aggressors , . . Time,
the Elements arid Modern Living. When
the tinv oil glands that keep the outer
covering of the skin smooth and flexible
get tired and worn out; when the blood '-- r
does not surge to bring life and he?'-’ rl-
to the tissues, the process must be helped
from the outside. a
M If you have any Jonh! about your skin
~ type, please write to the Lournay Beauty
Bureau, or consult the nearest Lournay
Beauty Expert and ask her to identify
your type.


Cak\
You normal-skin people are fortunate because you have no real
problem to face. Your skin neither becomes oily nor open pored,
nor does it have the tendency to flake as does dry skin. The important
thing is to forestall trouble by taking excellent care to keep your skin
as it is now.
TO CLEANSE: Remove everv trace of make-up and dust accumu-
lation with Lou may Cleansing Cream, which softens and dispels make-
up. The beauty of Lournay Cleansing Cream is that it liquefies when
it comes in contact with the skin, but retains body enough to hold in
suspension any dirt or dust that clings to the skin surface. These may
then be wiped away. Now bathe with Lournay Beauty Soap.
TO NOURISH: After night cleansing, pat Lournay Nourishing
Cream into the face and neck until well absorbed, using the cushion
of the finger in a rotary movement up and out. For correct move-
ments, seepages 12 and 13. Twice weekly apply Lournay Beauty
Mask, using method shown on page 11.
TO STIMULATE; After your morning wash with Lournay Beauty
Soap, brace the skin before make-up with Lournay Skin VitaHzer
applied on a pad of cotton-wool. This is a specially mild astringent
which may also be used as a freshener before new make-up-is applied
during the day.


fl' 1 '
A dry skin is usually very fin
indeed. But, unless it is etf
has a tendency towards flak
deserve them.
TO CLEANSE: It is mo
and dust should be removec
of Lournay Cleansing Crea
he skin. Take a generous quantity
thoroughly massage all over your
face and neck. This must be done before washing, otherwise your
skin will feel dry and taut. After Cleansing Cream has been
removed with a tissue, bathe your face with Lournay Beauty Soap.
TO NOURISH: After night cleansing, pat Lournay Nourishing
Cream generously into the face, giving extra attention to flaky areas and
lines. This Nourishing Cream is very readily assimilated by the skin
and should be patted in until well absorbed. Remove surplus cream
with tissue. If the skin is ageing, use Lournay Wrinkle Cream every
third night before Nourishing Cream. Use Lournay Beauty Mask once
a week . . . for method, see page n.
TO STIMULATE: In the morning bathe the face with Lournay
Beauty Soap. Stimulation for the dry type of skin must be very gentle.
That is why we specially recommend Lournay Skin Vitalizer, which is
a mild astringent. Your skin is now ready to receive your Lournay
Foundation Film preparatory to make-up.
M Before exposing this sensitive type of
” skin to outdoor conditions, use Lournay
Complexion Balm to soothe and protect
. . . several times a day if necessary.


If your skin has a tendency to be oily, it is most important that you
be on your guard against open pores. You will find, too, that correct
daily care will give you a more satisfactory make-up, otherwise the
excess oil in your skin will have a tendency to seep through your
powder and give an unbecoming “ shine.”
TO CLEANSE: Lournay Cleansing Lotion is a specially prepared
neutralised cleanser which does not leave a trace of oiliness. For this
reason it is ideal for the oily type of skin. Apply on a pad of cotton-
wool to thoroughly remove all traces of make-up. Then wash the face
with Lournay Beauty Soap.
TO NOURISH: Because your skin is oily, do not think It does not
need nourishing. The delicate living cells in the under-layers of skin
need nourishment provided by the regular application of a penetrating
cream. Pat Lournay Nourishing Cream freely into the skin until it is
well absorbed, then remove surplus with tissue. (For correct method,
see pages 12 and 13.) Every second night apply Lournay Beauty
Mask according to method shown on page 11.
TO STIMULATE: In the morning, wash the face, using Lournay
Beauty Soap. Then apply Lournay Astringent Lotion on a pad of
cotton-wool. This Lotion has been specially prepared to neutralise
excessive oiliness and refine the pores. Brisk patting will stimulate
and refresh the skin before applying your Lournay Liquid Powder Base.
\
V
\
(// your skin is excessively oily, use
Lournay Astringent Lotion as a correct-
ive before every change of make-up.)


t „,,s
This is a type of skin which in the main may be oily but has areas on
cheeks and forehead that are inclined to flake. The flaking is dryness
in the under cells, owing to lack of nourishment. The oiliness is due
to over-activity of the oil glands. Another type of “ combination ”
skin is dry, with oily areas around the nose and chin. Correct daily
care will normalise these conditions.
TO CLEANSE: Before going to bed, use a generous quantity of
Lournay Cleansing Cream, massaged into the skin. After removing
cream with tissue, thoroughly wash the face with Lournay Beauty Soap.
For day cleansing on this type of skin use Lournay Cleansing Lotion.
TO NOURISH: When the skin is absolutely clean, pat Lournay
Nourishing Cream into face and neck until well absorbed, paying
particular attention to the dry areas. Remove surplus cream with
tissue. It is advisable to apply Lournay Beauty Mask on the oily areas
every second night and over the entire face once weekly. (For method,
see page n.)
TO STIMULATE: Morning care is particularly important to the
“ combination ” type of skin. Wash with Lournay Beauty Soap, then
brace your skin with Lournay Astringent Lotion, applied with a
patting movement on a pad of cotton-wool. Where you have greasy
areas, apply Astringent every day, but where the skin is normal or
dry, apply lightly every second day. You will find this treatment will
even up your skin texture.
For the r combination ’ skin use Lournay
v Liquid Powder Base as your powder
foundation.




hWo* c oft V h Fb\* cVhC *t*° ol JU*V d . f kbe» ds
t to **^£^j£S£
\£&ST- 0- f Vt '
“” “" , 0 v«-
_* V/V*. a us ed v en« ve ’ U i of e °^. e tVi° d aS \\« fo^ o'* 0 '* o 0 a^V
* ,«4 « fo< » P£ lt o g=> "‘V* .*» »»»Sdo ««•£>'
tSr^> d “
W .d C' oc^ oid *£„ »“f<W“« for *<*


Sometimes your lines are merely laughter
yCREPEY NECK: lines, which add character to vour face and
y SAGGING MUSCLES: are not to be worried about. Perhaps you
have some unbecoming tricks of expression that are etching them-
selves on your face, or those harrowing scars of time a woman hates to
recognise. You can keep them in check with Lournay Wrinkle Cream,
which is scientifically prepared to smooth out lines and wrinkles and
generally tighten up the skin. After cleansing, tap the Wrinkle Cream
in where necessary, leaving on for ten minutes only. Wash with
Lournay Beauty Soap, then pat in Nourishing Cream as advised in
Daily Skin Care. Repeat this treatment not more than twice weekly.
VOPEN PORES; These are usually a characteristic of the more oily
type of skin but are very often caused by fatigue and nervous strain.
If you find they do not contract when you faithfully follow your daily
care, make a thin pad of cotton wool, large enough to cover the open
pores area, moisten with water and sprinkle with Lournay Vitalizer.
Lie comfortably, relax the muscles of your face for fifteen minutes with
the pad pressed gently over your face.
lf your summer sunshine has afflicted you with a crop
of dark brown freckles, or your tan has faded to a patchy discolouration,
then it’s high time to do something about it. First wash your face with
Lournay Beauty Soap and warm water, dry thoroughly, then massage
in Lournay Bleach Cream and allow to remain, not less than two hours.
\This treatment may be repeated twice weekly until the freckles disap-
pear and the skin resumes an even, natural colour.


Lournay Beauty Mask has been specially treated to refine open pores
and coarse-textured skin, and to clear away blemishes caused by excess
acids and impurities. It leaves the skin wonderfully clear and
smooth and may be used safely on all types of skin as advised under
the heading DAILY SKIN CARE.
METHOD: The application of Lournay Beauty, Mask is very simple.
Paint on a thin film of the mask over the entire face and allow to dry.
Without removing the first coat, apply a more generous film and leave
till morning. Remove the Mask with Lournay Cleansing Lotion
and wash with Lournay Beauty Soap in tepid water.
APPLICATION FOR VARIOUS SKIN TYPES . . . in conjunction
with usual Daily Skin Care,
Normal : Twice weekly,
Q r y . Once weekly.
Oily : Every second night.
Combination : ° n oil Y areas every second night and
over the entire face once weekly.
To rectify abnormal conditions such as pimples, coarse-textured skin,
etc., use the Beauty Mask twice weekly until the condition is rectified.
J - - - j
then use according to your skin type.


MA S v
A p
G /
Neck:
Start at the base of the neck, workt-
ing towards the jawline with a
rotary movement. Then pat
gently upwards to the point just
below the jawbone. Repeat this until
every part of the throat has been
covered.
Chin:
Pat firmly upward under the chin,
using the back of the fingers.
Use right and left hands altern-
ately, with a brisk slapping move-
ment to tighten those sagging
muscles.
Cheeks:
Place the fingers of both hands
on the chin. Stroke gently upward in
a rotary movement, following the
line above the jawbone to the lobe of
the ear. Repeat this movement, but
go a little higher up the cheeks
to the centre of the ear. With
the next movement, start
at the chin and work
up to the temple.


gently when you come to the
delicate skin beneath the eyes.
Temples:
Resting fingers of both hands on
the bridge of the nose , work
in a rotary movement from
the centre of the forehead to the
temples.
Forehead:
The final movement in your massage
again starts from the bridge of the
nose, using your finger-tips in a rot-
y movement , with a slightly
heavier stroke on the upward ,
outward part of the circle.
This is very good for your
frown lines and is also
pleasantly soothing.


. •*«f/, 4*
v % x
#« >
■ L
V These days make-up isn’t the hap-
hazard affair it was a little while ago,
when you simply bought a lipstick and
slapped it on willy-nilly, regardless of i
your colouring, your clothes or access-
ories.
To achieve perfection, to create an effec-
tive colour harmony and to give the
effect of a lovely whole, your make-up
must be selected with the greatest care
and your lipstick and rouge highlights
must blend perfectly with the dominant
colour of your clothes.
First, study your individual colouring
then consider your wardrobe and your
make-up will necessarily be in harmony
with both.
For your guidance*; Lournay presents the
most successful methods of make-up and
a harmonising chart to guide your selec-
tion of cosmetics that go hand in glove
with your clothes.


/^a£e-ufi
It is only logical that, if your powder is exactly the same shade as
your face powder and of a tone to flatter the skin, it creates a glorious
even glow that adds colour and vitality to your skin. Lournay founda-
tions achieve miracles in the way of making your skin appear finer,
smoother and lovelier, by making your powder cling evenly and by
covering any minor imperfections.
For the normal type of skin, or skin a little on the dry side,
smooth Lournay Foundation Film lightly and evenly over the face.
This delicate cream forms a protective film, yet does not mask the
natural texture of the skin.
For the more oily type of skin pat Lournay Liquid Powder Base
evenly into the skin with the fingertips and allow to dry before applying
your matching shade of face powder. This pearly smooth foundation
counteracts the tendency to “ shine ” which is a characteristic of oily
type skin.
If your skin is inclined to be sallow or muddy, choose your powder
base in a shade to give it a degree of warmth.
- „ face
s v n 8 .'too
,o\o P <l> to a
bS , a s thlS le a -' ,11
r* i,nde’ 0 L„ sat* 16 . nt tfi ll
lark a 5 in t oo
\ stre< £" «’ hicH nl aStcr '• d uSin C
C d >» 1


F.U'K I’On IM II
In the range of exquisite and subtle shades of Lournay Face Powder,
you will find a colour to emphasize the beauty of your natural colouring,
and, of course, you will choose a powder base to match.
Lournay Face Powder does not mask the translucent quality of the
skin nor the slight vital glow identified with live tissue. That is why,
Lournay gives you an idealized natural look without blanketing your
skin.
It’s*an extra minute or so well spent to powder correctly and you will
get a mat finish and smooth velvety appearance that makes the skin
seem much finer, and the powder stays on twice as long. And you
WON’T get that floury blanket, out of which your nose peeps in
shining splendour ten minutes after you’ve powdered.
Try this method, using a clean powder puff or pad of cotton wool:
Generously dust powder all over your skin, from the base of the
throat right up to the hair line. Then, with one edge of the puff, or a
compact piece of cotton wool, pat and press the powder over your face
until nearly all the powder disappears. Take special care with areas
round the eyes and at the base of the nose. Use an up-and-down pat-
ting motion. Finally, with a swansdown puff or a fresh piece of cotton
wool, dust off the superfluous powder, using a light smoothing motion
down over the cheeks and across the forehead.
oo* 1


j ■ j\
r r
1
f J
\ >
ARK IMIMMsCaXI
Don’t treat ears as the step-children of your face family. With side-hair
raising heavenward, ears are a very important feature in your beauty
scheme and a very lovely feminine attribute they can be. But, re-
member, once you show your ears, they must have the same beauty care
as your face. Before deciding to draw attention to them study your
ears carefully . . . their shape, size and colour ... and make up your
mind whether they are sufficiently like the pearly shells of legend
to show at all.
When applying your powder base, dab your ears lightly and powder
carefully, taking care that you do not leave powder drifts inside the
ears. If your ears are overlarge or not attractive in shape, powder them
a shade darker than your face .. if you must show them.
Long ears will look shorter if you let a curl droop over the top and
shorten the lobe with a chunky ear stud., Overshort ears can be given
more length with a graceful drop earrfn^-.
Co
'"os, ‘V «
"e/. **»


n it r r.
The primary purpose of rouge is Ip give a young healthy glow to the
face. We’re inclined to lose sight of this fact and slap on so much
colour that, instead of the delicate flush, we get a colour blob that
hardens and ages the face. Of Jourse, there is another purpose for
rouge arid-4hat Ji 6f modelling the face and improving the contour.
These are inflexible laws in rouging ! Use too little rouge, rather than
too much. Always try to get a natural effect, and your choice of colour
is vitally important ... it must tone with your lipstick and vet merge
satisfactorily with your natural skin tone. Apply rouge after powder
base and before powdering.
It would be crying for the moon to expect that rouge can change your
square, long or plump cheeked face into a perfect oval, but we do believe
that correct rouge application can correct specific faults in your facial
structure. We illustrate the most common, ones, with indication of
7
rouge placing. , '
. 0- y ..0


i r 1
We illustrate correct rouge placing for the
Normal face, which is oval in shape, without '
any strong contour characteristics. ’ You can
achieve this very satisfactorily by tightening your
face into a smile and rouging the natural cheek shape.
Blend well so that rouge fades into your natural skin tone.
APPLE CHEEKS: To minimise overplump cheeks which
go with a round face, keep the dominant rouge area high XK
on the cheekbones. Carry down toward the nose, across
the cheek to the lobe of the ear and blend upwards.
This gives the effect of a cheekbone. rsy ' '
FLAT CHEEKS: For the broad-nosed, flat-cheeked X
type it is necessary to give the illusion of curving cheeks.
Keep the dominant rouge area high on the cheek I
bones and extend to softly curved cheeks. The illus- \
tration will show you the line. X
/ V
HEAVY JAWS: The object of your rouge is to
draw attention away from your too-heavy jowls.
Place your rouge high on the cheekbone, curve it down
the centre of the cheek and fade away at the jaw-line.
HOLLOW CHEEKS: You want to keep the strong
modelling of your face, but hollow cheeks aren’t
very pretty. Keep your rouge area high on the p, 1
cheekbones, well up toward the eyes and blend (M
upward to the temple. Never rouge in the i
hollows. L Xj |,
VA


UP SIfiVICE
A mouth can make or mar your face. Before applying Vour lipstick,
first consider the shape of your face. If it is small and oval you don’t
want a great tragic oblong, or if it is strong and square, you simply
can’t have a Cupid’s bow to make fun of your face.
Keep your mouth as natural looking as possible. Improve the shape,
of course, but don’t paint on a mouth that doesn’t belong to you.
Lips should be soft ahd full, with gracious curves. No hard thin
lines or sharp points. Lips are an individuaLf.prob!em. There is no
set rule for their shaping, but they must retain the same essential
proportions as nature has given them.


The method of make-up we set out below will give your lips a soft,
curved fullness, with nice clean edges, yet will retain the character that
belongs to YOU.
(1) Relax the mouth and with the corner of your
lipstick place a dot in both corners of the upper
lip and a dot at the centre of the highest points
of the bow. On the lower lip place a dot in each
comer and one in the centre of the lip at its
lowest point.
(2) On the upper lip draw a straight line from
the corner dot to the dot at the high point of the
bow. Carry straight lines from the high dot on
the right bow to the dot that is under the left
bow. Reverse the procedure for the other bow.
These two lines should cross at dead centre. On
the lower lip draw a straight line from the
corners to the centre dot.
(3) Following each of the lines as a guide, draw
outward soft curves. This means you will make
four curving lines on the upper lip and two on
the lower. Fill in the outlines carefully with
• •
your lipstick.


x\ Beautiful eyes redeem even the plainest face and they
worth a little extra care. Tricks with make-up can
\ do wonders in emphasising their size and brightness,
' but the main thing is to keep your eyes clear and healthy.
Tears are an excellent eye-wash, designed by nature to protect the
eyes against disease-producing organisms. But you can t rely on
crying regularly, so a good eye-bath is helpful, particularly after the
eyes have been exposed to dust, smoke or glaring light. For tired eyes,
saturate a pad of cotton-wool with Tournay Vitalizer ; rest the pad on
the eyelids and relax for fifteen minutes.
Fine lines round the eyes can be prevented by keeping the skin in the
area well lubricated with Lournay Nourishing Cream, which has special
softening qualities, using the movement illustrated on page 15. Sun-
bathers and glare-squinters particularly need this treatment. Remember,
the skin close to the eyes is so delicate it requires very gentle treatment.
& t/O)
EYE-SHADOW : You can create the loveliest effects with Lournay Eye-
shadow. Choose a shadow to suit your individual type as shown on
pages 31 and 32. Apply very lightly with the tips of the fingers,
commencing at the roots of the eyelashes of the upper lid.
/ ' I . .1. __ 1 .. M —1 d Miifurn d t-1 1 I t f mpt*o*pc Inf
Graduate the colour upward and outward, till it merges into
the skin tone at the eyebrow.


MASCARA s h <H| ld not draw attention to the lashes themselves, but
rather enhance the loveliness of your eyes. Don’t cheapen your
appearance by making your eyes look as though they are enclosed in a
black picket fence. Choose colours to suit your type, as indicated
on the charts shown on pages 31 and 32. Use the side of a clean
brush and keep each lash separate from the others. First apply a
light coat, let it dry thoroughly and then carefully apply a second coat,
curling up the lashes as much as possible.
EYEBROW PENCIL:
Keep your eyebrow pencil very sharp and, when applying, hold it
lightly at an angle of about 45 degrees, balancing your hand bv resting
your little finger lightly on your cheek.
If your eyebrows are light, use tiny strokes as though you were
drawing each hair individually, barely touching the brows as you darken
them.
If your eyebrows ore too thick, a little discreet plucking is a good
idea. But don’t change the shape nor pluck them into a thin line so
that they lose their character. The brows should approximate the
curve of the upper eyelid.
If your eyebrows ore overthin. Beginning with the portion nearest
the nose, fill in the underpart of the brow with pencil, gradually tapering
up till you get about half-way. Then fill in the upper line of the brow,
following its natural downward slope as it grows out toward the temple.
If your eyebrows ore too short, continue the line in a slight down-
ward slope to a line parallel with the outer cornet of the eye. Blur
the pencilled line with your fingertips so that it does
abruptly.
not end too


maty m extu^
y YOUR HANDS are so much in evidence, they are such an essen-
-0) tial part of you, that you cannot neglect them in your beauty scheme.
Exercise them to keep flexible and capable of subtle expression
and keep them well massaged with Loumay Hand Balm so that
f - your touch is an exquisite thing. Night and morning, and after
- * every immersion in water, Lournay Hand Balm massage will
prevent the skin from becoming rough and red. Once weekly,
before h' oin « to bed, smooth Lournay Nourishing Cream into
/// j/' N your hands and sleep with your hands in clean white cotton
// !/ \ gloves. After applying liquid polish to your nails, massage Lournay
/j y / ' Hand Balm well into tips and cuticles.
YOUR ARMS AND ELBOWS must be kept smooth and lovely
too ! If the skin is roughened, or you are subject to goose-flesh on
-VOS) the upper arms, give the arms a daily friction with a loofah
tCt. \ while you are in the bath. Massage after your bath with
„ Lournay Complexion Balm.
Vu r " YOUR NECK very often destroys an illusion of youth because
CO j this is the vulnerable spot in your armour when it comes to defy-
-iJ ing time. To defeat those deep lines, crepey skin and sagging
muscles, include your neck in daily care. And, not more than
twice weekly, pat Lournay Wrinkle Cream firmly into the neck.
using the method described on page 12.
K
Don’t neglect your FEET! They do so much for you they
deserve a little care. Hot and cold plunges are very
good to refresh them and, to keep the skin soft and
smooth, massage well with Lournay Hand Balm
and dust with Lournay Talc, paying particular attention
between the toes.
to the skin


A beautiful face with dull, straggly hair is like a fine picture in a dull,
tarnished frame. Like everything else, hair responds wonderfully
to a little care.
First consider the scalp. Hair beauty begins with a clean scalp,
which permits the hair glands to function properly. Shampoo
your hair to keep the scalp quite clean and hair lustrous and sweet
smelling.
Now brushing ! The old-fashioned recipe of a hundred strokes a
day still holds good. Use a good stiff brush to stimulate the
scalp. Brushing ventilates the hair, redistributes the natural scalp
oils, removes superfluous dirt and dust and gives it gloss and lustre.
For a final polish, cover your brush with a piece of silk or use a soft
baby brush.
Daily massage stimulates the circulation of blood to the base of the
hair. Move the scalp in a kneading motion with the cushions of
the fingers. This constant care and absolute cleanliness will
guard against dandruff . . . the primary cause of thinning, un-
healthy hair.
For dressing of your hair, don’t follow fashion too slavishly but
wear the style most becoming to your face.
For a final touch, a little Lournay Brilliantine sprinkled on the
palm of the hand and smoothed lightly oyer the hair after it is
dressed will accent the highlights and sheen and will impart that
haunting perfume which is the hallmark of exquisite taste.


UVVIXmM 1 n V/ V l\l Jl I 1 M VJ VIVlinlTI 10 A v-ivaui
suitable for all types of skin, to build up tissue cells, counteract flabbi-
I M4
ness and to keep the skin fresh and youthful.
L •, V. . -V,
f./^W
LOURNAY ASTRINGENT LOTION for daily use, is designed to
neutralize excessive oiliness and refine open pores.
ifM
LOURNAY SKIN VITALIZER ... a particularly mild Astringent
IK
.; ?;<< >?*
, for the dry and sensitive skin. Braces and
■mi
&$ft|
m*- ,.<.'>'A
Hj, . —v refreshes the skin before make-up.
am specially created to suit the dry or normal skin, to
make-up and thoroughly cleanse the pores.
LOURNAY CLEANSING LOTION: This soothing, neutralized
cleanser is most suitable to the oily type of skin, or where a quick change
of make-up is required.
LOURNAY NOURISHING CREAM is a gentle, lubricating cream
—Hi
_____ , —~ rerresncs me skiii uciurc maikc-up.
a T * LOURNAY COMPLEXION BALM
’ .. soothes and protects the sensitive
| * skin. Particularly valuable to
guard the skin against harsh,
outdoor conditions and
for alleviating roughened
or chafed skin.


IDXIIY COSMETICS “
LOURNAY WRINKLE CREAM
is scientifically prepared to help the ageing
skin. This cream strengthens relaxed muscles, smoothes
out lines and wrinkles and generally rejuvenates the skin.
LOURNAY BLACKHEAD CREAM removes and corrects even
S |
r*£jj
the most obstinate cases of blackhead condition and is also bene-
ficial in cases of excessive oiliness.
LOURNAY BEAUTY MASK brings new loveliness overnight
to the coarse-textured skin which has a tendency toward open
pores and blemishes. Beauty Mask treatment is to be alternated
twice weekly with the usual application of Lournay Nourishing
Cream.
LOURNAY BLEACH AND
FRECKLE CREAM: If your sun-
tan has faded to a patchy brown or " s ,
your freckles are unsightly, this ’ f n.
mild, safe bleach cream will restore
the skin to an even, natural tone. VJ?'
kta|j
LOURNAY HAND BALM restores the


ppr^
V LOURNAY LIQUID POWDER BASE for
the more oily type of skin. A pearly smooth
foundation that merges with the skin texture
and enhances the natural skin tone. In shades to
match your face powder: Gipsytari, Sunkissed,
Pcachbloom, Roscglow, Dawn Pink, Magnolia, Frangipani.
LOURNAY FOUNDATION FILM for the normal or inclined-to-bc dry skin.
A delicate protective film that does not mask the natural texture of the skin and
imparts a warm, radiant glow. In shades to match your choice in Lournay
Face Powder: Gipsytan, Sunkissed, Pcachbloom, Roseglow, Dawn Pink,
Magnolia, Frangipani. May be obtained in either jars or tubes.
LOURNAY FACE POWDER is sifted to a light-as-air consistency that makes
it lie smoothly and invisibly on your face. You will find a shade to blend per-
fectly with your natural skin tone in these fascinating shades : Gipsytan, Sun-
kissed, Pcachbloom, Roseglow, Dawn Pink, Magnolia, Frangipani.
LOURNAY ROUGE: If your skin is inclined to be oily, we offer Lournay Pow-
der Rouge, but for the dry skin, Lournay Cream Rouge is more suitable.
Both types of rouge may be obtained in colours to blend with your lipstick:
Scarlett, Hibiscus, Burgundy, Marigold,
Sunbronze, Rendezvous, Red Velvet,
T y,v * Petunia.
LOURNAY LIPSTICK has a special
oil base that keeps your lips dewy-soft,
yet its colour is so satisfyingly indelible.
When making your choice from
I , ( A j K these vibrant new' colours,
n r " 1 remember the inflexible law
I • / - of colour harmony with
~ *■ y your clothes: Scarlett,
Hibiscus, Burgundy,
Marigold, Sunbronze,
Rendezvous, Red Velvet, Petunia,
liinfinr yjxiii


LUXI/Hy COSMETICS 1
LOURNAY EYE-SHADOW: Dramatize the >
colour of your eyes with these alluring ::j
new shades in eye-shadow : Almond Green, Siw/j
' Orchid, I.avender Blue, Dark Blue, iridescent
Blue, Grey, Golden Brown.
LOURNAY MASCARA: Your eyes
will gain depth and glamour if you
accent your eyelashes with Lournay
Mascara. Obtainable in Black, Brown,
or Blue.
LOURNAY EYEBROW PENCIL
Intensify the natural characteristics
of your eyebrows with Lournay Eye-
brow Pencil, either Brown or Black.
- ___ mvn • vnvil, e Hll v l KJL IZU,IS..
LOURNAY BEAUTY SOAP is an cxquisitc-
b' ,mc soap, perfumed with rare fragrance of
Lournav, to keep your skin smooth and
Vllovely.
9 LOURNAY BRILLIANTINE gives lustrous
A Ja, %■ highlights to hair, keeps wayward ends in
f, |! j’i place and imparts a lasting fragrance.
I ' I AMDkIA V rsliPTiki/s
LOURNAY DUSTING POWDER;
lOTw”"' t
| Mite
A feather-soft body powder to give you
day-long fragrance.
LOURNAY TALC is the perfect complement
to Lournay Beauty Soap to give you daily
to Lournay
bath luxury
LOURNAY PERFUME is a rare, enchanting
perfume that gives romantic distinction, mM- ” A \' J^ r
!k£\ yet is so elusive you will wear it by *
day and night. This subtle fragrance
is the final touch to the perfection
of Lournav luxurv.
A
2 9


To-day, make-up has become the final link
clothes and the wearer. Cosmetic colours h
range that it is possible to find complei
dominating shade of your clothes and your 1
It is only reasonable to believe that, as you chc
to suit the colour of your eyes, your skin and y<
in affinity with yotir clothes will also be most
There is nothing more satisfying to
has achieved an appearance of well-g
of which nothing has been left to chance.
such a wide
between the
o woman than the feeling that she
■groomed elegance, in the planning
chance. This distinctive air is due
to the fact that she and her clothes are in absolute harmony . . .
gown, accessories, lipstick, rouge, coiffure, finger-nails, and, of course.
her perfume.
If it pleases you to study our Colour Harmonising Chart, you will see
how simple it is to have complete colour harmony, by day or night.
The colours of all Lournay Cosmetics have been chosen by fashion
experts and stylists to give you what the fashion world decrees as the
most becoming shades.


If your Hair is
Blonde . . your
Eyes blue or grey
Powder Base
and
Face Powder
Rouge and
Lipstick
Eye
Shadow
Mascara
Eyebrow
Pencil
DAY
Frangipani
or
Peachbloom
Scarlett
or
Hibiscus
Lavender Blue
or
Grey
Brown
Brown
EVENING
Dawn Pink
Petunia
Iridescent
Blue
Blue
Brown
SPECTATOR
OR SPORTS
Peachbloom
or
Sunkissed
Marigold
or
Sunbronze
(not worn
for
sports)
Brown
Brown
If your Hair is
Brown . . . your
Eyes grey or hazel
DAY
Roseglow
Red Velvet
or
Petunia
Grey,
or Almond
Green
Black
Black
EVENING
Roseglow
Rendezvous
Orchid
Blue
Black
SPECTATOR
OR SPORTS
Sunkissed
or
Gypsytan
Marigold
or
Sunbronze
(not worn
for
sports )
Black
Black
If your Hair is
Dark . . your Eyes
brown
DAY
Sunkissed
Burgundy
Golden Brown
Black
Black
EVENING
Roseglow
Rendezvous
Orchid
Blue
Black
SPECTATOR
OR SPORTS
Cipsytan
Sunbronze
(not worn
for
sports )
Black
Black
COLOUR HARMON IS IN 6 CHART


If your Hair is
Titian or Auburn
Powder Base
and
Face Powder
Rouge and
Lipstick
Eye
Shadow
Mascara
Eyebrow
Pencil
Peachbloom
Marigold
Dark Blue or
Almond Green
Brown
Brown
DAY
Sunkissed
Sunbronze
Aim'd Green or
Golden Brown
Brown
Brown
Magnolia
Scarlett
Dark Blue or
Almond Green
Brown
Brown
EVENING
Magnolia
Petunia
Iridescent
Blue
Blue
Brown
SPECTATOR
OR SPORTS
Peachbloom
or
Sunkissed
Marigold
or
Sunbronze
i not worn
for
sports )
Brown
Brown
If you are a Matron
with hazel or
brown eyes
DAY
Sunkissed
Burgundy
Golden Brown
Black
Black
EVENING
Roseglow
Rendezvous
Orchid
Blue
Black
SPECTATOR
OR SPORTS
Cipsytan
Sunbronze
(not worn
for
sports)
Black
Black
If you are a Matron
. . with blue or
DAY
Magnolia
Red Velvet
Grey
Brown
Brown
EVENING
Roseglow
Petunia
Dark Blue
Brown
Brown
SPECTATOR
I OR SPORTS
Peachbloom
Sunbronze
(not worn
for
sports )
Brown
Brown
COLOUR HARMONISING CHART


Perhaps you have some personal beauty
problem which has not been dealt with in
this book. If it is not possible to consult
the nearest Lournay Beauty Expert, we
would be honoured to have the privilege
of helping you. All the information is
supplied by highly qualified experts at
BEAUTY BUREAU,
Box 2701C, G.P.O., Sydney.
Wholly set up and lithographed in Australia for Colgate-Palmolive Pty. Ltd.
by John Sands Pty. Ltd.. .Sydney C.T.A. 383


rmvsxxi
JKKmas W^.
A
mi
/
pp|lV M n^ll||^^
1
5
f
1
.
1
I
!
[
[
I
I
i
1
v
||
3
i
-i
V
1
’■'ft-
1
H^Kv* 1 %«*.
Mwwpy. -s?^
»T
A
/i
r
is
1
*-ik
k
A
r
I
.
.Ji
1
i
