

N
X
f-'f/UZZ
0> B I L
OP THE
|L\an|ini}r.
■1842®
h*
05
X
||lB42'
1 1842-March 12th ■1892. )
'nsxs--* *NeX§ 7 ' *nsx®<'» »vfixs ;sr- *^exa^ > '•NafiP*' 7^exs/->
I-*
QO
M
892||








Launceston Examiner
JUBILEE
[Reprinted from the Launceston Examiner ,
March 12, 1892.]
IFTY YEA RS is a long period of
time to look back upon. Half a
century’s tireless labour in the fearless
advocacy of principles laid down in its
initial number and modified only as
demanded by the varying phases and
developments of modern life, is surely a
creditable record, and a proof that the
mission of the upright newspaper
press is seldom in vain; and that is
the record which the Launceston
Examiner has completed to-day.
The history of the paper is to a
great extent the history of the colony,
and the fact that the abuses which it
undertook to combat have ceased to be
tolerated, and the reforms it advocated
have been carried into effect, may be
accepted as an indication that it has


played an important part in moulding
the destinies of Tasmania. The Examiner
was first published as a weekly journal
on the 12th March, 1842, that issue
containing the announcement of the
birth of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales
on 9th November preceding —for in-
telligence did not travel so rapidly
in those days as it does now ; it also
contained the report of a meeting held
in Launceston to form a Mechanics’
Institute, which, vigorously sustained
up to the present time, celebrated its
jubilee a few days ago. The social and
political life of Tasmania to-day pre-
sents a marked contrast to that which
prevailed in 1842. A venal press
exercised a cruel tyranny over the
people, the sanctity of private life was
ruthlessly invaded, and religion and
purity were held up to ridicule. At that
dark hour the Examiner sprang into the
arena as the champion of the oppressed,
and by inspiring the hearts of the
people with new courage materially
assisted in freeing them from the intoler-
able thraldom in which they had long


been held. We have no desire to dwell
upon the unpleasant record of the
period to which we refer, but it is
necessary that we should touch upon
it in order to make our review of
the half century of journalism fairly
complete. In all the most important
questions which have engaged public
attention in Tasmania the Examiner
has taken a firm and determined stand.
Under its lead and support the discon-
tinuance of transportation to Austral-
asia was carried to a successful issue.
It took a prominent part in demanding
Parliamentary and Municipal govern-
ment, and has been the faithful advocate
of the rights and privileges of the latter
up to the present hour. It was the
first to call attention to the importance
of introducing railways into the colony,
and it is certain that its spirit and
influence kept alive public agitation for
the Launceston and Western line, which
at length became an established fact,
and this pared the way for all the other
railways that have followed. Towards
the close of its first half-century


it gave a fair, impartial,!, and
earnest support to the scbenme for
holding an International Exhibition
in Launceston, and may justly y claim
some measure of credit for the s success
which has crowned that projeect. It
has always been upon the side <of that
steady progress which has exppanded
Launceston from the position of aa small
straggling town of four or five thoousand
inhabitants, as it was in 1842, width un
formed streets and footpaths, lighhted at
night only by public house oil ] lamps,
and dependent for its water suppply on
carts,into a city which covers an i area of
8340 acres, divided by 125 i streets
measuring 45 miles in length. . The
assessed annual value of the prroperty
for 1890 amounted to £132,6553, and
the Municipal revenue to £36,7244. The
total indebtedness of the Coumcil is
£150,000, bearing interest at fotur per
cent., of which £64,000 was expended
in securing water supply, £70,0)00 in
sewerage, and £6OOO for the Town
Hall. In 1891 the total assessment
was £135,168, and the revenue exclu-


sive of borrowing was £38,122. For
the current year the assessment is
£140,253. The life of the towns-
people in 1842 was the hard rugged
existence of pioneers ; whilst to-day the
citizens enjoy every modern luxury and
refinement, nearly every house having
water and gas laid on to it ( and tele,
phonic communication being procurable
by all who desire to possess it. The
trade of the port has risen by leaps and
bounds, and the number of visitors who
are attracted from the mainland by the
salubrity of our climate is rapidly in-
creasing, Few of the architectural
landmarks of 1842 remain, and few
like the Examiner can from the stand-
point of observation tell the story
of the growth of modern Laun-
ceston with its population, includ-
ing the suburbs, of 23,000 persons.
The functions of a daily paper and
its method of collecting news have
undergone marvellous changes since the
initiation of the Launceston Examiner.
The establishment of electric cables and
lines of telegraph has placed us in close


communication with the most diistant
quarters of the globe, and enablecd the
enterprising newspaper proprietor to
gather a synopsis of all the wrorld’s
news and present it to his constittuents
at their breakfast tables on the folloowing
morning. The spread of education! has
made the public more exacting,, and
consequently there are a larger mumber
of caterers to supply the increased and
ever increasing news-hunger off the
public. The Examiner , keeping' pace
with the times, and recognising its
mission to be above and beyond mere
considerations “ which deal with dust
and pelf/’ has faced the great questions
of the day, whether speculative or prac-
tical, and has brought its influence to
bear upon their discussion, and the
natural consequence is that it stands
higher in the estimation of the public
to-day than at any period in its history
and may be said to be ‘ ‘ firm based upon
the people’s will.” It has refused to
become the organ of any clique or party,
steering a straight course because it
believed it to be right, in the full


assurance that in the end right would
come uppermost; and conceding to all
classes and conditions of people the full,
free, sacred rights of citizens. This, after
all, is the main function of a secular jour-
nal, viz., to assist every movement which
will add to the material advancement,
social uplifting, or harmless amusement
of the people. The devotees of th e drama,
racing, cricket, or other manly sports,
have as much right to be heard as those
whose tastes and inclinations tend in
different directions, and it is the duty
of the press to chronicle and if neces-
sary to bring its guiding influence upon
all or any of them quite as much
as it is its manifest duty to review
political propositions or legal problems.
That which is improper, vulgar, or
injurious must be condemned. The
modem crusade for change must be
restrained before it crosses the some-
what misty line which separates true
reform from anarchy. The desire to
plant in the virgin soil of a country
whose history is as yet unwritten the
seeds of those dissensions and isms


which have been so constantly prolilific
of bitterness in the old world must be
discountenanced, and all this must be
done with the one object in view, viiz.,
that of convincing Australasians tthat
they are “ one people with one destinjy,”
allied in sympathy and ambitiion
with the glorious nation from which jail
have sprung.
Such is a brief and very inco,ra-
plete precis ot the task of the
modern journalist. In its performance
he may often falter and err, but if the
mistake be made with a single desire to
do ijight and not by yielding to the
popular cry of the hour or to less worthy
motives, it is both pardonable and
easily retrieved. The Examiner came
into existence in the middle of the most
energetic and pregnant century that has
ever dawned upon the world, and look-
ing back over the ever-widening abyss
which separates that period from
the present, it is impossible to deny
that we may at times have
been mistaken in the estimate we have
formed of public men and public ques-




EXAMINEE AND TASMANIAN OFFIC


A
«y>l l Vs
I Ji^"
ffni
-" XxVt'///
g2h #f) f&l
/it ijv 11 14
✓ i7i m
AND STATIONERY WAREHOUSE — 1892. 0( A ' J '^■' , iS*~ j „




tions. It is satisfactory, however, to
reflect that our mission has not been
fruitless, that we have seen the reforms
we have advocated accomplished, and
that actuated by the same desire for the
common good, our best efforts are still
at the disposal of those by whom they
have been so long and are still so highly
appreciated. Our past career must be
a pledge for our future, with the pro-
mise added in all sincerity that we will
strive to render better service than
before.


HOW
THE EXAMINER IS PRODUCEID.
The “flying roll” of to-day is the newspapoer.—
Talma&se.
In our leading columns we give a I brief
sketch of the career of the Launeeesion
Examiner, which has been part and paarcel
of the daily life of the people of this coblony
for the past half century, and which ennjojs
the proud distinction of being the oLldest
newspaper in Tasmania. The posiition
occupied by the press in Tasmania, or,’, in-
deed, in Australia generally, during; the
early days of pioneer colonising, and I the
more recent period of steady developmaent,
has been a responsible and onerous ione.
It has been the guide and instruictor
of a people who have, even up
to the present, evolved no distinctive
school of literature of their own. T'heir
literature has been that of the papers .which
has been distinct from that of respect-
able journalism all over the world only in
so far as the life and conditions with
which it had to deal were in themselves
weird, distinctive,and uaique. That it has
fulfilled its mission is the verdict given by
those whi are best qualified to form an
opinion. Before representative institutions
were granted to these young states, the
voice of liberty, and independence, and
justice found fearless expression in the
press. It covers the whole ground of
national thought and action, and has ful-
filled educational functions in an unculti-
vated land. A modern writer reviewing its
career has said, “ Probably if a number of


impartial, keen sighted, reflective men
were asked which of all our institutions
has best fulfilled its duty,with the least im-
perfection, and with the smallest margin of
disappointment and failure, they would
without hesitation give the foremost place
to the press.” This is true of the news-
papers of all the colonies—Victoria, New
South Wales, Queensland, and South Aus-
tralia, as well as Tamania. To come
nearer home we find Mr James
Bonwick, F.R.G.S., one of the most faith-
ful recorders of the history of our own
times, who, writing of early Australian
journalism, says:—“Though this (the
Examiner) belonged not to the period of
early press struggles, it deserves a passing
notice, not less for the admirable way in
which it has been managed for nearly half
a century than for the worthy part it
played in the cause of true freedom, in its
consistent advocacy of religious equality
in the eyes' of the law, and its vigorous
support of the Anti-Transportation League
of old.” After giving an extract from the
first leading article, Mr Bonwick adds:—
“ Such eloquent expression of elevating
sentiments could hardly have proceeded
from the pen of any other man than the
talented Congregational minister of Laun-
ceston, the Rev. John West, afterwards the
esteemed editor of the Sydney Morning
Herald .”
The Launceston Examiner was first pub-
lished on March 12, 1842, in the
form of an eight-page demy folio, appear-
ing on Saturday afternoons. Six months
later, beginning with the October quarter,
another issue per week was added, namely
on Wednesday afternoons, which continued


until the beginning of 1853, when it became
a tri-weekly, being published on Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday ; and on October
1 of that year the form was altered to a
double-demy broad sheet of four pages. On
December 21, 1877, the Examiner appeared
permanently as a daily morning paper,
and at the close _>f 1881 the size was ex-
tended to a sheet of double royal with a
supplement every Saturday, and occasion-
ally another in the middle of the week.
Daring its career of fifty years two of our
predecessors have been incorporated with
this journal; the first, the Launceston
Advertiser, about forty-five years ago, and
the last, the Cornwall Chronicle, towards
the close of 1880. Other papers have been
started here since the Examiner, but after
a very brief career the majority of
them passed away. The scope and
purpose, or at any rate the methods
adopted by journalists, have been
widened very considerably since the
Examiner started.lt is true the journalist has
to cater for all tastes, but it does not follow
that he is to adopt for the nonce every
passing opinion that finds expression in Jiis
columns. If the newspaper is to fulfil its
modern mission as the educator and leader
of the masses, it must above all things be
consistent. We know there are to be found
papers so eager for present popularity that
they will advance one set of opinions to-
day and exactly the reverse to-morrow,
receiving alternately, it may be, the praise
and censure of each party, but assuredly
provoking the contempt of both. A man
who does not know the way himself is
scarcely fit to be the guide of others, and
such is the position of a newspaper with-


out settled principles of conduct. It is
worse: It is a broken reed that pierces the
hand that leans upon it for support. This
weakness, at any rate, cannot be charged
against th q Examiner. We have not hesi-
tated to express our opinion on men and
measures whenever our judgment showed
it to be necessary ; and such is the effect
of established character that whenever a
question arises in which right or wrong
may be done no one is in doubt which side
the Examiner will take. What it believes
to be for the public good, that it supports
at all hazards. This is the truest policy,
which outlives the ephemeral popularity
that is purchased at the expense of con-
sistency .There are also those more question-
able productions which are termed society
papers,and serve simply to gratify the desire
of the gossip loving section of the people,
raking up old time histories, diving into
the privacy which should surround domes-
tic life, and culling from nastiness appro-
priate food for their patrons. The Examiner,
while recognising that its sphere of use-
fulness has been increased, and that the
range of subjects in which the public is
interested has widened with the increased
population, has kept steadily before it the
mission which it undertook ; and, knowing
well the influence which the press exer-
cises, has been careful that that influence
should be guardedly and thoughtfully used.
In dealing with the every day occurrences
of life it has taken account of human
frailty, and has striven to be merciful as
well as just, and in the exposure of
corruption and wrong-doing it has been
fearless and outspoken. Its patriotism is
as intense, its intentions as clearly de-


fined, and its desire to advance
the public weal as earnest to-day as
when fifty years ago the ink had hardly
dried upon its inital number.
In 1842 the number of hands, all told,
employed in the production of the Ex-
aminer was twelve ; but in 1892 the staff
numbers upwards of 100, and the estab-
lishment is as complete as any in the
southern hemisphere,embracing all branches
of letter-press, lithographic, photo-zinco,
and fine chromo-lithographic work, stereo-
typing, bookbinding, wholesale and retail
stationery, and printers’ furnishing. If
proof were needed of the excellence of the
machinery and skilled labour employed ib
would assuredly be found in the fact that
at the Tasmanian Exhibition no less than
eight gold medals and three certificates of
honourable mention were awarded to the
examples shown by the proprietor.
The method of collecting news, and the
facilities which railways, submarine
cables, and land lines of electric wire
furnish for the collection and prompt
transmission of news in 1892 form
a striking contrast to the primi-
tive conveniences which were at the
command of the pioneer pressman §0 years
ago. On such an occasion it will be neither
uninteresting nor out of place to describe
the process by which a daily newspaper is
produced. The hours of literary labour
are unlimited, for the reporter must
respond to the call of duty at all hours, nor
must he humour his likes and dislikes in
relation to sports and pastimes, or his pre-
judices in regard to theological matters.
Sunday is not a day of rest for him, for
the first person to complain of his absence


on the Monday morning might probably
be one who had uttered a scathing denun-
ciation of Sabbath work on the previous
day. But this is by the way. Let us make a
start by interviewing
THE LITERARY DEPARTMENT
in its comfortable and well-appointed
home in the Examiner offices. The staff
comprises the editor, sub-editor, five
gentlemen of the reporting staff, together
with the reader and his assistant. Two of
the reporters are detailed for special duty,
viz., mining and shipping, whilst the
others take the routine work of the city
and northern country districts, varied
occasionally by a trip to the capital when
some special occasion demands that the
paper’s staff there should be augmented.
The first duty of a reporter is to be prompt
in transcribing his notes and forwarding
his “ copy ”to the office. In the case of
unimportant meetings the reporter is
expected to write out his report during the
progress of the proceedings, so that when
they are completed he may hand it in to
the office. At the time appointed for the
compositors to take up copy,” i.e.,
commence work, the sub-editor must
have sufficient for them to make a
start on, and the supply must be
regularly kept up or the “comps” will
be idle, the paper will be late, the trains
missed, the town delivery delayed, the
harmony of the breakfast table rudely dis-
turbed, and a host of other incon-
veniencies will ensue. It is the sub-
editor’s duty to carefully examine all copy.
He must denote, cut down, alter, or reject
as he proceeds with his work, for the


columns of a newspaper are not elastic,
acd he must contrive to get all his news
into the space at his disposal. The work
of “ boiling down” copy or reducing it so
as to fit the required space and yet give
the backbone of the news it contains is an
exceedingly difficult matter, but the duties
of the sub-editor do not end here, for upon
him devolves the task of transcribing the
cablegrams which come to hand from
Great Britain and the colonies. The for-
mer which record the constantly changing
surrent of events in all parts of the world,
dealing mainly with proper names, and
often devoid of any clue to assist in de-
ciphering them, involve an amount of ex-
penditure and anxious labour of which the
public, who read the paragraphs next day,
have no conception. The “ sub” has also
to prepare Parliamentary reports received
by telegram, select extract matter, watch
engagements which have to be re-
ported; in short, of attending to
all the details of literary management,
and finally when a rush of advertisements
reduces the space he calculates upon hav-
ing at his disposal he has to consult the
overseer and then weed out and still
further condense the “ copy” which has
been passed into the composing room. The
editor is responsible for the leading
columns and general policy of the paper,
although he is not necessarily the vriter of
all the articles which appear. He must be
a man of wide experience, acquainted with
the salient points of all the great q estions
of modern times, and prepared o deal
with them upon the shortest notice. Of all
the members of the literary staff hi duties
are the most difficult to describe, aid yet




"V i^.
|/
C
|
K |v. In |
7f\ K i"v 111 I
o
o
«
$
fc
HH
00
O
Pk
a
C
u
oo
£
B


he is always fully engaged either in leader
writing, revising letters from correspon-
dents, or in receiving visitors. There
is no establishment which has such
a widely varied visiting list as the
modern newspaper. To its chief all
sorts and conditions of people
flock with an infinite variety of stories—
men with grievances; men with a taste for
amateur journalism; people who regard
the press as a convenient chevaux de f rise
from which they can fire bullets of spleen
against their fellows; persons who have
made their bow to the Police Magistrate
and do not wish their names published to
the world; the unassuming parent of a few
dozen verses which he has “just dashed
off,” and which he modestly requests may
“ appear in your next issuethe man who
has studied the science of advertising, and
tries to publish his wares as “ news for the
information of your readers—don’tcher-
knowand above and beyond all, the
irrepressible “ friend ” who comes to tell
you in confidence how the paper should be
run. The editor is to a great extent the
custodian of the secrets of the community,
and the confidential adviser of the people.
Like all the members of his staff his work
to be efficient must be untiring and
zealous, and he must expect little recog-
nition for the result of his efforts. Let us
pass now to the
COMPOSING ROOM
which in the Examiner establish-
ment is one of the most com-
modious and well appointed of its kind
in Tasmania. To the uninitiated visitor
it presents a somewhat novel appearance


with its racks, imposing surfaces, and
“ frames,” the latter being arranged back
to back. These are the desks at which the
intelligent compositors piece together in
type the record of the world’s news which
the literary staff has put together. These
“ frames” in shape resemble a double desk,
the lower lid of which slopes at a more
obtuse angle than the upper. On the lower
incline lies a long and shallow wooden
tray subdivided by little partitions into a
number of compartments of various sizes,
each of which contains a number of
types of one particular character. The
upper incline of the desk supports another
tray in the boxes of which the large and
small capital letters are placed. The
compositor stands before this frame, and
resting his “ copy” Upon the upper tray or
“ case,” picks the types from the various
compartments, and places them in regular
rows of even lengths in a kind of iron box,
which he holds in his left hand, the
measure of which is adjusted to the width
of the column of the newspaper. When
this little iron box—or “ stick,” as it is
called—is filled with lines of type, it is
emptied on to a “ galley,” which is a tray
of brass or zinc rather longer than a
column, about six inches wide, with a
wooden frame running round it. “ Stick-
full” after “ stickfull” of type lines
are added until the column is com-
pleted. It is then securely fastened
in the “galley” by means of a “side-
stick” and “ quoins,” or wedges, and the
type having been inked with a roller, a
proof of the column is taken by means of
a small hand press constructed for the pur-
pose. This proof is taken to the reader.


who compares it with the original “ copy”
as this is read to him by his assistant,
and on the margin of the proof-sheet
marks the errors which the printers have
made in composition. The proof-sheet is
handed back to the overseer, the
errors are corrected, and what is
termed a “ revise,” or second proof sheet, is
forwarded to the reader, who sees that
his first corrections have been attended to.
In some instances reporters desire to read
“proofs’* of any copy they have sent in and
this a practice which has great advantages
and which experienced editors always en-
courage. When the errors in proofs are
corrected the compositor's share in the
labour is finished, with the exception of
the later task of “ distributing ” the type,
or putting it back in the cases after it has
been used. The columns of type, after
being corrected, are arranged side by side
on one of the iron imposing surfaces by the
overseer and his assistants. When sufficient
columns to make a page have been laid
down, they are enclosed by a strong iron
“ chase,” or frame, and wedged together so
tightly that the whole page may be lifted
without any of the letters falling out. The
page, or “forme,” as it is called, is then
lowered down a lift to the machinery room,
where the next process commences. There
are seventeen compositors,besides odd hands
in the composing room of the Examiner,
who are under the control of two sub-over-
seers—one of whom devotes his time to the
preparation of The Tasmanian. The com-
positors, having distributed their type
during the day, take up copy at? p m., and
from that hour until two or three, and
sometimes four o’clock in the morning, are


hard at work. While all the city is at rest
they are busy, and we may venture to
assert that no more intelligent body of
tradesmen will be found anywhere than
those engaged in the composing-room of a
daily newspaper. The camaraderie which
exists amongst them is proverbial, and no
member of the “ craft ” who is in troub’e
or distress ever asks in vain for assistance
from them. The compositor is hardly
appreciated by the general public beef use
he is unseen, but we may venture to assert
that when the proof-sheets of his life are
finally revised, they will contain many a
creditable record.
MACHINE ROOM. 1
The formes, when received from the com-
posing room, are placed on the machine,
a two-feeder Wharfedale,capable of turning
out 3000 copies per hour, the papers being
also folded by machinery. The motive
power is supplied by two gas engines.
This operation concludes the printing of
the paper, and the work of publishing—
i.e., the wrapping of copies for the country
and sister colonies, and the apportionment
of the city “runs” commences. A regi-
ment of boys are waiting ready to dart off
as soon as they have received their comple-
ment of Examiners, whilst carts convey
huge bundles for delivery by post and
train.
“ THE TASMANIAN.”
The weekly issue of the Launceston
Examiner was first published on January
6, 1872, under the title of the Weekly
Examiner. A newspaper of this character
had been contemplated for some time pre-


M
H
W
W
•-d
to
w
CD
CD
B
>
a
W
5
w
w
o
o
B




viously, and we had publicly announced
that if sufficient inducement offered such a
paper would be brought out under the
title of The Tasmanian. The response,
however, was not at the time deemed suffi-
cient to warrant the very considerable
additional expense that would be in-
curred, and the scheme was allowed to
remain in abeyance. But others, possessing
either more faith or less caution, threw
themselves into the gap, and not only
cribbed our idea, but the title too ! As
soon as arrangements could be completed
we entered the field, and brought out the
Weekly Examiner as already stated. The
paper met with general approval, and as
no trouble or reasonable expense was
spared in its production, it very rapidly
grew in public estimation, and soon
achieved a position which no other weekly
paper in the colony has ever approached.
Towards the close of 1880 The Tasmanian,
as first started was discontinued, and
the proprietors of the Weekly Ex-
aminer, having purchased the copy-
right, amalgamated the two papers under
the former designation, thus recovering
the title which they had originally in-
tended for their weekly issue. The Tas-
manian is now the only weekly paper in
Northern Tasmania. It is illustrated by
the new photo-zinco process, and special
attention being paid to agricultural, pas-
toral, dairying, and mining interests it is
essentially a welcome visitor in country
homes, whilst the serial tales, by well-
known writers, which appear from time to
time render it pre-eminently a fireside
journal. On sporting matters it has long
been recognised as an authority. It is


under the editorship of a gentleman whose
duties are distinct from those of the
Examiner staff and who devotes his whole
attention to its preparation.
BRANCH OFFICES.
The increased popularity of the Examiner
and Tasmanian in the southern portion of
the island induced the proprietors some
years ago to establish a branch office at
the capital, an example which other news-
papers in the island honoured them by
at once following. The advantages of
this system are obvious. By having
one of its own staff in Hobart the
Examiner is kept in toueh with the
social and political life there, and a eom-
plete epitome of news is forwarded by tele-
gram every evening. A branch office was
established in Burnie in 1889, so that the
growing interests of the North-West Coast
might be faithfully represented by the
Examiner and Tasmanian. Much of the
success of the Examiner may fairly be
attributed to the able staff of corres-
pondents it has secured in all centres of
population throughout the island.
THE JOB PRINTINGS DEPARTMENT.
Attached to the establishment is one of
the most complete printing establishments
in the colony, at which an efficient staff is
constantly fully employed, the department
embracing' all branches of letterpress,
lithographic, photo-lithographic, photo-
zinco, and fine chromo-lithographic work,
steropypiag, bookbinding, wholesale and
retail stationery, printers’ furnishing, etc.,
etc.




JOBBING


»MP®SIN& BOOM.




THE OLD HOME AND THE NEW.
The Examiner was originally printed at
the rear of the late Mr Henry Dowling’s
stationery and book-selling shop, Brisbane-
street, in a room above the kitchen and
other domestic apartments attached to the
dwelling-honse; the publishing office
being a small building erected for the
purpose in a space ten or twelve feet wide
that formed the entrance to the yard from
Brisbane-street, but which was not re-
quired as there was a back entrance from
a right-of-way off St. John-street. The
Launceston Advertiser was printed and pub-
lished in an office on the opposite side of
the same yard, and when in 1847 that
journal was incorporated with the Examiner
the mechanical department of the
latter was removed to the office of its
predecessor. Here the work went on
until 1848, when the printing and pub-
lishing offices were removed to Charles-
street, to the premises now occupied by
Mr Pond ; and it may be interesting bo
some of our readers to learn that there
West’s History of Tasmania was printed.
The publishing office in Brisbane-street,
which had been vacated by the Examiner,
then did duty as the Savings Bank until
that institution provided its own premises
in Patterson-street 5 and it now forms a por-
tion of Messrs Dempsters’ extensive estab-
lishment. Land having been secured in
Patterson-street by the proprietors of the
Examiner, printing and publishing offices
were erected, and the concern was
removed in 1854, to premises that were
deemed commodious and ample at the
time; but as population grew and business
expanded additional accommodation was


needed, and in 1875 a large two-storey
braiding was erected in the rear of the
former, the upper floor being used as the
composing room, and the lower for the
machinery and presses. A. little later still
further room was required, when the roof
was taken off the original composing and
press rooms, and another storey added, the
extra space thus obtained being assigned
to the jobbing and book-binding depart-
ments. There being now two newspapers
to bring out, a daily and a weekly, the
literary staff was very much cramped, and
more storage being needed, in the begin-
ning of 1888 another two-storey building
was erected, the lower portion of which
was occupied as a store, the upper floor
being devoted entirely to book-binding.
The wholesale stationary branch having
now been added to the business, still
further accommodation was needed, and in
1891 the splendid four-storey warehouse
was erected, which forms such a striking
•bject to anyone passing along Patterson-st.
The contrast between the original offices
of the Examiner and those now in use is
shown by illustrations which appear in this
issue, and it is worth mentioning, in con-
clusion, that men who were apprentices in
the old home and have grown grey in the
service still occupy prominent positions in
the establishment, the united term of
service of seven of them making an aggre-
gate of 215 years. Of those who have
served their apprenticeship in the office
one ia now foreman in the Government
printing office, Adelaide, another is fore-
man in the Government printing office,
Hobart, whilst a third is father of the
“ cha t I” in Melbourne.


h \tt \\ \\ \ i iiiii
3 lilufJßi
K 1'W w 4Wm
g /$
5 mKß&ku&h
:
o Mam mZSgH
p
L 1 «"■
/ i I ...»•
> fa «> i
“ti i ,ii'*
4.^1
rl
lm
f c%BjlA
msmm paiii
f B |




THE PROPEIETAET.
The history of the Launceston Ex-
aminer wouli be incomplete without
a slight allusion to the men who
launched it upon the world. The late hon.
James Aikenhead’s name appeared on the
imprint as the first printer and publisher
of theExawdner ; he was also the recognised
editor, though he was most ably
assisted by the late Rev. John West.
While the paper was yet in its infancy, Mr
Jonathan Stammers Waddell, a practical
printer by profession, became a partner,
and assumed entire charge of tne com-
mercial and mechanical branch of the
business. On the death of Mr Wad-
dell, in 1857, his place was taken by
Mr Henry Button who had served his
apprenticeship in the office. Later on Mr
James Aikenhead retired in favour of his
son, Mr William Aikenhead, who
nearly five years since disposed of
his interest to his partner, Mr
Button, the present proprietor, whose con-
nection with the business commenced in
1845.
Such is a brief description of how the
E xaminer is produced, and a bird’s-eye
glance across its fifty years’ career. In the
future as in the past it will speak with un-
faltering tongue on all matters of public
©oncern,striving by every just means in its
power to advance the best interests of
Tasmania.


SONG OF THE REPORTER.
There are many who live but for pleasure,
There are many who labour for wealth,
There are many who seek after treasure,
And many who hunt after health.
But reporters, in craftsmanship brothers —
A peculiar race of men,
Spend their lifetime in working for others—
Sing hey for the pencil and pen.
Bach night in the week, even Sunday,
When others attend to their orayers.
He’s at work and expected on Monday
At his place, or the editor stares.
He reports the Eight Hours Demonstration
With a grin that’s satirical when
He reflects on his own situation—
Sing hey for the pencil and pen.
If a Are should break out in the city.
Or a murder be done in the dark ;
Should a bi» pot say something that’s witty,
Or a matron elope with her spark ;
Should a body be found in the water,
Or gold be observed in a glen,
There’s work for the happy reporter—
Sing hey for the pencil and pen.
At theatres, concerts, or dances,
Elections, or counting of votes,
The public is wrong if it fancies
A reporter’s not there with his notes.
Past mortems, a scientist’s lecture.
There’s nothing that’s out of his ken,
From a goat to new architecture—
Sing hey for the pencil and pen.
The ioys of a married existence
Are things he knows only in dreams,
Far all night with a steady persistence
“ More copy” the overseer screams.
Such being the case it’s a pity
If he can’t have a lark now and then.
So liin me in yelling this ditty—
"Hurrah for tbe pencil and pen !”
—Exchange.


1842-1892.
VKty long years their circling course have
ended,
And with some measure of success have been
attended.
Vail many a change on history’s page these
years will trace—
Changes for weal or woe—which time can ne’er
efface.
Oar constant aim has been to aid and help the
right,
Through evil and through good report, when-
ever might
Has threatened to oppress. Again we would
begin
The strife, with faith and hope and courage,
which are sure to win
Alway, if help is sought from One who, with
unceasing love,
Will every obstacle in His own time and way
remove.
We cannot tell what the next fifty years for us
will bring ;
But this we know: our God will cause that
everything
Shall work together for the good of this fair
land,
If love of truth and justice all our thoughts
command.


SPECIAL “ WATZGOOSE ”
From the Examiner of Monday, March 14.
At the invitation of Mr Henry Button,
proprietor of the Launceston Examiner, the
employees betook themselves to Mowbray
on Saturday afternoon to celebrate the
jubilee of the journal by holding a special
“ wayzgoose.” Early in the afternoon
’buses started from the Examiner office, and
being quickly filled with the living freight
of the employees, their wives, and families,
were speedily driven to the Eegatta
Ground. There everything had been pre-
pared for the carrying out of the monster
picnic which kindly thoughtfulness could
suggest, and as the guests arrived they
were received by Mr and Mrs Button at
the entrance. Then each and all entered
into the spirit of the entertainment with
that zest for enjoyment which is so
characteristic of the Australian people.
Between two and three hundred persons
were assembled, and dividing themselves
into various coteries games were suggested,
and no sooner were they mentioned than a
start was made to have them carried out.
The younger members of the party were
mustered for foot-racing, and being skilfully
handicapped those who were fleetest of foot
outstripped their competitors. Some of
the contestants were not novices to pedes-
trianism and their performances merited
the applause of the spectators. Girls,
youths, and boys all joined in these
healthful exercises and did their best to
secure the prizes which were awarded to
those who were victorious. Croquet, ball
throwing, quoit playing, tug-of-war, and
other games suitable for outdoor amuse-




bookbin:


)IN« BOOM.




ments occupied the time at the disposal of
the merry party, and in these innocent
forms of enjoyment a spirit of emulation
was engendered for the nonce that went a
long way towards filling to the brim the
cup of pleasure in which all drank so
deeply. There were many present upon
whom the hoary hand of time had laid his
fingers on hair and brow, not unkindly but
surely, while toiling in the interests of a
good master. These were those who
entered the service at a period when the
Examiner was merely gaining strength,
and its progressive policy was adding
to its power in the land, and they sat or
stood quietly looking on at the sports in
which the juniors were indulging. Their
thoughts were reflective, for looking
across the years which had passed
they counted the various changes which
have taken place, and when all the inci-
dents of their active lives had been re-
called they, perchance, lingered on those
which, to them, seemed most pleasing.
They were dwelling on recollections of
things and scenes which were only now
registered in memory, but allowing their
imaginations to take the place of bygone
events they glanced momentarily into
futurity as they watched the children
exerting their young limbs to the utmost
in their anxiety to be placed first amongst
the competitors, and piloted their thoughts
towards the years to come. Would these
bright young people be celebrating the
centenary of the Examiner in the course of
another fifty years when these older ones
had been laid to rest, and would they in
turn be indulging in retrospective and pros-
pective fancies in a similar manner ? How-


ever, the hours sped on apace and the
welcome sound o # the tea bell broke in
upon the wayward thoughts and actions of
the happy party, who adjourned to the
tent, where all partook heartily of the
viands provided. Afterwards the grounds
were again a scene of active enjoyment
until the dusk of evening forewarned the
party that it was time to return homewards.
A ring was formed and cheers were called
for the host and hostess and their family,
and as the loud huzzahs echoed on the
stilness of the air, the ’buses arrived, and
the return journey was commenced.


CONGRATULATORY.
Prom the Examiner of March 16.
From all quarters we have received
the most kindly congratulations on the
attainment of our Jubilee, and the
special issue commemorative of that
event which we published last Saturday-
One gentleman writing from George
Town says : —“ Many thanks for the
facsimile of Examiner of 1842. Ire-
member my father receiving the first
issues sent to him at Norfolk Island by
an old friend of his, a barrack sergeant,
at the time. I had great difficulty in
reading the small type (of the reproduc-
tion), but after applying a magnifying
glass, I was able to do so. Many per-
sons mentioned therein, whom I well
remember, have long since joined the
great majority. Pray receive my
humble congratulations on the Jubilee
year of the Examiner, and may it still
advance in the estimation of the public.”
Another old friend at Scottsdale writes:
—“ 1 have just been looking with very
great pleasure at the beautifully exe-
cuted fac simile of the first number of the


Examiner ; it must have been splendid
printing in those days—type all new. I
shall have a go in at the sketch of the
paper’s history this evening. What a
long time it seems to look back on.
You and I were boys when it started,
and what vast social and political
changes we have seen in these colonies,
in the old country, and throughout all,
or nearly all, the countries of Europe
and America, and I may add, in a lesser
degree, Asia and Africa. And here we
are, unaffected, or nearly so, by the up-
heavals in the older countries, enjoying
a fair measure of health and strength,
with enough to eat and drink, clothing
and shelter ; so that we have abundant
reason for loving gratitude and trust.
The history of the Examiner has been
more than half the history of the
colony, and its development corres-
ponds. How the late J. S. Waddell
would have rejoiced at the growth of
the paper could he have lived to
see it assume its present pro-
portions.” With very great hearti-
ness we accede to our friend’s


invitation to “ shake hands in spirit
across the 47 miles of railway which
separate us, whilst I offer, and you
accept congratulationsand whilst
hand clasps hand by a ready
effort of imagination which scorns
time and distance, our voices, mingling
in the same mysterious manner, may
join in the words and music consecrated
to true and undying friendship—
“ Should auld acquaintance be forgot
and never brought to mind ?”
From Hobart we have received the
following letter which, though marked
private, we trust the writer will pardon
us for publishing, as we withhold his
name, though we should have been
glad to have had permission to give the
latter:—The Examiner is to be
congratulated on its Jubilee, I
read the Jubilee issue throughout
with much interest; T also went
through almost the whole of the fac
simile reproduction. In it you forget
ito notice an interesting coincidence :
on the fac simile appears Saturday,
12th March, 1842; Saturday, 12th


March, ] 892, made the Jubilee perfect
—day as well as dat j. Would you
excuse me for suggesting that the lead-
ing article in the original number is so
admirable that it surely would bear re-
printing at the present time, the
principles of journalism being so ad-
mirably set forth.” Our southern con-
temporary the Tasmanian News writes :
—“ We beg to offer our hearty con-
gratulations to foe Launceston Examiner
on the auspicious occasion of its jubilee,
of which fact we are reminded by in-
teresting reminiscences published along
with Saturday’s issue. We unreser-
vedly endorse what is editorially stated,
that a secular journal should ‘ assist in
every movement which will add to the
material advancement, social uplifting,
or harmless amusement of the people.
Long may our contemporary wield an
influence for good in northern latitudes.”
We tender our sincere thanks to our
correspondents as well as those friends
who have personally tendered their
congra tul ations.
Printed at the Examiner Office, Launceston.






[Supplement to the “ Launceston Examinerl2th March, 1892.']
LAUNCESTON EXAMINER
COMMERCIAL AZTO
AaUZCVLTURAL
ADVERTISER.
For London.
THE fast-sailing barque NOOR-
M U HUL, 200 tons; J. Stephenson,
commander, having a great portion of-her
cargo now engaged, will be despatched as
above - . For freighter passage, apply to
N. B.—Application for passage to be
made early, (or the cabin will bo filled with
wool,) to the captain on board, or to
Eddie & Co.
March 8, 1542.
For London.
aAJL THF well-known fitst-class and fast-
sailing ship HENRY, 420 tons,
William Walraesly, commander, having
the part of her cargo engaged, wifi
meet with quick despatch. For freight or
passage, having superior accommodations,
apply to
Eddie & Go.
*areh 8, 1842.
SATURDAY EVENING, MARCH 12. 1842.
SALES BYT AUCTION. TO ” E S ° LD “ Y / U J?“ C AUCTION,
By Mr. J. C. Underwood,
. TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION,
, By Mr. J. C. Underwood, Premises, at Ross, on THURSDAY, the
r At Woodhall, near Perth, on WEDNES- > B M> instant, at 12 o’clock,
1 DAY, the 30tb-March. at 12 o’clock, 4 LL the STOCK-IN-TRADE, House-
fllHE following VALUABLE STOCK,, xi. . hold Furniture, aid Effects, together
, J. Ac., the proi»erty' of Mr. Thomas with the Lease of the Premises, lately occu-
Wedge, who is quitting the Farm, pied by the Insolvent, situate at Ross.
400 to 600 good sheep The stock consists of saddlery and all the
20 head of cattle, consisting of cows, requisites for carrying on the Tannery,
calves; heifers, and working bullocks, Household furniture, of the usual descrip-
in good condition tion; and at the same time all insolvent’s
40 to 60 store pigs right, .title, and interest to the lease of the
, 4 first-rate draught horses premises for four, years unexpired, from the
A *thorough-bred entire roll, 2 yrt. old 29th day of June now next ensuing .
A*thorongh-bred entire roll, 2 yt%. old
Advertiser, a good saddle horse
Bluebeard, a good saddle horse, has
Wn driven as a tandem leader, and
in the shafts
A filly, three years old, broken to har-
Several horses, fit for breaking
About 130 tons of the best oaten hny,
which can remain, to suit the conve-
, pifence of purchasers
Farming implements, consisting of
* ploughs, barrows, carts, drays, and
4 rollers
An excellent four-horse waggon, nearly
new
A good English-built boat/ with sails,
Terms—Under£26, cash; £2.kto£so, three
months; £fiOto£lOO, four mflntbs ; above
£lOO, fouy and six months’ credit, on ap-
proved endorsed bills.
For London.
With all Despatch.
*Ck&e TIIE splendid new Brifaah-hulU
%££& ship AGOSTINA, A 1, burthen
400 tons, W. Perry, comtomnder. The sail-
ing qualities of this vessel are well-known.
The greater part of her cargo is engaged',
and as she takes no oil, it renders her very.
desirable for a wool cargo.
For terms of freight or passage, having
superior accommodations, apply to Henty
and Co., Connolly and Co., or
J.Dowk ACo.
March 8, 1842,
__— ,0 BE s oLD liY PUBLIC AUCTION
For Xondon. jt v jur r J. C. Underwood.
M THE tp EMU, Underilip Insolvency of Silas Pi™, of
Sm:,yr A , Homrd, cwnmai.der.-w - Campbell Town, Butcher, by ortbrsf lie
now loud,n E wool foe the above port, and Awi|nee, on the Premisis, Campbell
voU be despatched about the 20th pmtlmo. Xow | FRIDAY, the 18th instant, .1
Fpr freight and passage, early application two p ’ c j ock ’
Hen”S^Co t °SSnTmd‘ce t 'w b t2" rd ’ 4 LL the * STOCK-IN-TRADE end
HenD and Co., tAmholly ann Co, or to UTENSILS, for osrry.ee on the
March 8, 1613. ’ I * »**«■»»/ Tallow Chandler.
About 4 J acres of potatoes, growing on the
«i nr |allotment.at Campbell Town, one horse,
urn rr ° r i . 1 one cow, ten pigs, cart and harness, wheel-
Will Have Prompt Despatch. I | )arrow an( i .undriea
THE remarkably fast-sailing barque ; ’
TADY KMM’a, Thomas Buck- 1 The right, title, a“d interest of. vatoble
™ ( V enmntander. A small quantity rf allotment of ground, situate at Campbell
wool only can be engaged for this vessel, / Town, containing about ten acres with a
and passengers desirous of dispatch may in- i building partially erected thereon, and other
sure it. For freight or passage, apply to improvements. This allotment is subject to
.... James Raven. ; a lien of £20..
March 6, 1842.
For Hobart Town. [ DrovXdor^Sik® 9 ’ ap “ “^•°L which upvTards of two X earB ««
IE schooner INDUSTRY, 100 P d endorsed bills. -x- ... _ ,
OTQr torn! burthen, hourly expired " * : The lease oflB acres of land.
from Port Phillip, will commence loading TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION, /--Haire,. tables, scales, weights, baking
for the above port and will have quick des- By Mr. J . C■ Underwood, AWastockof wheat
P h- F Geo e jf F R O KD P SIER At Mr * Cain ’ a Yurds > Campbell Town, on Further particulars may be had of Clms.
March 1842. F ’ S THURSDAY, the 17th* March, at 12 Mackenzie, Esq;, Campbell Town.
For Portland Bay.
_dSSuTHE fine fast-sailing schooner
WSSF. WILL WATCH, 78 tons, J. Har-
ding, commander, will positively leave the
Queen’s Wharf on Wednesday morning
next, the 19th instant. For freight or pas-
sage, apply to
Geo. & Fred. Fisher, Agents.
March 8, 1842.
For Sydney.
To Sail positively on the 14 tk instant.
-d MU THE fast-sailing barque CECILIA,
George Burrell, commander. For
freight or passage, apply on board, or to
Williams, Campbell, & Co.
March 8, 1842.
For Melbourne.
To Sail on Saturday next, the 12th instant.
4s&6 THE CORSAIR, Win.
Bell, commander. For freight or
passage, apply to
James Ravish, Agent.
March 8, 1842.
Terms-Under £25. cash; tlirec mon*bs’
credit on all purchases above £23, on ap-
right, title, and interest to the lease of the The titles to the above will be exhibited
premises for four, years unexpired, from tire at the time of* sale.
29th day of June now next ensuing . Lot 5.
• The premises are well-known as Kings- A very valuable allotment of ground,
bury Tannery, and are suitable for carrying situated In George Town, and bounded as
on the business with advantage. , follows:—On the south-east by 181 links
Terms—Under £25, cash; £25 and upwards, south-westerly,along other land, and known
three, months’ credit,'on approved en- as the Waterloo Tavern, omthe south-west
dorsed bills. by 288 links north-westerly, op the nortb-
TO BE SOLD BY PUBJLIC AUCTION,
XJi'.Wn. j. c. Underwood,
At the Yards of Mr. Britton Jones, Frank-
lin Village, on TUESDAY, the 15th
March, 1842, at .13 oNjlock,
SIX HUNDRED? fine-woolled two-
tooth EVVEB
S 7& ditto wethers
325 ewes, four, six, and eight-toothed
10 Nigrettarams, from Circular Head
1 bay cob mare, broken in to double and
single harness, and an excellent road-
o’clock; without reserve, and without fail,
raiHR following valuable and highly-bred
1 STOCK:—
1000 highly-improved breeding ewes
1200 ditto ewe and wether lambs
450 prime fat wethers
30 merino rams
29 head of prime cattle, consisting of
cows, calves, and heifers
12 pair of working bullocks
I mare and foal
1 filly
1 pair of horses, fit for carriage, car f, or
saddle
30 pigs
Carnage and harness
7 drays and carts for horses and bullocks
J excellent winnowing machine
2 ploughs, I. roller, 3 pair of harrows,
bows, yokes, and cheins, mid other
farming implements,
Also,—
About 400 bushels of wheat in the straw
12 tons of hay In stack
I wool screw, press, Ac.
Terms—Under £25, cash;.£26 and under
£lOO, three mouths; £lOO, three and four
months; above £lOO, three and six
month's (the six months’ bills to bear
throe months' bank interest,’on approved
endorsed bills.
Mr. Underwood pledges himself that the
stock, Ac., shall be produced, and begs to
assure his ftiends and the public that he was
no party to the disappointment already oc-
Lot 8.
Ditto, ditto, ditto, bounded on the Irpqt
by Sorell-street 105 links, on one side, by
ground belonging to Davis, 307 links; on
the other side in part by an allotment for-
merly belonging to Dr. Smith, and in other
part by an allotment formerly .belonging to
Emanuel Griffin, 813 links, and at the back
in part by ground belonging to Freestone
104 links, be the same more or less.
Lot 4.
Ditto, ditto, in Friend-street, Containing
72 rods (be the same more or less), with a
weather-boarded house, containing two
1 handsome grey cob mare, broken in
to harness, and will carry a lady
1 hamljwmo two-year-old colt, by Sipa-
hce, out of a Viscount ujare
8 working bullocks, in good order
1 oullock, fit for the - butcher
10 milch cows, chiefly polled, in calf,
and in excellent order,: some fit for
the butcher.
Terms-All sums Under £25, cash; £26 to
£lOO,- three months; above £lOO, three
and four months’ credit, on approved en-
dorsed bills.
west by 195 J links north-easterly to Sorell-
street, and on the north-east by 291 links
•south-easterly along Sorell-street.,
" Title—A grant from the Crown.
This property has the advantage of a
street running along tht side line from
Sorel-strcet to the Square. As property in
George Town is every day increasing in
value, and as it is now likely to much resor-
ted to by the fashionable world as a place of
recreation, and from the facility afforded to
visitors by the constant running of the new
steam-boat, whereby every comfort and lux-
ury may be obtained at prices as cheap as
at Launceston, the auctioneer particularly
invites gentlemen to this sale, os they will
have an opportunity of securing for them-
selves a maritime residence, which for ad-
vantage of situation cannot be surpassed.
Five £2O shores in the Tamar Steam
Navigation Company.
The steam-boat being now constantly
running from George Town to Laundcston,
it is quite needless to point 'out the advan-
tages to be derived from becoming a puis
chaser of shares in this. Company, which
must very shortly bear R very large pnr
Tbrms—A deposit of £2O per cent, ou the
day of sale, and the remainder'of the pur-
chase money by approved .endorsed bills
at threo months’ date, with alien on this
property.
Purchasers to pay theic own convey-
TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION
By Mr. 3, C. Underwood,
By order of the permanent assignee of Mr.
Henry Black, insolvent, on the premises
at Campbell Town, on THURSDAY, the
, 17th inst., at two o'clock,
THE LEASE of the PREMISES, of
which upwards of five years are unex-
The lease of a township allotment, of 10
acres, of which upwards of two years are
TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION
aw tease oi a township allotment, of 10 wit-. V w
acres, of which upwards of two years are 3, W. Bell,
unexqircd. At the Store of Mr, John Cmig, at Long
The lease of 18 acres of land. ford, o,l WEDNESDAY, the 16th March
Chairs, tables, scales, weights, baking next, commencing at 12 o’clock,
utensils, Ac., Ac. f|VHE whole of his SffOCK-IN-TRADE.
Also, a stack of wheat. I. (he intending to enter into anothb
Further particulars may be had of Chas. Ijne of business)’, consisting of prints, call
Mackenzie, Esq;, Campbell Town. roes, slops of all descriptions, cutlery, glass.
Teens'will he made known at the time of tale c »rihcnware ; groceries, a cask of superior
J negrohead tobacco, 20 boxes soap, sevenf
Valuable Buildinq Allotments situate at new and watches and tin.
■ y articles ofaniscellaneous property.
TO BE SOLD BY. PUBLIC AUCTION, .5“ of , this Property-dll be sold
By Mr. George Eddie,
A DAY’S 8 !»„ C d ta e^, ; S, ,'T t ’ T TUES - Wn,»lh. il £
HAY, the 22nd instant, the sale to com- and six months’ credit hv annmvp.l ’ , r/1
’ b> approvednego
»,, « uruer tiaoie mils.
G T W - ! undeP th * > ns( dvency of
ALL the insolvent’s right, title, and in- an excellent RUN of U
terest to the undermentioned ALLOT- r . acre9 ’ f °s, catt J a or ® hee P» j 1 ~a 8 T '
MENTS, Ac.; viz— frontage on the Meander and Wes
Lor i. Creek, with an unlimited rim of Gov
An allotment of ground, situate in Georce ment tand ‘ Eent moderate. Apply
Town, bounded in front by Sorell-street 92 « , ?:£****> Cal,tock > Delorq^
J. post-free.
Ditto dht. tritliA w«ttherA>o«ded hon« Latecto.. M.rch 0,181
hS.'Sd live rooms; -TUST LANDING «
r- ,ls
mg to Samuel Langharp, 329 links, and nt v ty
the back hyaline parallel with No. 1. March 8, 1832. J ‘ Dq ** -
For Sydney.
_4ffILTHE fine fast-sailing schooner
THOMAS CRISP, 180 tons, N.
Beard; master, will sail immediately on the
discharge of her iiArard cargo. For freight
or passage, apply to
„ t Eddie A Co.
March 8,1842.
[FACSIMILE reproduction
of the first issue of
office by photo-lithography
~ , J- Dquup
March 8, 1832.
to one-seventh of
the “ Launceston Examinerreduced in the
\al. The lower comers of the sheets have been
original.
injured by
darn p.]


a ______ LAUffCBSTCfr EXAMINER
PORT SO HELL POTATOES. -On ffl AMA 11 STEAM NAVIGATION ■T’ANCY GOODS, ox Cecilia, at MOSS (i A 11111 AG EUEPOSITOrT,
sale at the stores of the undersigned. X COMP/ '.—The Steam Vessel X 1 ami NATHAN’S Loudon Depot, V Brlsbane-street, Launceston.—-
Richard L. Ohr. GYPSfiY, R. M -ommander, will Charles-strcct. S. Miles, Coach Builder and Harness-
Also a few tons of potatoes from Brown’s
River seed.
Mrrch a 3.
ON SALE, at the stores of the under,
signed,
Provisions of all kinds
Bottled wines of every description
Bottled ale and porter
Tobacco in tierces and kegs
Three-bushel wheat sacks, full size
And a variety of English merchandise
of almost every description.
Richard L. Orr.
Colonial produce taken in exchange
fbr goods, kangaroo skins bought as usual
in any quantity above 200.
March 10.
ON SALE at the stores of the under-
signed, 30,000 No. 4 Manilla Cigars of
the finest quality.
G. & F. Fisher.
Wharf, Launceston, Feh. 20.
nmker, Lera to acquaint the gentry of Van
Diemen’s Land that he has, at the above
place, a constant show ol every description
of Carriage, (being selections from the first
stocks in England,) together with a quan-
tity of Harness.
S. Miles embraces the present opportunity
of re-introducing himself, with the assur-
ance that every order entrusted to his cure
shall receive such strict attention and punc-
tual despatch, withsuperiority of execution,
as may ensure general satisfaction.
N.B.i—S. M. has a regular supply of
English Carriage materials.
March 8,1842.
leave Launceston, to. Town Cove m
and Kelso Bay, enllinffb. -mediate IJIBBONSI RlBBONS!!—Plainsars- »
stations, during the ensuing i t. as iL net ribbons, satin ditto, fancy gauze pi
follows: cap ditto, new style bonnet ditto, selected of
Tuesday, Bth March, at J-past 8 o'clock, id purchased for sfc
in the morning. " ’ Moss & Nathan. tit
Thursday, 10th.—At 10 o’clock, ditto* 1
Saturfa,, mb—At i-paat 11 o’clock, . R’nFICIALS-~rroncbcapflowors«ii<l
ditto. . bouquets, ditto bonnet ditto; a choice a J
Tuesday 15th.-At 2 o’clock m the after- Belection 0 V dress caps and cap fronts, at f
ha Moss & Nathan b.
Thursday, 17th.—At f. -past Bo’clock ditto.
Sunday, 20th.—At 7 o'clock in the morn-
ing,and return in the evening.
Fa RES.
To Coulson’s os. 4s. Od.
To Brown’s -.75. 4s. 6d.
To. 1 nut Direction Bs. 6s. Od.
Tv '|’s : 10s. 6s. Od.
To *e Town Cove, and
Ken,. Ray 12s. Bs. od.
Joseph Kilnbr, Superintendent.
Launceston, March 8.
BONNETS! BONNETS!! BON-
NETS I !! —Superior Tuscan bonnets,
figured and white Dunstable ditto; also an
H?os3 & Nathan. ffMIE undersigned beg to call the atten-
l_ X tion of their numerous customers and
.... . . - the public in general to the following NEW
ves > • , SACRIF ICES—
Gloves— a spiomi
fancy kid gloves,’
white silk lace gloves, at
Moss & Nathan’s. One case, containing shawls, scarfs, and
ON SALE at the stores of the under-
signed—
Prime Irish and Haiubro’ pork
Port Phillip corned beef
200 dozen superior port wine, best qua-
lity
150 dozen sherry
50 ditto Marsalln
Pitch, tar, resin, in barrels
Bottled ale and porter
CHILDREN’S FROCKS—An assort-
ment of children’s plaid, gambroon.
sateen.de Dine, and Cotton frocks; a few
babies’ long robes, at
Moss & Nathan’s.
LEMON SYRUP.—On sale at the stores ? at . e . e
of the undersigned, Underwood’s Lc- babK
mon Syrup, in one-dozen cases.
Richard L. Orr,. m
March 10. JVi
MOUSELIN PE LAINES—One case
of Victoria silks, for ladies’dresses,
o'f the newest pattern; a large assortment
of mouselin de laiue dresses; Orleans cl th
aiul merinos, at
Moss & Nathan’s.
CATTLE STRAYED.—Whereas several* of m
head of cattle, branded W Lon the off aiul
side of neck, belonging to the estate of the
late W. E. Lawrence, Esq., strayed away
from Effingham, near George Town, pre-
vious to the enclosure of that property, and
are How in the bush, a REWARD of 10s
per head will he paid to any person who
will deliver any of the said cattle to Mr.
Storrer, overseer at Point Effingham, or to
the Undersigned, at Penqaite.
C. Gunn.
March 11, 1842.
Sydney grindstones late
Cordage and coir rope, and a variety of froi
other merchandise. vioi
G.& F. Fisher. are
Wharf> Launceston, March 10. per
ON SALE at the stores of the under-
signed—so demijohns white gin, in
packages, two gallons each.
G. & F. Fisher.
Wharf, Launcestan, March 10.
SIR WILLIAM' WALLACE INN,
Franklin Village.—Joshun Lyons, begs
most respectfully to acquaint ins friends and
the public, that he has taken the above well
known and old-established house, formerly
occupied by Mr. Britton Jones, where'he
hopes by strict attention and civility to merit
a continuation of that patronage so liberal?':
bestowed upon his predecessor,
It is needless to point out to country gen-
tlemen and settlers generally theadvautages
hnd accommodation afforded by the above
house it being so woll.known and frequented
that it is quite unnecessary for Mr. Lyons
-,o do more thau-to pledge himself to pay
•very attention to the comforts and require-
ments of those who favour him with a visit
0611 the m' st moderate charges.
Tile establishment affords excellent ac-
mmodation for cattle, horses, sheep, &c.,
■ which well-watered paddocks are pro-
ud.
SHEEP— Three hundred fat Port Phil*
lip WETHERS, for Sale. Apply to
James Raven.
March 5, 1842.
STAY S—ladies’ white and coloured stays,
ditto superfine French ditto, maid’s
white ditto, at
Moss & Nathan’s.
LADIES’ SHAWLS—Consisting ofbor-
dcred Norwich and merino shawls,
cashtnere, and silk velvet ditto, at.
Moss & Nathan’s.
g ADIES’ rfnd CHILDREN’S BOOTS
JLi and SHOES of every description, at
Moss & N athan’s.
Two cases ladies’ collars, capes, pele-
rines, and habit shirts
One ditto plain and figured nets
One ditto jaconet and cord muslins
One ditto quilling nets, blond lace, and
edgings
One ditto English mouseline de laine
dresses, small patterns ’ ,
One ditto French ditto, ditto
Two ditto white and coloured'stays
One ditto satin andsarsnet ribbons'
Two ditto women’s Tuscan and Dun-
stable bonnets, of the latest fashions
Two ditto children’s ditto, ditto
One ditto ladies’ and gentlemen’s gloves
Two ditto shirting calico
One ditto table cloths and covers
One ditto oilskin table covering
Five ditto hosiery of every description
CLOTHING.
Two ditto superfine cloth body and
frock coats
One ditto ditto trowsers
Two ditto; ‘containing 800 vests of
various descriptions
Three ditto gentlemen’s summer coats
Two ditto double and single-breasted
cloth jackets
Two ditto fancy doeskin, buckskin, and
drill trowscre
our ditto, containing 000 pairs light
and dark moleskin ditto, which are
particularly recommended to ,me-
One ditto fanny shirts
■One ditto white ditto, linen collars
fronts, and wrists
One ditto cloth and fancy sleeved vests
One ditto 150 pieces British silk hand-
kerchiefs
One ditto 100 ditto black and fancy
neck ditto
One ditto India rubber and girth braces
One ditto gentlemen’s blue cloth caps
One ditto Manilla hats
One ditto pleated and Taliona blouses.
D. & S. BENJAMIN.
Tamar House, St. John-street, )
and Launceston Emporium, >
Charies-street. J
HOSIERY —Ladies’ black and white silk
hose, 200 dozen women’s black and
white cotton hose, 300 dozen children’s socks
assorted, 100. dozen men’s half hose, 300
dozen men’s brown and coloured hose, at
Moss & Nathan’s.
FOR SALE—A new four-horse-power white cot
portable THRASHING MACHINE, assorted,
colonial make, price 100 guineas. Apply to dozen un
Wharf, Feb. 10, 1842. ° llh TIILI,AN '
EX ISABELLA—PERKINS, BEN- 13 J „ 8
NEXT, & Co. beg to inform the pub- Encash
lie that they have received a very fine of slops
sample of West India Sugar, via Hobart *
Town, imported in the Olenbervie, from
hat celebrated and justly-admired horse,
A R M E R’S F R I E N D,”
Government Sam ; dam, a Clydesdale
; imported direct from England, has
me the property of Mr. Lyons, and will
as usual at <he above Inn. This horse
sidered to be inferior to none in the
y as a cart stallion, and is now in the
of life.
Villiam Wallace,
anklin Village, March 0.
London. The quality is superior to any
Mauritius or East India. To be sold at their
usual low prices.
Also, fifty cases of prime English Cheese,
consisting of Pine, Wilts, Chedder,
Warwick, Stilton, and Cheshire, all in the
very best condition.
March ! 842.
Blankets and flannels—2oo
pairs assorted blankets, Welch and
Lancashire flannels, with a large assortment
of slops of every description, at ,
Moss & Nathan’s.
9ER FOR SALE, at reduced pri-
,—Boards and Battens; per 100 feet,
.sts and Quartering, per ditto, os.
Paling, per 100, os. Shingles and
.er 1000, Oa. Narrow Paling, per
Foi Cash only. j
-street, March 8.
IT ATS—A large stock of hats and cloth
11
Warwick, Stilton,’aid Cheshire,'all ia the /"tORNWALI AUXILIARY BIBLE
very best condition. VV SOCIETY. —To afford the inhabitants
March ' ! 842. of the northern side of the island an oppor-
J : tonity to procure the Scriptures, the follow-
WAN ' D a man to act as Coot, mid !*«« kindly consented to be-
ta ike himself generally useful. come depositaries
Apply tb : he Rev. W. 1, Gibbon. «>■ AmMj,JipHn«
iSKcha, Im. • Mr’TOtaft”’
■ * Mr, Oaisr. Longford
WANTED, a place as Housemaid, by q Mr. White, Wcllbury
young woman recently arrived in Rev. Mr. Richardson, Avoca
the colony. Respectable reference as to Rev. Mr. Walker, George Town,
character, fee. can be given. Apply to C.H., Flom vhum be had al lhe ices armW( ,_
at the office of this paper, if by letter post- • m nt
paid. 8181.88. testaments.
March 8, 1812. is' Pic, 8.0 is'
BUAYTED, an active Shopman, for the SI J ”
?V Drapery Business. Apply person- pearl, V4m0... 4 0 Minion I 0
ally, at Nonparicl,l2mo3 9
Moss & Nathan’s, Charies-street.. Minion, 24m0. 3 7
March 8,184 S. At the depository,at Mr. Best's, St. John-
LE.—Two large fixed THRASH-
MACHINES, mode to build in
ickwork of a barn, and well cal-
coutain dressing ami smutting
These handsome machines have
erected by the undersigned,
seen on application al their
■tirANTEDtopurchuelong Horse Hair, “ddifionto
' * Apply to Portuguese, and Dutch Bibles and Testa-
a. vn. i mentej and some Hebrew Bible, and Obi-
a , . uo , D v, R T, LL ’ I meats, and some Hebrew Bibles and Chi-
St. John and Bnsbaue-strcets. ncse Testaments.
Launceston, March 8, 1842. { •„* The committee respectfully refer to
~ j i , _ [the fourth resolution adopted at-the last
make rash ailvaiic.Bwii produce to tl.e
signmentt_of their friends Messrs. Jofm hetltiB 01 -families to the duty of supplying
Gore and Co. _ - their servants with copies of the Sacred
Borradailb, Gore, & Co. »
Cimitiero-street, March 8, 1842. j a mbs Aikeh head, Secretary.
mHE MISSES WADDELL uuderstand-
X ing it is generally reported that they
contemplate relinquishing, their establish-
ment, beg to state that such a report is erro-
neous, and take this opportunity of inform-
ing their friends and the public that in order
to meet the depression of the times, they
intend at the ensuing quarter to reduce their
terms to 50 guineas per annum; washing
the only extra.
The Misses W. presume that the report
has arisen from the severe indisposition of
one of the ladies, having rendered her in-
capable of taking an active part in the busi-
ness of their establishment; but as Mias
WVs health is now re-established, she will
be happy to devote herself with her former
assiduity to the instruction of her pupils.
Those parent* who value the privileges of a
a religious education, combined with in-
struction in useful knowledge and the usual
'accomplishments, will find every requisite
for the promotion of happiness and improve-
Wellington-strcet, March 9.
powerful cast iron four-horse m:
'. on the most approved prin- si-
ih 250 to 300 bushels per diem. G
i cutters, cheese presses, cart
fiiueS, plough shares, moulds,
y, or oats taken in exchange, rj
die fixed machines recently ce
ictured by Messrs. Smith of Si
v*7" ANTED a free or ticket-of-leave man
Vr as COOK-, must produce testimonials
of .character. Apply to Mrs. Dean, Patter-
been disposed of, the un-
rtfpared to receive orJers
drous of supplying theifi-
References giveq to pur-
had the above in use for
Alexandeb, & Co.
vv »«. 1> •’*<*. R “- W ' »• Launcestan March 8,18 i“
3 o’clock’ lV?’’]!. Vfi.HE DEPOSITOHY of the RELIGI-
wS » ° ’ y 1 DOS TRACT SOCIETY’S publica,
A collectibu will he made, after each lion is now removed to Mrs. Powell'S Mil-
service, in aid of the building fund of Nie liner, Charies-street, Launceston,
above-named plttee of worship. March 5, 1842.
WANTED, a free man to COOK for
and wait on a single gentleman.
Apply at the stores of
Eddie tc Co.
March 9, 1842.
AN TED a working OVERSEER .
V? two Ploughmen. Also a Nursery-
laid, apply ,ta
Glen Esk, March 7.


Tasmanian fire, life, ma-
RlNE„nnd ASSURANCE OFFICE.
James Ravki s; Agent.
Union Wharf.
Fire Engine always ready on application
at the yard.'
ON the arrival of the Indian, daily ex-
pected, Parkins, Benujett, &. Co. will
he enabled to introduce to the notice of the
ladies of Launceston aa<l its vicinity a most
magnificent display of British and Foreign
GEORGE BEST most respectfully in-
forms his friends and the public that he
■has now on sale a few brilliant Pier Glasses
in Gold .Frames, swing Dressing Glasses,
Mahogany Trafalgar and Drawing-room'
Chairs, easy and spring-stuffed Sofas, in
fancy and plain haircloth, goose-feather
Beds, hair and .wool Mattresses, Shower-
baths, Portable Water-closets, &c.
Furniture Warehouse, St. John- )
street, March 10,1812. V,
Manufacture; no expense has been spared |
to procure tlie latest designs in every fashion- . „
able article adapted for the season.: full par- ‘f* a
ticulars of which will appear in a few days. Af
March 12, 1842.
| MACQUEEN, Wcllington-
S.y street, has received by" late arrivals
. Superfine blue and black cloth trowsers,
jackets, and waistcoats
Moleskin trowsers and jackets
Buckskin and doeskin trowsers
-White drill and cantoon,ditto
Silk, valeutia,and gambroon waistcoats
Black silk, bandana, and, cotton hand-
kerchiefs .
Bleached and unbleached calico shirt-
ing and sheeting
Mouselm de laiue, priM and gingham
dresses
Worsted, cotton, and- India rubber
braces'
Flannels, bpdticks, blankets.
Irish linen, diaper, and huckaback :
Lamb’s-wool, wdVsted. and cotton‘hose
and half hose, in great variety
Worsted shirts and flannel drawers
Superior white shirts, with lawn fronts,
linen collars and wrists
Regatta and striped shirts
Black hgts,‘broad and narrow brimmed
Boys’ and men’s black and blue cloth
Tapes, pins, needles,
Silver, steel, and brass thimbles
rfJO BRESSM EN,—Wanted a steady
Jl good Pressman, to whom liberal tbages
will be given. Apply at the office of the,
Launceston Examiner.
March 11.
WANTED TO BORROW, for four or
seven years, £OOO, on mortgage at 10
per cent., for which ample security will bp
given; Apply at the office of the Examiner.
March 11.
W ANTED a NURSE 5 reference as to
.character will bo required. "Apply
to Mi?. Lcgge, at Mr. Jeuniug’s, Launces-
POUK. —One. hundred barrels, of prime
Irish Mess Pork for sale. Apply to
Sydney Place, March 9.
Barrett’s square fig tobacco . TIDETABLE.
Snuffs, and a general assortment of Satori>ay . . 238 (Tuesday . 483
groceries Suhoay .. ‘.'!'’. 32» We6nesoav .. tf,3B
Best powder and snot. Monday ’4 8 Thuusoay ..-..-0 23
March 0,1842. ' Friday ....... 7 -8 •
'Alii* Vnfuis. with. Slack, and Forest. Farms Saturday, hfncch 12, 1842
Cattle Farms, ■with Stock, and Forest Fun/
for Cultivation, to be Let by the Van Du
men's Land Company. .
mil E COMPANY propose to Let CAT-
8. TLE FARMS at the Surry Hills, on
the following terms
Each farm to consist of not less than one
square mile; which may be selected out of
50,000 acres. With each farm will be let
S“eS' V to B be iSI for m of
equal’value at the end of four years.
The rent for the laud and stock included
will be 2s. per acre, and tlie tenant will
have the right to lay out the. first time
, TlEm'ußtty"onf>n llio main land of
Circular Head, the Company propose to let
Forest Farms' of .80 acres and upwards,
SHIP MAILS. ? n
To LONDON, per Tar, on Tuesday, 15th in»t.; I s
Lady Emma, on Tlmr»da>, I7th Inst.; Nonnuhul,
ditto; Emu, on or about 19th inst., Agoiliaa, on dtj
° r To' sVDfV EY!' per Cscdiy, x.n Monday. I ith
inst.: Ta/nar, on Tuesday, 15tU. inst.; T/w-iat
ijrfuu; on or ifboiit 19th inst.
To MAURITIUS, per Phantim, -on Tuesday* na
15th instant, dr
Communications for the Editor, orders foP
the paper afld advertisements, to be ad-
dressed or left at the Launceston -Exam!-/
ner office, Drisbanc-streel.
Terms.—Subscription, if paid in ad Or Ace,
•'sixpence each number; credit, ten shillings
per quarter.
Advertisements, 12 lines or wider, 3s. fid.;
mid three-pence for every line above twelve.
BIRTH.—O.v Sunday moraine, the otl.in.Unt,
the lady of the late Thomas Williams, Esq., of a.
adapted for cultivation, at Ss. peracre, and Ti
and giving the tenant the same right to lay
out the first three years’ rent in fencing.
To every' tenant will he insured the right A.
to purchase Ma farm, at the end of seven
•years, or.-so soon after As the Company are
empowered by their charter to sell, at.the
fixed price of £9 per acre, and along credit Ti
will he given’tor the purchase money, at C
of forest farms not wishing to
avail themselves of the right to purchase,
will, at tlie end of their seven years’ lease,
he. paid for their improvements at the rate
of £4 per acre, for every acre which they •
have cultivated, and, so fur cleared as not to
have left more than ten stumps and trees
per acre standing.
On the Peninsula of Circular Head a few
eighty acre section? will he'let on a clearing
lease; rent free, tor seven yeara/but without
the right to purchase, and at the end of the
lease the Company will pay the tenant a
bonus, of £2 per acre, tor every mere of
land entirely dcared end cultivated; (tbe-
ing incumbent on the tenont to clear at least
7a every lease will l>e introduced such
stipulations os are necessary to prevent tile
establishment of public booses, to secure to
tenants right of road and drainage; and the
use of the Company’s wharfs, to enable the
Company to open and close roads, ensuring
compensation to tenants prejudiced by their
•formation; to reserve to; the Company the
use of indigenous timber, end for making the
Colonial Fencing Act applicable to the ad-
joining tenants. .
Mechanics and other personsnot requiring
forms will obtain town allotments at the rate
of 10s. per quarter acre,’ with the right of
purchasing the fee simple for the sum of
£lO.
Parties wishing to inspect, the district ad-
vertised, trill meet with event facility and
information, by appfyingno Messrs. Henty
,<t Co., Launceston.
(Signed) James Gidsok.
Circular Head,
March- 11, 1812.
The first edition is published in time for the
country post, which leaves at twelve o'clock,
and a second edition: containing the news
by the day's post, is distributed in the town
and neighbourhood, by 6 p. m., and for-
warded to Patterson's Plains, White
, Hills, Springs, Perth, and Norfolk Plains,
•in the course of the same evening. Ad-
Fnidai/ evening for the country edition,
and till twelve o'clock on Saturday for
the town edition.
LAUNCESTON EXAMINER,
Saturday, March 12, 1312.
The barque Richard Webb, arrived at
Hobart Town frpra. Dublin 13th November,
brings the pleasing intelligence of the birth
of a Prince of Wales on the 9th. Her
Majesty and royal offspring were in excel-
lent health.
In' proposing the establishtaeht of another
journal in Van Diemen's Land it may be
proper to state its principles and delineate'
its plan ; more than this would be superflu-
ous : to apologise would be mere affectation;
we expect—we ask'fib favour, unless our
exertions tb instruct and please appear to
A strong and general impression exists
that the multifarious. interests, increased
population, and advancing influence of
this town aud neighboijrhooa,' tlemufid the
establishment of an additional newspaper:
having aspired to fill toe acknowledge- 1 1-
XAUBTCESTON EXAMINER.
ON SALE, Ipr the ciuicy, we are resolved to mainlamOur po-
chimney pieces sition with spirit and resolution to win the
Force pumps, 2S aiid 3 inch . confidence a new undertaking can Hardly
«*f, be expected to command; m£Whili look-
House wateTclorets” P>l,eB ’ I ** *° - the public as our ojtfy patron,-to re-
Large assortment of Memel and Christiana cognise It as our only Jndge,
deals of all sizes. The legitimate province of the press has
It. I)k.Little. long been settled and defined, topi notwith-
Marpb 11, 1842. standing its occasional perversion, its iin-
cuncy, we are resolved to maintain Cur po- political - enfranchisement. Unless- then
sition with spirit uud resolution, to win the thecolonists, claim their rights with prompt
confidence a new undertaking ran Hardly titude and decision, .they look for them-in
be expected to command, afld, while look- vain ; a long period of legislative vis-
ing to the ,public as our ojlfy patron, -to re- saiage will punish Ytfci absurd indifference
cognise it as our only Judge.. to - the only sure p, election against, every'
The legitimate province of the press has species of, oppression a government
long been settled and defined, and notwi'th- recogijising ,the rights, and requiring .An
standing its occasional perversion, its im- concurrence of the people. Thus it belong*
mense pobhc utility is fully perceived and to the- coloipal journalist to awaken Ins
admitted. Stronger than charters and laws countrymen from political slumber; to
Tor the protection of the people, it has raised direiA therr energies, and to their.’
a tribunal, before which the best of rulers efforts to. obtain a representation in the
How, and the worst of despots tremble, councils of the. state; to assert their righto
With telegraphic rapidity it announces the and to describe and enforce their duties as
approach of political danger, and preserves citizens.
the sogiol edifice from injuries, which could 1“ a country : like this a newspaper Ue-
not be averted by arms. Keen to discover voted'to the ambition of a‘sect, or the
olid prompt to tell obnoxious truth; its cob interests of a caste, is a positive nuisance,
fecthte voice cannot be restrained by terror. Here vested rights, as they am restitute of
or stifled by corruption. Representatives all recommendation of utility; are devoid
may be intimidatcd-or bribed, and the forms of the sanctions of antiquity. To advance
of freedom may survive it* principles, but °» e claa9 of the body politic at the expense
si>. long as the. press exists tlie spirit of another, whether agricultural or com- .
liberty can never perish j ifo summons will nwcial, or to establish sectarian ddmina-
aruuse the people to defend their rights ..tkai,- wouhl-.b® us. pernicious as-Sve trust it
when they are invaded—to recover them ;ts .impracticable. ■ /Vliile Europe is groon-
whgn they are lost. The press .has other in g ««der tlie fetters that restrict her coiur
important functions to perform’, AH the merce, and is eager to extirpate the frag
complicated Concerns of man, his - wide- meats of feudalism which linger .about the
spreading relationships, his intellectual .soohd fabric, are we to see the mouldi-ring ,
acbievments, his commercial enterprise, bis , ru ? n s new chiselled and set in the framework
duties, ln»' wants, his sorrows—all these Australasian society ?or can it be ima*’
Combine to form the field from whence the those who have sought in distant
diligent journalist may gather instruction, colonies unincumbered and perfect political
-anil give importance, variety,.and interest commercial and religious liberty, will «n-
-tb his Ipbfiurs. * dare, even the Shadow of ecele.sjastkal
Tfyt ■ newspaper may be a curse; it.mav “ u P rt ‘“ ac y ® r - comnjercisfl reslrictldn ?. No!
disturb and disfigure the operations of that U . ie S* 4 ™, truths arc Widening their domi-
'mighty agency to which it belongs, and tar- «« the minds of men. which will
nish the triumphs of^the press. A news- “'lately effect more m the cause pf jqs-
paper may jie tne organ of .vice and the in- tlce, ( rei} f o ?* a .° ( ' co ™ l » <irc c than ten
strument, of prejadice, a mere channel-to exclusive laws, t/uti every man has u
ignorant vituperation, a dagger pointed, foUftffht to do and to entity.afl that dyes
feady for evcrV assassiri of pvfvatc rcimta- lUvad f l, t e Hal ri 9 Ut . °/ hu
turn, who is malignant enough to employ it. & ?“ r ’ and f‘ a / an execuUve government
and ha? cash enough .to pay for.it. Yet it S i °'? d rar be * ec, ‘ **“ '* the adyunxf-
is not enough that a newspaper'should be tr<xttpx of justice, and the protection
innofcudus—it ought to be; useful. * A false tie P m V l * l '
•delicacy that dares not disturb tlie quiet, of AlthouoH seftsihlcthat a season of col
peculators or impostors, or shrinks froifi mercial distrust, ihd pecuniary embartasV-
correcting the errors of well-meaningOmt ment, such as-now depresses ail oksses i.i
blufldemig functionaries, may secure a jour- the colony, is unfavourably t<*'o«r success
nalist from Opposition, but be mast speedily we,do .not despond: because wc belici.
drivel into contempt mid - drop ihtooblivion, notwithstandin j £he pressurt; is severe, j.
Private character, rnqy he safely left, to wiH-flot be lasting. Nor is it oiirusuaV foe
the censorship of private opinion ;. the press great commercial activity to be succeeded
is degraded when it-pursues the-objects of by torpor; or for. excessively high prices to ’
petty revenge And personal spleen; but be followed by competition,'and an equal
’ every servant of the public is amenable to depreciation of property. Van Diomen’s
the master be serves, and m.ay be cited; Lund is not, however, solitary in its present
without injustice; to. explain his proceed- difficulties; most other countries, (and more
mgs and acknowledge his errors. There than all Great Britain.) participate the
are however limits to/interference with periodical visitation ; but the difficulties of
public men ; their fireside is sacred, and this colony are transient, while-its resources
evert their official character demands a are as vast as they arc permanent. A few
generous representation, fhe reckless im- months will ascertain the real amount of
putation ot corrupt designs—the siibstitu- mischiefsuffered—restore confidence to {?>
tion of Surmises for facts—boundless abuse merciiant—andrevivc tlmhope of the ar
for trivial mistakes—these direct sympathy culturist; the nominal decrease of p*
to the sntterec and hatred to the writer; will be compensated by their greater
and even just remonstrances are impotent,. tainty, and a-more healthy monetary syste?
where the the authors of them are con- will protect the genuine traded from Ik
ternptible: fhe chronic grumblers by whom evils.jyhich ever follow unrestricted-<afcd
all human mishries are traced to the govern- and fictitious capital., ’
ment of the dah are ultimately unnoticed. Thus wHh cheerful ffnticipatious we ■-
save where mciiV quarrel' for the love of forward to the future, and although
;. brawl: hopes were too sanguine, no one willV,
Such are our views of the maxims which, sure ua for having calculated oH the
should guide—of tlie duties which should -perity. and not on the decline, of his a<
occupy a journalist. But, in this colony conutry.
the press is the shield of the people—their
only shield, Despjte of prayers and pro- The establishmeiitof a Mechanics' Initi
tests, measures aro tnumpliantly borne in Launceston is an event which will ire'
through the council to the throne which a satisfaction to every true friend of tfo
popular assembly would strangle in a mo- tony. It is useless to hope for the
ment. Defects are charged upon the colo- presaion of pernicious armiseineniS
niil press; we partly adinil them ; hut whu temperate Imhits, among the ma,:
would not leave those aberrations to the cliames, "unless a Held of more
correcting influence ol public opinion and pleasure is upon before thenl,
advancing intelligence, rather than restrict stf! ,sc of moral otffigatioa may
a privilege which fa the. las* stronghold of many cases, eliectually festrair'
liberty, rather than leave the people de- chievous pursuits; but thosew
pendent on the personal character of their nated with them, are b|if
temporary ruler., > -n position which' his from their influence by the
tory has taught be fatal, and which better engagements ; and v.‘.
experience has siiown may be dangerous. Institute supplies.
We regard the present crisis of our colo- Ris only to be regretted th
nial history as especially momentous. The. tion of such an institoric-n
time cannot be remote when the era of 60 Ion". Surely it is not V
irresponsible rule will-terminate in the colo, bf theTslaml there is less
hies of Great Bntam; But this is‘a penal Tone than in -the south:'
colony ; in the eyes of Britain debased in- some talented gentle
its character ahd degraded in its destiny, (o meet the
and judged more fit for (he region of always •incurred
martial government than ’the privileges of ha useful •


X.AVSVCiSSXttN EXAMIKEH.
g^fip«s
iii^gfil
|g|SSSrS
3SSI-Sr
S-f^SS™ 3 " sliisgf 3| '^gSrSg
lES5;:—e


■L A.UNCJ3ST ON EXAMINER
Adam Guttendge was fined £l, for in- Griffiths; 41 bag* flour, J. Raven ; 148 hags oats, 1841, Louisa, of London, 42 months om, with MOO
citing persons'to resist the constables jn the 34 ditto onions, H cases kangaroo skins, 28 bags barrels sperm oil. September®, 1841, Bristotve,
execution of their duty. bartey, R. L. Orr, of London, 38 months out, with 900 barrels of
John Brown was fined 10s, for using ob- , " —Per brig I DARE, 297 tons, Adair, sperm oil.
„^s^.sts3«sr
ously entering the shop of James iMillcr, of ditto! W. Hill • 6 ditto, F Palmer • 1 case writings, seamen in the brig Alfred, to the South Sea
and stealing therefrom four B.„k of Au"nal« a Mm*: the Count™ qf WiUcm, the Albatrou. the
show glasses, contaluing sweet-meats; re- March 11.—Per schooner WILL WATCH, and/xidvCfarkf to India and Eng-
manded. ,63 tons. Harding, for Portland Hay. 16,000 feet '““j *f e Margaret, or the Cape of
John Jones, ticket-oi-leave was charged
with being on Mr. Solomon's premises for
an unlawful puipose, and assaulting Wtn.
Sweet; sentenced twelve months in chains
and deprived of his ticket-of-leave.
' Charles Watson was fined £2O and costs
for sly grog selling.
A second information against Watson for
a similar offence was withdrawn.
William Witberell was fined £3 and costs,
for allowing his dog to be at large, it having
bit a man severely.
Duncan M‘Caig was also fined ?os., for
allowing his dog to be at large.
John Green appeared to answer the com-
plaint of bis hired servant, Henry Smith,
for not paying him wages due to him; he
was ordered to pay them.
Mary Saunders aud Eliza Inal I were
bound over to keep the peace towards each
other for twelve months.
Nine drunk persons this
Two seamen of the Cecilia were charged
by the duel officer of that vessel with re-
fusing to work; reprimanded and returned
to the strip.
William Witlterell was bound over to
keep the peace to wards, John Buttress, for
threatening to assault him.
Henry Meyers^was-also bound to the
peace, tor threatening William jDfr.
John Williams, tjcket-of-leave, was sent
four days to the trea'dwheel, for not report-
ing himself on coming to LanndesCon
Patrick Sanders was also sent theye four
days, for being drunk.
Thursday, March 10.
Only three drunkards this morning, and
no other case of importance.
Friday, March 1L
Three persons charged with being drunk
and disorderly.
Thomas Love, a ticket-of-leave man,
was charged with representing hhnseif to
be free, and having a silver watch in'his
possession which he could not account for;
remanded.
Johanna'Castles’was fined £2 and costs,
for allowing a female prisoner to be tippling
An information against John C'rosaing-
ham, for inducing a temale assigned servant
to remain absent, was dismissed, the in-
former failing to prove bis case,
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
LAUNCESTON.
■O3 tons, Harding, for Portland Bay. 16,000 feet
timber, 1200 palings. 18 packages furniture, 1 tent,
2 barrets fruit. 1 sofa, 2 bedsteads, 1 table, I bun-
O. ilaridge ; 80 bag* flour, J. Griffiths ; 1000
palings, H. White; 6 casks fruit, L. Roberts; 4
cases 2 barrels fruit, A. Cottrell; 4 bags onions,
J. Harding ; 3 ditto nails, Capt. Saunders; 5 pkgs.
2 bags luggage, Burton
AfarcA 11.—Per schooner SIR JOHN FRANK-
LIN, 52 tons, Jenkins, for Port Phillip. 1 cask
lines. J. Plexman\ 10 bags flour, J. Griffiths;
M,OOO feet timber; 4000 palings. J. Guillain ; 23
hhds. porter, Button A- Co.; 7 kegs tobacco, R.
L. Orr: 1 bale slops, I bag onions, D. Sc S. Ben-
jamins ; 100 boxes soap, 89 pkgs. oilman’s stores,
3 ditto mnslin, 40 kegs nails, Eddie & Co.; 4 cases
J cask fruit, H. James.
VESSELS IN HARBOUR.
Ship Agostina, loading for London.
Barque Sormuhul, ditto
Emu, ditto
Lady Emn.a, ditto
Cecilia, loading for Sydney.
Brig / Dare, ditto/or London.
—-- Fox, refitting.
—— Phantom, loading for Mauritius.
Henry, ditto Port Phillip.
Schooner Tumor, loading for Sydney.
— Thomas Crisp, ditto
Joseph Cripps, laid up.
Steamer Gipsy.
Corsair , loading for Port PhiUip.
HOBART TOWN.
March 2.—Scboouci Flying Souirrel, from Port
Phillip.
March 3.—Cutter Shamrock, from Port Phillip
with sheep.
March 4. —Barque Richard Webb, 400 tons.
M'Lachlau, master, from Dublin sth November,
with 199 niafr prisoners. Passenger*— Dr. Rogers,
:.nd 6'children; 5 free settlers, and 6
burn?'master, from o, port Phlffip tat Marehf'wilh
300 sheep ; Morrison, Agent.
Douglas, master, from Sydney 271 h February;
Cartm sundries. Cabin passengers—Mr. A Young,
Mr, . W. Livingstone, Lieutenant R.ivvlstone.
Steearge—J. King, Armley, J. Dowling,
40 male and 1 female convicts, 20 rank and file of
the 28th and 51st regiment; .
March 4.—Barque Franca, 2!6 tons, Campbell,
master, whaling.
March 7.—Barque Adeline, whaling.
March 7.—Barque Lord Sydnwulh, 190 ton*,
,Payne, master, for London, with ncndiips.
March 7.—Cutter Shamrock, for Port Phillip,
with sundries.
March B.—H. M; ship Bcbgle, 0 guns, J. L.
March 7 -Schooner Ttomas CdUp 175 tons- ’ March “-Cutter “w o 7lr, for" Port'Phillip,
Beard, master,from Manilla; Eddie A Co., Agents, with sundries.
3.602 bags sugar, J 56 ditto coffee, 31 cases cigars: March B.—H. M’ ship Beagle, C <un,s J L
4 ditto hats, Williams Sc Co.; 883 bags sugar. 100 Stokes, commander, on a cruise. °
boxes tea, 3 cases japajmed goods, A. B. Smith
and Co., of Sydney. .
Mflrch T.—Sehooner Edward, CO tons. Jacobs. MISCELLANEOUS,
master,-from. Crcular Head; Henty and Co., , ,
Agents. 43 hales wool, 6 hides, Henlv & Co. Arrivals ut Algoa Bay.— Nov. 14. Juno, British
Passengers—A.M. Milligan, Esn.,Mrs. Rowlands, steamer, A Spiers, from London June 24, to
John Elmer, Ellaa Elmer. Michael Allan, Alex. Sydney. Cargo sundries. Passengers—Messrs.
Miller. Stpehen Knnppcr, James Hewitt, Matthew Clark and-(S) Levy. Ha* been towed in for
Monaghan, Mr*. Monaghan and four children supplies by tho schooner Susannah Cbllings, hav-
Thocias Lewis, William Tegg, William Pelot. ’ iu g her rudder, paddle boxes, &c.
March o.—Steamer Corsair, 186 tons, Bell, mas- Vessel Foundered off the Cape. —From the St.
ter, from Port Phillip; J. Raven, agent. 600 Helena Shipping List of September 26 we extract
sheep, J. Archer; 4 case* merchandise, Perkins the following “ Captain Armstrong, of the
and C» Passenger*—Miss Julia Oavon, Mr. barque Windermere, reports, that an the 28lh
J. S. HUl,MissHill, Miss Alexander, Mr. J. P August, while offthe Cape, he experienced avery
Alexander, Mr. G. Alexander, John Crawford, * €Vere £ ;ilo > durin 8 wb lch he saw a vessel, appsr-
Robcrt Symmonds, Richard Foley, William Greie, en,, y English, and from 400 to 500 tons, go down
wife and child, James Smith, wife and child, James ' vitlrin a s ' lot distance from him, but without being
Smith, Jun., Georae Bryce, Mrs. Bryce, Stephen ?blc to render her any assistance, owing to the
Adams. Margaret Holland, James Waden. heavy sea running.” The Windermere arrived at
’ St. Helena on the 10th September.
departu nrs . Lord Howe’s Island.— The following vessels have
Mm* 11.—Brig I Bar,, OTT tom,.id»ir, for' •PS« 4 ;“ fTVW ;
LouUon; Henty end Oo„ i„n„. Pa,m„~ ' ? J ft .T"? .
Harding, for Poetl.nd llav iG. Fi.her. “? ft"'!; ", t 1”"" "i‘ eJ J “* ’'l, •”*
Grieve and ehlU.Henryß.nlon. 2S, emvri September 28, IWI. rel’re.hcd, end
March 11.—Schooner Sir John Franklin no sailed t 0 the northward the same night, clean ship,
tons, Jcnkhui, for Port Phillip, J. H. cSpbclU S^roScmL^
agent. Passengers—John Almond, J. Howarth. rlved here December 2,1841, ten days from Syd-
John Silver, W. Swingler. ’ ney.eleM ship, wded the same day. January 0,
March 0- Schooner Dusty Miller, 00 tons, San- 184l 84i ’, tr,e , S “'! th . Conipany a barque
dors, muster, for Sydney ;J. Guillsn, agent. Pas- ?“' aA an( t James Wake mg, n'»»ler,
tenger.-Me, end Mre? Died,..on, mT S-d.re,
' ‘ '' what they wanted, and left for Adelaide, South
MU' imports She reports having spukeilfthe following whalers
at sea,—October (i, 1811, Proteus, of!Sydney, Fow-
-1 esselt reported outwards during Ih&eek. i 0 mon ti, B out, 850 barrels sperm "oil. Oclobci
March O.- Pir schooner DUSTY MILLER* 19, 1841, William the Fourth, of Hobart Town,
!I0 tons, Sanders, master, for Sydney. 350 bag. 10 months out, 170 barrels sperm oH. February
wheat, 60 bags oats, 130 bags flour, 4 tons hay, J 2, 1841, Cape. Packet, 20 barrels. September 7,
Good Hope; and the Harrington , for London,
at £t 40s. per month; stewards and cooks, from
£3 16s. to £4 per month; boatswains, £4 per
month ; second mate, £4 10s. per month ;. .tosei-
men in the Lucy Ann, whaler, from £d to £8 ad-
vance. Sperm oil is valued by the owners at £45
per ton, and whalebone at £*o per ton. The
Water witch whaler’s article* are now at Raphael’s
Shipping Office, to ship a crew to go whaling, and
to carry oil to London, whtfn the men will be paid
for their oil at the London .market price.
The trade between Sydney and New Zealand
is increasing; five vessels'Werc on the berth at
the .former place—the Supply, Margaret, Royal
Mail, Deborah, and Ann Milne For Sydney, Uid
on at New Zealand, Bee, brig, 140,Cheyne ; Kate,
62, Donning; Ariel, 104,MuiholUnd 1 Sourabaya,
Finlay; .Cercromfcie. schooner; Porlenlia, fang’;
Harriet; Martha, brig; Chelydra , Whittingham
Hsgina; W inwick; Nimrod, brig . Regia ; Sham-
rock. The Fanny, .Captain Andrews, was loading
for London.
The Emu.— The new iron steamer Emu. cow
being fitted op by Mr. Struth, waa built by Ditch-
burn, of Milwall, London, in 1841. The engine
is made by Seaward and Company, of the Canal
iKm Works, London. She arrived from X-oadon
|»r the-Standerings, in the early part of November,
and abontahe 20th the keel was laid down in Mr.
Struth’s engine yard, Sussex-street, from whose
Vprd she was floated on the 27rh instant, The
Boilers and heavy parts of the engine were put on
board thp same day. When launched her whole
draught of water was ten inches, her present
draught 17 inches, and bv the terras of the con
tract her loaded draught of water is not to exceed
30 inches. The whole w eight of the hull, indepen-
dent of the deck and other wood work, is 17 tons.
TheLnginr is 30 home power, which, with w ater
sidcrably lighter than the marine engines hitherto
constructed. This advantage has been secured by
substituting wrought for east iron in the fra ne-
work and other parts of the machinery; The fol-
lowing are the dimensions of the engine .—Cylin-
der «2 inches diameter, length of stroke 24 inches,
diameter of paddle wheels 12 feet 4 inches. The
ail, the extreme breadth of benm u’ fret, depth
front deck to keel 6J feet. She is expected to be
plying by the end of February, on the Parramatta
.River, for which trade she ho* been expressly
SECOND EDITION,
LATEST INTELLIGENCE.
Mr. Hugh Ross’ trial came on last Wednesday.
Aftei the evidence had been gone into, Mr. Mac-
davell (his eonnsel) objected to the form of the in-
formation, and also contended that the prisoner wal
not a person contemplated by tfiasfafute on which
the information was framed ; in a short time the
jury returned a verdict of not guilty. On Friday
Mr. Ross waa again arraigned for embezzlement
as Clerk of the Peace for the districts of Hobart
Town, New Norfolk, and Richmond, as being one
office ; an objection was taken by Mr. Maedowell
to the information. Judge Mmitagu agreed in
opinion with the defendant counsel, and Mr.
Ross was again acquitted.
The Gazette announce* the appointment of Mr.
riceMr.MLachlnn! 1,1 ~e Le « WaUve C '° Unci1 ’
at from 7s! Sd. to 9s. per bushel.
The maU per will close at Hobart
Bass’ Straits.—The Beagle has left two
talented young officer* behind, to commence the
survey of the Straits. His Excellency, with bis
the placed tbe_ VaiuiUarl at thefreon^
of the colonial marine can be applied is so preg-
dangerous passage.— Hobart Town
Revenue.—The us&al abstract of IhoColonial
Revenue, for the fourth quarter of 1841, is pub-
lished in the Garotte. In -comparison with the
corresponding quarter of 184 Q, there is a decrease
of revenue and ah increase of expenditure.
languidly, at £5 4s. to £6 per cheat. Sugar—No
change ; the. market quiet. Spirit*—brandy, 4s.
to 4s. 6d.; white gin in demand at 3s. Tobacco-
Rising. Good bills were still scarce; gold, 2*
percent.premium. Bank billion England at par,!
to Is. 3d. per lb.—From the Herald, 26th Feb. ’
W r ANTED—A COACHMAN, free, or
ticket-of leave. None need apply
unless he is ftrfly qualified for the duties. ‘
Apply to James Rbbertson, Brisbane-strcet
March 12, 1840. i
MAURITIPS.-Thf splendid
clipper brig-PHANTOM, A 1, Jas.
Langston, comraaader, will positively sail
for the above port-on the 17th instant. Tor
freight or passage, apply to
CoNNollt & Co., Agertis.
Match 1?, 1842.
Messenger wanted immedi-
ately at the Examiner office.
SALBS BY AUCTION.
Coptinued from first page.
At the Risk of the Purchasers at Mr.
Collins's Sale.
TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION,
By Mr. B. JVaucis,
At his Rooms, on MONDAY next, tj»e 14th
Ma-ch, at I o’clock predsghr, the under-
mentioned Furniture, unless Wrf for prior
to the r ale.
THIRTEEN handsome horse-hair.
chairs
One ditto chimney glass
One chetfonier
Bedstead and bedding ,
One set telescope dining.tables
One large oilcloth
Draft table, decanters, mattresses, blan-
One case lemou syrup, &c. : Ac.
Tebns—Under £3O, cash; above that soiai
an approved indorsed bill at three months.
TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION'
By. Mr. B. Francis,
At]bis rooms, on MONDAY, 14th March*
at one o’clock precisely—
JEN Firkinsjjrlme Irish butter
One ditto handsome dark prints
One ditto cord and fancy trowsers, aleeye ■
waif treats and jackets
Two crates crockery
Four bags walnut*
One-case herring and anchovy paste
Quantity of stationery of various de-
TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION •
By Mr. J. W. BeU,
At Mr. Cmig’s, Longford, on- WEDNES-’
DAY next, the 16th instant, in addition
to the property already advertised.
FI3EN cases very superior pale SH*EHRY
JL One case of -superfine broad cloths’-
blue, black, olive, ar.d'brown
Five cases of picklea and sauces,
landed from the Cecilia, consisting,
anchovy, salmon, and Yarmouth hek
ring paste of exquisite flavour.
The above will be sold without the leas!’’
reserve, and on the same terms as the other
property.
Rent. rf ' nt
TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCTION
By Mr. J. W. BeU,
On the premises, situpte on the Weatb**- ;
Rond, near the' Travellers’ Rest, r ‘ 1
five miles from Launceston, on ■>'
DAY next, thp 14th instant, conorl;'
at 12 o’clock,
TWO slacks oaten hay, contain'
twenty-five tons ' .
One gtnall stuck of wheat, about
bushels
One. ftfack, of
Six acres barley
Five bullocks
One bull
Two bullock carts
Three ploughs, with - a number of .
- meri* implements, household furni-
ture, and other effects.
Terms-Cash.
ADJCURNEI SALE.
TO BE SOLD BY PUBLIC AUCJCJ
By Mr. J - C. Undervra.
On the premises lately occupied by
Scott and Uther, fit the Wharf, on
N ESP AY, the 23rd jnstant, at 1
ALL the remaining
the following lighters, See,-
Sampson, Shark, Glutton,
Hercules, and Flat Iro^
Two whale boat*
c7g° ii lies
Skiff Wasp
Two long boats, &c./&c.
The lease of the premises,
expire ita December, 18a3<,
Terms—All sums under £25, ca-
£loo, threfi months; £l5O, three
months; above £2OO, fije.aad'six 1


LAUNCESTON EXAMINER.
SYDNEY. Mr. Arden; of the Gazelle, who has been sen- he is i»t authorised to draw on England ami) A public meeting hod been held at Gra-
tenced to pay a fine of £3OO to the Queen, and to advance the money to the colonists.— i hum’s Town, at which resolutions were
Dr lano —TIw. nr la. vo.- I TI He I,M ,lo " e alfe;uJ - v M much - 1 think, ami adopted censuring the despatches of tho
late transitory visit to tlds Colonv wy again.reaching England,l shall consider it nwe riEdfsoSfindffiathe he > l . <lin G:. the present frontier system; and
BrltsdVJssr e ,tb ‘
.^jsatsstfrssp;
tlrv C; f a rolun- the honor or .he oral government wIH be seriously A better-conducted and more amicable slave ly-ig, who were to be apprenticed to
ary. buttrom the address we learn that h's artectcd, and I shall regret the issue, tor the sake meeting look niece subseauentlv in eon- the colonists. A meeting was held at Cane
hM no a oStil t Un l e ? onCJCpedieUCy, -f I I °‘ H , et ‘\ laj69t / S Superintendent, whose every nec tionViih thV ngVicuLral and borticul- Town on ipd December m tender the thanL
itis oulySdcdto those tfV*Xiln£ l ° tural 8,10 w ’ 0f «S»e the gentlemen lauded of the colonists to the Admiral for this <m-
“ hoTd ff?S” Si°S'S OP \ Dlon , U,eadvancementof,he P rovince - their country, and a happy unanimity on porfuuc supply of labor, and to devise tL
from the address mnv be cm! ?d2r . extract New Town.—The moral character of the in- this point prevailed from the Governor means of reimbursing the expense of trou*-
orehond W s “ 7 b J? cons ‘ der L ed habitants of this has sadly changed since the pane- downward. port ho had incurred. The Zuld Afrikaan.
10-ic we exJ«ll alu ?% ° a th# , 7 yric Pj* M fl. on so ! nc .‘ ew •*»!*«*soUcitor Mr. Eyre, the indefatigable bushman and of 3rd December, says-
tKEMKiiT 4 £.SS!!“!2S. U,e !&“* or explorer, hid communicated the result of We announce with much feeling of gratification
tween pi,,,,,i e , 2? , a.connexion be- a public house in this locality,, prophesied the con- another i< urncy up the Murray and Rufus, the satisfactory issue of the public meeting held
SSSIfIKS nSnaUtld IRbteS
orfoi.h.fS i l'm qS Kknvm. u"StMliM E,,„ 1.,e if A.idelUr 6t {7 »“> Se P?SM<I i. not very
willing to do so again. Ido not reoardlucli •” MornlngonltenlgETf Senudo, l.n etelS Insbly/pikmof )'the name, seemed fltvor- a,^lpSSentrf
& e„,e™ s SSSST4
“? r tjssi jtr&jzszstr*'*"** -“•
XSin d TK e,the f. lU t] * a 1- for some minutes. On reviving, he found hi. offenders from South Australia. “T*tthTtbmT£tbH meeting are due lo
simply this B ° ire d we T, |fv q re?elv" ker f “ pock f', S ! ! iul , L ' e l en §carchet1 ' a "'J his hat *«>e J *»- Our private advices report tin; sute of ,R*ar Admim! Sir Edward Donford KU,g, for iii»
suDotirf l!n Th,.J i , y A S 3t , ate tuuately hahad no money ou his person. Herald. trade t 0 bo anything but promising. A favorable consideration of the want «f Mm
tiiat suoportshaU be Extended’tJalT Mechanics’ Institution.-We observe that notice of the markets will be found in another throughout thU colony, and for sending a pertm
pract ' c<:and example, the moestrous street, is advancing with rapidity! We’harc uot was proposed by Mr. Ross, who took occasion to
therP^r/ L I| a l re, s lon ? arft . alik( > a, * d y pi beou informed if the proposed junction and CAPE OF GOOD HOPE. obs «vo, that Admiral King being without any
r ’ “I, of sup- „,i C of these premises with the Debuting Society par icular order as to any transmission «1 iKwrom
?vlLts 0m * tbe b,ate - The .Doctor’s have been finally arranged.-/6W. The Labour Question is agitated at the M LJ tluS u .^. o°y;,^ff?ulonly 0 ° y ;,^ff? ul only that , U>o ""
exertions to promote the prosperity of Cape, at publid meetings and m thc -news- “ : g rf al Uj
===== ff^r , ;., 1 .,,. re .hXvcra,r l £Ge„rg e ttZS'
C* f 4 4fh SOUTH AUSTHALIA.
SLSt?* m emigratum—id,e introduction the subject. His Excellency’s views and this place of 148 negroes, captured from dm shver
„ST d erection We have papers to the 18th of February- statements are said to be at variance equally Amu, at ids own expense, without iiaving any
ilnPa.s.fki: i ' vorB “ , P and school rooms—and In the Governor’s 'minute to the Council it with facts mid his expressed opinion twelve- guarantee or pledge ot repayment,
tue establishment of a college; and we hope appears that the receipts for 1841 amounted months before. The following is from the We notice that. Captain Fewson. lam
intenril'd s*",? 6 *, 'f*'™*’ the to £02,854. Is. 2d., and the expenditure to Graham'* Town Journal:- the Hartley, proposes to procure free labor-
intended sphere of his future labours. £93.207.95. Bd. In reference to the receipu, WAI3Fg OF T arorprs ers from Singapore at the rule of £lO ahead
Yesterhay's Government Gazette contains fj 36 ' 813, 3d ‘ .°. u! - v been raised from , () . gucls f ßCtorv to the people of this P a, ? n ß a money, He has lately been sup-
tln-ee ve«y important notice* relative to the changes tk e * ev en«e. or the sale of laud in the Co- j !t l lnformed* ofSheexact quarter P l y i “h' thc planters at the Mauritius with
m the land regulations, authorized by-the des- ,ouy - The glance was capital imported to „.y r ? 1 TLrived dwt In ia “ or ftom the eumo source,
patches recently received from England/ Two of de £ a > various miscellaneous expenses. formaUon on the subject' of labor, which could Tlie wine farmers were complaining bit-
these notices relate- to More-tor. Bay , the first be- . JRE financial affairs of the Colony were bavo warrailtC( i the statements made by him there- terly of the ruinous rates at which their
mg a proclamation notifying that Moreton Bay '« » deplorable condition, und a meeting : (in t() tll e colonial minister. The statements are Produce was sold. They had held a meel-
-25?."® i 0"F r “ P® nai sfifdement, und that all had been held to take the circumstances of: the more remarkable as-, they are so directly at mg at Stell nbosch to discuss measures thr.:,
settlors and other free persons ore at liberty to the colony into consideration. Thisassem- variance, not oulv with the opinions of men at all would give relief to those iuterestud H
a * t ? aD /® tfcer hly of the South Australians whs charac- i conversant with the subject, but with those of Hi* was anticipated that much ml van luge w.mld
r UCC infi i' r ?' s teri2ed b y nOHy declamation and disgrace- I Excellency himself as distinctly set forth by him resuU to tie wine farmers by dlffiig !
for f*d personalities. Mr. Mann, stylwl die a year ago. The following extract from His Ex- inferior kind* of Cape Into t
in the t^n^ff d fwtLl!oJ^i?».^i <>f z H I0 o tm . ents little u Joseph” of the province, suggested cailcncy!t^ reply to the Port Elizabeth address, made the prcparn tion of wine; the nudiit-fir of
In Suw7cxt f B SS 2f SZ «!i R rC “ Cdy * h V ths wineVrSt into the mirket TAV£
notice declares that sale bv unction is tatoTe- ftdvancß * ? um of «*> d thereby re- j s PCt \r vSrlStt- 1)0 les9 and of a bettev « lia racter, while tlm
verted t<>. in all parts of thc'Colony, at a minimum store confidence. A Mr. A ichols mtrpdu- J *; c * a ude .V I" ',j; c * xVhicli' , von per’ transport of the spiritus would not bf
. tf :«e, which ran never be les» than twelve MUinge ccd htmself to tho meeting by « apologizing va(les tUe pu V ic JJ in England. I can only onerous. A deputation with a memorial tu
anuerc. We regret exceedingly that the Governor tor his want of learning, havmgheen brough i ami . u t that such delusion should exist. T trust, the Lords of the Treasury on the subject of
, has come to the'determination of not reducing th? up in a manufacturing town, and Laving however, that the generous and liberal view, wliich the wine duties, waited on His Excellency,
minimum price, at any rate, to seven shillings an emerged from a sweep a cellar, but informed have been so strongly manifested by Her Majesty’s who promised to support it with hisbest in-
Mre, although five shillings would have been suf- the audience that wdiat he lucked in colic- government towards the. colonies, ami the encou- terest, The memorial is subscribed by Un-
,/m,. P r t ‘° n x fthe / lr ' d d * nt,,to ** giate training, he had supplied by self-train- r,moment held out to emigration by the Secretary qf wards of 800 wine growers, &c.
,B . d *T cb «»«eep, l~.g can ever f ux , and a diligent perusal of the « Richts of Stale, Lord John Ruuell, will be the means of die- & •
irV“ r purcly l’ Jsloral P ur ‘ Man,” which he recommended to the meet- the prejudice, of which you complain ; and
P was held oh the ICthFehrm.rv ’ A Mr * Anthony Best said » That that nn increased f.euunty to property on the fron- PARLIAMENTARY INTELLIGENCE,
lor tl* purpose of considering ard adopting peti’ 11^rt^ t thl!^!nU 0 i O Y^^ tha, pro’mote'iu coliunction with His Honor the Lieut.- Under this head in future will be found a
ssissssrit:
“ ”’ v
- cellency, the Emigration Jionrd, end the M „„e ivUra." AmcndmenM to the addrcsl,vote enrrlej
port PHILLIP. E^STJS&SASSS
affair. We subjoin a few extracts on the remains for tho colonists to show that the latter di-ulaved bv the Conservative -virtv wl.sk!
;90 shares. on h.s op.mons, than on the rcpresentat.ons s satisflcliou in publishing the follow- of the Melbourne Ministry. Mr, P. M
meeting was held at Melbourne to ore n ‘ a<le ot the meeting. ing, from a gentleman who gives his own name as Stewart’s playful allusion to the state of
sass Ass& sit fss^dss^jsi
w f
os a lesUtnomaJ of esteem, by the the rapid expenditure in Uie early history of the the sums paid to the different servants employed .. . comoe'ieil him to nrve the
V >dcya.is of Melbourne, Australia Felix, colony sudUealy ceased at the very moment when by my firm at Cradock’s Town. WhaV thev to «
Ynrunry 28, 1842.” Mr. Orto.) has for the colony was most in need of such support, and A European overseer. .£0 5 0 per month. fronj rih( . tbo
ne time been incapacitated frufai pursuing .that bad anch expenditure ceased more gradually, A ditto fanner 315 0 ditto close of the last session the right boo. baronet had
labours b/ a *plysical affection, and or ceased a yeaj.earhcr, or a year later than it A ditto journeyman car- . described them two pictures which might adorn
Spins to England by the Jeunet, about to- if no , w t . is - * £f > Hpi/p’ : »n’r.Vrdp".mr alO f aer month that chamber. The one wa# cf a good man strug-
:, nm (j.i-t Phillm Since the lonnclalion of the colony (nvo years,) tbe A St. Helen.an gardener i io «. per montn. « jf. aifficultiev dip mhpr w» «m > n..!
Oi. 11111 ‘ local government have expanded between £400,000 Apprentices (late slaves) 01 6 per day. ffioftheExSuer'fld£ forabudee^ln
...l*c Garuens.—Our readers, more espe- and £500,000, the; South Australian Company have Washing woman ••••••012 0 per month.
■t ladies, will be glad to learn iliat his Ex- tuvested au equal amount, the colonists have im- Lingoes.. 010 oto 16s. do. baronet himself—to behold him as Chancellor
dir „;v0..•!...» nnrini and ,-xuended nnwards of a 10 on : snd As much tobacco as rcmured. 2Mbs. meat, and ‘T 1 .- l ’" oa . el o oeno'u. Jim as
fihr George GippSlus given direction that
• all be immediately proceeded with, and
mitfee for superintending the progrutsrof the
ni-aged at.tlic same ran it they are now re-
urcseutcd to his Excellency that it will be
Batman’s J
•lie walks, and that this represen-
tcmiAal of the objecttonable houses!
ilitrefpro every prospect under-
>libcu sliovve, lliiyt however willing
■ <T-cy may be to* afford relief, yet
and £500,003, the South Australian Company luve
iuvested au equal amount, the colonists have im-
ported and expended upwards of a million; and
:J! tills rapid and enormous expenditure ceased at
attaining a point of positi»ejnde|iendencc. Capi-
talists then ceased to come to our shores, and thus
an annua) expenditure of capital, to the extent
probably of half a million sterling, was suddenly
the colony its credit with the
co control, though we-must suffer for them.
It is not political movement, 5t is not external or
internal policy, that tan relieve us; it is the simple
that keeps down and depresses the energies of
IG,OOO industrious, active, and intelligent colonists
in tins famed land. Assistance is impossible, but
rMe'or‘howVar'fwsHile It
tt.c slightest use, unless it liu for lu end and aim
I the importation of capital into the colony.
tobacco as required, 2Jlbs. meat, and
1 Jibs, meal per day. •
Hottentots 12s. to 225. Od. per month.
21L(. meat, lib. meal per day, a dnffel jacket every
winter and a dram, witli a permission to keep cat-
tle on the farms.
“John Centlivrei Chase.'’
But His Excellency need not have depended
altogether on private sources of Information- 1 -!*
had official papers within reach which, had he con-
sulted them, must have led to a very different
conclusion thau that to which be lias come. We
refer to the expenditure of the Royal Engineer
Department on this frontier. In the construction
sonsof color, have, been usually employed, ami a
reference to their pay might at once have satisfied
His Excellency that labor was Jn great request,
he lias stated would ho obtained by emigrant* from
of the Exchequer struggling with difficulties, and
also to behold him fishing for a budget. But
another picture might be given to the same right
hon. gentleman ; it was that of • politician fishing
for-a majority—(and having got it on a hook, not
knowing how to land it. (Laughter.) Hi* brother-
anglers iu that house would know very’ well what
lie meant, for they were aware that it was much,
easier to get a fish ou the hook than to land it.
And, picturing the politician that be bad described,
he could not but recollect tholines of Peter Pindar
with respect to Isaac Walton trout-fishing :
God give Hie strength, thou little trout,.
(Laughter.) Ho must conclude, bis observation*
bv remarking that, in this discussion, much more
was involved than mere party interests. The
present crisis would decide the financialprosperity
and commercial greatness of their comu;on noun*
try. (Hear.)


Z.AUNC£STdH exam ms a.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer and mantle, hart., and Sir C. Clerk, bart.; Under the plan of Mr. Lewis would altogether de-
Mr. Goulbourn wore at variance on the re- Secretaries of State, Foreign Department, Viscount privethcm. Of course in a colony them
venue questions. Mr. Wakley commented Canning and Lord Claude Hamilton; Under Se- L „n •wloii.ntiin.ra
on the strange mode of keeping the public cretary of State, Colonial Department, George Wm. f me ot ul »o s. ad eaturers, specu-
accounts, by which the two financial gentle- Hope, Esq.; Under -eeretary of State, Home Jators rcstlers and wrongheaded men. Ba-
rn en who had just spoken could draw from Department, Henry Bingham Bormg, Esq , with the prospectless of every grade from tst
figures such opposite results. of^°" tro '’ » liu , h on. John paupers to spendthrifts: but the perma- vre
; The Conservatives could not be provoked fwkburn mid °the l ri..ht' imn* Honrv r,ent dependence of all new colonies—the « 1
into a discussion of the important questions Thomas Sony™' * class which enabled a plantation to be tal
(Corn Law and Sugar Duties) referred to in '' the household founded, anil afterwords to prosper—aw to
her Majesty’s speech. The silent system Lord Steward of the Household, the Earl of family men, withenerc«. industry and some co;
had been adopted, and the effect of all S.r Liverpool; Master of the Horse to the Queen, ot.
Robert Peel and his party said was, “ That the Earl of Jersey; Vice Chamberlain, Lord ? a P lta .‘- -1 he principal object Ot these men .
they would not deign to take anything into Ernest Bruce; a Lord in Waiting, Viscount ta emigrating is to make sure of an ample jo'
consideration till they were r taken into Powerscourt. competence for their children; for, as re- cel
office,*' “In which event,” says the Exa- _______ gards themselves, they suffer more hard- ret
miner, “they ptpmise as people are wont to ~ ship, privation, and discomfort, in the »ti
do when they mean to give a civil refusal, ENGLISH EXTRACTS. struggles of colonial life, than await .them P a
“*» think atoat thc matter” at home, to sav nothin* of the severing of fri
" thlnh about the matter.” a t home, to say notbiug of the severing of
MR. CORNKWALL LEWIS ON THE GOVERN' natural ties and accustomed habits. All
that to designate him truly he most be styled MB ?j£ ° ? NDRNOIEB. this, however, they are content to bear in
“ Peel’s bill Peel.” It may be said with the some (Frmthf Spectator.) order to found fortunes for their dcscend-
propriety, that Sir Robert Peel made a -Peel There are two kinds of philosophers- ants; and when this fortune might be real-
Sed iu\er Cß r^fh h e TnS SJt who examine life or nature aud Ued. the scheme of Mr. Lewis would come
uiotol«the orVhe principles from things as they into operation, to swallow np thescien-
as they are—notwithstanding Ins clever two-edged ,n ent, rc*y or in relation to other tific rent, all the value added to it by the
lessons to the agriculturists on one side, and to the «“ n g.s; second, those who look at matters progress of society, and some of the iuter-
on the other, to avoid the “ fashion
nianoiacturers on me qtner, to avoitl the “ tashion
of positive accuracy,” and the intolerance of pre-
suming oneself to be always lathe right, and all
who differ from ns in the wrong—notwithstanding
the most delicate double-dealing manifested jn
twenty passages of.his speech— <
“ Like to a man on double business bonnd— ’’ (
the landed interest may .make Itself easy os far ,
as its new Premier is concerned. Tliongb slip-
pery, the gliding scale is safe in his hands—atoll '
events for the present. I
In the House of Xords on the 30th of <
August, Lord Melbourne intimated that i
lib Ministry had tendered their resignation, t
which had been accepted. Lord John Riis- .
sell did the same in the Commons. -He .
spoke at some length, but we have room
only for a short extract. 1
I make the motion with which I i
intend to conclude, to state some considerations,in ,
saying which I shall as much as possible avoid mat-
ter* of controversy and debate, to state the im-
pressions 1 entertain with respect to late events. 1
It was our duty, as we believed, to propose the
measures which were proposed in the late parlia- ,
ment, in reference to the trade and commerce of
the country, and which we thought essential to
its interests. Upon being defeated with regard to
one of these measures, we advised her M ijesty, as
»oon as the business of the session would permit it,
to resort to a dissolution of parliament. That dis-
solution having taken place, and the new parlia-
ment having assembled on the earliest possible
opportunity,-we advised her Majesty to submit to
them the consideration of measures of the .same
nature, and to ask for the opinion of parliament in
reference t-> these matters. It has pleased the
House of Commons, by a large majority, to address
her Majesty, stating'thit her ministers did not
enjoy the confidence of parliament and of the
country. This decision li ft us no other part to
perform than that of resigning our offices. I will
not use any arguments to showrwhy we think -wo
were justified in prolonging the struggle until the
present hour. I have on former Decisions justified
the course which we pursued on those particular
occasions, and I shall be ready to justify them
again. But lam nqw only stating tlie conviction
which wc entertained. - Sir, it has been our fate
now to hold power- for a considerable number of
years. I will not say that as long as wc could use
the power as- vre believed for the benefit of the
country, it was with reluctance we continued in
office; but this I will say, that I do not think the
possession of power in this country can be accom-
carrying into effect the measures which ministers
feel essential to the welfare of the conntry. Ido
not allude now to particular measures of minor or
less importance, but to measures of greater and
zransccndant moment. With regard to such mea-
sures, wc began, hi-the commencement of Lord
Grey’s administration with the Reform Act,—we
ended by proposing measures for the freedom of
commenced, with large aud Important measures
we conclude. In pursuance of great objects we
triumphed—in the pursuance of great objects we
have been defeated. (Hear, hear.)
For the sake of future reference we copy
the names of the New Miniafry.
Leader of the without office,
the Duke of Wellington ; Lord Chancellor, Lord
Lvndhnrst; President of the Council, Lord
Wharncliffc; Lard Privy Seal, the Duke of
Buckingham; First Lord of the Treasury, Sir
Robert Peel; First Lord of the Admiralty, Earl
of Haddington; Principal Secretary of State for
the Home Department, Sir James' Graham;
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
the Earl of Aberdeen; Principal Secretary of
State for She Colonies, Lord Stanley; President
of the Board of Trade, the Earl of Ripon; Pre-
sident of the Board of Control for the Affairs of
India, Lord Ellenborr ugh ; Chancellor of the Ex-
’•hcqaei, Mr. Goidburn; Secretary at War, Sir
H. Hardinge; Treasurer of the Navy and Pay.
master of the Forces, Sir Edward If uatchbull.
NOT IN THE CABINET.
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the Earl II? Grey;
Irish Secretary, Lord Eliot; Postmaster-General,
Lord Lowther, with « peerage; Chancellor of the
Doehy of Lancaster, Lord Granville Somerset;
First Commissioner of Land Rcvenne, Lord Lin-
coln ; Vice President of the Board of Trade aud
Master of the MinfyW. E. Gladstone; Esq.; Secre-
tary to the Admiralty, the hon. Sydney Herbert;
Joint Secretaries of the Treasury, Sir T. Free -
things; second, those \vho look at matters progress of society, and some of the inter- ■
abstractedly, rarely considering a whole ~.,t on capital expended in improvements 1
subject a, it is, but ns it might be if it ex- -faying the man an option of his own ‘I
Hied alone or could snMue al! other things j-ood-yyill in tile premises. Cut nothing more. ■
? ,ts own untune, Ine former, or practi- And it does this at a time when the actual
cel philosophy, is ty far the most difficult; progress 0 f Mc iely may have placed the ;
for it requires living; observation, great descendant in the position of his originni <
sagacity to perceive tue true elements of ancestor, and drive him to emigrate also,
things and much redection-to estimate ex- jf*. „ 0 „u g ive p c fa r field of industry to
nctly their respective influences It is also M, c hiid, e n, unless he be a man with a very
the most useful, and the most enduring; small family and a very large prudence. I
for though the mere form of things are very . J '.* ' ■ ; ,
various, their real essentials are few in is the end of life; separation is i
number, and a true deduction from a sut- , ie eud of , co io n , > 6t this, so fur us
ficieujlly extensive subjeet-niatter will give opjafa ■„ concerned, no preparation is i
a lasting genera! bulb. But abstractions, na! *a fan young ebuntrv— ■■ fbe brisk ,
not having been copied from life, never re- minor panto fortwentv-oae." - Butthepro-
semble anything living; and though not pr ; et y of a peaceableend willing separation
devoid of partial and subordinate truth, the cannot be too much inculcated upon the ,
mum utility of such theories arises from the sovereign slate. We will therefore -close
attention t)iqi call to tile subject, and the „ iUI „ | l<roli |, b? M ,. jj,wis. with which
truths thev elicit in the process of being oowllnliv «orw
confuted. The Schoolmen may be in- VnlLnnton indspenuskch
sfouccd as an example of the attract kind a dojoi!iant lindcrslooti **
oi philosophere, Bacon and his followers ot tare of the advantages arising from the relation
the practical class; or, to give a particular of supremacy end dependence to the related corn-
instance of more genera! apprehension, wnnlties, it would voluntarily recognise the.leg*
Adbm Smith is an example of tL real, and
M‘Culloch of the hypothetical school. ca! arrangeroentJTsti.dy to'prepare /o/indeJLd-
The philosophy ol Mr. CorncWall Lewis once those which were still unable to stand alone;
inclines towards the abstract. There are and lt «■**> “> promote colonization fur the
many useful remarks in his Essay on the
Government of Dependencies, and some of p en dence of it* colonics beyond the time when
his conclusions embrace the extent of his they need its protection.
subject; but his larger truths are few in The practical difficqUies and inconvenicncesln-
number an,l nut very difficult to ntttiu. K° nl b '“ mi'fgrtS
whilst his lesser truth., are not pf sr. choice
or rare a kind as to require so large a of supremacy and dependence, and of the impef-
volume to hold them. feet though necessary expedient of a subordinate
• • * • government. Now if a dependency la considered
~ ... i .1 as in training for ultimate independence, the diffi-
One of hts proposals is to "• try the «jr»- euto „,turtnyi»da«i.ttolt.S.ern,Mi,t,iftkey
lem of granting the land, not in perpetuity, do not vanish, are nevertheless greatly reduced,
but only for a term of years; npon the If a dependency were so considered, the free and
understanding that, at the expiration of the
term, the land would be granted again, for asasoml/of strife wTththe g
a similar term, at the market-rate, which, of vain resistance toils power; and all precautions
would enable the local government to de-r on the part of the supreme government, for the
fray its expenses without resorting to tux.-
turn director indirect; and us the expert- „ virtually .Satm?, would te needles. If.,ls-
ment would be tned ill a country in which pendency bo disUnt, if Its territory he large and
the land had not been anpropriated, •it its population numerous, and if the powers of its
would not disturb existing interests.” Ab- aul>on ’ ! 7 at,! «?! ern ™ e,,t r « id «
stractedly s,,e.ki„g, thi, g .che„,e is plan- "to IreS
sible; it looks well upon paper; and Mill, it from forming habits and opinions which are
we think, had some such notion about rent scarcely, consistent with Us virtual dependence,
and taxes: but if any colony should be so But if such « dependency bo ngsrtoins In train-
ill-advised as to uttcLpl it.immigration to SifatSSSfa
that colony would surely cease; and if it allowed to have free play, and the interferences of
were practised throughout our colonies, the dominant conntry with the political affair.; of
British' emigration would be directed to the * h « colony may cease almost insensibly
United Stufes. The national opinion is in
| favour of a freehold : the public has never empire being so fa- modified as to permit a domi-
tried to raise loans in interminable annuities ; nant country to take such a view of its politicftl
• and the attempt at converting permanent re,a fions with its dependencies es ihst now indi-
, -“is? rT”
1 has railed, though accompanied by -what is, pendence to a dependency, by establishing in it a
. mathematically and abstractedly, a bonus, system of popular self-government, and by abstain-
' The calculated value between a lease for jng almost constantly from any interference with
r cigbty-five vaura uud a freehold i* next to sS'“rtSSrfltodomloratroohir,.nd the
nothing; but m practice, the freehold dependency as has been described in the pwced-
fetches considerably more, (or rather, the ing paragraph, scemi, however, scarcely consistent
leasehold less,) for,.ptople feel, if they can- ,he duration of the dependence of the latter
not express, that In order to revise the
mathematical value, they must ever c „J| B tances implies a* P much moderation and
conduct,thrir affairs with mathematicalcx- rationality on both sides as would be Implied on
actncss, which the constitution of human tl ' e « iJe of foo dominant country by a voluntary
mture and of .oriel, prewnU their doing. wStaSSf S U.rtTh" Sn.nt
If lli«e reason, operate mill loree in Eng- ougM u |i, ant Wit, or.r a
land, where all land is appropriated, and dependency, unless the people of the dependency
investments must be made as they offer, consent to the cession; and ere capable of forming
1,0,r much stronger be their operation
m a new country, whither men go in order a,,, possession of it >hoald promise no advantage
to realise that future improvement of which u> itself.
MISCELLANEOUS.
The Biter firr.—“ The other evening,”
says a contemporary, “ a well-known novel
ist, a mart of, great coolness* and courage,
was met by a stmrt fellow, who pulled out
a pcinard and demanded his purse. ‘ Capi-
tal !’ the other exclaimed, ‘ I was just about
to make the same demand on you; but
come, as I find have fallen in with one of
ourselves, I’ll give you a share of a- prime
job I have in baud. Come along.’ De-
ceived by this show of confindence, the
real rogue joined the counterfeit, and they
stole along together till they were met by a
patrol, into whose hands the good r natured
friend unkindly lodged his associate.”—
Galignani’s Messenger.
TXT versus XXX.—They have temper-
ance waggons in the*west of America,,
marked TXT, to denote that the owner, is a
teetotaller.
Talleyrand a Plagiarist. —Talley-
rand lias the credit of being the first who
defined speech as “ a faculty given to man
to conceal his thoughtsbut this sly recre-
ant only twisted into an apophthegm- what
Young had thrown out (nearly a hundred
years before) in very scorn, when speaking
of Courts:—
“ When Nature’s end of language is declined.
And men talk only to conceal their mind.”
Wholesale .Fratricide.—A sign-
board in Hackney contains the following
terrific announcement Ir—“ Cuin-work of
all sorts done at the shortest notice;”
A New 'rwkjonrual states that a boy,
having got his father’s muff-box, indulged
so immoderately in the titillating dust, that
he sneezed himself to pieces. His remains
having been gathered up, a coroner’s in-
quest was-held over them, when the en-
lightened jury returned a verdict of “ Snuff-
ed out,”
Going! —Go to New Haven—you can
go for a shilling. Go to Harford—you can
go for a dollar. Go to Albany—you can
go there, too, for a dollar. Go to Staten
Island—you can go there for sixpence, and
get an excursion down the bay into the
bargain; and be brought home, too, if
; only you do not go ashore. Go on the
i fisliing banks—you can go and be gone alf
day for a shilling, and be jammed half to
’ death in the crowd. Go somewhere—go
everywhere—it’s so very cheap. Pray don't
■ stay at home.— Paper.
SKETCHES OF SUPERSTITION.
The merrotc of the Irish is, as regards the mean-
ing of the term, precisely the English mermaid, •
morHieh being a compound of muir the sea, and
olgh a maid. Yet the morrows of Jreland approx-
imate more to Ole ideas cntt-rt fined by the Shet-
landers regarding the seal, than to the common
notions of meruJalda, as half human, half piscine
beings. Thapeople of the far uorih imagine the
seal to pnt off its skin every ninth night, and to
appear then in a form completely human; and llicy
further say, that fishermen have sometimes caught
females without the seal skin, and taken tfieTW
Irish of the shape of the morrow, though it
not appear that they conceive itto be transfoiipcd
but merely to be a being in a human shape, capa-
ble of living in the deep; only so, however,when
in possession of a cohuleen dnulh, or little enchan-
ted diving cap. Mr. Croker gives an entertaining
little legend, illustrative of this subject, which we
shall repeat, slightly abridged, for the amusement
Dick Fitzgerald was sitting one morning by the;
side of the s?a, smoking Ifis pipe, quite IpnoiCme,,
and thinking to himself that a man without a wifi*
was, after all, like a bottle without a drop ofdriali
in it, or the left leg of a pair of scissors, or any-
thing not complete; when lo I he saw a beautiful
young creature, combing ber long sea-green hair,
upon the occan.sands. Beside her lay allttiucap,
the cohuleen dnuth. Dick knew what was what,
and seized the cap, knowing lh..t he was then su;/-
shed!*’ Dick' but as'sh-Tirr^
the more, he-thought she did not comprelitud h»
and tried the universal language, which all woitu
fish or no fish, understand. He took and squer
her hand, which was a very pretty hahd,jti
little webhijd between the fingers. The me?
was wonderfully pacified, and ceased whini#
once. But she had yet doubts. “Man,” pj:
she, looking up in Dick\ ftica, “ tj
a fish put that in your, bead#- “ Man,” said
merrow again, “ what will you do with me, if
won't eat me?” The iicat way'she Tailed
<■ man,” settled the matter entirely..-; ' -
| turned he, trying to -speak short IpK.*, -
here's my word tor you, tins bWsad mpni,
I'll make von Mm. Fitzgerald 'elore a the. ■
« Nevct sav the word twice,” sridffiem?
up'myh'air. ” 1 'so pu t My^rder


LAUNCESTON EXAMINER.
w*> .11 right, ...ha knew .ha »■«. itaaw from Amelia.. The price, .re a. fallaiv .-Wheel. A!.« nr, the ..me date tender, will" be received
strangers, and then she was ready. But first she per bushel, Bs.; flour, fine, 20s.—-seconds, IBs. at Launceston, addressed to the Deputy Assistant
stooped down, and whispered some words close to per cwt.. English barley, fis.; Cape ditto, Ss.; Commissary General Priaulx, for 10,000 bushels
JSWJ rt‘ ng ", oats, ss. fid.; maize, 65.; hay, £5 per ton; straw, of wheat of the above-mentioned quality, *t per
r*^., Wa!^R. b , r '‘ ak ,^. t , l for £3; potatoes, Bs.; Port Arthur coal, per ton, 20s. 100 pounds. H J, v
delivered; she oak, 145.? gum, 10s.— Murray’s Persons desirous of tendering are particularly
<Wh»rr k § nhirm- V «l tob ?*°w A kings Itevuw. requested to observe, that bonds will be required
jaS!"; V 1 “Ot'ungelse but a mad. man. Return of Grain and Flour exported from the for the due fulfilment of their contracts Iramedl-
tho tn.fh 11 .♦“** kTj t ®* peak p? rtof Hobart Town, during the week ending Ist ately after, they shall heve had notification of their
the truth, I have nothing but a straw bed at home. March, 1842, inolusive-Flour, 250 barrels; ditto, offers being accepted.
with vonT"*' *\V n5 ’ „ _ , „ . The tenders must specify the price ill words at
\?’V p”. ’ m Return of Gram and Flour imported at the port length, raid be signed by the person willing to
tefn J^ U » ge v d V ofH » bart Town > during Ihe week ended 26 th enter into a bond with the party tendering for the
etZZZnZusl, February, 1842, inclusive-*,7. completion of this offer; the penalty in which
« I th be proportionate to the magnitude of the
Sv * fPU ’ h a " d * Upper 90 SYDNEY. contract, and will be strictly enforced against
,TV I, . a-.,. .. Pork, 60s. per barrel; ham*, Td. per lb.; hyson those who fail in their engagements.
“ a * e Tf l [ , , bcd went off with the skin tea, £9 to £lO per chest; sugar, £3O to £35 The wheat must be delivered into the storks
merrow to the pi lest, but his. everence demurred. per ton: tobacco 8 Jd. to lOd. per lb.; B. P. rum, between the Ist of April and the 30th June, 1842.
, 8 „ ly T,° ra -? iS 11 . 1 * *!\ arry? . P J ea!l * I Oil. ;O. P. ditto, 3s. 3d.; foreign ditto, Is. 2d. Payment to be made on the completion of the
ffllTT’a. 59 £ttL&.-2*L2»' I"'.**- > ~ «!«- »«- «•> «»-i P>v ale, contract.
“Is it a fishy woman yoo’d marry f ” “ Please
your reverence/' said Dick, in an Under lone,
“ she is as mild and as beautiful as the moon! ”
This argument had no effect; bht at last Dick
said, “ She lias ail the gold in the sea for the ask-
ing. I can make it vwrlh any one’s while to do
the job." “ Oh! that alters the case,” said the
priest, and so he at once made the merrow Mrs.
Fitzgerald. ” After this Dick and his fishy wife
lived very happily, and had one or two children;
till one day, tlie merrow fell to cleaning the house,
and fonnd her little enhuleen driuth in a corner,
Where it had been hidden. She no sooner saw it
than she was seized with a longing to visit her re-
lations. Down she went into the sea, intending
«o come back soon, but her people, seemingly,
would not let her return. A sorry man was Dick
Fitzgerald, when he came home, and heard from
his children what had happened. During his
•whole life afterwards, he still looked for her re-
turn, always blaming her father for keeping her.
** Surely (said he) she would not leave her hus-
band and children of herself." She never came
back, however, although she had been so good a
wife, that her memory is still preserved in the
country, under the title of the “ Lady of Golle-
The residue of this subject, an entertaining one,
must lie over to a future number.— iChambers’
Edinburgh Journal.
akin tea, £9 to £lO per chest;'sugar, £3O to £35
per ton : tobacco BJd. to JOd. per lb.; B. P. rum,
lOd. ; O. P. ditto, 3s. 3d.; foreign ditto, Is. 2d.
per gallon ; case gin, 12s. fid. to 145.; paly ale,
2s. fid. per gallon ; brandy, 4s. ditto ; arrack. Us,
ditto; bottled beer and ale, 11s. per dozen ; Dun-
bar’s scarce; soap, £29 to £35 per (on.
The grain market is on the rise. The millers
still exercise an influence over, the prices that is
not desirable. The price of fine flour at the. mills
was £2O *o £2l’; seconds, £l7 to £lB per ton.
Wheat may be quoted at Bs. to 10s., with the pros-
was 39,011 bushels wheat, and 12,910 maize.
PORT PHILLIP,
Dunbar’s ale, 9s. fid. to 10s. per dozen ; Irish
hotter, I*. per lb.;. coffee, Is. ditto; flour, £23 per
too ; oats, ss. to fis. fid.; Irish pork, £3 I Os. to
£4; porter, £5 per hhd.. Spirit market over-
stocked ; prices nominal. Sugar, Mauritius, £B2 ;
Manilla, £2B per ton; hyson skin tea, £l2 per
chest; tobacco, lid. to Is. 3d. per lb
THE MARKETS.
COLONIAL MARKETS.
The latest authentic information as to the state
of the markets in this and the neighbouring colo-
nies vwill be impartially furnished, and our quota-
tions ordy drawn from inch sources as can be
LAUNCESTON.
WhEat.—A slight advance in price has taken
place, although the market is not brisk; sales have
bben made at 7s. fid. to fis. a bushel during the
week. Perhaps the tenders advertised by the
government may have had an'lnflnence on the
price. Growers ought to take advantage of a
temporary rise to quit a portion at least of their
ereps.. It will be for their immediate as well as
future advantage to. meet the demand, at a remu-
nerating rate. The state of the Sydney market is
encouraging, but top miich reliance ought not to
foe jilaced on Its permanence.
It is difficult to come to a decision on the proba-
ble price of wheat in the course of the season, but
wc submit the following as we .believe to be correct
data on which an opinion may be formed. The
crops of wheat and maize ip New South Wales
have been deficient; in the southern portion of
this island the harvest has not yielded an average
return; little wheat may be expected from South
America, and less flour from the United State* ; the
addition to population by the arrival of emigrants
uud prisoners will increase the consumption, and
f the prices continue moderate the colonists of
Ytov-. Zealand will require a considerable quantity
of flonr, either from New South V ales or Van
Diemen’s Land. On the other hand, the breadth
of wheat grown last season h«s Leen greater than
formerly; the South Australians, have raised at
leait six months’supply for themselves, and the
quantity required for Port Phillip will noteqml that
of. last year, as the settlers there have also grown
a considerable quantity of grain. - We leave those
interested'to draw their own conditions and de-
cide for themselves.
Bahi.ey—English, may be quoted -at from fis.
to Ci. fid. per bushel; but wc have not heard of
any sales aia higher rate than Oi.. Cape barley,
Oats—feed, 4.1.; for seed, 4s. fid. to ss. per
Flour—first quality, £2O; second, £lffi third,
£lfi ncr 20001bs,
Return of grain and flour exported from the
port of Launceston, during the week ending 20th
,b„ 1842, inclusive—Oats, 61 bushels;.wheat,
ditto; flour, 291 tons.
Return of grain and flour imported at the
•t of Launceston, during the week ending 26ih
trnary, 1642, inclusive—Maize, 13 bushels.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Fine flour, 30s. per lOOlbs.; seconds, 255. do.;
colonial wheat, 10*. per bushel; East India ditto,
«a. ditto; oats, ss. to 5s (11. ditto; English barley,
fis. ditto; Cape, 4s. ditto; potatoes, £6 to £8 per
There was little demand for goods imported
from England. Butter, Is. per lb.; casks, 255.
Er tun; conlage, 90s. per cwt.; coffee. Is. per
; cheese, lOd. ditto; pork, £4 to £5 per bar-
rel; rice, 2d. per lb.; Mauritius stigar, £24 to
£39 pet ton ; refined ditto, 9d. per 16.; soap, £3O
to £49 per ton; hyson skin tea, £ll per chest;
rum, 2s. fid. to 4s. Od. per gallon; case gin, 10s.;
brandy, 4s. fid. te 6*. per gallon : ale, £6 to £lO
per hhd.; potter, £0 ditto; bottled, Os. to lls.
, CAPE TOWN.
Wheat, colonial, from 7s. to Bs. per bushel;
Cape wine, from 40s. to 525. per leaguer (117
Ballons). The latest quotations from England were
£l2 15s. to £l3 per pipe; and the price had con-
sequently advanced a little.
AGRICULTURE.
The important interests of agriculture will re-
ceive our constant attention. If Van Diemen’s
Lind is to be a corn growing country, and to sup-
ply the Australasian colonics when their own oro •
duce is deficient, it must be by successful competi-
tion with American and Indian growers; there esn
be no doubt that the fine quality of Van Diemen’s
Land wheal will secure it precedence, unless its
high price should induce regular importations from
other countries.
In the early stage of the colony when labour was
more costly and land less valuable,-a-lodse method
of cultivation might yield the largest immediate
profit; but now it is important that the farmer
should improve the practice of agriculture by fol-
lowing out tha principles recognised by occupiers
of the best corn districts of Great Britain; and
In tins way, by continued steady production, in-
sure s profitable return upon his capital. Exces-
sively high prices are always dangerous; the secu-
rity of the colonial farmer lies in beiug able to
keep the foreigner out of the market by a plenti-
mouerat > *' V ria K ° ?dqqua Hts"y ’ s " sood etndi * ion ’ at
Wc w ill* endeavour to obtain and famish such
information as we deem useful to farmers, and
shall always foe glad to collect and express their
THE HOBART TOWN GAZETTE.
PRINCIPAL SUPERINTENDENT’S
DEPARTMENT.
March Ist, 1812.
Notice.—The Principal Superintendent begs
to notify, that in consequence of the great de-
crease In the numbei- pf male convicts available
for assignment, and with a view of carry ingout
the instructions of. the Secretary of State, as well
as to afford a more equitable distribution of their
services, His Excellency the LieHtenant-Governor
has directed that no more men shall be assigned
to individual* who already have to the number of
fifteen convicts in their service.
The Principal Superintendent, in publishing
this for general information, begs at the same time
be absolutely necessary that 4he immbe^of'as-
signed servants which the applicant shall at that
time possess, together with the extent of his land
in cultivation, shall be stated, ami also that no at-
tention will be given to communications on the
subject unless they shall be prepaid.
•m, 4s. CJ., brandy, Ss. Od, per gallon ; case, fifteen <
■s.; sugar. Manilla, £32 per ton; Mauritius,' T be
~itto ; tea, £8 per chest; soap,' £4O ditto; this for
*cco, is. per lb.; salt, £4 per ton ; bottled beer, to state
per dozen ; Loudon porter, £4 58. to £4 10s. be absi
hhd.
HOBART TOWN.
Friday , March 4,1842.
./e are happy to find that the agriculturists and
.wheat holders in general have had the discre-
void/alllng into former errors. They have
advantage of the Sydney demand to
/ t their grain or to raise the price. We
i!ed that this is the best method of keep-
raarket, producing ns Van Diemen’s Land
Ved to do, the finest grain in the world, and
■ice which, all expeu-cs considered, b little
;at present than the cost of purchasing
COMMISSARIAT OFFICE.
Hobart Toten, Feb. 23, 1842.
Wheat.—Tenders will be received at this office
until 12 o’clock on Wednesday, the ICth of March
next, for 20,000 bushels of clean colonial wheat,
Joifn°d» d qUali,y ’ “ nd free from 6mut ’ P* r 100 ]
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Hobart, February 21, 1842.
Notice is hereby given, that I am authorised
by the Lieutenant-Governor to offer the indul-
gence of a conditional pardon to such well-con-
ducted ticket-of-leave men as will serve in the
police, as hercin-after stated, at the expiration of
their respective terms of service; viz.-
Ticket-of-leave men whose term of transporta-
tion is seven years, to serve with good conduct}
for six months.
Ditto ditto 14 years, ditto one year.
Ditto ditto life, ditto fifteen mouths.
It is however clearly to be understood, that no
pardon will be issued under these regulations
until such ticketeof-leavc men shall have been in
the colony either four, six, or eight years respec-
tively, according to their terms of transportation
being either for seven years, fourteen years, or
Men wishing to enter under these regulations
are to address their applications to the Chief Po-
lice Magistrate, and send them through the Police
Magistrate of the district in which they may re-
side.
M. FoRSTEn, Chief Police Magistrate,
Saik of Crown Lands—By public auction
on Monday, the 4th day of April next, at twelve
o’clock at noon, at the Court House,.Launceston.
/Suburbs of Longford, section A. 8., Lot 3, 10
acres,— Bounded on the north by 20 chains easterly
along Lot 4 commencing from the road from
Crcssy to Longford, on the south east by 5 cliains
37 links south-westerly along street, on the
south by 29 chains westerly along Lot 2 to the
main road aforesaid, and thence on the. north
west by 5 chains 35 links north-easterly along
that road to the point, of commencement. Unset
price £BO.
Lot 4,10 acre*.— Bounded on the north by 20
chains easterly along Lot 5 commencing from the
inain road from Longford, to Crcssy, on the south
y street, on the smith by2o
along Lot 3 to the main road aforesaid, and thence
on the north west by S chains 3T links north-
easterly along that road to the point of com-
mencement. Upset price £BO.
Lot 6, 10 acres. —Bounded on the north by 20
chains easterly along Lot 6 commencing from the
road from Cressy to Longford, on the south east
by 6 chains 37 links south-westerly along
street, ou the senth by 29 chains westerly along
Lot 4 to the main road aforesaid, and thence on
the north west by 5 chains 37 links, along that
road to the point of commencement. Upset
price £BO.
Lot 6,10 acres.—Bounded on the north by 20
chains easterly along Let 7 commencing from the
main road from Cressy to Longford, on the south
east by 6 chains 37 links south-westerly along
street, on the south, by 20 chains westerly alons
Lot 6 to the main road aforesaid, and thence on
the north west by 6 chains*? links north-easterly
Upset price £BO. P
AUDIT OFFICE
March 2, 1842.
Warranls for Contingent Expenses sent to the
Colonial Treasury for payment between the 22nd
ultimo and this date
Porter & Moodie, carpenter's work; J. Hamil-
ton, forage; K, Murray, ditto; R. Scott,jetties;
J. L. Burnett, extra work ; J. T. Waterhouse,
rope; T. Tilley, rings; J. Andrew, bells; G,
Hutton, furniture; J. Austin, mails; D. Moses,
paint: S. Lord, Lord ». Knopwood ; R. Marlow,
firewood ;F. Moore, coals; T. Pcesnell, firewood ;
J. Knight, newspapers; J. Morgan, ditto; J.
Burnip, a coffin; S. Scott, stationery,;'J.-Knight,
almanacks; John Price, to pay rewards; C. O.
Booth, ditto; G. H. Barnes, for furniture; T.
Gay, repayment; F. Burton, sawn timber;. R.
Marlow, cartage ; R. Nottley, travelling expenses;
W. B. Isles, taking census ;J. Hobbs, ditto; H.
Vicary, ditto; T. Aubin, ditto; E. Rainsford,
ditto; S. P. Tomlins, ditto ; T. Cmt'enden, ditto;
T. Bee, ditto; G. Bnd.l, ditto; R. Cleburne, can-
dles; H. Dowling,quills; J.'P Waterhouse,axes,
S. A. Tegg, stationery; *1). Hubert, ditto; W.’
Cove, stores ; R. Cleburne, ditto; J. Harrison,
Williams v. Scott; W, G. Elliston, advertising;
Priest & Darling, repairs; J. Andrews, bells; J.
COLONIAL SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
March 8, 1842.
His Excellency the Lieuienau(-Govern*.. - has
been pleased to grant a Ticket-of-Leave to IGfi,
Jane Phillips, per Gilbert Henderson, as a reward
for her good conduct in having given information
which prevented a robbery being committed in her
masters house.
Memorandum of Free Pardon has been ordered
for 265, George Griffiths, per Lord Hungerford,
until Her Majesty’s pleasure be known.
for the following persons until Her Majesty’s plea
William Carnaby, Albion
Henry Palmer, EariSt. Vincent
John Ryley, Chapman (2)
Charles Tandy, Georgiana (2)
Charles Wood, Medway
James White, Argyle.
ling to Memoranda of Conditional Pardon have been
for the ' ssue<l for the following persons until Her Mgjesty s
which pleasure be known, namely :
of the J«bn Abbott, Atlas
against Mary Brown, William Bcypn
Michael Cowan, Sonthwopfli
storks' Josiah Bearden, Lady Nugent
Josiah Dearden, Lady Nugent
James I‘lagan, Lord Melville
Thomas Greenaway, Persian
Wiliam Heath, Gilmore (1)
Jenkin Jenkins, Lord Lyndoch (2)
Charles Knight, Lord Lyndocli
James Milton, Eden
Elizabeth PuddefooY, Edward
Adam Sprovrlc, Currency Lass
Robert Salcoal, Katherine Stewart Forbes
Mary Stacey, Westmoreland
Jonathan Thompson, Lotus
James Vanstone, Eden
Edward Wheeler, Clyde
Henry Williams, Medway (2.)
Sarah Bennett, American
John Bryant, Argyle.
John Bates, William Miles
James MConkcy, Elphinstone
James Gilchrist, Sir Godfrey Webster
Thomas Gbodhsrd, Larkins
Frederick Hind', Surrey '
Thomas Ingieby, John (1)
William Jones, Manlius (1)
Michael Kifson, Bussorah Merchant
Elizabeth Law, Mermaid
Daniel Spencer, Bengal Merchant
John Stockholm, Clyde
James Taylor, Lord William Bentinck
John Warrqn, Surrey (2>
John Woodcock, Asia
John Williams, Thames
Joseph Wilkins, York (1),
John Williams, Manlius (I)
Emanuel Welsh, Katherine Stewart Forbes.
Tickets-of-leavc baVe been granted to the follow
ing convicts, viz.—
Joseph Andersott, Royal Sovereign
Henry Algworlb, Layton
James Betts, Waterloo
Thomas Blackman, Royal Sovereign
Richard Baker, Lady Nugent
Robert Collins, Mangles
James Christian, Neptune
Joseph Darlington, Neptune
Elizabeth Ferguson, Arab
John Fencourt, Neptune
Henry James Graves, Arab
William Gower, Neptune
Thomas Guest, Southwortli
Robert Green, Layton
William Charlton, Isabella
George Hayman, Frances Charlotte
Robert Isaacs, Royal Sovereign
William Johnson, Neptune
Elizabeth Kelly, Atwick
Abraham Lynham, Bard aster
John Lewis, Waterloo
William Partner, Bardaster
James A. Robinson, Marian Watson
Elizabeth Boutko, Atwick
Crispin Richardson, Mpffatt
Jerome Savary, Bardaster
James Smith, Lord William Bentinck
Charlotte Stevens, Atwick
Joseph Springay, Susan
Thomas Smart, Neptune
James Upchm, Asia (4)
William Wood, Marla
Peter Witt, Royal Sovereign
William Brewer, Mangles.
George Chandler, Lotus
James M’Cann, Moffatt
Thomas Heudy, Aurora
Robert Jarvis,.Georgians
Joseph Jeffcocb, Mangles
Mary Ann M’Laren, Nautilus
John Marriott, Susan
Cornelius Norcctt, Isabella
Adam Oyston, Edeu
John Pearce, Susan
John Roberts, Royal George
James Sullivan, Emperor Alexander
Thomas Stubbs, Arab (2)
William Swatman, Lord William Bentinck
William Stnbbr, Isabella
John Sullivan, Elphinstone
Oliver Turner, Andromeda
Isaac Thomas, Chapman
John Thomas Wildnian, Lady Nugent
William Willis, Mangles
Richard Whittaker, Asia
Edward Wilson, Recovery
Henry Cotton, Strathficldsay
William M’Henry, Lady Nugent
Michafl Lane, ditto
James Neilson, Prince Regent
Thomas Lisley, Phoenix
James Riley, Lady Nugent
Robert Taylor, Indefatigable
William Talbot, John (3)
Chark^W ood, Layton (2)
LAUNCESTON.—Printed and published
by the proprietor, James Aibknhkad,
of Cameron-street, at the Launceston
Examiner Office, Brkbane-street.
> I s
5 £
■*s L
OH y
& ix
C V
