

“ Law of Population ” Prosecutions
SELLING OBSCENE LITERATURE.
SYDNEY DAILY TELEGRAPH, APRIL 25, 1888.
H33>ss j
Jf~9 1 1
A bookseller, named Robert Bear, carrying on business at
Park-street, was proceeded against before Mr, Delohery, S.M.,
yesterday, in the Summons Division of the Central Police
Court, on a charge of selling an obscene book, entitled “ The
Law of Population.” The information was laid oy Sub-
Inspector Bell, and the evidence in support of it was solely
that of two police officers of a lower grade. The first of these
was Senior-Constable Kelly, who was the active agent in
collecting information for the prosecution. He stated that on
March 31 he bought a copy of the book in question at
defendant’s shop for a shilling. He handed the book to
Senior-Sergeant Garland, who subsequently waited upon the
defendant. The latter, when asked by the officer, did not
remember having sold the book, though he did not deny that
he might have done so. The defendant declared that if he had
sold the book he did not sell it as an obscene book. Both
Kelly and Garland said they had read portions of the book and
marked passages out, which, in their opinion, were obscene.
Garland qualified his opinion by saying that there was nothing ob-
scene in the words themselves but in the tendency of the passages,
which was decidedly obscene. Kelly declared he had seen
quite as strong statements in medical works. Both, however,
gave an unhesitating opinion that the tendency of the book
was harmful. In refutation of this evidence, two witnesses
were called, who gave an equally decided opinion to the
contrary. One of them, Mr. Ebenezer Skinner, said he had
read the book and regarded itjjyjLseful and valuable work,
calculated, if generally studied, to stop poverty and immorality.
The book was, in his opinion, scholarly, and the views it
expressed could not be intelligibly set forth in any other
language than that employed. Mr. Easton found nothing
obscene in the book, which seemed to him to be intended to
instruct people in much the same topics as medical works.
The case was postponed until next Tuesday.
OBSCENE LITERATURE.—FINE OF £5 IMPOSED.
SYDNEY DAILY TELEGRAPH, MAY 2, 1888.
At the Central Police Court yesterday, Robert Bear was
charged, on remand, under the Act 43 Vic., No. 24, Sec. 2,
with selling a certain obscene book called “The Law of
Population.” Mr. Tarleton, instructed by Mr. C. T. Richards,
appeared for the prosecution; and Mr. F. Gannon for the
defence. It appeared from the evidence for the prosecution
that Sergeant Garland and Senior-Constable Kelly went to
the defendant’s place of business in Park-street, and pur-
chased the book referred to. Both witnesses stated that they
considered it to be obscene, and, in cross-examination by Mr.
Gannon, they stated that they could not say that it was a
medical work. They admitted that there were passages in
the Bible which were not fit to be read, but they did not
consider them oleceiie, Mr. Gannon submitted that the
Bench must dismiss the charge, and having read a number of
passages from Dr. Churchill’s work, from Malthus and from
the Bible, be contended that the book in question was not
one whit more obscene than these passages. The book was a
scientific work on a medical subject, and therefore ought
not to be considered obscene. Mr. Tarleton, in reply, asked
the magistrate to consider what was the object of the book; was it
a scientific person who wrote it; was it sold for purposes of
science ; or was it bought for the purposes of learning science ?
He submitted that the book was grossly obscene and immoral.
Mr. Delohery, D.S.M., said he thought the work was obscene
and altogether opposed to chastity, and if it were to get into
the hands of young people it would not only corrupt their
morals but would seriously affect the law of population. The
Court in England had held it to be obscene in Bradlaugh’s
case, and in our Courts a similar work had been held to be
E. T. & J. Radciiffe, Printers
obscene in Skinner’s case. These were decisions which in Uh
public interest ought to be coincided with. It was absurd to
suppose that this was a medical work. He would fiat
defendant £6, with costs of court, and £3 3s. professional
costs.
ALLEGED OBSCENE BOOKS.
, An Important Decision.
EVENING NEWS, DECEMBER 14, 1888.
In Banco, this morning, before their Honors tho ehtof
Justice, Mr, Justice Windeyer, and Mr Justice Stephon,
judgment was given in-the matter ex parte William White-
house Collins. The Chief Justice delivered judgment, saying
this was an application for a prohibition to be directed to Mr.
G. W. F. Addison, S. M., in connection with the conviction
of Collins for having sold an obscene and indecent book, in re-
gard to “ The law of population.” The conviction was based
upon the Act Sec. 2, Vic. 43, No. 24. His Honor dwelt upon
the comparative nature of the book in question with the noto-
rious “ Fruits of Philosophy,” a work written by Charles
Bradlaugh and Mrs. Annie Besant, and concurred with the
decision arrived at in regard to this little work by the law
courts in England. It was impossible but that the judges
would feel repugnance at the character of the work before the
court. His Honor further dealt with the lecture delivered
a person named Walker in this city, with the results of that
lecture, and used the illustration as showing that the book in
question was one of an indecent character and calculated to
deprave the morals of the community. His Honor was aware
that he had the misfortune to differ in his view with that
held by his learned colleagues; but, notwithstanding this
fact, he felt called upon to express his opinion in clear and
unmistakeable language. He had no doubt but that his
brother Judges held as high a view of the public morals as it
was possible to hold; but the fact was that they regarded the
book from a different standpoint. His Honor was decidedly
of opinion that the rule nisi for a prohibition should be
discharged with costs.
Mr. Justice Windeyer said, in the course of a very lengthy
judgment, that it had been admitted in argument that an
abstract discussion on the laws of population was a fitting one
for the philosopher and the student of socialogy. A consider-
ation of the freedom of the people in early days was gone into
by His Honor and the advancement of morality touched upon
at some length. With the advance of thought, law had also
progressed; and it was no excuse for a person who published
an obscene or immoral book to say he thought he was doing
a public good. The book in question did not come before the
court as an obscene libel, but rather as to whether or not il
was consistent with the morals of society. His Honor ooold
not see anything in the language of the book tending to excite
the feeling to wantonness or lust, and nothing but what might
be read out with appropriateness and benefit by one person to
another of a similar sex. The time had passed when know-
ledge had to be regarded as the exclusive privilege of caste or
class. Ignorance was no more the mother of chastity than of
true religion. True morality was identical with the greatest
good for the greatest number. The degree of obscenity to
connection with this pamphlet was dependent upon ths
manner of its publication; and, after a large number of
reasons had been expounded, His Honor asserted that prosti-
tution was in itself the outcome of enforced celibacy. His
Honor did not think that the Act was intended to apply to a
work of this kind, and he agreed that all prosecutions of this
kind should be regarded as mischievous. The prohibition
should go, as he did not think the work was an obscene bode,
and was not calculated to create immorality.
Mr. Justice Stephen concurred, and the prohibition wmt
ordered to go, with costs.
292 Sussex-street, Sydney.


Dfirsm
Gan Yon Afford to Have a Large Family ?
READ THE FAMOUS
“BESANT BOOK,”
Which the Government Has Attempted in Vain to Suppress.
(FOE REPOET OP TEIALS SEE OTHEE SIDE.)
ADVOCATING REGULATING THE SIZE Op YOUR FW&V ACCORDING TO YOUR JttEANS.
CAN YOU AFFOED TO KEEP A LAEGE FAMILY ?—“ You may have a fixed income or weekly wage sufficient to enable
you to keep a family of two or three children in comfort, and to lay by a few pounds for a ‘ rainy day.’ But, divided amongst a
family of six or seven, your income would be quite inadequate to provide proper food, clothing and housing. Your means would be
swallowed up in living from day to day, and sickness or misfortune would find you unprepared and helpless. The care of a large
family exhausts the mother by unceasing and harassing toil, and frequent child-bearing undermines her health. Such are some of
the miseries attendant upon TOO LARGE FAMILIES.
“ THE LAW OF POPBLATION,"
MRS. HNNIE BESKNT,
Contains Reliable Information, and the Medical Directions are Easy, Plain, Explicit, though Chaste and Delioaid.
ppiee, Is.; op by Post, seeaPely uipapped and fpee fpom obsePYation, Is. 2d. in Stamps.
B0RNIN& FEWER BABIES!!
READ “ THE
Wife’s Handbook”
And Private Companion for Married People,
WITH HINTS ON MATTERS OF IMPORTANCE, NECESSARY TO BE KNOWN BY ALL
MARRIED AND MATURE PERSONS.
PRICE, Is.; POSTED, Is. 2d.
(( U. n AS IT WAS, AS lIT IS, AS IT SHOULD BE.
I ni l ml!n ByAHNIEBESANT - Price > ls -; Post > ls - 2d -
Hi.til A iUQVj "MARRIAGE” should be read by every woman in the world.
On receipt of payment by Money Order or Stamps these Books will be posted to any Address. Write to
Sir ROBERT BEAR, CHEAP BOOK DEPOT,
16 PARK STREET. NEAR TOWN HALL, SYDNEY.
SEE OTHER SIDE.] t SEE OTHBB SIDE
