

LAW
LECTURES
ME, JUSTICE HAEGEAYE.
VOL. I.
LECTURES I AND 11.
PRICE, TEN SHILLINGS & SIX PENCE.
Sydney:
JOHN FERGUSON, PUBLISHER.
1878.




LAW LECTURES,
&e., &c.
BY THE
HON. JOHN FLETCHER HARORAYE
SENIOR PUISNE JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT;
PRIMARY JUDGE IN EQUITY,
JUDGE OF THE DIVORCE COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
“ DEUM TIMETO : REGEM HONOEATO : YIRTUTEM COLITO:
DISCIPLINIB BONIS OPERAM DATO.”
Stat: Acad: Cant ah:
SYDNEY;
PUBLISHED BY JOHN FERGUSON,


PwirrED *t
JOHN FERGUSON
41 Market Street,
Sydney.


HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR HERCULES GEORGE ROBERT ROBINSON,
K.C.M.G., Ac, Ac.
GOVERNOR OF THE COLONY OF N. S. WALES, &0., &o.
THIS VOLUME OP LECTURES
DEDICATED
(with his excellency's permission),
AS A TRIBUTE OF RESPECT AND KSTEBM,
THE LECTURER.




PREFACE TO LECTURES I. AND 11.
The following pages contain the recorded labours of many agreeable
evenings occupied (during the occasional intervals of very active
public life and onerous professional duties) in continuous efforts to
promote the study of the Law among my fellow colonists of New
South Wales.
The Eight Lectures reprinted in the first volume, may be
considered as the eight most important occasions upon which my
efforts seemed most easily capable of revision; and were perhaps
those most successfully received by the gentlemen who then
honoured me with their attention as audience ; and as these eight
Lectures were delivered at rather long intervals, they seem to mark
out my progress as a Lecturer with a great degree of distinctive-
ness, from the year 1858 to 1871.
It may be mentioned that I arrived in Sydney on February Ist,
1857, and at first felt little inclination, or perhaps ability, to resume
the arduous labours of my profession as a Barrister, which I had
pursued for above ten years in London as a Conveyancer and
Equity Counsel. But after several short trips throughout the
colony, my health became so invigorated by the Australian climate
that I resolved to “ cast in my lot ” with the legal profession of
this colony, and accordingly I was admitted to the Bar of this Colony
in March, 1857, on the motion of my now esteemed Brother Judge,
Sir William Montague Manning.
Among my earliest renewals of old English friendships, none was
more welcome to my feelings than that wi:h my late revered friend
I)r. Woolley. We had been fellow-students together at the London
University in 1830 and 1831, and his brother, the Rev. Joseph
Woolley, now an.en ' nt Inspector of Education under the
Imperial Government, had been one of my most intimate friends
while at Cambridge from 1833 to 1837.


To be welcomed by Dr. Woolley of the Sydney University, was,
in itself a most delightful epoch in my life, as all New South
Wales gentlemen will acknowledge, who ever enjoyed the personal
friendship of that noble-hearted gentleman. One of the first
proofs of his friendship to me was, his recommendation to the
Senate of the Unirersity to establish a Law Readership and to
offer me the appointment. Thereupon the Senate requested me to
deliver some public lecture, as a proof of my lecturing capabilities,
and I gladly complied by delivering the first Lecture reprinted
in this volume.
Upon the publication of my lecture in a pamphlet form, a copy
of which I sent to each member of the Senate, I received the
appointment of Reader in General Jurisprudence, at a salary of
£lOO per annum, with Students’ fees of two guineas for each
course of Lecture.
I now look back to the evening of August 3rd, 1858, when Dr.
Woolley shook me by the hand at the close of my lecture and
kindly approved of my performance, witTi feelings of the most
intense gratification. Ever since that evening, now above twenty
years ago, my public career, thanks to all my colonial friends,
seems to have been one long journey of successful toil and
victorious conflict, and with “nulla retrorsum vestigia.”
I will now specify the scope and object of these two lectures.
LECTURE I.
1. The scope and object of this Lecture was to impress upon my
audience at the School of Arts, the general intention of all “Laws ”
considered as rules of conduct; prescribing what is “right” and
prohibiting what is “ wrong,” in every civilized community, for the
preservation of peace and order in such community. I explained
the nature of “ Ahttract Law ” as the rule of Right and Wrong;
which would, and must, exist per se as “ Law,” even if all the human
beings subject to such law ceased to exist, or had never existed at
all.
I further explained “ Parliamentary Government” as the source
of “binding Laws’ among all English communities; and as con-
trasted with tyrannies of all kinds.


aa follows
First Course. — Trinity Term;
Second
Course. — Michaelmas Tbrm.
Lecture
>>
1.
2.
Introductory Lecture.
On our Constitutional
Law.
Lecture
11.
On Municipal Corpora-
tions.
3.
On our Legislative Sys-
tem.
f
12.
On Joint Stock Com-
panies.
yy
4.
5.
On our Judicial System.
On the Office of Justice
of the Peace.
»>
13.
On Commercial Part-
nerships.
6.
On the Common Law of
))
14.
On Principal and Agent.
England.
15.
On Trustees and Exe-
>9
7.
On the Law of Real and
cutors,
Personal Property.
16.
8.
On International Law anu
Commercial Jurispru-
yy
On Mortgagors and
Mortgagees.
9,
dence.
On the Civil Law and
yy
ir-
On Landlord and Ten-
ant.
Equity Jurisprudence.
is.
if
10.
On Modern Conveyanc-
yy
On Husband and Wife
ing and Testamentary
yy
19.
On Parent and Child.
Dispositions
yy
20.
On Master and Servant
The motto of this, my first Lecture, was the well known concluding
sentence of the First Book of Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity :
“ Of Law, there can be no less acknowledged than that her seat
is the bosom of God; her voice is the harmony of the world; to her
all things in Heaven and Earth do homage; the very least as
feeling her care, the greatest as not exempted from her power;
both angels and men and creatures of what condition soever, though
each in different sort and manner, yet all with uniform consent
admire her as the mother of their peace and joy.”
LECTURE 11.
The second of the following Lectures is a reprint of that which I
delivered at the University of Sydney, on the sth March, 1866, in
the presence of Sir Charles Nicholson, the then Chancellor, the
members of the Senate, and 1 the other authorities of the University
on the occasion of my commencing my duties as “ Reader in
General Jurisprudence.
In this Introductory Lecture I explained to the University
authorities the topics of my two courses of “ University Readings ”
In this Lecture I ah get forth to the University Students the
importance of their study of “Abstract Law or Jurisprudence,” as
defined by Dr. Johnson, Sir James M’lntosh, Cicero, Hooker.
Burke, Blackstone, Hallam, and Lord Bacon not only with a view


to the preservation of our liberal and enlightened notions of
Jurisprudence on each topic of Lecture, but also with a view to
their professional eminence as Barristers or Attornies.
In explaining to my audience the general object of each of these
twenty Lectures, I stated how fully I concurred with the Chancellor
and Senate of the University in their wish that my readings
should treat each subject in relation to General Jurispru-
dence ; and should not profess to enter into legal details, or
professional views of my several topics, —but should carefully
adhere to the University system of providing the highest possible
Education for her Students as “ Gentlemen and Scholars.”
The Motto I prefixed to this Lecture, when published, was a
passage from Bolingbroke’s Letters on History in the following
words ; —“ There have been Lawyers that were Orators, Philoso-
phers, Historians, —there have been Bacons and Clarendons. There
will be none such any more, till in some better age, true ambition
and love of fame prevail over avarice ; and till men find leisure and
encouragement to prepare themselves for the exercise of this pro-
fession, by climbing up to the “ vantage ground ',” (so my Lord Bacon
calls it) of science, instead of grovelling all their lives below in a
mean, but gainful, application to all the little arte of chicane. Till
this happen, the profession of the Law will scarce deserve to be
ranked among the learned professions; and, whenever it happens,
one of the vantage grounds to which men must climb is metaphysical,
and the other historical, knowledge. They must pry into the secret
recesses of the human heart, and become well acquainted with the
whole moral world, that they may discover the abstract reason of all
Laws, —and they must trace the Laws of particular states, especially
of their own, from the first rough sketches to the more perfect
drafts; from the first causes or occasions that produced them,
through all the effects good and bad that they have produced.” I
endeavoured by this Motto, and by my remarks upon it in the body
of the Lecture, to encourage my youthful audience to take the
highest possible view of the Legal Profession, and to adopt the
two great recommendations of Bolingbroke the study of History
and of Metaphysics or Moral Science; as the two great sources of
eminence in the Legal Profession, in all its branches.
The Second Lecture may be considered as a permanent intro-


duction to my University Course of Lectures one “General
Jurisprudence,” contained in vol. ii. I explained to my audience
the high and noble science I was about to place before their youth-
ful minds, and the spirit of earnestness in which these studies ought
to be entered upon.
Concurrently with the delivery of Lecture n., I composed and
published the Syllabus of my University Lectures, (to be reprinted
hereafter as Appendix A.) This Syllabus contains a short epitome
of each Lecture, to be perused by each student before attending
the Lectures, —to diminish his trouble in “ taking notes,” and also
to enable him at any future time to recall my Lecture to his mind
with considerable accuracy for more extensive researches or
studies.
I have only now to remark, as I wrote with the publication of
my first Lecture, that T have consented to place all these Lectures
before the public at the suggestion of a few esteemed friends, and
in deference to their opinion that these Lectures might be useful to
others than the youthful audiences to whom they were addressed.
In doing so, however, I unreservedly submit myself to that
candid but rigid criticism which I consider the best test of literary
or scientific truth, and the best external incentive to my own
improvement.
I have to thank Mr. Grantley Hyde Fitzhardinge, of our Colonial
Bar, for his great kindness in superintending these Lectures
through the Press, and for many valuable siiggestious in correcting
the proofs for publication.
JOHN F. HARGEAYE.
Supreme Court, Sydney,
April 6th, 1878.


■


LECTURE
LAW,
delivered at the
MECHANICS’ SCHOOL OF ARTS, SYDNEY,
August 3rd, 1858
THE EEV. JOHN WOOLLEY, D.C.L.
PRINCIPAL AND DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF ARTS, IN THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
IN THE CHAIR.
“Of Law there can be no less acknowledged than that her seat
is the bosom of God ; her voice is the harmony of the world; to
her all things in heaven and earth do homage; the very least as
feeling her care, the greatest as not exempted from her power;
both angels, and men, and creatures, of what condition soever,
though each indifferent sort and manner, yet all with uniform consent
admire her as the mother of their peace and joy.”
Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity. Book I.




SUMMARY OF LECTURE I.
Preliminary observations upon Law as a Science and as an Art.
All English Law is the result of Progressive Wisdom.
Present necessity of sound views as to all our social rights.
Abstract Law is Law in its Catholic and Eternal sense.
The Laws of Conscience—Truth—Honour.
Enunciation by Hooker of four abstract principles essential to
the validity of all Law.
First. —Human Law must not contradict the Law of Nature,
or the Revealed Will of God.
Recognition of this principle by the Law of England.
Example in the Common Law Maxim:—“No man shall
be judge in his own cause.”
Second. —Harmony and Peace must be the object of Law.
To what extent this principle is adopted in English Law.
Third. —Equity, in the sense of equality, must direct the enact-
ments of Law ; and equality, in the sense of impartiality
must regulate the administration of Law. In the eye
of the English Law, all men are equal.
Fourth. —The Vox Populi, or uniform consent of the go-
verned, gives the obligatory and final sanction to all
Law.
All systems of Delegation or Representation of the people
are designed to obtain this consent of the governed; by
qualifying and protecting the natural right, so as to
ensure the exercise of the Elective Franchise honestly,
freely and wisely; as well as peaceably and at regular
intervals.
Concluding remarks on the modern doctrines of the Natural
Equality of Man, and the tyranny of the Majority.
Observations on the value of English History as illustrating
English Law.




LECTURE I.
There are two points of view from which we may
advantageously consider “ Law,” viz.—as a Science or as
an Art; —that is, either as a scientific system of Abstract
Truths to be known, investigated, studied, understood
and believed : or, as an artificial system of Practical
Pules, to he obeyed in our daily lives, defining the actual
duties to he performed by us and established in our
several stations of life; for the peaceful and quiet regula-
tion of all the social arrangements of our own particular
Civil Community.
Prom the former point of view, namely, as a Science,
Law occupies the studies and lives of a separate class in
the community, which, though including several distinct
branches, has been usually designated by the single
phrase “The Legal Profession;” or, sometimes, and
perhaps more happily, 11 The Great Brotherhood of the
Law.”
From the latter point of view, namely, as an Art, Law


recommends itself to the consideration of every member
of every civilized community, as the permanent source
of all his political, social, and domestic rights; and as
defining all his duties and powers in the innumerable
transactions of business, or of pleasure, in which he can
be engaged.
The Law of England, however, has, whether viewed as
a Science or as an Art, one great peculiarity, common
to every branch, almost to every chapter of the Law, and
that peculiarity is, that in its present state, the Law of
England is the result of a long series of successive
Reformations, Revolutions, Reforms and Amendments.
It is not to be studied, like the Code Napoleon or any
of the u Codes,” as they are called, of the Continental or
American States, from the pages of a particular book, or
from a few Declarations, Constitutions or Charters; for
its Precepts, Maxims and Rules are set forth in a vast
number of volumes; are to be gleaned from every page
of our history ; and have been secured to us by a long
succession of Civilizing Conquests and Revolutionary
Settlements, recorded in a National History of above
1000 years.
I know no author who has alluded to this peculiarity
of the English Laws in more appropriate language than
Burke; who, in his celebrated speech on “ The Resolu-
tions for Conciliation with America,” thus apostrophises
Lord Bathurst; and drawing up for an instant the
curtain which hung over England at the beginning of
the 18th century; “ unfolding,” as he says, “ the rising
glories of his country, and gazing with admiration on the
then commercial grandeur of England, and pointing to
America as the little speck then scarcely visible in the mass


of the national interest,” uses the following eloquent but
truthful language :—“ Young man, there is America —
which at this date serves for little more than to amuse
you with stories of savage men and uncouth manners;
yet shall, before you taste of death, show itself equal to
the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy
of the world.”
“ Whatever England has been growing to by a pro-
gressive increase of improvement brought in by varieties
of people, by a succession of civilizing conquests and
civilizing settlements in a series of 1700 years, you shall
see as much added to her by America in the course of a
single life! ”
“If this state of things,” said Mr, Burke, “had been
foretold to the youthful English senator in 1704, would
it not have required all the sanguine credulity of youth
and all the fervid glow of enthusiasm, to have made him
believe it.”
“Fortunate man,” exclaimed the great orator of 1775,
“he has lived to see it—fortunate, indeed, if he live to
see nothing to vary the prospect or cloud the setting of
his day.”
If in these magnificent but truthful sentences of Burke’s
we substitute the word “Australia” for “America,”
and picture to ourselves the orator as addressing an
English audience in the 19th instead of the 18th century,
how every word comes home with practical wisdom to
ourselves, and to our own age and our own political
affairs !
Burke retired from Parliament in 1794 ; when Austra-
lia was but “a little speck visible, and scarcely visible,
in the mass of the national interests of Great Britain ; ”


but since the commencement of the present century and
more especially since the birth of many of the young
men I am now addressing, has not Australia shown itself
equal to as vast an addition as was made by America
during the 18th century to the commerce of England ?
May we not say in the words of Burke ?—“ Whatever
England has been growing to by a progressive increase
of improvement, brought in by varieties of people, by a
succession of civilizing conquests and civilizing settle-
ments, in a series of 1800 years, we have seen as much
added to her by Australia in the course of a single life.”
May not we exclaim :—“ Fortunate men, we have lived
to see this ; fortunate, indeed,4f we live to see nothing to
vary the prospect or cloud the setting of our day.”
But my object in having thus quoted and applied to
ourselves this celebrated passage from Burke was to re-
mind you of the distinctive peculiarity of the national
greatness of England :—lt has grown out of a progresive
increase of improvement, brought in by varieties of
people and a succession of civilizing conquests and
civilizing settlements, extending over a period of 1800
years.
This is the first point that I would impress upon you :
Beverence for the ancient foundations on which our
English Laws are built. u Now, if ever,” says Macaulay,
the last of the illustrious self-raised nobles of Great
Britain, whose bloodless banner now ranks with the time-
honoured banners of the Howards, the Percies, the
Bussells, the Stanleys, the Nevilles, the Wentworths and
the Cavendishes, in the most ancient senate acknowledged
by, or known to, the civilized world; and whose sagacious
wisdom will henceforth, from that high position, assist


the deliberations of the British Parliament, now swaying
the destinies of the universe:— u Now, if ever,” says
Macaulay, writing in 1853, at the close of the European
Insurrections and opening of the Crimean War, “Now,
if ever, ought all who enjoy the protection of British
Law to appreciate the wisdom and patriotism of our fore-
fathers. All around us the world is convulsed by the
agonies of great nations. Governments which lately
seemed likely to stand during ages have been, on a
sudden, shaken and overthrown. The proudest capitals
of Western Europe have streamed with civic blood. All
evil passions, the thirst of gain, the thirst of vengeance,
the antipathy of class to class, the antipathy of race to
race, have broken loose from the control of all human
and divine Laws. Fear and anxiety have clouded the
faces and depressed the heart of millions. Trade has
been suspended and all industry paralysed. The rich
have become poor and the poor have become poorer.
Doctrines hostile to all Sciences, to all Arts, to all in-
dustry, to all domestic charities; doctrines which (if
carried into effect) would in thirty years undo all that
thirty centuries have done for mankind and would make
the fairest provinces of France and Germany as savage
as Congo and Patagonia, have been avowed from the
tribune and defended by the sword. Europe has been
threatened with subjugation by barbarians, compared
with whom the barbarians who marched under Atilla and
Alboin were enlightened and humane. The truest
friends of the people have, with deep sorrow, owned that
interests more precious than any political privileges were
in jeopardy and that it might become necessary to sacri-
fice even liberty to save civilization. Meanwhile, in our


Island, the regular course of government has never been,
for a day, interrupted, The few bad men who longed
for license and plunder have not had the courage to con-
front, for one moment, the strength of a loyal nation,
rallied in firm array around a parental throne.”
“ And if it he asked what has made us differ from
others? the answer is—We never lost what others are
wildly and blindly seeking to regain:—The authority of
Law, —for the security of property,—for the peace of
our streets, —for the happiness of our homes.”
It seems to me, as I have already stated, that “Law”
presents itself most naturally, and certainly most ad-
vantageously, to our consideration from two points of
view, viz., either as a Science or as an Art; that is
(shortly expressed), as a system of Truths to be believed,
or as a system of Duties to be performed.
In a School of Arts it is, of course, in this latter sense
that we must chiefly view it, namely, as the System of
Eules artificially prescribed among ourselves and adopted
by our own uniform consent, as commanding what is
right and prohibiting what is wrong, in our conduct to-
wards each other as members of the same civil com-
munity. This is the extent of the meaning of the word
“ Law ” as an Art ; and in this sense no one under the
care of British Law can altogether neglect its rules for a
single day ; as Law is in fact:—
“The Art of living in peace with each other.”
Again, since the publication of “Blackstone’s Commen-
taries on the Laws of England ” (now exactly a century
ago), the study of the “Law” as “the art of living in
peace with each other,” recommends itself to almost every
class among us, as an art very easy of acquisition.


I cannot place this part of my subject before you in
better language than in the words of Mr. Warren, the
able editor of the last edition of Blacks tone’s Commen-
taries'abridged and adapted to the existing Law.”
“ It was Blackstone’s Commentaries,” says Mr. Warren,
“ which, about the middle of the last century, introduced
large classes of English society to a knowledge of the
Laws of their country; of which it gave them so attractive
an account and so full and accurate a chart, as to render
ignorance and indifference any longer inexcusable.”
It is true that the publication of these justly celebrated
Commentaries produced far wider effects than Blackstone
ever, I believe, contemplated. Blackstone, in his Intro-
ductory Lecture, professes to compose these celebrated
Commentaries (first delivered as Lectures to the University
of Oxford) merely for the enlightenment of “ the upper
classes ” of society ; under which phrase he includes only
“the nobility of England, gentlemen of independent
estate and fortunes, members of the legislature and of
the learned professions : ” —while all other classes of
English society are most summarily dismissed by him as
“ persons of inferior condition,” who, according to the
political opinions even of the Liberals of the last century,
had “neither time nor capacity to enlarge their views
beyond the contracted sphere in which they are appointed
to move !”
But all these exclusive notions have long since passed
away; and now, not only have the great middle classes
of English communities, whose growth in intelligence,
power and importance during the last half of the 18th
century and this first half of the present, has produced a
vast but silent Eevolution in all our English institutions,


found themselves compelled to join in the march of
intellect; —hut even “ the millions,” as thoughtful men
now designate the humblest classes of all civilized com-
munities, feel that though man has not, yet God has,
given them “ both time and capacity to enlarge their
views beyond their own contracted sphere,” and that
they have a direct, immediate and daily increasing interest
in the Laws. So also the most superficial observer of
political events must admit that, as every year more fully
develops the spirit of our Constitution; and the popular
element is better enabled to assume its rightful position
in the practical working of our Constitution, the more
urgent becomes the necessity for every member of the
community by his own exertions and enquiries to acquire
at least a sound popular knowledge of Law; and the more
dangerous to the peace of the community becomes the
prevalence, and the more imperative the duty of all
peacefully disposed citizens to prevent the dissemina-
tion, of erroneous or unsound notions upon any of our
social rights.”
No one will question the correctness of Mr. Warren’s
views as to the importance, in the present day, of a
popular knowledge of Law even as a mere question of
expediency, to the middle and lower classes themselves.
As Mr. Warren well remarks with respect to England ;
u A large proportion of the property of England being
now in the hands of the middle classes, they have to alien
it by contract or by will; and surely thereby acquire
an interest in knowing something of at least, such
branches of the Law, as may enable them to act in doing
so with safety. From the middle classes are also
selected those juries, who are entrusted with our


properties, liberties, reputations and even lives; but,
above all, the middle classes are now largely entrusted
with the power of self-government and have become the
depositaries of vast political power through the recent
remodelling and extension of English Municipal and
Parliamentary systems; whilst the humbler classes are
also raised in the social scale by the wide diffusion of
Education.”
Again, a few lines further on, Mr. Warren remarks:
“As to our Criminal Law affecting all alike; is there
any rank or elevation in life, any uprightness of heart,
any prudence or circumspection of conduct, which can
justify any man in concluding that he may not, at some
time or other, be deeply interested in such knowledge.
These and many other considerations, especially the
establishment of the English District Courts, bringing
Law home to every man’s door, constitute unanswerable
reasons for desiring to see Law made at the present day
popular—that is, accessible, intelligible and interesting
to the mass of society.”
All these reasons for rendering Law popular, that is,
“ accessible, intelligible, and interesting to the mass of
society,” apply with tenfold force to our colony of New
South Wales, in the present position of all its various
ranks and classes.
I propose to occupy your leisure this evening by reading
to you first of all a few extracts from writers of high
authority, with the view of illustrating the essential
characteristics of Law, considered in its abstract sense;
and more especially as exemplified in the Law of England.
I do not think we should derive any real or permanent
benefit from the exposition of any particular branch of


our English Law, considered either as a Science or as an
Art; unless we first obtain sound, clear and distinct
notions of the nature of Law in its abstract sense; i. e .,
in the widest and most general signification that can
possibly he conveyed by the term.
Let us then consider Law in its abstract sense.
The first sentence commonly set forth in introductory
and elementary treatises on Law, as descriptive of Law
in its most general and abstract sense, is a well known
passage from the recovered and invaluable fragments of
Cicero’s Treatise De Eepublica, which may be thus
translated; though scarcely so as to carry the full force
of the original Latin :
u Abstract Law is, in very truth, that perfect reason
essentially inherent in our nature, given to us all as human
beings, invariable, eternal; whose voice gives force to
right and restrains from wrong. From this Law it is
impossible to release ourselves, either by decrees of
Senates or by the popular will. This Law is superior to
all explanation and interpretation. It is the same at
Rome and at Athens. It is the same now and for ever.
It is the one bond which binds together all nations and
all ages by one eternal and unchangeable union. God
is the sole and universal Judge and author of its rules;
and the man who will not obey Law, seeks to escape
from himself, and rejects the very nature of man.” faj
The other passage which is commonly set forth in ele-
mentary or introductory treatises on Law, in its most
general and abstract sense, is the following:
u Of Law, there can be no less acknowledged than that
her seat is the bosom of God ; her voice the harmony of
(a) Cic. de Rep. ed Mai. p 251,


the world ; all things in Heaven and earth do her homage ;
the very least as feeling her care, the greatest as not
exempted from her power; both angels and men and
creatures of what condition soever, though each in different
sort and manner, yet all with uniform consent, admire
her as the mother of their peace and joy ! ” ( h)
The passage which I have just read to you is the con-
cluding sentence of the first book of Hooker’s Ecclesiastical
Polity, a work composed about three centuries ago by an
humble clergyman of the Church of England, in the
seclusion of his parsonage in the county of Kent.
The time will not serve for me to explain the great
constitutional principles of Hooker’s noble treatise and
its value to all students of English Law; but I may
at least mention that its general scope and intention was
to soften down the harsh tones of all the uncatholic and
sectarian creeds of the Elizabethan age; to cool down
the heat of religious dissensions, by bringing into one
favourable view the whole controversy, and compelling
all the thoughtful and moderate men of the English
nation, whether Eoman Catholics or Protestants, to
acknowledge how numerous and important were the fun-
damental and Catholic truths of religious belief which the
then contending parties held in common with each other ;
and how loud therefore was the call of Christian charity
to uniformity in essentials and mutual forbearance in non-
essentials.
But you will perhaps say, what have we to do with
these topics in a lecture upon Law ?
My friends, you have much to do with these topics, as
the great truths elucidated by Hooker’s noble treatise lie
(hj Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity. Book 1. last sentence.


at the root of all sound Laws; and especially in all social
communities where Law and Eeligion are so blended
together, as they are in all communities founded upon
English Law. But far more, especially, have you to do
with these topics, before you enter on the consideration
of Law in any of its more limited meanings; and I
should be misleading you and building my subsequent
observations on the sand rather than on the rock, if I
were not, even at the risk of wearying you, by the
repetition of this great truth, —to impress upon you that
there exists a Law which is superior even to the Law of
nature, and in some senses antecedent to the revealed
will of God, a Law to which all human Laws insensibly
endeavour to assimilate themselves ; —and that Law in
all its widest and most exalting precepts you will best
understand by reflecting on the comprehensive sentences
I read to you from Hooker, in which he declares, that —
u Her seat is the bosom of God; her voice is the
harmony of the world; to her all things in Heaven and
earth do homage; the very least as feeling her care, the
greatest as not exempted from her power.”
This is that Law which, Cicero says is “ essentially
inherent in our nature, given to us all, invariable and
eternal, whose voice gives force to right, and restrains
from wrong,” and of which Hooker echoes the same
great truths :—“Angels and men, and creatures of what
condition soever; though, each in different sort and
manner; yet all, with uniform consent, admire her as
the mother of their peace and joy.”
This is that catholic and eternal Law which prompts
the whispers of conscience, “ the witness without which
God hath not left himself” in any human heart; —this


is that Law which is common to every form of religions
belief, which makes the soul of man rise above the suffer-
ings of the body, and which has peopled Heaven with its
11 noble army of martyrs,” of every creed.
This is the Law of honour, which binds even the man
who believes in this life only, more securely than any
Act of Parliament can bind: — u The knot that binds me
by the Law of honour,” says Montaigne, a pinches me
more than that of legal constraint; and lam much more
at ease when bound by a scrivener than by myself. Is
it not reason that my conscience should be much more
engaged when men simply rely upon it ? In a bond, my
faith owes nothing because it has nothing lent it. Let
them trust to the security they have taken without me;
but I had rather break the walls of a prison, and the
Laws themselves, than my own word.”
Thus much for the various forms which abstract Law
assumes, in regulating the affairs of men and binding
them together in one harmonious union of peace and
j°y-
But I must not take up any more of your time in dis-
cussing these preliminary but most interesting topics, or
in following these great truths to their legitimate con-
clusions.
What I wished to impress upon your minds, is, I
trust, now effected ; and you will ever bear in mind that
there is a Law which is above all legislative control ; a
Law which is not to be discussed by man with man but
by man with his own conscience; and that Law is the
Law of Honour as some call it, the Law of Conscience
as others say, or the Law of Abstract Truth and Eight.
Let us now pass onward to Positive Law ; and here, I


think, we shall most advantageously occupy our time and
thoughts by considering how far our own English Law
adopts and recognizes the fundamental essentials of Ab-
stract Law; taking the passage I read to you from the
conclusion of the first book of Hooker’s Ecclesiastical
Polity as a condensed resumd of the abstract principles
on which all Human Laws should be founded. There
seem to be involved in Hooker’s sentences, four great
principles which may be stated separately, as follows :
Firstly , Every Law must acknowledge as its seat —or
the source of its authority over men —“ The bosom of
God.” That is: God is, in the highest sense, the author
of all Human Law; and we must acknowledge the
obligatory power of Laws over human conduct and con-
science as arising from a higher source than the “will
of the people.” It is, I say, the will of God, and part of
the Divine economy of the universe, that all the human
beings, within each particular jurisdiction, should be
bound together by certain common rules for the peaceful
regulation of their social intercourse with each other;
until the day shall arrive when all nations and peoples
and tongues shall be gathered together into one Family ;
until we shall become “One Fold under One Shepherd.”
Secondly , Hooker lays down this principle : —That the
voice of Law shall be “ the harmony of the world.” So
human Laws should promote the harmony of communi-
ties ; —should reconcile, not irritate, the jarring discords
that must ever arise from opposite social rights;—soothe,
not aggravate, the contentions that must ever spring from
the clashing interests and conflicting claims of the human
beings “of every condition” who are associated in one
common social intercourse, and become, in very truth, to


all who own subjection to her control, 11 The mother of
their peace and joy.”
Thirdly , we learn from these sentences of Hooker :
That Law must, in her enactments as well as in her
administration, admit no favour, or inequality, among in-
dividuals. Men of what condition soever must, in the
eye of the Law, be equal. u The very least shall feel
her care; the greatest should not be exempted from her
power.” And thus also these words of Hooker’s teach us
that Equality, in the sense of Impartiality, must regulate
the administration of the Law.
Fourthly and lastly, the conclusion of these sentences
shows us, that all persons to be bound by the Law
ought to have given their “ uniform consent,” express
or implied, to all legal enactments.
In other words, the people must either individually
give their uniform consent or unanimons sanction to
every Law; or the community must adopt some inven-
tion of representation or delegation, or some combina-
tion of representative systems, more or less capable of
ascertaining and giving legal expression, to the “ voice
of the people; ’* so as to obtain indirectly, the uniform
consent of the governed to the Laws by which the com-
munity is to be governed.
Let us now examine and apply these four essential
principles, with reference especially and particularly to
English Law.
As to the first of these fundamental aud essential
principles of Law considered in its abstract sense, which
declares that her seat shall be the bosom of God; that
is, that all human Laws must acknowledge the Will
of God as the source of their authoritative power to bind


the conduct and the conscience, it will be sufficient to
remind my present audience of the words of God himself:
“By ME Kings reign, and Rulers minister justice.”
And, as incidental to this principle, we have this neces-
sary and natural corollary :—that human Laws shall not
infringe on the Will of God; nor direct nor forbid any-
thing, contrary to the revealed Will of God, or to the
Law of Nature.
I do not see how any one can dispute that the English
Law admits this most necessary restriction on the
Legislative power ; but it may be as well to place this
point clearly before you, in the words of Blackstone.
In Blackstone’s first volume, you will read as follows ;
“Upon these two foundations—the Law of Nature
and the Law of Revelation, depend all human Laws ;
that is to say, no human Law should be suffered to
contradict these. There are, it is true, a great number
of indifferent points, in which both the Divine Law and
the natural leave a man at his own liberty; but which
are found necessary, for the benefit of society, to be
restrained within certain limits. And herein it is, that
human Laws have their greatest force and efficacy; for,
with regard to such points as are not indifferent, human
Laws are only declarations of, and act in subordination
to the former. For instance, in the case of murder, this
is expressly forbidden by the divine, and demonstrably
by the natural Law; and from these prohibitions arise
the true unlawfulness of this crime. Those human Laws,
which annex a punishment to it, do not at all increase its
moral guilt or superadd any fresh obligation, in foro con-
-Bcientic e) to abstain from its perpetration. Nay, if any
human Law should allow or enjoin us to commit it, we


are bound to transgress that human Law or else we must
offend both the natural and the Divine Law.”
So again, in further illustration of this fundamental
principle, that a human Law is null and void, which
enacts any rule contrary to the Law of nature, I will
refer to the following passage from Burke’s Tract on the
Popery Laws. ISTo one will suspect or accuse Burke of
any undue leaning or tendency to democratic opinions ;
and we shall, therefore, be quite safe in relying upon him
as a sound constitutional authority upon this point.
“ The Legislature,” says Burke, “ have no right to
make a Law prejudicial to the whole community ; even
though the delinquents in making such an Act, should be
themselves the chief sufferers by it, because it would be
made against the principle of a superior Law, which it
is not in the power of any community or of the whole
race of man to alter; —l mean the will of Him who
gave us our nature, and in giving impressed an invari-
able Law upon it.”
But j>erhaps it will be as well if I now call your
attention to a familiar and practical example, from our
English Laws, of the application of this first funda-
mental principle of Abstract Law which I am
endeavouring to impress upon your minds :—that
human Laws cannot override or contradict any maxim
of the Law of God, whether declared by the Law of
Nature or the revealed Will of God.
You are all, of course, familiar with that common
and universal maxim of the English Law ;—that no
judge or magistrate, or even juror, can sit or act in any
judicial matter in which he is personally interested. In
popular phrase the English Law says :


“No man shall be judge in his own cause.”
Not that there is any Statute of the Realm or Act of
Parliament which declares this to be “the Law.” There
is not, I believe, in all the old Parliament rolls or
chronicles of our mother country, from the earliest
period, the slightest trace or record of any legislative
enactment declaring or providing “ that no Englishman
shall be judge in his own cause.” How, then, you will
say, is it “ Law ? ”
It is because the Judges of England have, from the
earliest records of judicial proceedings in England, held
this maxim to be essential to English justice. It is part
of the Common Law or unwritten folkright of England ;
that is, it is one of the abstract maxims of the Law of
Nature which have been applied by a long unbroken
succession of wise and enlightened judges, to the ad-
ministration of English social rights. It is part of the
same old Common Law of England which declares—
“ That every Englishman’s house is his castle ” :
“ That there is no wrong without a remedy ” :
“ That no one shall be condemned unheard ” :
“ That every prisoner shall be presumed innocent,
until proved guilty.”
These and many other invaluable principles of
Abstract Justice, quite unknown to any other civilized
nation, or any recorded or acknowledged “ Code of Law,”
form “ the old Common Law of England.”
Now, the familiar legal maxim, “ that no man shall
be judge in his own cause,” is the one of these great
maxims of the old Common Law of England which I
have selected, in order to impress upon your minds this
important fundamental principle, namely, that even the


all-powerful English Legislature cannot override or con-
tradict any maxim of Abstract Justice. “If an Act of
Parliament,” says Lord Coke, the great oracle of the
Common Law, “ should ordain that the same person
should be party and judge, or which is the same thing,
judge in his own cause, it would be a void Act of Parlia-
ment, for it is impossible that one should be judge and
party; for the judge is to determine between party and
party or between the Government and a party; and an
Act of Parliament can do no wrong, though it may do
several things that may look pretty odd.” Notwith-
standing the almost self-evident truth of this great
maxim, there is sometimes considerable difficulty in
applying legal maxims to practical business ; but in this
we shall have no real difficulty, because the whole
question of the interest of the judge in any subject
before him and the nature of the disqualification there-
by brought upon him from adjudicating in the matter —
and the absolute and total invalidity of any judgment
or decree made by judges interested, even remotely and
indirectly, in the subject matter before the Court —have
been recently clearly laid down, after elaborate argument
before the highest English Court of Law, in the case
of “ Dimes v. The Grand Junction Canal Company.” ( a )
This was a Suit in Chancery, which arose a few years
ago, relating to some disputed manorial rights claimed
by a person named Dimes against the Grand Junction
Canal Company; and in the progress of the suit, the
then Lord Chancellor (Lord Cottenham) had pro forma
signed a Decree, the cause having been set down and
heard before the Master of the Rolls and the other
Equity Judges, because of Lord Cottenham’s interest
(a) 3 H. L. cas. 759,


as a Shareholder in the Canal Company; his Lordship,
however, fully acquiescing in, and confirming the
Decree of the other judges. The plaintiff, Mr. Dimes,
was dissatisfied with the Decree on the merits, and
appealed to the House of Lords; objecting, among
other grounds, that the Lord Chancellor’s formal
signature to the Decree appealed against, rendered such
Decree absolutely void. The House of Lords, after
hearing long and learned arguments of Counsel, and
taking the opinion of the Common Law Judges, reversed
the Decree of the Lord Chancellor, on the ground of
interest; which, having existed at the time of hearing
the cause, had disqualified Lord Cottenham from acting
as Judge in the matter, and rendered his Lordship’s
Decree, therefore, absolutely void.
The judgment of Lord Campbell in the House of
Lords is so clear and simple a statement of this great
maxim of English Law, and as it seems to me illustrates
so admirably the first of the essential principles of
abstract Law I am endeavouring to impress upon you,
that I am sure your time will be well spent in listening
to his Lordship’s words. His Lordship says, “ With
respect to the point upon which the learned Judges were
consulted, I must say that I entirely concur in the advice
which they have given to your Lordships. No one can
suppose that Lord Cottenham could be, in the remotest
degree, influenced by the interest he had in the concern ;
but, my Lords, it is of the last importance that the
maxim that no man is to be judge in his own case —
should be held sacred ; and that it is not to be confined
to a cause in which he is a party, but should be extended
to all in which he has an interest,”


His Lordship then concludes thus : —“ Since I have
had the honour to be Chief Justice of the Court of
Queen’s Bench, we have again and again set aside
proceedings in an inferior tribunal, because an individual
who had an interest in a cause took a part in the decision.
And it will have a most salutary influence on these tri-
bunals, when it is known that this High Court of last
resort, in a case in which the Lord Chancellor of England
had an interest, considered that his decree was, on that
account, a decree not according to Law, and was set
aside. This will be a lesson to all inferior tribunals, to
take care, not only that in their decrees they are not in-
fluenced by their personal interest; but to avoid even the
appearance of labouring under such influence.”
The House of Lords having on this ground set aside
the Lord Chancellor’s decree as absolutely void, con-
firmed the judgment of the inferior or primary Equity
Judge on the merits against the appellant; who had,
therefore, merely the satisfaction of finding that he had
been ventilating, as Lawyers say, a great constitutional
maxim of English Law; a satisfaction which, fortunately
for the peace of society, is very frequently enjoyed by
persons of a litigious disposition.
I must now call your attention for a few minutes to the
second fundamental essential of Law considered in its
abstract sense, namely, that her voice shall be raised to
promote “ the harmony ” of the community; she shall
be “ the mother of peace and joy; ” —that is, she shall
reconcile, not irritate, the jarring discords that must ever
arise between opposite social rights; she shall soothe,
not aggravate, the contentions that must ever spring up
between men of various conditions, living together in
one social community.


Far be it from me to claim for Human Law the office
of the revealed Will of God, or to arrogate for the
ministers of the Law the duties of the sacred ministers
of Religion, whose especial mission it is to spread “peace
on earth, and good will among men 1 ” I am only
anxious to place clearly before your minds, the fact that
this harmonizing of clashing interests, which is the object
of Law in its abstract sense, is also the guiding principle
of English Law in all its branches; and that every
statute that is passed either by the Imperial Legislature
or by our own Colonial Parliament, to regulate our
Colonial affairs, and every decision of the Courts of Law
in this colony, are rendered necessary by the springing
into existence of doubtful rights, or by the more intricate
questions which necessarily arise from the contradictory
claims constantly emerging in a highly advanced state
of civilization.
The doubtful rights and conflicting claims of an early
or primitive state of society were settled by appeals to
physical force or to arms —according to—
The good old rule, the simple plan,
That he should take who has the power,
And he should keep who can.
This however is not living in civilized society, but
out of society; not under Law, but beyond the bounds
of Law. Therefore, as social communities become
more firmly established, Laws arise to define more
accurately all our social rights and duties; and the
more peaceful and harmonious the community, the more
accurately do the Laws define duties and rights either
by the direct enacting powers of an acknowledged
Legislature establishing what the Law shall be, or by
the decisions of wise and enlightened Judges declaring


what the. Law is, and applying the general maxims or
enactments of Law to the special circumstances of each
case; but all members of the same community of what
condition soever, and whether engaged in administering
the Law or in obtaining the enactments of the Legis-
lature, should have no other object than, according to
Hooker’s principle, to “harmonize” the whole community
and promote their “peace and joy.”
Let us examine a little further this second abstract
principle, as applied to the frame and object of our
English Laws; and observe how carefully the harmony
and peace of the community enter into the English Law,
as the object and intention of its provisions.
This is well expressed by Mr. Mac-Namara, a very
clever legal Essayist:—“ Impressed with the importance
of Tranquillity to the Social state, the Common Law
of England has evinced great care for its preservation.
Among other salutary measures it has constituted many
high functionaries, the Chief Conservators of the Peace
throughout the Realm ; and committed to inferior offi-
cers the task of maintaining the Peace within particular
districts. In the former class, the first and head is the
Sovereign ; besides whom and deriving their authority
from him are the Lord Chancellor and all the Judges
of the Realm, who are ex officio Conservators of the
Peace.”
“ To the second class belong the Judges having limited
local jurisdiction, all of whom are appointed “ Conser-
vators of the Peace ” within the precincts of their res-
pective Courts ; —together with the Sheriffs, Justices of
the Peace, Coroners, Constables, and others, within
their respective Hundreds, Towns, and Districts.”


‘‘The duties of these ‘Justices of the Peace/ as they
are carefully styled in the Royal Commission, consist
(according to Dalton, an old lawyer) in these three
things, namely : — First, in preventing the breach of the
Peace ; wisely foreseeing and repressing the beginning
thereof, by taking surety for the keeping of the Peace,
or for the good behaviour of offenders :— secondly , in
pacifying such as are breaking of the Peace :—and thirdly ,
in punishing, according to Law, such as have broken
the Peace. But of these three duties,” Dalton con-
tinues, “ the first, the preventing of a breach, is most
worthy to be commended to the care of Justices.”
I think I should be wasting your time by adducing
any further or particular illustration or proof of the fact,
that the general spirit of English Law is strictly in
accordance with the second principle laid down by
Hooker; and that the practical operation of English
Laws and their general intention and object is—“to
promote the harmony of the Community.” So far,
indeed, as I am acquainted with the Codes or Laws of
other nations, X believe their is not any Code of Laws,
either ancient or modern, which adopts this second
fundamental principle of Abstract Law as its guiding
principle so thoroughly as our English Statute Law; nor
do I believe that any nation either exists now, or ever did
exist, in which this great principle has been so familiarly
brought home to the daily observation and practical ac-
quaintance of the individual members of the community,
as where the English Common Law forms the basis of
the Municipal Laws.
Let us now pass onwards to the consideration of the
third of the essential principles of Law, namely,


“ Equity,” as founded on the Natural Equality of Man,
in the enactments of “ Law ; ” and “ Equality ” in the
sense of Impartiality in its administration; that is—ln
the eye of the Law all men shall be equal: 11 The very
least as feeling her care, the greatest as not exempted
from her power.”
You will find this great principle clearly laid down by
Burke, as the basis of British Law. After alluding to
the fallacies broached by Hobbes in the seventeenth
century, and quoting a well-known passage from Cicero,
in support of his own enlarged view of “Law” in its
abstract sense, Mr. Burke continues thus :—“ In reality
there are two, and only two, foundations of Law; and
they are both of them conditions, without which nothing
can give it force: —I mean Equity and Utility. With
respect to the former, it grows out of the great rule of
Equality, which is grounded upon our common nature,
and which 1 Philo,’ with propriety and beauty, calls the
‘ Mother of Justice.’ All human Laws are, properly
speaking, only declaratory; they may alter the mode and
application, but have no power over the substance of
original Justice. The other foundation of Law, which
is Utility, must be understood, not of partial or limited,
but of general, Utility, connected in the same manner
with, and derived directly from our rational nature; for
any other utility may be the utility of a robber but can-
not be that of a citizen—the interest of the domestic
enemy and not that of a member of the Commonwealth.
This present equality can never be the foundation of
those statutes which create an artificial difference between
men (as the old penal Laws did) in order to induce a
consequential inequality in the distribution of Justice.”


And then he concludes with this sentence : —“ Law is the
mode of Human Action respecting Society; and must he
governed by the same rules of Equity, which govern
every private action.”
The other branch of this, the third essential of valid
Law, namely, Equality in the sense of Impartiality in the
administration of Law, is thus admirably illustrated by
De Lolmc, in his celebrated Essay on the English Con-
stitution :
“Ho subjects under English Law, however exalted
their rank, are to think themselves exempt from sub-
mitting to the uniform course of Law, or hope to influence
or overawe it. The severe examples which the two
Houses of Parliament have united to make on those
judges, who had rendered themselves the instruments of
the passions of the Sovereign or of the designs of the
ministers of the Crown, are also awful warnings to the
judges who have succeeded them, never to attempt to
deviate in favor of any of the most powerful individuals,
from that straight line of justice, which the joint wisdom
of the Legislature has marked out to them. This has at
last created such an impartiality in the distribution of
public justice in England, has introduced into the Courts
of Law the practice of such a thorough disregard of
either the influence or wealth of the contending parties ;
and procured to every individual both such an easy
access to these Courts, and such a certainty of redress,
as are not to be paralleled in any other Government.”
De Lolme then mentions two examples of public legal
proceedings, one against a Peer of the Eealm, and the
other against a Prince nearly related to the Crown; both
highly illustrative of this impartiality of British Law,


and its utter disregard of persons, as well in its adminis-
tration, as in its enactments ; and then proceeds to show
the general sentiments of the English people on this
subject in the following words :
“ What struck me most in these transactions was,
that these legal proceedings against a Prince, nearly
related to the Crown, were looked upon by all those I
heard speak about them, as being nothing more than the
common and expected course of things.”
“It was this strict Impartiality which prevails in the
Administration of British Law,” adds De Lolme, “that
became a strong inducement to me to enquire into the
nature of a Government, by which such effects were
produced;” and to compose the celebrated essay which
bears his name.
Again, in another passage, De Lolme remarks : “ Any
violation of the Laws of England, though perpetrated by
men of the most extensive influence ; nay, though com-
mitted by the especial direction of the very first servants
of the Crown, will be publicly and completely redressed.
And the very lowest of subjects will obtain such redress, if
he has but spirit enough to stand forth and appeal to the
Laws of his country.”
To us Englishmen, also, it is a peculiar satisfaction to
find this great principle one of the leading provisions in
Magna Charta; by the twenty-ninth article of which it
is provided:
“No free man shall be taken into custody or impri-
soned, or disseized of his free tenement, or of his
liberties, or of his free customs; —neither shall he be
outlawed or exiled, or in any other manner injuriously
affected; —nor will we take proceedings against him,


nor send against him except by and through the lawful
judgment of his equals, or by and through the Law of
the land. To none will we sell, to none will we deny or
delay, justice or right.”
These remarks and extracts will, I trust, sufficiently
show how the English Law is based in all its main out-
lines on the Natural Equality of Man, the third essential
of Abstract Law as laid down by Hooker:—
“ The very least shall feel her care; the greatest not
be exempted from her power.”—But upon this topic,—
the Natural Equality of Man, I will reserve the few
other remarks I have to make, for the conclusion of this
Lecture.
With reference to the fourth and last of Hooker’s
fundamental essentials of “ Law,” namely —The consent
of the governed , it will be as well to give you at once a
clear constitutional authority, on which to rely for the
application of this principle to all English Law.
For this purpose, I will read to you another well-
known passage from Burke, in which you will find the
doctrine of the Consent of the Governed, or vox populi ,
stated with all its proper qualifications:—“ In all forms
of Government,” says Burke, “the people is the true
Legislator , and whether the immediate and instrumental
cause of the Law be a single person or many, the remote
and efficient cause is, the Consent of the People, actual
or implied, and such Consent is absolutely essential to
its validity. To the solid establishment of every Law
two things are essentially requisite : first a proper and
sufficient human power to declare and modify the matter
of the Law, and, next, such a fit and equitable Consti-
tution as may have a right to declare and render binding.


With regard to the first requisite, the Human Authority,
it is their judgment the people give up, not their right.
The people, indeed, are presumed to consent to whatever
the Legislature ordains for their benefit; and they are
to acquiesce in it; though they do not see clearly into
the propriety of the means by which they are conducted
to that end. This they owe, as an act of Homage and
just deference, to a Reason which the necessity of Govern-
ment has made superior to their own.”
And yet, on the other hand, as already explained to
you, the Legislature has no right to make a law prejudi-
cial to the whole community, nor against the clear principles
of the Law of Nature, or the revealed will of God. One
passage on this point I have already cited to you from
Burke’s works; and I must he allowed to refer you to
another passage, a few lines further on, where all laws
which tend to the direct exclusion of a great body of
men, not only from the 11 favors, privileges, and trusts,”
but from the “ common advantages of society,” are pro-
nounced by Mr. Burke, abstractedly considered, to be
“ null and void ;” even “ though ratified by the people,
not representatively, hut even collectively.” “It would
he hard,” he says, “to point out any error more truly
subversive of all the order and beauty, all the peace and
happiness of Human Society, than the position, that any
body of men have a right to make what laws they please,
or that laws can derive any authority from their institu-
tion merely, and independent of the quality of their
subject matter.”
I trust these extracts will be sufficient to guard you
against hilling into that dangerous error, that whatever
the people, either collectively or when represented in


their proper Houses of Assembly as in all our English
Constitutions, and in the American also, may agree to,
must, as a matter of course, be right.
The popular sanction is required to give effect to Law;
but there are other and far higher essentials required to
give Law the obligatory power of binding the conduct
and conscience. It is the losing sight of this distinction
that has given rise to the modern phrase “ Tyranny of
the Majority; which in America,” says He Tocqueville,
“ is producing the most perilous mischiefs and is the cause
of much anxiety to all friends of that Great Eepublic.”
But I must now hasten onwards.
In all these enquiries into abstract principles, we must
see that the duty of the Legislature of established com-
munities, is not so much to build up the frame-work of
a new Constitution (as would be the object of popular
assemblies in a primitive or rude state of society), as to
obtain the popular sanction to such necessary alterations
of existing legal rights and duties, as the changes of
time, place, or other circumstances, render advisable;
and as the various classes of the community vary in their
relative importance to the general body politic. In fact
the great problem which from time to time comes before us,
is how we can best, that is most safely and effectually,
obtain the sanction of the people to those changes and
adaptations of our Law, which are demanded by the pro-
gressive requirements of our social state.
I will not attempt to enumerate, much less to define,
the various great principles which have been adopted
in the English constitutional Law, to ascertain and
regulate the elective franchise of the popular House of
Eepresentatives. To do so would be quite beyond both


my powers and my present duty. But I must at least
take this opportunity of distinguishing between Delega-
tion and Representation.
u l n America/’ says De Tocqueville, u the system of
Delegation has wrought incalculable evils. There a
custom is gaining ground which will in the end render
all the guarantees of the Representative Government
useless and vain. The electors, when they name a de-
puty, often trace out for him a line of conduct, from which
he is not to depart; and except that there is no tumult,
it is as if the Majority met and deliberated in the Market-
place.” This system of Delegation is thus complained
of by Mr. Webster, in the opening of his celebrated
speech on the Tariff. “ Different members of the
Senate,” says that great and truly patriotic statesman,
“ have instructions, which they feel bound to obey, and
which clash with one another. We have this morning
seen an Honourable Member from New York (an
important motion being under consideration,) lay his
instructions on the Table, and point to them as his
power of attorney, and as containing his directions for
his vote.”
“ How absurd,” observes Professor Smyth, when com-
menting on this mistake in American politics, “to have
a question decided by the constituents at one end of a
country, and afterwards debated at the other ! Of what
use are reasoning and eloquence addressed to those who,
in the first place, have to lay their instructions on the
Table ? ”
In our own English constitution there is no principle
more firmly established, than that stated by Mr. Justice
Blackstone, in the first volume of the Commentaries, in


these words :—“ Every Member of the English House
of Representatives, though chosen by one particular
district, when elected and returned serves for the whole
realm. For the end of his coming thither is not
particular, but general; not barely to advantage his
constituency, but the Commonwealth. And, therefore,
he is not bound like a deputy in the United Provinces,
to consult with or take the advice of his constituents
upon any particular point, unless he himself thinks it
proper or prudent so to do.”
Mr. Justice Coleridge, in his edition of Blackstone’s
Commentaries, has most judiciously directed the
student’s attention to Mr. Burke’s statement of this
great constitutional principle of the English Repre-
sentative system, as set forth in the conclusion of his
celebrated speech to the electors of Bristol.
But to return from Delegation to Representation ;
the great problem of the 19th century. I will extract
the substance of my remarks on this subject from the
Edinburgh Review of January 1852 ; a Review which
you all know, has always supported every reasonable
extension of the franchise, and every other liberal
measure in England. If the time would allow me, I
should also like to read some most sensible remarks on
this subject, from a very excellent little book called
“ Meliora,” or “ Better times to come; ” containing a
series of twenty-one Lectures and Contributions upon
topics connected with the improvement of the social
condition of the working classes, contributed by some
well known philanthropic English noblemen, gentlemen
and clergymen, with some few Essays by working men
themselves; and forming together an invaluable little


compendium on the condition, social and mental, of the
English working classes.
I will now proceed to read to you a single quotation
from the Edinburgh Review, which thus states in a few
choice sentences the real question that sooner or later
must arise and must be adjusted and settled in every
community under British Law, namely : how the con-
sent of the people, the fourth essential element of sound
and valid Law, is to be best obtained, under existing
circumstances of a great, general and uncontrollable desire
having arisen for the extension of the suffrage among
the working classes of the 19th Century.
“ The desideratum is some plan, which shall give to
working men a greater participation than formerly in
the election of Members, proportioned to their aug-
mented intelligence and independence: some plan,
which shall not overturn the existing system nor proceed
on the assumption of its incurable and radical injustice,
but which shall harmonize with its main features and
which can be engrafted upon it, so as better to attain
its purposes and carry out its meaning.
This is the main problem which we, the colonists of
New South Wales, have now before us. We must not
overturn any part of our existing system of Laws, nor
proceed on the assumption of its incurable or radical in-
justice ; and we must be especially careful that every
reform of our Colonial Laws, and especially of our
Constitutional Law, harmonizes with the mam features
of our British Constitution and is engrafted upon it, so
as better to attain its purpose and carry out its meaning.
In our own colony and in all communities adopting
the British Constitution as a model, it seems to me that,
F


if we may not now safely entertain the utmost possible
extension of the franchise among the electors of the
popular branch of the Legislature, it is difficult to under-
stand when or where this questioner be safely entertained.
Every act of the aggregate Legislature is so sifted
and examined, not only by the Press, (a free Press in the
highest sense of the word), but by the long intervals
that elapse between the introduction of any Bill and its
final enactment; —as well as by repeated discussions in
both Houses of Parliament, each having the entire con-
fidence of the community at large;—and the power of
the Crown is so dearly defined, and made so completely
serviceable to the community, by the responsibility of
Ministers; —that there is, in my humble opinion at least,
no practical danger to be feared from the utmost
extension of the elective franchise, i.e., to every one at
all capable of exercising the franchise, honestly , freely ,
and wisely : —the only necessary restrictions which, on a
little reflection you will find, include and extend to all
rightful disfranchisement.
What are called property and residential qualifica-
tions, are so far important as being the simplest means
whereby the electors can acquire some reasonable know-
ledge of each other, and obtain some mutual recognition
of each other’s claims as men honestly interested in the
peace and well being of the community; they also
supply the only practical means of identifying the indi-
vidual electors, and of apportioning the representation
among the aggregate numbers of the community, ac-
cording to registrations in the public Electoral lists
We need not therefore comment on these. Nor need
we observe upon the questions of the duration of Par-


liaments or of the ballot; nor upon the question whether
the elections shall be altogether open and public ; these
being matters which are merely, or chiefly, for the con-
sideration of the Electors themselves ; whose object, I
presume, will be only to secure for themselves the due
election of their members at regular but stated intervals ;
and that the elections shalt be conducted peaceably,
without danger of fraud in the return, or undue pressure
on the voter at the time of voting.
But as to the other “ disqualifications,” in the strict
sense of the term, as the Edinburgh Review well says, —
“ The advocates of universal suffrage are themselves
compelled to acknowledge the invalidity and untenable-
ness of their own principle of universality, by violating
it as soon as they have laid it down ; and, if fairly
worked out, it would lead to results, which at once
make it manifest that some fallacy lurks under its ap-
parent simplicity. The principle laid down under the
term “ Universal Suffrage,” it is obvious, goes the whole
length of declaring that all citizens, whatever be their
age, sex, or condition, being required to obey the Law,
and being punishable for resistance to it, are, ipso facto,
entitled to votes in the election of the members of the
Legislature. But thewomanas well as the manis hanged
for murder; the minor as well as the adult is impri-
soned for fraud and transported for felony ; the pauper
as well as the millionaire is compelled to comply with
every requirement of the Parliament; ” all, therefore,
would have an equal claim to the elective franchise,
if the right depended upon the abstract principle alone,
that all who are bound by the Laws should participate
in the suffrage.


Yet no man in his senses ever ventured to push the
argument thus far. The most complete suffrage ever
practically proposed, even by the Chartists, falls far
short of Universality ; and makes exceptions, as arbi-
trary and as fatal to the principle, as those familiar to
our existing system.
Let us consider the matter a little further.
The nearest approach to universal suffrage ever seri-
ously demanded is, that every male of the full age of
twenty-one years shall be entitled to a vote.
Now observe what vast exclusions and disqualifica-
tions are implied in this apparently very simple
“ Adult Manhood Qualification,”
as it is called.
In the first place, —it excludes all women, thousands
of whom hold independent property; hundreds of
thousand of whom pay taxes; and all of whom, in
Christian communities, are at least as competent, inte-
lectually and morally, to exercise the franchise, as a
great proportion of those who now possess it.
And secondly ; —it excludes at least a million minors,
of the male sex out of an aggregate population of Great
Britain, and many thousands of the population of this
Colony, between the ages of 17 and the arbitrary age
of full manhood at 21 years.
Now all these classes are called upon to obey the
Law ; all of them are interested in the process of Legis-
lation, since all suffer by partial and unwise enactments.
Yet the advocates of universal suffrage absurdly
conceive themselves to be guilty of no injustice,—of no
inconsistency or unfaithfulness to their theory, in ex-
cluding them; and, if closely questioned as to the


defensible grounds of such exclusion, would probably
reply :—That minors are excluded from the franchise,
though not from the acquisition of property and due
submission to all the laws of the land, because they are
not mature enough, morally or intellectually, to exercise
the franchise wisely and judiciously : and that women are
also excluded from the franchise, though not from the
acquisition of property, and due submission to all the
laws of the land, because the habits of English domestic
life are such that they could not be expected to exercise
the franchise freely and independently ; and with due re-
gard to their own especial and separate duties to the
community.
So then we find the advocates of Universal Suffrage
are driven by their own good sense to contend for the
exclusion of large classes of their fellow citizens on these
several grounds, of want of maturity , want of judgment ,
want of freedom, want of independence j — that is, moral ,
mental and circumstantial unfitness :—the only grounds
of disqualification which have ever been maintained by
the advocates of any system of restricted suffrage ; and
we return, in fact, to the very point from which we
started, namely, —that each community must adopt such
restrictions of the elective franchise as are consistent
with the other portions of the Social fabric, and as the
time, place, and other circumstances of the community
render advisable; a conclusion to our argument which
will at least tend to bring the contending parties to issue,
on much more intelligible and practical points than the
doctrines of “ The Primitive Equality of Man,” or “The
Tyranny of the Majority.”
Nevertheless, I must not dismiss these modern doc-


trines of the “ Primitive Equality of Man,” and “ The
Tyranny of the Majority,” without some special remarks.
As to the first of these phrases, you will recollect
that when engaged in the consideration of the third
most important foundation of Law, namely, the
Equality of all persons in the eye of the “ Law,” I read
to you a passage from Burke, showing that all enact-
ments of positive Law must be founded on “ Natural
Equity,” and on the “ Natural Equality of Man.” And
I do not think that I should be doing justice to the
fundamental principles of Law which I have been
endeavouring to impress upon you, if I were to dismiss
these modern doctrines of the “ Equality of Man,” and
“ Tyranny of the Majority,” without the following
remarks.
It was just before the French Revolution of 1789
that Paine published his “ Age of Reason ” and
“ Rights of Man ; ” in which he stated that he had
discovered that we, the pitiable people of England, had
no Constitution; and that we had, therefore, only to
call a Convention and make one. Paine’s works were
soon followed by the “Political Justice” of Mr.
Godwin, who longed for Society without Government,
and Morality without natural Instincts; and Miss
Wolstoncraft supplied the last magic ingredient for the
Revolutionary cauldron, whose bubbling draughts were
to restore our worn-out world to rejuvenescence, by her
celebrated Essay on the “ Rights of Women.”
These melancholy misconceptions, I had almost said
caricatures, of the true doctrines of Natural Equity and
the Natural Equality of Man, were sufficiently exempli-
fied to our own observation, and received a fair trial


before the present generation of Englishmen, in Fergus
O’Connors Land Scheme at Snig’s End, in that half-
Chartist half-Mormonite establishment at “ Harmony
Hall,’ which was the subject of a suit in Chancery a few
years back, and in various other so-called “ Socialists”
schemes and projects.
Now, although the general verdict of all persons who
understand and appreciate the blessings of British Law,
has been already given, and given publicly, uponall these
Socialist schemes, yet as they seem to be in some degree re-
vived by the Mormonite movement in the United States,
I cannot conclude this most important branch of my
subject, without one further attempt to place the modern
doctrine of the Equality of Man fairly before your minds,
and its connection with the Laws of Nature and of God
as well as with the Positive enactments of all civilized
communnities; and I cannot find any better statement
of this doctrine than in the words of Professor Smyth,
from whose Lectures I can never too frequently quote :
u The original Equality of Man,” says Professor
Smyth, u belongs to his awful relations to the Deity, the
great Creator of the World; and this equality is seen,
in the inevitable changes of his being, and the events of
his existence; in his birth, his growth, his decline, his
diseases and his death; —in his appetites, affections,
pleasures, and pains; in his moral and religious duties;
in his hopes of a Hereafter and his obedience to his God.
In these great, paramount and mysterious respects we
are all equal; but in no other. In our relations to each
other, as the members of a civil community, all Personal
Equality disappears. We are differently constituted;
we come into the world under different circumstances of


birth and natural endowments, different relations, different
duties and necessities; different opportunities for good
or evil arise ; and all that can be done for the original
Equality of Man, his Equality in the eyes of his Creator,
is to allow every man, (as far as law and civil ordinances
are concerned), to do what he thinks good, if he do it
without injury to others. ISTo other Equality, but this
sort of Equality, is possible.”
And again, in another passage, after appealing to the
good, practical, common sense of all English audiences,
against the visionary schemes of the French political
philosophy, Professor Smyth asks : —“ Why should there
now be a contest going on between the people and their
masters; between the many and the few ? Those who
are placed low in the scale of social existence are neither
placed there nor kept there, by those who are above them.
The gentlemen of our days are not wanting in feelings of
benevolence to those beneath them; and never in the
history of the world were such exertions made by the
upper and middle classes of society, to rescue the labour-
ing classes from ignorance and vice, and to extend to
them the benefits of knowledge and the comforts and
support of Eeligion.”
“Is it expected,” he continues, £> that the rich shall
parcel out their estates, or break up and divide their
capital, and cause the poor to cease out of the land ? or
(if they did) could such an effect be thus produced ? Far
different seems the economy of an overruling Providence.
It is by a system of mutual dependence and assistance;
of reciprocal obedience and control; of diversified eleva-
tion and depression; by interchanged offices of kindness
and duty; —and not by primitive systems of rude Liberty


and Equality, that it has pleased the Almighty Father to
call forth the virtues and provide for the welfare of his
creatures.”
I must now recall your attention to another modern
phrase, the “ Tyranny of the Majority,” of which we
hear and read so much in all writings about American
politics; and of which some men, even here, express a
sort of morbid timidity.
Of the travellers who have written on the Tyranny of
the Majority among the Americans, I will only refer to
De Tocqueville as cited by Professor Smyth. I should
observe that De Tocqueville, (though a Republican) does
not acquiesce in the great Republican maxim, that every
one is to submit to the Majority.
“It is not,” he says, “ that I object, like other Euro-
pean writers, to the weakness of the American Govern-
ment ; —I object to its force:—not to the extreme of
Liberty that I find there, but that there is no protection
against tyranny.”
De Tocqueville asks :
“Is any one treated with cruelty and injustice in
America, to whom shall he appeal ?
u To the Public Opinion? ftps that which forms the
Majority.
“ To the Legislative Body ? It represents the Majority,
and obeys it blindly.
“To the Public Force? Public Force is only the
Majority under arms.
“To a Jury ? It is but the Majority, clothed with
the power of pronouncing its own decrees. The Judges
themselves are in some states elected by the Majority;
and, however unreasonable or unjust your treatment,
you have no course but to submit.”


To this Tyranny of the Majority De Tocqueville finds
a barrier, in the Lawyers of America; and he makes the
following profound, but most practical remarks, on their
position with reference to the future stability of that
great Republic:—
“ The Lawyers of America,” says De Tocqueville,
“ where there is no nobility, no men of letters, and where
the people are distrustful of the rich, form the superior
political class, and the most intellectual portion of Ameri-
can society. They can, therefore, gain nothing by change.
They are thus made conservative, and this is a feeling
added to the love of order which is so natural to them.
They are the American aristocracy, and they form the
most powerful, and so to speak, the only counterpoise to
the Democracy.”
Important testimony this, my friends, to the value of
the “ Great Brotherhood of the Law,” regarded as the
natural barrier under Republican Institutions like
America, against the excessive pressure of the Democratic
principle; but which I quote to you, not from any idea
that in social communities founded on the Constitutional
Law of England, any such office is assumed by the
Lawyers, but rather as showing you the general conser-
vative tendency of the English Law, even when adopted
by Republican Governments, as well as suggesting this
remark, that the study and practice of the English Law
will insensibly raise in every candid mind all proper
barriers against the undue preponderance of the naturally
democratic principles of every individual and isolated
member of a free and independent community.
But besides being pleased with the American Lawyers,
De Tocqueville finds great safety for America in the
Municipal Institutions; where “Democracy may con-


same its dangerous activity, and where the people may
serve a sort of apprenticeship to their Republican duties.”
These Municipal institutions he dwells on at great length,
and evidently considers this as one of the most important
parts of his work; and so do others. If any of my
hearers should like to pursue the subject of Municipal
Institutions a little further, they will find an admirable
chapter on the subject in M. Guizot’s History of Civili-
zation in Europe.
In considering the effect of the passage I read to you
from De Tocqueville as to the Tyranny of the Majority
in a pure Republic, and in applying its warnings to any
community founded upon English Constitutional Law, as
at present practically operating throughout the British
Empire; you must ever bear in mind the great peculi-
arity of the English Constitution in so balancing and guard-
ing the most opposite interests of all ranks and orders in
the community, that each is insensibly compelled to com-
municate its due proportion of activity, and no more than
its due proportion of activity to the practical business of
good legislation.
There are most excellent reasonings on this topic
throughout I)e Lolme’s Essay, and in almost every page
of Professor Smyth’s Lectures, but as they do not directly
and immediately elucidate the subject of this evening’s
Lecture, I must not read them to you. I must, however,
in reference to this u Tyranny of the Majority,” refer
you to some admirable warnings, in Professor Smyth’s
Lectures against the danger of applying these Abstract
Principles of Natural Right to existing and established
communities.
“Judging from the conduct and reasonings of too


many among us,” says the Professor, in one of the Intro-
ductory Lectures on the French Eevolution—annually
addressed to the University of Cambridge —“we should
say that the French Eevolution has rolled over us with
all its thunders in vain; and that we are still as thoughtless,
presumptuous, and. ignorant, as we were, before those
terrible scenes had taught us the rashness and fatal effects
of abolishing existing distinctions of ranks and orders
and ancient Institutions; and the absurdity of relying
for good laws upon the single, unaided operation of the
great Eepublican principle of “ self-government, ” as it is
called that is, “ the Art of governing by the Majority
the mere Majority, no matter how constituted or num-
bered ; the Art of resolving a Kingdom into its Parishes,
and governing by its Vestries.”
But I must hasten to a close—lt would be quite be-
side my duty to discuss any of these theories. We are,
I trust, all of us content with the practical liberty to be
enjoyed under British Law; and for my part, at least,
ha\ mg never heard or read of any Nation or Community
which enjoyed more practical liberty than Englishmen,
I listen with great indifference to any of these thoretical
speculations. I have ever thought that the application
of theoretical principles of Abstract Eight to our estab-
lished institutions must be fraught with extreme peril to
all our daily comforts and peace;—and, how any person
acquainted with the great land-marks of English Law,
and acknowledging, as every such person must, how care-
fully the Natural Liberty of Man is provided for, and
how little the Natural Equality of Man is interfered with,
in all our English Institutions; or rather how anxiously
the Natural Equality of Man is guarded and fenced


about, —in the enactments of all English Laws, as well
as in their administration; —how any such reasonably
well-informed person should be led astray by these specu-
lative theories from our practically ultra-republican
Liberty, surpasses, and has ever surpassed, my individual
and unaided comprehension.
I fear I have wearied you by these remarks; but you
must see that I was unavoidably led into them, as part
of the consideration of the fourth essential of Valid Law,
the u Consent of the People;” a phrase which every
“politician” clothes with his own peculiar ideas; and as
to which you must exercise your own judgment. I could
only bring before you a few of the opinions of those great
and wise men, who have investigated the foundations of
Abstract Law, —and who have laboured anxiously, and
often thanklessly, to guard us against the sophist, the
demagogue and the experimentalist.
But to be effectually guarded against all these perils,
so that you may preserve undiminished the English Con-
stitutional Liberties; which, as Blackstone says, in the
final words of his Commentaries, are “ the best birthright
and noblest inheritance that your posterity can claim at
your hands,” you must, by the unerring light of the
history of your own country, test the accuracy and truth-
ful wisdom of these abstract principles. “It is there,
in the history of our own country,” says Professor
Smyth, from whom I have already quoted and as the
Lecturer to whom, in their youthful days at the Univer-
sity of Cambridge, those great Constitutional authorities
Hallam and Macaulay listened with patient atten-
tion and anxious reflection ; and from whose lessons of
public wisdom and political honour hundreds of Eng-


land’s noblest public characters may, in the present day,
trace their own philanthropic and high-minded princi-
ples, and the pages of whose Lectures you will never
open without instruction : “lt is,” says Professor
Smyth, “ there, in the history of our own country, that
we shall learn those lessons which are, of all others, the
most important : —to prevent Revolutions, still more
than how to conduct them :—acquire timely habits of
caution and forethought, of modesty and calmness ;
obtain instruction, which we do not purchase by our
own suffering;—and have our existing passions and
prejudices, our selfishness and our unreasonableness
awed into silence and subdued and transformed into
practical wisdom, by Meditation on the Past.”
I must now conclude this Lecture.
Earnestly and with a sincere desire to communicate
sound practical wisdom, I have this evening endea-
voured to perform the duty which the good opinion of
others thought me able to undertake, in explaining, as
far as the limits of an evening’s Lecture would allow me,
some of the fundamental essentials of Law, in their ap-
plication to the particular Laws under which we live in
comfort, in one civil community as British subjects.
As always happens, when an individual comes out
of his own limited routine of thought, and casts down
what Lord Bacon calls—
The idols of his own den,
I have, most pleasantly to myself, refreshed my own mind,
by recalling these old friendships of my youthful studies.
And not less delightfully or advantageously to myself,
have I renewed this evening the impressions of old-
fashioned legal principles, long since engraven on my


mind ; impressions which I would fain hope have also
been communicated to your minds this evening, and have
produced in all our minds, I trust, this gradual, unalter-
able conviction : —that there are some eternal unchange-
able and catholic truths in these old-fashioned principles
of Hooker, Burke and Blackstone, which are manifested
even in our own times by their complete and as it were
fresh and practical adaptation to our own living selves,
in all our daily duties, political and social ; —whether as
subjects of the mighty British Empire ; —as colonists of
New South Wales ; —or in the still more important
office and responsible duty now cast upon all of us in
every condition of Colonial life, of each contributing his
efforts to bind together into one harmonious Federa-
tion, all the Subjects of British Law, in this the Australian
Hemisphere. *
I have now only to thank you for the patience with
which you have listened to me, during this attempt to
render Law interesting to you; and I shall indeed rejoice,
if any of you should hereafter be induced to investigate
further the Laws of England for your own gratification
and mental improvement, by the study of the authors I
have cited ; or, if anything I have said this evening
should hereafter be usefully remembered by any who
have this evening honoured me with their attention.
* Since this Lecture was delivered, the subject of Federation has been so
abundantly discussed, that a few additional words are necessary here to explain
my views on this most important subject; more especially with regard to the
extent and the particular objects for which I consider a Federative Union of the
Australasian Colonies durable and practicable. The result of my repeated
consideration of the subject is, first, that there are many objects of almost
exclusively Australian interest, upon which Federation of some kind is absolutely


necessary; and that this, if rightly undertaken by the Colonies, and carried out
in a generous spirit towards each other, will bo productive of most advantageous
results. The second observation I would make is, that there are many other
objects of only remote and partial interest to the Colonies contemplating
Federation; and upon such topics, it must be obvious that Federation should not
be attempted, as the consideration of them would only tend to embarrass and
delay the really necessary Federation ; while their establishment at present
would complicate unnecessarily our intercolonial and home relations, and hamper
the independent action of the several colonies.
Under theyfrst head of objects to be accomplished by Federation, I should class—
1. All measures for the mutual and vigorous defence of all the Australasian
Colonies, both by land and by sea; and secondly, for the maintenance of
all Postal Steam Traffic with England and other countries.
2. The construction and maintenance of all intercolonial Railroads, Common
Roads, Telegraph Lines, &c.
3. The settlement of all Border Customs, and Intercolonial Trade and Commerce
regulations upon some united and friendly principle.
4. The arrest and extradition of criminal offenders for specified causes.
Under the second , or less important objects of Federation, I should specify—
1. The establishment of Federative Courts of Appeal on all Litigation of purely
Colonial nature; but without taking away or affecting the right to appeal to
the Privy Council.
2. The assimilation, as far as possible, of our Criminal codes Insolvency Laws
Probates, and Administrations, &c.
3. The same as to Naturalization, Marriage, Patent, Copyright, and Evidence of
Judicial and Publi c Records and Transactions.
If the several objects of Federation be thus kept apart, I see no difficulty in
the early establishment of an “ Australasian Legislature” by Imperial and Colonial
Statutes ; which Legislature could hereafter deal with any additional topics as they
may arise.
There are only two other remarks which I wish to make on this most important
matter. The first is, that Federation cannot at the present day be viewed as in
times past, when Great Britain was literally and truly a distant seat of Govern-
ment. The universal extension of telegraphy to almost hourly communication
with Great Britain has, to all intents and purposes, rendered these Australian
Colonies, both politically and commercially, an integral part of Great Britain,
except for mere local matters, as above divided into two heads. The second remark
is, that the vast increase and developement of the Imperial Steam Navy has, in
like manner, and in connexion with telegraphy, given to the Australian Colonies
most complete defensive security, and that we are now perfectly at leisure to devote
ourselves both safely and efficiently to our own local interests in all the arts and
sciences, and in all social and administrative improvements.






LECTURE
GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE,
DELIVERED AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
On March sth. 1860.
THE HON. SIR CHARLES NICHOLSON, D.C.L.
CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY,
IN THE CHAIR.
“ There have been Lawyers that were Orators, Philosophers, His-
torians ;—there have been Bacons and Clarendons. There will be
none such any more, till, in some better age, true ambition and love
of fame, prevail over avarice ; and till men find leisure and en-
couragement to prepare themselves for the exercise of this profession
by climbing up to the “ Vantage Ground ” (so my Lord Bacon calls
it) of science, instead of grovelling all their lives below in a mean,
but gainful application to all the little arts of chicane. Till this
happen, the Profession of the Law will scarce deserve to be ranked
among the learned professions; and whenever it happens, one of
the Vantage Grounds to which men must climb, is Metaphysical
and the other, Historical Knowledge. They must pry into the secret
recesses of the human heart, and become acquainted with the whole
moral world, that they may discover the abstract reason of all Laws .
and they must trace the Laws of particular states, especially of their
own, from the first rough sketches to the more perfect drafts ; from
the first causes or occasions that produced them, through all the
effects, good and bad, that they have produced.”
Bolinobroke. Letters on History.




SUMMARY OF LECTURE 11.
Introductory Observations; Opinions of Bentham, Lord Avon-
more, box. Mr. Justice Coleridge, and Sir W. Jones on
the ~\ alue of Blackstone’s Commentaries ; their import-
ance to English and American Liberties; proposed reprint
of our Colonial Statutes, and the reserved Judgments of
Supreme Court
cope and Object of Proposed Lectures; Abstract Law or
Jurisprudence as defined and noticed by Dr. Johnson,
Sir J. Mclntosh, Cicero, Hooker, Burke, Blackstone,
Hallam, Lord Bacon
Ihe Study of Jurisprudence as a Branch of University Edu-
cation, best commenced with the original text of Black-
stone’s Commentaries ; summary of the topics of these
volumes
On the Study of Jurisprudence, with a view 7 to Professional
Practice ; English Law Lectures ; Bolingbroke’s obser-
vations on Metaphysics and History as connected with
Legal Studies ; Cicero de Oratore ; Coleridge on the
Mental Dangers of Advocacy, and on the Metaphysics
of Theology ; Hooker on the Union of Religion wdth
Justice
All sound Jurisprudence founded on “ Conscience ” ; Cicero de
Legibus; Digby’s “Broadstone of Honor”; Professor
Smyth of Cambridge
Comparison of Legal Study with other branches of University
Course; Cicero, Seneca, Hallam ; O’Brien’s Lawyer;
his Character and Rule of Holy Life;” The Topics of
Lectures surveyed and explained
First Course 2. Constitutional Law ;3. Legislative System ;
4. Judicial System ; 5. Justice of the Peace ; 6. Common
Law of England; 7. Law of Property; 8. Commercial
Jurisprudence and Mercantile Law; 9. Civil Law and
Equity Jurisprudence; 10. Modern Conveyancing and
Testamentary Dispositions
Second Course l. Municipal Corporations; 2. Joint-Stock
Companies ;3. Commercial Partnerships; 4. Principal
and Agent; 5. Trustees and Executors ; 6. Mortgagors
and Mortgagees ; 7. Landlord and Tenant; 8. Husband
and Wife ; 9. Parent and Child ; 10. Master and Servant
Concluding Remarks Recent death of Lord Macaulay;
Remarks by the present Lord Chancellor of Ireland
upon Lord Brougham, and Modern Law Reformers




LECTURE 11.
“ It is an nndeniable position, that a competent knowledge of the
Laws of the Society in which we live is the proper accomplishment
of every Gentleman and Scholar; a highly useful, I had almost
said essential, part of liberal and polite education.”
The passage which I have just read to you is taken
from the first Introductory chapter of Mr. Justice
Blackstone’s celebrated Lectures on the Laws of Eng-
land, addressed exactly a century ago to the “ Vice-
Chancellor and Gentlemen of the University of Oxford,”
and which, published afterwards in their present form,
have become familiar to all wherever the English tongue
is spoken.
I have commenced these Lectures before the Uni-
versity of Sydney with the above extract from
Blackstone, stating before an University audience that
Law must be considered and treated as a branch of
u liberal and polite education ” and as the “accomplish-
ment of Gentlemen and Scholars ; ” not merely in order
to impress these leading truths on our minds at the


very outset of these Lectures, but also because the Law
Lecturer, from whom I have quoted the passage, sup-
plied by bis own Lectures the most perfect model of
11 Law ” Lectures which were ever addressed to any
assemblage of Gentlemen or Scholars, or delivered at
any establishment of English Education.
As Blackstone’s most unrelenting critic, Bentham,
was forced to admit—“ Blackstone, first of all institu-
tional writers, taught Jurisprudence to speak the
Language of the Scholar and Gentleman, put a polish
on that rugged science, cleansed her from the dust and
cobwebs of the ‘ office,’ decked her out to advantage
from the toilette of classic erudition, enlivened her
with metaphors and allusions, and sent her abroad in
some measure to instruct, and in a still greater measure
to entertain, the most miscellaneous and even the most
fastidious audiences.”
So also, Lord Avonmore, one of the most brilliant of
Irelands brilliant Lawyers, said—“ Blackstone it was
who first gave to ‘ Law ’ the air of a science ; he found
it a skeleton and clothed it with life, color, and com-
plexion , he embraced the cold statue, and by his touch
it grew into youth, health and beauty.”
“Blackstone’s style of English,” wrote Fox in a
private letter, “is the very best among our modern
writers always easy and intelligible, far more exact
than Hume, and less studied and made up than
Bobertson.”
The same opinion Fox thus publicly expressed in
Parliament : “ Blackstone’s purity of style I particu-
larly admire ; he is distinguished as much for simplicity
and strength as any writer in the English Languge.


He is perfectly free from all Gallicisms and ridiculous
affectations, for which so many of our modern authors
and writers are so remarkable.”
Mr. Justice Coleridge notices “ the lucid order of
the Commentaries, their sound and clear exposition of
the Law, their style—almost faultless in its kind ; and
the learning, judgment, and taste of Blackstone, and,
above all, his total want of self-display.”
So Sir W. Jones speaks of the Commentaries “ As
the most correct and beautiful outline that ever was
exhibited of any human science.”
But in these days, audiences such as I now address,
or rather all audiences addressed in the English Lan-
guage, have still larger and most solid reasons for
reverential attachment to Blackstone’s Commentaries ;
and the chief of those reasons is—that by their publica-
tion the middle classes of Englishmen were first
awakened to a due sense of their own importance in the
community, and acquired a familiar knowledge of all
their political as well as their social rights.
Further than this, in England,—and in America
also, —from the date of these Commentaries, not the
middle classes alone, but as the 18th century advanced
the large masses of Society, “ the millions”—as
thoughtful men now style those who used to be called
the lower classes of Society, —became familiarized and
practically acquainted with all the great and ancient
land marks of English liberty, whereby our properties,
franchises, reputations and even lives were placed above
all peril; and learned from their pages to understand,
and therefore to appreciate, ail our social privileges and
political liberties.


In Burke’s speech on American Taxation you will find
the most distinct and important testimony given to the
value of the Commentaries, in connection with the first
establishment of the American liberties.
Lastly, to refer to the recent edition of 11 Blackstone’s
Commentaries abridged and adapted to the existing Law
and intended for use in our public Schools and Universi-
ties,” Mr. Warren well remarks :—“ It was Blackstone’s
Commentaries, which about the middle of the last
century introduced large classes of English society to a
knowledge of the Laws of their country, of which it
gave them so attractive an account and so full and
accurate a chart as to render ignorance and indifference
any longer inexcusable.”
With such unanimous and high testimony to the value
of Blackstone’s Commentaries as a Text Book for all
Students of English Law or Jurisprudence, it must be
obvious to every one, that the task of a Lecturer or
Reader on these subjects must he very simple. His task
must he, to accompany the Student in following the steps
of Blackstone; and while so doing, he must endeavour:—
Ist. To point out the most important alterations and
modifications of the English Law since the time of
Blackstone in the various political, social and domestic
relations lectured upon, with especial reference to our
own community 2nd. To direct the Student’s attention
to the various fundamental principles and philosophical
maxims of General Jurisprudence on which our English
and Colonial Laws are based; and which are in fact the
great landmarks to guide the future progress of the
Student in every branch of Jurisprudence.
To fill up the u C hart ” laid down by Blackstone so


far as it affects our own Australian Laws, was the first
object I had in view in accepting the appointment I have
the honor to hold in this University; and indeed, to
correct the outlines of that Chart so far as to present to
every “ Australian ” a guide to the study of the English
Laws as modified and adapted to our Colonial require-
ments, would he an undertaking worthy of the most
erudite and ambitious of our Australian Lawyers; but
when we contemplate and examine our Colonial Statute
Book, and observe and consider the confusion and
entanglement in which our Colonial Statute Law seems
to be huddled together, and the extreme difficulty of
tracing legislation, and collating these Statutes with each
other, on any particular topic or sections ; —when we
consider all these impediments in the way of the practical
use of and reference to our Colonial Statute Book, I con-
fess I cannot hold out much hope to an University
Audience, that their Lecturer on General Jurisprudence
will be able to accomplish much towards the elucidation
of our Colonial Laws, or he able to fill up much of the
outline of our Colonial Jurisprudence.
It seems to me that the first step to be taken towards
the improvement of our Colonial Laws, and this before
any measures are taken for their amendment or consoli-
dation, must be a correct reprint of all the Ordinances
and Acts of the Colonial Legislature, or other proper
authorities, in their mere chronological order from the
commencement of the Colonial Statute Law, at least to
the close of the year 1859—and without any annotations,
remarks, or other commentary; but simply with a view
to the amplest and most accurate investigation of the
present state of our Law.


In like manner I regret that I cannot even refer you
to any authorized collection or reports of reserved
judgments of our Supreme. Court, in all its several
Jurisdictions of Common Law, Equity, Insolvency, Yice-
Admiralty, and Ecclesiastical matters. Even in the area
comprised in the Equitable Jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court, I have myself collected more than 120 reserved
Judgments upon points in Equity Jurisprudence of great
importance, and if other Members of'the Legal pro-
fession would collect and arrange the reserved Judgments
on the other branches of the Jurisdiction of that Court,
I am satisfied that a most valuable, or rather an invalu-
able collection of Colonial Law would result from a very
moderate expenditure of Labour.
But, Gentlemen, until all the Colonial Statute Law,
and the reserved Judgments of the Supreme Court are
thus collected and arranged first in chronological order
as I have suggested, and afterwards classed under the
several topics of Law’or Jurisprudence, I cannot hope
to bring from these Colonial sources of information much
light upon our Colonial Jurisprudence.
Nevertheless in the course of these Lectures, I shall
endeavour to elucidate the various topics by references
to as many of the Colonial Statutes and Eeserved
Judgments as are applicable and within my knowledge ;
and must trust to future labours to bring Colonial Juris-
prudence more usefully under your consideration.
Let us now consider more closely the precise scope
and object of these proposed Lectures on Jurisprudence.
“Law,” says Dr. Johnson, “is the science in which
the greatest powers of the understanding are applied to


the greatest number of facts.” And Sir James Mclntosh
(when commenting on this dictum of Dr. Johnson)
says,—“No one who is acquainted with the variety and
multiplicity of the subjects of Jurisprudence and the
prodigious powers of discrimination employed upon
them, can doubt the truth of this observation.”
The Law that I would hope to explain will be founded
on that Abstract Law of which Cicero speaks in his
Treatise de Republica : —“ Est quidem vera lex, recta
ratio, naturae congruens, diffusa in omnes, constans,
sempiterna, quae vocet ad officium jubendo, vetando a
fraude deterreat; quae tamen neque probos frustra jubet
aut vetat, nec improbos jubendo aut vetando movet.
Huic legi, neque abrogari fas est, neque derogari ex hac
aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari potest. Nec vero per
senatum aut per populum solvi hac lege possumus, neque
est quaerendus explanator aut interpres ejus alius. Neque
erit alia lex Eomae, alia Athenis—alia nunc, alia post hac;
sed ct omnes gentes et omni tempore una lex et sempi-
terna et immutabilis continebit; unusque erit communis
quasi magister et imperator omnium Deus. I lie legis
hujus inventor, disceptator, lator :—cui qui non parebit
ipse se fugiet, ac naturam hominis aspernatur; atque
hoc ipso luet maximas paenas, etiam si csetera, supplicia
quae putantur, effugerit.”
It is of this Abstract Law or General Jurisprudence
that Hooker speaks, in the noble peroration of his First
Book, when he says :—“ Of Law there can be no less
acknowledged than that her seat is the Bosom of God,
her voice the Harmony of the World, all things in
Heaven and Earth do her homage, the very least as feel-
ing her care, the greatest as not exempted from her


power; both angels and men, and creatures of what
condition soever, though each in different sort and
manner, yet all with uniform consent, admire her as the
mother of their peace and joy,”
Again, in another passage set forth in the motto to the
first course of these Lectures, the same elightened
Philosopher from whom I have already quoted, Sir James
Mclntosh, observes, u There is not, in my opinion, in
the whole compass of human affairs so noble a spectacle
as that which is displayed in the progress of Jurispru-
dence ; —where we may contemplate the cautious and
unwearied exertions of wise men, through a long course
of ages, withdrawing every case as it arises from the
dangerous power of discretion, and subjecting it to
inflexible rules ; extending the dominion of Justice and
Reason, and gradually contracting within the narrowest
possible limits the domain of Brutal Force and Arbi-
trary will.’’
So again Burke, in his celebrated speech on American
taxation, says: ‘-'the science of Jurisprudence is the
pride of the human intellect; a science which with all
its defects, redundancies and errors, is the collected
reason of ages, combining the principles of original
justice with the infinite variety of human concerns.”
“ It is,” he continues, “ one of the first and noblest of
human sciences ; and does more to quicken and invigo-
rate the human understanding, than all other kinds of
human learning put together ; but it is not apt, except
in persons very happily born, to open and liberalize the
mind exactly in the same proportion.”
I need not remind you that Sir James Mclntosh and
Burke were antagonists in early political life, and always


of very different opinions on political topics, particularly
as' to the French Revolution; but in these passages as
to the moral and mental effect of the study of the Law,
you observe there is the most exact coincidence of
opinion between these master minds in Philosophy and
True Learning.
You will see, if you refer to Burke’s speech from
which I have read this extract, that Burke was replying
to his then political antagonist Charles Greville; and that
the latter part of the passage quoted by me as to the mental
effect of the study of the Law, as not “ opening and
liberalizing the mind ” in the same proportion that it
became quickened and invigorated,—was an oratorical
introduction to an attack upon the policy of a political
opponent; and must, therefore, not be considered as
entitled to so much weight, as if written by Burke after
calm reflection. I have quoted, however, the whole of
these sentences exactly as they stand, in order that you
may have the full weight of Burke’s authority, in
estimating the scope and object of the studies we are
now about to enter upon.
To me it seems that, however much there may have
been, in the study or practice of the English Law in the
days of Burke, which might not tend to open and liberalize
the mind, subsequent alterations in that Law (from
Burke’s age to the present) have manifested and developed
at least among Lawyers themselves, a tendency to open
and liberalize the mind.rather too widely ; and that at
all events the tendency of the present generation of
Lawyers is much more to experimentalize in Legislation,
than to build on the old foundations of our ancestors. I
would also suggest that Burke’s concluding sentence


wouldfind few dissentients, if we understand the warning
as referring rather to the practice of the Law, as a pro-
fession than its study as a science.
I think I may also add another observation on this
oft quoted passage from Burke. Burke was a statesman,
not a lawyer —a political philosopher rather than a meta-
physician or psychologist, and therefore not so well able
as we could wish to appreciate the peculiar excellencies
of a Jurisprudence which had not then assumed any of
the forms of a science ; but had only then cast off its
cumbrous feudal armour, and was just beginning to re-
veal all its harmonious and noble proportions, and
present itself to Englishmen in the light in which we are
now enabled to view it.
Let us next refer to Blackstone, our favourite Author
and Commentator. In the introduction to his Commen-
taries Blackstone thus speaks of the Theory and Practice
of the Law; —“ The Law is a Science which distinguishes
the criterions of right and wrong, which teaches to estab-
lish the one, and to restrain, to punish and to redress the
other; which employs in its theory the noblest faculties
of the mind, and exerts in itspractice the cardinal virtues
of the heart; a science which is universal in its use and
extent; accomodated to each individual, yet compre-
hending the whole community.”
These quotations from Dr. Johnson, Sir James
Mclntosh, Edmund Burke, Cicero, Hooker, and
Blackstone, as to the general nature of Abstract Law
or Jurisprudence, are thus echoed by the great
Constitutional Philosopher of our own age, Henry
Hallam ; —whose star has just melted away into the
He&vens ; but who, while among us, seemed in his


all requisite materials are accumulated to his hands, is
but watching the stream that will run on for ever ; and,
though I am fully sensible that I could have much
improved what is now offered to the Public by keeping
it back for a longer time, I should but then have had
to lament the impossibility of exhausting my subject.”
“EIIOIEI, the modest phrase of the Grecian sculp-
tors, well expresses the imperfection that attaches to
every work of literary industry or of philosophical in-
vestigation. But I have other warnings to bind up my
sheaves while I may —my own advancing years and the
gathering in of the heavens.”
Nevertheless, in looking through Hallam’s works for
some traces of his opinions as to the study of Jurispru-
dence, I find that in the last edition of his Literary
History of Europe, he thus touches with a master’s
hand the subject before us. Writing of the History
of Jurisprudence, when its study became revived in
Europe about the 12th century, Mr. Hallam thus shows
the advantages of Jurisprudential studies as a mental
discipline, and the revival of legal studies as accom-
panying the progress of enlightened civilization. His
words are—“ The application of general principles of
Justice to the infinitely various circumstances which may
arise in the disputes of men with each other, is in itself
an admirable discipline of the moral and intellectual fac-
ulties. Even where the primary rules of right and policy
have been obscured in some measure by a technical and
arbitrary system, which is apt to grow up perhaps
inevitably in the course of civilization, the mind gains
in precision and acuteness, though at the expense of
some important qualities j and a people wherein an


artificial Jurisprudence is cultivated, requiring both a
regard to written authority, and the constant exercise
of a discriminating judgment upon words, must be
deemed to be emerging from ignorance.”
He then proceeds to comment on the condition of
Europe in the 12th century, and the importance to all
Law Students of studying the Feudal Law in connec-
tion with the Civil Law; and I hope you will all consult
Hallam’s own pages for this slight but invaluable notice
of the subject before us in these Lectures.
But there is another philosopher, Bacon, foremost in
the scroll of fame, whose mighty intellectual powers we
have to lament were never applied to the advancement
of the science of Jurisprudence. As Hallam well re-
marks—Bacon was compelled, for a reason sufficiently
obvious and almost avowed, to be cautiously silent upon
the Art of Government, the craft of his King. The
motives for silence were so powerful that, even in his
“ Advancement of Learning,” the proper place for the
science of Law, he treats only of two heads in political
science—the methods of enlarging the boundaries of a
State, which King James could hardly resent as an in-
terference with his own monopoly;—and one of far more
importance to the well being of mankind, the principles
of universal Jurisprudence, or rather of universal Legis-*
lation, in which he investigates the standard on which
all laws ought to be framed.
These principles of Legislation Bacon has condensed,
or rather sketched, in ninety-seven aphorisms or short
rules which, from his great experience as a professional
lawyer, as well as his peculiar vocation for that part of
philosophy, deserve to be well studied at this day.


own mental character to have combined the religious
respect for antiquity, so characteristic of Dr. Johnson,
without his bigotry or morbid superstition,—the wide
philosophic powers of Mclntosh’s mental vision,
without his speculative rovings,—and the sound con-
stitutional erudition and political sagacity of Burke,
without his enthusiastic and irritable temperament.
In the last of Hallam’s invaluable compositions,
“ The Literature of Europe during the Middle Ages,”
he expressly excepts “ Law ” from his consideration.
Never, I believe, having practised at the Bar, he seems
to have left the Legal Literature of Europe and of our
England in particular, without attempting to throw
any light upon its treasures, or applying thereto his
wonderful powers of industrious research and discrim-
ination. He did not claim Law or Jurisprudence
among the “ sheaves,” which, as he mournfully writes
in the Preface to the last edition of the Literature of
Europe, “ his own advancing years, and the gathering
in of the heavens, warned him to bind up.” The
passage I refer to in this most interesting of all his
works was written only a short time before his death
last year, and that passage so well expresses the modest
but earnest tone of Hallam’s mind, and seems so pro-
phetic of his own recent death, that I cannot help
reading it to you ; more especially as Hallam’s apol-
ogies may well furnish me with excuses for my own
shortcomings and deficiencies in these lectures ;
“ The Press is so active that no year passes without
accessions to our knowledge, even historically considered,
upon some of the multifarious subjects which the
present volume embrace. An author, who waits till


“ Upon such topics,” as Hallam continues, “the
progressive and innovating spirit of Bacon’s genius was
less likely to he perceived by his Royal Master ” ; and
these ninety-seven aphorisms certainly will well repay
the attentive perusal of the student of modern
J urisprudence.
Well indeed would it be, both for the Legal Profession
and the Public, if these high and philosophical views
of the nature of the duties of the Legal Profession as
thus depicted by such eminent men as Dr. Johnson, Sir
James Mclntosh, Burke, Blackstone, and Hallam, were
always present to our minds; but at least it is gratifying
to know, that such have been the views of these sound
and enlightened philosophers; and believing that they
are still the views entertained by all the leading
members of the Legal Profession in England and
America, I doubt not they will be found equally accept-
able to all Colonial members of “ the great brotherhood
of the law.”
But I must now leave these preliminary topics
relating to “ Abstract Law ’’ and to “ Lawyers ” as the
“ Jurisconsulti ” of a civilized community; and proceed
to more precise advice to you as pupils. You must
have already noticed that the authors from whom I
have quoted use the terms “Law” and “Jurisprudence”
as synonymous with each other; and throughout all
these readings I would wish you to understand these
words as of the same meaning. Unless actual laws
exist and can be cited to you as founded on those great
principles of Justice mid Reason with which I would
seek to imbue your minds, and which lie at the root o f


all sound Law, our Readings on General Jurisprudence
will be without practical illustration of the great truths
I am appointed to teach ; and, on the other hand, unless
our Readings be conducted so as to exemplify and
explain the practical duties of our daily life, I shall
despair of leaving any useful or beneficial trace of our
progress on your minds or memories.
I ought also here to state that, although it was the
wish of the University authorities that the Title of the
office in virtue of which I have the honour to deliver
these Lectures, should be 11 The Readership in General
Jurisprudence,” yet I must thank them for the indul-
gence which was kindly extended to me of perfect
freedom as to the topics of my Lectures; and I have
selected all those topics out of Blackstone’s Commen-
taries, chiefly in order that throughout the Lectures, I
may fix your attention on “ General Jurisprudence ”
only so far as its operation is observed in the practical
business of our daily life; and I shall endeavour to
keep your minds altogether free from those theoretical,
and in a great measure speculative inquiries, which
might perhaps appear to be popularly included under
the term “General Jurisprudence,” but which I believe
to be of little practical benefit to any student, certainly
to any youthful student of this University,
With this view also I have commenced this Introduc-
tory Lecture with the preceding remarks upon Black-
stone’s Commentaries ; and have sought to impress upon
your minds the inestimable value of that work, which I
now recommend to you, as the foundation of all our
future Readings.
It is the original text of Blackstone which you must


peruse, not the interpolated editions recently published,
incorporating only portions selected from Blackstone’s
text ; —which editions I only notice now as bearing
unanimous testimony to the value of the original text.
By only once perusing the original text of Blackstone
you will obtain a general outline or plan of what English
J urisprudence was a hundred years ago • and, having
once secured this basis for future operations, you will
find all your future studies agreeable and advantageous.
If, on the one hand, you would extend your studies
further back into the authorities cited by Blackstone, you
will find all your antiquarian investigations producing
increased clearness and accuracy of knowledge as to
principles. If, again, you extend your studies into the
century subsequent to Blackstone, you will find all our
statutes and amendments of the law, all our political
and social changes since 1760, easily arranging them-
selves under Blackstone’s text; and gradually supplying
your minds with legal knowledge applicable, and safely
applicable, to almost every question that may arise in
the present day, as to your own rights and duties. Ido
not recommend you at this stage of your studies under
my guidance even to consult these incorporated editions
of Blackstone ; not even the best, if not the only good
one, by Mr. Serjeant Stephen. This may, hereafter, be
useful to you but as students in Jurisprudence, you
would find its perusal of no present advantage. For
myself I know no style of composition so unpleasant
and painful as these incorporated editions ; I cannot read
a single chapter even of Mr. Serjeant Stephen’s without
a restless dissatisfaction. The intermittent change,
from Blackstone’s style to Mr. Stephen’s interpolated


sentences, is so irritating, that I feel that neither author
has fair play. Blackstone’s elegant and continuous
essay is all shattered into fragmentary sentences ; which
like the ruins of some ancient building, though incor-
porated into the walls of a modern edifice, only make us
lament the Vandalism of the present age, and regret
more deeply the absence of the original fabric. So, on
the other hand, Mr. Serjeant Stephen’s profoundly
learned and accurate statements of the law in its present
state are, by the constant necessity of using the text
of Blackstone, prevented from arranging themselves so
as to produce their own natural effect; but are cramped
and distorted, so as to fit the spaces left vacant by the
rejection of the old materials.
Let us just glance over the first two volumes.
In Blackstone’s first volume you will find in the
original text a lucid and correct statement of those
branches of English Jurisprudence which relate—first,
to our rights and duties as members of the same political
community ; and secondly to the determination of our
social and domestic relations towards each other.
The four introductory chapters should be attentively
perused by you all. They explain the nature of laws
in general, the grounds and foundation of English law ;
and define the countries subject to those laws, distinguish-
ing between Imperial and Colonial Law.
The body of the Commentaries is then commenced
by a firm and clear assertionpf the three absolute rights
of individuals, viz : —The enjoyment of personal security
and personal liberty, and the possession of private pro-
perty, —rights which must be primarily secured by
every code of Jurisprudence.


The remainder of the first volume, to the 13th chapter
inclusive, is then devoted to our social or relative duties,
public and private: our public duties in relation to
Magistrates, whether supreme, as the Legislative and
Executive authorities ; or subordinate, as Justices of the
Peace* &c; The 14th to 17th chapters relate to the
four private or domestic relations of life—viz., Master
and Servant, Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, and
Guardian and Ward, and the last chapter will bring under
your notice the nature of the Corporations of the Mother
Country, and the various incidents of these bodies in
their social and political capacity. The varied subjects
of this first volume of the Commentaries, and the
admirable spirit and tone of Blackstone’s Commentaries
on these most interesting topics, must render this portion
of his work very attractive to all students of Jurispru-
dence, whether of General Jurisprudence or of the
Jurisprudence of our own Colony.
In Blackstone’s second volume you will find an able
and lucid outline of the English Law of real and personal
Property; which almost all our subsequent legal writers
have adopted as the basis of their own treatises.
I need scarcely tell you that the Property laws of any
nation form perhaps the most important branch of its
Civil Jurisprudence; and in the English Laws of
Property, as explained by Blackstone, we see the most
striking developments of our own peculiarly compounded
nationality all more or less illustrating the great principles
of General Jurisprudence, which I shall bring under
your observation, during these University Lectures.
This second volume of Blackstone’s Commentaries has
always seemed to my mind more elaborated and highly


finished than the other volumes; although I believe that to
be owing rather to the circumstance that the English Law
of Property is in itself more completely elaborated, and
has undergone more cautious and less organic changes
than other branches of English Jurisprudence ; and the
Commentator, therefore, found this branch of his labours
more complete and ready for his masterly powers of
elucidation.
With regard to the Third and Fourth volumes of the
Commentaries, I do not wish you, during this year of
your studies, to do more than peruse the titles of the
several Chapters. These Volumes relate respectively, as
you will observe, to our Civil and our Criminal remedies
for wrongs against our personal or public rights, as
enunciated in the two preceding Volumes. In them-
selves, therefore, the topics of these last two Volumes of
the Commentaries supply little to elucidate the principles
of General Jurisprudence, while as illustrations of our
past English Jurisprudence so little remains Law at the
present day, that the perusal of these Volumes would be
of little use except to the antiquary or Law Student.
This leads me to another remark. In recommending
the first two Volumes of Blackstone’s Commentaries as
your first Text Book, and as the basis of these lectures,
none of you must imagine that your attending these
Lectures will supply you with your professional educa-
tion as Law Students, or that these Lectures will, in the
least, assist you in passing your Examinations at the
Supreme Court, either as Attorneys or Barristers.
University Lectures on Jurisprudence are, as Blackstone
said, addressed to you as “ part of a liberal and 'polite
education , and as an essential part of the education of


Scholars and Gentlemen and will have no more of a
professional character than is necessary to elucidate each
subject. Law as a Profession, must be studied very diffe-
rently from Law as a particular branch of the University
Curriculum. In England from the first establishment
of the Lawyers as a distinct class in the community in
the 12th and 13th centuries, when the four Inns of
Court—Lincoln’s Inn, the Inner Temple, the Middle
Temple and Gray’s Inn, —forming one Metropolitan Legal
University for the study and practice of the Law, —
became fixed, nearly contemporary with the settlement
of the Aula Regis by Magna Charta, —from that date
until the age of Blackstone, you will find that the study
of the Law, as a Profession , was promoted, so far as the
Inns of Court could promote it, through the Readings
of the several Inns, where every Barrister and Serjeant,
before admission to his Legal degrees, was required to
go through a long and severe course of elaborate mootes,
readings, exercises and orations on various legal topics,
embracing the whole compass of Jurisprudence.
These readings, mootes, and exercises fell into disuse
about a century and a half ago, but their good uses
have been recently revived by the establishment of
Law Lectures under the direction of a Council of
Education, consisting of the Attorney-General of
England, and a permanent Board of the leading Queen’s
Counsel of all the four Inns of Court.
I would fain hope that this short course of Lectures on
Jurisprudence may suggest some additional advantages
to be provided for Australian Law Students; but at
least I will use my best efforts to render these Readings
useful to the Law Students who listen to me, though


only as introductory to their professional studies here-
after ; and after each Lecture I shall be most happy,
following the example of the Cambridge Professors, to
converse with any one, who may think I can assist him
by any advice or information in my power; and you may
peruse any of the books which I may from time to time
lay on the table.
The subjects of the English Law Lectures embracing,
as I have said, every topic of English Law and Practice,
will henceforth undoubtedly, form a most important and
valuable portion of the education of the Law Students
of England ; the lecturers or Leaders being selected
from Barristers of great eminence in their respective
branches of the Profession ; and most, if not all of them,
having given ipublic and ample evidences of their ability
by their several philosophical and scientific treatises on
various abstruse branches of the Law.
These English Lectures are, however, far more
elaborated than I could hope to address to you ; and
are replete with Professional learning to a degree which
I could not think adapted to this Colony ; —where we
are compelled to adopt a less ambitious and more
practical course of study. N evertheless, I would not
advise those of my audience, who may hereafter be, or
now are, of the Profession of the Law, or perhaps just
crossing its threshold, to place before themselves any
less lofty standard of excellence than those which have
always been held up before English Law Students.
And to enforce this advice let us for a few minutes
pause and consider the nature of the Legal Profession,
and its peculiar duties. This topic of practical j urispru-
dence will be best introduced to you by reading a


passage from Bolingbroke’s Letters on History,
respecting the state of the Legal Profession in his day,
at the beginning of last century.
“ I might instance in other professions the obligations
men lie under of applying to certain parts of history, and
I can hardly forbear doing so in the noble profession of
the Law, in its nature the most noble and beneficial to
mankind, but in its abuse and debasement the most
sordid and most pernicious. “A Lawyer is now, I speak”
says Bolingbroke “of ninety-nine in a hundred, to use
Tally’s words non nisi leguleius quidam cautus et acutus , —
prceco actionum , — cantorformularum, —auceps syllabarum
How admirably do these few words, which Bolingbroke
thus adopts from Cicero’s Treatise de Oratore, combine
together into one view all the mental and moral dangers
which beset the Lawyer’s career, whether Roman
or English • —and in pursuing your classical readings, in
the University course, you will find in the younger
Pliny’s Letters many comments on these words of Cicero
and the most interesting picture of the whole system of
the Roman Advocacy and Clientage. I will at least
attempt to impress Cicero’s words upon your memories
by a few remarks.
By “ leguleius cautus ” I understand Cicero to warn his
readers against gathering scraps and fragments of juris-
prudence, rather than fundamental principles and
essential rules of Right:—
By “prceco actionum,” I understand Cicero todesignate
that class of Lawyers who foment discord in Society for
the sake of actions to arise; ferreting out litigation among
individuals who, but for their interference, might have
lived in harmony with each other :


By “ cantor formularum ’’ Cicero warns the young
Lawyer against learning jurisprudence by rote, —against
the thoughtless use of precedents without considering
the legal principles involved therein, —against becoming
“ a mere singer of the forms of positive law ” instead
of having his whole being attuned to those
Harmonious Rules, which form the Universal Laws
of our one Common Nature of Humanity ;
Lastly, Cicero by the words 11 auceps syllalarum ,”
means to warn the Lawyer against becoming a mere
“ splitter of hairs ; ” as is often said of the mere
technical Lawyer : —who, by the acute and practised
subdivision and dissection of legal verbiage, and a ready
application of all the quirks and quibbles of litigation,
11 Can make the worse appear the better reason.”
These are the Lawyers, to whom I have often
listened before the recent Reform of English Chancery
Pleadings, who seemed at length to have brought their
minds to delight in wrangling over the “thens and
theres ”of a demurrer,— to take pleasure in mental
conflicts irrespective of the discovery of truth. Like
gladiators, advocates of this sort sacrifice the better
part of their own minds in “the keen encounter of
forensic wits,” and after long habitual surrender of their
moral nature to the ambition nurtured by petty
successes, seem to lose all sense of moral right and wrong
in the discussions in which they are engaged; and at
length rest their client’s defence and the vindication of
his rights rather on technical points and arguments and
mere forensic quibbles than on the real and substantial
merits of his case or on reasonings drawn from the
Eternal principles of the Laws of Conscience and


Honour, and on the familiar truths of Common Honesty ;
or that Social Virtue which regulates the duties of all
ranks and orders of human being in all the varied transac-
tions of life by that one harmonious and never failing
principle which is so well condensed and expressed in the
phrase, “ Fair dealing between man and man .”
But to return to the extract from Bolingbroke,—after
having thus expressed his opinion of the Lawyers of
England, according to his experience of ninety-nine in a
hundred of the Legal Profession, in the reigns of Queen
Anne and King George the First.—Bolingbroke thus
continues, in words which I would strongly recommend
to the consideration of every student of Jurisprudence :
“But there have been Lawyers that were Orators,
Philosophers, Historians, —there have been Bacons and
Clarendons. There will be none such any more, till in
some better age, true ambition and love of fame prevail
over avarice; and till men find leisure and encourage-
ment to prepare themselves for the exercise of this
profession, by climbing up to the “ vantage ground” (so
my Lord Bacon calls it) of Science, instead of grovelling
all their lives below in a mean, but gainful, application
to all the little arts of chicane. Till this happen, the
profession of the Law will scarce deserve to be ranked
among the learned professions ; and whenever it happens,
one of the vantage grounds to which men must climb is
Metaphysical , and the other Historical knowledge. They
must pry into the secret recesses of the human heart,
and become well acquainted with the whole moral world,
that they may discover the abstract reason of all Laws, —
and they must trace the Laws of particular states,
especially of their own, from the first rough sketches to


the more perfect drafts \ from the first causes or occasions
that produced them, through all the effects good and had
that they have produced.”
As to the hard truths contained in this denunciation
of the Lawyers of Boliugbrokes age, that they had
debased a Profession “ in its nature the noblest and most
beneficial to mankind, so as to become the most sordid
and the most pernicious,”—that Lawyers had allowed
a avarice to prevail over true ambition and love of fame,”
and that Lawyers had “ grovelled all their lives in a
mean, but gainful, application to ail the little arts of
chicane ” ; —I will merely reply by saying, that such
results are the faults or errors of the individual, not of
the Profession. There have been Paeons and Claien-
dons, as the scoffing Bolingbroke admits and well for
us, the countrymen of Bacon and Clarendon ; —well loi-
ns, and for all who dwell in peace and safety, and in
the secure enjoyment of all that makes life happy and
honorable, under the care of British Law ; —well for us
I say, that there have never been wanting, in every
peril of our Liberties, learned and patriotic Lawyers and
wise and enlightened Statesmen, who carefully studied
the great principles of British Law, and who have pre-
served the Landmarks of British Liberty,— k
an inheritance to us and our children for ever.
But, I would not dismiss this extract from Boling-
broke,'without impressing upon every one the truth of
its concluding remarks on the revival of the law as a
Profession, and as one of the noblest and most beneficial
to mankind.
It has revived during the present century, and must
revive chicflv by strict adherence to the rules here laid
K


down by Bolingbroke. Young men must find leisure
and encouragement to prepare themselves for the exercise
of this Profession, by climbing up to the <£ vantage
grounds,” of Science ; and especially must they climb to
the u vantage grounds” of Metaphysical and Historical
knowledge.
Here again you observe how Law and Jurisprudence
co-operate.
The Students of both must pry into the secret
recesses of the human heart, by the study of every
branch of metaphysical, or rather psychological, science,
as it is more properly called; —they must become
acquainted with the whole moral world, that they may
discover the abstract reason of all Law ] —and they must
labour until they at length acquire that magic insight
into first principles which renders Lawyers so influential,
not merely for the protection of the interests of their
individual clients, but for the advancement and against
the retrogression of a State.
Again, as Bolingbroke well remarks, to become sound
Lawyers, you must also become careful and attentive
Students of history. You must, as Bolingbroke says
“ trace the Laws of particular States, especially of your
own, from the first rough sketches to the more perfect
drafts; —from the first cause or reason that produced
them, through all the effects good and bad that they have
produced.”
To you, or any of you, who may thus be called upon
to adopt any branch of the Law as a profession, I would
ask what nobler work can be placed before any
Student, and what mental toil can be too great, and what


industry too laborious, to prepare yourselves for the
responsibility of such duties ?
Nevertheless, I would in this introductory Lecture,
warn those of my hearers who may already be Law
Students, or who may hereafter enter on the Study of the
Law as a Profession, that unless they are watchful they
will suffer both mentally and morally from too exclusive
attention to the Law and especially to its Practice. I
have already quoted to you Edmund Burke s opinion on
this point; and Coleridge in his Table Talk has a
striking passage to the like effect, but recommending the
study of the Metaphysics of Theology as a cure for the
mental perils of Advocacy. Coleridge’s words are 1 “I
think that upon the whole the Advocate is placed in a
position unfavourable to his moral being , and indeed to his
intellect also in its higher powers. Therefore, I would
recommend an Advocate to devote a part of his leisuie
time to some study of metaphysics or the metaphysics of
theology. Something I mean which shall call forth all
his powers, and centre his wishes in the investigation
of truth alone, without reference to a side to be
supported. No studies give such a power of distinguish-
ing as metaphysical, and in their natural and unperveited
tendency they are ennobling and exalting Some such
studies are wanted to counteract the operation of legal
studies and practice ; which sharpen indeed, but like a
grinding stone, narrow whilst they sharpen .”
That Metaphysical Studies are not without great use
as accompanying Legal Studies, Bentham’s celebrated
Treatise on Judicial Evidence well shows; but I am
disposed to think that you will find a more effectual and
simple corrective to the dangerous tendency of legal


studies, by adopting those high views of the Legal
Profession, which I have already suggested to you from
the quotations previously made; and which I know is
the view taken of the Profession by many of its brightest
ornaments.
Hooker, in the First Chapter of his fifth Book, thus
speaks of the inseparable union of Eeligion with Justice.
u So natural is the union of religion with justice, that
we may boldly deem there is neither, where both are
not. For how should they be' unfeignedly just, whom
Religion doth not cause to he such ; or they religious , who
are not found such by the proof of their just actions ?
If they who employ their labour and travail about the
public administration of justice , follow it only as a trade
with unquenchable and unconscionable thirst for gain : being
not in heart persuaded that Justice is God’s own work , and
themselves His agents in this business ; —the sentence of
right , God’s own verdict; —md themselves his Priests to
deliver it; —formalities of Justice do but serve to smother
right , and that which was necessarily ordained for the
common good , is, through shameful abuse , made the cause of
common misery.”
You must read the whole passage, to appreciate the
admirable manner in which the “judicious Hooker”
treats the vast subject of Public Equity, concluding with
these words: — a all good laivs arc the voices of right
reason , which is the instrument ivherewith God will have the
world guided ; ’ ’ —a sentence which I would have always
before our minds while studying Jurisprudence.
There is another remark which, if you adopt the high
view I would wish you to take of the study and practice


of Jurisprudence, must find its place in this Lecture, as
introductory to the course; and that is—you must never
ignore the existence of conscience,—nor admit for an
instant any philosophy which is based on a denial of
conscience, as an inherent part of man’s mental and
moral nature.
There is an excellent note in Mr. Justice Coleridge’s
edition of Blackstone discussing to some extent the
difference in foro conscientice between offences mala in se,
and those only inala prohibita ; and there is no possibility
of your avoiding this metaphysical difficulty which lies
at the threshold of every code of Jurisprudcnce.
Let me, therefore, most earnestly warn you against
that class of false philosophers, who, like Hobbes, Mande-
ville, Hume, Paley, and Bentham, denying the existence
of conscience , as the faculty by which we judge of right
and wrong ; —and so denying the permanent and immutable
character of the laws which it discovers to us; —substitute
in its place, as the guide of human conduct, several
varying and uncertain standards , called the Supreme Power
of a State, Self-interest , Utility , General Good of Man-
kind and other external and experimental standards. These
Philosophers wholly ignore the moral nature of man ;
and, forbidding him to look within for a guide and rule
to judge of human conduct, send him necessarily to the
cumbrous and variable accumulations of a painful
experience, to determine, not what is right , but what is
useful ; not what is honest , but what is profitable. ( a)
(a) Vide Cic. do Legibus I. 12. “ Quibus enim ratio a natura data est, iisdom
ctiara recta ratio data cst i ergo et lex, qmo ost recta ratio in jubendo et votando
si lex, jus quoquo ab omnibus ratio. Jus igitur datum est omnibus recteqi.ce
Socrates execri emu solehat qui primus utilitatem a natura sejunxesset , (b.) Ibid,


Even the pagan orator, unenlightened by the sun of
Christianity, could discern the fallacious character of
speculations such as these. Speaking of those who
made power and utility the measure of right and wrong,
Cicero indignantly exclaims :—“ Quod si psena, si metus
supplied, non ipsa turpitndo, deterret ab injuriosa facino-
rosaque vita, nemo est injnstus, et incauti potius habendi
sunt improbi. Turn autem qui non ipso honesto
movemnr nt viri boni simns, sed utilitate aliqua atque
frnctu, callidi sumus non boni.”
I would still further enforce this topic of my Lecture
by a short extract from a modern work, Higby’s <( Broad
Stone of Honoura copy of which is in your own
University Library, and which I trust you will all peruse
during your leisure. It is an attempt, —and a very
ingenious and successful attempt, —to apply the chivalric
honour of the middle ages to the facts and circumstances
of the nineteenth century.
The author, in his review of the callings which present
themselves to the notice of young men on entering upon
life, thus speaks concerning the Legal Profession:—
u The Profession of the Law will, of course, present
itself, and the question will arise whether it be consistent
with your Order. How this appears to mo to be
altogether a question of individual character, and not
one that will admit of any general conclusion. If you
are of studious habits; —of a decided disposition of
mind, not to be influenced by the subject of your study,
and of a devotedness to truth, not to be perverted or
overcome by sophistry,—if you are firmly established
in the principles of religion,—and if you are one of
those elevated spirits that are raised above the world,


above temptations and opinions : in that case
yon may embrace this Profession ; and look up to a
Cicero, a Sulpicius, a Daguesseau, a More, a Bacon, a
Clarendon, a Hale, a Mansfield, and an Eldon, as your
dignified Masters.” “ But,” continues the author, “if
this be not your character ; if nature has not so
fashioned you, and practice confirmed these habits ; if
a higher power has not so refined and elevated your
mind, I exhort you not to undertake the Profession of the
Lawf
The author then confirms his advice by quotations
from Clarendon, Bacon, Cicero, and other writers; and
concludes with an entreaty to this youthful aspirant for
the honours of the Legal Profession—“ after an honest
examination of his own powers, habits and disposition,
to make that decision which will disown every base and
unworthy motive ; —the decision of conscience and
honour; —which will assure to him his own respect,
whatever may be the subsequent opinion which
experience shall induce him to adopt.”
In this moral sensitiveness, and assertion of your
own honour and conscientiousness I wish you to lay a
broad and firm foundation for all your Legal Studies.
You will find it the more important, because as I have
already shown you by several quotations, the study of
Jurisprudence being the “ Collected Eeason of Ages,”
will necessarily withdraw us, often altogether, from
present thoughts, and the passing events of our own
passing age; and compel us, perhaps more than any
other study, to live with antiquity as with our own
living selves and contemporaries. In guiding you
through these studies, it will be my object to show you


that it is in these fixed rules of Truth , Justice . and
Honour that we trace those silver cords, which have
bound together, all the u Just Men” of every Age,
and of every Nation ; —and have linked the public
history of each Nation, with the history ol Humanity
both past and future, in one Universal Brotherhood.
And think not that it is immaterial to your studies
what school of Moral Philosophy you adopt.
The afeneral effect and result of these studies upon
your own mental and moral natures will be, I trust
beneficial; but it can only be so by the efforts of your
own minds, and according to your own mental and
moral idiosyncrasies; and recollecting my own difficulties
and doubts as a Law Student, and tracing these doubts
and difficulties, as I now can, to my having no fixed
and unvarying basis for my studies, I should be unjust
to you not to warn you against this chief danger that
besets the threshold of your career. For myself I can
truly promise you, that in this varied course of Lectures
on so many branches of our Jurisprudence, public and
private —political, social and domestic, —I have set
before my mind only your improvement; —and that my
great object will be to illustrate these great truths,
which Professor Smyth of Cambridge thus laid down
to his pupils :—“ that the magnanimity of uprightness , all
{he elevating , alt the attractive qualities of the human mind
aie the best protection of Nations , as well as of individuals;
That the path of Honour is the Path of True Policy ;
And that the Great Governor of the World , in public as
well as m private life , has indissolubly connected , even on
this side the grave , the happiness of his creatures with the
exercise of their virtues and the fulfilment of their duties J


It is now twenty-five years since these sentences
were addressed to me when a youthful student at Cam-
bridge ; and I assure you that I have found no thought
so useful to me during my own studies in Jurisprudence
as the thought that I was studying the human
developments of the great principles of Justice as laid
down by the Eternal and Almighty Governor of the
World for the happiness of his creatures ; and proud
indeed ought England to be that she possesses in her
own Jurisprudence, so many illustrations, of the truth
of those philosophical principles, which insist upon
placing the foundations of Positive Law on the highest
and noblest views both of our mental and moral
natures.
This leads me to another remark. These Lectures
on Jurisprudence being part of an University System
of Education, and the studies in Jurisprudence leading
us back into all ages of the world, and into the greatest
depths of philosophy, ancient and modern, will
necessarily compel us to take enlarged views of every
topic before us ; and after a time will create an instinctive
habit of examining and testing every topic of Jurispru-
dence in its widest possible relations to the progressive
development of Society.
I will illustrate my meaning by reference to your
other studies in this University ; —for example, your
mathematical studies.
You all remember that as you advanced in the
study of mathematics especially when you reached
Newton’s Principia, and when for the first time
your minds grasped the laws of gravitation,
your thoughts were compelled to rise above this


earth of ours as the scene of the actionmerely
of the mechanical powers,—you all remember how
from that date in your mathematical education you
felt that you had achieved a great mental advancement.
Your Mathematical Lectures and Leadings, both
synthetical and analytical, the whole area of your
mathematical studies from that date assumed to your
own minds, a vastness and grandeur infinitely above
their proportions while you were studying the Lever,
the Inclined Plane or the Screw, or working out the
most difficult problems in the Differential or Integral
Calculus.
So, Gentlemen, I would have you pursue your studies
in Jurisprudence while under my guidance ; —but with
this difference, —that from the very commencement of
your studies with me, you will at once adopt the
enlarged and truly catholic views I now seek to impress
upon you, as to the relations of the several Systems of
Jurisprudence of the different ages and the several nations
of the earth, and that you will look upon these Systems
only as the varied, because always the free, develop-
ments of an Eternal and Unchangeable Jurisprudence,
which the Almighty Governor of the Universe has laid
down as inherently right;—which has existed for ever,
independently of this earth and all its inhabitants ; —and
which will hereafter be revealed to us in all its infinite
perfections and in all its harmonious proportions.
It is with reference to this view of our subject that
I have quoted to you already, in the early part of this
Lecture, the two noble passages from Cicero and
Hooker, —passages every word of which should be
engraven on your memories, should be meditated upon


in your hours of reflection, and be the scource of
constantly-recurring and always increasing mental
delight to you.
It is iu the perfect coincidence ot thought that exists
in the “ Just Men ”of different ages of the world, that
we feel the grandeur of our subject; and appreciate the
bonds which unite all nations in one universal and
eternal union ; —when we long for the opening ot that
Day when, as Cicero says : —“ Omnes gentes, et oinni
tempore, una lex et sempiterna et immortalis con-
tinehit ” ; —and what is still more important to
remember “ unusque erit communis quasi magister et
imperator omnium—Deus.”
You will also recollect Seneca’s condensed expressions
to the same effect as Cicero’s “ Ille enim ipse omnium
Conditor et Rector; —Scripsit quidem fata, sed
sequitur ; —semper paret, semel jussit.”
But in this Introductory Lecture the present topic
may well carry us a little farther. The Providence of
God and the Immortality of the Soul being the
foundations of Natural Theology, and being the
foundations also of my conceptions of General Jurispru-
dence, I do not see why the future > reassembling
together of all these master spirits of each age should
not give additional interest to our present studies.
Hallam, in discussing the character of Shakespeare,
and the effect of his drama on the literature of his
age and on posterity, laments the insufficiency of past
criticisms to realise “ the religious depths ” of Shakes-
peare’s character.
In Hallam’s note you will read his regret that none


of the critics upon Shakespeare seem to have described
or understood
The Shakespeare we shall meet in heaven.”
What an enlarged view of Shakespeare’s dramas
and of Shakespeare himself does this short remark bring
before our minds ! And from the time that I read this
note of Hallam’s I confess that Shakespeare’s dramas
and Shakespeare himself have occupied a very different
place in my estimation, —and have been the source of
far deeper pleasures to me, as the composition of a great
mind whom “ we shall meet in heaven.”
Why should we not extend these thoughts into the
subject before us?
I have already quoted to you from the writings of
many illustrious men ; and, having no ambition to be
“ an original thinker,” I shall throughout these Lectures
c ite to you the opinions of many illustrious thinkers and
reasoners who have gone from among us.
Why should we not look upon all these “ illustrious
dead ” in the light that Hallam has placed himself before
us, —as “ having bound up their sheaves,’’ —and been
gathered into the heavens, —where the “ spirits of all
just men ” will be “ made perfect.”
As an illustration of the practical application of the
principles I am seeking to impress upon your minds, I
gladly lay upon the table a little book which was
published at London in the year 1842, and which will
well repay an attentive and frequent perusal. It is
entitled The Lawyer, his Character and Rule of Holy
Life ; after the manner of George Herbert’s Country
Parson ;by Edward O’Brien, Barrister-at-law.” (1) The
author was the third son of Sir Edward O’Brien, of
(1.) —Appendix B.


Dromoland, bom in 1808, and, after taking his degree at
Trinity College, Cambridge, became a member of the
Irish Bar. He was one of those enthusiastic, I may
well say glorious, characters whose memory sheds such
imperishable lustre on the name of “ Irishmanand
whose idea of a perfect Lawyer, as expressed in his little
work, seems almost too high for human nature to attain
to. Mr. O’Brien himself died of a fever, caught in
consequence of his exertions on behalf of some religious
and charitable societies established in Dublin ; and after
his death this little book was found among his
manuscripts and published by a legal friend.
The pages of this little book show how thoroughly
Mr. O’Brien had reflected on the nature and duties of
the Legal Profession ; and as there is not a single word
which can possibly offend or grate on the prejudices of
the sincere believer in any religious creed I feel no hesita-
tion, but rather the greater pleasure, in leaving the book
on the table for your perusal .You will find in its pages
several of the passages I have cited to you in this
Lecture, with many others from classic and other
writers of authority. And by now reading to you the
titles of the chapters of the book, you will gain a clear
conception of the scope and object of the author. The
titles of the chapters are as follow : —l. The Lawyer;
2. Their Diversities; 3. The Lawyer’s Choice of aCalling;
4.The Lawyer’s Life ; 5. The Lawyer’s Knowledge;
6. The Lawyer’s Accessory Knowledge ; 7. The Law-
yer’s Duties ; 8. The Lawyer Advising ; 9. The Lawyer
Drawing Pleadings; 10. The Lawyer Advising on
Evidence; 11. The Lawyer in Consultation; 12. The
Lawyer Pleading in Civil Cases; 13. The Lawyer ot


Counsel for the Crown; 14. The Lawyer of Counsel
for Prisoners; 15. The Lawyer examining Witnesses ;
16. The Lawyer Drawing Deeds ; 17. The Lawyer
Drawing Wills; 18. The Lawyer a Peace-maker; 19.
The Lawyer an Arbitrator ; 20. The Lawyer on Circuit;
21. The Lawyer at Elections; 22. The Lawyer’s Secrecy;
23. The Lawyer Discomfited ; 24. The Lawyer in the
Matter of Fees ; 25. The Lawyer’s Regard for Pro-
fessional Rules ; 26. The Lawyer’s Regard for Profes-
sional Confidence ; 27. The Lawyer in Vacation ; 28.
The Lawyer’s Humanity ; 29. The Lawyer’s Charity ;
30. The Lawyer’s Courtesy; 31. The Lawyer’s Hospi-
tality ; 32. The Lawyer a Citizen; 33. The Lawyer a
Legislator ; 34. The Lawyer’s Consideration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs ; 35. The Lawyer upon Sundays ;
36. The Lawyer become Judge; 37. The Lawyer’s
Death ; 38. The Lawyer’s Prayer.
The mere enumeration of these chapters shows how
thoroughly Mr. O’Brien had reflected on the various
duties of the Lawyer; but I wish you to read these
pages to obtain an idea of what a Lawyer may be “whose
sole impulse is the love of Justice,”
In these 144 duodecimo pages you have, as Mr.
O’Brien’s biographer writes, “ The portraiture of the
very soul of a man conversing with his fellow-men :
recording for their benefit the best thoughts of his best
hours : presenting them, in a brief space, with principles
the sifted and select result of all his studies, meditations
and experience : counselling them, exhorting them ]
witnessing for what he has known of Truth, and putting
it forth, with his prayers, that it may serve to the need
of his brethren.” * * * * “ The grave which has


closed on its author does not more securely shield him
from the arrows of fortune, and the sharp or flattering
speeches of men, than did his own manly and modest
nature and those of Mr. O’Brien’s friends who remain
will possess in this book, a memorial more consoling
than public applause could be. In it his portraiture
remains; stamped upon it they will find not his love
of Justice alone, but that kindness which made him seem,
if injured, to remember Justice only against himself:
they will observe his fearless reverence for Truth, and, at
the same time, his respect for opinions long established ;
his slowness to oppose them; his charitable desire to
exculpate those who hold them, and that higher charity
which stimulated him to combat their error : they will
he reminded of his reluctance to give pain, and his greater
fear of doing wrong; his distrust of his own judgment
and his invariable faith in the moral sense and the divine
commands ; his indifference to promiscuous applause, and
his solicitude for the esteem of those he esteemed, the
love of those he loved. They will find many light traces
to fill up, of his single-heartedness, his humility, his
earnestness and his courtesy.”
Gentlemen, I ask you all to peruse these pages at } our
leisure ; and to such of you as may have the candour and
patience to reflect and form your own opinions on the
important social topics of Mr. O’Brien’s chapters, I will
only add, that I hope you will have also Mr. O’Brien’s
manly courage, and be enabled as fearlessly to maintain
your conscientious convictions as he did his.
But I was in error when I said just [now that Mr.
O’Brien’s ideas of a perfect lawyer were “ too high for
human nature to attain to.” I forgot Sir Thomas More;


—I forgot Sir Matthew Hale. Eead and reflect npon the
lives of those Lawyers; and then you will understand
how True Religion and Sound Philosophy may be com-
bined with the deepest Legal Learning ; and how Purity
of Life will give additional glory to the strictest perform-
ance of the Lawyer’s professional duties.
In conclusion, I will now proceed to lay before you a
short sketch or outline of the Lectures or Readings I
propose to deliver at this University during the ensuing
terms of 1860.
The appointment to the office of Reader in “ General
Jurisprudence ’’ to the University, under which I now
address you, requires me to deliver at the University of
Sydney a series of at least twenty Lectures or Readings
on General Jurisprudence ; and, as I have already stated
to you, I shall endeavour to bring before you the vast
subject of General Jurisprudence, not as a theory, but as
most conveniently arranged with reference to the most
important of the topics of Law, which have been com-
mented upon by Mr. Justice Blackstone in the first and
second Volumes of his Commentaries.
In preparing and delivering these Lectures it will be
my earnest endeavour, in accordance with the “ Report
of the Professorial Board ” (to whom this subject was
referred) to convey to my audience a clear and philosophical
exposition of “the principles involved in Jurisprudence;
pointing out their most important applications in our
code, and the various modifications of the law since the
time of Blackstone—with especial reference to our own
community.”


Although indeed I cannot expect to effect much in
these first rough drafts of my Lectures, yet I would fain
hope that, by keeping before our minds the passage from
Mr. Justice Blackstone, with which I commenced this
evening, I shall be able at least to place the various im-
portant topics of our Lectures before you as parts of the
“ liberal and polite education ” of an University
and of the education of “ Gentlemen and Scholars.”
My previous observations this evening have been in-
tended to introduce the subject of Jurisprudence as
agreeably to you as I can —first, by showing you the
class of authors whose writings you should first peruse ;
—secondly, by pointing out to you hew noble and en-
nobling is our subject in itself; —and thirdly, by warning
you against the various narrow views of that subject,
which would impede your future progress in studying
Jurisprudence. By these preliminary observations made
with these views, I thought I might secure, if not
increase, your veneration for the extensive and almost
exhaustless stores of philosophy which lie open to your
enquiries under the name of General Jurisprudence.
1 thought further that by these extracts and this mode
of treating our subject, I might excite your curiosity
most effectually on these introductory topics; communi-
cate some general knowledge on some of the points I have
touched upon, give some hints that may be useful to you
in your future studies, —and, at the very outset of your
studies, call into activity all the nobler qualities of your
p ear ts; encourage a love of constitutional freedom and
of mild government, —a love of peaceful industry and of
lawful authority, which, to be patiently submitted to,
must be founded upon Reason and Justice; —inculcate


and impress upon you a sense of duty and responsibility
as the basis, and only firm and lasting basis, of every
sound system of Jurisprudence.
As I have already said, Gentlemen, I purpose during
this year’s Lectures to limit my Leadings to the various
topics of Law selected from the First and Second Volumes
of Blackstone’s Commentaries and specified in the syllabus
before you. These topics you will observe are distributed
over twenty Lectures during 1860, ten being delivered
during Lent, and ten during Trinity, Term.
The topics comprised in the first course of Lectures
during Lent Term will be :
Ist. Introductory Lecture
2nd, On our Constitutional Law.
3rd. On our Legislative System.
4th. On our Judicial System.
sth. On the Office of the Justice of the Peace.
6th. On the Common Law of England.
7th. On the Law of Real and Personal Property.
Bth. On Commercial Jurisprudence and Mercantile
Law.
9th. On the Civil Law and Equity Jurisprudence.
10th. On Modern Conveyances and Testamentary Dis-
positions.
The second course of these Lectures will be delivered
during Trinity Term, and will comprise the following
topics, viz.;
Ist. On Municipal Corporations.
2nd. On J oint Stock Companies.
3rd. On Commercial Partnerships.
4th. On Principal and Agent.
sth. On Trustees and Executors,


6th. On Mortgagors and Mortgagees.
7th. On Landlord and Tenant.
Bth. On Husband and Wife.
9th. on Parent and Child.
10th. on Master and Servant.
You will observe, even from the mere list of these
twentv topics, how wide an area is before us, during
the twenty evenings the total period for which I shall be
favored with your attention during the ensuing months.
You cannot help observing that the subjects which I
have undertaken to elucidate are of the utmost impor-
tance to us all; that they relate to our dearest interests,
while we consider ourselves as members of the same
political community; boasting and rightfully boasting,
that the bonds which unite us are not the bonds of des-
potic authority, are not the bonds of the strong imposed
on the weak , but are the bonds of mutual duties towards
each other, the bonds of reciprocal responsibility to
each other , —bonds which I think I shall succeed in
shewing you have created, among all who have adopted
our English Jurisprudence, a far more firm and lasting
union than any other by which any political communi-
ties ever have been , or can ever be bound together.
As a political and Social community, in the first
place, I shall endeavour to give you a clear and distinct
statement of our present condition in the next three
Lectures of this first course ; which you observe relate
to the following subjects, viz. :
The Constitutional Law of our Colony.
Our Legislative System, and
Our Judicial System.
Under one or other of these heads, it has appeared to


me that I might classify and arrange most of the great
principles of Jurisprudence which relate to our political
relations, either towards Her Most Gracious Majesty or
His Excellency the Governor General, as representing
Her Majesty, or towards each other, as fellow citizens
under fixed Constitutional Laws and possessing an
elaborate system of Legislative and Judicial Self-
Government; and I hope to treat these delicate subjects
in a manner which will enable every pupil to pursue the
subject safely and advantageously to any further extent
to which he may choose, or be obliged, to carry them.
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW.
In my next Lecture on Constitutional Law, I shall
especially rely on the Constitutional writings of I)e
Lolme, Hallam, and Macaulay. I shall endeavour to
introduce you to those grand Constitutional Statutes of
the Mother Country,—which, commencing from Magna
Charta, have at every epoch in our Constitutional
History secured and fixed every advance of .English
liberty by appropriate legislation; dividing our
constitutional history into three periods—lst from Magna
Charta to Queen Elizabeth; 2nd, from Queen Elizabeth
to Queen Anne; 3rd from Queen Anne to Queen
Victoria
I shall also endeavour to put you on a right course of
reading through the English Constitutional Law as
contained in the various Constitutional Statutes I shall
cite to you; also noticing the most important J udicial
decisions on Constitutional Law, and conclude with a
short account of our own Colonial Constitution Acts.
LEGISLATIVE SYSTEM.
In my third Lecture, on Our Legislative System, I


shall, in the first place, explain the elaborate fabric of
the English Legislative System, and the position of the
Crown in the Mother Country, with reference to
Imperial Legislation; and the admirable manner in
which the Royal Prerogative is made subservient to the
real interest of the people. I shall then point out the
limits of our Colonial Legislative authority, and notice
the various topics reserved for Imperial Legislation by
the terms of His Excellency’s Commission. I shall also
endeavour to explain the position of the Executive
authority as part of our Legislative system, and
specify as many of the leading decisions in our Consti-
tutional law on these most important topics, as the
limits of one evening will enable me ; especially such
decisions as Ashby v. White, Stockdale v. Hansard,
Fraser v. Hampden.
JUDICIAL SYSTEM.
In the fourth Lecture of this course, viz ;—On our
Judicial System, I shall endeavour to bring into one
view the History of the English Judicial System since
Magna Charta. I shall also enumerate to you the most
valuable features of our Judicial System, such as its
separation from the Legislative and Executive authority
the limitations of “ judicial discretion,” the independence
of the judges in respect of the Crown, the further
limitations on judicial power by juries, and the other
important principles which render this branch of our
English Jurisprudence so entirely conducive to the best
interests of society. I shall also hope to bring under
your notice the chief provisions of our own Charter of
Justice, and the various Colonial Statutes on the subject
of our Judicature.


These three Lectures, next after the present Lecture,
relate, as yon observe, to the largest possible view of
our Jurisprudence ; and I would consider my duties in
treating these most important topics as defined by the
concluding sentence of Blackstone’s Commentaries.
Adopting Blackstone’s words, my endeavour will be “ to
examine the solid foundations of our Constitution —to
mark out its extensive plan;—to explain the use and
distribution of its parts;—and from the harmonic us
concurrence of those several parts, to demonstrate the
elegant proportions of the whole.’’
I would also hope that we shall keep before our
minds, especially during these three Constitutional
Lectures, the final words of the Commentaries :
“ that the preservation of our Constitutional Liberty
is a duty which we owe to ourselves who enjoy it : —-
to our ancestors, who transmitted it down ; —and t
our posterity, who will claim at our hands this, the
best birthright and noblest inheritance of mankind,”
The points of English Jurisprudence which will thus
be introduced into these first three Lectures, I need
scarcely promise you, will be altogether beyond all
controversy or question ; and will be discussed by us
rather with a view to guiding your future Jurispruden-
tial studies and researches, than in the hope of giving
you any complete outline of the important topics
embraced by them. Nevertheless, considering our
Constitutional Law, and the proper adaptation of our
Legislative and Judicial systems to each other as the
foundations of our English Jurisprudence, I think I
shall, in the few hours I have set apart to these topics,
satisfy you that the most ancient and firmly established


statutes of the Mother Country, and the principles of
our own Colonial Jurisprudence on these topics, are
based on the soundest principles of General Jurispru-
dence, and on the catholic and eternal maxims of
Reason and Justice ; while on the other hand, by thus
practically treating these branches of our subject, I
think you will accustom yourselves to consider our
present Imperial and Colonial Constitutions, though
now known to us as the result of the labours of a long
succession of patriot statesmen, as being also secured to
us by the most anxiously considered and patiently
elaborated statutes, and by a long and unbroken series
of wise and enlightened Judicial decisions; —and
although Reform, Amendment, even Revolution, be
engraven on so many portions of our Constitutional
Law, and written on so many pages of our Statute
Book, I think you will become convinced that we now
enjoy, under this old English Jurisprudence, in every
position of life, all the practical advantages of a more
than Republican liberty.
These four Readings may be considered as introduc-
tory to the course which will occupy us for the present
Term ; not only as laying a broad and firm foundation
for all our future Readings, but as necessarily most
general in their character, and as referring to those
larger topics of General Jurisprudence, upon which
clear opinions must precede all investigations into the
topics selected for our subsequent Readings. And I
am sure that by thus giving, or, rather, attempting to
give you a clear practical outline of the present state of
our Jurisprudence, firstly, as to our Constitutional Law ?
or those invaluable, long-established primary maxims,


and fundamental Principles of Political Truth and
Justice, which are interwoven into every branch of our
Jurisprudence ; secondly as to our complicated Legis-
lative system , or the machinery whereby our Jurisprudence
may he cautiously, but effectually, amended, and from
time to time adapted to the ever-varying and advancing
requirements of a highly civilized and liberty-loving
community ; and thirdly, as to our present Judicial
System, or the machinery whereby our General Juris-
prudence is applied with a perfect impartiality, and with
strong and just efficiency, to every particular case of
rights invaded or wrongs attempted among us ; and if
you will yourselves further pursue these introductory
topics by your own reflections, you will find that during
the four evenings, which is the utmost I could allot to
these portions of our subject, you will have acquired
correct and definite perceptions of these important
branches of English Jurisprudence, as illustrating the
more abstract principles of General Jurisprudence.
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.
After the short vacation we will commence with my
Fifth Lecture, in which I shall attempt to give you a
practical and un technical exposition, as far as I can in
a single lecture, of the office of “Justice of the Peace;”
that ancient judicial magistrate whose office is of so
much practical importance to us, as “ bringing home ”
the initiatives of English Law and Justice to every
even the most remote, district of our Colony ; an office
the dignity and duties of which I am sure it is desirable
on every ground, should be fully appreciated through-
out the Colony, and by every rank in life. In this
Lecture 1 shall be able to bring before your minds the


colonial aspect of the office of “ Justice of the Peace,’’
because, by the adoption in this colony of three
admirable English Statutes, Sir John Jervis’ Act the
Colonial Law upon this topic has been consolidated
into a very distinct outline the leading feattures of
which I shall have no difficulty in placing before you
and fixing in your memories.
THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.
In my sixth Lecture I shall introduce you to that
vast storehouse of the Maxims and Principles of
English Jurisprudence, “ The Common Law of England
and I shall endeavour to place before you the chief
points in its history,—explain some of its leading
maxims,—and direct your future reading to the sources
of the most useful learning relating to it. By thus
looking into the treasuries of the Common Law you
will learn how utterly beyond all estimation is this
ancient and peculiarly English branch of our Jurispru-
dence, how full of instruction, and how illustrative of
every topic of General Jurisprudence. I shall also
hope, in this Lecture, to give you a clear historical
summary of the Pise and Progress of the Common Law,
the chief points of its connexion with the Feudal
System, and the influence which the u Common Law
maxims ” exercise on every branch of English Juris-
prudence.
In the four remaining Lectures of the First Course,
I shall endeavour to give you an insight into four
different views of our Law of Property, and its most
conspicuous rights and incidents ; dividing my subject
into the four following divisions, contained in my
seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth lectures.


THE LAW OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY.
In my seventh Lecture I shall endeavour to explain
The Law of Real and Personal Property , showing you
the origin of the abstract Right of Property, and dis-
tinguishing between the various kinds or classes of
Property as recognised by the English Law, and as
forming a distinct branch of General Jurisprudence. I
need scarcely remind you that the Laws of Property
form the most essential feature of every code of Juris"
prudence ; and in our code the rules and maxims of our
Property and Tenure Laws form a peculiarly characteristic
and highly National branch of enquiry.
COMMERCIAL JURISPRUDENCE AND MERCANTILE LAW
In my eighth Lecture we will consider our Commer-
cial Jurisprudence and Mercantile Law , and the rules and
maxims which fall most naturally under these two heads;
regulating, as they do, our mutual duties, liabilities, and
responsibilities as to our Commercial and Mercantile
property ; and I shall hope to point out to you at least
the ground plan and chief outlines of that edifice which
the merchant has erected for himself; with little aid from
our Judges and still less from our Legislature. I shall also
hope to explain the principles of international codes and
navigation law. This lecture will treat of our Commercial
and Mercantile Jurisprudence, only so far as such Juris-
prudence extends over Mercantile Property, as shipping,
negotiable instruments, charter-parties, &c : reserving to
the Second Course our duties as persons or individuals,
connected as partners, principal and agent, or otherwise
personally in our Commercial relations.
THE CIVIL LAW AND EQUITY JURISPRUDENCE.
The ninth of these Lectures will relate to the Old


Civil Law of Rome , and its Modern Offspring, our
English Equity Jurisprudence ; —and here I greatly hope
to be able to give you a succinct and intelligible survey of
one of the most wonderful products of Human Ingenuity
and Intellectual Labour that will come under our notice
during these readings;—a system to which, although I
only ask your patience and attention to it for a single
evening your enquiries will often be attracted in your
future life, as yon will see how deeply all its principle ß
and maxims enter into every relation in which we stand
towards each other as members of the same social
community.
In this Lecture I shall merely consider those branches
of the Civil Law and of our Equity Jurisprudence which
relate to Property and its incidents; leaving those most
important parts of the Civil Law which relate to Com-
munities, Obligations, and their incidents, and other
special matters, to the Lectures in the second course on
those specific topics. Of course it will be impossible, in
a single lecture, to give yon any more detailed informa-
tion, either as to the Civil Law of Eome or as to our
Equity Jurisprudence, than is necesary for an explanation
of those subjects, as exhibiting two particular phases of
General Jurisprudence.
MODERN CONVEYANCING AND TESTAMENTARY
DISPOSITIONS.
Lastly , in the tenth Lecture of the first Course, and
the last of these four Lectures on Property, I shall
endeavour to bring before you a simple and practical
survey of the principles of Modern Conveyancing and
Testamentary Dispositions —that is to say, oi the instru-
ments whereby property is transferred from one man to


another inter vivos , or by Testators in their "Wills or
Testamentary Dispositions ; —a branch of our Jurispru-
dence which I trust to make perfectly intelligible to you,
although it is burdened with an undue amount of
technicalities. Here also I trust to show you how much
we have to admire in our English Laws, and how wisely
those Laws, by a mixture of the Civil Law of Rome
with the Law of Feudal Tenures, have regulated the transu
fer of Property from one owner to another ; and, adopting
the words of Burke, I think you will find that even in
our modern systems of Conveyancing and Testamentary
Dispositions, with all their defects, redundancies and
errors ; the great “principles of original Justice” have
been successfully applied to all the “infinite variety of
human concerns.”
In this Lecture I hope to be able also to give you a
short sketch of the history of English Conveyancing, as
an Art, and the various stages it has gone through
until it reached its present highly elaborated condition ;
concluding my lecture with a practical analysis of most
of our usual Conveyances and forms of Wills, so as to
supply you with a key to the ready interpretation of
the most usual legal instruments which may come before
you.
That Lecture will conclude the first course, and I
hope these ten Lectures will leave a clear and definite
impression on all your minds, upon each topic which
shall have been discussed by us, during this term of
your University course.
I think in the present Introductory Lecture I ought
also to give you a short epitome of the second Course
of Readings to be delivered here during Trinity Term.


The Lectures or Leadings for this second course will
have for their object, rather to explain our personal
relations, and the more practical principles on which
our social intercourse is founded, than to expound our
political constitution, or to explain the larger and more
expansive views of General Jurisprudence.
The ten Lectures of this Second Course may he
divided into three divisions, viz. : —lst, Corporations,
Joint Stock Companies, Partnerships and Principal and
Agent; 2nd, Trustees and Executors, Morgagors and
Mortgagees, and Landlord and Tenant; and 3rd,
Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, and MastePand
Servant.
CORPORATIONS, JOINT STOCK COMPANIES, PARTNER-
SHIPS, AND PRINCIPAL AND AGENT.
The first four lectures relating to Corporations , Joint
Stock Companies , Partnerships and Principal and Agent
will bring before your minds the whole varied system
of the social combinations, into which the Law allows us
to incorporate or unite ourselves for a common object.
By these four lectures you will learn how large are the
powers which men possess for good or evil, hy combining
and concentrating their separate individual powers into
one common focus. I shall also seek to instruct you
how to distinguish and appreciate the sound and fixed
principles which should regulate these various social
combinations; and, as far as the time permits, I shall
endeavour to show you how our English Laws have, in
this province also, applied the great principles of General
Jurisprudence, and in many respects restrained the
Natural Bight to combine for a common object, within
defined limits ; making such combinations not only more


powerful for effecting the common object, but also less
likely to produce peril to the common peace or our
individual liberties. In these four lectures I shall also
endeavour to give you a view of Modern Municipal
Corporations, as presented to us in the Mother Country,
in America, and in the British colonies ; so that yon may
comprehend the principles which ought to regulate their
establishment and encouragement among ourselves.
The legal incidents and relations of the several
members of Joint Stock Companies, and of Commercial
Partnerships 4 and of Principal and Agent will also
require special notice, as most important branches of
every code of Modern Jurisprudence.
These four lectures on Corporations , Joint Stock Com-
panies, Partnerships , and Principal and Agent, whether
considered in this combined view, or separately from each
other, will, I trust, leave a clear, definite and lasting
impression on your minds of the extreme necessity of
of maintaining the great principles of Justice and
Honesty as the only guide in judging of the validitory
propriety of the infinitely various rules, which men must
lay down for their conduct; when combining their united
forces, whether of capital, talent or labour for any
common object of social advantage or individual benefit.
TEUSTEES AND EXECUTOES—
MOETGAGOES AND MOETGAGEES—LANDLOED AND
TENANT.
The fifth, sixth, and seventh Lectures of the second
course will relate to General Jurisprudence as developed
and applied in the three relations of Trustees and
Executors, Mortgagors and Mortgagees , and Landlord
and Tenant.


These three relations seemed to me to he the most
common and generally known relations, in which the
English Law of Property has been allowed to develope
itself and become incorporated with our social interests,
duties and responsibilities, and which will consequently
supply these Readings with many practical illustrations
0 f General Jurisprudence.
These relations would seem at first sight to be some-
what technical in their character ; but I think I shall
be able to show you that the great principles of the
Civil Law are in these three topics combined with the
Feudal Law of Real Property in a degree which has been
very favourable to the development of our own English
Jurisprudence ; and that the principles of General
Jurisprudence laid down and inculcated in the previous
Lectures of these courses will be found again developed
and illustrated here.
In determining the relative duties, rights and
liabilities of Trustees and Executors we shall incidentally
ascertain and fix the duties, rights and liabilities of all
persons in a fiduciary position towards others and as to
every species of property.
In investigating the relative rights, duties and
liabilities of Moi tgagors and Mortgagees , we shall
incidentally ascertain and fix the rights, duties and
liabilities of borrower and lender, debtor and creditor,
and all persons in similar relation to each other. I have
selected this relation of Mortgagors and Mortgagees as
a topic of Lecture because I found in it an admirable
illustration of the mode in which Natural Justice and
the Jurisprudence of the Civil Law as to Obligations,
have been practically applied among us, resulting in the


formation of a very distinct branch of English
Jurisprudence.
The last of these relations, viz., that of Landlord
and Tenant , is a relation of such daily and general
occurrence, and of so much importance to our social
and domestic peace and comfort, that I thought an
evening hour might be advantageously spent in
investigating the principles which should guide you,
whether as Landlords or Tenants, in entering upon and
in performing the duties which arise from such relation.
This Lecture will also enable me to give you a further
insight into the English Law of Landed Property, and
will familiarise you with some important Imperial and
Colonial Statutes which ought to be brought under
your observation.
HUSBAND AND WIDE.—PATIENT AND CHILD.—MASTER
AND SERVANT.
The three concluding Lectures of the second course
will explain the relations of Husband and Wife , Parent
and Child, and Master and Servant; three relations
which it is of the utmost importance should be founded
on sound and definite principles of General Jurispru-
dence,
HUSBAND AND WIFE.
The first of these Lectures, viz., on Husband and
Wife will, of course require our investigation of the
Law of Marriage; a branch of General Jurisprudence
upon which, with the Law of Property, as Sir James
Mclntosh observes in his Introductory Lecture, the
whole frame of every social fabric must rest. “ Around
these institutions all our social duties will be found, at
various distances, to arrange themselves ; some more


near, obviously essential to the good order of human
life, —others more remote, and of which the necessity is
not, at first sight, so apparent, —and some so distant
that their importance has beep sometimes doubted,
though, upon more mature consideration, they will be
found to be outposts and advanced guards of these two
fundamental principles —that man should securely enjoy
the fruits of his labour, and that the society of the
sexes should be so wisely ordered as to make it a school
of the kind affections and a fit nursery for the Common-
wealth.”
The Civil Law of Rome, the English Common Law,
and the English Statute Law will each supply us with
much useful learning, and many general principles on
the subject of marriage ; and the recent alterations of
the English Divorce Law will also compel us to inves-
tigate the exact nature of the Marriage Tie more
accurately, and perhaps more anxiously, inasmuch as
these English alterations of the Law may shortly come
before our Australian Parliament. You will find also
that the largest jurisprudential view of the Marriage
Contract has been elaborated with consummate skill and
matchless eloquence in the speeches of the most
accomplished orator of the British Bar, Erskine; who,
during the whole period of his forensic career, was
invariably retained in every important cause on this
topic ; and who seems to have understood the Jurispru-
dence of Matrimony in all its intricate and beautiful
ramifications.
PARENT AND CHILD.
The nurture, education and protection which we
receive from our parents on the one hand, and the duty


and obedience which we owe to them on the other, form
the foundations of the earliest relation of human life,
that of Parent and Child. I trust, on the one hand,
to be able to show you both from the Civil Law and
our own Modern Jurisprudence that the due perform-
ance of the duties of parents in this nurture, education,
and protection, in obedience to the fixed law of our
nature implanted in man under every form of social life,
is generally enforced as essential to the prosperity of
every social and political community ; and, on the other
hand, that the implicit and dutiful obedience which we
ought to render to our parents, while under their control,
is the best preparation for the larger duties of citizenship,
and for that patient submission to authority which binds
us together in the performance of all the varied duties
and responsibilities, arising from the various relations
discussed and examined in detail during our previous
Lectures.
I think, too, we shall be able to admit these principles
of patient submission to authority as a part of our
General Jurisprudence, without falling into the Filmer
theory of Paternal Government, or endangering in any
degree the Political Liberty on which our social Govern-
ment rests.
MASTER AND SERVANT.
In our final lecture, viz., On Master and Servant , we
shall have before us a branch of General Jurisprudence
of the utmost practical importance to us; because the
relation of Employer and Labourer gives rise to contracts
of the most extensive character, and of the utmost
impoitance to the progress of Social Improvement.
Unless this relation ot Employer and Labourer be founded


on sound principles, admitted and recognised by the in-
dividual parties to the contract, and unless this relation
be cleared from oppression on the one hand and extortion
on the other, that most important instrument of modern
civilization, Money Capital , will be unable to exert its
proper power in our social and national progress. Unless
we clearly understand how Labour , as the great Creator
of Property , and how the hiring of a man’s services, as
the agent whereby a very large amount of Property is
first created, then preserved and improved; unless we
clearly understand how the great principles of Reason
and Justice (upon which the relation of Master and
Servant must be founded, to be mutually serviceable and
advantageous to both parties) have been cleared from
all the slavish Jurisprudence of antiquity, and expanded
by our modern law into a system which has now be-
come as perfect as any other branch of General Juris-
prudence ; —unless we clearly understand this, we shall
take a very inadequate view of a relation which occupies
a most important position in our English and Colonial
Jurisprudence.
Besides these twenty Lectures, I also hope to be able
to deliver a few special Lectures to any Gentlemen
who may wish to form “ a senior class of Jurisprudence
Among the topics of these Lectures, I have thought I
might advantageously explain the principles of Forensic
Rhetoric, —the Chief Rules of Evidence, —and perhaps
give a few additional Lectures on Equity Jurisprudence
and Equity Practice.
But the delivery of these additional Lectures will
depend on the formation of a senior class, as I must not


lecture except to an University Audience nor attempt
any professional style of readings.
Such, Gentlemen, is a short sketch of my proposed
readings on General Jurisprudence at this University,
during the present year 1860. The topics to be con-
sidered by us, the mere titles of subjects set forth on the
prospectus, and thus rapidly glanced over in this
Lecture, will show you at once how “ the tvhole compass
of human affairs ” lies here displayed before us; how
“ the principles of original Justice 7 have been adapted by
the “ collected Reason of Ages' 1 to “ the infinite variety of
human concerns ; ” and how u the cautious and unwearied
exertions of wise men ’ have, through a long course
of time, formed a science which, I trust, will be
found, in your experience also, “to quicken and
invigorate your understandings , and to “ discipline
all your mental faculties lt is in this light, Gentlemen,
as a discipline of the mental faculties, that I would
especially wish you to enter upon these studies, and
would urge you to bring all your moral and intellectual
powers to bear upon the science now placed before you;
so that hereafter, in all the relations of social life, in
all your intercourse with men of every possible opinion,
and of every varied phase of personal and political
character, you may possess an unerring Catholic Juris-
prudence, safely guiding your opinions and your conduct.
Before I conclude, I have two additional observations
to make.
The first is, that when I first sketched out this Lecture
we all looked forward to Macaulay as our guide in our
constitutional studies ; from the high position which lie


had just attained as the future Nestor of the British
House of Lords. As I said, while lecturing at another
place, “ Macaulay’s banner now ranks with the time-
honoured banners of the Howards, the Percies, the
Bussells, the Stanleys, the Nevilles, the Wentworths,
and the Cavendishes, in the most ancient Senate acknow-
ledged by, or known to, the civilized world.” But
scarcely had his sagacious wisdom, from that high
position, begun to assist the deliberations of the British
Parliament, than, alas ! he is summoned from this earth.
The volumes of that History of England which so many
thousands, I might say hundreds of thousands, of English-
men watched and waited and longed for; which were
welcomed at the remotest bounds of the British
Dominions ; which flushed with national pride the brows
of us all, while we read his Raphael paintings of “ our
ancestors —those volumes are concluded. Macaulay,
like Hallam, has “now bound up his sheaves,” —and
been “ gathered into the Heavens” to the “ spirits of
just men made perfect .”
The other concluding observation I would make is, that
the propriety of my references to Hooker, Burke, Cole-
ridge, and others, as to the lofty views I would wish you to
adopt in our Jurisprudential studies, are thus confirmed
by the address on Jurisprudence, recently delivered by
the Right Honorable Joseph Napier, Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, before the National Association for the pro-
motion of Social Science.
Speaking of Henry Lord Brougham, and other master
spirits of this age, who have helped forward the great
work of Law Amendment, the Lord Chancellor of
Ireland continues thus : —“ Much of this Law Reform


has been brought about by the energy of those master
spirits (I speak both of the living and the dead), not
Ministers, but High Priests of Justice; —men, who in
the good providence of God, have been raised up from
time to time and have imparted living powers, and
loftier views, and clear intelligence to public opinion ;
to that which, m the end, must test, and discriminate,
and separate, the true from the false ; reject what is
unsuited for immediate use, but absorb what is in keep-
ing with the “sensus communis,” —which nourishes the
real life and accords with the inherent laws which
govern the “ Progressive Development of Society.”
Gentlemen, no one can be more sensible than myself
of the deficiencies and short-comings of this Lecture,
and I might find many and sufficient excuses in the
circumstances under which I accepted my appointment;
though I would rather seek my excuses in the vast and
immeasurable subjects of these Lectures.
But I will not detain you by any thoughts relating
to myself.
Enough for me that I have done my best to fulfil my
duty towards you, and towards the University ; and it
will be hereafter the highest reward and gratification
to me, if you should hereafter look back upon these
Lectures, as having in any degree given new vigour
to your intellectual progress ; —in any degree opened
new stores of learning to your enquiries;—in any degree
introduced you to authors, whose guiding stars may
henceforth shine on some portion of your mental exist-
ence, and assist you to steer your course, manfully
and honourably, through the troubled seas of this Life,








LAW LECTURES.
BY THE
HON. JOHN FLETCHER HARGRAVE,
SENIOE PUISNE JUDGE OE THE SUPREME COURT
ALSO
PRIMARY JUDGE IN EQUITY,
JUDGE OE THE DIVORCE AND MATRIMONIAL
COURT OE NEW SOUTH WALES.
VOLUME I
(Now in the Press),
Will comprise the following Lectures:
1. On “ Law as a branch of Popular Education.” Delivered
at the School of Arts, Sydney, August 3rd, 1858. _
2. On “ General Jurisprudence.” Delivered at the University
March sth, 1860.
3. On “ The influence of the Judges and Lawyers of England,
in establishing and defending our Civil and Religious
Liberties.” De-livered at the University, April, 1862.
4. On “ The Duties and general Education of the Legal Pro-
fession.” Delivered at the Supreme Court, May 9th,
1864.
5. On “ General Jurisprudence, as a branch of Collegiate
Education.” Delivered at St. Paul’s College, October,
1864.
6. Inaugural Address to the Law Institute of Sydney. De-
livered at the Supreme Court, December, 1871.
7. On “ The Rights of Property.” Delivered at the Supreme
Court, December, 1872.
APPENDICES.
A. Syllabus of the University Lectures, as delivered Annually
at the University of Sydney, in Trinity and Michaelmas
Terms, 1858-1865.
B. Extracts from Mr. O’Brien’s “ Lawyer.”
C. Chart of Constitutional Law, establishing and declaring
our Civil and Religious Liberties.—Chart of our Colo-
nial Constitution.
D. The Governor’s Commission, and Letters of Instruction.


The First Volume will be dedicated (by express permission) to
His Excellency Sir Hercules George Egbert Robinson,
K.C.M.G., &c., &c„ Governor of New South Wales.
LECTURES I AND II ARE NOW READY.
VOLUME II
Will comprise the following Twenty Lectures,
AS ANNUALLY DELIVERED AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY, FROM
1858 TO 1865.
First Course. —Trinity Term.
Lecture 1. Introductory Lecture.
„ 2. On “ Our Constitutional Law.”
3. On “ Our Legislative System.”
„ 4. On “ Our Judicial System.”
„ 5. On “The Office of Justice of the Peace.”
6. On “ The Common Law of England.”
7. On “ The Law of Real and Personal Property.”
„ 8. On “ International Law and Commercial Jurispru-
dence.”
9. On “ The Civil Law and Equity Jurisprudence.”
„ 10. On “ Modern Conveyancing and Testamentary Dis-
positions.”
Second Course. —Michaelmas Term.
Lecture 11. On “ Municipal Corporations.”
„ 12. On “ Joint Stock Companies.”
„ 13. On “ Commercial Partnerships.”
„ 14. On “ Principal and Agent.”
„ 15. On “ Trustees and Executors.”
„ 16. On “ Mortgagors and Mortgagees.”
„ 17. On “ Landlord and Tenant.”
„ 18. On “Husband and Wife.”
„ 19. On “ Parent and Child.”
„ 20. On “ Master and Servant.”
This Volume will be dedicated (by express permission) to
the Honourable Sir Edward Deas-Thomson, K.C.M.G., the
Chancellor of Sydney University.
IN TWO VOLUMES,
DEMY OCTAVO.
Printed and Published by John Ferguson, Market Street,
SYDNEY.






LAW LECTURES.
BY THE
HON. JOHN FLETCHER HARGRAVE,
SENIOR PUISNE JUDGE OE THE SUPREME COURT
ALSO
PRIMARY JUDGE IN EQUITY,
JUDGE OE THE DIVORCE AND MATRIMONIAL
COURT OE NEW SOUTH WALES.
VOLUME I
(Now in the Press),
Will comprise the following Lectures:
1. On “ Law as a branch o£ Popular Education.” Delivered
at the School of Arts, Sydney, August 3rd, 1858.
2. On “ General Jurisprudence.” Delivered at the University
March sth, 1860.
3. On “ The influence of the Judges and Lawyers of England,
in establishing and defending our Civil and Religious
Liberties.” De-livered at the University, April, 1862.
4. On “ The Duties and general Education of the Legal Pro-
fession.” Delivered at the Supreme Court, May 9th,
1864.
5. On “ General Jurisprudence, as a branch of Collegiate
Education.” Delivered at St. Paul’s College, October,
1864.
6. Inaugural Address to the Law Institute of Sydney. De-
livered at the Supreme Court, December, 1871.
7. On “ The Rights of Property.” Delivered at the Supreme
Court, December, 1872.
APPENDICES.
A. Syllabus of the University Lectures, as delivered Annually
at the University of Sydney, in Trinity and Michaelmas
Terms, 1858-1865.
B. Extracts from Mr. O’Brien’s “ Lawyer.”
C. Chart of Constitutional Law, establishing and declaring
our Civil and Religious Liberties. —Chart of our Colo-
nial Constitution.
D. The Governor’s Commission, and Letters of Instruction.


The First Volume will be dedicated (by express permission) to
His Excellency Sir Hercules George Robert Robinson,
K.C.M.G., &c., &c„ Governor of New South Wales.
LEO TUBES I AND II ABE NOW BEADY.
VOLUME II
Will comprise the following Twenty Lectures,
AS ANNUALLY DELIVERED AT THE UNIVERSITY OE SYDNEY, FROM
1858 TO 1865.
First Course. —Trinity Term.
Lecture 1. Introductory Lecture.
„ 2. On “ Our Constitutional Law.”
3. On “ Our Legislative System.”
4. On “ Our Judicial System.”
5. On “ The Office of Justice of the Peace.”
” 6. On “ The Common Law of England.”
7, On “ The Law of Real and Personal Property.”
8. On “ International Law and Commercial Jurispru-
dence.”
„ 9. On “ The Civil Law and Equity Jurisprudence.”
I 10. On “ Modern Conveyancing and Testamentary Dis-
positions.”
Second Course. —Michaelmas Term.
Lecture 11. On “ Municipal Corporations.”
„ 12. On “ Joint Stock Companies.”
„ 13. On “ Commercial Partnerships.”
„ 14. On “ Principal and Agent.”
„ 15. On “ Trustees and Executors.”
„ 16. On “ Mortgagors and Mortgagees
„ 17. On “ Landlord and Tenant.”
„ 18. On “ Husband and Wife.”
„ 19. On “ Parent and Child.”
„ 20. On “ Master and Servant.”
This Volume will be dedicated (by express permission) to
the Honourable Sir Edward Deas-Thomson, K.C.M.G., the
Chancellor of Sydney University.
IN TWO VOLUMES,
DEMY OCTAVO.
Printed and Published by John Ferguson, Market Street,
SYDNEY.






