





LAW OR WAR
BY
LUCIA AMES MEAD
AUTHOR OF “MILTON’S ENGLAND,” “SWORDS
AND PLOUGHSHARES,” ETC.
GARDEN CITY, NEW YORK
DOUBLEDAY, DORAN & COMPANY, INC,
1928


Copyright, 1928, by
DOUBLEDAY, DORAN & COMPANY, INC.
All rights reserved


To
ROSE DABNEY FORBES
In Honor of Her Devoted,
Generous and Untiring
Service for the Cause of
Peace




PREFACE
This volume is prepared for that increasing body
of people who have been roused by the tragedy of
the World War and its resulting problems to a new
sense of international danger and international
duty; who realise that something resolute and com-
prehensive is necessary if talk of the “next war” is
to be stopped; and who begin to see that in organisa-
tion lies the hope of the nations, as the founders of
our federal republic saw that it was the solution
for the problem of growing anarchy in our states.
Serious minds refuse to believe that there is any
problem which is hopeless and Elihu Root is right
when he says that there is no international dispute
so grave that it can not be settled peacefully where
there is the will to settle it. He is, in the writer’s
judgment, equally right in his belief that the League
of Nations and the World Court have provided the
greatest agencies for world peace in the history of
civilisation. This means that it is through law and
world organisation that war and its evils are to be
overcome; and it is the aim of this volume to illus-
trate and enforce this truth. The last chapter of
the volume was originally prepared as an address
which was given at the congress of the World Alii


ance for International Friendship through the
Churches in 1925. Portions of two earlier chapters
have appeared in previous writings, though they are
here revised.
The world’s greatest catastrophe came in the
Christian nations, and through the policies and ac-
tions of their most highly educated men. But this
was due to ignorance or disregard of fundamental
facts and principles; and continual disregard of
these by governments and peoples will involve re-
peated catastrophe. We already hear wild predic-
tions of another world war in fifteen or twenty
years. Whether that suicide of civilisation shall
ensue depends on the education and enlightenment
of the rising generation, into whose hands the issues
will soon pass. The rising generation needs to know
far more than the passing generation did of the true
principles of human relations, if it is to avoid the
fatal and futile blunders which the suffering world
now contemplates.
War is not a natural calamity like the tornado or
the earthquake, but an evil for which man is re-
sponsible and which it is man’s duty to remove. By
a right and resolute course war between nations
may be abolished in a generation, as witchcraft,
slavery and yellow fever have been abolished. The
framers of our federal Constitution did not wait for
any change of human nature, and we do not need to
PREFACE


wait for the conversion of the world to Christianity
before educators and statesmen of the influential na-
tions banish the stupid effort to settle questions of
justice by explosives.
This work aims to present in untechnical and
simple terms the cardinal points which demand
primary consideration in this imperative reform. It
endeavours to show the crudity and the mischief of
prejudices and slogans which warp the public mind,
and which still control many men in high places.
It suggests the necessary and the next steps toward
adequate world organisation, and it seeks to help
earnest men and women to realise more seriously
that above all nations is humanity, and that nothing
human is foreign to us.
L. A. M.
PREFACE


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
Preface vii
I. History of the Peace Movement . . i
11. Education and World Peace ... 20
111. Preparedness 34
IV. Some Neglected Facts About Our Wars . 50
V. Interdependence 66
VI. Creating the International Mind . . 88
VII. Dangerous Fallacies about War and
Peace - 111
VIII, The Points of View of Militarists and
Peacemakers 134
IX. Patriotic Songs, Symbols, and Societies . 154
X. Arbitration, Hague Courts and Confer-
ences 172
XI. The League of Nations .... 192
XII. Before and After the World War . . 215
XIII. The Use of Armed Force .... 243
Appendix :
Some Peace Organisations . . . 257
Covenant of the League of Nations . 259


LAW OR WAR
CHAPTER I
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT
A BRIEF OUTLINE
In iB6O millions of American citizens maintained
that slavery was ordained of God, inevitable, a ne-
cessity for civilisation. No one of them or of their
descendants maintains that view to-day. As the
great task of the nineteenth century was to end man-
selling, so the task of the twentieth century, said
Andrew Carnegie, is to end man-killing, and the
sceptics answer as before: “War is inevitable, it is
bound up with human nature,” or, as a certain mili-
tary officer writes in one of the magazines: “As the
unoccupied reaches of the earth’s surface grow
smaller, competition between races and nations must
inevitably increase in intensity, and war power,
which is the ultimate form of competitive capacity,
must exercise even greater influence in the future
than in the past.” Some people are still fooled by
this pseudo-economic wisdom; but the period has
passed when such dicta have weight except with


visionaries who are blind to the meaning of history
and to the new economics of the twentieth century.
As, however, there are still many visionaries with
facile pens, practical peace-makers must patiently
unravel the intellectual tangle in which vague defini-
tions, half truths, guesses at history, and ignorance
of the new organic unity of economic interests have
left many persons, despite their diplomas, degrees,
and cleverness in mathematics, languages, and
physics.
A little survey of well-known historic facts may
properly precede discussion and may recall to the
reader that the peace movement was not born with
the Czar’s rescript nor cradled in a Carnegie Peace
Endowment. We pass by the sublime, prophetic vi-
sions of Isaiah and Micah, the heavenly wisdom of
the gospels, the centuries of early Christian non-re-
sistance, when the Church grew apace until political
power and prosperity degraded it, to the time of
Dante’s boyhood, when there appeared, in the beau-
tiful old city of Coutances in Normandy, a young
lawyer, Pierre Du Bois by name. We know little
of this student of Saint Thomas Aquinas, but we
do know that before Dante’s “De Monarchia” had
presented the conception of peace through a world-
empire he proposed an international representative
organisation. He would have had a congress of
princes institute a permanent tribunal of arbitration,
LAW OR WAR


composed of chosen judges, from whom six should
be selected to try a case. Six hundred years later,
in 1899, the first Hague Conference agreed to prac-
tically the same plan as was outlined by the lawyer
of Coutances. But in his day the nations were not
ready; they must wait. In 1624 “Le Nouveau
Cynee” (the New Cyneas) by Emeric Cruce, ap-
peared in Du Bois’s country, and was the first book
that explicitly developed the thought of a regular
system of arbitration. It was followed by “The
Great Design” of Henry IV, published fifty years
after his death in the posthumous memoirs of his
great minister, the Duke of Sully. This was the
first comprehensive scheme in modem history to or-
ganise the world. The king or his minister (there
is much controversy about it) had planned a federa-
tion of the European states, with a central senate
and proportionate contributions from the various
nations to the common international army and navy,
which should insure the substitution of legal meth-
ods for the prevailing system of war. Ravaillac’s
dagger, in 1610, frustrated this scheme, just at the
time that little John Milton was learning to talk,
and Shakespeare had completed his greatest trag-
edies and was retiring from London to Stratford.
The name of the great scholar Erasmus must not
be omitted even in the briefest list of workers for
world peace.
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


But the world was still not ready, and its organi-
sation was to be postponed three centuries as a prac-
tical political achievement. One class of hideous
wrongs, however, could be ameliorated. Five years
after the little band of English exiles coming out
of Holland had reared their first log cabin beside
Plymouth Rock, the greatest scholar and benefactor
whom that same brave little Holland ever produced
published an epoch-making book—“ The Rights of
War and Peace.” On July 4, 1899, the hundred
diplomats assembled at the first Hague Conference,
led by the head of our American delegation, Dr.
Andrew D. White, travelled together to ancient
Delft and, after gazing on the noble statue of Hugo
Grotius which adorns the square, entered the great
bare church where Grotius lies buried. As each
national group arrived, their ears were greeted by
the organ notes of their own national air. There, in
an august company, they gathered around the
marble monument while the representatives from
America in behalf of their Government and people
laid a superb silver wreath upon it, as Ambassador
White delivered a eulogy on the immense service
which this great soul had wrought for all mankind.
The prodigious learning of this great scholar, who
was sought by the elegant young Milton on his visit
to Paris because he said he venerated him more than
any other living man, and the cumulative force of
his legal and ethical arguments, reinforced by copi-
LAW OR WAR


bus citations from the ancients, gradually produced
a marvellous effect on an age accustomed to savage
butchery in war, in which neither age nor sex nor
the helplessness of wounded and prisoners had
availed to secure either justice or clemency. The
world may thank Hugo Grotius primarily for the
kindly treatment which, in recent wars, Americans
gave to Spanish prisoners and Japanese gave to
Russians.
“The Rights of War and Peace” was the first
great attempt to deduce a principle of right and a
philosophic basis for society independent of biblical
and ecclesiastical authority. It had an immediate
effect all over Europe. Gustavus Adolphus is said
to have slept during his campaigns with a copy under
his head of this great work by the man who is prop-
erly called “the father of International Law.”
His unlearned but ardent contemporary in Eng-
land, George Fox, born three years before the pub-
lication of “The Rights of War and Peace,” began
a movement as permanent as the influence of this
book. In his quaint suit of leather, this preacher of
the inner light fared up and down the city streets
during the Civil War boldly proclaiming, “Woe,
woe to the bloody city.” He and the great body of
Friends, his followers, like the early Christian mar-
tyrs, endured dungeons and stripes and persecution
of every kind, but they stood steadfast in their faith,
fighting with their tongues, which sometimes jvere
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


sharp indeed, and receiving the appellation, “Quak-
ers,” because they made the enemies of peace to
quake, not because they themselves had faltered. A
few of them later, founding the City of Brotherly
Love, treated the natives of the New World so justly
that, as every schoolboy knows, they had their re-
ward in long years of peace.
A half century rolled on after the appearance of
Grotius’s great book and the beginning of Fox’s
preaching, and this time a follower of Fox, another
Englishman, the high-bred scholar and New World
pioneer, William Penn, the founder of that Phila-
delphia, presented a scheme for “The Present and
Future Peace of Europe.” This plan was for a gen-
eral alliance or compact among the different states
of Europe to form a Diet or Congress of Nations.
Unlike the Great Design of the French king, this
was the first scheme free from suspicion of ulterior
motive and inspired purely by love of humanity.
But still the nations were not ready.
The profoundest philosophic word of the eight-
eenth century about the great problem that made
Franklin declare “there never was a good war nor a
bad peace” was uttered by Immanuel Kant, the
master mind of Germany, in his essay on Eternal
Peace, published at the very time that our Consti-
tution had made our little group of thirteen states
already a world power. Kant’s great insight was
law; or war


that the world’s peace can never be permanently
attained until the world is organised, and it can
never be safely organised until its constituent na-
tions have achieved self-government. In his day
any degree of representative government was the
rare exception. Even Great Britain’s House of
Commons, so late as 1866, represented only one man
in four. World organisation, had it been possible
in Kant’s day, would have been chiefly a compact
between monarchs, and the only peace obtained
would have been that in which the mighty dominate
the weak —a peace that portends slavery or revolu-
tion. In the period which has elapsed since the sage
of Konigsberg taught the world the secrets of the
starry heavens and of the mind of man, as well as
the principles of peace with justice, scarcely a single
independent nation has been left which has not
achieved, however feebly, some form of representa-
tive government. The immobile Orient has awak-
ened, Turkey is striding ahead, and the aroused pa-
triotism of China demands liberty and a republic.
The world has witnessed a silent revolution in the
minds of men more stupendous and far-reaching
than perhaps all that the previous thousand years
had wrought. The master minds of physics in the
realm of invention have almost annihilated time and
space and have brought reports to every breakfast
table of yesterday’s doings in Tokio, Melbourne,
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


and Constantinople. No longer is it necessary to
chronicle the words, “And still the nations are not
ready, but must wait,” for now the fulness of time
has come and a united world is a practical necessity.
Its prototype in the United States has been tested
for over a century and a quarter.
When Washington, Franklin, Madison, and their
great compeers, less than a hundred in all, sat down
in that fateful summer of 1787 behind locked doors
in Independence Hall in the City of Brotherly Love
to wrestle with their problem, they were helping to
solve, all unwittingly, not their own problem alone,
but that of the whole world. The group of thirteen
quarrelsome colonies, bound by a rope of sand,
seemed approaching dissolution. So tense was hos-
tility between Connecticut and New York, for in-
stance, due among other things to the latter’s custom
duties at her border line, that in one town the mer-
chants banded themselves together to forbid any
citizen carrying over merchandise into New; York
for a year, under penalty of paying two hundred
and fifty dollars fine. The citizens of Maine and
Georgia were much farther apart in sympathy than
are those of Canada and New; Zealand to-day. The
sailboat and camel—the conveyances of Pharaoh
and Alexander —and the little four-page newspaper
were all that served as mediums between them.
How little those bewigged giants of statesmanship,
law or war


sitting in that classic hall, could realise how the
little candle they were lighting was to become the
great torch of liberty enlightening the whole world,
throwing its beams to far Cathay and waking the
myriads from slumber, lightening the gloom of suf-
fering millions the world over, by showing where to
find the key to unlock prison bars! They thought
only of the task in hand; but, in solving the prob-
lem of creating a United States, they also showed
the essential method of creating a United World.
The glory of our government and our people is
that, more than any other on God’s earth, have they
been able to contribute to humanity the secret of
attaining peace with justice. The latest critic of the
Supreme Court, that most original feature of the
mighty work which the Constitutional Convention
created, has said: “In the only opportunity ever
given the Supreme Court to prevent war, it failed.”
Is not the accusation false to history? Did the
Court ever fail to do what it was created to do?
Despite interstate quarrels, sometimes concerning
boundary lines, vital interests, and honour, it has
from the beginning settled quietly, one after an-
other, the numerous differences arising between
states which, unsettled, would have meant war.
Forty-eight states from the Atlantic to the Pacific,
containing now one hundred and twenty millions of
people, have had peace and justice around the border
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


lines of each, notwithstanding the reckless riots, the
murders, lynchings, and disorders that have dis-
graced civilisation within those borders. The one
instance referred to as a “failure,” when half the
country was ready to rise in arms to overthrow the
national government, was in the nature of the case
one with which no court was meant to cope. The
critic’s further inference that the Hague Court
would fail when tested on a serious issue, could
apply only when, following the analogy, one half
of the world should find itself fundamentally and
bitterly opposed to the other half and should choose
universal war rather than reason. If such an un-
thinkable insanity should ever wipe out civilisation,
naturally the Hague Court of Arbitration and the
newer Permanent Court of International Justice
would fail, but only if either had once become the
acknowledged arbiter between governments.
The first Peace Society the world ever saw was
founded in 1815. When the New York merchant,
David Low Dodge, established this first Peace So-
ciety, he made membership in a Christian church a
pre-requisite to membership in his society; and the
peace movement in America and England has been
essentially a Christian movement ever since, though
naturally, except at the beginning, it has made no
such condition of membership. Almost invariably
the Hebrews the world over are counted among the
LAW OR WAR


friends of peace, and on the continent of Europe the
ablest of the free-thinkers are often found to be
ardent workers for peace. Following the leadership
of David Low Dodge, the noble ancestor of illus-
trious descendants, and in the same year, the Massa-
chusetts Peace Society was started in Boston by
Noah Worcester and William Ellery Channing. In
these days of international courts and conferences
and the League of Nations, which seem to novices
in world affairs to have sprung up full-fledged in
the last fifteen years, it is well for students to turn
back to the heroes and pioneers who in New Eng-
land,thought out the methods of world organisation
and international justice before the present actors
in the world’s great drama were born. They died
before they saw the fruition of their toil and tears
and hopes; but the statesmen who met at the Hague
Conference in 1899 owed their success largely to
these men, who had in the thirties and forties marked
out what came to be known in Europe as the “Amer-
ican plan.” William Ladd, whose work indeed de-
serves a monument, must in this brief survey be
passed with no adequate word of eulogy. Charles
Sumner, who was as valiant a champion of peace as
he was of the abolition of slavery, in three powerful
addresses, and especially in “The True Grandeur of
Nations,” said almost all that could be said before
those later special contributions to the subject by
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


Jean de Bloch, Novicow, Norman Angell, Elihu
Root and a host of modern students based upon
our new conditions.
Elihu Burritt, “the learned blacksmith,” a mar-
vellous self-made scholar with the heart of a child,
brought about cheap ocean postage and, working
untiringly both at home and in Europe, shared with
his great contemporaries, Cobden, Bright, Richard,
.Victor Hugo, in the great task of stirring the nations
still suffering from Napoleon’s exhausting wars.
Upon the centenary of Burritt’s birth, in 1910, the
polyglot city of New Britain in Connecticut, where
he was born and where his body lies, closed banks
and shops and schools, and forty nationalities in
native costumes, marching with banners and their
national music in high festival, celebrated the birth
of him who, of all citizens of his state, had best
illustrated the meaning of the motto on the great
banner flung that day to the breeze, “Above all na-
tions is humanity.” To Elihu Burritt more than to
any other was due the success of the great Interna-
tional Peace Congresses in Europe in the middle of
the last century.
The Crimean War, in which Lord Salisbury later
said that England “placed her money on the wrong
horse,” our Civil War, and the wars in Italy,
Austria, France, and Germany, delayed for thirty
years the advance of the peace movement. In 1889
LAW OR WAR


a man of lowly birth, who had known the sharpness
of poverty, founded an institution more powerful
for the accomplishment of international peace and
progress than any other before 1919 except the
Hague Conferences. William Randall Cremer, a
member of Parliament, afterward knighted for
his achievement, initiated the Interparliamentary
Union, composed of members of the world’s parlia-
ments, which deals with all questions of public inter-
national law that concern the maintenance of peace.
To-day this organisation, numbering over three
thousand members, has brought the peace movement
into the realm of practical politics. Its chief early
accomplishment was the presentation to the Inter-
parliamentary Conference in 1895 of the draft for
the organisation of a Permanent Court of Arbitra-
tion. To a large extent this work was later adopted
by the first Hague Conference.*
In 1896, Alfred Nobel of Sweden, the inventor of
dynamite, died, leaving most of his great fortune
to establish five annual prizes, amounting to nearly
forty thousand dollars each, to be given to such per-
sons as had done the most important work for litera-
ture, chemistry, physics, medicine, and peace: the
peace prize is awarded by the Norwegian Storthing.
'•‘The Interparliamentary Union meets annually in the different
capitals. Its executive authorities are the Interparliamentary
Council, composed of two delegate members from each national
group and an executive committee of five members.
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


A Nobel Institute was established in Christiania,
whither the winner of the peace prize each year is
supposed to repair and deliver an address. Some
years the prize has not been awarded. In some cases
it has been divided. Among the recent recipients
are M. Briand and Herr Streseman. The provision
for a peace prize was due to the influence of Nobel’s
friend, Baroness von Suttner of Vienna, author of
“Lay Down Your Arms,” a book translated into
many languages, which, with her many other writ-
ings and addresses, made her a leading factor in the
peace movement for thirty years. The list of recip-
ients of the Nobel Peace prizes includes Theodore
Roosevelt, Elihu Root and Woodrow Wilson.
One of the notable benefactors of the cause of
peace was Albert K. Smiley, who every year for
twenty years from 1895 generously entertained as
his guests for a three-day conference in the spring-
time hundreds of the most able and eminent men of
all professions and large business interests. The
famous Mohonk Arbitration Conferences were held
in the great assembly parlour of his hotel beside a
beautiful lake near the Catskills, and presented
every subject connected with the judicial settlement
of international affairs. Among its presiding officers
for years at a time were such men as Senator Ed-
munds, Hon. John W. Foster, Judge George Gray,
and President Butler of Columbia University. In
LAW OR WAR


the early days, the most notable figure in the confer-
ences was the venerable author of “The Man With-
out a Country.” At the first session in 1895 Edward
Everett Hale sounded the watchword which he
reiterated with emphasis year after year: “We must
have a permanent international Tribunal of Arbitra-
tion, a permanent Tribunal, a permanent Tribunal”;
the notable participants in these unique conferences
were Justice Brewer, Cardinal Gibbons, Hon. Oscar
Straus, Hon. Andrew D. White, President Charles
W. Eliot, Wu Ting Fang, Hague Court judges,
among a host of captains of industry, bankers, gov-
ernors, admirals, generals, and distinguished for-
eigners from every land.
The first man to pledge a large amount to the
cause of international peace was Mr. Edwin Ginn,
the well-known publisher of Boston. In Novem-
ber of 1910 his World Peace Foundation, previously
known as the International School of Peace, was
incorporated and received an ultimate endowment
of $1,000,000. This Foundation issues a series of
invaluable pamphlets published regularly and em-
bodying the results of great research on current in-
ternational affairs. They supply colleges and stu-
dents with data on all branches of international
relations. The Foundation is the American agent
for all publications of the League of Nations, the
International Labor Office and the World Court
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


reports and it is carrying on much educational work
in making the activities and accomplishments of
world organisations known to the public.
Mr. Ginn’s endowment was followed a year later
by a gift from Andrew Carnegie of $10,000,000 to
establish the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace. This gift followed Mr. Carnegie’s previous
gifts of $1,500,000 for the Peace Palace at the
Hague; of $5,000,000 for Heroes of Peace in Amer-
ica, and of $1,250,000 in Great Britain; of $1,000,-
000 in France, $1,250,000 in Germany and $1,790,-
000 in smaller countries for the same purpose. Mr.
Carnegie also gave $850,000 for the building and
beautification of the grounds of the Pan-American
Union in Washington and $1,000,000 for the erec-
tion of the Central American Court in Costa Rica.
One gift which has perhaps produced the largest re-
sults was $2,000,000 for the Church Peace Union in
which Protestant, Roman Catholic, and Jew com-
bine to promote peace activities in the religious
world and, through the World Alliance to Promote
International Friendship Through the Churches, is
reaching out all over Europe, bringing former ene-
mies and people of different creeds to confer to-
gether to promote good will. French and German,
British and Austrian, Anglican and Greek arch-
bishops have met on common ground and in great
conferences in the European capitals. All over our
LAW OR WAR


land in great city churches and in little rural meet-
ing houses, Christians are learning of the progress
of the League of Nations, the decisions of the World
Court, and children are learning of their little brown
cousins beyond seas; and every church is asked
to have a permanent committee on International
Friendship, for which Edward Everett Hale set the
example a generation ago.
The headquarters of the Carnegie Peace Endow-
ment are in Washington * with the division of In-
tercourse and Education in New York City. Its
first chairman was Elihu Root, who was fol-
lowed by President Butler of Columbia University.
Among the distinguished men who have served
the Endowment are Dr. James Brown Scott, Pro-
fessor John B. Clark, and Professor James T.
Shotwell, The Foundation deals with international
law, economics, and education. In Paris it has
handsome European headquarters. The directors
have undertaken important and extensive enter-
prises, among others, sending scores of pro-
fessors and editors to London, Paris, the Hague,
Geneva, and elsewhere to study world affairs and
stimulate their work. The directors provide for the
carrying on of an Institute of International Law at
the Hague every summer; for the publication in
French of the periodical The International Mind,
* See Appendix.
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


and for a vast amount of research regarding the
World War. It has devoted part of its funds to re-
construction in Belgium.
A movement of promise is that of the Cosmopoli-
tan Clubs, which, from a little club of students in
1903, has developed into a body of importance, rep-
resenting about fifty different countries. The modest
beginning was in the apartment of a Japanese stu-
dent in the University of Wisconsin, where was
founded an International Club of sixteen foreign
and two native students. As one studies the faces
of these picked men in some club group, future
leaders of science and politics in China, Japan,
Brazil, Mexico, India, the Philippines, South Africa,
and South America, as well as the frank, alert faces
of our native collegians, one realises that the club,
like similar ones elsewhere, is a melting pot for the
elimination of prejudice, suspicion, and indifference.
These men by the common bond of intellectual in-
terests and common recreation, are coming, without
any loss of patriotism as concerns their native lands,
to think of themselves as first of all citizens of the
world, members of the brotherhood of man. The
beautiful and spacious International House, erected
by John D. Rockefeller, Jr., opposite Grant’s tomb
in New York, is a centre for international student
activities which, with a similar house given by the
same generous donor to the University of California,
LAW OR WAR


may produce far-reaching results. This brief survey
records only a part of the unofficial work which for
a century has begun to show the world that war is a
product of confused thinking, and that its extinction
does not need to await a change in human nature.
A discussion of the history of official action for
international peace will be discussed in a later
chapter.
In this outline, which is chiefly prepared for
American readers, no effort has been made to sum-
marise the work of peace societies in other coun-
tries, but in many countries the work has been and
is being promoted with great devotion and high in-
telligence, and some of the European peace journals
are of marked significance. The English Peace So-
ciety was organised in 1816, the next year after the
founding of the New York and Massachusetts so-
cieties here.
HISTORY OF THE PEACE MOVEMENT


CHAPTER II
EDUCATION AND WORLD PEACE
As the world’s future depends largely upon the
psychology in the making in a few leading coun-
tries, what millions of American children are now
being taught about human relationships may shape
world policies and create ruin or prosperity. Euro-
pean university students during the post-war period
have suffered greatly from privation, from depleted
libraries and laboratories, and from poverty-stricken
professors’ inability to do their former work of re-
search. Additional obligations are therefore thrown
on all American scholarship to help atone for the
enormous loss to the world of culture. Few things
are more important than supplying our 700,000
teachers with the special kind of help they need to
enable them to cope with imperative new demands.
For a century before the war ambitious minds were
intoxicated with the marvellous output of science
and invention. Commerce and mechanics absorbed
attention, and we had little insight into interna-
tional relationships and the most vital human prob-
lems. This was true of every country, and the log


ical outcome was the World War. Its tumultuous
aftermath has produced many bewildered minds un-
able to instruct that large part of the rising genera-
tion which is greedily feeding at the mental garbage
pail provided by the enormous number of sensational
and vulgar periodicals that fill the news stands.
Post-war education needs to differ materially
from that provided a generation ago for those in
Europe whose lack of vision brought on the great-
est calamity the world has known. Our people
learned how to spell pterodactyl, to locate the Xingu
River, to remember the number killed at Benning-
ton; but millions of them left school believing that
trade followed the flag, that another nation’s pov-
erty was our opportunity, that patriotism meant sup-
porting an administration’s policy, right or wrong,
and that what was wrong for an individual was right
for a nation. Teachers themselves believed that
there was such a thing as French trade, German
trade, Russian trade. They did not know what
every twelve-year-old should be taught, that indi-
viduals, not nations, trade. The German who sells
dye-stuffs or optical instruments is not a rival of the
Russian who sells wheat or furs or oil; nor of the
Frenchman who manufactures silk or perfumes or
wine, or of the Englishman who sells coal or cotton
cloth. His greatest competitor may live across the
street. One of the most deep-rooted causes of the
EDUCATION XND WORLD PEACE


war was lack of elementary knowledge of interna-
tional economics.
Life and death and the future of civilisation de-
pend upon ideas. The chief thing that has made
for progress has been clear thought. Does not even
good will come second? For unless one first sees
what is good to do, he may with the best intentions
support very fanatical and dangerous policies, as
Soviet Russia has shown. The devil loves to lurk
behind a pious mask. It is under the claim of pre-
serving peace that the most blatant and sophistical
arguments are presented for more devilish mechan-
ical devices to destroy men whom lack of statesman-
ship has turned into enemies. Yet there was never
an age when world peace was so possible and the
agencies for it so far advanced. Our national con-
tribution to world peace depends largely on the
power of certain groups of so-called patriotic so-
cieties to impose the old Prussian conception of
nationalism upon the American people, and of the
power of certain newspapers with enormous cir-
culation to befuddle the minds of the electorate.
The yet unfledged voters in our High Schools
need, more than any details about civics or history, to
have burnt into their consciousness the fact that all
human beings are interdependent and since the In-
dustrial Revolution have come into a new relation to
each other. The machinery of government and facts
LAW OR WAR


about elections can be looked up at any time in a
reference book; these are only means to an end. The
end is to get sound judgment about public policies
and the will to serve. Old prejudices, traditions,
and newspaper headlines form the basis of the judg-
ment of millions of voters. Their minds are lumber
rooms of facts huddled together without order or
system. They have a morbid fear of not being loyal
to their own. That means that one must vote a
straight party ticket every time. What is needed is
the true sportsman spirit at the Harvard-Yale game;
to care more for a clean game, even if it goes against
one’s own side, than to have one’s own side win, if
it has slugged or fouled with its policies and slogans.
Does not loyalty to truth often lead one to vote with
one party in a national election and with another in a
state election? Loyalty to country instead of party
will create the fine type of independent voter which
will bring both parties to a higher standard.
The need of understanding something of world
history if one is to understand one’s own, is gener-
ally recognised; but the need of considering one’s
own political history in its relation to economic and
vital statistics and moral principles is less under-
stood. The High School student leaves school
usually grossly unprepared to make sound judg-
ments on public issues. Especially is he unable to
judge matters which appeal to the emotions, like
EDUCATION AND WORLD PEACE


questions of danger and defence. He knows some-
thing of cryptograms, ventricles, orati obliqua,
queens of England, but does not know that these
matters are but trivial compared with the weightier
matter of human relations. Questions presented to
many tens of thousands of students during a period
of ten years have elicited the information that the
very great majority imagine that foreigners in the
course of our history have slain no less than two
million Americans. These students were from
twelve to nineteen years of age. Their text-books
had never given any of the pertinent facts that
would profoundly affect their attitude toward dan-
ger and defence from foreigners. They have never
learned that every year automobiles destroy more
citizens than did all foreigners in our first four wars
beginning with the Revolution: that more have been
murdered here in ten years than those slain in our
five foreign wars combined.
Until pupils are taught always to think of using
facts comparatively, and are given the facts that
need to be compared, can their judgment on vital
matters that affect their future and their taxes be
anything more than the result of impulse, tradition,
and prejudice? Let a page of essential facts now
omitted from our text-books be inserted in each new;
edition.
Imagination should be encouraged quite as much
LAW OR WAR


in the study of arithmetic as in poetry. Teachers
are usually content with accuracy and speed, and
leave pupils absolutely unable to visualise figures as
applied to areas, population, and money. Lack of
imagination is being recognised by psychologists as
a serious defect in students in business colleges.
Those who can perform problems, make schedules,
draw up statistics, often have little power to visual-
ise human beings, or human relationships as affected
by them, or the relation of one set of figures to an-
other in terms of obligation or of opportunity. In
respect to imagination, it is a question whether the
banker is better off than the average man who deals
very little with figures. How many who can figure
cleverly and swiftly have the imagination to con-
ceive what figures mean when applied to human
needs? The men who brought on the war were
trained to extract cube root, and to go through other
processes which not one in a thousand ever subse-
quently used, but they were left to grow up to voting
age grotesquely fancying that anything to make
money circulate rapidly helped prosperity, no matter
,what was produced; though money can circulate as
rapidly in making bullets as in making bread. They
imagined that we had a “good balance of trade” if
iwe exported for gold three times as much as we re-
ceived in imports; that by leaving our customers
land debtors to become paupers in fighting out their
EDUCATION AND WORLD PEACE


“squabbles,” we can get markets and reparations.
Does not the rising generation need to learn what
the unstable dollar has done and still is doing to
complicate the problem of individual and national
debts; what injustice and suffering have resulted in
the enormous changes in the purchasing power of
the dollar, and what relationship this problem has
to national prosperity and world peace*? Is it not
of more practical importance for British boys to
know that Great Britain had not paid off her Na-
poleonic war debts when she embarked in war in
1914, and that the interest on them had about
doubled the original amount, than to know about the
wives of Henry VIII or the wars of the Spanish
Succession*? It would have been useful for them
to have figured in relation to their father’s income
what it meant for Great Britain in 1880 to pay out
of 84,000,000 pounds sterling, 73,000,000 pounds
for army and navy and interest on debt; what it
signified when the Boer War wiped out the savings
of the country for thirty-six years. It would be
well for American children to learn this year’s an-
nual budget and that we are spending nearly four-
fifths of it on something connected with war, past,
present or future. Every child should be taught to
work out problems whose terms should incidentally
convey a vast deal that he needs to know. Let him
figure how long it would take men of different
LAW OR WAR


salaries, from those of a letter carrier up to that of
a corporation lawyer or bank president, to earn a
million dollars. The cost of his town or city hall,
his school, his church, might be ascertained and taken
as a norm for calculations. A clear conception of
these matters would help give some faint compre-
hension of the significance of our national expendi-
ture, and of our country’s needs, and what it means
when our annual budget is reckoned in billions and
our annual loss by crime about equals it. The child
should learn that great wealth is not produced by
mere thrift, and this might set him to considering
the bases of great fortunes, and the relation of great
fortunes to tariffs and to special privilege, to private
seizure of national resources, and the relation of
national expenditure to war.
Is not knowledge of our national faults and ac-
quaintance of others’ opinion of us an essential step
toward creating a proper understanding of other
people? Nearly ninety years ago Hegel in his
“Philosophy of History” remarked upon the pre-
ponderance in the United States of private interest,
and maintained that “respect for law exists apart
from genuine probity, and the American merchants
lie under the imputation of dishonest dealings under
legal protection.” How are children who daily hear
of a “four thousand dollar clergyman,” “a fifty
thousand dollar lawyer,” a “ten thousand dollar
EDUCATION AND WORLD PEACE


engagement ring,” “a million dollar bride,” a “hun-
dred million dollar baby,” a “billion dollar captain
of high finance,” to perceive relative values in other
terms than coin? Athletics seems almost the only
popular field excepted from the financial blight.
Must not development of a true spirit of interna-
tional ethics go hand in hand with the development
of a true spirit of civic and national patriotism?
The school must not only develop the growing con-
sciousness of the family of nations, but must prob-
ably be the chief instrument in its realisation; for
it is largely an intellectual matter, and, therefore,
something which neither church nor home is usually
fitted to teach as well as the school. Many a father
who is devoted to family and church and country, is
a rank sceptic as to any possibility of ever ending
war and is confident that only a great navy can pro-
tect his country from invasion. The curl of the lip
in contempt, the careless expletive, “a tricky Jap,”
“a Greaser,” “a Hun” may, like a poisonous germ,
infect some little mind and demand much skilful
treatment from the teacher before it is eradicated.
In Parent Teachers’ Associations, few matters are of
more consequence than suggestions to parents as to
ways in which to develop the consciousness of human
solidarity and interdependence. Let children learn
from the start how many things enrich their lives
which come from every land, from the coffee and
LAW OR WAR


grapefruit on the breakfast table to the Bible and
Shakespeare and a large share of the books and
pictures in the home.
The American School Citizenship League, for-
merly known as the School Peace League, has with
meagre funds been attempting a scientific aid to
teachers for nearly twenty years. The logical de-
velopment of the international viewpoint is pre-
sented in a Course in Citizenship and Patriotism,
prepared by pedagogical experts in the League who
are masters of the philosophy and technique of teach-
ing ethics and citizenship. Chief Justice Taft in his
introduction to this Course in Citizenship, which is
prepared for primary and grammar grades, said:
“There are much needed lessons in this book to im-
press upon the youth who are to receive them the
idea that we are not the only people in the world;
that we should earnestly cultivate friendship and
sympathy with other peoples. These lessons will
also arouse the proper aspiration for a settlement of
international disputes by peaceable means.” The
true story of one’s country becomes linked with that
of other countries. In every grade little ways of
helpfulness are taught, and a sense of responsibility
developed from the start. The contribution of each
race to American life is shown and the whole series
of talks and suggestions culminates in the higher
grades, when the thought of the world family and
EDUCATION AND WORLD PEACE


our relationship to humanity emphasises Bishop
Brent’s trenchant statement in a recent address:
“The true citizen to-day is a citizen of the world
and his first loyalty is to mankind. Patriotism
comes as a second loyalty, to be checked, disciplined,
and determined by the first and larger loyalty.”
This is a hard saying for “patrioteers” who have
never learned the truth of Lowell’s noble poem,
“The Fatherland.”
The essay contests arranged by the American
School Citizenship League enlist the attention of
hundreds of competitors in lands all over the globe
in Normal and High Schools and Colleges. The
subjects announced every year require research, and
study of world organisation and all that contributes
to international good will. The celebration of Good
Will Day, May ißth, the anniversary of the open-
ing of the first Hague Conference, is focussing atten-
tion of young people everywhere on one day in the
year which people of every land can celebrate to-
gether. Internationalism can properly exist only
as it is based on a true spirit of nationalism. Hos-
tility to the word has been engendered by those who
assumed that it weakened the spirit of patriotism.
Love of humanity no more weakens love of country,
than that weakens love of one’s own family. No
one is fitted for twentieth-century problems who
has not transcended the viewpoint of the American
LAW OR WAR


who, before the Civil War, declared: “My first
allegiance is to Harford County, my second to the
state of Maryland, my third to the United States.”
Just as the old states’-rights doctrine is now every-
where transcended, so must the narrow nationalism
that post-war reaction has created be transcended.
The child must be taught that he is first of all a
human being, a citizen of the world, a child of God.
The great internationalists —Dante, Lessing, Kant,
Mazzini, Victor Hugo, Sumner, Hale—were always
the most intense of patriots, seeing that only by the
perfecting of their own nation could the nation serve
as leader and benefactor among the peoples of the
earth, thus satisfying Emerson’s noble definition;
“The right patriotism is the delight which springs
from contributing our peculiar and legitimate ad-
vantage to the benefit of humanity.” Only teachers
with lofty souls can inculcate this type of patriot-
ism. The noisy and spectacular side of patriotism
elates the crowd, but it leaves the shallow mind
inert and apathetic when the real test comes in that
civic drudgery which wins no medals, title, gold lace,
or pensions and gives only the quiet satisfaction of
saving fellow men from accident and death; saving
forests and waterpower from extinction; preventing
waste and suffering by the public; and creating
beauty, happiness and health for multitudes who
may take it all for granted and even give no thanks.
EDUCATION AND WORLD PEACE


Says Professor Lindeman: “Our attempts to become
educated are confined to a few breathless years of
fact-hunting after which we settle down to some
form of collecting dollars, automobiles, and satis-
factions. Guidance for the state is left at loose ends.
We have concentrated attention on inventing demo-
cratic machinery for selecting leaders and forth-
with left them to function automatically. We de-
vised checks and balances instead of ways and
means . . . The spirit which prizes liberty is at
low ebb and, as Lincoln foresaw, when we have de-
stroyed this spirit we have planted the seeds of des-
potism at our doors. Privileges will need to be sacri-
ficed, institutions reshaped, for these are instruments,
means toward ends. Man is himself the end, and
when institutions stand in the way of his aspirations
they must be cast aside.” No modern state has
previously put into a legal system all the things
desired. A capitalist state like ours, spite of our
Constitution which can be circumvented, might
easily in a crisis adopt much of the Fascist doctrine.
We admire efficiency and Fascism accomplishes that.
It is quite in harmony with the smug nationalism,
and centralised power and intolerance that have
developed in so many countries since the war. When
democracy fails, as the non-voting half of our popu-
lation are trying to make it fail, we may find capital-
ism demanding Fascist principles to secure quickly
LAW OR WAR


(desired results. Democratic methods are slower.
Said Viscount Grey : “We have lived on to-day into
an epoch which regards democratic, representative
government as on its trial. Its merits and efficiency
are questioned when we are engaged in establishing
it. In some countries, democratic representative
government is no longer regarded as an ideal at all.”
Must not Normal students who are busy learning
how to teach punctuation, algebra, and botany, if
they are to gain a perception of relative values, per-
ceive that, first and foremost, they must learn how
to preserve democracy and to save the State? Is
any matter which requires trained judgment more
important than the vital question of “prepared-
ness”?
EDUCATION AND WORLD PEACE


CHAPTER III
PREPAREDNESS
No greater lesson has Emerson taught the world
than that nothing can be known except as it is seen
in its relations. A thing is large or small, important
or unimportant, only as it is contrasted with other
things. We do not know whether our own car is
moving, if the one beside us moves, until we look
out on solid ground.
Preparedness and defence are good words but they
mean nothing until they are compared with danger.
It is time that they ceased to be monopolised by the
army and navy and were put to larger service. All
wise persons believe in prudence and foresight and
preparedness for anything that is likely to threaten.
The common phrase “adequate preparedness,” on
the lips of every military man, means nothing what-
ever until one is told what the preparedness is for.
What is adequate for one condition is inadequate
for another. Germany had an army adequate to
fight two others, but not to cope with a larger coali-
tion. No nation ever can be prepared for all con-
ceivable danger.


Does not the kind of preparedness and the amount
of preparedness that every nation needs, depend on
the degree of danger and the kind of danger exist-
ing? A rocky coast needs many lighthouses; a safe
coast, few. Berlin, which is practically fireproof,
requires few fire-engines, and is proud of having
fewer than our flimsily built cities necessitate. A
nation that has little danger from without should re-
joice if it needs few battleships; nothing except dire
danger can excuse the taxation of the toilers of the
world for more cruisers. Some years ago when our
navy cost much less than it does now, an American
admiral, resenting protests against spending money
on the navy, asked, “Why does not the speaker turn
his attention to the waste of six hundred million
dollars by fires which a proper civilisation would
prevent? Expenditure upon the navy is but a triv-
iality compared with that.” A singular comparison,
indeed! One may compare one evil with another,
or one preventive with another; but if a navy is sup-
posed to be a preventive of war, should not its cost
be compared with the cost of the preventives of fire,
not with the loss by fire?
In arraigning our extravagance and waste the ad-
miral might have gone further, and reminded us that
we are the most homicidal of civilised nations. We
have murdered, in every million citizens, 129 in
one year, while in that same year across the border
PREPAREDNESS


in Canada, only three out of every million were mur-
dered. We are the most wasteful and extravagant
people on the earth. Before the war we destroyed
60,000 more lives by accident in four years than
died by bullets on the Union side in four years of
Civil War. Deaths in our country from automobiles
cost yearly more lives than did the battles in our
first four foreign wars —a fact not to be surmised
from historical text-books. We destroy by fire seven
times as much yearly as does all Europe. This has
been said to equal the cost of half the new buildings
erected annually in the United States. Said Pro-
fessor Giddings of Columbia University: “For three
hundred years we have been a herd of wild asses in
the wilderness. There have been other herds in
other lands but no other has accomplished an equal
amount of damage in so short a time.” Our civic
corruption, colossal land-thefts, our growing im-
perialisms and admiration for the huge and costly
as contrasted with the fitting and beautiful, have
amazed Europe. A common question is whether
Americans are not chiefly Babbitts, and care most
of all for material things. One-quarter of our sol-
diers in 1917 were found unable to read a newspaper
in English; and in 1918 we had still 5,000,000 il-
literates; yet with ignorance, recklessness, waste,
preventable disease, accident, and crime attacking
LAW OR WAR


our fair land, men in power are spending their chief
thought on possible enemies overseas.
Since our republic was founded no nation has de-
clared war against us. Said Secretary Charles E.
Hughes in 1925: “So far as we can see into the
future, the United States is not in the slightest
danger of aggression. In no single power and in
no possible combination of powers lies any menace
to our security.”
In three foreign wars, the War of 1812, and the
wars with Mexico and Spain, combined, including
the Philippine adjunct to our Spanish war, we lost
less than fifteen thousand men by foreign bullets.
For previous past wars before the World War, and
for preparation for future war, the United States
was paying about seventy cents out of every dollar
of its income, though without an enemy in the world.
Let one imagine a householder spending seventy
cents out of every dollar on stonewalls, bulldogs,
burglar alarms, and moats, and having only thirty
cents on every dollar left for family needs; that is
what we pay for Congress, the President, the cabinet,
federal judges, federal prisons, custom house build-
ings and officers, post office buildings in every city,
coast-guard, light-houses, census, printing, diplo-
matic and consular service, forestry, waterways,
quarantine, irrigation, agricultural and other depart-
PREPAREDNESS


merits, mints, etc. After the World War we had
only fifteen cents on the dollar to spend for these
purposes.
Said John Ruskin: “It is a state of mind very
much to be dreaded for a man not to know the devil
when he sees him.” Is it not a state of mind still
more to be dreaded when a nation does not know
its real enemies from bogies? Despite the fact that
for thirty years before the Civil War, and from
1872 to 1898, we had a small navy, we were a real
and great world power; our democracy, as James
Russell Lowell said, was undermining every mon-
archy in Europe. We did not first become a world
power when Dewey sank a few old Spanish ships.
Ever since the Constitution was ratified and began
to serve as the basis of the dozens of national con-
stitutions written since, we have been a world power,
and have been recognised as such. It was once our
pride and glory that we need not burden ourselves
with the millstone of militarism that the great
powers of Europe had hung around their throats.
To-day, with our new militarism and demand for a
great navy and, under the clamour of vested inter-
ests which want contracts for manufacture of mili-
tary equipments, are we not following Old World
methods, without Old World excuses? A spirit of
vain emulation has been goading us to increase of
armaments out of all proportion to our needs. For
LAW OR WAR


over a hundred years, we as a world power, though
with a very small navy, were unassailed. Since the
World War our vaulting ambition has demanded
that we have a navy equal to any on the earth. Since
the destruction of Germany’s navy, Great Britain
has been willing to abandon her two-power navy
and permit ours to equal hers; but are not our dan-
gers only a fraction of her dangers and does not our
navy far exceed our need of defence ? Great Britain
depends on her merchant marine for food, and one-
third of her people would starve or be forced to
emigrate if her supplies from overseas were cut off.
She is within gunshot of the continent. Her coast-
line, including her possessions, is twice our own.
We on the other hand, safe between two oceans, can
feed ourselves, have immense resources, and are not
in the slightest danger of invasion. All this is
sedulously ignored when the demands for annual
appropriations are presented. Has a navy any more
to do with the dignity of a country than have fire-
engines or life-saving stations? As to wealth, the
richer the country, the better customer it is, and the
less likely to be attacked by other nations which
want customers. The wealthier a country the sooner
can it buy ships and ammunition in sudden exigency.
The advice given college Freshmen by a United
States Senator to take military training was because
“we are a rich country and others are poor and jeal-
PREPAREDNESS


bus and may attack us.” This idea is constantly
repeated. It is assumed that we can keep off ma-
rauders only by guns and bombs. What affects in-
dividuals and nations is confounded. An individ-
ual’s house may be looted if he stores up precious,
portable material. Bandits may overpower men
carrying pay-rolls. A certain factory in Nevada
was in great danger, until it paid its people in checks,
not cash. But our nation’s wealth is in its inventive,
clever brains, its fields of grain, in mines and oil-
wells, in skyscrapers, factories, public buildings,
waterpower, railroads ; these possessions are not port-
able. The fact that some revengeful nation might
bomb New York and do great damage is theoreti-
cally true, but it would have nothing to gain. Even
if a coalition tried it, they would simply destroy the
goose that lays the golden egg, and could no longer
help their needs by borrowing. It is such fantastic
bugaboos as this which militarists and the jingo press
conjure up that terrorise the masses and induce them
to rely on steel and bombs instead of treaties to se-
cure defence.
China was not only the inventor of gunpowder,
but has been conspicuously the employer of a force
which, when widely adopted by the western world,
may prove more efficacious for defence than the ex-
plosive which the nations so readily accepted and
employed. Even a few unorganised Chinese mer-
LAW OR WAR


chants, unsupported by their government, were able,
in a nation without a navy, to bring to some meas-
ure of justice our great nation with a navy second
only to England’s, when their boycott of our goods,
a few years ago, wrought havoc in the cotton trade.
Their later boycott of Japanese goods quietly se-
cured certain desired and just concessions. What
would not be the power of 400,000,000 organised
Asiatics backed by their government, if, twenty-five
years from now, they should unite to refuse to deal
with any nation that had wronged them and trans-
fer their trade to a more friendly nation? The mere
threat of non-intercourse with any nation by an or-
ganised world would be quite adequate; it would
never need to be carried into execution, any more
than our army is ever called on to enforce the de-
cisions of our Supreme Court. It is the rational,
bloodless, and effective weapon suited to an organ-
ised world which produces the largest results with
the least waste and expense. It is par excellence
the Christian method. It is the political application
of the “shaking the dust off the feet” and “let him
he anathema.” It is wholly removed from the spirit
of violence and revenge, and must not be associated
with the sudden, unannounced boycott which often
does gross injustice in disputes between labour and
capital.
Since Washington’s time our population has in-
PREPAREDNESS


creased about 28 times, our expense for armaments
has increased 650 times, and our area about three to
four times. We are told periodically, just before
the vote on the naval budget, that Japan has so
many hundred thousand soldiers that she can land
on our shores, and that we are unprepared for pos-
sible dangers. Japan needs no further expansion at
this time for she has not yet developed her newly-
acquired island of Formosa. Her ambition for ex-
pansion is in Manchuria. She would not take the
Philippines as a gift. The climate is too hot for her
people and she could not afford to fortify them.
We have no excuse whatever for suspicion of Japan.
She has only too great cause for grievance toward us,
even in addition to the groundless and wanton insult
to her involved in the action of our Senate in the
cancellation of the Gentleman’s Agreement touch-
ing her trifling immigration to this land. Said a
well-known missionary: “When Perry opened Japan
to the knowledge and intercourse of Western na-
tions, one thing that shocked the Japanese was the
bloody history of these nations on this side of the
globe; and one of their greatest moralists expressed
this wide feeling when he begged his government to
send him on a mission to the West that he might
plead with those nations to put an end to the brutal
wars which two hundred and fifty years of peace had
made Japan profoundly dislike. At the entrance of
LAW OR WAR


countless towns and villages a high flagstaff stands
at the base of which is written, “Peace be to this
village.” Compare the national hymn of Japan
with those of the nations of the West. Hymns to
be national must express the deepest and strongest
sentiment of the nation. Not a shadow of war here.
We of the West have to be careful how we sing our
national hymns where representatives of different
nations are gathered, but Japan’s national hymn can
be sung anywhere in the world without giving of-
fence. It was the so-called Christian nations that
taught the Orient that “to command respect” they
must be armed. It was by the guns left over from
the World War and sold by people in Christian
nations that China’s civil war has been carried on.
Confounding defence with armaments, defenders
with armies and navies, has befogged the minds of
untrained thinkers. Granted that all citizens should
defend their motherland. But why assume that
there is only one form of defence, and that only
armed men are defenders? Women are as responsi-
ble as men for national defence. They fight against
real enemies which fill our cemeteries with graves.
Our navy faces no enemy that wants to attack us
as do hunger, microbes, and ignorance, which it is
the business of women daily to contend with. The
woman stands with the farmer in the front line of
national defence. She has a more constructive task
PREPAREDNESS


to perform than has any soldier. Her training
should be as thorough. The compulsory military
training, which our military men desire and are rap-
idly extending, is focussed on that which has only
one object—killing neighbours who have become
enemies. There is no objection to compulsory train-
ing for both young men and women, provided that
each may choose the type of national service which
he or she desires. The man who digs iron and coal
is doing far more for his country than the man who
learns to kill another man. In fact, without miners
men would be living in the stone age without a pin,
or knife, or nail, to say nothing of a gun. The
training which may well be given to and required
of all young men and women is that which will help
them to fight the perennial enemies—cold, hunger,
dirt, poverty, ignorance, vice, disease, and accident.
Among the long list of defenders needed to sustain
our modern state and guard it from disaster, the
least productive and most to be pitied are those inno-
cent youth who are compelled to spend most of their
days in non-productive manoeuvres and whose work,
if it comes, is to slay other youth equally innocent.
In criticising our underemphasis upon real dangers
and our one-sided use of the term “defence,” no crit-
icism is made of the gallant and able men who
silently serve in our army and navy. Let it always
be remembered that it is the public, not they, who
LAW OR WAR


are perpetuating the antiquated system of settling
questions of justice by dynamite and submarines.
Nothing said here is opposed to the idea of national
and international force for police purposes.
That “government is based on force” is a con-
ception, which, said Elihu Root, “is less than half a
truth.” Yet the fallacy is dinned in every ear, and
the public seems to have taken this dangerous and
sophistical maxim as axiomatic and formerly de-
duced many irrelevant doctrines from it, including
the theory that women should not vote. Said T. W.
Higginson: “It is the civilian who rules on the throne
or behind it, and who makes the fighting men his
mere agents. Yonder policeman at the comer looks
big and formidable; he protects the women and over-
awes the boys. But away in some corner of the City
Hall, there is some quiet man out of uniform, per-
haps a consumptive, a dyspeptic, or a cripple, who
can overawe the burliest policeman by his authority
as city marshal or as mayor.”
All governments, to be sure, use force. No gov-
ernment, least of all a republic, is based on force.
The weakest government in the world uses propor-
tionally the most force to protect its inherent weak-
ness. Our President needs no guard of thousands
of soldiers when he walks the streets, as did the ter-
rified and hated Czar who ruled over 150,000,000
Russians. Our national security against outside at-
PREPAREDNESS


tack rests chiefly on the same ground as that of
ordinary citizens in ordinary civil life. The chief
reason that our neighbours are not committing arson,
perjury, and homicide is not because they are afraid
of prison cell or hangman’s noose. Is it not because
their environment, education, and experience have
made such crimes loathsome to them, and because
they know right well they would have more to lose
than gain in the end by turning felons? Only a
small minority require the police. Workers for
peace, as such, welcome proper preparedness against
real dangers, and, when necessary, the use of force;
but they sharply distinguish between the kind of
force which aims to secure a judicial decision and
the kind that alms to settle by lewisite and bombs
such questions as boundaries or payment of debts.
Navies never compel offenders to go to court. They
aim at victory irrespective of justice. When Ben-
jamin Franklin said: “There never was a good war
nor a bad peace,” he meant that if one side was
wholly right, the other must be wholly wrong. Both
might be wrong and like two dogs snarling over a
bone that belongs to neither; but both could not pos-
sibly be right. At most, there could be on both
sides only fifty per cent of justice, which could
not produce a just war any more than a half-rotten
apple could be a good one. Is not any meas-
ure of justice that is achieved in war accom-
LAW OR WAR


panied by a thousand injustices toward the in-
nocent? Whatever may be said about revolu-
tions and revolts against tyranny within a country,
war to-day between nations stands condemned as
futile and abhorrent. It is often assumed that revo-
lutions and revolts are in the same category as civil
war. General Pershing once declared that there was
“no doubt that the Civil War never would have oc-
curred had the Union been equipped with an army
of a reasonable size and ready for immediate use.”
Yet the committee on naval affairs in February,
1861, reported that we had ample naval prepared-
ness but that “an aristocrat in the cabinet of Presi-
dent Buchanan had seen to it that the navy was scat-
tered to the four winds of heaven.” The South was
as well equipped as the North. Said the Mobile
Alabama Advertiser: “We are much obliged to
Secretary Floyd for the foresight he has displayed
in disarming the North and equipping the South for
this emergency. One hundred and thirty-five thou-
sand muskets have been quietly transferred from the
northern arsenal at Springfield.” There is no tell-
ing the quantity of arms and munitions which were
sent south from other arsenals. Four men out of
seven in the Cabinet were from slave states and one
was a northern “copperhead.” If the North had
been better equipped, the South would have had still
better preparation for striking its blow at Bull Run.
PREPAREDNESS


In the nature of the case, no government which con-
tains two hostile parties can prepare for civil war
without helping the enemy.
Had there been more “preparedness” war would
simply have been on a larger scale, or come sooner,
as would have been the case had England heeded
Lord Roberts’s plea twenty years before 1914 for
England to create a great army. Does not increase
of armaments in one country simply compel more
armaments in another? The paradoxical logic is
that every nation must be better prepared than every
other! America says that her only preparedness is
for defence. So say they all, except those who agree
with Captain Pye, U. S. N., who boldly declares:
“The most effective defence and the one most in
keeping with American character is a strong offence.
Our policy in war as in business is ‘Go get them!’ ”
So said Tirpitz in 1917.
General Pershing held that: “There is little ques-
tion that under strong leadership the United States
could have prevented the World War altogether.”
One nation’s action always affects that of others.
Had we in 1914 a trained army of 2,000,000 men,
as we are told we should have had, we should have
needed years to vote and tax and prepare for it, and
we should have been a very different America from
what we were. We should have incited more ex-
posed nations, which lacked our enormous natural
LAW OR WAR


assets, to fear us and to strain every nerve to go us
one better. The war would doubtless have come
sooner, Europe would have been profoundly alarmed
and looked with consternation at a nation, safely sit-
uated like ours, making anything like the prepara-
tions that we did make after we had seen a World
War waging for two years. One must reiterate that
technical experts are not often statesmen, and have
no better knowledge of how human nature will act
than have other people. But the deluded public
thinks that, because they understand war games and
phosgene gas and all the weapons of destruction,
they must divine what premiers and parliaments and
financiers are doing, and can thus estimate the nature
and degree of danger. Is not the problem of pre-
paredness chiefly psychological? Like the problem
of witchcraft and slavery, it vanishes when men
think clearly and act sanely upon the basis of fact,
not tradition or fiction. Few school histories of any
country give impartial, unbiased statement of facts,
and the real student must seek higher authorities,
unafraid of school-boards and publishers, to learn
many facts which complacent readers would like to
have forgotten.
PREPAREDNESS


CHAPTER IV
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS
The history of the United States is replete with
records of magnificent heroism, courage, and wis-
dom. The statesmanship of the great founders of
the republic, the devotion of pioneers in untrodden
paths, and of the men who preserved the Union,
ended slavery, and made America for so long the
home of the oppressed of all the world, are matters
of which all patriots are justly proud. Our country
was for a long period the moral and political leader
among the nations, the advance guard of all move-
ments for international peace. Washington, Frank-
lin, and Jefferson were known as the peace leaders
among world statesmen. But to-day we have begun
to substitute for that type of leadership another,
based on wealth and material power, coupled with
a new and proud spirit of aloofness. An insidious
encroachment on the sovereignty of little neighbour
states is breeding an alienation from former friends.
Let us cherish as our most precious treasure the
records of our true nobility and greatness; but let
us not, like the ostrich, bury our heads in the sand,


shut our eyes, and refuse to recognise these sorry
facts, if we are justly to appraise ourselves and learn
how to avoid new blunders. So far as they deal
with international relations, all school histories be-
fore publication should be criticised by international
historical experts. The accomplishment of this is
one aim of the World Federation of Education As-
sociations.
There are numerous omissions in American history
text-books, which leave pupils utterly in the dark or
with distorted views as to many vital matters which
vehement Fourth of July orators, who proclaim that
we have never fought but for the noblest ends,
would have us ignore. In the interest of truth, a few
are here suggested which text-book writers who fear
school-board judgments frequently omit. Their
errors are chiefly not of commission, but of omis-
sion, which, however, equally prevent giving a true
impression.
Until 1800 history in schools was almost entirely
that of Greece and Rome. With the growth of
nationalism all nations began inculcating its spirit
by writing their own history from their own point
of view. There was wide-spread propaganda for
patriotism. Professor C. H. Hamlin declares, in
“The War Myth in United States History,” “Pa-
triotism became international hatred, measured in
terms of military service. All nations pictured their
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


side as defensive; that its -wars 'are defensive against
an offensive enemy is the war myth of every coun-
try.”
The navigation laws, which led to much smug-
gling by leading New England merchants, were one
of the chief causes of the Revolution; the western
land restrictions by the British government as re-
garded their purchase, were another, and also the
financial legislation by England which prohibited
the colonists’ fiat money. The Stamp Act, which is
ordinarily understood as accruing to British inter-
est, did not, however, give a penny to England, but
was for the support of the colonial army to prevent
possible trouble with the Indians and French. The
American boycott proved an effective weapon by
the colonists in forcing Great Britain to repeal her
tariff on imports.
The acts of Great Britain which brought on the
war were legal and comported with the spirit of
that day, however unjust we feel them to have been.
When we criticise taxation without representation
we must recall that the great majority of people in
England were taxed, but they had no suffrage, and
did not achieve suffrage until ninety years after
1776. The colonists were no more unjustly treated
in this matter than were the British.
In Great Britain a strong and noble minority, in-
cluding Burke and Fox, Barre and Pitt, withstood
LAW OR WAR


King George and rejoiced that the colonists had re-
sisted. We have honoured them by giving theii;
names to many towns. Yet three generations fol-
lowed here who grew up assuming that all Ameri-
cans were right and all the British wrong. The
Revolution, it must be reiterated, was a war between
the progressives and reactionaries on both sides the
Atlantic. One-third of our Americans remained
loyal to King George and suffered grievously. The
New York legislature passed a resolution that Tories
should be “deemed guilty of treason and should
suffer death.” They were often tarred and feathered
and sometimes killed. New York alone confiscated
$3,600,000 belonging to Tories and all the states
did likewise. Although in the final treaty in 1783
restitution to the Tories for confiscated property
was agreed to, nothing was done and the agreement
became a scrap of paper. With bitterness of heart
about 100,000 broke up their homes and emigrated
after the war. One event is not often recalled —out
attempted invasion of Canada in 1775, after Con-
gress had declared, as seems evident, that they had
no intention of doing so.
The Alien and Sedition laws of John Adams’s ad-
ministration were used to promote fearful tyranny,
and Jefferson later made shipwreck of them. These
laws attacked foreigners especially, and resulted in
shameful persecution of harmless people who, as it
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


has been said, “rallied to the banner of freedom
only to find it was not freedom at all.” But reac-
tion came against the laws, and persecution defeated
its own ends. Our democracy was not then devel-
oped. Students in colleges were divided by social
rank. Until 1830 property and religious qualifica-
tions for the ballot had not been entirely removed.
In one state an Episcopalian could hardly hold an
office, and in another a Baptist was forbidden to
vote. Catholics were ostracised and their churches
were burned. Jews were under the ban. Jefferson,
the true father of tolerance and democracy, did
more than any other to promote the rights of citi-
zens and to banish the blight of bigotry and op-
pression,
Englishmen as a whole preserved no such griev-
ance as did we. They were embroiled in other wars,
and the Revolution was only one among many, while
to us it seemed the supreme event. British text-
books stated the case more fairly than did ours. It
was largely our false teaching of the history of the
Revolution that can account for the startling ebulli-
tion of war sentiment during that critical week in
1895, when it seemed as if we might actually de-
clare war against Great Britain over a boundary line
in Venezuela that Americans neither knew nor cared
about, except as it affected the Monroe Doctrine.
The War of 1812 might not have been fought had
LAW OR WAR


there been a cable under the Atlantic, and we bad
known that Great Britain had withdrawn her Orders
in Council which had forbidden trading of neutral
nations with France. Our country was divided over
this war, though all detested the impressment of
American seamen, the numbers of which, however,
proved later to have been grossly exaggerated in
Madison’s estimate; but this impressment was a con-
tributory cause. One real cause of the war, how-
ever, as later became apparent, was the desire for
western expansion, friction over British trading
posts, and a clamour for annexation of Canada.
Though usually credited as a war, in which we
gained the victory, the war was a failure. In the
treaty which ended it, the claims of both countries
were set aside in silence. Professor Muzzey de-
clares the war a “blunder, unnecessary, impolitic,
untimely, and rash.” General Winfield Scott as-
serted that the army of officers were “generally sunk
in either sloth, ignorance, or habits of intemperate
drinking”; they were “swaggerers, dependents, de-
cayed gentlemen, utterly unfit for any military pur-
pose whatever.” The United States won no terri-
tory that it wanted, did not secure its rights at sea,
was defeated in nearly every land campaign; but
brilliant naval victories tended to make these facts
forgotten.
Our recent painful relations with Latin America
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


make a reference to our war with Mexico in 1846
of peculiar significance. General Grant who was a
young Lieutenant in that war, declared in his
Memoirs that it was “one of the most unjust wars
ever fought by a stronger against a weaker people.”
Daniel Webster, Charles Sumner, Emerson, Lowell,
Whittier, all the best elements in New England,
strongly opposed the war, which, more than any
other war, belied the boastful assertion made at a
military convention in Washington in 1926: “The
Government of the United States has never un-
furled its battle flag for conquest or aggression, but
only in defence of human rights.”
Charles Sumner in a lengthy Report on the War
with Mexico traced the history of its origin and
said: “The grand, compelling motive was the desire
to extend the institution of slavery.” He quoted
Secretary Upsher’s protest against the abolition of
domestic slavery in Texas: “If Texas should not be
attached to the United States, she can not maintain
that institution (slavery) ten years.” Sumner wrote
the following “Resolves concerning the Mexican
War and the Institution of Slavery” which in part
are here quoted:
“Resolved that the present war with Mexico has
its primary origin in the unconstitutional annexa-
tion to the United States of the foreign state of
Texas, while the same was still at war with Mexico;
LAW OR WAR


that it was unconstitutionally commenced by the
order of the President to General Taylor to take
military possession of territory in dispute between
the United States and Mexico and in the occupation
of Mexico • and that it is now waged ingloriously—■
by a powerful nation against a weak neighbour—
unnecessarily and without just cause, at immense
cost of treasure and life, for the dismemberment of
Mexico, and for the conquest of a portion of her
territory, from which slavery has already been ex-
cluded, with the triple object of extending slavery,
of strengthening the ‘Slave Power’ and of obtain-
ing the control of the Free States, under the Con-
stitution of the United States.
“Resolved that such a war of conquest, so hate-
ful in its objects, so wanton, unjust, and unconsti-
tutional in its origin and character, must be regarded
as a war against freedom, against humanity, against
justice, against the Union, against the constitution,
and against the Free States; and that a regard for
the true interests and the highest honour of the coun-
try should arouse all good citizens to join in efforts
to arrest this gigantic crime by withholding sup-
plies, or other voluntary contributions for its further
prosecution, by calling for the withdrawal of our
army within the established limits of the United
States, and in every way aiding the country to re-
treat from the disgraceful position of aggression
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


which it now occupies towards a weak, distracted
neighbor and sister republic.”
These resolves were debated for several days by
the Massachusetts legislature and finally passed two
to one, showing a courage which probably no legis-
lature in any state would show under similar cir-
cumstances to-day when the spirit of timidity, of
“playing safe,” and of virulent hostility to such free
speech is dominant. This action in the midst of
war, was a moral tonic, though the war was fought
to a finish, and half of the Mexican territory was
taken and paid for at the cost of one Statler Hotel
to-day.
The Civil War might have been prevented had
our government, like Great Britain in 1833, set free
our slaves and compensated the owners. The Mexi-
can War was one great factor in the extension of
slavery and the creation of conditions which led to
the defiance of the national government in iB6O.
Civil war belongs in a different category from inter-
national war; and our Civil War must be passed over
with few words. Revolutions, rebellions, within a
nation may continue long after international war
has ended; though after general disarmament and
prohibition of manufacture of arms for profit, even
civil strife would be on a small scale. The civil
war in China in 1927 was possible only as China
purchased large stores of ammunition sold by gov-
jLAW OR WAR


ernments or firms which had accumulations left over
from the World War.
In the Civil War voluntary enlistment would not
have been adequate either north or south to have
carried on the war, and this has been true of all
important modern wars, especially the World War.
Each section has written its own version of this
fratricidal strife, each telling of glorious victories
and heroism, but for the most part omitting the
crimes committed and the moral loss.
It has been claimed often that with “adequate
preparedness” by our government the secessionists
would have been overawed and the war prevented.
As has previously been said, there never can be ade-
quate preparedness against civil war when both sides
have about equal control in the government, and
can send half the arms to the region that is disaf-
fected, as was the case under President Buchanan
and Cabinet secretaries who presently joined the
Confederacy. The southern claim that secession
from the Union was as justifiable as that of the
thirteen colonies from the mother country failed to
recognise that the moral issue in the latter case was
one which won a “decent respect” from the “opinion
of mankind,” while slavery, without which secession
would never have come, could make no such appeal.
Before the Civil War many Americans deemed it
our “manifest destiny” to annex Cuba and various
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


filibustering expeditions were sent there. In 1895
the United States prohibited free entrance of cane
sugar any longer; this was a great blow to the sugar
interests there. The Cubans blamed Spain and be-
came insurgents, and after a humane Governor Gen-
eral had failed to suppress disturbance General
Weyler’s harsh policy of concentrating inhabitants
in certain military camps created great misery and
destruction. Our State Department protested and
tried to prevent naturalised Cubans from fomenting
trouble from here, and giving military assistance.
Spain retorted by calling attention to our Sherman’s
march to the sea and the destruction accompanying
his path. Later, In the Philippines, we adopted a
similar concentration policy. The chain of Hearst
newspapers advocated intervention as American citi-
zens owned $50,000,000 worth of property in Cuba.
Our first claims on Spain for damages were $16,-
000,000, but these on investigation by a claims com-
mission, dwindled to $362,252, in the usual ways
that claims diminish. It is interesting to observe
here, incidentally, that Hon. Wayne McVeagh
showed that the claims awarded the United States
for damages against Mexico from 1868 to 1892
were less than one per cent of the claims presented.
Great Britain in a certain demand got two per cent
of her claims and the United States claims against
France were cut down to a “fifty-sixth thousandths
LAW OR WAR


of one per cent.” Taking all amounts presented in
this survey from different nations, which were $790,-
000,000, the total allowance made by an impartial
commission was $8,500,000!
After Spain’s withdrawal of General Weyler and
grant of autonomy, which would have prevented in-
surrection if offered earlier, the battleship Maine
on a “friendly visit” was blown up one night in
Havana harbour, killing 250 men. This occurred
February 15, 1898, and was followed by the war-
cry from sea to sea, “Remember the Maine.” The
cause of the explosion is unknown; the Maine was
left rusting in Havana harbour for twenty years
and we refused to have it raised, to show conclu-
sively whether it was blown up by accident from
within or, as was probable, was blown up by rebels
to get America’s intervention.
Said James Ford Rhodes in his “McKinley and
Roosevelt’s Administration”:
“McKinley feared a rupture in his own party
and on account of that fear had not the nerve and
power to resist the pressure for war. We may
rest assured that if Mark Hanna had been Presi-
dent, there would have been no war with Spain.”
When President McKinley went before Congress
and asked for $50,000,000 with which to fight
Spain, it was after the representatives of Great
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


Britain, Germany, France, Austria, Russia, and
Italy had appealed to him to continue peaceful re-
lations. It was after he had received from Minister
Woodford in Spain the cablegram:
“1 believe the ministry are ready to go as far
and as fast as they can and still save the dynasty
here in Spain. They know that Cuba is lost.
Public opinion in Spain has moved steadily to-
ward peace.”
We declared war the day after Woodford’s later
cablegram had come saying Spain granted the armis-
tice demanded by the President and ‘T hope that
nothing will be done to humiliate Spain, as I am
satisfied the present government is going and is
loyally ready to go as fast and as far as it can.”
The war was the product of a jingo press and
shocked and amazed Spain. For this war there was
little excuse; aside from indirect loss, it cost $300,-
000,000. It ended in our taking the Philippines
which, with the exception of Manila, had won in-
dependence of Spain by its own efforts. The Presi-
dent insisted that the entire group be taken because
of the “commercial opportunity.” The cruelties in-
cident to misgovernment in Cuba could probably
have been prevented had the United States secured
the co-operation of several of the Latin-American
republics in a united protest, followed by a boycott
LAW OR WAR


if the protest failed. No doubt Cuba is far better
to-day than she was under Spain, and since the be-
neficent work under General Leonard Wood in san-
itary reform. While the method chosen by the
United States accomplished some good, it was un-
necessary to accomplish the result and led to far-
reaching consequences, including imperialistic pol-
icies.
The guerilla war which Filipinos carried on for
three years involved enormous losses to them. Our
loss was less than 5,000 soldiers. Concentration of
natives in camps, the infliction of the torture of the
old Spanish “water-cure” to compel natives to dis-
close where their armed forces were, and other fea-
tures of our efforts to subdue men who were fighting
for their liberty, make sad reading for those who
boast of revolutionary ancestors who likewise fought
for their own independence.
In Norman Angell’s “Patriotism Under Three
Flags,” the author comments on the habitual lan-
guage of some of the more popular newspapers,
.which seemed to indicate a real dementia during the
war with Spain, and he quotes by way of illustration
from the newspaper with the largest circulation:
“Occasionally we hear croaks from the peace men.
‘How sad to kill sons and fathers of sad-eyed
women!’ they say . . . etc. No sadder than to
kill cousins and aunts of sad-eyed rattlesnakes.
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


The man who would object to this war would ob-
ject to the destruction of poisonous reptiles in
India. And, as for the American who has any
feeling about the war other than the red-hot de-
sire to hear of victories and Spanish ships sunk,
all we can say is that he reminds us of the canni-
bal toad now on exhibition in the Paris Jardin
d’Acclimatation.”
Two out of two hundred signed testimonies by
American soldiers, describing scenes similar to
those here described:
“i. Last night one of our boys was found shot
and his stomach cut open. Immediately orders
were received from General Wheaton to burn the
town and kill every native in sight,—which was
done to a finish. About a thousand men, women,
and children were reported to be killed. I am
probably growing hard hearted, for I am in my
glory when I can sight my gun on some dark skin
and pull the trigger. . . .Tell all my enquiring
friends that I am doing all I can for Old Glory.”
This was signed by A. A. Barnes, Battery G,
3d United States Artillery, and was first pub-
lished in the Standard of Greensburg, Ind.
“2. Our orders (in Samar) were clear and
strict. Everybody found in the hills, man, woman
and child, was to be killed. Shoot all hogs and
dogs, and we were not instructed to spare chil-
dren ... I saw as many as twenty Filipinos
LAW OR WAR


given the water cure. The native, of course, re-
sisted, and the soldier rubbed the bottle across
the mouth lacerating the flesh and breaking the
teeth and leaving the man’s face covered with
blood. After the cure was over, the prisoner was
shot and his body left for the dogs. One night
last November we found seven old natives in a
shack. The native interpreter plied them with
questions, but they refused to tell anything, so
we tied them in a row and shot the lot and left
them for the dogs ... I was very sick.”
This appeared in the Philadelphia Record as
the statement from Michael Snee, Company M,
Ninth Infantry, under command of John B.
Schoeffel, Rochester, New York, April 21, 1902.
Conquest of the Philippines meant doubling of
our navy, our direct and indirect expenditure of a
thousand million dollars of which only $3,000,000
in the cholera season was a direct gift. The hos-
pitals, good roads, and schools which followed were
paid for by Philippine funds but directed by Ameri-
cans. Our imperialism began with the conquest of
these islands, though according to the Jones Act of
1916, Congress promised independence when a stable
government should be established. Up to 1928 no
action had been taken toward recognising this pledge
or removing our control of the islands from the ad-
ministration of the War Department.
SOME NEGLECTED FACTS ABOUT OUR WARS


CHAPTER V
INTERDEPENDENCE
The first step upward from the grunting caveman
living on nuts and fruits like chimpanzees, scores
of thousands of years ago, to the scholar with an
LL.D. came from co-operation with his fellows.
Language thus developed and with it man whetted
his mind on other minds and learned their expe-
rience. The family, the clan, the tribe, the village,
the city, the state or province, the nation, were suc-
cessive stages in a growing and more complex inter-
dependence. Civilisation is another name for inter-
dependence. The most wretched and miserable of
men is one who is self-sufficient for all his needs;
who must create alone his food, his meagre clothing,
and his wigwam. Most wretched spiritually is he
whose sympathy is limited to those of his own tribe
or sect or social clique. Darwin taught that “selfish
and contentious persons will not cohere and without
coherence nothing can be effected. The chief causes
of the low morality of savages are first, confinement
of sympathy to the same tribe.” “The Darwinian
theory,” said William J. Bryan, “represents man as


reaching his present perfection by the operation of
the law of hate—the merciless law by which the
strong crowd out and kill off the weak”; so little
did Mr. Bryan understand Darwin’s phrase “the
survival of the fittest,” so often confounded with
survival of the best, instead, as it signifies, survival
of what is best fitted for a particular environment.
If it be an environment of earth, it will be a very
low thing, an earthworm that will survive; if it be
a low social order, it will be the thug that will sur-
vive. “The social instincts,” said Darwin, “with
the aid of active intellectual powers and the effects
of habit naturally lead to the golden rule: ‘What-
soever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them’ and this lies at the foundation of
morality. The moral sense is the greatest distinc-
tion between man and the lower animals.” This
moral sense implies a common nature, common inter-
ests, common rights, common duties, a surrender of
personal sovereignty for the time in order to have
one’s person recognised in a community life which
gives back in richness far more than it takes.
A growing sense of interdependence has marked
all progress of the human race. The test of a gen-
uinely educated person is not his diplomas, degrees,
books written; is it not his capacity to say truth-
fully with the ancient Latin poet, “I count nothing
human foreign to me”. 1 ? In a stimulating address by
INTERDEPENDENCE


a prince among historical scholars, G. P. Gooch, he
says: “The upward movement may be described as
symphonic or orchestral. The elements which have
created unity in the human race are kinship and
language, and one may possibly say religious in-
stinct. But religions have differed so widely and so
often created antagonisms that they can not always
be counted on as an element for world-unity.”
Yet the greatest advance in thought regarding the
unity of the human race was the teaching by Christ
of the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of
man. Of whatever race, or sex, or rank, all were
equal before a common Father. More or less con-
sciously, for a thousand years the idea of the unity
of all people in Christendom, though of different
nationalities, grew in western Europe under the
headship of the Pope, more powerful than king or
emperor. Such a conception of national sovereignty
as obtained in Europe in 1914 was unknown in the
days of Dante and Wyclif. Christendom tran-
scended the idea of national sovereignty at a time
when most of the world was still unknown, but it
did not create world-unity. The Renaissance and
Reformation broke up even this unity. But no con-
ception of to-day embracing less than humanity as
a whole is to be tolerated. Science permits a human
voice to be heard half round the globe; and all the
instruments of scholarship, commerce, common ideas,
LAW OR WAR


and experiences are unifying human thought and
are tuned in the orchestra to the symphony’s chang-
ing keys.
As long ago as Defoe, the English race was pro-
nounced by him as “mongrel.” The earliest ele-
ment was Iberian, which spread also over France,
Spain, and North Africa. Then came the Celtic
blood; then the Roman blood, which was a mixture
of races from the three continents on the Mediter-
ranean. The Anglo-Saxon infusion was followed by
the Danish and Norman. In fewer numbers came
the Flemings and French Huguenots. We in
America have not only all these through England
but many more strains from Germany, Ireland,
Italy, Russia, Poland, Greece, Syria, and—more
perhaps in our political than racial family—ten mil-
lion of the sons of Africa. If Britain was of com-
posite race, how much more America.
Language is the greatest invention man ever made,
vastly more important than all machines combined.
“Man,” said Aristotle, “is a symbol-making ani-
mal.” He creates words which mark the infinite
difference between the creature that only inherits
barks or squeals and can never create a sign for a
universal and the creature who can create a medium
for transmission of thought to millions of people
through the ages. Not only our blood, but our lan-
guage is composite. Our short words are usually
INTERDEPENDENCE


[Teutonic; the long ones dealing with abstract mat-
ters are from the Greek and Latin. Our religion is
composite, partly Hebraic, and this, to some extent,
developed from other Asiatic peoples than the He-
brews; and partly Greek and Christian. We have
borrowed names and usages from Norse Mythology;
jurisprudence from Rome; we have learned democ-
racy from Greece. How much do we realise our
daily debt to those marvellous minds which rose like
snow-capped peaks from the plain of ordinary
thought—Plato and Aristotle? After 2,000 years
they are still the masters of those who know. Their
wisdom, blazing like a huge searchlight across the
darkness and materialism of this age of speed and
wealth and force, makes our unsteady little lights
look pale indeed. “The Greeks,” said Mr. Gooch,
gave us “ordered freedom” and “introduced into the
world the ennobling conception of government by
discussion, government by an appeal not to force
but to reason.” Greece gave the idea of freedom
and Rome developed political organisation to a
marked extent. To-day self-government has become
a matter of course, and the common man, even the
Mexican peon, down-trodden for centuries and for
many recent years worse off than were our own black
slaves, is beginning to lift his head and say, “I too
am a man.”
In the Middle Ages, in the sight of the Church,
LAW OR WAR


the common man was considered religiously the
equal of the feudal lord and knelt at mass beside
him; but in the sight of man in daily life he was a
serf, a peon, and treated with contempt. It is in*
structive to note how in the sixteenth century, with
the rise of the Puritan spirit, the value of every
human being was enhanced and caste among white
people diminished. In 1789, the French proclama-
tion of the Rights of Man was simply a new pro-
nouncement of what had been taught in England
and America for over a century.
Roman law developed from the custom and ex-
perience of many generations of various peoples.
The laws and customs of different countries have a
common human basis and help standardise social life.
The Schoolmen of the Middle Ages, despite their
minute logic and acumen, were hampered by eccle-
siastical limitations and gained no breadth of philo-
sophic vision. For nearly 1,800 years, between
Plato and Saint Thomas Aquinas, there was little
independent thought. Then came Descartes, Spi-
noza and Leibnitz, each of a different nation. Mod-
ern philosophy began to flower with them and later
reached impregnable heights under the great German
idealists.
Scientific genius from many lands has enriched
us. Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Linnaeus, Newton,
Darwin, Pasteur, Roentgen, Edison, and Marconi—
INTERDEPENDENCE


how many lands and tongues these names call to
mind! So, too, in literature; Homer, Dante, Cer-
vantes, Goethe, Shakespeare, each writing in a dif-
ferent tongue, belong to the scholars of every land.
Music speaks a language which all men can under-
stand. Beauty which is its own excuse for being,
wakens kindred emotions in every heart. The whole
world was thrilled at the marvellous revelations
which archeologists have brought to light of Tut-
Ankh-Amen, of Assyrian, Hittite, and Phoenician.
The world of scholarship is one. The unlearned
layman feels richer as he hears of dinosaur eggs
found in Mongolian deserts; of pigmies reached by
aeroplane in New Guinea; of all the startling new
revelations of the things that reveal stages of de-
velopment in our mysterious world.
When Austria struck Serbia she hit Alabama.
The first week after the war began, cotton went
down to half-price, farmers were ruined, factories
and mills shut down in Brazil and China. Bread-
lines began in New York City. The ends of the
earth were touched as by an electric shock. Why?
Because a profound revolution has taken place since
Washington’s day. Washington could travel no
faster than could Pharaoh. He would have waited
many months to learn of a war broken out in Man-
churia. To-day a boy, for two cents, may learn
last night’s news from Shanghai; his father may
LAW OR WAR


speak with London; he may hear music from Berlin
and see a photograph taken yesterday in Paris.
Washington lived in a country of less population
than our New York City. His wise advice was given
for men living under the conditions of his time.
Our enormous influx of news, some worthless,
some important, paralyses untrained minds, when
it should enrich them. A dazed mind ceases to be
astonished or thrilled at the marvellous. As inter-
dependence grows it becomes increasingly important,
yet far more difficult, to select out of the stupen-
dous miscellany of facts those which are really
salient; to see their bearings on other things, to
realise that, though national independence be
achieved, we may nevertheless have no liberty in
thought expression. The average breadwinner, fed
on cheap literature, has little insight into the reali-
ties of our kaleidoscopic life in which so little time
is taken for reflection. As he faces what are seem-
ingly millions of unrelated facts, he gropes blindly
for a clue. The world’s greatest need is for inter-
preters who can discern the essentials, see parts as
related to wholes, discount superficial differences,
and show how social growth comes only as men
come to feel their relations with all things human.
Norman Angell, who, certainly more than any
other writer before the World War, reached multi-
tudes in many lands with the philosophy of “The
INTERDEPENDENCE


Great Illusion,” has shown the interlocking relation-
ships of commerce, which to-day are a thousandfold
more compelling and complex than ever before in
history. Not even peace advocates have been alive
to this stupendous argument from the recent changes
in world conditions, but have dwelt on the unchris-
tian character of war, while often tacitly assuming
with their opponents that, if a nation stole, it might
gain somewhat of material advantage in spite of
wickedness, as indeed, an individual thief may do.
This is the great illusion alluded to in an earlier
chapter which Mr. Angell’s facts and figures set
forth. That we, being many, are members one of
another is the profound truth to which he revealed
a new and startling application:
When the prosperity of an average German
factory is distributed pretty evenly over some such
factors as these: the capacity of a peasant in Prov-
ence who sells his olives in New York to subscribe
to a South American loan, in order that a dock
might be built on the Amazon to enable the man-
ufacturer in Manchester to sell furniture in Baku
to a merchant whose wealth is due to the develop-
ment of petrol consumption in an automobile
trade created in Paris—in a world where business
is done in such conditions as these, we are told
that the limits of commercial or industrial activ-
ity are determined by the limits of political in-
fluence, and that there exists some direct relation
LAW OR WAR


between political power and economic advantage!
And we are still told it even when the prosperity
of lesser states give it the lie; the whole thing is
one vast mystification, the most colossal illusion
of the modern world.
It is the function of banking to destroy the false
philosophy which assumes that bygone conditions
st\ll survive, and that any nation has aught to gain
in the end by attacking another, even if it wins. A
great navy does not increase the carrying trade of a
country. Little Norway has had, in proportion to
population, three times the carrying trade of Eng-
land, Switzerland gets orders from Canada which
England can not get with all her dreadnaughts.
Before the war Germany had a larger gold reserve
than England, which did not prevent Germany bor-
rowing to a great extent from England, and the
latter from being the banker of the world. Even
before the war, little Belgium’s Three-per-cents
were quoted at 96, while imperial Germany’s were
quoted at 82. The Three-and-a-half-per-cents of
mighty Russia were at 81 while Norway, practically
without an army, had hers at 102. These facts are
economic-sociological phenomena. Capitalists have
evidently concluded that nations that have great
armies and navies are not as safe places for invest-
ments as are little nations which are not likely to go
to war. In 1870 Bismarck could afford to fight the
INTERDEPENDENCE


France of that day. In 1914, though with a far
greater army and with twenty million more people,
it became a different problem, when these added
millions were dependent on foreign food and living
on industries dependent in large measure on foreign
capital. The preposterous Pan-German’s economics
were borrowed from the era of the robber-baron.
Had he ruined conquered victims, he would have had
to rehabilitate them in order to feed and clothe his
own people. The traditional axioms of European
statecraft were largely based on robber-baron eco-
nomics. Statesmen imagined that nations could ex-
pand by force of arms. Italy has learned no lesson
from France in Africa; and France, though she can
command black soldiers, has not yet perceived how
unreal are most of her colonial gains, except upon
the map. What French family that must send its
young son to spend a year or more in the army, and
must pay the cost of the increased colonial adminis-
tration upkeep, is the richer for this larger space upon
the map? The dictum of a leading English journal
before the war that “If Germany were extinguished
to-morrow, the day after to-morrow there is not an
Englishmen in the world who would not be richer,”
was equalled by that of a Boston business man after
the war, “I would just as lief have the whole Ger-
man race wiped out.” This talk by educated people
shows such an abysmal depth of ignorance of ele-
LAW OR WAR


mentary economics, and the ultimate effect upon
themselves, that one doubts whether what is com-
monly called “education” is any assurance that one
has got beyond the stage of belief in witchcraft and
astrology and slavery. The first glimmerings of in-
telligence have seemed to come to many astute busi-
ness men since the war regarding the need of having
prosperous customers if one is to sell goods. The
bungling over the problem of German reparations
was largely due to obtuseness in this matter. It was
a new idea to some people that exports alone can pay
for reparations , and they must exceed imports. The
report of the Institute of Economics, established by
the Carnegie Corporation of New York, with head-
quarters in Washington, demonstrated that “Ger-
many cannot feed more than sixty per cent of her
people unless she can continue to pay for her present
import of foodstuffs; about one-sixth of her agri-
cultural lands were taken from her at the close of
the war. Food and raw materials must be a first
charge on foreign money obtained by the sales of
exports; only the money left over after these are
paid can be devoted to reparations. The Allies can
not eat their cake and have it too. They can not
collect anything from Germany so long as they re-
fuse to let Germany earn by foreign trade money
acceptable to them. . . . The total production of
gold in the world since the discovery of America is
INTERDEPENDENCE


little more than half the sum which Germany is
obligated to pay.” This was written before the
Dawes agreement had brought sanity into the solu-
tion of the problem and at a time when Germany
was harshly criticised for building canals, factories,
and public buildings, as if this diverted money from
reparations. But she used home material, paid in
paper money, worthless elsewhere, and none of this
product could be exported.
Professor Moon of Columbia University in his
“Imperialism and World Politics” gives a search-
ing analysis of economic relations between nations,
and shows convincingly through charts and figures
that the assets of imperialism are not equal to its
liabilities. No doubt individual investors and those
who deal in steel and cotton often make large profits,
but the masses are compelled to pay more taxes to
keep up colonial armies and navies than they receive
in duty-free goods from their colonies. England has
possessions in every quarter of the globe, yet she
must obtain from outside regions copper, quick-
silver, platinum, cotton, fertilisers, and sulphur, as
her possessions do not adequately supply her.
“What is needed to-day,” says Professor Moon,
“is the gradual development through international
conference of international agreements against un-
fair practice in the control of raw materials.”
Some treatment of the world as an organic whole
law; OR WAR


must result from economic processes. World feder-
ation is a clear corollary of the demands of science,
invention, and modern civilisation. Feudalism had
to merge internationalism as an economic necessity.
The economic need has forced the world to face the
problem of interdependence from a new angle. The
World Economic Conference held in Geneva in
May, 1927, brought forward in its resolutions the
economic truth as it exists to-day. Co-operation in
commerce, industry, agriculture was the demand of
350 delegates. Lowering of tariff barriers, aboli-
tion of import and export prohibitions, the applica-
tion of science to agriculture, will point the way to
economic unity and consequent peace.
The portentous problem of the increase of popu-
lation and how to meet it by adequate food supply,
is forcing economists to consider how Germany can
get necessary raw materials for her manufactures
when deprived of her African colonies and with
one-third of her population requiring food from
outside sources. They propose the sending of Ger-
man scientists to this huge continent, four times the
size of the United States and rich in mineral and
many other products. For the 400,000 babies of
Italy, who annually increase its numbers, some room
must be found, and Africa offers apparently the
best solution for that and for other economic prob-
lems. If properly developed with far-sighted co-
INTERDEPENDENCE


operative effort, Africa may help prevent for hun-
dreds of years economic disaster to all branches of
the white race and at the same time uplift the un-
inventive backward peoples who are unable to de-
velop their natural resources by themselves.
Our modern political economy, dealing with
human needs, raw materials, interchange, migration,
with the reflex action of man’s endeavours to grasp
wealth without commensurate giving in return are
awakening a profound new sense of interdepend-
ence. The growing spirit of service, unknown to
the men of the classic age, who had slight perception
of the unity of the human race, is finding its ex-
ponents in every land. The forerunners of the idea
of the League of Nations belonged with the men
of vision who are to-day making segregated, narrow,
and prejudiced men objects of pity and derision to
sane and healthy minds. The Darwinian perception
of the scientific as well as moral value of the golden
rule reveals the key to progress in an increasingly
complex and interdependent world.
It is commonly assumed that morality and self-
interest are antagonistic both in the case of citizens
and of nations. The assumption is that a moral
action involves some self-sacrifice. Lord Hugh
Cecil thus states the doctrine in its international
form:
LAW OR WAR


“We personify a state, but a state is not a per-
son. It contains a vast number of persons, and
those who speak in its name and determine its
policies act not for themselves but for others.
Everything which falls under the head of unself-
ishness, is inappropriate to the action of a state.
No one has a right to be unselfish with other peo-
ple’s interests. It is the business of every ruler
to exact to the utmost every claim which can be
both justly and wisely made on behalf of his
country. He is in the position of a trustee of the
interests of others and must be just and not gen-
erous.”
The qualification “justly and wisely” however
goes a very long way when it becomes the case of
noblesse oblige in the relations of a strong to a weak
nation. Never was a nation wiser than ours when
it returned the Boxer indemnity to China and in
having it expended in sending her sons here to learn
our western science. When President Wilson de-
clared that the United States would “never again
take a foot of land by conquest,” he recognised the
iniquity of the principle of conquest, and that it is
the duty of the nation as much as of the individual
to be just. The nation must no more lie or steal
than the citizen himself, and for the same reason.
In the long run, and often in a very short run, theft
and violence are their own undoing. When Bis-
marck, though against his own better judgment, was
INTERDEPENDENCE


over-persuaded to take Alsace-Lorraine to promote
future security to the empire, it was under the as-
sumption that the golden rule could play no part
in that transaction. But did it prove of advantage
to the state? This act led to France allying herself
.with Russia, to forty years of bitterness, the turning
of Europe into an armed camp at incredible sacrifice,
and finally to the return of the provinces to France.
But for that the World War would have been a
Balkan war.
In 1878, when Lord Beaconsfield went to Berlin
to attend the Congress of diplomats, he persuaded
them to tear up the treaty of San Stefano, which
had guarded the Balkan states according to a
true ethnical principle, and it forced these little
nationalities back under Turkish control. He
wanted a strong Turkey to hold the Dardanelles
and to prevent Russia from getting an outlet there
and threatening the Suez Canal and British trade
with India. This policy was one of the deep-lying
causes of the cataclysm of 1914. Beaconsfield’s
policy was that Great Britain’s duty was to ignore
the golden rule and think solely of her own inter-
ests. But her own interests could not be conserved
unless she dealt “wisely and justly.” The mas-
sacres and cruelty at the hands of the Turks which
followed the Berlin treaty led to the first and second
Balkan wars and to the World War, originating
LAW OR WAR


in that seething and embittered section of Europe;
which had been the pawn of the great powers. Tens
of thousands of the fine youth of Great Britain
lay down their lives in the awful butchery at Gal-
lipoli, and billions of dollars were poured out to
open the Dardanelles to Russia after Great Britain
ever since the Crimean War had done her utmost
to keep Russia from having a warm water port.
Many religious souls like Tolstoi have held that
“reason has nothing to do with loving my neigh-
bour.” In religion and intuition alone did he find
sanction for this love. The modern scientific mind
often looks with some contempt on idealists as im-
practical, holding beautiful theories that will not
work because opposed to reason. This conception
as regards moralists results from inability to per-
ceive that mutual aid and interdependence increase
the life force of the individual. He gains by giv-
ing; yet this principle, like many another in social
science, has not been demonstrated to many minds
that readily see cause and effect in chemistry and
physics. If morality and self-interest do not har-
monise, then moral conduct must work harm instead
of benefit, and if such moral actions were continued
one would end in the poor-house or asylum or the
grave! Ergo , if every one were moral, all would
work out their own loss and destruction! Morality
therefore would weaken life instead of making it
INTERDEPENDENCE


more abundant. The root of the matter is failure
to see that life is enormously enriched by association
and that the welfare of society requires the highest
well-being of the citizen. He must share in the in-
creased vital intensity of the whole.
If murder and theft were really for the well-being
of the murderer and thief, they would be justified.
But obviously, if this principle were practised uni-
versally, the thief and murderer themselves would
be robbed and assaulted and not only civilisation but
all life would end. “Thou shalt not kill” was a law
written on the fleshly table of men’s hearts long
before they were engraved on tables of stone, and
this was because it promoted self-interest. In like
manner, shiftless work and laziness are immoral
because they do not produce what men must have; if
they did, they would be justified. Chastity and
temperance lengthen life and make it nobler and
more effective; that fact, and not the pronounce-
ments of an oracle, compels their observance. Envy
is unrighteous and emulation is not, because the
first makes one unhappy, and the second incites
happy, healthful activity. Darwin has shown that
morality evolves from the consideration of self-in-
terest as manifested in association:
“Even at an early period in the history of man,
the expressed wishes of the community will have
naturally influenced to a large extent the conduct
LAW OR WAR


of each member; and as all wish happiness, the
‘greatest happiness principle’ will have become a
most important secondary guide and object; the
social instinct, however, together with sympathy,
having served as the primary impulse and guide.”
Life is another name for association and life more
abundant is measured according to the fulness with
which one life shares and enjoys the experience of
another, enriching others and being enriched through
interdependence and co-operation. Divorces, rup-
tures, tariff barriers, wars, break natural association
and communication. They are immoral in so far
as they deplete fulness of life and happiness for all
concerned.
The modern scientific mind which has discarded
the old basis of authority as to morals, if it has
found no substitute is drifting like a derelict at sea.
The post-war scepticism among youth as to whether
age-long conventional morality has any scientific
basis is one of the tragic manifestations of the con-
fused thought of the time which, if continued, may
bring about another world catastrophe. There is a
true touchstone, a scientific test that shows indubi-
tably what is right for individuals and for nations;
it is whether the act, universally exercised, will in
the long run promote richer, larger life. There is
no contradiction between morality and self-interest,
only a contradiction between truth and error. Our
INTERDEPENDENCE


scientific age must restate in scientific form what
religion and instinct foresaw, and prove that the
highest self-interest of the individual and the state
is in harmony with biological and social evolution.
World righteousness and world economic welfare
must be shown to be compatible.
Social problems find solution in justice, not char-
ity. George W. Nasmyth has illustrated this idea
by showing that when the former Sultan of Turkey
levied thirty per cent taxes on 24,000,000 people he
received less revenue than did the Queen of Holland
with 6,000,000 subjects and a lower tax-rate. Over-
taxed people are under-fed; subjects of a despot are
ignorant. For both reasons the Turks produced
little. Injustice reacts on those who practise it, and
that is the prime reason for condemning it. If all
were unjust life would suffer paralysis. States that
had slave-labour fell farther behind in productivity
than those that had free labour.
Conscience has been happily called “a lightening
calculator of enlightened self-interest.” History
is an account of the growth of comradeship in ever
wider and wider circles. The people of Illinois and
Indiana know that it is not for their own interest to
despoil each other. Some day the Balkan states,
after they have acquired a Geneva method of con-
ference, and an easy auxiliary language as a medium
of communication, and have dropped tariff barriers,
LAW OR WAR


will each see likewise that the other’s prosperity en-
hances theirs. Justice is another name for equality
before the law. Injustice and war act as a negative
selection and weaken or destroy the flower of the
race. Rome fell, not from luxury, but from the
seeding out generation after generation of the ablest
men, leaving weaklings and slaves to propagate
posterity.
Science is rapidly multiplying wealth, so that
the estimate made by de Bloch that the average in-
come per day of each human being was about ten
cents, would probably be exceeded to-day, despite
the war’s devastation. He estimated that with
world federation and a world customs union this
income would be multiplied tenfold. World fed-
eration becomes the solvent for all social reform.
Welfare workers, whether in the field of education,
medicine, or industry, are finding themselves work-
ing on the same problem of world welfare which
will be enormously simplified when the fabulous
sums of money put into attempted preservation of
peace through increasing armaments shall be set
free by universal treaties based on an understanding
of co-operation. To learn this we must create the
international mind.
INTERDEPENDENCE


CHAPTER VI
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND
There are hundreds of international organisations
in this world for which the radio and phone-film
are annihilating time and space and making the
huge globe shrink smaller and smaller every day.
Of these, the International Postal Union with its
headquarters at Berne, the International Institute
of Agriculture, with its headquarters at Rome, and
now over twenty years old, and The World Federa-
tion of Education Associations, now over four years
old, deal with some of the most fundamental inter-
national relations. Every one of these three orig-
inated in the thought of an American. Mr. Blair,
head of the American Postal Union, first suggested
the idea in 1862 of an International Postal Union,
out of which came a dozen years later the definite
organisation with headquarters at Berne. To David
Lubin of Sacramento is due the credit of the con-
ception of the International Institute of Agriculture,
and largely its successful accomplishment in linking
fifty-seven nations together in a common purpose
before the League of Nations was conceived. The
World Federation of Education Associations was the


outcome of the committee on Foreign Relations ap-
pointed in 1921 by the National Education Asso-
ciation. This began almost at once to organise a
world conference on Education. In 1913 this Asso-
ciation had arranged an international congress on
education which was held in 1915 at the beautiful
Panama-Pacific International Exposition in San
Francisco. In 1914, following a resolution passed
by Congress, the President of the United States sent
invitations to all foreign governments credited to
the United States to send delegates to this Congress,
and thirty nations officially did so. This confer-
ence, which came after the World War had been
raging for a year, felt deep responsibility in laying
foundations for a new world order. There had been
earlier international congresses on education held
in this country, one in connection with the World
Fair of 1893. The most extensive work in creating
international good will and understanding was that
by the American School Citizenship League with
headquarters in Boston. The National Education
Association endorsed the work of the League and
said it hoped that School Peace Leagues might be
established in every country. At the suggestion of
our national commissioner of education the Nether-
lands Government sent out an invitation for a con-
ference to be held in September, 1914* Sixteen
nations, including all the great nations except Ger-
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


many, accepted, but alas, before the date arrived,
educators and every one else were thinking of bombs
and machine guns and the world was in a ferment.
For many years before and since the World War,
May 18th, the anniversary of the opening of the
first Hague Conference, was celebrated as Peace
Day. Then followed a short period of great un-
certainty as to the future plans for world adjust-
ment, when this celebration fell into abeyance and
emphasis was laid on Armistice Day. But in 1923
the World Conference on Education, meeting in
San Francisco, selected the day for general celebra-
tion, calling it Good Will Day and affirming that
on this day, May 18th, “should instruction be given
concerning the results of the Hague Conferences and
also the later efforts to bring the world together into
a co-operative body, and that this instruction should
be accompanied by songs, national and interna-
tional, plays and pageants which carry out the spirit
of the day.” The interchange of messages between
school children of different nations is becoming a
feature of the observance of May 18th. The chil-
dren of Wales have for six years sent by wireless a
goodwill message. What could be more delightful
than this:
“We boys and girls of the principality of Wales
and Monmouthshire, greet with a cheer the boys
and girls of every other country under the sun.
LAW OR WAR


Will you, millions of you, join in our prayer that
God will bless the efforts of the good men and
women of every race and people who are doing
their best to settle the old quarrels without fight-
ing? Then there will be no need for any of us
as we grow older, to show our pride for our coun-
try by going out to hate and to kill one another.
Long live the League of Nations—the friend of
every mother, the protector of every home, and
the guardian angel of the youth of the world.”
Every High School class in our whole country
would do well to formulate a friendly letter to be
sent to the children of some foreign city, the pupil
whose message was judged the best to choose the
city to which it were to be sent for publication
through its School Board. These messages could be
made part of the work in English and would serve
incidentally to develop imagination and good-will,
a by-product of supreme value. Every year Tokyo,
Melbourne, Budapest, Leipsic, Glasgow, Buenos
Aires, and scores of other cities should thus be made
to feel that the children of Chicago, Cleveland,
Philadelphia, Boston and scores of our own cities
were thinking of them and looking forward to a
time when they should do better than their fathers
and bring about a co-operative world.
At the San Francisco meeting, which was at-
tended by representatives of fifty nations, the World
Federation of Education Associations had its birth.
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


and subsequently a prize of $25,000 was offered by
Raphael Herman of Detroit for the best programme
for it to undertake. At its first biennial, at Edin-
burgh in 1925, the programme adopted was pre-
sented by Dr. David Starr Jordan, the eminent
educator and peace advocate, who was the prize win-
ner. His suggestions briefly stated were: for com-
mittees on teaching of history and patriotism “ex-
pressing its values, its limitations, and its perver-
sions” ; on international sports, especially those
games which involve co-operative action; effort
to establish a Bureau of Conciliation in the De-
partment of State at Washington; on consideration
of military preparedness and military training in
schools and colleges, and on standing incentives
to war; on current arguments on war as a
cosmic necessity; on the International Court of
Justice and the general machinery for interna-
tional co-operation. The elaboration of this last
idea encouraged the thought of our entrance
into the League of Nations with a modifica-
tion of present provisions for sanctions. The estab-
lishment of these committees and the future ap-
proval of later meetings of their recommendations
will require years of constant work, which could be
enormously fruitful if adequate funds were avail-
able to enable educational experts to devote their
whole time to this great work.
LAW OR WAR


Meanwhile, certain considerations in harmony
with Dr. Jordan’s point of view might well be con-
sidered and adopted as widely as possible. One of
the most hopeful is that the governments of eight
great nations could create and keep world peace.
This does not depend on the conversion or educa-
tion of illiterates, who form the bulk of the world’s
population. World peace, which can arrive without
any change in human nature, depends on true ideas
on international rights and duties, and the will to
attain them in making substitutes for war obligatory.
World peace could probably be accomplished by
the cost of one single cruiser wisely spent. The
reason that the large funds given for the cause have
not yet produced the results expected is partly due
to the fact that they have been spent largely in aca-
demic or ill-co-ordinated work, rather than in prac-
tical ways to affect legislatures and executives as
well as the general public. This is not to under-
estimate the very valuable work that has already
undermined much cheap philosophy about war.
The foundation of peace teaching is in the home.
School authorities for two generations to come must
consider educating parents as well as teachers and
pupils. Parent-Teacher Associations should bring
together all who are working for children. Should
not the general scheme of studies on rights and
duties be made clear to parents, especially as regards
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


the futility of war, substitutes for war, and the
refutation of current fallacies about it? Should
not parents be shown how the first principles of the
fair settlement of disputes must begin in the nursery,
and be given in the pre-school age ? The advantage
of a “cooling-off period” should be stressed. If boys
of ten and twelve fight, this “cooling-off time” might
be used for a written statement from each fighter
of what he thinks the other thinks about the affair.
The writing out of this would be considerable educa-
tion to a turbulent, resentful youngster. It would
force him to take the other’s point of view, which
lays the basic principle for world-peace. The enor-
mous value of a period of investigation and delay
before action in the case of nations can be shown
as illustrated in the Dogger-bank affair during the
Russo-Japanese War, which is a dramatic and di-
dactic story. The same cooling-off period is now
provided for in many international treaties.
“Seven out of ten children and young people in
America under twenty-five years of age are un-
reached by the educational programme of any
church, Jewish, Protestant, or Catholic” is the esti-
mate obtained after careful investigation. Each na-
tion represented in the World Federation of Educa-
tion Associations might well ascertain its own
proportion of youth thus neglected. Many college
graduates are devoid of any serious thought of God
LAW OR WAR


or of what Kant calls “the categorical imperative.”
A sense of duty is often diluted to a mere conformity
to conventionality and good taste. There can be no
foundation for the international mind and the
brotherhood of man but the Fatherhood of God.
An eminent university president has recently said:
“The forces that make for human degeneracy were
never so many, so active, or so ominous, and nothing
less than civilisation is at stake. Childhood and
youth need religion more than anything else, and
more than at any other time of life, for the founda-
tion of character; education without it lacks heart
and soul. For this stage of life, almost any faith or
creed is better than none. Our statesmen need new
training in international relations, for they show
every symptom which alienists find in all minds
grappling with problems too large for their powers.
We have lost power of discrimination between men,
things, ideas, and books.” Civilisation has reached
the stage when an earnest alarm-call is issued by a
British officer addressing the Royal Institute of Pub-
lic Health; “Instruction against gas should occupy
a definite place in school curriculum. Anti-gas drills
should be carried on periodically.” When Mr. Edi-
son tells us that London can now be destroyed in
three hours, eight millions turned to corpses and
their homes to ashes, by recently invented methods
of destruction, the futility of rifle practice, even if
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


made universal, seems evident. The public needs to
be profoundly impressed with the fact that war prep-
arations must lessen and soon end altogether, or the
suicide of white civilisation will be threatened. Can
not a fresh emphasis be put on this in all Normal
School instruction?
One of the chief obstacles to the creation of the
international mind is the persistent effort of The
War Department, of various “patriotic” societies,
and the jingo press to put military training into
schools, and to encourage all youth to go to military
camps. Military training is being extended in an
unprecedented degree. In 1862 Congress passed the
Morrill Land Grant Act, which gave land to agri-
cultural colleges and provided that among other
things military training should be offered. This
amounted to little but military physical drill for a
time; but, in 1916, a great “preparedness” drive
swept the country with appeals for increase in de-
fence. Universal military training was proposed.
The agency for this was the National Defense Act,
which in 1920 was amended and enlarged, and was
the basis for wide-spread effort to extend military
education in the schools. It was astonishing to see
civil educational institutions relinquishing part of
their control over teaching to the War Department,
The Reserve Officers’ Training Corps is divided into
Junior and Senior divisions, the first giving instruc-
LAW OR WAR


tion in high and preparatory schools, the second in
colleges and military schools. The first course in
college is for two years; two years more may be
elected with the requirement that it shall include
a summer in camp and not be broken before the ex-
piration of the four years. In 1925 military train-
ing was given in more than 226 educational institu-
tions, by members of the R. O. T. C., while other
trainers gave instruction in some other schools. Sub-
stantial financial help is offered students who take
the advanced course in college, this amounting some-
times to S3OO a year and providing a strong induce-
ment to impecunious students. General Pershing
expressed fervent hope that there might come “plans
and policies which might be applied to our schools
everywhere” and that the summer camps should
have presently the training of 100,000 young men
every summer. For years it was assumed that agri-
cultural colleges with state subsidies were not only
to offer military training but to require it; this has
now; been repudiated by government authority, and
therefore when it is required it is at the desire of the
trustees or faculty.
There are two aspects to this training, one the
physical, the other the psychological. Even Ger-
many did not give military training before the nine-
teenth year, simply preparing students for it by
physical training previously. Dudley A. Sargent,
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


M.D., long at the head of the Gymnasium at Har-
vard University, after technical discussion of the
muscles and nerves employed in proper exercises
wrote :
“The exercises of the young should be of such
a composite nature as to bring about the co-opera-
tion and co-ordination of the muscles. This in-
volves principally the training of the central nerve
system. All gymnastic sports and athletic games
that require skill, dexterity, coolness, courage, and
presence of mind are included in this list and are
exceedingly valuable as adjuncts in the develop-
ment of character.
“My principal objection to military drill as a
physical exercise is that it does not to any extent
meet the physiological demands of the body as
set forth in the above observations. In other
words: it is not of sufficient interest as a means
of physical development to arouse any moral
earnestness on the part of the boys. The exercises
of the manual are not performed with sufficient
force and rapidity to engage the energetic con-
traction of the muscles employed. It is an essen-
tially one-sided exercise, bringing into excessive
exercise . . . while the other muscles, excepting
the legs on parade days, do not get sufficient em-
ployment to keep them in good condition. It does
not increase the respiration and quicken the cir-
culation to a sufficient extent to secure the con-
stitutional benefits that should accrue from exer-
cise. The muscles are not alternately contracted
LAW OR WAR


and relaxed, but are kept in a state of prolonged
tension. This not only impairs the tone of the
muscles but puts an additional strain on the brain
and nervous system . . . there is nothing in the
drill itself that tends to make one erect or grace-
ful. If you would account for the graceful poise
of the West Point cadets, you must see them in
summer two hours a day in the hands of the danc-
ing master. ... In case of any malformation or
local weakness the drill tends to increase the de-
fects rather than to relieve them.”
What the growing boy needs is not routine drill
but boy-scouting, competitive games, everything that
develops initiative, ingenuity, courage. Whatever
may be said for military training in college, it is pre-
mature before that, beyond marching and the setting-
up drill which is only a part of ordinary gymnastic
training. All this should be supplied for factory
hands and clerks as well as for students. General
Leonard Wood has said that: “Personally I do not
believe that we should give the training until the
year in which the youth becomes nineteen.” Colonel
Thomas F. Edmands has said: “The modern drill
regulations are by no means adapted for work in
schools under any circumstances.”
But the main objection felt by those who would
inculcate the international mind is that the use of
guns, target shooting at “a target which wiggles”
and all the accompaniments of the military drill pro-
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


duce a profound psychological impression on young
minds, as they are intended to do. Much is said in
the way of inducement as to the instruction in citi-
zenship given in military camps. Analysis of the
War Department’s plan for division of time shows
that in R. O. T. C. camps five hours are given the
first year and three the second and that ends it;
while 90, 104, 126, and 148 hours respectively are
given in the four years to military training and in-
struction. In a manual which stated that it was a
“Military Bible,” issued in 1923 and written by two
United States army officers, we find that it had been
adopted by 105 military schools and colleges, and
gave specific instructions as to the best way in which
to place an enemy’s feet and shoulders when one
was trying to break his neck; how to use the bayonet
in different parts of the body, and how to “kick the
most vulnerable parts.” The manual says:
“It is an easy matter to teach the few simple
technical details of bayonet combat, but an in-
structor’s success will be measured by his ability
to instil into his men the will and desire to use the
bayonet ... It is the intense eagerness to fight
and kill hand to hand, and is the overwhelming
impulse behind every successful bayonet assault
. . . the growth of the spirit of the bayonet is
fostered in short talks on what has already been
accomplished by the bayonet. There is no senti-
ment about the use of the bayonet. It is a cold-
LAW OR WAR


blooded proposition. The bayonet fighter kills or
is killed. The instructor must encourage the men
to cultivate a facial expression of sternness, eager-
ness to fight, and confidence in winning ... To
finish an opponent who hangs on or attempts to
pull you to the ground, always try to break his
hold by driving the knees or foot to his crotch
and gouging his eyes with your thumbs.”
The outcry against this manual was so great after
a time that in some instances it has been withdrawn
or modified. But the animus that actuated the
above statements still remains. When untrained,
credulous youth are subjected to training by officers
who are under the obsession of the fallacies pre-
sented in a later chapter, especially when they are
able and attractive men, the psychological result is
certain. It is this attitude of mind that, regardless
of the gift of uniform and railroad fare and a free
vacation in healthful surroundings, fills the minds
of parents with misgiving. True, the sons may re-
turn home with no desire for war; but will they not
feel that war is inevitable, and that military service
[will give more glory and honour than any service for
producing health, or for life and property-saving,
.which can be done by a non-uniformed civilian, and
which will bring no medals, title, pensions, or ad-
venture? That protests to the War Department are
not unavailing is shown by the fact that in the 1926
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


edition of the R. 0. T. C. Manual, Second Year Ad-
vanced Course, the following passages that appeared
in 1925 have been deleted, as a matter of policy,
but presumably with no change of mind on the part
of the writers:
“In this world of ours, force is the ultimate
power. The mainsprings of human action are
self-preservation and self-interest, in a word, self-
ishness.” “We may ponder whether if selfish-
ness, ambition, competition and strife were re-
moved from the world, we should not fall into a
most intolerable state of stagnation.” “An ar-
mistice should never be granted at the instance of
a defeated foe; it is the enemy’s admission of his
own weakness and the signal for administering
the knock-out punch.” “During the course of a
great war, every government, whatever its pre-
vious form, should become a despotism,”
The argument for military training has been
stated by Major Wm. W. Edwards: “The High
School boy in his Sophomore year is in his most
plastic and enthusiastic age. He is at the age of hero
worship and idealism —once fairly launched on en-
thusiasm for the R. O. T. C, he will almost cer-
tainly continue it either at college or elsewhere. The
Junior R. O. T. C. is the fountain head of military
training and when he is fourteen . . . is just the
right age.”
law; PR WAR


The War Department has steadily gained in its
endeavours; it has had about $4,000,000 to spend
in a year in R. O. T. C. expenses, and the economic
allurements which it offers are impressive. But
there is a rising tide of hostility to compulsory train-
ing and it is to be hoped that many more colleges
will follow the example of Wisconsin University,
Boston University School of Business Administra-
tion, and some other institutions which are making
military drill optional. How can the international
mind be created in the atmosphere of the R. O.
T. C., when no substitutes for war are ever discussed
and it is assumed that war will never end until
human nature ends?
Among the hopeful agencies for peace is the new
international auxiliary language now coming into
vogue.
“The war is only an episode; communication
marks an epoch,” said Professor G. F. Nicolai in his
“Biology of War,” written during the World War,
probably one of the most important books on war
ever written.
Communication began when man “the symbol-
making animal,” developed language and made of
sound a universal. After unknown ages came
hieroglyphics, then the alphabet, and finally “Guten-
berg made thought cosmopolite.” To-day the tele-
phone and radio are annihilating space and time,
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


and the American Radio Relay League is considering
an international language as becoming almost a ne-
cessity for their business. They have written officers
of foreign radio clubs asking their approval for the
use of amateurs of Esperanto or Ido.
Henry Ford was quoted as saying: “Difference in
language indicates difference in thought, in ambi-
tion, and method. Difference in language hinders
science and invention and commerce just as it hinders
world peace and understanding. Language leaves
its mark on everything, and you can readily see it
in government and mechanics. There are some lan-
guages in which you cannot build a machine at all.
There are some languages in which you cannot suc-
cessfully run a factory,”
If the peoples of the world are to live in friendly
co-operation, it is imperative that they should under-
stand each other. Photographs and cinemas may
help visualise certain phases of each other’s lives.
But we need something more, for films in the Orient
have often presented the worst and most licentious
features of American life, outlawed here and belying
us abroad. The profiteer in films has poisoned the
minds of millions of Asiatics, and laid the founda-
tion for contempt and emotions akin to hate.
Hundreds of millions of Orientals, with minds as
keen as ours, are shut off by illiteracy in their own
language from understanding even their own peo-
LAW OR WAR


pie, for lack of an alphabetic system of notation.
Not one in a thousand of them will learn a Euro-
pean language and come into touch with world
thought. Unless there can be some very simple, easy
means of communication devised, one which is in-
ternational in all its connotations and will create no
prejudice, there seems no possibility of that real
understanding which undermines the danger of war.
A Danish or Portuguese discoverer or inventor
wants to get into immediate touch with the mind
of Petrograd, Vienna, Rome, Melbourne, Tokyo,
Buenos Aires, and New York. It is costly to trans-
late books even into a dozen different languages, yet
he must reach the users of one hundred and fifty dif-
ferent languages and dialects if his product of genius
shall benefit the world. No living language is sim-
ple and regular enough and sufficiently without
idioms to be adopted as the international language
to supplement native dialects. English grammar
and genders are simple, but our irrational spelling
and idioms and ambiguities in pronouns make Eng-
lish far more difficult than any simple international
language which can be employed. Such a language
should be phonetic, should contain only those sounds
which are common to all European languages, and
the whole question of spelling and pronunciation
should be disposed of by a grammar school child in
fifteen minutes, instead of needing attention more
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


or less for ten years. Most busy breadwinners have
no time to learn more than one language aside from
their own, and this ought to put them into touch
with all the world.
All the little nations like Holland, Albania, and
Greece, which so jealously guard their own historic
language, and must teach their children several
alien tongues if they would be educated, would feel
immediate relief if in one-quarter of the time needed
to acquire one European language they could come
into touch with all the world. Repugnance which
thoughtless people have for an auxiliary language
because it is “artificial,” is like that of a sentimental-
ist who objects to railroads because their tracks are
not as beautiful as meandering wood-paths. Most
accessories and instruments in civilised life are as
artificial as shoes and stoves and pen and ink. The
only question is, are they beneficent? Does Esper-
anto, or Ido, or some improvement on them, promise
to save for hundreds of millions of people a year’s
time? Does it in actual practice help to break down
that nationalistic prejudice which the World War
has so accentuated?
Just what form the new auxiliary language should
take only linguistic experts can decide. It should
be based on European roots, preferably on Latin
roots, familiar to persons of culture, and which will
aid the pupil .who wishes to go further and acquire
LAW OR WAR


European languages. When psychologic experi-
ments have developed the absolutely easiest form of
language—the shortest cut in conveying information
—the public must be educated as to the scientific
and missionary value of the spread of the new in-
vention. It seems as tremendous in its possibilities
as the railroad or radio have been. The reviving
interest in the matter is shown by the increase of
Esperanto journals from twenty or thirty at the
close of the World War to about seventy now.
After eighteen sittings at the College de France,
Esperanto with certain modifications was favoured
by the savants as the most desirable. It is a lan-
guage, which like any living language, can grow.
To establish the wide-spread study of the aux-
iliary language, normal classes authorised by gov-
ernments and preferably sponsored by the League
of Nations should prepare to teach the secondary
schools of the world. Thus all business clerks,
bankers, librarians, commercial agents, journalists,
world travellers, and delegates to international con-
gresses would in one school generation acquire
facility and these would be the persons who would
control the avenues of influence which govern
policies and legislation.
The spirit of cosmopolitanism, which in the days
of Kant and Goethe prevailed, in spite of much
narrowness, would return and enlarge the scope of
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


patriotism from nation to humanity. A commonly
used international language would profoundly aid
the sense of human solidarity. It would follow or
accompany a common coinage and common stand-
ards of weights and measures. In the course of a
century it might save a year or so of study or wasted
effort for untold millions of human beings.
In 1924 there assembled in Venice, in response
to an invitation from an Italian Chamber of Com-
merce, representatives of 208 organisations from 23
different countries, including representatives from
84 chambers of commerce in Europe, from two in
America, and from others in Asia and Africa. The
conference was arranged by commercial bodies fa-
vouring Esperanto as a means of international com-
munication, though representatives from societies
not favouring Esperanto were admitted. It was
learned that China had introduced the teaching of
this language into normal schools because of the
difficulty of European languages. A remarkable
case of conversion was that of an Italian professor
who had come as a sceptic and simply meant to ob-
serve. On the train he learned the grammar of
Esperanto, which contains only sixteen rules. He
actually took part in the proceedings, speaking very
slowly but correctly in Esperanto. It was reported
from Bulgaria that many Bulgarian merchants pre-
ferred to correspond in Esperanto, and that more of
LAW OR WAR


them knew that language than French or English.
The Paris Chamber of Commerce favoured Es-
peranto and were influenced by the fact that Esper-
anto possesses only twelve verb endings while most
national languages have 180 and, as they usually
have 100 irregular verbs, one may need to learn
thousands of terminations. To show that Esperanto
may express exact shades of language, experiments
were made of translations from three widely differ-
ent and delicate texts; two Esperantists made the
translations under the eyes of the judges; later, two
others, ignorant of the original text, made the second
translation immediately afterwards to the original
text. The closeness of the last translation to the
original convinced sceptics.
Every child should be encouraged to look forward
to an auxiliary language as twenty years ago they
looked forward to the development of aviation.
Educational authorities throughout the world should
work in close co-operation with commercial, tech-
nical, scientific, religious, and other groups to secure
serious study of the world language, and should ac-
quaint themselves with the status of the work and
what has been done by the Committee on Interna-
tional Auxiliary Language at Washington. The
fact that a quarter of a million Esperantists exist,
and that people of over twenty nations assemble at
congresses to practise language and get acquainted.
CREATING THE INTERNATIONAL MIND


is evidence of the practicality of the invention which
in some form is destined to help make the doctrine
of the brotherhood of man become a reality.
Physical science and material development have in
a sense brought the antipodes together, but they have
not gone far to develop sympathy and understanding
and a sense of unity. The world needs something
more than mechanical devices. It needs a different
international philosophy, a different point of view,
a new communication of minds and spirits. It ought
not to be a generation before the radio messages
from London and New York should be understood
simultaneously by High School students in twenty
different countries, and when the increasing number
of delegates to world conferences should listen to
all addresses translated into one auxiliary language
instead of sitting through the wearisome process of
listening to the same thing in three or four lan-
guages. Enormous sums are being given almost
daily for educational work along the old conven-
tional lines, and that is well. But why does not
some millionaire with imagination endow the
League’s Commission on Intellectual Co-operation
for research and experiment necessary to perfect one
of the world’s greatest instrumentalities for human
progress?
LAW OR WAR


CHAPTER VII
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND
PEACE
War is chiefly the product of false premises,
twisted logic, of outgrown slogans, of euphemisms
which throw a glamor over evil. As men think,
madness and misery, or justice and prosperity, ensue.
The primary fallacy is that the man who under-
stands the science and technique of war necessarily
understands the philosophy of war, the available
substitutes for war, the way in which alien people
react, and the obligation of international relation-
ships.
Calm and frank debate with experts on T. N. T.,
on submarines, armour plate, and poison gas, is made
difficult at the start by the assumption on the part
of so many experts on the technique of war that any
one who argues concerning the futility of force under
modern conditions asperses Washington, Grant, and
Pershing and is a crack-brained theorist. Never-
theless a calm and frank statement should be at-
tempted. Not only do the technical experts create
public opinion, but many who sincerely pin their
faith to them are vociferous.


Said Renan: “War is, in a way, one of the condi-
tions of progress, the cut of the whip which prevents
a country from going to sleep.”
Said von Moltke; “War is an element of the order
of the world, established by God.”
Said Lester F. Ward: “War has been the chief
and leading condition of human progress.”
Said Major Charles F. Farnsworth, U. S. A.: “In
every animal there exists a fighting instinct. If you
crush that fighting instinct in a man or boy, you
get the coward.”
Said Major-General Charles F. Summerall; re-
ported on Jan. 17, 1925: “Our country is better
to-day, infinitely better, than it would have been
had there not been a great war. The spirit of service
is abroad in the land, and our country is profiting
by it.”
“By war alone can we acquire those virile qualities
necessary to win in the stern strife of actual life.”
An endless number of illustrations of this same
fallacy as to the nature of war uttered by eminent
men, largely in the army and navy, could be pre-
sented.
What is the fallacy? It is the confounding of
that kind of struggle which Nature ordained with
that struggle which sets at defiance man’s instincts
and Nature’s teachings. Struggle is indeed, “estab-
lished by God.” Struggle is inevitable, wholesome,
LAW OR WAR


bound to continue as long as poverty, cold, disease,
ignorance, filth, ugliness, folly, and death continue.
Man must daily struggle against all obstacles to his
mastery of Nature. He must tunnel mountains,
bridge rivers, fly through the air, go to the bottom
of the sea, fight fire and wild beasts and noxious
pests. But when he goes to the wholesale, organised
slaughter of his fellowmen, he engages in abnormal
struggle and does what even lions and tigers do not
do. They do not go en masse to fight their own
species. No brutes war collectively against their
own kind, though occasionally there may be a case of
single combat among some species. But snakes do
not kill snakes, nor a pack of wolves go out to kill
another pack of wolves. The fox who steals a
chicken is no more engaged in war than the farmer
is who kills a chicken for his wife’s Sunday dinner.
Animals are like butchers, not like soldiers. Getting
food is not war. War is a specific form of struggle
which has no origin in brute inheritance. It goes
against man’s nature even more than murder. One
man in a thousand may commit murder. The vast
majority, though instinct with selfishness, never go
so far as that. War was not developed as an insti-
tution until scores of thousands of years after the
caveman joined with his fellows in mutual aid
against primeval monsters and learned the benefit
of co-operation. First, rudimentary language must
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


have been invented; then some form of clan iand,
later, some tribal organisations were developed.
The caveman doubtless sometimes committed mur-
der, though not with the cunning calculation of our
high school bandits. But it took countless ages of
development in civilisation before slow-witted homo
sapiens could make war possible. War means or-
ganised, collective action with weapons, under dis-
cipline and authority of general, king, or chief. War
is a product of the cunning, crafty side of civilisa-
tion which exercises the virtues of foresight, in-
dustry, inventive powers, and the leadership of dom-
inating minds. As an institution it goes not very
far back into prehistoric times.
The more civilisation has advanced, the greater
has man’s wickedness and power of wholesale de-
struction of his own species become. Degree of,
.wickedness depends on knowledge, and on ability
to avoid this organised destruction of his own kind.
The brains that can invent tanks and battleships
and lyddite are highly developed, and capable, if
turned to logic, ethics, and economics, of devising
methods that do not set man’s natural instinct at
defiance in the settlement of disputes, and of seeing
through the hoary sophistry of confounding struggle
.with .war and pronouncing war “established by
God.”
The “cut of the whip” was not needed to incite
LAW OR WAR


men to feverish activity; in building New York and
Chicago skyscrapers, in cutting the Suez and Pan-
ama canals, in reaching the poles, in harnessing
Niagara and Muscle Shoals, in fighting hookworm
and yellow fever, and in revealing Tut-Ankh-Amen
in his 3,000-year-old sarcophagus. War did not
make civilisation. Mental, moral, and physical
exertion made civilisation.
As to war having been “the chief or leading con-
dition of human progress,” this progress began
when man learned to talk, to make a fire, a raft, a
wheel, to make all manner of implements down to
the printing-press, the steam engine, the electric
light, the automobile, telephone, radio, and to as-
suage human suffering. It came from the power of
imagination and sympathy, from almost everything
except from bloodshed, devastation, waste, and the
aftermath of bitterness and revenge. President
Jordan in his “Blood of the Nations” has demon-
strated that war destroys the best blood and leaves
populations to be fathered by the old, the weak, and
the derelicts. Rome fell, not because of luxury.
There was no luxury for slaves or for the vast mul-
titude. She “petered out,” largely, because for
century after century she took the youth with the
best blood and physique, and left them, without an-
tiseptics, ether, or Red Cross, to perish in agony in
order that greed for conquest and the prestige of
DANGEROUS FALLACIES JVBOUT WAR AND PEACE


Roman arms might be gratified. Each generation
thus depleted brought Rome finally to a generation
of weaklings, the progeny of slaves and of incom-
petents. The same was true of Greece, Assyria, and
Egypt. Only one nation of antiquity has kept its
blood—unwarlike China, now incited to alter its
age-long policies and to imitate the armed Occident
which “respects” only an armed nation.
General Summerall’s unconsciously inverted state-
ment of the truth hardly needs refutation. The loss
of forty thousand million dollars of our people’s
Wealth, in our land in which one conscript soldier in
four could not write a letter in English or read an
American newspaper, a land in which crime exceeds
that in any other great nation, and in which divorce
breaks up one home in seven, a land which has im-
poverished foreign customers, seems utterly forgot-
ten by this master in the technique of war. He holds
the doctrine which finds war good per se, which en-
courages its continuance, seeing it has such infinite
capacity for our betterment. We had been told that
generals fought only to end war, but there seem to
be exceptions who would encourage slaughter for
the sake of its moral benefit.
POLICE AND INSURANCE
Says the Kansas City Times; “It is ridiculous to
hold that military training tends to bring on war.
LAW OR WAR


One might argue with equal reasoning that training
a youth to fight fire would make him an incendiarist:
or that training a youth for police duty would make
him a bandit.”
Said Admiral McKean: “The policemen do not
start street fights, nor do the firemen, fires, and
neither does the navy stir up strife.” Mr. McNider
of the [War Department asked the Woman’s Repub-
lican Club of Boston: “Is it a bad policy to rig up
a set of automatic sprinklers so that the next fire
can be put out before it gets under way- 1 ?”
Former Secretary Weeks in an address at West
Point was quoted as saying: “If it were not for
the restraining effect of military establishments of
the nations of the world, an indescribable state of
chaos would result and civilisation would be rapidly
terminated through self-destruction.”
A false analogy which makes a vivid picture in
the mind may do more to create war conditions than
do armies and navies. The men who do the fight-
ing, do not make war except when they are allowed
to engage in propaganda, and are of official rank
and undertake to permeate the press and the public
mind with sophistical talk which is as often genu-
inely sincere as that of any anti-evolutionist of
.Tennessee or Texas.
There is nothing which throws such a glamor
over the soldier’s work as confounding it with the
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


police. Talk to any audience about the Boston
police strike, the looting and panic which ensued,
tell them that what police are to our cities, armies
and navies are to our nation; show that we might as
well abolish the police as abolish army and navy,
appeal to their sentiments in the interest of law and
order, of righteousness, safety of home and fire-
side, and the whole body of virtuous, patriotic citi-
zens will thunder applause and go forth convinced.
This is the easy stunt of our military propagandists
as they address schools, colleges, and parents to en-
list recruits for the summer training camps and give
eloquent pleas before Rotary Clubs and women’s
alliances.
But let us consider the flaw in the argument. The
function of police is essentially a kindly, protective
function, guarding the public in time of fire, looking
after lost babies, telling householders to put ashes
on the icy sidewalks, etc., and watching out for
bandits and burglars. About once in two days, in
some sections, in others oftener, the policeman makes
an arrest. He does not punish the criminal; he calls
the patrol wagon and takes his man to court. He
gives his testimony and returns to his beat. He is
not allowed to punish. When Boston police once
used their sticks too freely over the heads of Tech-
nology students in a class fight between Freshmen
and Sophomores, their wages were docked for a
LAW OR WAR


month. The sole function of police when they use
any force at all is to take to court. Naturally, if
attacked, they defend themselves, as any one would,
and may rightly shoot in self-defence. The point
to be observed is that armies and navies never con-
vey to court. They are the agents of nations that
refuse to take international disputes to court, but
who prefer to settle them by explosives. They feel
that honour can be retrieved by dynamite, by man-
gling innocent enemy conscripts, by destroying the
work of centuries, that boundary lines may be set-
tled, and injustice by past generations rectified by
the use of poison gas and cruisers. The soldiers on
both sides are almost entirely helpless innocents,
always lied to by the real makers of war who do not
go to war themselves. Few wars could be begun
or continued except on the basis of misunderstand-
ing and lies. Courts aim to sift evidence carefully
and get the truth. War never does, nor do the few
men who make war.
Armies and navies are rival bodies. Why do we
have them? Because other nations do. Police never
are rival bodies. The police of Albany are not pre-
paring to defend themselves against the police of
Buffalo. The militia or constabulary of one state
are not called to go against the militia or constab-
ulary of another state. Sheriffs read riot acts, and
fire on an approaching mob that wants to break
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


down a jail door and hang an untried black man to
the lamppost; sheriffs, police, militia exist to pro-
mote law and order and to force disputants to take
their case to court, or to be peaceable. Until the
millennium we shall need non-rival bodies, under
collective control to keep order. Had Secretary
Weeks said: “If it were not for the restraining effect
of non-rival bodies under joint control and having
police functions an indescribable state of chaos
would result and civilisation would be rapidly
terminated through self-destruction,” there would
be very much to say for it. Nevertheless, millions
have existed in Africa and Asia and lived to old age
without ever seeing a policeman. The Secretary ap-
parently conceived of practically all mankind de-
siring to be lawless and only restrained by fear from
robbery and murder. A town of 13,000 inhabitants
in Maine has had only two policemen. Probably
not ten per cent of our inhabitants would become
bandits and cutthroats, even if they could. The
vast majority know that to protect their own prop-
erty, they must respect that of others. Let us have
that type of force which takes thugs and thieves to
court. Let us have more police, and let their work
and that of the courts and parole boards be done
more thoroughly. Let us teach every child that
nations as well as cities, If they organise, can have
a police force, and that non-rival bodies, under
LAW OR WAR


world-control, will end rival armies and navies, if
the rising generation learns to think logically and
to see through false analogies and flamboyant
rhetoric.
How about “insurance,” a favorite term of Theo-
dore Roosevelt’s, as applied to armies. The word
is used with two meanings. Usually it means money
paid by insurance companies after a disaster,
whether of fire, hail, or death. When comparison
is made with the army, it is always used in the sense
of protection, as it is obvious that armies pay no
damages. The army is compared to the fireman.
But when a fireman fights fire, he does not do it with
fire. He does not pour on gasoline. He fights fire
with water or ashes that smother and put out a
blaze. The soldier is compelled to fight slaughter
with slaughter, battleship with battleship, gas with
more powerful gas. But perhaps it is claimed that
the army protects all the time that it is not used,
that it frightens away evildoers, that if it is large
enough and strong enough, it ensures protection.
Said Theodore Roosevelt: “So long as we have a
strong army and navy, just so long and no longer
shall we have peace.” Is not this guessing, and
guessing that belies history? During most of our
history we have had a very small army and navy
yet no nation ever declared war against us. China
for four thousand years and Japan for hundreds of
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


years did not have a navy. It is precisely the nations
that have had strong armies and navies that have
gone to war.
Said Frank H. Simonds: “In the larger sense, it
is plain now that the war brought no victors and no
vanquished. Europe lost the war, not Germany or
her allies; and in the same sense it was Europe and
not any individual people or government, monarch
or prime minister, who willed the struggle, not de-
liberately, not directly, but by the acceptance of a
system which Sooner or later could end only as it
did end. It is certain that it was the war system and
the war preparations on every hand that terrified
every nation and made for war, not peace.”
Rear Admiral J. S. Murdock, retired, said:
“When we can do away with our police forces, our
criminal courts and jails, in our nation, which we
like to consider the leader in the march of progress,
and rely on the moral or ethical nature of the crim-
inal to prevent burglary, arson, or murder, we may
consider ourselves on the first step toward the de-
velopment of ‘Law, not War.’ Human history is
old and shows that law, justice, and morality are
none of them efficacious as substitutes for war.”
He did not Say, “for armies and navies,” but for
“war.” A writer in the Portland Press Herald de-
clared: ‘When the bootlegger, the dope fiend, the
great criminal horde, become honest, law-abiding
LAW OR WAR


citizens . . . when good government becomes an
honest effort instead of a politician’s game, then we
may hope for universal peace.” Said the British
Commander-in-Chief at a London Conference of
Territorial Chaplains: “Why should we dare to
think that we can change human nature in a few
years because war has become more terrible than
it was in past ages? Wars will not cease, and can
not cease so long as human nature remains as it
is, and no human agency can possibly change the
main characteristics of human nature. If God
wishes to change human nature, he is hardly likely
to do so by playing upon our weaknesses —fear of
death and the horror of pain and discomfort.”
Said Major General Charles F. Farnsworth: “I
believe that wars in the future will occur just
as they have done in the past. I feel that it will
come to our country during the lives of many of us,
just as it has come to every nation on the earth at
short intervals of time. Such hours will come to
every country. So long as individuals will fight,
even when they have courts to which they may ap-
peal, we must expect that nations that have no court
of appeal will fight. When all men and women
have always in their mind a true conception of
service, then, and not till then, will war disappear.”
Said John R. McQuigg, once national commander
of the American Legion: “Let us remember that
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


world courts and Hague tribunals can not accom-
plish the impossible. .They can not change human
nature in the space of a few years. With the most
magnificent territorial empire on which the sun
shines, the United States of America is the richest
prize of the ages, the greatest inheritance since time
began. It will be ours only for so long as the world
knows that we are ready to prepare to defend it.”
Said Major General Edwards: “This soft, mushy
propaganda, rampant throughout the country to-day,
of peace at any price, peace with dishonour, assumes
that there has been a fundamental change in human
nature.”
Said Count Antonio Cippico, Italian Senator, at
the Williamstown summer Conference: “Given the
actual economic world struggle, it seems to me ut-
terly useless to attempt the complete abolition of
war. War is a cruel necessity . . . biology is based
on a perpetual struggle; chemistry on continued re-
actions. It is in vain therefore to condemn that
strife or violent reaction which after all is life it-
self.”
Said Admiral LL K. de Stiguer; “If war is a crime,
all who participate in it are criminals, all monu-
ments to outstanding events of war, such as the
Bunker Hill monument, are memorials to wrong; if
war is a crime then you must repudiate Washington,
LAW OR WAR


Lincoln, Grant and all who have been instruments
in forming our American institutions.”
Said Chaplain Herbert S. Johnson, a regular of-
ficer in the army: “The tendency to make war;
springs from the same source as lying, theft, murder,
adultery, and will last as long as the tendency to
those other vices of human selfishness.”
The above quotations present a medley of widely
prevalent fallacies which need careful sifting. They
are based chiefly on two deeply embedded ideas:
one, that war cannot end until human nature
changes, and, secondly, that what has been is bound
to be. Added to this is the assumption that those
who are urging that war be now declared by inter-
national action to be henceforth a crime have ever
held that past wars, before there was a beginning of
world organisation, or a EWorld Court set up, were
in the same category as future wars after they were
once outlawed. Christians honour Hebrew patri-
archs, though like Jacob, they may have had two
wives. All abolitionists have honoured Washington
and Jefferson, though they were slave-holders. All
peacemakers honour Grant who fought in a civil
war, as they honour the leaders of the Revolutionary
War which was really a civil war, fought, as we now;
recognise, between progressives and reactionaries on
both sides the Atlantic. Civil war is in a different
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


category from international war, and as yet there
are no world agencies to cope with it. All rational
persons must perceive that with the growth of en-
lightenment and of substitution of new remedies for
old evils, our new scruples, due to new knowledge
and changed conditions, do not imply a reckless con-
demnation of men who under other conditions acted
according to their light.
The assumption that human nature does not
thange is irrelevant. The abolition of war is not a
question of human nature, or of some miracle. It is
a question of Organisation. There are not only
economic causes of disputes, which Count Cippico
held must lead to war, but racial, religious, and end-
less other causes of disputes. Disputes are not war.
They need not lead to war any more than disputes
between individuals lead to murder or to duels,
which are now outlawed. The most cursory glance
at history shows that there has been no essential
change in human mental capacity or physical in-
stincts since the days of Homer and King David.
When clans coalesced with other clans and ceased
fighting each other; when tribes united and built
cities; when shires in England, and provinces in
France united and stopped fighting each other; when
Saxon, Welsh, and Scots stopped fighting and
created Great Britain; when thirteen quarrelsome
colonies, fast disintegrating, became firmly knit
LAW OR WAR


under the Constitution, so that one state has never
fought another state since then —there was no change
in man’s instincts. Italian babies are probably not
better than they were in the days of Dante or Saint
Francis, but Italian cities which fought each other
then have extended their common interest and now,
under one flag, one king, and one Parliament, no
longer fight. A hundred weak little dukedoms and
principalities, abolishing customs barriers between
them and forts and guards, and becoming a strong
Germany, did so without creating any change in
their inborn instincts. Progress has been marked
by extending the area of common interests: the
printing press, the photograph, the steam engine,
locomotive, and radio are not changing human na-
ture, but are they not changing human knowledge
and experience, and extending human understanding
and sympathies and so altering human action? The
man who prates about human nature preventing the
end of war is shooting not at the mark, but child-
ishly shooting into the air. He is blind to the whole
point at issue. Ideas change and therefore actions
change, but man’s innate instincts remain essentially
the same and will continue to do so.
Darwin rightly distinguished the savage from the
civilised man, chiefly by his lack of imagination and
inability to sympathise and have fellowship with
one outside his tribe. The new extension of com-
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


mon interests in a world in which extensive foreign
investments and exports make it imperative to be on
good terms with customers, has introduced elements
which are to control the future. Do they not make
the precedent of the frequency of ancient wars
worthless under our new conditions? Is not the
militarist who argues from the past on the basis of
human nature never changing, aside from his new
knowledge of the powers of destruction, both il-
logical and a “back-number”.?
[Theft, laziness, and cruelty—sins connected with
slavery—have continued since slavery as an insti-
tution was outlawed. Sins of the flesh and indi-
vidual murder will continue indefinitely after war is
outlawed by the nations. Organised, systematic,
legalised war is essentially different from multiple
murder by individuals each with a different and per-
sonal motive. The War System will end when gov-
ernments "will it. These will do so when the plain
people are convinced of its futility and demand that
all nations share in World Organisation, provide
substitutes for war, and use those substitutes. There
are endless causes of disputes and there always will
be. There is only one cause of war—lnadequate
World Organisation. Individuals lust for drink,
for revenge, but no individuals lust collectively for
jvar. The peoples in every nation in the World
LAW OR WAR


War carried on mutual annihilation either from fear
or sense of duty.
There is a mournful illusion lurking in all these
conf dent assertions quoted. It is that it is possible
for war to go on repeatedly as it has in the past.
Tet the very men who utter these fallacies know
that science has made it possible to turn London in
three hours into a heap of ashes, with eight million
corpses, as Mr. Edison assured us. Every day dem-
onstrates the futility of force under modern condi-
tions to prevent war by intimidation or permanently
to settle disputes. The war system must stop or
white civilisation will end. The propaganda in
military schools and camps of the dangerous fal-
lacies above mentioned, with no word about avail-
able substitutes for war, while they may not pro-
mote love of war, do promote continued belief in
the war system and are working to frustrate attempts
to abolish it. The President of Norwich University,
the well-known military institution, is reported to
have told his students: “The only peace worth hav-
ing is obtained by instant readiness to fight when
wronged.” Were an individual wronged, or if the
town of Norwich or the state of Vermont were
wronged, he would say: “Take the case to Court.”
But if the nation decides, by itself, that it is
wronged, would he call for redress by slaughter?
not slaughter of the original wrong-doers, but by
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


the innocents whom the government can coerce to
fight against others equally innocent?
This propaganda fosters the conceit that our coun-
try has never gone to war needlessly.
Said a writer in the Press Herald , Portland, Me.:
“The pacifists like the poor, we have with us al-
ways. Washington knew them. They would not
fight nor would they help those who could and did.
They prevented Washington from organising an
army of veterans to uphold the cause of liberty, and
when the war was over they came into an enjoy-
ment of all the things independence brought. Abra-
ham Lincoln had many bitter experiences with
pacifists. They said: ‘Let the erring sisters depart
in peace’ . . . From Bull Run to Appomattox Lin-
coln had the pacifists always hounding, abusing him,
villifying him, obstructing him. More than once
the pacifist chorus has imperilled the country. We
became a nation in spite of them. The Republic was
saved and its black citizens set free in spite of them.”
Said Colonel William H. Monroe, U. S. Army:
“Frenzied pacifists are again abroad bombarding
our defenceless heads with the poison gas of mis-
representation and disloyalty. But there is little
danger of any one getting caught in the clouds of ab-
surdities broadcasted by these flighty fanatics . . .
I wonder if these paid pacifist propagandists realise
that they are tackling mentalities of no mean calibre
LAW OR WAR


:with tainted pabulum that ordinary common sense
has long since rejected. I wonder at the brazen-
faced effrontery with which these apostles of peace
at any price bid us lay aside our gas-masks and take
a whiff or two at their delectable concoctions of vile
gasosity ... I wonder how these birds of bolshe-
vistic tendency dare fly in the faces of intelligent
people dragging in their foul talons the flag of this
nation and voicing contempt for our laws and insti-
tutions by their shrill cries and frenzied floutings
of our overworked army and navy courageously and
unselfishly devoted to carrying out the provisions of
our National Defense Act . . . against all enemies
at home or abroad, pacifistic, communistic, or bol-
shevistic ... I wonder how little these flying buz-
zards of ill-omen, these calamity howlers of the air,
know the patriotic heart of our people, the deep-
seated determination of all of our citizens to defend
themselves ... by the only means that has ever
withstood aggression—an adequate army and navy.
I wonder if these visionary fanatics dream that the
fathers and mothers of this land will ever fail to
rally to the defence of their flag because forsooth of
the slinking hyenas of pacifism and disloyalty that
howl within or without our gates.”
The above explosion of rhetoric so accurately ex-
presses the attitude of mind of many citizens, in-
structed by members of the army and navy and
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


Legion, that further quotation is unnecessary. A de-
cent respect for the opinion of mankind demands
definitions. When an inflamed imagination sets up
scarecrows and bogies and valiantly overthrows them
with vituperation, the exercise may be exhilarating
but it is not convincing to sane minds.
A militarist is not a person who wants war. He is
one who, whether a military man or a sweet old lady,
holds essentially the fallacies above expressed. He
gives undue emphasis to the efficacy of military
force. It is one’s philosophy, not one’s profession,
that makes one a militarist.
“Pacifist” or “pacifiste” is simply the French form
for the word which Jesus used when he said,
“Blessed are the peacemakers.” Who are peace-
makers and what are they trying to do in these days
when another war threatens world suicide? First
let us say, that 'Tories and “Copperheads” were not
pacifists. The editor who confounds them with the
Tories who tried to thwart Washington can not show
that they were Quakers, conscientious objectors, non-
resisters, or pacifists. They simply stood by King
George like good monarchists and would have been
willing to fight in any cause that they believed in.
So far from their coming “into enjoyment of all
that independence has wrought,” as was shown in a
previous chapter, 100,000 at great expense and
trouble, after the war, emigrated to Nova Scotia and
LAW OR WAR


Canada where they could be under British law.
The men who “hounded, abused and villified Lin-
coln” were men who condoned secession and slavery.
They were not Quakers, non-resisters, conscientious
objectors or “pacifists” like Garrison and Whittier.
All this is too obvious to require refutation.
Many peacemakers refuse to be classed as “pac-
ifists,” unless in every debate they can define for
themselves the meaning of the word that has been
so dragged in the dust and distorted from all sem-
blance to its real meaning. The term pacifist or
peacemaker is as vague as the word Christian. A
Christian may be a Jesuit, a Presbyterian, a Second
Adventist, a member of the Greek Church, or a
Unitarian. So peacemakers may hold varied views
as to methods, but their fundamental principles are
practically alike as summed up in the chapter fol-
lowing.
DANGEROUS FALLACIES ABOUT WAR AND PEACE


CHAPTER VIII
THE POINTS OF VIEW OF MILITARISTS AND
PEACEMAKERS
The majority of militarists deprecate war. They
may or may not be military men. They are those
who hold certain theories about war based on the
assumption that it is rooted in human nature, is as
inevitable as sin, and can be kept in bounds only as
nations guard themselves by armed force. They
consider armies and navies the “first line of defence”
and in each nation they believe that their “adequate
preparedness” has not been reached.
Military officers are not only often busy teaching
military tactics in school and camp, but in instruct-
ing the public in a wide-spread propaganda as to the
philosophy of war, the reaction of foreign nations to
our policies, and the probabilities regarding our
danger from attack. In regard to the last they are
sometimes very positive. Some years before the
World War, in a tour in the Far East, Dr. Charles
W. Eliot was interested to find that only one of the
many American officers whom he met was not posi-
tive that we were immediately going to war with


Japan, though he found no indication among the
Japanese that they wanted or expected war.
A few illustrations from a vast number of similar
ones illuminate the type of instruction that is being
eagerly imbibed on Main Street, in the college drill
hall, and in military summer camps, and which
points the pen for editorials read by millions. May
not utterances like these have a profound effect in
shaping national policy and so deserve examination?
Said Colonel O. F. Robinson in July, 1926, in
an address reported in one of the Washington army
periodicals: “We are to-day the richest prize in the
world for an irate nation. A successful war against
us by a combination of European nations would be
a quick and easy way of settling their debts to
us . . . An infinite wisdom has established the con-
ditions under which we live and put in being the
great law of the universe—the law of the survival
of the fittest.” The first reaction to this of the aver-
age man is fear. Here is, he thinks, an expert on
all that pertains to war. Of course he must know
our dangers.
A “prize” is something that can be taken and used
and enjoyed. Gold, jewels, pictures, produce, can
be stolen from an individual. But a nation’s pos-
sessions as shown in a previous chapter belong to a
different category. By their destruction what enemy
could become a dollar richer? If our European
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


debtors unite and simply say: “We can not, and
therefore shall not, pay,” what could we do about it?
Should we send our sons to kill their sons to compel
them to pay what they say is impossible ? So long as
the Canadian frontier remains unguarded, an attack
from a nation with the greatest navy would be un-
thinkable. Conceive of other debtors, with their
currency at less than a quarter of normal value,
taxing their people further so as to wage successful
war on us 3,000 miles away. As for the survival
of the fittest, as has previously been stated, science
means by that, not survival of the best, but of that
qualified to survive in a particular environment. A
fish is better fitted than a man to survive in the sea,
a bird fitted for the air; in a social environment of
thieves and murderers the Emersons and Edisons
would first succumb. Pilate survived while Jesus
was crucified; martyrs perished in the flames while
Nero fiddled. A scientific phrase detached from its
real meaning is dangerous.
Said General James G. Harbord: “Our land re-
sounds to the whine of the professional pacifist, de-
manding total disarmament. Yet none of them
take the equally logical advocacy of discharging the
police to prevent crime, disbanding the fire depart-
ment to stop fires, and dismissing the doctor to pre-
vent disease.” This philosopher thus teaches that
the functions of armies are essentially analogous to
LAW OR WAR


those of police and firemen and doctors. To this
astonishing assumption one must constantly reiter-
ate that it is the business of firemen to destroy fire,
an enemy wholly different from themselves, with
something different from fire itself. While the con-
script is forced to destroy beings with bodies, wives,
and sweethearts just like his own, and using the same
means as they —guns against guns, battleships
against battleships, gas against gas. Soldiers belong
to rival bodies; firemen and police do not. The con-
fusion of thought which confounds the two is a
dominant factor in militarism. Men who are ex-
perts in mathematics and mechanics and military
science often find simple problems in logic beyond
them. It seems needless to argue that the work of
destruction by the soldier has not the slightest
analogy to the healing work of the physician. As
to the ever insistent argument about the army as
police, which has previously been analysed, the anti-
dote to the fallacy needs repetition every year in
every grade of Grammar School and in adult clubs
and classes which are frequently told, as if it were
an axiom, that as we have always had war we shall
continue to have it, so long as men are sinful.
Few peacemakers demand “total disarmament”
of their own nation. They know that the great
nations will disarm only by simultaneous action.
The arguments of most military men, except a few
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


like General Tasker Bliss and General Allen, are
for measures that assume the perpetuity of the war
system. No wonder that after thirty years of play-
ing “war-games,” of thinking of every nation as a
possible enemy, substitutes for war seem to them
intangible and remote. No one criticises the experts
in their own field. What the public has a right to
demand is that there be recognised the profound dis-
tinction between the science of war which officers
are competent to teach, and the philosophy of human
nature or of the war system about which they have
shown themselves conspicuously incompetent to
teach the public. The last man who should usurp
the function of the statesman, philosopher, or the
preacher is the technician in the art of war.
The kind of reasoning that detects flaws in sub-
marines is not the same as that required to under-
stand our relations to Mexico or Japan. The kind
of prophecy which can foretell what steel and gas
can do is not that needed at Locarno conferences or
in the college lecture room. Shooting straight at
targets does not help one to think straight. The
obedience taught under direction and compulsion
does not develop the self-control and voluntary
obedience to conscience that good citizenship de-
mands.
Children can be taught what eminent technicians
fail to see, like the fallacies in the following asset-
LAW OR WAR


tions; “War is nature’s plan for the elevation of the
whole human race,” said Colonel Traub, Chief of
Staff, 77th Division, to the Daughters of the Ameri-
can Revolution. Secretary Wilbur is reported to
have said: “Preparation for war has a high moral
value.” The distinction between struggle and war
which Colonel Traub, like many others, has failed
to see has already been discussed. If preparation
for war has a high moral value then why not have
more of it and let every woman share in the moral
uplift? Preparation for war before 1914 was uni-
versal. The nations were so well prepared that they
could wipe out thirty millions of lives by battle,
famine, and the after consequences of war; they
could destroy in four years over three hundred thou-
sand million dollars’ worth of wealth. The differ-
ence between man’s struggle with environment which
stimulates, educates, and uplifts him, and the war
system —collective slaughter of the human species—■
is so great that the thought which puts them both
into the same category is appallingly absurd. It is
this medley of false assumptions, perverted logic,
and misreading of history which stun the reader in
the pronouncements of so many military men. Ad-
miral Bradley M. Fiske has warned us that we are
surrounded by “nations not only virile but ambi-
tious, intelligent, and poor who want what we want
and realise that we have achieved it largely through
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


war.” The Admiral seems to have forgotten that
we obtained Florida, the vast Louisiana Territory,
and Alaska without shedding a drop of blood. His
assumption, like that of Colonel Robinson, is that
poor and envious nations could secure advantage
by injuring the one nation from whom they want to
borrow; that by more destruction, loss of trade, and
bitterness, and the endangering of civilisation, any
nation could prosper.
General Fries tells us that “the army has been in-
vestigating various disarmament and pacifist so-
cieties” and he has declared, according to report, that
the “insidious pacifist is to be feared more than the
man with torch, gun, or sword.” “Pacifists” deal
only in argument, and argument it seems is more
dangerous than fire and sword! Evidently the
Beatitudes need expurgation and peacemakers are
not blessed if they oppose explosives as a method of
settling controversies. All this loose, often casual
talk of eminent officers is taken seriously and sent
out in Associated Press dispatches. Who commis-
sioned the army to play the inquisitor, and investi-
gate those who are peaceably trying to bring about
peaceful settlement of international disputes? The
cry of “Bolshevik, traitor and communist” which
militarists both in and out of the army have raised
against them, especially since the World War, have
had about the same foundation as the cry once
£aw or war


raised: “gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners.”
A careful expose of the systematic and extensive
propaganda against liberal and “radical” thought
has been edited by Norman Hapgood in a volume
entitled, “Professional Patriots.” A survey has
been made in this book of editors and organisations
which make a specialty of discrediting those who do
not hold their own views, among whom are many
peace workers, explicitly named. Some of these or-
ganisations give no financial reports. The financial
backing of many of these comes chiefly from well-
known capitalists who desire under the guise of
patriotism to alarm the public with wildly exag-
gerated claims as to menace to property in all move-
ments that would tend to change the status quo.
Under the title of “Better America Federation,”
with headquarters in Los Angeles, one of their
agencies has attracted much attention through a
laudable emphasis on the Constitution and prize
oratorical contests and a widely circulated weekly
News 'Letter. The Federation as stated in this book
“is supported chiefly by public utility companies and
certain large commercial interests of southern Cali-
fornia. Through its board of directors it is tied up
with corporations who utilise the patriotic appeal
to distract attention from their own purposes . . .
The Federation is allied with the controlling busi-
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


ness interests of southern California.” It maintains
a staff of salaried speakers which it furnishes to
social and commercial clubs. An article in Better
Schools, an educational journal of Los Angeles, once
characterised thus many committees of the Federa-
tion operating under various names to carry out its
purposes:
“So hateful are the policies of this group of
reactionaries, that they find a frequent change of
name necessary. When their hypocrisy and fraud
are discovered, they shift to a new one.” (The
article catalogues these aliases and continues):
“and now having worn out all the old masks,
they are appearing as the committee of One Thou-
sand and the committee of Ten Thousand.”
Senator J. M. Inman speaking from the floor of
the State Senate said :
“We see the Better America Federation at work
using what control it possesses to serve the special
interests. Under a false title, which would seem
to indicate that the organisation is aiming to make
American citizenship and better national life, we
find it being used openly and actively in trying to
aid these corporate interests in their endeavour to
evade just taxation.”
Among the most aggressive propagandists is the
Woman Patriot of Washington, started in Wash-
ington in 1922 by the anti-suffragists. The paper
LAW OR WAR


is dedicated to the “defence of the family and the
state” and “against feminism and socialism.” It has
attacked peace movements and the Federal Chil-
dren’s Bureau and its president has characterised
Mrs. Florence Kelley, the valiant secretary of the
Consumers’ League, as “perhaps the ablest legisla-
tive general communism has produced.” Another
very active assailant of peace workers is Fred R.
Marvin who in the New York Commercial has ex-
posed so-called “subversive movements.” Mr. Mar-
vin’s efforts have been prodigious and in 1927, ac-
cording to “Professional Patriots,” he had four libel
suits, each for $25,000, on his hands in the courts.
R. M. Whitney of the American Defense Society
published a series of widely-read articles on “The
Reds in America” in which his publisher was in-
volved in a SIOO,OOO libel suit, which was dropped
when retraction was made.
The National Civic Federation has perhaps the
most extensive literature of propaganda against
peace workers, who are continually linked up in the
publications of Mr. Ralph Easley, the chairman,
with bolshevists and communists. He says: “We
regard their theory of internationalism with its con-
tempt of love of country as one leading to disloyalty
to our government and the destruction of national-
ity.” The notorious “Spider-web” chart published
in Henry Ford’s Dearborn Independent was pre-
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


pared in 1923 by the woman librarian of the Chem-
ical Warfare Service of the War Department,
headed by General Fries. It attempted to show the
web of lines between organisations and women
leaders which were supposed to tie together in an
international conspiracy organisations of women, all
influenced by Moscow. The theory presented is
that the result of the peace movement, whether con-
sciously or not, is to disarm the United States so
that the bolshevists can take it. Organisations like
the General Federation of Women’s Clubs, the
Women’s Christian Temperance Union and the
League of Women Voters were shown to be in some
measure affiliated with organisations like the Na-
tional Council for Prevention of War—a clearing-
house for anti-militarist effort, and therefore as-
sumed to be under the influence of Moscow.
In New York, the notorious Lusk committee on
Investigating Seditious Activities was unable to
make good on its fantastic charges: “Its chief case
.was thrown out of court and the two laws which it
sponsored for the control of the loyalty of schools
and teachers in New York were repealed by the
legislature, and its part in throwing out of the legis-
lature five duly elected assemblymen who were So-
cialists was condemned throughout the country.”
The four-volume report of the committee cost the
state $100,000; copies were sent to libraries, editors,
LAW OR WAR


and patriotic organisations, and its gross exaggera-
tions and misinformation continue to mislead the
public. Its list of 62 persons holding “dangerous,
destructive and anarchistic sentiments” includes
Miss Jane Addams, Dr. David Starr Jordan, George
W. Kirchway and Miss Lillian Wald. Newton D.
Baker, then Secretary of War, in response to letters
and telegrams regarding this list declared: “The
War Department does not undertake to censor the
opinions of the people of the United States. It has
not authority to classify such opinions. In the par-
ticular list are names of people of great distinction,
exalted purity of purpose, and life-long devotion to
the highest interests of America and mankind. Miss
Jane Addams, for instance, lends dignity and great-
ness to any list in which her name appears.”
There are a score or so of other organisations of
the same inquisitorial type as those mentioned. Some
of them are managed by genuine fanatics, probably
as sincere as the Mr. Braman mentioned in “Pro-
fessional Patriots” who attempted to federate “over
fifty patriotic organisations with a membership of
7,000,000”; half of these protested against the use
of their names without their authority. Mr.
Braman was reported in the New York Times to
have said: “The Reds are holding 10,000 meetings
in this country every week and 350 radical papers
have been established here in the last six months.”
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


In an address on “The Spirit of the Times,” the
president of the National Security League is re-
ported as saying: “We have 500,000 communists
meeting weekly publishing fifty papers attacking
your country, your government, your right to pros-
per.”
What is to be said of these statements but that
there are many ill-balanced and credulous citizens
.who accept without investigation unproved asser-
tions. It is probable that, according to recent care-
ful estimate, out of our 120,000,000 not over 10,000
are communists. Some of them are doing some harm
but, on the whole, these few crude and ill-trained
persons, usually foreigners who have had hard ex-
periences and have heard little of the best which
America can offer, are doing far less harm in our
country than certain prosperous and inquisitorial
bodies who, sometimes sincerely and sometimes for
selfish ends, systematically organise to condemn and
silence those who hold a different philosophy.
What is the philosophy of the peacemaker? At
the risk of repetition of some previous matter it may
be thus summed up: In all sects and parties there
are always a few impractical extremists who injure
their own cause by trying to take the fourth step be-
fore they have taken the first; it is cruelly unjust to
proclaim that they are typical. The typical peace-
LAW OR WAR


maker would agree substantially to the following
statements:
1. Internationalism involves “no contempt for
love of country” and is in complete harmony with a
proper nationalism. There can be no international-
ism until first there is nationalism, just as there can
be no nation until there are first smaller units that
compose it. Love of home does not preclude love
of one’s city, one’s own state, and one’s own nation.
But, as above all nations is Humanity, there must
be a larger as well as a smaller patriotism, each per-
fectly consistent with the other. The few fanatics
who would abolish all national boundaries, might
equally well abolish all city and state boundaries,
and do away with all organisation but one on the
earth; but they are negligible in numbers and less
harmful than the very many who would make our
boundaries the limit of our allegiance and responsi-
bility.
2. Future war between nations can and ought to
be abolished in a generation. It has become futile
for the achievement of national advantage, what-
ever may be said about past war and revolts and
revolutions within a country.
3. War is not due to human nature which in most
respects has changed little since the days of Plato.
Customs, ideas, and environment change, but human
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


instincts remain about the same. War is due to the
failure hitherto of the largest units of human organ-
isation to adopt the same methods which have
worked successfully for centuries with the smaller
units of city, state, and provinces.
4. False assumptions, false analogies, ignorance
of what real self-interest requires, are the obstacles
to be removed through new methods and new ob-
jectives in education. Ordinary education largely
ignores the most vital matters.
5. The logical line of action is to secure treaties
between all important armed nations, whether mem-
bers or nonmembers of the League of Nations, for
a peaceful settlement of all future disputes. This
must be followed by simultaneous reduction of ar-
mament as soon as sanctions are provided by an or-
ganised world as a substitute for rival military
forces.
6. As it is always a few powerful people in con-
trol of a system of government who make wars, a
comparatively few can and probably will end war.
The great bulk of the population of the globe, being
illiterate and helpless to shape international policy,
are relatively negligible in this matter. 'War will
end through the action of intelligent, forward-think-
ing people in six or eight influential countries which
create wealth, foreign markets, and armaments.
When these come to see that their prosperity under
LAW OR WAR


modern conditions depends on the abolition of jvar
and war preparations, and that this demands ade-
quate world organisation, the rest of the world will
co-operate in terminating the present war system.
It must be reiterated that it is the “educated” and
“Christian” nations, not illiterates or heathen,
which have wrought most destruction.
7. Nearly all peacemakers abhor the atheism, the
communism, and the coercion of the masses exercised
by the self-denying, sincere fanatics who, for the
time-being, are in power in the land that has made
the wild attempt to bring about a world revolution
in the interests of the proletariat, and have failed.
[There is slight danger of their influence in America
and of its being permanent in Europe outside their
own borders.
8. Almost all peacemakers believe that there
must be a minimum of the police type of 'force
[whether for city, state, nation, or family of nations
under collective control. [What they aim to abolish
is the use of national, rival military force.
’9. Peacemakers reject the imperialist policy
which claims that our “domain” should extend wher-
ever our nationals’ lives and property and interests
are involved.
10. American peacemakers are alarmed at the
naive conceit and presumption with which we are
increasingly regarding our small neighbours who
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


question our suzerainty. As Professor Moon has
said, our annexation of Porto Rico was a piece of
“pure imperialism.” We criticise the imperialistic
ambition of Old World powers and are apparently
unaware that we have already adopted their own
policies. Peacemakers know that facilis descensus
Averni. We are in danger not only of continuing
the present suspicion and resentment of certain
parts of Latin-America but of adopting a policy that
will make it permanent and detrimental to all our
interests. We perceive how easily unthinking citi-
zens are hoodwinked by the unchallenged assertion
that “The Calles fetish of Mexico for the Mexicans,
imperils a hegemony essential to Pan-American
unity and economic solidarity. The plain fact is
that our disinterested (sic) sponsorship for Latin-
America was never more precarious than now.” *
11. Peacemakers perceive that the psychology of
our nations is undergoing rapid transformation, and
leading us complacently to act on the principle that
whatever our political procedure w;e are morally
right, and that our will must be law. While inter-
ference with turbulent and backward peoples may
sometimes be justified, this should never be done but
by collective action. Disinterested states should be
asked to co-operate in an extreme emergency if inter-
ference for police purposes is called for. Only so
♦ Marcosson in the Saturday Evening Post, February, 1927.
LAW OR WAR


can there be any confidence in claims that the in-
terference is for righteous purposes. Most peace-
makers deprecate our delay and indefinite postpone-
ment of fulfilment of the promise in the Jones Act
to grant independence to the Filipinos as soon as
they achieved “a stable government.” Filipinos
are as competent as Abyssinians or Liberians of
self-government and assumption of international
obligations as members of the League of Nations, in
which they would have due protection from aggres-
sion. Peacemakers all recognise the insidious
growth of the spirit of intolerance, and the increased
reliance on force accompanied by vociferous asser-
tions that we can never become a militaristic people.
12. Nearly all peacemakers desire the entrance
of the United States into the World Court and the
League of Nations, under whatever conditions this
can be brought about satisfactorily to our govern-
ment and the League. Until our entrance they urge
all possible co-operation with the League, and Con-
gressional action to ensure that we will take no ad-
vantage by permitting supplies of armaments from
our country to a nation that is recognised by the
League as an “aggressor nation”; or at least that we
will deny protection to our nationals who dare to
do so.
13. Peacemakers rejoice to see that in our new
treaties the old reservation of matters of vital inter-
[VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


est and honour is withdrawn. They all believe in
our signing all-inclusive arbitration treaties pledg-
ing some form of peaceful settlement regarding all
disputes. Senator Kellogg’s proposal, following the
initial offer of M. Briand in April, 1927, for a
treaty which should renounce war as the future
policy between France and the United States, was
for an extension of this idea in multilateral treaties.
These are now being considered, and thus far fa-
vourably by the British government and the British
Commonwealth of Nations, France, Italy, Japan,
and are open to other nations to sign. If carried out
and ratified by two-thirds of the United States Sen-
ate, this event would be epochal in history. It would
be the beginning of constructive measures leading to
further treaties providing methods of settling vari-
ous types of disputes. This achievement would
logically prevent any renewal of the preposterous
naval building programme presented to Congress
in ,1928. This was reduced by the House of Repre-
sentatives from seventy-one naval vessels to sixteen,
owing to the unprecedented protests which poured
in from all over the country. Forty-three nations
have already signed pacific treaties of an all-in-
clusive character, and as yet we have not one. Even
without ever entering the League of Nations we
could thus attain security, and remove ourselves
LAW OR WAR


from being the object of fear on the part of certain
other nations.
A cardinal limitation of those who lay chief stress
on the military side is their failure to look at the
family of nations as a whole, and their thought of
sovereignty as pertaining to their nations alone.
What is needed is a clear view of the gradations of
sovereignty, and of true and false patriotism.
VIEWPOINTS OF MILITARISTS AND PEACEMAKERS


CHAPTER IX
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES
“I care not who makes the laws of a country, if I
may write its songs,” is the oft-quoted dictum of one
who knew the relation of cause and effect in history.
It was a music hall ditty,
We don’t want to fight,
But, by jingo, if we do,
We’ve got the ships,
We’ve got the men,
We’ve got the money, too,
which a generation ago inflamed the English people
and had tremendous weight in creating war senti-
ment. It is matter for consideration whether chil-
dren throughout our land are to be taught that “con-
quer we must, when our cause it is just.” It would
seem much like a survival of the mediaeval supersti-
tion that the victim thrown into the river who could
float was not guilty, and that Elsa’s innocence could
be proved by the valiant sword of Lohengrin. War
is but a gigantic duel ; the stronger and more skilful
wins, regardless of justice. We won the Mexican


War, not because we were right, but because we
were strong, as the Assyrians conquered the Jews
for the same reason. Success is almost always
on the side of “the heaviest battalions” in any war.
Children who grow up with the ingrained notion
that their country must always be right and, there-
fore, always successful, become the zealots and hot-
heads who foment other wars.
“The Star Spangled Banner” has been selected by
the army and navy as the national anthem, and a
thoughtless public seems to assume that this is con-
clusive and the question is not to be reopened. So
jealous are certain persons for the pre-eminence of
this particular song, that one almost runs the risk
of being called unpatriotic if he is heretical enough
to question it. But the decision of the small body
of army and navy officials, though somewhat in-
fluential in shaping public opinion, can settle noth-
ing. The rulers of the republic, the people, must
decide whether this song, written for a special time
and place in the War of 1812, is to be their chief ex-
pression of national faith. “The Star Spangled
Banner” is far from being great poetry, and it is
vocally difficult —the people cannot sing it. These
two defects should prevent its adoption as the na-
tional song. But it is also unsuited to many hours
and places. At sunset, when the flag is lowered, is
it not rather absurd to ask, “O, say, can you see by
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


the dawn’s early light” 1 ? The song deals with one
incident, and that a war incident. “The perilous
night” was one special and comparatively unim-
portant night in our history. Whatever is special
or local or refers to facts not generally known, is
not suited for a national anthem, to be learned by
heart, to be sung by millions of all classes, to shape
the national ideals of a powerful people. As during
our whole history we have been at war with for-
eigners less than one-tenth of the time, war should
not be the sole topic referred to in our chief national
anthem.
“My country,” “sweet land of liberty,” “free-
dom’s holy light,” “our father’s God” are nobler
and more universal themes than “the rocket’s red
glare, the bombs bursting in air.” To-day, “Amer-
ica” is undeniably the American people’s dearest
national hymn as the “Battle Hymn of the Repub-
lic” is the most inspiring and poetic in its verse, and
Eichberg’s “To thee, O Country,” presents the
noblest music; while “America, the Beautiful” is
the most comprehensive and is growing daily in
favour. Why should not the army respect the feel-
ing of the people, rather than the people obey the
behest of a few army officers? Let “The Star-
spangled Banner” be retained in the repertoire of
military bands, and be sung sometimes with various
other national songs, like “Hail, Columbia”; but let
LAW OR WAR


the great body of civic patriots of our land choose as
the national anthem a song which, like “America”
or “America, the Beautiful,” does not ignore the in-
terests, life, and faith of a great Christian people.
That “America” is sung to a tune of German origin,
which is also used as the national air of our “kin
beyond sea,” and by the Swiss as well, does not con-
demn it, but rather gives an honourable historic an-
cestry for the national anthem of a great cosmo-
politan people like our own. One of the most thrill-
ing experiences of many sea voyages has been the
rising at the close of the ship’s concert and singing
that air, common to both countries, each passenger
singing the words of his own land. National an-
thems cannot be written to order: they must evolve.
We may be long in finding the ideal one; England
has not yet found hers. But let no silly shame be-
cause of the present doubt as to what our chief an-
them shall be, hasten us to accept an unrepresenta-
tive and inadequate one.
The exaggerated attention given to the symbol
of our country, so noticeable in the last few years,
is in keeping with the exaggerated attention to all
that is external and spectacular in modern life. The
most sacred symbols of religion have in times past
become such fetishes that for a time all who loved
the thought for which they stood more than the
symbols, have discarded them. There is danger of a
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


Puritan revolution sometime against patriotic sym-
bols, if the symbol is allowed to become a fetish,
and the real thing for which it stands is overshad-
owed by it.
An illustration of the extreme attention to a sym-
bol was shown in the action of a certain society of
“patriotic” women some years ago on the occasion
of the arrest of a poor foreigner who had carried
some potatoes in a flag and was obliged to pay a
large share of his week’s wages as a fine for his act,
which, in his ignorance of the law, had seemed to
him so innocent. The heroism of the policeman who
had performed the brave deed of arrest they thought
worthy to be honoured, and accordingly they ar-
ranged the presentation of a cup and flag, with an
accompanying eulogy, as if he had risked his life
in capturing a thug.
In a certain Patriotic Primer, in a long catechism
for children upon the flag, we find the pupils called
to state in answer to questions that the flag must be
of “all wool bunting or silk.” “The union must be
one-third the length of the flag, extending to the
bottom of the fourth red stripe.” “The flag was
first raised over Fort Stanwix, on the present site of
the city of Rome, N. Y., August 2, 1777. The first
salute ever given to it in a foreign country was on
February 14, 1778. There were sixty-four designs
made before the Stars and Stripes were adopted,”
LAW OR WAR


etc. Betsy Ross is frequently mentioned on Flag
Day, and children are taught that the first flag was
made out of a soldier’s white shirt, an old blue army
coat, and a red petticoat. It is well enough to record
these facts, but they are not important, not the kind
of facts to emphasise. Is there not danger, in pa-
triotism as well as in religion, of tithing mint and
anise and cummin, and forgetting to emphasise the
weightier matters? In the 1924 manual for immi-
grants of the National Society of the Daughters of
the American Revolution, nine pages out of forty-
one of original matter are devoted to the symbol
of our country.
On Flag Day let the teacher discuss symbols in
general and Aristotle’s definition of man as a “sym-
bol-making animal.” Not only the wedding ring,
the communion cup, the cross, the star and crescent,
the Freemason’s symbols, the bush before the inn,
the barber’s pole, the pawnbroker’s gold balls, the
dove, the olive leaf, and the scales of justice might
be used as illustrations, but it should be shown that
every car ticket and banknote and every word or
figure is a symbol, as it stands for an idea. The flags
of other countries should be mentioned, and the
pupils’ attention called to the fact that Norway,
France, and several other countries besides ours have
flags of red, white, and blue. Richard Le Gal-
lienne’s stirring poem on “War” well brings out the
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


power of symbols and music, the soullessness often
behind them, and the need of penetrating to their
easy deceits.
War
I abhor;
And yet how sweet
L The sound along the marching street
Of drum and fife, and I forget
Broken old mothers, and the whole
Dark butchering without a soul.
Without a soul —save this bright treat
Of heady music, sweet as hell;
And even my peace-abiding feet
Go marching with the marching street,
For yonder goes the fife,
And what care I for human Life;
The tears fill my astonished eyes,
And my full heart is like to break,
And yet it is embannered lies,
A dream those drummers make.
Oh, it is wickedness to clothe
Yon hideous, grinning thing that stalks
Hidden in music, like a queen
That in a garden of glory walks,
Till good men love the things they loathe;
Art, thou hast many infamies,
But not an infamy like this.
There are in the United States to-day scores of
thousands of American citizens of privileged birth,
LAW OR WAR


descendants of the early founders of our country and
of those who fought for its independence, who have
joined societies which pass under the common title
of “Patriotic.” The members are not wholly re-
sponsible for the general title given by the public,
as their avowed purpose is to concern themselves
peculiarly with the reminiscent aspects of patriotism
and to honour worthy ancestors. Their study has
been valuable in preserving colonial relics and tra-
ditions, in instituting antiquarian research, and in
bringing about greater reverence than we otherwise
might have for the farmer and artisan who left the
plough and shop in ’76 to fight for independence.
Had one the genial wit of Howells, one might ven-
ture to discuss some of the results of patriotic ac-
tivity in these organisations without giving offence.
But perhaps it is possible for an ordinary descendant
of Revolutionary ancestors to say an earnest word to
her compatriots that may be helpful and suggestive,
and not be deemed impertinent or unfriendly. If
the Father of his country were to address to-day the
descendants of his old comrades of the days that
tried men’s souls, what would he say? Doubtless
he would congratulate these men and women as be-
longing to a small class of the most privileged peo-
ple who have ever lived, and he would perhaps con-
trast the limitations of the women of his time with
the large leisure of many of these women of to-day.
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


Perhaps he might point out that the test of culture
and character is the use of leisure. Great organisa-
tions of these men and women, privileged by birth,
tradition, culture, and large freedom in the disposal
of their time, are now being tested as to their patri-
otism; and might he not inquire whether many out-
side their organisations are not showing far more
willingness to serve their country than those whose
credentials admit them to these honoured bodies
whose power for patriotic work is unrivalled?
What would the heroes of ’76 who fought with
Washington be doing to serve their country were
they alive in this year, when lynchings and mur-
ders and corruption in high places, when grow-
ing imperialism and militarism are belying the
promise of our past, and to the south of us
neighbours look on us with fear and disrespect?
As women are the buyers and educators, they set the
standard of living and the ideals of the child. They
largely control the standards of amusements. They
can practically control race prejudice and the tend-
ency to a caste system, which always conduce to
special privilege and militarism. We need women
with a patriotism which is equal to sacrificing bridge-
whist parties in order to teach little immigrant citi-
zens, not colonial history, which they can learn at
school, but the best American standards of whole-
some living. We need debutantes with a patriotism
LAW OR WAR


which is equal to some sacrifice of the parties and
pleasure of the privileged for the help of the masses
whose poverty, or ignorance, or disease menaces the
republic. We need women of leisure who will bring
to the busy men who earn their bread something of
the vision and wide outlook over national problems
which their clubs and reading ought to furnish.
Probably the best patriotic work among women’s
organisations to-day is being done by those which
are not labelled “patriotic.” Whoever works against
child labour and for conservation, education, and
good citizenship is doing the highest form of patri-
otic service. A patriotism which will sacrifice as
much for concrete countrymen as for an abstract
idea called country is too rare among professional
patriots. With a population in this country one-
third of foreign parentage, and largely unacquainted
with our literature, traditions, and political prin-
ciples, it would seem as if the prime duty of patriots
to-day was to enlighten these newcomers and lend a
helping hand, with care not to patronise those who
are counted as genuinely citizens as ourselves. Some
organisations of patriotic women in Connecticut, by
publishing common-sense advice to immigrants in
their own language, have suggested a line of work
which more might follow. What does the average
Slav or Greek in Lowell mills or the Italian or Rus-
sian Jew in Chicago slums most need to make him
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


an American patriot? Is it stereopticon lectures on
the battles of the Brandywine or Bennington, some-
times provided from “the chapter’s” funds? Is it
not, first of all, that personal friendliness which can
alone bridge the chasm which yawns between culture
and ignorance, between privilege and privation?
Is it not that spirit of democracy .which goes an
arrow’s flight above noblesse oblige and welcomes as
potential bringers of gifts these toilers from the
lands of Socrates, Dante, and Tolstoi?
Granted, as of course we all do, that the work of
reminiscent patriotism has a proper place, are not
our “sons” and “daughters” and “dames” too often
in danger of overdoing this side of the matter?
Memorials to the Revolutionary heroes are admi-
rable when wrought in bronze or marble, but they
have just as much to do with patriotism, and no
more, as statues of the apostles have to do with re-
ligion. Let us erect them, let us have parliamentary
law niceties and bunting; let us have genealogies and
epitaphs, let us present loving-cups, and listen to
recitations and eulogies and violin solos, and eat
pink ices, and have exhibitions of Colonial samplers
and pewter mugs; let us cultivate antiquarianism,
genealogical research, and social intercourse; but, in
the name of the forefathers who made real sacri-
fices for the country they loved, let us not call our-
selves “patriots” unless we add to these harmless and
LAW OR WAR


agreeable functions somewhat more definite, serious
work in service, in doing what these men would do
were they here to-day and were they confronting the
insidious and terrible dangers of prosperity and
wealth as nobly as they once confronted poverty and
obloquy.
Just as the Church has awakened to perceive that
it must have a forward movement and present a new
and larger conception of Christianity, if it is still to
nourish the great mass of common folk, so those of
English blood who cherish the principles of the
founders of the republic must awake to see that, un-
less a red-blooded, twentieth-century patriotism
Which demands present courage and sacrifice be
better understood by all our “patriots,” these prin-
ciples may be unconsciously and ignorantly repudi-
ated by the next generation of a population which
marks our country as the melting pot of nations.
[There is one new aspect of the “patriotic” organi-
sations which unhappily is growing more prominent
and is deplorable. It has been well portrayed by a
patriot whose ancestors came with those who settled
Boston, whose own grandfather as a boy carried a
powder-horn at Lexington and whose years have
been devoted to carrying out the principles of the
Founders. He has thus written of them:
“Why do the members of the various ‘Patriotic
Societies, ’ the various sons, daughters, dames, de-
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


scendants, almost invariably appear on the conserv-
ative side of public questions and frequently as per-
secutors, and reactionists? It is a strange outcome
for people organised to perpetuate the memory of,
the great radicals and revolutionists of our history.
It would be difficult to recall any evidence of these
societies and the newer ones that have sprung up
since the war, and which claim peculiarly the title
of ‘patriotic/ ever expressing interest in any method
of preparedness except that connected with muni-
tions and military training. Their suspicion of those
who look on the agreement which has kept the
peace between us and Canada for over a century as
being the truest preparedness; the readiness with
which their leaders credulously accept and circulate
disparaging reports of those who like Jane Addams
are trying to substitute law for war, has been in de-
fiance of the spirit of the founders of the Republic.
Doubtless the great body of members of the socie-
ties which are based upon heredity may deplore the
extreme and denunciatory attitude of their leaders,
who have tried to suppress free speech and slan-
dered as ‘bolshevists’ and ‘reds’ persons whom some
military man has told them to beware of. But if
so, the rank and file have been dumb and have al-
lowed the talkative and splenetic to slander other
people without protest. ‘Patriots’ who would look
with horror at stealing a purse, steal other people’s
LAW OR WAR


reputation with a chuckle. They have assumed that
those who wish to do away with ‘special privilege’
want to abolish private property and must be com-
munists ; that whoever has urged our recognition of
Russia must approve the fanaticism and injustice of
the Soviet government; that if one member of a
society has said wild foolish things, every member
must be held responsible.
“There was held sometime ago in Washington a
great Conference on the Cause and Cure of War.
It was called by nine national women’s organisa-
tions acting unitedly, among them the Women’s
Christian Temperance Union, the League of Women
Voters, the Federation of Women’s Clubs, The
Young Women’s Christian Association, the Women’s
Trade Union League and the Association of Uni-
versity Women, all earnestly concerned in the Peace
cause. There were nearly a thousand people at the
week’s conference with Mrs. Carrie Chapman Catt
as its president and Mrs. Thomas G. Winter, chair-
man of the programme committee. It was a most im-
portant and impressive conference to everybody but
the patriotic organisations. These mustered a hun-
dred women at the New Willard the day after the
conference adjourned to denounce the ‘Catt conven-
tion’ as they called it. The chief speaker was Cap-
tain , formerly of the British Secret Service.
His speech, said the Washington despatch, was ‘a
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


warning against internationalism.’ ‘When I sat
looking at those thousand women,’ said the Captain,
‘I thought is it not possible that these women are
being drugged before their execution? There is a
plan afoot that will mean destruction to the United
States, a force attempting to disarm the United
States, like that which led to Soviet Russia.’
“If these things were exceptional it would be
better to be silent about them, but they are typical
and becoming common and gross. If they provoked
indignation and protest from within they might cure
themselves, but no such protest gets into print . . .
It is not merely the lack of sympathy with the cause
of progress and international friendship, the patience
with snobbery, the superciliousness and veneer which
large-minded men and women in the patriotic socie-
ties have occasion to deplore, but a petty and obtuse
chauvinism. The Boston papers some time ago re-
ported a hearing at the State House on School His-
tories. The opposition of the Knights of Columbus
and Sons of the Revolution to various text-books
of high repute, by Hart, Muzzey and other accom-
plished scholars is noted; and Professor Hart came
in from Harvard to show that it was no more sinful
or dangerous to tell pupils that in their day men
spoke ill of Washington and Jefferson than for them
to learn at home that men spoke ill of Roosevelt and
Wilson. What is the chief trouble? It is the com-
LAW, OR WAR


mon fear that these books do not let the pupils think
badly enough of England. Irish Catholics and blue-
bloods do not usually fraternise, but hatred of red-
coats makes strange bed-fellows. All went well as
long as the Revolution was viewed as a struggle be-
tween a united America of ‘patriots’ and a united
England of tyrants; but it does not go so well when
one-third of our people were not ‘patriots’ and most
of the best English men were on our side.
“It is good to be debtors to the past; but it is
good only as it makes us creditors of the future.
One of Napoleon’s young marshals, who had risen
quickly from the ranks, was so snubbed in the ‘good
society’ which took him up—scions of the faded
aristocracy of the old regime—that in a moment of
flashing resentment at dinner, he shivered his glass
on the table and exclaimed, ‘Gentlemen, I would
have you understand that you are simply descend-
ants, lam an ancestor.’ The main thing for all of
us blue-bloods, red-bloods, descendants, and other
[folks is somehow to become ancestors of something
that this struggling world waits and prays for.
These people who revile ‘radicals,’ that is, men like
[William Brewster, Roger Williams, Thomas Jeffer-
son, and Charles Sumner, never revile reactionaries.
,The tongues so glib against ‘pacifists’ never deviate
into talk of ‘militarists’; against peace people, never
against war people.
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


“We do not want too many celebrations of the
Mayflower men and the men of 1776 by men who
do not know their spirit; who, had they lived in Eng-
land in the time of the Pilgrims, would have said
‘they got what they deserved’ when they were har-
ried out; who in the Boston of Sam Adams would
have counted the ‘father of the Revolution’ a ring
leader of demagogues and the consort of hoodlums;
and when Garrison and Phillips were the victims of
‘mobs’ of gentlemen would have white-washed the
mob.
“It is a shocking thing to the man who knows our
history, who know the principles and prophecies of
the founders of the Republic and the price they paid,
to see great bodies of men and women . . . con-
struing their office pettily, according to the letter,
not according to the spirit. I would not be misun-
derstood. I revere history and our great past; I
value genealogy; memorials are sacraments and pro-
vincialism is precious. But heraldry and monu-
ments are not the principal thing, and the mind that
makes them so is not robust. . . . There is no vir-
tue in being slaves of a ‘legendary virtue carved
upon our fathers’ graves.’ Elijah prayed that God
would take away his life because he was not ‘better
than his fathers.’ If, with all the light and training,
to-day is not better than yesterday, then it is not so
good.
LAW OR WAR


“The great cause here in 1776 was the independ-
ence of America and then the union of the states.
The great cause of 1861 was the saving of the Union
and the ending of slavery. The great cause to-day
is the ending of war, and the peace of the world.
Washington was called to organise a nation. We
are called on to organise the family of nations; and
the choice between the darkness and the light on that
supreme issue will determine the place of every man
of us in history.”
To save our bodies from disease we must study the
construction of the body and its management. To
save the world from destruction we must study the
structure of the body politic. It behooves not only
legislators, but every patriotic citizen, to know some-
what of such technical matters as courts and treaties
and the technique of world organisation.
PATRIOTIC SONGS, SYMBOLS, AND SOCIETIES


CHAPTER X
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND
CONFERENCES
Hugo Grotius said, in his great work, “The Rights
of War and Peace”: “It will be useful and almost
necessary, that certain congresses of Christian pow-
ers should be held in which controversies which arise
among some of them may be decided by others who
are not interested, and in which measures may be
taken to compel the parties to acceptance on equi-
table terms.” Our Ambassador, Andrew D. White,
said: “The germ of arbitration was planted in mod-
ern thought when Grotius in his T)e Jure Belli Ac
Pads’ urged arbitration and mediation as prevent-
ing war and wrote these solemn words, ‘especially
are Christian kings and statesmen bound to try this
way of avoiding war.’ Of all works not claiming
divine inspiration that book, by a man proscribed
and hated both for his politics and his religion, has
proved the greatest blessing to mankind: more than
any other it has prevented unmerited suffering, mis-
ery, and sorrow.”
The first practical project for arbitration in


America was framed by Samuel Adams for the
Legislature of Massachusetts as instruction to its
delegates in Congress:
“You are hereby instructed and urged to move in
Congress assembled to take into their deep consid-
eration, whether any measures can by them be used
that national differences may be settled and deter-
mined without the necessity of war,” One great
glory of Washington’s administration was the Jay
treaty out of which came several arbitrations. No
one was satisfied with the treaty, but Washington
said it was our business to accept it as negotiated
by Chief Justice Jay.
From the time when John Jay put an arbitration
clause into our treaty with England in 1794, there
were until 1904, 540 arbitrations between different
nations.* The most notable as concerns ourselves
was the settlement of the Alabama case between
the United States and England, in consequence of
which England paid us damages for the destruction
wrought by the ship Alabama built in England
which ravaged our Union shipping during the Civil
War. This outcome of the arbitration made a tre-
mendous impression throughout the world.
In 1897 a treaty of arbitration arranged between
the United States under President Cleveland and
Great Britain, was defeated by a minority of the
♦ln 1928 there are in force 319 bilateral pacific settlement
treaties.
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


Senate. A few Senators whose combined constitu-
ents amounted in number to less than the population
of Chicago succeeded in preventing the necessary
two-thirds vote, thereby thwarting the will of the
people of two nations. Extraneous questions like
those of Home Rule, which agitated the Irish ele-
ment in America, helped toward the defeat which
was a world calamity. Had we ratified this treaty,
for which nearly 1,30x3,000 petitioned Parliament,
the results would have been far-reaching. The
minority report in our Senate illustrates the ex-
tremes to which false patriotism, conceit, and folly
can carry men who have grave responsibility for
the lives of men. It says: “We will be purblind if
we relax our attitude and accept a paper guarantee
of peace in place of the moral and military forces
that are the supreme elements of strength in our
splendid Republic. . . . Treaties are essentially
temporary expedients, and in fact seem made to be
broken, as fortresses are said to be made to be taken;
and it is a question whether an open field and the
chance of a fair fight are not the best protection to
a peace-loving nation, both in war and in diplo-
macy.”
In August, 1898, like a bolt from the blue, came
the Czar’s rescript calling a conference of the twenty-
six nations having ambassadors at his court to con-
sider the limitation of armaments. The call was
LAW OR WAR


received with coldness and scepticism in many
quarters. “The Czar’s proposal for disarmament
goes against nature and against civilisation; this
alone condemns it,” wrote one German editor. “The
Czar’s advocacy of peace is perhaps a stimulus to
war,” wrote another. “Disarmament would make
wars more frequent,” wrote Dr. E. von Hartmann.,
“Peace will never be better assured than by a thor-
oughly drilled army ready for instant service,” quoth
the Kaiser a month later. But in England there was
hope, and, week by week, a new journal entitled
War Against War, edited by William T. Stead,
went broadcast through the English-speaking world,
showing in each number a map covered with black
dots marking the English towns where peace meet-
ings had in the previous week been held. Argu-
ments, statistics, and illustrations from Jean de
Bloch’s powerful new work were cited to show the
great opportunity about to be opened to civilisation
at The Hague.
The little neutral country of Holland was selected
as presenting the best kind of meeting-place for such
diverse elements, and the offer of the Queen’s
“House in the Wood” as a place of assembly was
accepted. On the Czar’s birthday. May 18, 1899,
one hundred appointed delegates with their attaches
held a brief first session in the circular hall, deco-
rated on all sides by great frescoes of war and peace;
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


by courtesy, Baroness von Suttner, whose book
“Down with ,Your Arms” had had wide influence,
was the sole lady admitted. Ambassador de Staal
of Russia was elected president ; and thereafter, with
the press excluded, the work was carried on behind
closed doors. De Bloch, of Russia, the great author-
ity on militarism, arrived, presented his “Future of
War” in six volumes to each delegate, gave dinners,
and lectured with stereopticon on the futility of
modern war. Peace workers from every land assem-
bled and shared in the tense excitement as, bit by
bit, the news of progress leaked out from behind the
closed doors. Mr. Stead, fresh from a visit to the
Czar, was of great service here.
The members of the Conference, meeting for the
most part in scepticism, soon found themselves under
the inspiration of Lord Pauncefote, our Ambassador
Andrew D. White, Bourgeois of France, Nigra of
Italy, and a few others, men of courage and vision,
.working diligently in three committees from morn-
ing to night, forming friendships as they lunched
together and together attended social functions. At
one period during the Conference German indiffer-
ence and even hostility seemed about to wreck it.
In this exigency, Dr. White commissioned Frederick
W. Holls of our American delegation, a prominent
member of the New L York bar, to carry a letter to
Minister yon Biilow. In this letter he made a noble
LAW OR WAR


and powerful plea for the principle of arbitration
and showed what wrong the Kaiser’s ministers
would do if they; should permit him, a “ruler of such
noble ambitions and admirable powers,” to draw;
upon himself the resentment of the world through
frustrating progress at the Conference. Mr. Holls
carried with him manifold evidences of American
enthusiasm for arbitration—among others a cable
message from thirty-one Baptist clergymen in Ore-
gon and a prayer written by the Bishop of the Epis-
copal Church in Texas, to be used every Sunday
during the session of the Conference. Chancellor
Hohenlohe, though a Roman Catholic, was espe-
cially affected by reading a copy of this prayer. The
letter of Mr. White was presented to the Kaiser
with friendly recommendations from these states-
men; and Count Munster, head of the German dele-
gation, had sent Dr. Zorn to Berlin on a similar
mission; indifference gave way to co-operation and
hostility ceased.
The diaries of Dr. White and the Baroness von
Suttner reflect vividly the stress and strain of the
momentous experience until, after necessary com-
promises and the reservation by the Americans that
nothing agreed to involved any abandonment of the
traditional attitude of the United States towards
questions purely American, the conventions at last
were signed and sealed. The problem proposed by
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


the Czar of lessening the burden of armaments had
not been solved, but a logical precedent condition
for the reduction of armaments had been decreed.
The Permanent Court of International Arbitration,
with a panel of judges appointed by the signa-
tory powers, was now assured. More had been ac-
complished for world organisation in three months
than in the previous three centuries. Mankind
entered the new century with the rational hope that,
ere it ended, duels between nations would be as
obsolete as are to-day duels between men in all Eng-
lish-speaking countries.
After the ratification of the conventions and the
opening at The Hague, in April, 1901, of the man-
sion which was to be the temporary headquarters of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration, scepticism
again prevailed. “You have got your court, but no
one has used it, and no one will use it except for
trifling issues,” was the cry. But in much less time
than it took the Supreme Court of the United States
to receive its first case, that Court having met and
adjourned repeatedly for over two years without
receiving a contested case, President Roosevelt, act-
ing on the suggestion of Baron d’Estournelles de
Constant, then on a visit to the United States, ar-
ranged with President Diaz to send to the Tribunal
a long-standing case, involving money, known as
LAW OR WAR


the “Pious Fund Case.” According to the Hague
Convention each country selected two judges from
the large panel of judges and these four selected a
fifth to try the case. This was soon settled in favour
of the United States.
President Roosevelt in sending the first case to
the Hague Tribunal, a small case, did it without
much reference to the Senate, After France and
Great Britain had signed an arbitration treaty in
1904, Secretary John Hay attempted to negotiate
treaties in 1905 which, in the words of President
Roosevelt, “should be with all powers which are
willing to enter into treaties with us.” Following
the proviso of the Anglo-French treaty of 1903 ex-
ception was made of matters of vital interest and
national honour. The compromise which is a purely
technical matter and belongs to the routine business
of the Department of State which knows far more
than the Foreign Relations committee, was a matter
of suspicion on the part of the Senate; the latter de-
veloped the idea that the compromis must receive
the advice and consent of the Senate. Despite the
opposition of President Roosevelt and Secretary
Hay, the Senate had its way, and the treaty was de-
feated. Elihu Root, following Secretary Hay
in the State Department, negotiated twenty-five
treaties three years later with the hampering condi-
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


tions demanded by the Senate. These were mostly
for a five-year period. All were renewed once and
a dozen are still in force.
In 1911, President Taft secured the acceptance by
Great Britain and France of arbitration treaties, and
he practically went on the stump to secure popular
approval. He declared: “We cannot make omelets
without breaking eggs; we cannot submit interna-
tional questions to arbitration without the prospect
of losing ... lam willing to abide an adverse
decision in a court of arbitration for my own coun-
try, even though it may impose a serious loss upon
her, if the system of arbitration is to be made per-
manent and the court is of such a character that when
I have a just cause I can count on receiving a just
judgment. If we are going into the arbitration game
we must take our hard knocks with equanimity as
we expect others to take theirs, with the knowledge
that the disadvantages that may accrue to each party
can never equal the horrible losses of war.” The
extraordinary outburst of enthusiasm with which
the proposal for the treaty ;was hailed in Great
Britain revealed the immense interest taken by the
highest dignitaries of Church and State as well as by
the rank and file of Englishmen in prospect of a
noble culmination to the hundred years of peace be-
tween Great Britain and the United States. A cam-
paign of six months was begun in the United States
LAW OR WAR


on the report of the Foreign Relations Committee of
the Senate which raised technical objections and
would have emasculated the treaties. Never was
the Senate so besieged by petitions and letters from
boards of trade, churches, and all kinds of organisa-
tions in favour of these treaties. Germany seemed
ready to sign a similar treaty, and it was evident that
if these treaties were accepted without amendment
it would probably be possible to secure similar ones
within ten years with many other nations. By the
casting of one vote, the treaties were weakened in
dignity and proper form. The result was due to a
division on party lines. Had not partisanship been
rife, owing to high feeling incident to a presidential
election, this second calamity might have been
avoided. It is well for voters to realise the diffi-
culties of our State Department in dealing with the
Senate on international affairs, about which some
of the Senators are always inexperienced and sus-
picious. The election of one prejudiced and unfit
person may profoundly affect the future of our own
and other countries, as our Constitution makes it
possible for thirty-three men in the Senate to thwart
the will of sixty-three Senators and, incidentally, the
will of the American people.
In 1913 Secretary Bryan submitted a proposal
to thirty-six nations which asked that disputed facts
be submitted to impartial inquiry before nations
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


went to war. All accepted it in principle. Thirty
treaties were negotiated to continue in force until
notice of an intention to terminate it had been given.
An important feature of the treaties is that the five
members of the commissions to investigate should be
chosen at the start and thus obviate delay when an
issue arose.. Twenty-one of these treaties are now
in force; their chief value is that they may modify
the attitude of governments in the daily differences
that arise between them. The other nine treaties
were not ratified. No offer of such a treaty was
made to Japan. Colonel House broached the sub-
ject to the Kaiser who replied in flamboyant fashion,
although his government had accepted such a treaty
in principle. In September, 1914, negotiations were
offered, but at that time the German government
;was busy .with other matters. Had that treaty been
signed we might have had to wait a year in 1917
'for investigation before entering the war, and the
history of the future would probably have recorded
a negotiated treaty between the Allies and Germany
before the debacle at Caporetto that summer of
The first treaty after the war, covering the arbi-
tration of all disputes, was signed by the Moslem
states of Afghanistan and Persia. This says that
they “have decided to submit to arbitration all the
difficulties arising between the two countries and
LAW OR WAR


undertake loyally to carry out the decisions of the
arbitrators.” This was signed in 1921. From
1828-1926 there were [no bipartite arbitration
treaties, pledging the pacific settlement of all dis-
putes, signed between different nations, some of
whom are the larger powers. The United States
has never signed such a treaty. France has five such
treaties with other nations and, as has been said,
offered such a treaty to the United States in 1927.
To this brief glance at the general course of arbi-
tration may be added a still briefer one regarding
what has been accomplished in Latin America. It
is to Simon Bolivar, the Washington of South Amer-
ica, that five nations owe their freedom from the
thralldom of Spain. A statesman of the broadest
views, in the second decade of the last century he
arranged five treaties with as many nations in which
there was provision for arbitration of differences
arising between them. He called the first Pan-
American Peace Congress in 1826, at which the four
nations that attended pledged themselves to “ami-
cably compromise all differences now existing or
which may arise in the future.” Though these
pledges were not ratified, their influence was later
evident in the many treaties which provided for ar-
bitration. In the constitution of Brazil it is decreed
that no territory shall ever be taken by conquest.
In 1900 Chile and Argentina were on the point of
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


war over a boundary line. On an Easter Sunday a
good bishop of Argentina pleaded with his people
not to disgrace their common religion and common
blood by fratricidal war. A Chilian bishop followed
his example and they travelled through their respec-
tive countries imploring arbitration instead of war.
Better counsels prevailed. The question was sub-
mitted to the King of England and the decision was
rendered in 1902, but before its announcement agree-
ment had been made for limitation of armaments.
In 1903 Argentina and Chile signed the first arbitra-
tion treaty that covered all cases. A colossal statue
of the Christ was taken up 13,000 feet, beyond the
highest point where the railroads crossed the Andes,
and there, on a lofty pedestal, was unveiled before
thousands who had made the ascent to witness the
moving spectacle. Beneath the outstretched hand
extended over the borderline, where might have
stood frowning fortresses, were read these words:
“Sooner shall these mountains crumble into dust,
than Argentines and Chilians break the peace to
which they have pledged themselves at the feet of
Christ, the Redeemer.”
This short survey records only a part of the work
that for a century has begun to show that war is a
product of confused thinking and impetuous action,
and that its extinction involves no change of human
nature, but merely complete arbitration treaties and
LAW OR WAR


their observance. It is a fact of extraordinary his-
toric interest that in no instance has a nation that
pledged itself to arbitrate broken its pledge and
gone to war. In one instance there was a compro-
mise, and, in another, mediation prevented war.
If nothing more had been accomplished that cold,
wet summer at The Hague than four months’ pa-
tient, courteous discussion of the delicate and diffi-
cult questions involved, by the weary men who met
daily and did their work under great difficulties of
language, it would have been richly worth while.
At the second Hague Conference, in 1907, plenary
sessions were open to the representatives of the press
and to others fortunate enough to secure tickets of
admission; but the chief work was done in commit-
tees. Elihu Root, then Secretary of State, directed
our representatives to propose in addition to the
Arbitration Court whose use was optional, a regular
Court of Justice for the nations which should pledge
themselves to its use. The proposal failed for rea-
sons presently to be stated. The first Conference
had crystallised ideas of international law; the
second studied further international problems.
The primary difficulty in regard to setting up a
Court of Justice was the necessity of having few
members. How were these to be elected? No
method could be found that would give the small
states the certainty that they could equal the power-
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


ful states in the selection of judges. The speaker
for Brazil, who was the mouthpiece of the smaller
states, said that his country, whose area was greater
than that of the United States, had then only 26,-
000,000 inhabitants, but in a century it might have
100,000,000, and be more powerful than many of
those governments that were dominant to-day. It
could not sanction any method of choice that did
injustice to the smaller states. In addition to this,
Germany refused to pledge herself to compulsory
use of a Court. Could the matter have been carried
through as it was outlined in the mind of Mr. Root,
the World War could have been prevented.
The Hague Court of Arbitration has been housed
in the Peace Palace at The Hague, the gift of An-
drew Carnegie, embellished by rich donations of
works of art from the member nations of the Confer-
ence. Japan sent marvellous tapestries, Great Brit-
ain provided stained glass, Germany, the iron fence,
etc. The Permanent Court of International Justice,
established by a Statute signed by '53 members of
the League of Nations, opened in 1922 and meets
regularly in the Peace Palace. This Court is largely
the product of the mind of Elihu Root, whose first
proposal in 1907 came to naught but was practically
provided for in the League Covenant as a most de-
sirable measure after the tragedy of war had begun
to teach its lesson. In the summer of ,1920 Mr.
LAW OR WAR


Root was invited to join the jurists appointed by the
League, who met at The Hague and drew up the
Protocol of Signature and the Statute of the Court,
which, with some modifications by the League,
was accepted by them, and the treaty was sent out
to the states for ratification. The judges .were
elected in September, 1921, by the Assembly and
Council of the League voting separately. A very
wise provision of the Statute was that the eleven
judges and four deputy-judges should be nominated
by the panel of judges of the old Hague Court
of Arbitration, as these include many of the ablest
jurists of the world, and thus the little nations
would have equal opportunity with these stronger
ones in selecting the nominees. The jurists on the
panel could have no political ambition or influence.
Nominations are sent to the Assembly of the League
which includes all members and also to the Council,
the small executive body. The term of office is nine
years. Among those sitting in this august body was
America’s eminent jurist, John Bassett Moore, The
fourteen other members come from large and small
nations all over the globe, familiar with different
forms of law. No one represents his own country.
His salary comes from the League, but his loyalty is
given to the Statute. Provision was made for an
“optional” agreement, which has been signed by
about half the 53 signers of the Statute. This
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


pledges them to accept as compulsory the jurisdic-
tion of the Court in certain specified cases. Ger-
many, in 1927, signed the agreement. The signers,
as a whole, were not willing to accept the jurists’
proposal that the Court should be compulsory for all
signers. But gradually as confidence grows, doubt-
less all signatories, and these now include some of
the most important governments, will accept com-
pulsory arbitration. Suspicion was rife at first that
the judges would be influenced in their decisions by
national prejudice or favouritism. This suspicion
has now largely vanished since the judge born in
France, in an issue in which his country was in-
volved, voted against its claim. There is no more
reason for fear that these judges will be influenced
by prejudice in favour of the countries in which they
were born than that our own Supreme Court Justices
will be influenced in favour of the states from which
they come. Who has ever objected that having two
Justices from Massachusetts has militated against
impartial justice?
In 1924 the delegates at Geneva accepted a much
more comprehensive protocol than the Covenant of
the League of Nations. This Geneva Protocol in-
cluded compulsory use of the Court. The basic
thing in this Protocol was the branding of aggressive
war as an international crime. The difficult ques-
tion as to what shall be considered aggression was
LAW OR WAR


settled. Following suggestions from certain emi-
nent Americans, refusal to resort to pacific settlement
in violation of the undertakings contained in the
Covenant and the Protocol, was declared to be ag-
gression. Both sides to a conflict might be consid-
ered aggressors. If the Council could not agree as
to which was the aggressor, it should establish an
armistice. Any nation that broke that or refused
to accept the judgment of the Court, could be de-
clared an aggressor. This simplified the whole prob-
lem, as previously the decision as to which force
first crossed the boundary line or engaged in any-
thing that could generally be accepted as aggression,
involved much delay in investigation and in violent
difference of opinion, each nation always claiming
that it was engaged in defence. The Geneva Proto-
col, which was an amplification of the Covenant,
marked the most advanced proposals ever considered
for world peace. But though signed by the Fifth
Assembly, and arousing much enthusiasm, it has
not yet been ratified by many of the governments
and is not in force. Compulsory arbitration and
other features of the Protocol are certain in time to
be resurrected and adopted. America’s absence from
the League in a measure prevented ratification by
the British government.
The Permanent Court of International Justice
(World Court) gives advisory opinions as well as
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


definite verdicts. This question of advisory opin-
ions is deemed of great importance by the members
of the League of Nations as it helps them to see the
bearing of technical and legal points on political
issues in question, and enables them in advance to
avoid mistakes. For years, many Americans who
were not ready for the entrance of the United States
into the League, were desirous of its entering the
Court as this was a comparatively slight step toward
co-operation. Entrance would not pledge us ever
to send an issue to the Court, unless we signed the
optional clause to do so. On the other hand, non-
members can resort to it even though they do not
sign the Statute. But our entrance was defeated by
one of the reservations which the Senate finally ap-
pended to its acceptance which was made in January,
;ip26, by a vote of 76 to 17. This whole matter was
under consideration by the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee long before it was submitted to the Sen-
ate, and it was four years after the Court was estab-
lished before our action was taken. The crucial
reservation was part of the fifth and practically de-
manded special privileges. It said: “The Court
shall not without the consent of the United States
entertain any request for an advisory opinion touch-
ing any dispute or question in which the United
States has or claims an interest.”
The Secretary General of the League called to-
LAW OR WAR


gether the delegates from the states signatory to the
Statute of the Court to consider our reservations and
asked that we send a representative to explain it.
This our government declined to do. The delegates
considered the matter for three weeks, with earnest
endeavour to agree on a solution of the difficulty
about advisory opinions without embarrassing the
states already committed to the provisions of the
Statute. They proposed a supplementary agree-
ment which proposal failed to persuade our govern-
ment, and over this slight issue the matter came to
an end to the chagrin of millions of Americans.
Despite the fact that one of the reservations pro-
vided for our withdrawal from the Court “at any
time,” eloquent Senators proclaimed that our en-
trance into the Court would create “entangling al-
liances” and would defy the principles laid down by
Washington and Jefferson, which sophistry was
credulously received by the great multitudes of the
uninformed. The final act of the Conference is now
in the files of the State Department. It would seem
that there is no valid reason why conversations
should not be reopened regarding it.
ARBITRATION, HAGUE COURTS AND CONFERENCES


CHAPTER XI
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
Four years after the League of Nations was estab-
lished, a prominent civic worker in New York had
heard so little of it that he remarked to some one
going to the headquarters of the League, “I suppose
that by this time you have a regular secretary who
remains the year around.” So little did he realise
that at that moment at the Secretariat at Geneva
there were 300 men and women from thirty-four
nationalities, besides the 317 from twenty-eight na-
tionalities in the adjacent International Labor
Bureau, connected with the League. In all, 272
Americans have served in some capacity in the
League’s activities and that of the Labor Bureau.
Among well-known Americans have been Profes-
sor Manley O. Hudson, Bishop Charles H.
Brent, Jeremiah Smith, Jr., Thomas S. Adams,
Roland W. Boyden, Allen W. Dulles, and among
the women: Dr. Alice Hamilton, Julia Lathrop and
Grace Abbott. The 465 persons now in the Secre-
tariat include, besides a large clerical force, econ-
omists, geographers, translators, historians, and ex


perts of various kinds dealing with different depart-
ments of world business in this great clearing-house
of nations. These persons do not represent their
own countries but simply serve the League.
What has the League thus far achieved? The
first years of the League resulted in a large amount
of agreement upon questions of importance that
should have been settled long before, but which for
lack of proper political machinery had not been at-
tended to. These matters being settled, the League
was willing to approach more difficult questions.
The League exists as it declares, “to promote inter-
national co-operation and to achieve international
peace and security.” The Assembly is composed of
three representatives from each of fifty-five nations;
the Executive body, the Council, has one representa-
tive each from five permanent members and nine
non-permanent; the latter are for a term of three
years, one-third of the number coming up for elec-
tion annually. The Council can act only by unani-
mous vote. When matters are considered in the
Council affecting states not members of that body,
the interested state sends a representative. At one
session nine other states had representatives. The
fiftieth session of the Council will occur in the sum-
mer of 1928.
The International Labor Bureau, housed in a ca-
pacious new building near the Secretariat on the
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


shores of Lake Geneva, has great capacity for use-
fulness to all the toilers on the globe. Its allevia-
tion of conditions of labour in India and elsewhere
has been notable. Women and children who have
been beasts of burden and have toiled ten to sixteen
hours a day in factories have cause to bless the Bu-
reau, though its work has only just begun. Of the
139 conferences held since 1920 under the auspices
of the League, the most notable are: The Interna-
tional Financial Conference of 1920 at Brussels; the
Lausanne Conference which dealt with the Turkish
situation and removed the extra-territoriality rights
of the Allies; and the International Opium Confer-
ence held in 1925, which considered suppression
of smoking and limitation of manufacture and pro-
duction. The Locarno Conference of 1925 is closely
linked with League activities, and was an event of
world-wide importance, and practically ensured
peace between nations on both sides of the Rhine.
A preliminary Conference on Disarmament and an
Economic Conference were held in 1927.
The League has established registration of all
treaties made by its members with any nations either
in or out of the League; only registered treaties are
binding; this prevents dangerous secrecy, such as
has so often in the past left nations helpless in the
hands of diplomats, and forced innocent peoples into
a war not of their choosing. Upwards of 1,000
LAW OR WAR


treaties are now registered at the Secretariat and
open to the public.
League members are pledged to pacific settlement
of disputes either by some form of arbitration, con-
ciliation, judicial settlement or reference to the
Council, and no loophole is left for possible use of
force when an aggressor decides to abide by the
verdict and nine months have elapsed after the sub-
mission of the case. Even then, in such a remote
contingency if the aggressor will not yield, use of
military force would not occur until mild, and later
drastic, economic pressure was used. No nation
would dare stand out against the world. 'The
League has settled the following disputes:
1. One between Finland and Sweden concerning
the Aaland Islands which left them under Finnish
sovereignty, neutralised and non-fortified, and with
the Swedish language preserved to the inhabitants.
2. One between Poland and Lithuania, a very
complex and difficult matter, still unsettled but the
League prevented war.
3. A dispute over Upper Silesia, involving rights
of Germans and Poles finally settled in the longest
treaty ever made which provides for the adminis-
tration of Upper Silesia as an economic whole for
fifteen years.
4. Dispute between Jugo-Slavia and Albania,
both members of the League; there was no blood-
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


shed, though Jugo-Slav troops entered Albania dis-
puting the question of boundary line. For such
hasty, improper action Jugo-Slavia found she could
borrow no money from any European bankers, and
she was obliged to withdraw.
5. Settlement of frontier questions involving
Greece, Rumania, Serb-Croat-Slovene State, Aus-
tria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.
6. The outbreak between Italy and Greece, due
to certain Greeks having murdered certain Italian
officials, and the hasty action of Italy in a reprisal
attack on the island of Corfu, in which about twenty
refugee children were killed. The League instantly
called a halt; all small nations were intensely con-
cerned. Italy voluntarily paid 10,000,000 lire to
the families affected; a settlement by the council of
ambassadors in Paris was followed by the payment
of damages by Greece to Italy and the painful epi-
sode which shocked the world ended without war,
largely through energetic action by the League.
7. There has been settlement of the Memel dif-
ficulties; consideration of eastern Carelia which in-
volved Russia; settlement of frontier between
Poland and Czechoslovakia; of the minority ques-
tion in Greece; settlement of the Iraq frontier and
the controversy between Turkey and Great Britain
over the Mosul region in Iraq. This was a serious
and complicated matter, which resulted in a treaty
LAW, OR WAR


between Great Britain and Iraq. Turkey received
a percentage of Mosul oil and some rectification of
her boundary.
8. The League called immediate halt to raids of
Greek troops into Bulgaria in the autumn of 1925
on the appeal of Bulgaria, and at once sent an im-
partial commission to investigate which, on inquiry,
showed Greece to be responsible. She was com-
pelled to pay $224,000 damages, though her treas-
ury could ill afford it.
9. Establishment of the Permanent Court of In-
ternational Justice (World Court) based on a stat-
ute signed thus far by 53 nations. Elihu Root, as
has already been shown, had a large share in the
drawing up of this statute. The Court has had
annual sessions since it was opened in 1922. Besides
ten regular decisions, it has given thirteen advisory
opinions which are of equal consequence. The
League has no more domination over the Court than
our Congress has over our Supreme Court.
10. The League accomplished the financial re-
construction of poverty-stricken Austria and Hun-
gary, with the assistance of American financial ex-
perts and an international loan.
11. Development of deserted Macedonian plains
by aid to 500,000 refugees, who are now by their
labour adding to the wealth of Greece.
12. The League brought back 400,000 starving
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


refugee soldiers from Russia to their respective coun-
tries and to families who had not seen them for four
years.
13. The League has had commissions working on
armaments, private manufacture of them, chemical
and bacteriological warfare, and preliminary ses-
sions have been held for a later Disarmament Con-
ference. The Permanent Mandates Commission
hears reports from mandatory governments over dif-
ferent grades of backward peoples in Asia and
Africa; the Mandatories are obliged to follow di-
rections of the League and are held responsible for
their actions. This plan, however defective, has
prevented confiscation of territory and irresponsible
administration.
14. The League has established commissions and
the holding of conferences on the manufacture and
traffic of opium and other drugs; on Health Organ-
isation, including study of malaria, sleeping sick-
ness, etc. It has established the Far Eastern Epi-
demiological Intelligence Bureau; a commission on
Public Health training; on Quarantine of infected
ships, etc.; committee and conference on White
Slave Traffic; committee on Protection of Children;
committee on Intellectual Co-operation with head-
quarters in Paris. This concerns itself, among other
things, with the instruction of youth in the prin-
ciples of the League. Almost every month in the
LAW OR WAR


year several committees or conferences dealing with
these and other international matters are being held
at Geneva, creating, as nowhere else, an interna-
tional feeling and impartial treatment of interna-
tional issues. Out of such conferences will probably
come, eventually, a common coinage and a common
system of weights and measures.
This brief outline of some of the achievements of
the League leaves the unimaginative, who have
never breathed the League atmosphere and witnessed
the assembling of delegates from the ends of the
earth, incapable of conceiving its significance; he is
like one who had never seen a being of flesh and
blood and had beheld only its skeleton. As well
teach the Constitution of the United States to a
Persian or Siamese who had never been in America,
and expect him to understand its application and the
significance of the land of Jefferson and Lincoln, as
to interest the average American in the League if he
has nothing more than a catalogue of formulas and
facts without a background of history and the power
of sympathetic interpretation.
All unsympathetic and unimaginative minds look
with suspicion on anything which binds them to a
new procedure. Every one recalls that two states
of our original thirteen were so suspicious in 1789
that they at first refused ratification of the Consti-
tution. When Congress first met it had no quorum.
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


Ten amendments were at once added to satisfy the
people. The Supreme Court, likewise under sus-
picion, met and adjourned for two years before it
was trusted with the first contested case.
The League of Nations began under like sus-
picion. M. Clemenceau on being asked some months
before the war ended what he thought of a League
of Nations replied that he could not consider such
a matter. He was a fighter, and a younger genera-
tion must deal with such problems. Even before a
line of the Covenant of the League was written
bitter protests against any League appeared in vari-
ous American newspapers and elsewhere. The first
draft of the Covenant was presented to us by Presi-
dent Wilson in February, 1919, and for three
months this open covenant was subjected to scrutiny.
.Valuable suggestions made by leading Republicans,
Mr. Root, Mr. Taft, Mr. Hughes, were incorpo-
rated and the second draft was much improved.
Never was a covenant more “openly arrived at.”
Yet it is surprising to recall the public ignorance
of the contents of the Covenant in the partisan strug-
gle which followed until the election of 1920. With
the exception of a little discussion about Shantung,
Senators gave slight attention to the complicated
treaties of Versailles, St. Germain, Trianon, etc,,
which had certain drastic, vindictive features which
have provoked bitterness and induced financial dis-
LAW, OR WAR


tress. They concentrated discussion on the Cove-
nant, the most advanced step ever taken to provide
a meeting-place of nations and a clearing house for
international problems.
The primary cause for the failure of the ratifica-
tion was the provision of our Constitution requir-
ing a two-thirds vote of the Senate to ratify a
treaty, though it permits Congress to commit the
country to war by a majority vote. It is important
to remember that a large majority of the Senate de-
sired to ratify the treaty with the Lodge reserva-
tions, and had they done so the people would have
gladly acquiesced. When it came up for reconsid-
eration it was lost by only one vote. Senator New-
bury of Michigan said he thanked God that his one
vote had kept us out of the League. In the Presi-
dential campaign of 1920 orators galore, some of
whom had hardly read the Covenant themselves,
denounced it to audiences in which not one voter
in a hundred had ever read it. Said one able and
honest journalist, “I have a little kid at home and
I don’t want him to have to go to war and that’s
why lam against the League.” “Have you ever
read the Covenant?” he was asked, and he replied,
“No, I never had a copy.” Earnest women besought
women voters to oppose the League since “it meant
more war.” Second-hand interpretations handed
down by partisan propagandists to an uninformed
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


public, and the inflexible attitude of an invalid
President resulted, after long contest, in what many;
now feel to have been a tragic political blunder.
Until 1922 the irreconcilables said; “The League
is dead,” Gradually, as the League has steadily;
been doing admirable work, they have deigned to
recognise its existence. Business men are painfully
realising that Europe’s financial distress affects their
commerce and is even now the cause of much unem-
ployment.
Before the admission of Ireland into the League,
there were loud outcries about Great Britain being
“allowed six votes,” as her constituent elements in
the Commonwealth of Nations each had one vote in
the Assembly, and if we entered we would have one
there. It was assumed that Canada, Australia and
the rest would be a unit and act together under the
dictation of Downing Street. The facts are that
in the Council of the League, which must act unan-
imously except on matters of procedure, the whole
British Empire of 440,000,000 people have had only
one vote,* and the Council is the body which is
executive, while the Assembly chiefly engages in dis-
cussion and votes on only a few matters aside from
the election of judges, and members of the Council.
In the Assembly it is quite fair that Canada, and
♦ln September, 1927, Canada was elected as one of the tem-
porary members of the Council.
LAW OR WAR


other dominions having five to ten million inhabit-
ants, should each have a vote when much smaller
states like Haiti and San Domingo have a voice.
Ireland and other members of the British Dominions
accept no domination from Downing Street and will
stand in less awe of the mother country than Carib-
bean states under our domination would in regard
to us.
A clerical writer, wrathfully critical of the League
for permitting the domination of Great Britain over
her Indian subjects, declared that: “The League
which was organised ostensibly to promote justice
and freedom made itself the guarantor and defender
of the most stupendous example of political injus-
tice and oppression known in our modern day. These
‘Big Four’ nations so framed the League as to make
it an additional chain about the necks of India and
all the rest of their possessions—a chain holding
them in bondage actually more securely than before.
This is what is meant that the League guaranteed
the territorial integrity of the states within it.”
This is a sad misreading of Article X. Should India
revolt, as is possible if she can ever unite her an-
tagonistic and illiterate elements, she will find no
obstacle in the League; no nation in the League
would meddle in the rebellion one way or the other.
A revolt against a suzerain would not be “external
aggression.” The League is not so constituted that
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


it can suppress civil war or internal revolutions. The
wiser heads in Great Britain foresee the necessity of
eventually granting to India all the independence
that she desires. All Asia is demanding freedom
from the thralldom of the white race. It is probable
that when the weak and discordant elements in
India become capable of effective revolt, it may be
accomplished most effectively by the boycott and by
refusal to do military service under the British flag.
If that day comes, the League will make no effort
to maintain British imperialism.
It has sometimes been claimed that over twenty
wars have occurred since the League was founded,
and the inference has been made that the League has
encouraged rather than prevented war. The truth
is that though Poland within the League fought
Russia outside the League, and Greece, in the
League, fought Turkey which is outside it, no nation
in the League has had a war with another member.
The wars that have been fought have been of the
nature of domestic wars or the beginnings of a war
promptly arrested.
The League spends annually about $5,000,000 —
one-third of the cost of one new cruiser! Great
Britain, the largest contributor, pays about $425,000
and Albania pays the least amount —$5,000. Under
the Covenant, war is not yet outlawed. Reliance is
placed chiefly on delay, investigation, and publicity.
LAW OR WAR


Any nation like our own can attain security, whether
in the League or out of it, by negotiating treaties,
as Sweden, Switzerland, and many other nations
have done, pledging the peaceful settlement of all
disputes between itself and certain other states.
A California senator in a tirade against the Cove-
nant of the League once declared, “This League
means that American boys shall police the world;
that Europe, Asia and Africa may draw upon us in
every dispute and quarrel; that our nation may be
at the mercy of European and Japanese diplomats.
It means that we shall guarantee the territorial in-
tegrity of every country on the earth.” This re-
minds one of the men whom Dante declared had
“foregone the good of intellect.” Here was an able
and presumably honest man so blinded by partisan
passion as to conjure up lurid pictures which had no
reality outside his imagination and that of millions
equally uninformed. He referred of course to the
crucial Article X, which has been so grossly misun-
derstood by those who would emasculate the League
and leave it incompetent in the last resort to stop
aggressive war.
Stopping “external aggression” is literally what
this article means when it says: “The members of
the League undertake to respect and preserve as
against external aggression the territorial integrity
and existing political independence of all members
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


of the League. In case of any such aggression, or
in case of any threat or danger of such aggression,
the Council shall advise upon the means by which
this obligation shall be fulfilled.”
This advice is only for an extreme and unlikely
contingency. Long before it could be used, two
things would happen. It would be evident that
some disturbance was brewing and some grudge
existed. No war ever started suddenly between
friends who had solemnly pledged themselves to
arbitrate every dispute. It is the duty of each and
every member of the League which sees trouble ap-
proaching to report to the Council for investigation.
Such troubles will be numerous, not only among the
Balkans but elsewhere. No member will be called
on at first to rush in troops. If a member state does
break its pledge and venture “external aggression,”
the first punishment will be withholding credit, sale
of munitions, and if an aggressor yfill not yield,
withholding supplies and intercourse. The different
stages can be ordered instantly from the Council to
all its members, Germany never suffered anything
like a complete boycott. During the war she had
supplies from Turkey, Bulgaria, Rumania, Switzer-
land, Holland, Norway, Denmark, and part of the
time from Italy. Does any one imagine that she or
any other great power is going to run the risk of not
having a ship enter its port, or a railroad car cross its
LAW OR WAR


border, or a telegram being delivered 1 ? of being
ostracised and anathematised far more than Ger-
many was for breaking Prussia’s old pledge regard-
ing Belgian neutrality? However, until the United
States pledges herself not to take advantage of such
a situation by providing supplies for an acknowl-
edged aggressor, the League will be greatly hampered
in making a boycott completely effective.
The senator assumed that rushing American troops
across the sea would be the first, not the last, meas-
ure. He forgot that in no case could our troops
go without the consent of our one member of the
Council and the sanction of Congress so far as our
own forces are concerned. Moreover, and this is
the main consideration, the Covenant does not guar-
antee the boundaries existing when the treaty was
signed shall remain forever in a growing, changing
world. The framers of the Covenant were not so
childish as to imagine that the whole process of
history would be reversed and that boundaries exist-
ing now could be forever maintained. “Existing
political independence” means, of course, that exist-
ing when the aggression is made, which may not be
for fifty years hence when present boundaries and
conditions may have been peaceably changed. Did
not we change our boundaries peaceably by political
authority when we added Florida and when we pur-
chased the Louisiana territory and Alaska? Did
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


not Norway and Sweden peacefully separate?
Have not scores of changes been made in govern-
ments and boundaries without “external aggres-
sion 1 ’? This has nothing to do with internal col-
lisions or domestic revolt, such as might arise in
India, or such as arose in China and Morocco. With
civil war and internal disturbance, let it be reiter-
ated, the League has nothing to do.
As to our being called “to police the world,” the
whole tendency of discussion is for regional agree-
ments for security. When a person throws a match
into a waste-basket and there is a blaze, no one
rushes to the telephone and summons the fire-engines
from neighbouring towns. The nearest person
throws on a bucket of water. The nations of each
continent should stand together to preserve the in-
tegrity of each. Each nation may secure safety as
France has done through the Locarno compact as
well as by each standing by all and all by each.
Disputes in North and South America should be
prevented by Pan-American agreements from end-
ing in aggression. The notion that, in a possible
fracas between Rumania and Hungary, for instance,
Japan and Chile and the United States must mo-
bilise troops and rush to the rescue, was never con-
ceived by the sane men who wrote the Covenant;
only perverseness and partisan excitement read it
into the plain words of the Covenant.
LAW OR WAR


The interpretation of the Constitution has filled
law libraries. The interpretation of the Covenant
awaits further development. It will be interpreted
by the Permanent Court of International Justice,
whose eleven judges and four deputy judges, chosen
from different continents as the most expert and
reliable jurists of the world, may be trusted to come
as near the truth as fallible mortals can. The safe-
guards of the Covenant must be emphasised.
Whereas no southern state could secede from the
United States, which has in the Republic a super-
state, any nation may withdraw from the League
by giving two years’ notice, as the League is not a
super-state. What possible risk should we take now
in entering the League, if we did so on condition
that whatever changes we think needful should be
accepted subject to our withdrawal? The prime
consideration as regards peace is that all members
pledge themselves to the nine-months “cooling-off”
period during which they may have disputes arbi-
trated or investigated and reported on, and can use
no force until the expiration of that period and,
only then, if the nation against whom the verdict
has gone refuses to abide by that verdict.
Here is a great section of the world taking the
greatest step ever taken in all history toward the
abolishment of war. The United States, as previ-
ously noted, has already twenty or more treaties,
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


the so-called Bryan treaties, for a similar cooling-off
period. Why not extend this pledge to fifty-five
nations, and lend them our strength in bringing in
the nations still outside, thus achieving a genuine
League of Nations that can outlaw war?
The achievements of the League seem all that
could have been expected by an agency so sadly
crippled at the start with the whole responsibility
thrown on men dazed and exhausted with four years
of war. The Assembly has met every September,
growing in its eight sessions in experience, mutual
understanding, and democratic character; the Coun-
cil has met forty-nine times in various countries
and dealt with exigencies and the most important
matters. The suspicious have often claimed that
the League is all right for the big problems of the
Little Powers, and for the little problems of the
Big Powers, but that once get two Big Powers
really involved and it simply will not function. But
the memorable meeting of the forty-fourth session
of the Council in March, 1927, disproved that
theory. The dispute over the Saar Valley, which
had continued for seven years between France and
Germany, had become magnified into a serious ques-
tion of national prestige. The foreign ministers of
the two countries met at Geneva and for three days
argued, sought compromises, pled their public opin-
ions in vain. They finally came to see that the only
LAW OR WAR


chance for agreement was in a public debate, al-
though this was dangerous and was a new attempt in
diplomacy. The fourteen-nation members met with
the German Foreign Minister Streseman, acting as
President, who announced the first international de-
bate in which Germany had the right to state her
case in this important question. One hundred and
five journalists were in attendance ready to send
reports to the ends of the earth. [What was involved
was really the possibility of a break between the two
major powers which since the Locarno compact had
been coming together. Never before had a matter
of prestige between two great powers been debated
under such publicity. [Yet it was done with good
humour and wit, and the whole matter brought to
a successful conclusion, each side making conces-
sions which could never have been accomplished in
a private session [without being at once rejected at
home. The world perceived, as Mr. Chamberlain
stated, that the method offered an infinitely greater
hope of success than the old process of constantly in-
creasing irritation through the interchange of soul-
less telegrams. [The Saar debate marked a mile-
stone in the series of successful efforts to secure a
peaceful settlement of difficulties.
It has been objected that the great imperialist
powers have been made the permanent members of
the Council, and that it is unjust to have them
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


dominate. But it is evident that there would be no
justice in giving Denmark or Abyssinia equal power
with France or Great Britain. In the long run
strong and influential nations are bound to have
weight in proportion to their power. Shall this
power be uncurbed and used outside the League,
leaving the outsiders free as in pre-war days to go
to war when they please; or shall the powers in co-
operation voluntarily submit to pledges and, hand
in hand, control each other and insist on reason in-
stead of slaughter in the settlement of their dis-
putes? The powers will take no interest in any
organisation that nullifies their own influence. The
provision for a Council which can act only when
all members agree, and for an Assembly in which
the smallest nation can be heard and has equal
weight with any other, guarantees, so far as now is
possible, justice and safety to each little state, and
puts permanent responsibility into the hands of the
five most powerful states plus nine of the smaller
states which rotate in office. The division of power
obviates the difficulties which made the Hague Con-
ferences much less effective. When the League is
further developed, the requirement of unanimity
for all action of the Council may yield to some qual-
ification. At present unanimity of fourteen nations
is not so difficult as when the rule applied to forty-
four nations in the Hague Conference.
LAW OR WAR


Said Elihu Root in 1926: “M. Briand very wisely
said that in Europe there must be moral disarma-
ment before there could be physical disarmament,
and ever since he has been applying that sage philos-
ophy to his own immortal glory and to the great
benefit of all mankind. , , . When the League was
completed, when we refused to become a member
of it and Europe was left without the support of the
most populous and richest and most potentially
powerful nation whose name was written into the
Covenant, what would any member have said to
another who had been brought into such an unto-
ward condition by his representative and agent, mis-
taken, but in good faith? What, but an expression
of the most sincere regret . . . What did we do?
We, the great peace-loving people, what have we
done to help in this wonderful new work? No
sympathy, no moral support, no brotherhood. Our
executive department has done the best it could,
but governments can do but little. It is the people,
the power of the people behind the government, that
means everything. We have allowed insensate prej-
udice, camouflaged by futile phrases, to appear, but
falsely to appear, to represent the true heart of the
American people.”
The primary question for Americans to consider
is, shall we choose fear, anarchic international rela-
tions, and possible world-war, or the beginnings of
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS


order, system, and regular political machinery, for
doing the world’s necessary international business'?
Granted that existing political machinery is inade-
quate ; the issue now is that which Alexander Ham-
ilton faced in 1788 —either the particular Constitu-
tion, with which he was by no means satisfied, or
disintegration and chaos. He chose the courageous
policy and urged our entrance upon the untried ex-
periment as the better alternative. Now it is for
sane men to begin and improve such a world’s busi-
ness agency as we now have, or to let malcontents
encourage conditions that may defeat it and lead
to an exterminating world war. The abnormal
psychic attitude which existed in Europe previous
to the great World War should be studied if we are
to escape still worse disaster.
LAW OR WAR


CHAPTER XII
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR
For ten years vast study has been given by scholars
to research into the startling events, and the frantic
letters and telegrams which passed between the
heads of governments and diplomats, during the
fateful weeks after the assassination of the Austrian
archduke at Sarajevo. The first bewilderment and
then the wholesale condemnation of Germany as the
instigator of the war “for which she had been pre-
paring for forty years” is giving way to a pro-
founder analysis of a situation which at the time
stunned the world beyond the power of sane thought.
It is now obvious that any armaments or training of
men forty years or thirty years or even fifteen years
before the war, would have been of no account in a
world in which new inventions make any weapon
quickly obsolete. When the war came Germany’s
accumulation of armaments was used up in two
months and, like her opponents, she struggled des-
perately to keep her munition makers at top-speed
until the end.
Sharp differences still exist as to the proportion


of blame to be assigned to the original combatants,
though the majority of scholars do not go so far as
Professor Barnes in placing less blame on Germany
than on France and Russia. Signor Nitti, the former
Italian prime minister, however, declared that “Rus-
sia’s attitude was the real and underlying cause of
the world conflict.” Baron Rosen, late Russian
minister at Washington, wrote to E. D. Morel, the
eminent London publicist, of English and French
descent, that he agreed with the latter’s view that
“the legend of the German plot to impose domina-
tion over Europe is responsible for the vast puni-
tive mechanism known as the treaty of Versailles,
and further that this dogma of Germany’s sole re-
sponsibility for the war is internationally what the
Dreyfus case was nationally for the nation con-
cerned.” He said he subscribed “unreservedly to
the views you entertain in regard to the nefarious
character of the policies practised by the so-called
statesmen of the leading nations of Europe during
the decades which preceded the advent of the catas-
trophe.” Surely nothing more nefarious has been
put on record than the letter of Lord Fisher, Admiral
of the British Fleet, proposing to King Edward in
1908, that “as it was Germany’s set intention to
make even England’s mighty navy hesitate at sea, it
Seemed to me a sagacious act on England’s part to
LAW OR WAR


seize the German fleet when it was so very easy of
accomplishment.” * He wrote of a plan, several
years before the war began, to land 100,000 troops
on the Pomeranian shore. Another startling bit of
information marked “Secret” was in a note by Lord
Fisher in which he says, “Tirpitz asked a mutual
friend living in Berlin to inquire very privately of
me whether I would agree to limiting size of guns
and size of ships, as this is vital to the Germans,
who can’t go bigger than the Dreadnoughts in guns
of size.” “I wrote back by return post,” said he,
“yesterday morning, ‘Tell him I’ll see him d—d
first’ (them’s the very words). I wonder what
Wilhelm will say to that, when Tirpitz shows him
the letter.” Fisher called attention to the statement
of Admiral Mahan that “88 per cent of England’s
guns are aimed at Germany.” In 1909 he rejoiced
at Britain’s “eighteen miles of ships —the most
powerful in the world, and none of them more than
ten years old.” In 1911 he wrote, “I happen to
know that the Germans are in a blue funk of the
British navy and are quite assured that 942 German
merchant steamers would be ‘gobbled up’ in the first
forty-eight hours of war, and also the d—d cer-
* He had urged the King to “repeat Nelson’s Copenhagen,” and,
as he later stated, he knew that the Germans had “a daily dread”
of this very thing, which was a reason for their “feverish haste”
in strengthening their navy.
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


tainty of when and where a hundred thousand troops
embarked in transports and kept ‘in the air’ might
land. N. B. There's a lovely spot only ninety miles
from Berlin .” It is needless to say that the average
Briton would have heartily condemned this, had he
known of it.
In July, 1914, the momentous decisions, made
hastily when all were madly struggling on the brink
of an abyss, are not now our chief concern. In
August, 1914, Lloyd George said in Queen’s Hall:
“What are we fighting for? To defeat the most
dangerous conspiracy ever plotted against the liberty
of nations; carefully, skilfully, insidiously, clandes-
tinely plotted in every detail with ruthless, cynical
determination,” The consensus of opinion to-day
as regards responsibility is now probably that of
Lord George in December, 1920: “The more one
reads memoirs and books written before the war the
more one realises that no one at the head of affairs
quite meant war at that stage. It was something
into which they staggered and stumbled, perhaps
through folly; and a discussion, I have no doubt
would have averted it. ... I can not say that Ger-
many and her allies were solely responsible for the
war which devastated Europe . . . that statement,
which we all made during the war, was a weapon
to be used at the time; how that the war is over, it
LAW OR WAR


cannot be used as a serious argument.” * A discus-
sion might have averted it! Alas, no men of offi-
cial position, foreseeing misunderstanding and con-
sequent disaster, had done the one obvious thing
which a foreign minister should do as soon as in-
ducted into his responsible position—talk face to
face with the men whose minds he could not fathom
by letters and cablegrams and whom it was vitally
important he should understand. It was common
report that Sir Edward Grey did not speak German,
had never been in Germany, and had only once
crossed the Channel on a brief visit to France. When
he had a vacation he loved the solitude of a fishing
trip. What might have happened had he gone to
Berlin and instituted an exchange of visits in which,
every year, the men who held in their hands the life
and death of millions had sat around a table and
breakfasted together! Mr. Asquith in his work,
“The Genesis of the War,” made the astounding
statement regarding Baron Marshal von Bieber-
stein, the representative of Germany in London for
some time before his death in 1912: “I am as
satisfied as one can be of anything in the domain of
♦Mr. Asquith and Lord Grey, who, with Mr. Lloyd George,
were the responsible English statesmen at the outbreak of the
war, have publicly declared in recent years that their view of
German and European feeling in 1914 was mistaken, and that they
do not believe that Germany then desired war. Lloyd George’s
words undoubtedly express their later opinion.
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


conjecture that if he had remained, there would
have been no European war in 1914.”
In the treaty of Versailles the central powers were
held responsible for all the damage done; and insane
demands for over one hundred thousand million dol-
lars were made at first for reparations, which grad-
ually diminished to about one-tenth that sum, and
now are left indefinite.
What we need to know are the deep-lying causes,
the false political theories, the gross misapprehen-
sions of each other and of their own true interests,
which the nations in the armed camp of Europe en-
tertained. An exaggerated patriotism had devel-
oped a pathological condition and false psychology.
It was the first general war since the establishment
of conscription and the enrolment of the great ma-
jority of male citizens of fighting age. Previous
wars had been like the Napoleonic wars and the war
against Austria for Italian freedom. The war of
1914 began, as George P. Gooch has said, “in a pe-
riod of nervous tension marked by the spirit of en-
terprise, speculation, hastiness, anxiety, but inspired
by no ruling ideal.” Men’s nervous systems could
not adjust themselves to the complicated and ab-
normal conditions of existence. The same tension
exists to-day. How can the average man, not on
fire with spiritual zeal and lofty thought, amid the
hustling throngs in noisy streets darkened by day
LAW OR WAR


by monstrous skyscrapers, and ablaze at night with
whirling, lurid figures that blot out the stars, focus
thought on anything which is not material and im-
mediate and distracting? The repose of mind neces-
sary to think out complex problems of human rela-
tions is all but impossible in the obtrusive and dan-
gerous conditions of our great cities, where, if one
tries to think, every street crossing brings one nigh
to death. What wonder that insanity, divorce,
suicide have become matters of course and that legis-
lators grapple in vain with stupendous problems
which no education that was given them helps them
to solve. A test of sanity is the possession of a sense
of life being worth while, and the feeling of respon-
sibility for one’s own life and the common social life.
In a scholarly and penetrating book on “The
Neuroses of Nations,” * C. E. Playne of London has
traced acutely the psychical conditions that super-
induced the war. The historic, political, and eco-
nomic conditions have been profoundly studied, but
not equally the important psychological conditions
which render so much of present life abnormal, the
most abnormal feature of which is that it is not
recognised as such. The continuance of civilisation
depends quite as much on recognition of group-
*ln a later book (1928) entitled “The Pre-War Mind in Brit-
ain” Miss Playne had applied the same principles used in her study
of France and Germany, to England in that same period.
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


pathology as on the problems of raw materials and
tariffs.
For decades before the war the descent to the
abyss began; yet had there been brakes to hold back
the cars of State, had a League of Nations existed
to summon its Council at once after the affair at
Sarajevo, the fatal plunge would not have come.
One of the early portents of future trouble was the
decline of intellectual life for two decades before
the war; there were no Darwins, Carlyles, Brown-
ings, Dickenses, George Eliots; no Mazzinis,
Tolstois, Lincolns, Emersons, Pasteurs, Bismarcks,
or Wagners. Literature, as compared with that of
the sixties and seventies and eighties, was decadent.
Reading was largely of magazines and newspapers,
albeit there was a lessening of illiteracy and a wider
spread of scientific knowledge. “A good time” was
the goal of many minds. Thinkers and reformers
were often considered “bores.” Despite greater
comfort, novelty, and richness of life, haunting dis-
satisfaction, scepticism, satiety, the lack of zest in
life made many hungry for any tumult that would
give spice to satiated, unjoyous lives. There was a
lack of men of genius in all walks of life. The
church lost much of its hold on the consciences of
men, as by superficial minds it was assumed that
science was undermining its main theses. Confused
thinking and lack of aim prevented observance of
LAW OR WAR


the danger signals. Excitement, rush, games on
stupendous scale, decreasing homelife, restaurant
and railroad existence, grew apace, and with it all
tense nerves, no time for thought and consequent
impoverishment of soul. Universal military train-
ing in Europe bred a regimented life, accustomed
to irresponsible routine, and with inadequate initia-
tive. The grim spirit of Prussian militarism was
manifest in the harsh sculpture, devoid of any at-
tempt at Grecian grace. Nothing uglier, or more
portentous as a reflection of the dangerous spirit
that was growing, could be found than the colossal
war monument at Leipzig, erected a few years be-
fore the war. Pride, fear, national conceit in both
France and Germany built up an ever higher wall
of separation. Strenuous efforts were made by chau-
vinists to prevent the third Hague Conference
scheduled for 1915.
The phrases, “the will to power,” “politics of
force,” did not exist before 1910. But the worship
of power antedates that. There was a swing back
from German idealism to a crass materialism, which
accompanied the transition of Germany from a sim-
ple agricultural to a thriving commercial and in-
dustrial life, but which, nevertheless, doomed
myriads of workers to the dull routine of factory
life. Among scholars, Professor Treitschke’s deifi-
cation of the blind power of the State was a far
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


cry from the conception of the State as an end exist-
ing for the general advance of culture and educa-
tion. Bernhardi, though read but little in Germany,
was read in half a million copies in England after
the war broke out, —and there his soulless and pre-
posterous theories were supposed to be typical of
German thought. He, and a group of scholars, fol-
lowed Treitschke who advanced the ideas of the
really small group of rabid Pan-Germans. This
brilliant professor of history at Berlin stamped his
ideas on successive classes of students destined to be
influential. Said C. E. Playne:
“It was a Satanic vision which he pursued. And
he pursued it like many of his followers and the
Pan-Germans, with perfect uprightness of heart.
This was their obliquity, their falling away, their
mental trouble. The conception of might, as an
end in itself, as an ideal the nation should strive
for, was the very opposite to the pure humanism
which constituted the ideal of the great German
thinkers of the saner period of Kant and Goethe.
It was the crowd of his followers who proclaimed
his inverted standard, so obsessed were they with
the strained and hardened views which Treitschke
enunciated. The regimentation of Germany les-
sened the sense of responsibility. The mechan-
ical training of men as conscripts diminished the
sense of value of organic life. Those neuroses
LAW OR WAR


which rush to fill up spiritual voids took posses-
sion of whole groups and may be said to have af-
fected the whole national mind.”
They exalted power; obedience became the su-
preme virtue. Militarism was only one manifesta-
tion of the idea of the supreme importance of phys-
ical and mechanical means of compulsion. The
“will to power” obsession blinded Germany more
than any other nation in the pre-war period.
In “The Guilt of William Hohenzollern,” Pro-
fessor Friedjung in a study of imperialism between
1887-1914 asserts that “the flood of imperialism
extending from England gradually sucked in the
other great nations, including North America, and
finally overwhelmed nearly the whole of humanity,
leaving death and destruction in its wake.” In one
generation Great Britain had taken over the control
of enormous areas of Africa and Asia, and now rules
over 45,000,000 people in Africa, and in the whole
world over 440,000,000 people, that is, fifteen mil-
lion more than one-quarter of the inhabitants of
the globe. Nationalism should lead to internation-
alism, not to imperialism. Its present nature has
been demonstrated in the relations of the European
powers in Asia, and the evidence that Asia is now in
steadily growing revolt. It was the British control
BEFORE ANP AFTER THE WORLD WAR


of India that led to the keeping of the Turk in power
for fifty years at the Dardanelles so as to prevent
Russia getting control there and perhaps threaten-
ing England’s free access to the Suez canal. The
British government failed to perceive how a gen-
erous policy and safe-guarding treaties might have
prevented the ominous pressure, and, by giving Rus-
sia what she had a natural right to —access at all
times to a warm water port —have drawn off the
poison and relieved Europe from constant fear and
tension. How long would the United States have
kept within bounds if it had been shut off from the
Pacific by the width of Washington, Oregon and
California, and from the Atlantic by as wide an area
in the east, and had no outlet except through Hud-
son Bay, frozen over half the year? John A. Hob-
son, the eminent English economist, closed his pro-
found study of “Imperialism” with these words
which are as pertinent to our country as to his own:
“Imperialism is a depraved choice of national life,
imposed by self-seeking interests ... It is the
besetting sin of all successful States and its penalty
is unalterable in the order of nature.” This penalty
is the preponderance of wealth in the hands of a few
and wars with backward people.
The lust for empire and the mistaken notion of its
advantages except to a favoured few was one of
the deep-lying causes of the World War. The
LAW OR WAR


growth of the system of capitalism, which requires
foreign markets, has a profound relation to milita-
rism and war. If the full value of products were
distributed to all producers, including the highly
competent and highly salaried brains of every con-
cern, so that all producers might receive in propor-
tion to their production, and with no excessive profit
to the invested capital, would not the producers’ in-
creased purchasing power consume the surplus which
now the profit system compels proprietors to scram-
ble for in markets overseas? Failure to distribute
justly and rationally to producers means poverty,
slums, congestion in home cities, and desperate ef-
forts to go far afield for customers. If the millions
of poor whites in the Appalachians, and the millions
in sordid tenements in Liverpool and London, were
able to buy as much as they can produce, which a
proper readjustment would enable them to do, there
would be few millionaires and fewer wars, and
superior brains and organising ability could have a
due reward.
British imperialism was one of the causes of the
World War, as well as the Russian ambition for a
warm water port, as to which Iswolsky, six months
before war opened, said that it was the historic mis-
sion of Russia to take possession of the Straits. The
Austrian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was another serious factor in breeding war. Aus-
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


tria’s unwarrantable ultimatum to Serbia, which was
the immediate cause of the war, had, however, more
basis than at first appeared. We know now that
the assassination of the heir to the throne of Austria
by a native of the turbulent country in which only
a few years before regicides had shocked the world
;with their assassinations of the Serbian king and
queen, was not merely the individual act of a fa-
natic youth, but a result of deliberate plot of a great
group, of which men high in the government had
some cognisance.
There is an enormous mass of evidence in the
drama, art exhibits, novels, and newspapers of the
period both in Germany and France, as well as in
other countries, which reveals the growing tenseness
of the attitude of each toward the other. Clever
French writers promoted the spirit of revenge, while
German writers fostered the fear that Germany was
being surrounded by a ring of enemies. Everywhere
there was a conspicuous lack of sound political
philosophy and a sane spirit of co-operation.
All the world knows of German chauvinism; but
when during the war all cables were cut, and Amer-
ica received news only through a British censorship,
no emphasis was laid on the neurasthenia which
prevailed in France before the war and which
created a similar attitude of mind to that in the
central countries. As an offset to bitter words of
LAW OR WAR


Poincare at the dedication of a monument to the
war dead, the words of E. D. Morel, the English
scholar, should be cited.
Born of a French father and English mother, E.
D. Morel in England was one of the few who tried
to preserve a judicial attitude of mind, and in his
“Ten Years of Secret Diplomacy” and in his earlier
magnificent work in driving the despotism of the
Belgium King, Leopold, from the Congo, he showed
an accuracy and love of truth, which made him
honoured when his views were most unpopular.
After the war he won the seat of Winston Churchill
in Parliament. After describing the blood-feud
.which had been active for 250 years, in which Ger-
many had been overrun, dismembered, and devas-
tated by French armies, Lorraine seized in 1670
and later, Strasburg, and the ascendency of France
over all Germany for half a century, with fearful
devastation of the Palatinate, he drew a picture of
the Prussian and Austrian armies combined invad-
ing France to save the French monarchy from de-
struction:
“Four years later, French armies again poured
over German soil and for nine years the German
population underwent a repetition of the horrors
inflicted on it by Louis XIV. In 1803, Napoleon
created his confederation of the Rhine and all
western Germany was dragooned into obedience
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


to his sway. In 1806, the French armies entered
Berlin in triumph, the museums and art galleries
were ransacked and the contents carried off to
Paris. Four years later, as part of his campaign
for the starvation of Britain and the destruction
of her commerce, Napoleon annexed the northern
coast of Germany. But the tide turned and the
French imperial armies, that had ravaged almost
every country in Europe, were pursued onto
French soil at the hands of Prussian, Austrian,
and British troops. That was the first of ‘the
three invasions within a century.’ We took part
in it.
“Another half century. The first step had been
taken in the formation of a real German nation.
All that was then necessary to make German
unity complete was the adhesion of the southern
states . . . but once more the emperor of the
French stood in the way. She claimed the right
to prevent the unification of Germany, but the
Germans, after the French armies again started to
invade Germany, drove them back to Paris. This
was the ‘second invasion.’
As to the invasion in the World War, said Mr.
Morel;
“No one enjoying either political or historical
authority in this country has attempted to rebut
the accumulated evidence (mainly Russian and
French) which goes to prove that the Republican
rulers of France, far from being guiltless for the
LAW OR WAR


great war, played a very active part in bringing
it about, deemed themselves fully prepared to
undertake it and were confident of the result.”
In fact, France and Russia together had vastly
more men under arms than had Germany and Aus-
tria together when the war broke. As to what he
calls the “population myth,” Mr. Morel called at-
tention to the fact that Germany’s excess df popula-
tion over that of France by 20,000,000 is vastly
off-set, so far as danger is concerned, by the fact
that France has applied military conscription to her
millions of subjects in African possessions. Said
Mr. Morel: “This conscription of Africa by France
is one of those tremendous events which alter the
destinies of nations. . . . It is far less a matter of
obtaining ‘security for France’ than of obtaining
security for Europe including the French people
. . . against the recrudescence of a Napoleonic
militarism with resources in men and raw materials
which Napoleon never dreamed of.” Though these
words preceded by some years the Locarno compact,
which seemed so happily to banish hostility and
ensure security, they still have a measure of perti-
nence.
Norman Angell in his volume on “The Public
Mind” maintains that a certain section of the press
is pushed, as a first condition of its existence, to in-
tensify the human weaknesses which underlie most
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


public folly, and to exploit immensely dangerous,
disruptive forces. It largely controls the public
mind and often renders the voice of the people, the
voice of the devil. The hope of democracy lies in
public recognition of this, as a navigator recognises
where lie the reefs which he must avoid. Mr. Angell
holds that right ethical and moral judgments about
everyday things would seem to be vastly easier for
the common mind to achieve than a knowledge of
technical matters about bacteria and electrons. But,
on the contrary, it is found far more difficult to
achieve wisdom in ordinary matters about human
relationships. Men who were keen to detect errors
in scientific discussions were completely at the mercy
of propagandists in war time, as they had never sus-
pected the methods of deception used. They did not
know what Lord Northcliffe wrote to Lloyd George
in the London Times on November 16, 1917, that
there were 500 officials of the British War Mission
in the United States with 10,000 assistants; not that
these were attempting to deceive, but certainly to
give a wholly one-sided statement of affairs. Said
The World To-morrow: *
“The French side of the story is even more
extraordinary. Three years ago a French editor
wrote an astonishing book about French journal-
ism from the inside. Among others, he discloses
♦April, 1927.
LAW OR WAR


the following: With the declaration of war the
French government appropriated an initial 25,-
000,000 francs for propaganda. A large build-
ing of five stories, the Maison de la Presse, be-
came headquarters. In the 200 rooms of this
structure were huge presses, a photographic de-
partment, a translation department, etc. The
business of the Maison was to arouse France and
the world against Germany. It deliberately man-
ufactured evidence to suit their needs. In the
work of the photo-chemical department were the
best artists of France. They produced in life-
like miniature whatever was wanted.”
Italy’s ambitions have gone far toward dominat-
ing a large section of North Africa. Her conquest
of Tripoli in 1910, and her gains from the World
War, leave her disturbed by British control of Malta
and French control of Tunis. She looks with keen
suspicion on any further French control. France,
with enormous expenses, debts that cannot be paid
and plans for new forts, is feeling the heavy cost.
But she has enormous issues at stake and wants un-
interrupted hegemony from the coast to her own
possessions in the hinterland. Great Britain, which
wants unobstructed access secured by Gibraltar for
her fleets to Suez, is bound to have a hand in the
settlement of every dispute in the Mediterranean.
The elimination of French rule in bygone days
in the wilds of Canada, and the immense Louisiana
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


territory, and the establishment of the English-
speaking peoples there, cannot be compensated now
by the acquisition of occupied territory in Africa
which France has no surplus citizens to colonise.
Moreover, French investors invest billions in other
lands but not in Africa. France draws no colour
line, and black men represent African possessions in
the French Assembly. The great mass of 10,000,-
000 blacks in French West Africa have no vote, but
there are black and white and yellow in its schools
and in her civil service. In British West Africa the
colour line is sharply drawn. The faithful blacks
who fought for France in the World War would
have had no interest to do so had they not felt that
France treated them as no other conquerors have
treated Africans. This fact is a vast insurance of
the future of France in Africa. Nevertheless, while:
France has lately added by conquest enormous new
areas, she has no colonists. Germany could send
out many colonists but has lost her colonies. Great
Britain has both colonists and colonies, though now
they are all practically independent in a Common-
wealth of Nations. As the population of France
hardly holds its own, and three millions of for-
eigners are taking the place there of the men lost in
the war, France can send forth no settlers. Two
hundred years ago her population exceeded that of
Great Britain and Germany combined. T°’day,
LAW OR WAR


the French colonies contain only 300,000 French in
a population of over 42,000,000 French subjects in
Africa. These colonies are an economic burden, not
an asset, and cannot be made to pay. Said Dr.
Charles Sarolea, Professor of French literature in
Edinburgh University, an experienced African
traveller and student, “The results bear no propor-
tion whatsoever to the enormous expenditure, to the
magnificent effort exerted, and to the tragic political
sacrifices. The results do not justify the controlling
influence of the colonies in French foreign policy.
The third colonial empire seems destined eventually
to follow the vicissitudes of the two others in Amer-
ica. It will have deflected the whole course of
French foreign policy, and yet it will not be a per-
manent achievement.”
Among the able opponents of the war, Professor
Nicolai of Berlin, who wrote his “Biology of War”
in prison, during the war, and Alfred Fried of
yienna, with Professors Quidde and Forster, de-
serve mention together with Leon Bourgeois of
France, Remain Holland, Jean Jaures and others
.who tried in vain to stem the tide which swept their
respective nations when the hysteria of fear had
banished all sane thought. The governments were
not unprepared, however surprised the mass of citi-
zens might have been. Sir Julian Corbett in his
“History of Naval Operations in the War” says:
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


“Given the scale which we deliberately chose to
adopt, there is no doubt that the machinery for
setting our forces in action had reached an ordered
completeness in detail that had no parallel in his-
tory,”
The fearful blockade of Germany, which lasted
for months after the Armistice, was responsible for:
the deaths of scores of thousands of helpless inno-
cents ; children and old people died a lingering death
of starvation, and of disease incident to malnutri-
tion. For years after the war the scholarly class
lived like unskilled workers. Professors turned the
key upon their laboratories, sold their libraries, and
did menial work to get bread for their children.
Said one newspaper, the Neue Zurcher Zeitung:
“High officials have a bowl of soup at noon, a bit of
bread and sausage, or potatoes, turnip, and carrots
at night. High School principals have been forced
to sell part of their meagre household outfit in order
to live.” Alfred Fried, himself a winner of a Nobel
peace prize, wrote of the intellectual starvation
which lasted for years and to some extent still con-
tinues: “Foreign newspapers bring fabulous prices.
The manual labourer almost always has a higher
income than the university professor. German
scientific papers are at the point of death because
the publishers can no longer support the risks. From
Vienna came the word: ‘Our great libraries soon will
LAW OR WAR


be utterly unable to purchase books, for the income
from their endowment scarcely pays for the bind-
ing of presentation copies. . . . Austria, will soon
be completely shut off from the world by the barrier
of its paper money . . . The chemical institutes
had no glass, no rubber, no retorts, no metal at the
end of the war; we were five years behind in scien-
tific literature . . . We stand face to face with
the extinction of branches of knowledge without
which modern economic life and modern hygiene
are inconceivable/ ”
What these scientists were losing was not merely
loss to them but to the whole world. The mute
inglorious Keplers, Roentgens, Einsteins, Pasteurs,
Marconis, Wattses, whom the lack of timely “dis-
cussion,” doomed to insanity or bloody death, took
benefit incalculable from unborn generations.
The United States, the people most remote from
war and suffering, experienced a bitterness and in-
dulged in a vindictiveness which was a revelation
that amazed those who had not known what was
latent in our character. Being a college graduate
gave no assurance of logical thought, of possessing
bowels of mercy, imagination and the power to un-
derstand an enemy’s point of view, or any desire to
do justice. One who dared think independently or
to question the prevailing view of the “Hun” was
at once dubbed “pro-German,” just as, later, he was
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


called “Bolshevist.” It was three or four years after
the war before a calmer mood supervened, after
Philip Gibbs and others had revealed how the masses
had been nerved to frenzy by purposeful misinfor-
mation, just as, later, newspaper men were sent to
Geneva with instructions to report nothing good of
the League of Nations. In 1920, John F. Moors, a
Boston banker and philanthropist, correctly de-
scribed the situation then. “Espionage, raids, de-
portations, hitherto held to be obnoxious to Ameri-
can traditions, are accepted as inevitable. The
very word ‘Russia,’ is almost taboo. No one seems
to have a right to ask whether there is or is not a
blockade of that suffering country, or, if there is
one, why there is. Even the time-honoured rights
of habeas corpus are endangered. Suddenly one
realises that the liberty which seemed forever ours
without further struggle, is, if not gone, going . .
John A. Hobson, a careful student of the Ameri-
can attitude of mind at various periods, said some
years later: “The American acceptance of liberty
is grounded in an acceptance of standardisation . . ,
its condition is one of close conformity . . . im-
posed upon him by the power of mechanical large-
scale production. He wants to be like his neigh-
bours. In itself an amiable quality, it lapses into
what so many critics have recognised as a chief dan-
ger of democracy, the herd mind and the tyranny
LAW OR WAR


of the majority . . . During the war this herd
passion and its intolerance blazed more fiercely in
America, than in any of the European belligerents
except perhaps in France.”
One outstanding illustration was the case of four
young Russians, three men and a girl, who were
convicted under the Espionage Act for circulating
handbills criticising the Government’s policy to-
ward Russia, couched in highly coloured language
and calling for a strike of munition makers. Justice
Brandeis and Justice Holmes of the Supreme Court
dissented from the approval of their condemnation
and said: “In this case sentences of twenty years’
imprisonment have been imposed for the publishing
of two leaflets that I believe the defendants had as
much right to publish as the Government has to pub-
lish the Constitution of the United States now
yainly invoked by them.”
The tarring and feathering and sometimes killing
of members of the Industrial Workers of the World,
the wholesale deportation of 1,200 alleged mem-
bers who were working in mines in Bisbee, Arizona,
were only a few of the high-handed proceedings that
disgraced the nation during the period which Louis
F. Post, assistant Secretary of Labour, described in
his volume “The Deportation Delirium of Nineteen-
Twenty.” He said: “So far did the spirit of the
Department of Justice carry its detectives and their
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


coadjutors, that they directed their machinery of
intimidation at every official who in the performance
of his duty was trying to administer justly the law
of the land in the ‘red’ deportations . . . One of
the most gratifying and reassuring of all the events
developed by the deportations delirium occurred.
Twelve American lawyers of honourable distinction
. . . with the eminent Dean of the Law School of
Harvard University at their head, publicly indicted
the Department of Justice on Constitutional grounds
for its lawlessness in connection with the deporta-
tions crusade . . . The Senate ordered an investi-
gation . . . the facts disclosed were by Constitu-
tional tests damning. Our laws for the protection
of our Government from aliens conspiring for its
forcible overthrow had been so drawn as to necessi-
tate deportations for harmless expressions of harm-
less opinions. . . . Had the public sentiment that
made this crusade possible been a product of con-
isiderate American thought, instead of a temporary
delirium, the democracy of our Republic would have
barely escaped destruction by the very forces that
were operating professedly for its preservation.”
In regard to America’s charity to stricken Europe
after the war, it must be said there was never such
an exhibition of liberal, helpful giving, as, of course,
there has never been such need of it. The relief
work in Belgium, France, Germany, Austria, Tur-
LAW OR WAR


key, and Russia after the war, under the Red Cross,
the Friends’ Society, the Near East and other
agencies, especially, at first, the wonderful work of
Herbert Hoover in saving the lives of millions, con-
stitutes one of the most glorious chapters in the
tragedies of human history. Lest we be exalted
above measure however, it is chastening to remember
that our total contributions for starving Europe
were far less than our expenditures during the same
period for tobacco and chewing gum.
The war increased everywhere the spirit of narrow
nationalism which, except in states having large
relations in Europe and in intellectual classes, had,
before the war, left the great bulk of the people
grossly uninformed and uninterested in foreign af-
fairs. During our period of participation in the war
there was intense interest accompanied with much
emotion, and very limited information which, in
many quarters, has been only slightly increased since
the war. English lecturers who come here are
amazed at the stolid indifference by great masses in
large sections regarding everything but our own
affairs; this is not surprising, considering the char-
acter of most of the newspapers they read, which
are devoid of significant information and stress what
is sensational, trivial, and local. Every citizen who
can afford to buy a box of cigarettes or chocolates
might do well to subscribe to one or more of the
BEFORE AND AFTER THE WORLD WAR


valuable leaflets or bulletins, which for the same
price can be had weekly or monthly to supply vital
news * regarding the whole problem of war and
peace. It seems not unjust to say that, with shining
and notable exceptions, the American people as a
whole have not learned the lesson of the EWorld
War and are unconsciously one of the chief obstacles
to world organisation, and, therefore, to world peace.
One stumbling-block is confused thinking as to the
function in this world of armed force.
♦ See Appendix.
LAW OR WAR


CHAPTER XIII
THE USE OF ARMED FORCE
At the Assembly of the League of Nations, in
1924, the delegates saw a great light; an enormous
step forward was taken when they unanimously
recommended to their respective governments that
they accept the provisions of the Geneva Protocol,
which had been there considered, and which began
by asserting that “war of aggression constitutes a
violation of the solidarity of the international com-
munity and is an international crime.” For some
of the most important ideas embodied in the Protocol
the Assembly was indebted to Professor Shotwell of
Columbia University and his eminent American
colleagues.
Though the Protocol has not come into force, a
profound impression was made on the thinking peo-
ple of all countries, and its main provisions will
doubtless eventually be accepted, if the world is to
attain security and peace. Had the United States
been in the League and accepted the position which
the French government accepted then and later con-
firmed, namely, that it would be willing to adopt


peaceful methods of settling international disputes
specified in the Protocol, it seems that Great Britain
and her dominions would have ratified the Protocol.
Said Charles Roden Buxton: “Not a single power
among those concerned has gone back on it. It is
not France nor any other power among those which
is preventing the realisation of Arbitration and Dis-
armament.” It is a matter of grave concern to all
Americans who long to see our country a member of
the League that when Australia, New Zealand,
Canada, South Africa, and the Irish Free State sent
in their replies to Great Britain’s query, each and
all showed concern as to how the ratification might
affect possible relations with the United States.
South Africa declared, “to accept the Protocol, mem-
bers feel, would be only to make it more difficult
for countries outside the League, notably America,
to become members and would consequently con-
tribute very materially to making it impossible for
the League to attain its real object.” Canada, in
advising against acceptance, declared: “Among the
grounds for this conclusion is the consideration of
the effect of the non-participation of the United
States upon attempts to enforce the sanctions, and
particularly so, in the case of a contiguous country
like Canada.” The Irish Free State said;
“As long as some of the more powerful states re-
frain from participation in the League of Nations,
LAW OR WAR


'the feeling of distrust and uneasiness must con-
tinue.” The British government in refusing its ad-
herence said the League of Nations “never supposed
that among the states which might remain out of the
League would be found so many of the most power-
ful nations, least of all did they foresee that one of
them would be the United States of America.”
Is not our country, therefore, having seriously
handicapped fifty-five nations in their attempt to
extend arbitration and disarmament and to gain a
sense of security, under peculiar obligations to the
world to bestir itself and remove itself from being
an incubus to world progress?
Security is a relative term. There is no means of
obtaining absolute security between individuals so
long as bandits- fools, and children can buy pistols,
and so long as lawmakers and courts are very fal-
lible. There is no absolute guarantee of security be-
tween cities, though warfare between cities such as
existed in medieval days is unknown in our time.
There is no absolute guarantee of peace between one
of our states and another state. Let it be reiterated
that there is no guarantee that civil war, rebellion,
revolution, and riots may not break out in this and
in other countries; in fact, we are certain that after
International war has been outlawed and practically
ended, strife may break out within the limits of a
country. The last form of killing to be abolished
THE .USE OF ARMED FORCE


will be murder, which requires no collective action
and organised preparation and may occasionally
occur at any possible future time when submarines
and tanks have become as obsolete as spears and
thumbscrews.
There can never be any absolute security. Noth-
ing in this world is sure but death and mathematics.
To-day we are discussing relative security, practical
security, such as every citizen feels he possesses in a
city of police and courts; at least security from pur-
poseful attack, however long, with our reckless city
building and congestion and insufficient laws, we
permit the slaughter by automobiles in one year of
more citizens than fell in our first four foreign wars
combined. If practical security from attack can be
obtained in small areas, why not in ever larger and
larger ones'? There is no different principle involved
in either. Does not world peace involve simply an
expansion in application of those principles which
have worked throughout forty-eight states of out
Federal Republic and throughout the areas of the
British Commonwealth of Nations, with 440,000,-
000 black, white, yellow, and brown people speak-
ing hundreds of different languages and having
many religions?
How is this comparative security from attack in
smaller areas obtained? A certain town in Maine
a few years since had 13,000 inhabitants but only
LAW OR WAR


two policemen. That town may have a few more
now and need them, but the facts remain that se-
curity in that town and in other towns and cities, in
nations, and in the world, depends ninety-five per
cent on the good-will of the people, not on fear of
the police. The people know that chaos would be
let loose and they themselves be despoiled, if they
.were not obedient to law.
How far shall penalties be provided for those who
break the peace and are a public menace? Physical
punishment in nursery and public school has extraor-
dinarily diminished everywhere within two genera-
tions. Organised sport, team play, school cheers
which let off steam, with milder discipline, make it
possible for a teacher to work off the animal spirits
of 2,000 boys and secure an obedience that the old
ischool master with rattan and ferule never got from
twenty boys. The nations are as late in learning the
lesson of national psychology as were parents in
learning child psychology or lawmakers that of
Criminals. A minimum of corporal punishment for
specially unruly youngsters is sometimes wholesome.
Police compulsion for breakers of the law is and al-
ways will be a necessity. Sheriffs, state militia or
constabulary, and a national guard will also remain
a necessity so long as we can see into the future.
Now how far shall army and navy be used to serve
as a method of attaining security?
THE USE OF ARMED FORCE


The Navy League which exists to bring pressure
to bear on Congress as regards appropriations for
“adequate defence,” declares: “First and foremost
the navy is our first line of defence. The navy
exists as the physical sanction of our foreign policies
just as federal, state, and domestic police are the
sanction of our domestic laws. ‘Our foreign policy
is as strong as our navy and no stronger.’ The coun-
try needs a navy second to none, that when nations
are assembled around the Council board our states-
men will be heard as attentively as those of any
other country.” To promote this theory a series of
bulletins presenting it have been sent by the League
to 3,000 newspapers throughout the country. There
is apparently no thought in the Navy League that
when we make economic pressure and all-inclusive
arbitration treaties part of our foreign policy, we
shall have a sanction far more effective than explo-
sives and those scientific devices for slaughter which
the next decade will make obsolete. The Navy
League ignores the historic fact that when we had a
very small navy we were a world power and the
moral leader of the nations and that, despite huge
armaments, we have now lost a large share of moral
leadership.
The League of Nations provides for economic
pressure and for the exercise of collective military
power when the Council shall so determine. Accord-
LAW OR WAR


ing to the Protocol of 1924, not ratified: “Those
obligations shall be interpreted as obliging each of
the signatory states to co-operate loyally and effec-
tively in support of the Covenant of the League of
Nations, and in resistance to any aggression, in the
degree which its geographical position and its par-
ticular situation as regards armaments allow.” The
.Council can only recommend, it cannot decide , the
contribution of each state. The states are bound
to afford passage to the troops engaged in protecting
the covenants of the League. The aggressor state
is to be automatically known to be an aggressor if
it “resorts to war in violation of the undertakings
contained in the Covenant or in the Protocol. Vio-
lation of the rules laid down for a demilitarised
zone shall be held equivalent.”
In the famous Article X of the Covenant, which
declares that “The members of the League undertake
to respect and preserve as against external aggres-
sion the territorial integrity and existing political in-
dependence of all members of the League,” no men-
tion is made as to the method to be employed. Thus
far no mention of collective military force has been
agreed to by the Council, though milder measures
have been brought to bear as previously mentioned,
Jvhen Jugo-Slavia was brought to terms when she
encroached on Albania, and when Italian troops
fired on Corfu after her officers had been assas-
THE USE OF ARMED FORCE


sinated. This was an attack essentially like ours on
Vera Cruz, except that Italy was bound by her
pledges in the League, and we were acting accord-
ing to traditional rights of a sovereign nation which
has taken no pledges and desires to be free to go to
war when it pleases. The Greco-Bulgarian episode
was another illustration. All the great nations are
almost as much armed as they were before the World
War, with the exception of Germany; with the fear
and suspicion that still obtains, they have no inten-
tion of disarming before they feel that arbitration
is accepted as obligatory and security is reasonably
assured; the question therefore arises as to the pos-
sibility of the exercise of force, if any nation refuses
to arbitrate and invades another nation that con-
sents to arbitrate. Certain peace advocates have
called this use of collective force for police purposes
“war.” There are some who, while consenting to
the restraint and physical punishment of individuals
and even to the execution of individual assassins,
maintain that one can never consider a nation of
men and women and children as a unit to be pun-
ished for guilt. They hold that no power has the
moral right to punish the innocent who are related
to the guilty or happen to live in the country with
them. The contention of these peace advocates is
sound that one cannot indict a whole nation. But
the question is, of two evils which is the worse.
LAW OR WAR


Granted that no military compulsion could ever l>e
exerted to enforce a policy of the League or a deci-
sion of the Permanent Court of International Jus-
tice, just as no military force can ever be exerted to
enforce a decision of our Supreme Court; neverthe-
less, in case of invasion and the oppression of a
nation that consents to arbitrate there is a quite dif-
ferent situation, which is very considerable and must
be faced.
What is the ethics of the situation? The famous
discussion in the Constitutional Convention about
the coercion of a state is important to consider.
Madison, after proposing to call forth the force of
the Union against any member of the Union which
failed to fulfil its duty under the articles of the Con-
stitution, soon saw the folly of this and wrote, “A
Union of the states containing such an ingredient
seemed to provide for its own destruction. The use
of force against a state would seem more like a dec-
laration of war than an infliction of punishment,
and would probably be considered by the party at-
tacked as a dissolution of all previous contracts, by
which it might be bound.” It is true that in the com-
paratively recent case between Virginia and West
yirginia, when there was delay in acceptance of the
terms of the verdict by the Supreme Court, Chief
Justice White said that he would find a way to
bring about obedience. But this was not a decision
THE USE OF ARMED FORCE


of the Court. In its earlier days the Supreme Court
had been confronted by disobedience; and its deci-
sions occasionally flouted, as in the case of Georgia
in the Chisholm case in 1792. The other twelve
states sided with Georgia against the Court. There
have been a number of instances where states have
ignored or refused to accept decision by lower federal
courts. But in no instance has military force backed
up the decision of our Supreme Court, and it will
never be called to enforce the decision of the Perma-
nant Court of International Justice.
Certain advocates of peace have rashly inferred
that because no force can or ought to be used in sus-
taining the decisions of the highest courts as regards
states, that any exercise of military force would be
“war.” In the Geneva Protocol the proposals for
penalties for aggression, when the aggressor is rec-
ognised by the League as such, are essentially the
same as those provided by the United States for
keeping law and order when there is an outbreak in
our republic. Again and again the United States
forces have entered different states to maintain peace
until violent disorder had ceased, and the original
dispute could be either left unsettled or settled
legally. They were carrying out essentially police
functions. The policeman does not settle a dispute.
He insists that disputants shall not stab each other
when they have a dispute, but shall take it to court.
LAW OR WAR


The collective force of the city or of the nation in
restraining disorder and in compelling recourse to
courts is the same type of force as that advocated by
the framers of Article X of the Covenant and of
the unratified Protocol. It may involve suffering
of the innocent. But so does the arrest of a criminal
father bring suffering to innocent wife and children.
So may the appearance of federal troops in turbulent
states. The question is, which is the greater of two
evils?
Collective, repressive military force has none of
the characteristics of predatory, revengeful war. It
is not conducted by nations that have a personal
grievance. Just as rioting ceases when federal
troops appear, so it goes without saying no single
power will ever stand out against a collective force
that is vastly superior. There is no reason to sup-
pose that military repressive measures will ever need
to be employed against one aggressor when the de-
fensive nation has agreed to arbitrate. Will it suf-
fice to assume this at the start and abolish all repres-
sive force beyond that of economic and diplomatic
pressure? Evidently no nation goes so far. Arbi-
tration, Security, Disarmament. This is the sequence
insisted on by our nation and all others. Granted
that complete, universal disarmament would bring
security from attack. Granted that our own na-
tional disarmament would not endanger us and
THE USE OF ARMED FORCE


would advance our moral leadership for it would
imply that we are a very different people from what
we know ourselves to be, —absolutely just and
righteous and everywhere recognised as such. But
the question is, what, under existing conditions of in-
creasing armaments, continued fear and suspicion,
the nations can be persuaded to carry as a minimum
of force. The requirement to use force as a last
resort to drive home an aggressor is perhaps the chief
reason for American hesitancy to enter the League.
It is the serious objection which Great Britain finds
to the Protocol. The proposal of Professor Shotwell
is one that deserves profound consideration. It is
that the use of force by the neutral nations shall not
be obligatory, as the Protocol would make it, but
optional . An aggressor nation would first suffer
milder coercion—economic pressure, possibly block-
ade; though that should never go so far as to starve
a people and never when, as in the allied blockade
after the Armistice it was exercised on a nation that
had laid down arms, or at least had ceased fighting.
The sole object of force should be to compel the
force of the aggressor to cease and should go no
further.
If the aggressor is outlawed and as such deprived
of any security for his property in other lands; if he
retains no rights that any one is bound to observe;
if he may have several antagonists instead of one
enemy to contend with and any nation may cut off
LAW OR WAR


trade, commercial and financial intercourse, such an
aggressor is bound quickly to come to terms. If in
the remotely conceivable circumstance that several
nations likewise become aggressors and come to the
help of this aggressor, we should then see on a larger
scale such a condition as existed here during our
Civil War. It would mean another World War.
But the probability of another World War, unless
the nations accept responsibility for suppressing ag-
gression and pledge themselves to peaceful settle-
ment of their disputes is incalculably greater. The
confounding of the police type of force with that of
rival armies and navies tends to prevent the assur-
ance of a minimum of protective force in the back-
ground. This assurance would lead to decrease of
armaments and a sense of security. Without this
sense of security, disarmament cannot be expected;
and any fantastic or merely theoretical objections
to it are out of harmony with the universally ac-
cepted collective repression of violence within each
nation, and are a hindrance to world peace.
The primary consideration is an international
agreement on certain standards of international con-
duct and the education of the world to sacrifice
everything for the maintenance of those standards.
The world is now practically agreed to condemn and
repress any nation that attacks another which stands
ready to arbitrate.
THE USE OF ARMED FORCE




APPENDIX
SOME PEACE ORGANISATIONS
[(Several supply pamphlets free or at nominal price.)
S. American Peace Society (the oldest in the world).
Advocate of Peace. 612 Colorado Building, Wash-
ington, D. C.
2. American School Citizenship League, 405 Marl-
boro Street, Boston, Mass.
3. Carnegie Peace Endowment. Supplies a vast
amount of free literature to libraries. 407 West
117th Street, New York City.
4. Church Peace Union, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York
City.
5. Christianity and World Problems Series. Pam-
phlets by Kirby Page, Sherwood Eddy and others;
10 or 15 cents; nearly a million sold. 347 Madison
Avenue, New York City.
6. Conference on Cause and Cure of War. Annually
convenes delegates from nine national women’s or-
ganizations. 171 Madison Avenue, New York City.
7. Foreign Policy Association. News Bulletin
(weekly), $l.OO a year. 18 East 41st Street, New
York City.
8. League of Nation’s Non-Partisan Association.
League of Nation News (monthly). 6 East 39th
Street, New York City.


g. National Council for the Prevention of War.
News Bulletin (monthly), 25 cents a year. 532
17th Street, Washington, D. C.
10. World Peace Foundation. Issues valuable technical
pamphlets, 5 cents each. 40 Mt. Vernon Street,
Boston, Mass.
>l. World Alliance to Promote International
Friendship Through the Churches. Holds
great national and international conferences. 70
Fifth Avenue, New York City.
LAW OR WAR


COVENANT OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
WITH AMENDMENTS IN FORCE APRIL 1, 1928
Italics Indicate Revision
The High Contracting Parties,
In order to promote international cooperation and to
achieve international peace and security
by the acceptance of obligations not to resort to war,
by the prescription of open, just and honorable relations
between nations,
by the firm establishment of the understandings of in-
ternational law as the actual rule of conduct among
Governments, and
by the maintenance of justice and a scrupulous respect
for all treaty obligations in the dealings of organized
peoples with one another. Agree to this Covenant of
the League of Nations.
Article i
Membership and Withdrawal
if. The original Members of the League of Nations shall
be those of the Signatories which are named in the Annex
to this Covenant, and also such of those other States named
in the Annex as shall accede without reservation to this
Covenant- Such accessions shall be effected by a declara-
tion deposited with the Secretariat within two months of the
coming into force of the Covenant. Notice thereof shall
be sent to all other Members of the League.


2. Any fully self-governing State, Dominion or Colony
not named in the Annex may become a Member of the
League if its admission is agreed to by two-thirds of the
Assembly, provided that it shall give effective guarantees of
its sincere intention to observe its international obligations,
and shall accept such regulations as may be prescribed by
the League in regard to its military, naval and air forces
and armaments.
3. Any Member of the League may, after two years’
notice of its intention so to do, withdraw from the League,
provided that all its international obligations and all its
obligations under this Covenant shall have been fulfilled at
the time of its withdrawal.
Article 2
Executive Organs
The action of the League under this Covenant shall be
effected through the instrumentality of an Assembly and
of a Council, with a permanent Secretariat.
Article 3
Assembly
1. The Assembly shall consist of representatives of the
Members of the League.
2. The Assembly shall meet at stated intervals and from
time to time, as occasion may require, at the Seat of the
League, or at such other place as may be decided upon.
3. The Assembly may deal at its meetings with any mat-
ter within the sphere of action of the League or affecting
the peace of the world.
4. At meetings of the Assembly each Member of the
League shall have one vote and may have not more than
three Representatives.
LAW OR WAR


Article 4
Council
1. The Council shall consist of representatives of the
Principal Allied and Associated Powers [United States of
America, the British Empire, France, Italy and Japan], to-
gether with Representatives of four 1 other Members of the
League. These four x Members of the League shall be
selected by the Assembly from time to time in its discretion.
Until the appointment of the Representatives of the four
Members of the League first selected by the Assembly,
Representatives of Belgium, Brazil, Greece and Spain shall
be Members of the Council.
2. With the approval of the majority of the Assembly,
the Council may name additional Members of the League,
whose Representatives shall always be Members of the
Council; 2 the Council with like approval may increase the
number of Members of the League to be selected by the
Assembly 2 for representation on the Council. 1
2 bis. The Assembly shall fix by a two-thirds majority
the rules dealing with the election of the non-permanent
Members of the Council , and particularly such regulations
ns relate to their term of office and the conditions of re*
eligibility.
3. The Council shall meet from time to time as occa-
sion may require, and at least once a year, at the Seat of
the League, or at such other place as may be decided upon.
4. The Council may deal at its meetings with any matter
within the sphere of action of the League or affecting the
peace of the world.
1 The number of Members of the Council selected by the As-
sembly, by application of the second clause of Art. 4, par. 2, was
increased from four to six on September 25, 1922, and from six
to nine on September 8, 1926.
2 By application of this clause Germany was designated as a
permanent Member of the Council on September 8, 1926, the ap-
propriate action of the Council having been taken on September 4,
APPENDIX


Any Member of the League not represented on the
Council shall be invited to send a Representative to sit as
a member at any meeting of the Council during the con-
sideration of matters specially affecting the interests of that
Member of the League.
6. At meetings of the Council, each Member of the
League represented on the Council shall have one vote, and
may have not more than one Representative.
Article $
Voting and Procedure
1. Except where otherwise expressly provided in this
Covenant, or by the terms of the present Treaty, decisions
at any meeting of the Assembly or of the Council shall re-
quire the agreement of all the Members of the League
represented at the meeting.
2. All matters of procedure at meetings of the Assembly
or of the Council, including the appointment of Committees
to investigate particular matters, shall be regulated by the
Assembly or by the Council and may be decided by a ma-
jority of the Members of the League represented at the
meeting.
3. The first meeting of the Assembly and the first meet-
ing of the Council shall be summoned by the President of
the United States of America.
Article 6
Secretariat and Expenses
1. The permanent Secretariat shall be established at the
Seat of the League. The Secretariat shall comprise a Sec-
retary-General and such secretaries and staff as may be
required.
2. The first Secretary-General shall be the person named
LAW OR WAR


in the Annex; thereafter the Secretary-General shall be
appointed by the Council with the approval of the majority
of the Assembly.
3. The secretaries and the staff of the Secretariat shall be
appointed by the Secretary-General with the approval of the
Council.
4. The Secretary-General shall act in that capacity at all
meetings of the Assembly and of the Council.
5. The expenses of the League shall be borne by the
Members of the League in the proportion decided by the
Assembly.
Article 7
Seat, Qualifications of Officials, Immunities
1. The Seat of the League is established at Geneva.
2. The Council may at any time decide that the Scat of
the League shall be established elsewhere.
3. All positions under or in connection with the League,
including the Secretariat, shall be open equally to men and
women.
4. Representatives of the Members of the League and
officials of the League when engaged on the business of
the League shall enjoy diplomatic privileges and immunities.
5. The buildings and other property occupied by the
League or its officials or by Representatives attending its
meetings shall be inviolable.
Article 8
Reduction of Armaments
1. The Members of the League recognize that the main-
tenance of peace requires the reduction of national arma-
ments to the lowest point consistent with national safety and
the enforcement by common action of international obli-
gations.
APPENDIX


2. The Council, taking account of the geographical situa-
tion and circumstances of each State, shall formulate plans
for such reduction for the consideration and action of the
several Governments.
3. Such plans shall be subject to reconsideration and re-
vision at least every 10 years.
4. After these plans shall have been adopted by the sev-
eral Governments, the limits of armaments therein fixed
shall not be exceeded without the concurrence of the Council.
5. The Members of the League agree that the manu-
facture by private enterprise of munitions and implements
of war is open to grave objections. The Council shall ad-
vise how the evil effects attendant upon such manufacture
can be prevented, due regard being had to the necessities of
those Members of the League which are not able to manu-
facture the munitions and implements of war necessary foe
their safety.
6. The Members of the League undertake to interchange
full and frank information as to the scale of their arma-
ments, their military, naval and air programs, and the con-
dition of such of their industries as are adaptable to war-
like purposes.
Article 9
Permanent Military, Naval and Air Commission
A permanent Commission shall be constituted to advise
the Council on the execution of the provisions of Articles
1 and 8 and on military, naval and air questions generally.
Article 10
Guarantees Against Aggression
The Members of the League undertake to respect and
preserve as against external aggression the territorial in-
LAW OR WAR


tegrity and existing political independence of all Members
of the League. In case of any such aggression or in case
of any threat or danger of such aggression, the Council
shall advise upon the means by which this obligation shall
be fulfilled.
Article 11
Action in Case of War or Threat of War
1. Any war or threat of war, whether immediately affect-
ing any of the Members of the League or not, is hereby
declared a matter of concern to the whole League, and the
League shall take any action that may be deemed wise and
effectual to safeguard the peace of nations. In case any
such emergency should arise, the Secretary-General shall,
on the request of any Member of the League, forthwith
summon a meeting of the Council,
2. It is also declared to be the friendly right of each
Member of the League to bring to the attention of the
Assembly or of the Council any circumstance whatever
affecting international relations which threatens to disturb
international peace or the good understanding between
nations upon which peace depends.
Article 12
Disputes to Be Submitted for Settlement
1. The Members of the League agree that, if there
should arise between them any dispute likely to lead to a
rupture they will submit the matter either to arbitration or
'judicial settlement or to inquiry by the Council and they
agree in no case to resort to war until three months after
the award by the arbitrators or the judicial decision, or the
report by the Council.
2. In any case under this Article, the award of the ar-
APPENDIX


bitrators or the judicial decision shall be made within a:
reasonable time, and the report of the Council shall be
made within six months after the submission of the dispute.
Article 13
Arbitration or Judicial Settlement
1. The Members of the League agree that, whenever
any dispute shall arise between them which they recognize
to be suitable for submission to arbitration or judicial set-
tlement, and which can not be satisfactorily settled by
diplomacy, they will submit the whole subject-matter to
arbitration or judicial settlement.
2. Disputes as to the interpretation of a treaty, as to any
question of international law, as to the existence of any fact
which, if established, would constitute a breach of any in-
ternational obligation, or as to the extent and nature of the
reparation to be made for any such breach, are declared to
be among those which are generally suitable for submission
to arbitration or judicial settlement.
3. For the consideration of any suck dispute, the court
to which the case is referred shall be the Permanent Court
of International Justice, established in accordance with
Article 14, or any tribunal agreed on by the parties to the
dispute or stipulated in any convention existing between
them.
4. The Members of the League agree that they will
carry out in full good faith any award or decision that may
be rendered, and that they will not resort to war against a
Member of the League which complies therewith. In the
event of any failure to carry out such an award or deci-
sion, the Council shall propose what steps should be taken to
give effect thereto.
LAW OR WAR


Article 14
Permanent Court of International Justice
The Council shall formulate and submit to the Members
of the League for adoption plans for the establishment of
a Permanent Court of International Justice. The Court
shall be competent to hear and determine any dispute of
an international character which the parties thereto submit
to it. The Court may also give an advisory opinion upon
any dispute or question referred to it by the Council or by
the Assembly.
Article 15
'Disputes Not Submitted to Arbitration or Judicial
Settlement
1. If there should arise between Members of the League
any dispute likely to lead to a rupture, which is not sub-
mitted to arbitration or judicial settlement in accordance
with Article 13, the Members of the League agree that they
will submit the matter to the Council. Any party to the
dispute may effect such submission by giving notice of the
existence of the dispute to the Secretary-General, who will
make all necessary arrangements for a full investigation
and consideration thereof.
2. For this purpose the parties to the dispute will com-
municate to the Secretary-General, as promptly as possible,
statements of their case, with all the relevant facts and
papers, and the Council may forthwith direct the publication
thereof.
3. The Council shall endeavor to effect a settlement of
the dispute and, if such efforts are successful, a statement
shall be made public giving such facts and explanations
regarding the dispute and the terms of settlement thereof
as the Council may deem appropriate.
APPENDIX


4- If the dispute is not thus settled, the Council, either
unanimously or by a majority vote, shall make and pub-
lish a report containing a statement of the facts of the dis-
pute and the recommendations which are deemed just and
proper in regard thereto.
£. Any Member of the League represented on the Coun-
cil may make public a statement of the facts of the dispute
and of its conclusions regarding the same.
6. If a report by the Council is unanimously agreed to
by the Members thereof other than the Representatives of
one or more of the parties to the dispute, the Members of
the League agree that they will not go to war with any
party to the dispute which complies with the recommenda-
tions of the report.
7. If the Council fails to reach a report which is unan-
imously agreed to by the members thereof, other than the
Representatives of one or more of the parties to the dispute,
the Members of the League reserve to themselves the right
to take such action as they shall consider necessary for the
maintenance of right and justice.
8. If the dispute between the parties is claimed by one
of them, and is found by the Council, to arise out of a mat-
ter which by international law is solely within the domestic
jurisdiction of that party, the Council shall so report, and
shall make no recommendation as to its settlement.
9. The Council may in any case under this Article refer
the dispute to the Assembly. The dispute shall be so re-
ferred at the request of either party to the dispute, provided
that such request be made within 14 days after the submis-
sion of the dispute to the Council.
10. In any case referred to the Assembly, all the pro-
visions of this Article and of Article 12 relating to the ac-
tion and powers of the Council shall apply to the action
and powers of the Assembly, provided that a report made
by the Assembly, if concurred in by the Representatives of
LAW OR WAR


those Members of the League represented on the Council
and of a majority of the other Members of the League, ex-
clusive in each case of the Representatives of the parties to
the dispute, shall have the same force as a report by the
Council concurred in by all the members thereof other than
the Representatives of one or more of the parties to the
dispute.
Article 16
Sanctions of Pacific Settlement
1. 1 Should any Member of the League resort to war in
disregard of its covenants under Articles 12, 13 or 15, it
shall ipso facto be deemed to have committed an act of war
against all other Members of the League, which hereby
undertake immediately to subject it to the severance of all
trade or financial relations, the prohibition of all intercourse
between their nationals and the nationals of the covenant-
breaking State, and the prevention of all financial, com-
mercial or personal intercourse between the nationals of the
covenant-breaking State and the nationals of any other
State, whether a Member of the League or not.
2. It shall be the duty of the Council in such case to
recommend to the several Governments concerned what
1 "lt is for the Council to give an opinion whether or not a
breach of the Covenant has taken place. In deliberations on this
question in the Council, the votes of Members of the League al-
leged to have resorted to war and of Members against whom such
action was directed shall not be counted.
“The Council will notify to all Members of the League the date
which it recommends for the application of the economic pressure
under this Article.
“Nevertheless, the Council may, in the case of particular Mem-
bers, postpone the coming into force of any of these measures for
a specified period where it is satisfied that such a postponement
will facilitate the attainment of the object of the measures referred
to in the preceding paragraph, or that it is necessary in order to
minimise the loss and inconvenience which will be caused to such
Members.”
APPENDIX


effective military, naval or air force the Members of the
League shall severally contribute to the armed forces to be
used to protect the covenants of the League.
3. The Members of the League agree, further, that they
will mutually support one another in the financial and
economic measures which are taken under this Article, in
order to minimize the loss and inconvenience resulting from
the above measures, and that they will mutually support
one another in resisting any special measures aimed at one
of their number by the covenant-breaking State, and that
they will take the necessary steps to afford passage through
their territory to the forces of any of the Members of the
League which are cooperating to protect the covenants of
the League.
4. Any Member of the League which has violated any
covenant of the League may be declared to be no longer a
Member of the League by a vote of the Council concurred
in by the Representatives of all the other Members of
the League represented thereon.
Article 17
Disputes Involving Nonmembers
1. In the event of a dispute between a Member of the
League and a State which is not a Member of the League,
or between States not Members of the League, the State or
States not Members of the League shall be invited to accept
the obligations of Membership in the League for the pur-
poses of such dispute, upon such conditions as the Coun-
cil may deem just. If such invitation is accepted, the
provisions of Articles 12 to 16, inclusive, shall be applied
with such modifications as may be deemed necessary by
the Council.
2. Upon such invitation being given, the Council shall
LAW OR WAR


immediately institute an Inquiry into the circumstances of
the dispute and recommend such action as may seem best
and most effectual in the circumstances.
3. If a State so invited shall refuse to accept the obli-
gations of Membership in the League for the purposes of
such dispute, and shall resort to war against a Member of
the League, the provisions of Article 16 shall be applicable
as against the State taking such action.
4. If both parties to the dispute, when so invited, refuse
to accept the obligations of Membership in the League for
the purposes of such dispute, the Council may take such
measures and make such recommendations as will prevent
hostilities and will result in the settlement of the dispute.
Article 18
Registration and Publication of Treaties
Every treaty or international engagement entered into
hereafter by any Member of the League shall be forthwith
registered with the Secretariat and shall as soon as possible
ibe published by it. No such treaty or international engage-
ment shall be binding until so registered.
Article 19
Review of Treaties
The Assembly may from time to time advise the recon-
sideration by Members of the League of treaties which have
become inapplicable, and the consideration of international
conditions whose continuance might endanger the peace of
the world.
APPENDIX


Article 20
Abrogation of Inconsistent Obligations
1. The Members of the League severally agree that this
Covenant is accepted as abrogating all obligations or un-
derstandings inter se which are inconsistent with the terms
thereof, and solemnly undertake that they will not here-
after enter into any engagements inconsistent with the terms
thereof.
2. In case any Member of the League shall, before be-
coming a Member of the League, have undertaken any ob-
ligation inconsistent with the terms of this Covenant, it
shall be the duty of such Member to take immediate steps
to procure its release from such obligations.
Article 21
Engagements that Remain Valid
Nothing in this Covenant shall be deemed to affect the
validity of international engagements, such as treaties of
arbitration or regional understandings like the Monroe doc'
trine, for securing the maintenance of peace.
Article 22
Mandatory System
1. To those colonies and territories which as a conse-
quence of the late war have ceased to be under the sover-
eignty of the States which formerly governed them and
which are inhabited by peoples not yet able to stand by
themselves under the strenuous conditions of the modern
world, there should be applied the principle that the well-
being and development of such peoples form a sacred trust
of civilization and that securities for the performance of
this trust should be embodied in this Covenant.
LAW OR WAR


2. The best method of giving practical effect to this
principle is that the tutelage of such peoples should be en-
trusted to advanced nations who, by reason of their re-
sources, their experience or their geographical position, can
best undertake this responsibility, and who are willing to
accept it, and that this tutelage should be exercised by them
as Mandatories on behalf of the League.
3. The character of the mandate must differ according to
the stage of the development of the people, the geographical
situation of the territory, its economic conditions and other
similar circumstances.
4. Certain communities formerly belonging to the Turk-
ish Empire have reached a stage of development where
their existence as independent nations can be provisionally
recognized subject to the rendering of administrative advice
and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are
able to stand alone. The wishes of these communities must
be a principal consideration in the selection of the Man-
datory.
5. Other peoples, especially those of Central Africa, are
at such a stage that the Mandatory must be responsible for
the administration of the territory under conditions which
will guarantee freedom of conscience and religion, subject
only to the maintenance of public order and morals, the
prohibition of abuses such as the slave trade, the arms traffic
and the liquor traffic, and the prevention of the establish-
ment of fortifications or military and naval bases and of
military training of the natives for other than police pur-
poses and the defense of territory, and will also secure equal
opportunities for the trade and commerce of other Members
of the League.
6. There are territories, such as Southwest Africa and
certain of the South Pacific islands, which, owing to the
sparseness of their population or their small size, or their
remoteness from the centers of civilization, or their geo-
APPENDIX


graphical contiguity to the territory of the Mandatory, and
other circumstances, can be best administered under the laws
of the Mandatory as integral portions of its territory, sub-
ject to the safeguards above mentioned in the interests of
the indigenous population.
7. In every case of mandate, the Mandatory shall render
to the Council an annual report in reference to the terri-
tory committed to its charge.
8. The degree of authority, control or administration
to be exercised by the Mandatory shall, if not previously
agreed upon by the Members of the League, be explicitly
defined in each case by the Council.
9. A permanent Commission shall be constituted to re-
ceive and examine the annual reports of the Mandatories,
and to advise the Council on all matters relating to the
observance of the mandates.
Article 23
Social and Other Activities
Subject to and in accordance with the provisions of in-
ternational conventions existing or hereafter to be agreed
upon, the Members of the League:
(a) will endeavor to secure and maintain fair and
humane conditions of labor for men, women
and children, both in their own countries and in
all countries to which their commercial and indus-
trial relations extend, and for that purpose will
establish and maintain the necessary international
organizations;
[(b) undertake to secure just treatment of the native
inhabitants of territories under their control;
[(c) will intrust the League with the general supervision
over the execution of agreements with regard to the
LAW OR WAR


traffic in women and children and the traffic in
opium and other dangerous drugs;
(d) will intrust the League with the general supervision
of the trade in arms and ammunition with the
countries in which the control of this traffic is nec-
essary in the common interest;
[(c) will make provision to secure and maintain free-
dom of communications and of transit and equit-
able treatment for the commerce of all Members of
the League. In this connection, the special neces-
sities of the regions devastated during the war of
>914-1918 shall be borne in mind;
J(/) will endeavor to take steps in matters of inter-
national concern for the prevention and control of
disease.
Article 24
International Bureaus
1. There shall be placed under the direction of the
League all international bureaus already established by
general treaties, if the parties to such treaties consent. All
such international bureaus and all commissions for the
regulation of matters of international interest hereafter con-
stituted shall be placed under the direction of the League.
2. In all matters of International interest which are reg-
ulated by general conventions but which are not placed
under the control of international bureaus or commissions,
the Secretariat of the League shall, subject to the consent of
the Council and if desired by the parties, collect and dis-
tribute all relevant information and shall render any other
assistance which may be necessary or desirable.
3. The Council may include as part of the expenses of
the Secretariat the expenses of any bureau or commission
which is placed under the direction of the League.
APPENDIX


Article 25
Promotion of Red Cross and Health
The Members of the League agree to encourage and
promote the establishment and cooperation of duly author-
ized voluntary national Red Cross organizations having as
purposes the improvement of health, the prevention of
disease and the mitigation of suffering throughout the world.
Article 26
Amendments
1. Amendments to this Covenant will take effect when
ratified by the Members of the League whose Representa-
tives compose the Council and by a majority of the Mem-
bers of the League whose Representatives compose the
Assembly.
2. No such amendment shall bind any Member of the
League which signifies its dissent therefrom, but in that
case it shall cease to be a Member of the League.
LAW OR WAR
