

6lo r
COMMONWEALTH / AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT/CIVIL AVIATION
LAWRENCE HARGRAVE
PIONEER
AUSTRALIAN AVIATION




COMMONWEALTH / AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT/CIVI L AVIATION
LAWRENCE HARGRAVE
PIONEER
AUSTRALIAN AVIATION
, ISSUED BY-
PUBLIC RELATIONS BRANCH
2J+6 . 5000 . 10/53


Lawrence Hargrave.


LAWRENCE HARGRAVE
HIS LIFE AND WORK
The invention of the aeroplane was not the worh of
any one man, but no one made a greater contribution to its
development than Australia's Lawrenoe Hargrave. During his
experiments at 3tanwell Parh, in N.S.V., he discovered almost
every major principle of aerodynamics by which aeroplanes fly
today.
Lawrence Hargrave was born at Greenwich, England, January 29,
1850. He received his formal education at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar
School in Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmorland, where he early showed an ap-
titude for mathematics. He was 16 when he sailed from England in the
1,530 tons "La Hogue", once famous as an Australian liner.
It was intended that Lawrence should follow law, but he failed
to matriculate and turned to a life of adventure, both practically and
theoretically. Engineering fired his imagination. He entered the
engineering shops of the Australian Steam Navigation Company, where he
acquired the technical proficiency which enabled him to construct the
flying models with which he experimented.
Between the years 1872 and 1877 the spirit of adventure burned
strongly within him and at the age of 22 he became a member of the com-
mittee of management of the New Guinea Prospecting Association. They
purchased the brig "Maria", an unseaworthy vessel of 167 tons, formerly
used in the coal trade, and left Port Jackson on 25th January, 1872.
Disaster followed the expedition. The vessel drifted onto the Bramble
Reef, off the coast of Queensland, and sank on 26th February. Hargrave
was one of the last to be rescued. Two rafts were used by the party
in their escape, one of which reached Cardwell. The survivors were
well received by the blacks. Those on the second raft were murdered.
Of a total of 75» only I+o persons survived the ill-fated expedition.
New Guinea, however, seemed to hold a strange fascination for
Hargrave. On May 18th, 1875> he again sailed, this time as engineer
on the barque "Chevert", a ton vessel originally built as a French
man-o-war of 11+ guns. Between May and September, 1875, this expedition,
under William Macleay (afterwards Sir William Macleay) explored the
Gulf of Papua. Hargrave took his discharge from this ship at Somerset,
at the tip of Cape York Peninsula, and we next hear of him exploring
the hinterland of Port Moresby between October, 1875, and January, 1876,
It was at Moresby that he met Luigi Maria D’Albertis, with
whom he sailed over I+oo miles up the Fly River. During this trip he was
employed as engineer on the steam launch "Neva" at the wage of 1/- a
month.
Hargrave’s final visit to New Guinea was in 1877, when he
sailed to Torres Straits to report on the pearling stations. During
these trips he kept accurate and detailed notes.


In 1877 Hargrave was elected a member of the Royal Society of
New South Wales. He remained a member throughout his life.
Two events of note occurred in 1878. In September of that
year Hargrave was married. In the same month he was appointed as Extra
Assistant Astronomical Observer, under H.C. Russell, at the Sydney Ob-
servatory. He held this position for only five years and retired in
1883 to devote himself exclusively to scientific research - the achieve-
ment of human flight.
At that time people believed that flying through the air was
impossible. They called Hargrave's research a folly and spoke of him
as the "mad kite flier". Even some members of the Royal Society scoffed
at him. But he was confident of success.
He built many models and other apparatus, usually of a small
size and simple construction. He often complained that he found it
difficult to obtain materials for his models, and, so meticulous was he
for detail, it is revealed that "in the 28 years from 1887 to his death
in 1915) he spent ... exactly £ij.18.19-1 on experimental material".
In reply to criticism Hargrave wrote: "It may be said that
it is a waste of time to make machines of such small capabilities, and
that no practical good can come of them. But we must not try too much
at first; we must remember that all our inventions are but mere develop-
ments of crude ideas; that a commercially successful result in a prac-
tically unexplored field cannot possibly be got without an enormous
amount of unremunerative work. It is the piled up and recorded experi-
ence of many busy brains that produces the luxurious travelling con-
veniences of today.".
From 188 U to 1899> a total of 18 of his papers appeared in
the Royal Society's "Journal". He looked upon this "Journal" as a
"sort of bank in which can safely be deposited ideas of a more or less
bizarre nature which, when first presented, appear ridiculous".
He corresponded with aeronautical workers in Europe and America
and it was said that his work was better known amongst the scattered
members of this little world of flight than at home. Although many
people are vaguely familiar with the name of Lawrence Hargrave, few
realise that he laid the foundations of research in aeronautics. In
addition to the papers that he read before the Royal Society, he brought
models to demonstrate the contributions he was making to a new science.
On December 2nd, 1885, a model weighing 1 .i+7 lbs., driven by
rubber bands in tension, flew 120 feet at m.p.h. Although at this
time he was still constructing his models with flat wing surfaces, he
was convinced of the superiority of planes set • at a dihedral angle.
He used this principle later in his kite models, and now it is employed
to give lateral stability to most modern aircraft.
Using his training as an engineer, he experimented intensively
with various means of propulsion for the aircraft he visualized. He
built models powered by clockwork, elastic bands in tension, steam and
internal combustion engines. During the course of these experiments
he invented 6 type of engine now known as the "rotary".


Rotary aeroplane engine invented by Hargrave in 1889,
In this engine the cylinders were arranged on the blades of
a propeller. The principle was "the boss of the propeller turned into
an engine, allowing the cylinders to revolve on the crankshaft, the
shaft and crank-pin being stationary and the thrust coming direct on
the valve face".
The first machine weighed f lb. Most of the successful early
aircraft engines were constructed on this principle, the best known of
these being the French "Gnome".
In 1894 a leading writer of that time wrote "If there be one
man more than another who deserves to succeed in flying through the air,
that man is Lawrence Hargrave.".
Dp to that time his energy was devoted principally to the
building and experimental testing of aeroplane models, with single flat
supporting surface usually of paper and propelled chiefly by flapping
wings. On April Bth, 1890,a flapping wing, single-cylinder, compressed-
air-driven model which he constructed, flew 368 feet. He persevered
with this type of model because of the poor results of his screw pro-
pelled aircraft at that time.
About the year 1893, however, Hargrave’s attention was drawn
to the "lift" which raised birds and artificial objects from the ground
without application of power and by the force of the motion of the air
above. His researches led him into the dynamic principles underlying
the movements of concave-convex surfaces in a wind. In his experi-
ments with kites he discovered that one with horizontal surfaces curved
with the convex side upwards pulled twice as hard as one with flat sur-
faces. He predicted, therefore, that "in all probability the curved
plane would prove to be the permanent type of supporting surface of
flying machines" - another prophecy that came time.
His experiments with kites began in 1893, with a type which
he called "cellular". In his famous experiment at Stanwell Park in
IB9i+, four box kites lifted Hargrave 16 feet from the ground in a breeze
of 21 m.p.h. Except for a few attempts at gliding, this was the only
occasion he was in the air.




Although it haa often been claimed that Hargrave invented the
box kite, he disclaimed this. He experimented with them and some of
his designs led to the military observation kite. Others, combined
with suitable recording instruments, resulted in the Marvin-Hargrave
apparatus used for meteorological observations by the Weather Bureau
of America.
In iB9B he read two further papers on "Soaring Machines” and
exhibited both monoplanes and biplanes. One of these models soared in
a wind of 12-11+ m.p.h. He said then: "If we are not soaring in mod-
erate breezes before the end of the century it will not be from ignorance
of the way to do it."
In 1899 Hargrave visited England where he read a paper and
exhibited models to the Aeronautical Society of Great Britain.
Even while experimenting with his models of pine, paper and
elastic, he looked forward with serene optimism to the time when man-
carrying, power-driven aeroplanes would carry passengers and mail. When
Wilbur Wright made his historic flight on December I?th, 1903 - the
first successful flight in a man-carrying, power-driven aeroplane -
Hargrave was suffering from an attack of typhoid fever. Prom his sick-
bed he wrote to congratulate the airman.
His work, however, was not all concerned with flight. The
scope of his interests and the activity of his brain were remarkable.
At one time he constructed a pair of water skis with which he walked on
the waters of Sydney Harbour. Others who essayed the feat failed.
He also experimented with a hydroplane, but no practical results came
from this, mainly because of the lack of a suitable engine.
Another subject in which Hargrave tookakeen interest was the
travels of early explorers. Basing his theories on the notes he had
made in New Guinea, he endeavoured to solve the disappearance of the
Spanish Captain, Lope de Vega, off Tinacula, in 1595. He firmly be-
lieved that de Vega visited Sydney Harbour nearly 200 years before the
First Fleet under Governor Phillip. In a biographical sketch written
shortly after his death, appeared the following passage: "Pew keener
students of ancient geography than Hargrave ever lived. I think he had
in his possession copies of the charts made by every navigator of note
from the time * that the mariners of Spain first voyaged across unknown
seas in search of new continents to conquer."
About the year 1912, we find his numerous locomotory devices
overlooked. In the same way, his attempts to elucidate the early hist-
ory of Australia were thrust aside. But his contributions to the
science of Aeronautics have been built on and carried to a practical
success by men on both sides of the world.
Hargrave's son, Geoffrey, also adopted engineering as a pro-
fession. The Technological Museum, Sydney, displays a rotary aero-
plane engine made by him. For many years he assisted his father in
the construction of his models. Geoffrey enlisted in 191 U and was sent
to Gallipoli. When he was killed in May, 1915, his father destroyed
many papers which he had obviously been keeping for his son.
Hargrave attended his last meeting of the Royal Society in
June, 1915- When illness overtook him there was little will left to
resist, and* after two weeks' illness, he died on July, 6th, 1915, at
Lister Private Hospital, Darlinghurst, Sydney, He was buried at Waver-
ley Cemetery.


Although the work of Lawrence Hargrave is little known in
Australia now, many tributes have from time to time been paid to his
researches. After the first successful flight from Europe to America,
the press referred to his work and its lack of appreciation in Australia.
Ross Smith's famous flight in 1919 brought further mention of the name
of Lawrence Hargrave. No more convincing argument can be advanced for
the importance of the Hargrave kite than the fact that the first aero-
plane ever to fly publicly - that of Santos Dumont, in Prance in 1906 -
was simply an arrangement of these kites.
* Model of the Santos-Dumont biplane (1906), the first aeroplane
to fiy in Europe. It dew tail first, and consisted of an arrangement of
Hargrave box kites.
The "Lawrence Hargrave Memorial Fund" to erect a suitable
monument to the "scientist who discovered the principles of flight" was
launched at the end of 1919. The amount collected - between £3OO and
£350 - was considered tobe insufficient to erect a suitable monument,
and the money was held in trust. In 1922 the Royal Society of N.S.W.
suggested an edition of his collected aeronautical papers, but nothing
came of this.
The Sydney Technological Museum, Ultimo,contains photographs
of Hargrave's devices and models, and nine early flying machine models,
presented by Hargrave in 1891. Many other later models were given to
Germany and housed in the Museum at Munich,a memorial tablet to Hargrave
being set up among the collection of aerodynamic material.
At the present time, Mr. G.O. Inglfedew, of Sydney, is con-
structing replicas of the most important of these from detailed plans
published by Hargrave. The models will be exact duplications, lacking
only the sentiment attached to the originals. Some are already on view.
These models, together with those of the most modern types of aircraft,
will tell a connected story of the beginnings of the aeroplane and its
development into the highly efficient machine we know today.


3 1508 00246321 9


