

LAWS
OF THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
Grand United
Order of Oddfellows
FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
Enrolled under the Friendly Societies' Act,
1886 , 1892 , and 1894.
ADOPTED 5th MARCH, 1918.
Adelaide:
HUNKIN, ELLIS & KING, PIRIE STREET.
1918.


LAWS
OF THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
Grand United
Order of Oddfellows
FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
Enrolled under the Friendly Soeie ties' Aet,
1886, 1892, and 1894.
ADOPTED sth MARCH, 1918.
JSBBSifc;
Hdnkin, Ellis & King, Firie Street,
1918,


®ruBteea :
WM. BRING (Chairman).
W . H. IND.
E. J. HENRY.
R. E. KIPPIST.
J. KAY.
(Braitir £ecretacg ati£i Creasurer:
CHARLES E. MOLTON.


The South Australian Grand United
& o« Oddf e / /(
$
FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
INCORPORATED.
We herebp Certlfp that
was Initiated a Member of
*2/1.. (J Lodge,
No./ jh 1 ADELAIDE DISTRICT.
on
the.
1 —day
As Witness our hands,


The Advantages of Oddfellowship.
“To-morrow has never yet dawned on any man, but still man loves to
peer into the future. Truly may it be said that the stern necessities of
life compel wise and practical men to look, provide, and hope for the
future. No man dare defy futurity and all its unknown joys, trials,
sorrows, or misfortunes ; though the full man, worthy of the name, feels
confidence in the unseen to-morrow, bring with it what it may, and,
trusting in the Almighty Giver of all good, he learns to labour and to
wait. •
■'Seeing thus, that no man dare deny futurity, and when alone and
unassociated with communities is ever liable to casualties and priva-
tions of Nature without the power of alleviating them, and that by
nature he is both weak and powerless by his own unaided efforts. He
who created this world gifted man with faculties of mind and destined
him for associating with his fellows; to this end the power of lan-
gauge was imparted, minds to design, and hands to execute. This stands
in evidence of the goodness of that Divine Architect who created this
world, with all its glittering orbs that move with unerring harmony
through the tracts of infinite space.
"Though the fulness of time will bring the consummation---when the
sword shall be turned into the ploughshare—in the meantime our noble
Institution has made one step towards this great end ; and as we advance
in years, numbers, and intelligence, greater will be the advantages to
those who follow after us,'through our earlier and successful exertions.
"The Grand United Order of Oddfellows was founded for the purpose
of assisting each other at times, when, but for the helping hand of our
brethren, sorrow and misery .might sojourn for a long period in our
dwellings; for this* and our great brotherly dove to all mankind, we
have bound ourselves together by a solemn tie to act to each other as
brethren, holding out that helping hand to each in that hour when sick-
ness or suffering overtakes us. We then have the power of knowing
that the pangs of extreme poverty may be relieved, the despondency of
sickness alleviated, and the hour of mortal dissolution rendered less
awful by the voluntary association of the brotherhood, uniting together
ior one common good* and to", guard against 4 ,those unforeseen casualties
which al! men are more or less liable to.
/‘To cheer and protect the suffering and unfortunate; to sympathise
with and aid those whom sickness, accident, or disease may overtake;
to dry the tears of the widow and orphan, aiid to grant aid to our
brethren when travelling in search of employment, are among the lead-
ing objects of the Grand United Order of Oddfellows.
‘‘Thus far it has be<|n observed the objects of our Society are mutually
to-aid each other in thejhour of adversity, and contribute in a manly
and becoming way to each others happiness. We tolerate no licentious-
ness, or permit our members to engage in brawls; but claim a ready
obedience to our laws, which will make them both beloved and honor-
able. Our laws are just and liberal, consistent with the general welfare
of the whole Brotherhood, The assumption of power and arrogance of
demeanour by the presumptuous is not tolerated; the rights of every
member are scrupulously respected -and (guarded /'each individual mem-
ber >as eflual rights and privileges,'and no artificial barriers are permit-
ted to any of our members from obtaining the highest honours
in the Ogden;! Henevolqice, Rriendship, and Brotherly Love are our
Objects £ Justi<|e, adbertyi andf Morality are our Characteristics; we are
obedient to the laws of opr country, and we strive with the fear of Qod
in our hearts, to be good fathers and good husbands; honest, sober,
.aod industrious in our occupation; and holding out the hand of Friend-
ship, Love, and Truth, we welcome all mankind to the folds of the
OWd United Order of Oddfelknys,” ’


INDEX TO GENERAL LAWS.
No. of Law.
Application and Investment of Funds ,5 to 6
Annual Returns
Alteration, Amending, or Making Laws . . . . ol to
Certificates and Declarations to be Forwarded to o
District Jg
Delegates—Appointment . to
District Officers —Nomination of ‘
District Officers —Mode of Election 7
District Officers —Vacancies, how tilled 11
District Officers’ Power to Examine Branch Books,
, . . . . . . 14 to lo
District Officers’ Meetings 16
District Committees, how formed .. . . 18
District Committees and Order of Business . . . . 17 to 20
District Members .. 41
District Special Board of Arbitration 44
District Auditors 28
District Trustees 29 to 31
Establishment of Branches 34 to 40
Entertainment of Business 27
Fines 48 to 49
Forms to be used under penalty 51
Funeral Funds _ 3
Funeral Donations 4-.> to 47
Grand Secretary and Treasurer’s Duties .... .... 8
Grand Secretary and Treasurer —Giving Security .. 8
Grand Secretary and Treasurer- —Mode oi Election . . 11
Grand Master to Preside 12
Interpretation Clause 50
Levies —Funeral Fund 21
Levies —Management 21
Lodge Seal to be affixed 22
Management Fund 4
Management and Closing of Branches 41
Name, Constitution, and Objects of Society .. .. 1 to 2
Petitions 43
Passwords 42
Refractory Lodges 23
Schedule of Forms A to M
Tyler—Appointment IS
Visiting Lodges and Extension of the Order 19
INDEX TO BRANCH LAWS-MALE.
Admission of Members 89 to 41
Appropriation of Funds 12
Balancing Books of Accounts .. 13
Committee of Management and Officers 19 to 25
Clearance or Transfer of Members 47 to 50
Contributions 68 to 64
Contributions to other Lodges, Surgeons’ Lists, &c. 71 to 72
Declaring or Striking Levies on Members .. .. 9 to 10
Declaration of Age, Health, and Registration .. . . 43 to 44
Divulging Names of Members Voting, &c 42
Disorderly Conduct of Members, causing Sickness,
and Punishment 76
Disputes and Appeals 58 to 62
Fines .. 6-7-38-34
financial Secretary and Duties .... 26
Financial and Lodge Committees .. 28 to 31
Friendly Societies’ Dispensary .. ,81
Honorary Members 46
Lodge Auditors 11


No. of Law.
Lodge Meetings and Business . . . 1 to 5
Lodges or Branches, how constituted 4
Lodge Sick and Funeral Fund 17
Lodge Medical and Management Fund 18
Lodge Officers and Elections 19 to 25
Members Giving and Receiving Countersign .... 6
Members Speaking in Open Lodge 7
Members to be Financial 36
Minute Secretary and Duty 27
Members Marrying after Initiation .. .. .... 44
Members removing to distant parts and their Sickness 72
Members out of Lodge Limits 7*
Meetings of Country Lodges 3
No Lodge allowed to Initiate persons who have been
refused admission in any other Branch of this
Order under penalty . . . 41
Opening and Closing Propositions 8
Pay-up Night 36
Persons Admitted in Lodges not Members 5
Prohibition Hours when on, the .Sick Fund 77
Propositions and Initiations . . 39 to 40
He-adraission of Members 35
Regalia 85
Registration and Declaration Book 45
Suspension and Expulsions 51 to 57
Sickness and Sick-Pay 65 to 70
Sick-Pay Maximum, Full and Half 69
Surgeons 79 to 84
.Surgeons for Members of other Societies 70
Trustees. Treasurer, and Guarantee Bond 14 to 16
When Benefits Cease, &c 34 to 38
INDEX TO BRANCH LAWS-FEMALE.
No. of Law.
Admission of Members 22 to 24
Auditors 21
Contributions 25
Declaration On and Off Funds 34
Finance and Lodge Committees 15 to 16
Financial Secretary and Duties 18
Funeral Fund 5
Funeral Fund Levies 7
Funeral Allowance 6
Funeral Allowance—Dispute of Claimants 8
Honorary Members 28
Imposing on Sick Funds 35 to 36
Lodge Meetings 9 to 10
Lodge Management 11
Lodge Sick and Funeral Fund 26
Lodge Medical and Management Fund 27
Management of District Funds 3
Minute Secretary and Duty 19
Misappropriation of Funds . 29
Name, Constitution, and Objects of Society 1 to'2
Propositions 12
Re-admission of Members 33
Sickness and Sick Pay 30 to 31
Surgeons 23
Treasurer and Funds 4
Treasurer and Duties 20
Trustees 17
Visitation of Sick * | ] 37
When Benefits Cease .... 82
INt)EX fo BRANCH LAWS (ConliuUecl!.


GENERAL LAWS
For the Government of the
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
Grand United Order of Oddfellows
FRIENDLY SOCIETY (Incorporated).
Preamble.
It having been found advisable to alter, repeal,
amend, and add to the laws now in force in the
Friendly Society known as the “South Australian
Grand United Order of Oddfellows Friendly So-
ciety,” be it hereby enacted by, and with the author-
ity of a District Committee Meeting of the Order,
held in accordance with rules now in force at the time
hereof, and assented to by such District Commit-
tee or adjournments thereof, that all laws hitherto
in force and acknowledged as such are hereby re-
pealed, and these laws substituted in lieu thereof,
which shall be acknowledged and acted upon for
the future, immediately on their being confirmed by
the Governor, in accordance with the requirements
of the Friendly Societies Act, 1886, and Amended
Acts 1892 and 1894.
Name, Constitution, and Objects of the
Society.
1. The Society shall be called the “South Austra-
lian Grand United Order of Oddfellows Friendly
Society,” and shall consist of a General Board, or
Committee of Management, composed of the three
Executive Officers of the Order, called the Grand
Master, the Deputy Grand Master, and the Grand
Secretary and Treasurer, and delegates appointed
as hereinafter provided for, and shall be unlimited


in its number of members (male and female),
Branches, Districts, Juvenile Branches, and Grand
Master’s Councils, and, collectively, shall possess
the power of legislating and adjudicating upon all
matters relating to its general government, rule,
welfare, and in all cases and circumstances not here-
in provided for, the Society, in general District Com-
mittee Meeting assembled, shall have authority to
legislate and adjudicate thereon; and the business
shall be conducted at the office of the Society, Alfred
Masonic Hall, Waymouth-street, Adelaide, or at
such other place as the District Trustees, in con-
junction with the District Officers, may from time
to time appoint.
• 3. The objects of the Society are the following,
viz:—To raise funds by entrance-fees, contributions
of the members, fines, donations, interest on capital,
and receipts from any other source, for insuring a
sum of money, not to exceed Fifty Pounds, to be
paid on the death of a member, and a sum of money,
not to exceed Ten Pounds, to be paid to a member
on the death of his wife, and a sum of money, not to
exceed Eight Pounds, on the death of a member of
a Juvenile Branch. Provided always that no sum
of money which may have been insured and be-
come 'payable on the death of a member, or his
wife, or a member of a Juvenile Branch, shall be
paid unless the party applying for the same shall
produce and deliver a certificate signed by a legally
qualified medical practitioner or coroner, except in
cases where, from the nature of the circumstances,
it is impossible to procure such certificates, as pro-
vided for by the Friendly Societies Act of 1886, and
for the relief of members in sickness, and other
purposes.
District Funeral Funds.
3. The District Funeral Funds shall consist of the
amount standing to the credit of these funds, to
which shall be added levies upon each benefit mem-
ber (adults and juveniles) of this District, as may
be determined by each District Committee Meeting,
and interest on the capital of this fund, rent of free-
holds, gifts, &c. The levies to these funds shall
be paid by the Lodges’ Sick and Funeral Fund, and
Juvenile Branches from the General Fund, and no
payment shall be made from these funds except for
funeral moneys due upon the death of members and


their wives, or members of Juvenile Branches, or
for rates, taxes, commission, and repairs to freehold
property.
District Management Fund.
4. The District Management Fund shall consist of
the amount standing to the credit of this fund, to
which shall be added sale of goods, fines, &c.,
and a levy upon each benefit member of this
District (adults and juveniles). The amounj
of such levy shall be determined at each
District Committee Meeting, and shall be
paid from the Lodges’ Medical and Management
Fund, and from Juvenile Lodges’ General Fund.
This fund shall pay all expenses incurred in con-
ducting the business of this District, and all other
payments ordered by resolution of a District Com-
mittee Meeting.
Application and Investment of Funds.
5. The present capital of the Society, and all mo-
neys hereafter received on account of entrance-fees,
contributions, fines, donations, levies, and interest
on capital, &c., shall be applied in carrying out the
objects of the district, and in paying the expenses of
management, according to the rules thereof, as here-
inafter expressed.
G. So much of the funds of the Society as maj'
not be wanted for immediate use, or to meet the
usual or accruing liabilities, shall, by a majority of
the Trustees for the time being, be invested pursuant
to the requirements of the Friendly Societies Act
1886, and amended Acts 1893 and 1894, in respect of
such funds.
District Officers.
7. The Grand Master and Deputy Grand Master
shall be elected at each Annual Committee of the
District, on a Tuesday in the month of March from
Past Presidents. The mode of election shall be
as follows;—On the first Lodge night in the month
of November in every year each Lodge may nomi-
nate one Past President for each of the offices of
Grand Master and Deputy Grand Master. Such
nominations, if made, shall be forwarded by the
Financial Secretary of the Lodge to the G.S. within


seven days after the night.of nomination, under a
penalty for non-compliance of ten shillings and six-
pence without appeal, to be paid to the District
Management Fund by the Financial Secretary, and
should such nomination be not forwarded within
the before-mentioned seven days, the nomination,
so far as regards the Lodge so neglecting, will be
void. The G.S. shall circulate throughout the
Lodges, on or before the 10th day of December en-
suing, the names of those persons who have been
nominated for the several offices above specified,
and also the names of those persons who have con-
sented to stand their poll for the office to which
they were nominated. On the finance night of
every Lodge next preceding the Annual District
Meeting the votes of the brothers present for. the
persons nominated as above shall be taken by ballot,
and the Financial Secretary of each Lodge shall
send the result of such voting, as per schedule K,
under cover to the Grand Secretary, or in default
be fined ten shillings and sixpence without appeal;
such results to be opened by two scrutineers ap-
pointed by the meeting; and those persons nomi-
nated as above who have the highest number of
votes in the aggregate shall be declared elected to
the separate offices of Grand Master and Deputy
Grand Master. Provided always that should there
be one candidate only for either position, such can-
didate shall be declared elected at the Annual
District Committee Meeting.
The G.M. and D.G.M. of the past year shall not
be eligible for re-election to the same office for
twelve months, unless there are no other qualified
candidates. Provided always, that any person
who shall visit any Lodge other than the one of
which he is a member on the night of election of
candidates for the office of Grand Masfier and
Deputy Grand Master, shall be held to be disquali-
fied from accepting such office.
8. The Grand Secretary, who shall also be Trea-
surer, shall give security to the Trustees of the
Society in the sum of not less than Five Hundred
Pounds, in some Guarantee Society (approved by
the District Trustees, premiums to be paid by the
District) for all moneys and properties entrusted
to his care. He shall deposit in the Bank to the
credit of the Society all sums received by him as
soon as the}' amount to twenty pounds and up-
wards, and the Bank of the Society shall be the


Bank of Adelaide, or such other Bank as may from
time to time be decided by the Trustees of the So-
ciety. He shall have charge of all accounts of
the Society, and shall be the recognised medium of
communication between Lodges and the District,
and the various saleable goods of the District shall
remain in his possession. He shall keep the books
in a true and faithful manner, and produce a bal-
ance-sheet and all securities for the inspection of
the Auditors; send to each Lodge of the District a
report of all the proceedings and financial matters
within one month after each District Committee
Meeting; forward to the Public Actuary all re-
turns required by the Friendly Societies Act; he
shall also render to all Branch Secretaries any as-
sistance that may be necessary; for neglect of duty
he shall be dealt with as the District Committee
Meeting shall determine.
9. The Grand Secretary and Treasurer holding-
office on the passing of these laws shall continue in
office during the pleasure of, and be removable by,
the Grand Master, the D.G.M., and District Trus-
tees combined, or the District Committee Meeting.
10. The salary of the Grand Secretary and Trea-
surer shall be fixed at the Annual District Commit-
tee Meeting to be held in March, and shall be paid
monthly.
11. If a vacancy occurs during the year through
death, resignation, or otherwise, in the office of
Grand Master or Deputy Grand Master, the remain-
ing officers shall have power to fill up such vacancy;
but should the office of Grand Secretar-y and Trea-
surer become vacant from death or any other cause,
the G.M. and D-G.M., in conjunction with the Dis-
trict Trustees, shall appoint a member to tempor-
arily fill the position until the next District Com-
mittee Meeting is held. Notices shall be sent to all
the Lodges as soon as possible calling attention to
the vacancy, and each Lodge may nominate one
member to fill the office, these nominations to be
circulated among all the Lodges. ' On finance
night of every Lodge next preceding the annual
District Meeting the votes of the brothers present
shall be taken by ballot, if contested, for the per-
sons so nominated. The Financial Secretary of
each Lodge shall send result of such ballot under
cover to the Grand Secretary, or in default be fined
10s. 6d., without appeal, such results to be opened
by the scrutineers appointed by the meeting. No


person acting as a District Officer in any other
enrolled benefit Society shall be eligible for any
District office in connection with this Order.
13. The Grand Master shall preside over all Dis-
trict Meetings, and shall be entitled to give only a
casting vote upon any matter, see that justice is
done to each Lodge and Brother in the District,
impose fines for infractions of laws, and attend, if
practicable, the opening of all new Lodges in the
District. In the absence of the Grand Master from
the District Meeting, the Deputy Grand Master
shall preside. Should both officers be absent, a
Chairman shall be chosen from the delegates pre-
sent. When it is not convenient for any of the
District Officers to be present at the opening of a
new Lodge, they shall have power to authorise two
Past Presidents to act for them.
13. A District Committee shall be formed, to con-
sist of the Grand Master, Deputy Grand Master,
Grand Secretary, and delegates appointed by each
Lodge to attend the same, to be chosen out of the
past and present elective officers, as follows: —
Lodges having less than fifty members and G.M.’s
Councils shall send one delegate, Lodges hav-
ing more than fifty members shall send two
delegates. No delegate shall sit on such Com-
mittee unless he has been regularly appointed
by his Lodge or G.M.’s Council (as per
Schedule H) and be a subscribing brother; but in
cases of emergency the Noble Grand and Financial
Secretary of the Lodge or presiding officer of the
G.M.’s Council, shall have power to appoint any
qualified brother of their own Lodge or G.M.’s
Council in place of the delegate appointed, subject
to the approval of the Committee; except in cases
of a new Lodge, when any of the elective officers
may be appointed, though not subscribing brothers
to such Lodge, if there be none of their own
qualified.
Provided also, that Lodges at a greater distance
than twenty miles from Adelaide shall have power
to appoint qualified brothers of other Lodges to
represent them at District Meetings, not more than
one qualified brother of any one Lodge shall be
appointed to represent such Lodges. The Com-
mittee to be held in such room in the City of Ade-
laide or such other place as the District Committee
Meeting may from time to time appoint.


14. The District Officers are empowered to exam-
ine the books of any Lodge, or to appoint afly
qualified brother to do the same. Expenses to
be paid by the Lodge.
15. The District Officers may review the position
of any Lodge, and if they consider its financial
position or progress unsatisfactory, they may make
any suggestions they think advisable in the interest
of the Lodge and Order; and the District Officers
are empowered to enforce upon such Lodge any or
all of such suggestions.
16. The District Officers shall meet at least once
a month for the transaction of business connected
with the District, and any Officer of the District
or Trustee being absent from any meeting after
receiving notice to attend shall be fined five shil-
lings, except in case of sickness, or a satisfactory
apology be received and accepted. All accounts
owing by the District (except amounts due on
death of members or members’ wives, or votes by
District Meetings) shall be submitted to the Dis-
trict Officers at their meetings, and be approved by
them, and initialled by the Chairman before being
paid. The remuneration to be paid to the G.M. and
D.G.M., if present, shall be five shillings each. Any
Lodge requiring the special attendance of the Dis-
trict Officers shall pay their reasonable expenses,
and the decision of a majority of the District Officers
on any question as to the interpretation of the
General Laws shall be final.
District Committees and Order of Business.
17. The District Committee Meeting shall be held
half-yearly on a Tuesday in the months of March
and September of each year, at 10 o’clock a.m., on
a date to be fixed by the District Officers, and shall
have power to adjourn from time to time until the
business of the Committee is concluded. District
Officers and Delegates not attending at the time
appointed shall be fined five shillings each, unless
a satisfactory apology be made.
18. The District Officers shall receive twenty shil-
lings each and the Tyler ten shillings per day per
sitting. The Tyler shall be appointed by the Dis-
trict Officers.


t l9. Each Annual District Meeting may vote a sum
ot money not exceeding £5O for the use of the
District Officers in visiting or opening new Lodges
during the next ensuing twelve months.
30. Any member improperly reflecting on the deci-
sions of any District Committee Meeting, so as to
bring them into contempt or ridicule, shall be fined
such amount, or suffer such punishment as the Dis-
trict Committee Meeting shall determine; and any
delegate refusing to obey the G.M. when called to
order shall be fined five shillings for each offence.
31. All Lodges shall join in the Funeral and Man-
agement expenses of the District according to their
number of members, and the rate per member of
District levies Shall be fixed at each half-yearly Dis-
trict Committee Meeting. And if the levies and
other income have not been sufficient to meet the
past half-year’s expenses in either or both the Fune-
ral and Management Funds, then a special levy shall
be made upon all the members to either or both
these funds to cover the loss. Such levy shall be
collected from the members of each Lodge. The
returns and cash from each Lodge to be delivered
to the G.S., or forwarded so as to be received by him
on or before the 35th days of January, April, July,
and October, under a fine of twenty-one shillings for
non-compliance in each case.
33. The District and each Lodge shall be provided
with a seal or stamp, and (except printed circulars
or summonses) all documents, correspondence, cer-
tificates, and clearances shall have the District or
Lodge seal or stamp affixed thereto.
33. If a Lodge refuse or fail to comply with the
resolutions of the District Committee Meeting the
G.S. shall warn them in writing of the same; and if
they still persist in non-compliance, the District
Officers shall have the power to suspend such
Lodge until the next District Committee Meeting is
held, when the delegates shall have
power to continue or discontinue such
suspension, and such Lodge shall have
no claim on the District funds during such suspen-
sion. Any District Officer using this law with an
improper motive shall be dealt with as a District
Committee Meeting may decide.


34. The General Laws shall apply to District Com-
mittee Meetings, and fines shall be imposed by
presiding officers the same as in ordinary Lodge-
room.
23. Any member having a charge pending against
him at a District Committee Meeting, or bringing
a charge against another, shall not be allowed to sit
as a delegate during the time of the case being-
heard, nor shall any delegates sit and vote for or
against who are interested in cases of appeal.
26. The business of the District Committee Meet-
ing shall be conducted with properly closed doors
(members of the Order allowed to be present), and
shall commence as soon after the appointed time as
the officers are seated, and the Tyler has reported
that no strangers are present.
Entertainment of Business.
21. After the meeting has been constituted, by
calling the roll, the G.M. shall read the programme
of business for the day, after which the business will
be proceeded with as follows:
I. The reading of the manuscript minutes of
the previous meeting.
11. The balance-sheet and Auditors' report
thereon.
111. Trustees’ report.
IV. Grand Master’s report.
V. After these reports and all other reports
or correspondence relating to the business
of this District have been read, the Grand
Master shall ask for a motion regarding
each of the reports and other matters
separately, and the discussion shall be
confined to the subject matter of the mo-
tion before the meeting.
VI. Every proposition or amendment' shall be
signed by the proposer and seconder, and
handed to the G.M. during the sitting;
and the member proposing such shall read
it aloud, that it may be considered by the
G.M. as to its being in order; and at the
time for hearing it shall not be proceeded
with in the absence of the delegate from


the proposing Lodge, unless by some
other member present duly authorised in
writing to take*up the motion during his
absence.
VII. Xo motion or amendment shall be enter-
tained or discussed until it has been sec-
onded; and one amendment only shall be
discussed at the one time, but all amend-
ments shall be considered and put before
the original motion, and delegates from
Lodges only shall be allowed to vote on
any motion or amendment.
VIII. On the adoption of any amendment such
amendment shall be held to have quashed
the original motion; and for all purposes
of subsequent discussion the amendment
so carried shall be acted'upon as an orig-
inal motion, and two other amendments
only shall be received.
IX. The mover of any motion or amendment
shall be held to have spoken to the same.
In the discussion of either no delegate
shall be allowed to speak more than once,
except strictly in explanation, or in con-
tradiction of a misstatement, excepting
the mover of the original motion, who
shall have the right to reply; and no
speaker shall without special permission
occupy a longer period than five minutes.
X T o further discussion shall take place
after the mover has replied.
X. On any delegate rising to a point of order
during discussion the speaker shall sit
down, and the person so rising shall
state the point of order; when the G.M.
or presiding officer shall rule thereon,
which ruling shall be final.
XL No, amendment shall be received by the
G.M. or presiding officer which shall be
a direct negative to a motion, or which
does not preserve the substance of such
motion; excepting always notices of mo-
tion for alteration of laws, which may be
dealt with as provided for in General
Law 53.


XII. No question touching upon the interpreta-
tation of the laws shall be answered un-
less the same shall have been sent in to
the G.S. fourteen days prior to a District
Meeting, vouched by the signature of the
Financial Secretary, and Lodge seal at-
tached.
XIII. It shall be incumbent upon every delegate
-when about to speak to rise and address
the G.M. or presiding officer, and con-
duct himself in a respectful manner to-
wards the meeting.
District Auditors,
28. Two Auditors shall be elected (subject to their
consent) by the District Committee Meeting, one
to retire every six months, and shall be eligible for
re-election. They shall examine the accounts and
the securities of the Order for the preceding six
months, and their remuneration shall be fixed at
the annual District Committee Meeting. Should
either Auditor be absent after receiving three days’
notice of the audit, the District Officers may appoint
a substitute. The G.S. shall attend all Audit
Meetings to give any information that may be re-
quired by the Auditors.
District Trustees.
39. There shall be five Trustees, who shall be
elected and removable by the District Committee
Meeting. One Trustee shall retire annually,
according to seniority of appointment, but shall
be eligible for re-election. The Chairman or one
Trustee chosen by themselves shall attend the District
Meeting, and shall be paid at the rate of ten shillings
per meeting, he shall answer all questions relative
to the Trustees’ report, but shall not divulge the
names of borrowers or situations of property. No
part of the moneys of the Society shall be lent to a
Trustee or the wife of a Trustee of the Society, and
no Trustee shall sell any property held as security
by the Society to any co-trustee or his wife. Any
three of the Trustees shall be empowered to sign
cheques for withdrawing money from the Bank,
such cheques to be countersigned by the Grand
Secretary. In the event of a vacancy through


death, resignation, or other cause, the District Offi-
cers, in conjunction with the District Trustees, shall
fill such vacancy, subject to the approval of the en-
suing District Committee Meeting. In no case
shall . more than one District Trustee be elected
from any one Lodge. The Trustees shall meet once
in each half-year to examine and consider the vari-
ous securities.
30. The District Trustees shall, if requested by
any Branch of the Society, take the management
of, and suitably invest, any surplus funds of such
Branch, subject to such rules and regulations as the
District Trustees shall make for such purpose, and
bearing such rate of interest per cent, annually as
they shall from time to time determine, and no
Branch shall invest their Funds at a lower rate of
interest than the rate determined by the District
Trustees, as hereinbefore stated. A separate
account shall be kept of such moneys so invested
or managed by the District Trustees.
31. The Trustees and Secretary to the Trustees of
the District shall receive the sum of five shillings
each for their attendance at Trustee meetings.
Annual Returns.
32. A return shall be furnished by every Lodge on
forms supplied by the District, showing the names
of all members belonging to the Lodge who have
joined during the year, date of admission by initia-
tion or clearance, occupation, where born, and date
of birth, age, &c., and all particulars necessary, as far
as practicable, and sent to the G.S. with the Decem-
ber returns. Lodges not complying with this law
shall be fined one guinea, to be paid to the District
Management Fund for each and every breach there-
of.
Certificates and Declarations.
33. All Medical Officers’ certificates and declara-
tions of age and health received by Lodges for mem-
bers initiated,, accepted by clearance, or received
when arrears paid up, shall have amount paid for in-
itiation, clearance fee, or arrears, endorsed upon
them by the Financial Secretary and sent by him
with the next quarterly return sheet to the Grand
Secretary, under a penalty of 10s. 6d. for each
breach of this law, the fine to be paid to the District
Management Fund,


Establishment of Branches.
34. The District Committee (or District Officers
for the time being) shall have power to establish
Branches called Adult or Juvenile Lodges, male or
female, and to grant Dispensations for the opening
of the same. But any Lodge applying to open a
Juvenile Lodge shall be responsible for the proper
working of same when opened, and all funds or
property of any Juvenile Lodge being closed for
want of members to be held in trust by the parent
Lodge, until such Juvenile Lodge be re-opened. The
interest on such fund to be retained by the parent
Lodge. Every Branch shall be bound by these laws,
but may make such by-laws as such Branch may
think fit, provided they are not inconsistent with
these laws, and are approved by the District Offi-
cers.
33. Every application for a Dispensation to open
a new Lodge must be forwarded to the G.S., and
shall specify at what house or place such intended
Lodge is to be held, together with the names, ages,
trades or professions, and places of residence of ap-
plicants for the same; and such application shall
contain the names of at least fifteen persons wish-
ing to become members. No Dispensation to open
a new Lodge shall be granted unless the proposi-
tion money of the persons proposed to be initiated
be first deposited in the hands of the G.S.
36. The District Officers shall appoint the presid-
ing officers of new Lodges for the first term of
office; and shall also provide for any emergency that
may. occur in any Lodge.
\
37. No Lodge shall be allowed to separate from
the District without the sanction of a District Com-
mittee Meeting, under a penalty of their Dispensa-
tion being cancelled, and the members shall forfeit
all claims on the District funds, and the Lodge shall
be expunged from the list of Lodges of the Order;
and every Lodge in this District shall be made
acquainted with the secession by the G.S. in writing.
38. Any District Officer who shall be found guilty
of receiving a bribe for the purpose of opening any
new Lodge, or using ah undue influence in contract-
ing for regalia or any other property required for
the use of the District shall forfeit his office.


Name.
Age.
Occupation.
Residence.
Amount.
39. Before the sanction of the District Officers is
given for the granting of a dispensation to open a
new Lodge, one or more of them shall inspect, or
cause to be inspected, the premises in which it is
intended to open such 'new Lodge.
40. The form of application for a Dispensation
shall be as follows:
To the Officers of the Adelaide District of the
5.A.G.U.0.0.F.
We, the undersigned, hereby make application for
a Dispensation to open a Lodge of the
Grand United Order of Oddfellows, at the
, in
in the State of South Australia, to be called the
Loyal Lodge, to be held every
and to be opened as soon as arrangements are made
by the District Officers.
41. When a Lodge in compliance is unable to
meet the demands of its members, the District Com-
mittee Meeting shall decide what steps are to be
taken in the matter, and should it be decided to
take over and manage its affairs for the time being,
then the members shall pay their contributions to
the G.S., and the District Officers and District
Trustees shall make arrangements for medical ad-
vice, &c., and the payment of sick-pay, but, should
it be decided to close the Lodge, the members shall
become chargeable to the District Funds, and be
called District members, whose sick allowance shall
be regulated by the District Officers and District
Trustees, such allowance not to exceed twelve shil-
lings per week for the first twenty-six weeks, eight
shillings per week for the se_cond twenty-six weeks,
and five shillings per week after, so long as the
sickness may continue, and they shall be subject to
all the laws relating to sick-pay and funeral 4°na-


tions. The members so taken over shall receive
sick-pay for such periods only as they appear in
their Lodge sick-pay book to be entitled to.
Pass-words.
42. The pass-word shall be issued half-yearly, and
the G.S., or any member, or any Lodge, shall be
fined two pounds if he or they send the pass-word
or give any information connected with this Order
to a Lodge or member out of compliance, and the
President shall not give the pass-word to any mem-
ber of his Lodge unless such member is good on
the books.
Petitions.
43. All petitions shall receive the sanction of the
District Officers or District Committee before cir-
culation. They must be signed by the G.S. on be-
half of the District Officers, and are liable to be
withdrawn at any time by them; and when any
petition has gone through the Lodges it shall be
delivered to the G.S., and a statement of the
amount received published in the next report of the
District.
District Special Board of Arbitration.
44. There shall be a Special Board of .Arbitration
formed in the manner hereinafter explained, for the
purpose of settling disputes, hearing appeals, &c.,
in conformity with the Friendly Societies Acts. The
award made by such board to be final, and without
appeal to any Court of Law or Equity, as provided
for in the above-named Acts.
I. The Special Board of Arbitration shall con-
sist of seventeen Past Presidents, who
shall be elected annually (as hereinafter
expressed); and in no case shall a member
of such Board sit or adjudicate upon any
case in which he may be personally, con-
cerned, or to which he may have been a
party, or have sat upon in judgment in
Lodge or District Committee Meeting.
11. Each Lodge in the District shall send to
the G.S., along with the names of the
brothers nominated as District Officers
for the ensuing year, the names of two
P.P.’s of their own or any other Lodge
who may in their opinion be fit persons


to be members of such Board of Arbi-
tration; and out of the Past Presidents
so nominated seventeen shall be chosen
by ballot at the District Comittee Meet-
ing, and these shall form the District
Special Board of Arbitration.
111. When a case is to be heard by the Special
Board of Arbitration the names of such
of them as are not in any way concerned
in the case about to be heard shall be
placed' in a ballot-box, and the seven
whose names are first drawn (five to form
a quorum) shall be the Arbitrators to de-
cide upon such case; provided always, in
all cases each party, appellant and defen-
dant, shall have the option of objecting to
any names drawn to the number of three.
In all cases the defendant shall be allow-
ed the first objection, and when such is
the case others must be drawn to ma!ke up
the number to seven in place of those ob-
jected to.
IV. In the event of any member of such Arbi-
tration Board being, by illness or other-
wise, prevented from attending, he shall
send, or cause to be sent, to the G.S. a
statement in writing of the cause of his
absence, and if such statement be not
deemed satisfactory by a majority of the
other Arbitrators, a fine of ten shillings
shall be inflicted. The remaining six
Arbitrators shall then draw lots or other-
wise determine which one of them shall
withdraw, so as to ensure there always
being the odd number of five or seven,
on all of whom it shall be imperative to
vote upon the question brought before
them. Each Board shall appoint its
own Chairman. The G.S. shall attend
and take the minutes of proceedings in
all cases brought before the Special
Board of Arbitration.
V. Any party appealing to such. Board shall be
chargeable in such amount as the Arbi-
trators may determine, with the neces-
sary expenses of such Arbitrators for at-
tendance, and mileage for those residing


at a distance, for the payment of wit-
nesses, and all other needful expenses
which may accrue.
VI. Members attending such Special Board of
Arbitration shall receive the sum of five
shillings each, and threepence per mile
each way shall be paid for travelling ex-
penses to those residing beyond the limits
of the City of Adelaide. The expenses
of witnesses shall be fixed by the Arbitra-
tors appointed to hear the case.
VII. No case shall be brought before the Special
Board of Arbitration unless it has been
previously decided upon by a District
Committee Meeting: and any Lodge or
member wishing to appeal against such de-
rision shall give notice of appeal to the
G.S. within twenty-eight days after such
decision was given, who shall forward
such notice of'appeal to the Lodge within
fourteen days after the receipt of such
notice of appeal; or in case the party
concerned be a member, to the Lodge to
which the member belongs within the
same period; and the service of such no-
tice on the Lodge shall be considered as
valid as service on the brother. On the
receipt of notice by the Lodge the Finan-
cial Secretary shall serve such notice
either on the brother or at his last known
place of abode.
VIII. In all cases of appeal to the Board of Ar-
bitration when notice is given a sum of
money estimated as equal to the expenses
of the Board shall be deposited by the
appellant with the G.S. Should the ap-
peal not come on for hearing after notice
has been so given, the expenses attending
the meeting of the Board shall be defray-
ed out of such sum so deposited.
IX. The Special Board of Arbitration shall, in
delivering their award upon all cases
submitted to them, give their reasons in
writing for giving or making such award;
such reasons to be printed in the next
half-yearly report.


X. In the event of an appeal being made to the
Special Board of Arbitration, the G.S.
shall give notice to the appellant and de-
fendant that the balloting for Arbitrators
will take place at the District Office at
the first monthly meeting after such
notice, or earlier if urgent. The appellant
and defendant can appoint (if not con-
venient for either to attend) any other
party, being a brother of the Order, to see
the balloting, and to object according to
law.
Funeral Donations for Male Members.
45. On the death of a member of any Branch in
connection with this Society in South Australia,
who is good upon the books, the person nominated
by the deceased in writing, deposited with the
Financial Secretary, or in (Jefault of such nomina-
tion. the wife, child, father, mother, brother, or
sister of such member, shall be entitled to the fol-
lowing sums, according to length of membership:—
Up to 6 years .. £lO
6 to ll „ .. £l5
11 to 16 „ .. £3O
16 to 31 „ .. £35
31 to 36 „ .. £3O
26 to 30 „ .. £35
Over 30 „ .. £4O
which shall be the full limit. Provided always,
that should a member die before the expiration of
twelve months from the date of his initiation, his
Funeral Donation shall be paid, subject, however,
to the contributions, levies, &c., due to his Lodge
tor that twelve months being paid. Should the
Officers of the Lodge or District have any suspicion
that the person claiming the Funeral Donation is not
entitled thereto, they shall cause the deceased mem-
ber to be decently interred, and defray the funeral
expenses incurred, also pay the balance, if any, on
proof to his legal representative.
46. On the death of a member’s wife her husband
shall be entitled to the sum of ten pounds (£10),
provided that no member of this Society or other
person who may hereafter enter or re-enter as a


Member of this Society shall be entitled to any fur-
ther sum of ten pounds if he shall during a first or
any subsequent term of membership have received
the said funeral donation on the. death of any pre-
vious wife. Provided always, that should a mem-
ber’s wife die before the expiration of twelve
months from the date of such member's initiation
the Funeral Donation shall be paid, subject, how-
ever, to the contributions, levies, &c., due to the
Lodge for that twelve months being paid.
47. Upon the death of any member or
member’s wife when such member is bad on
the books the District Committee is hereby
empowered to consider the circumstances of
the case, and if in its opinion any sum of money
should be granted to the widow or nearest blood
relation of such deceased member, or to the mem-
ber on the decease of his wife, it is hereby em-
powered to grant the following amounts;—lf at the
time of death the member has been bad on the
books within the previous fourteen weeks and has
paid up arrears, and is not yet entitled to benefits,
deduct ten per cent, of the amount that would
otherwise have been payable; if at the time of death
the member is bad on the books, deduct ten per
cent, for the first Lodge-night, and in addition five
per cent, for every succeeding Lodge-night whilst
bad on the books from the amount that would have
been payable had the member been good on the
hooks at time of death. It shall not be obligatory
to make such grants, but the above scale shall be
the maximum amount that may be granted under
such circumstances, and Branches applying for the
funeral donation, or any part thereof, of the wives
of members or members who were incorrect or un-
financial at the time of death shall give notice in
writing at least fourteen days before a District Com-
mittee Meeting is held of their intention to apply,
&c., such application to be attested by the N.G. and
Financial Secretary, and bear the Lodge seal. Full
particulars must be given as to the length of mem-
bership, date of becoming incorrect, and when com-
ing into compliance (should he do so), and how
much was paid, also the amount of contributions or
fines due to the Lodge on the last Lodge-night pre-
ceding the District Committee Meeting, and any
other information in posession of the Branch, and
no application shall be considered unless strictly in
accordance with this law.


Fines.
48. All fines inflicted by these laws shall be charged
to and paid by the- Lodge to which the offending
party belongs, provided he remains a member of the
Order, the Lodge shall debit him with the amount;
and if not paid within three months from the time
the fine was inflicted he shall be suspended from all
benefits until the same be paid.
49. Aiij' Lodge or member breaking a law to which
no fine is attached shall be subject to a fine of five
guineas, or such less sura as a Lodge or Committee
of the District may determine, exclusive of expenses.
Interpretation Clause.
50. Whenever the following words, expressions, or
initial letters occur in the General or Branch Laws
or Schedule of Forms thereto attached, such words,
expressions, or initials shall have the meanings
hereby assigned to them; that is to say:—The word
“Society” shall mean the South Australian Grand
United Order of Oddfellows Friendly Society, and
shall mean and include the collective present and
future members of such Society. The word
“District” shall mean a main division of the Society
consisting of the Lodges at present opened and any
that may hereafter be opened. The word “Branch”
shall mean a Lodge of the Society, consisting of an
unlimited number of members thereof. The term
“Lodge” or “Lodges” shall refer to Adult Lodges,
unless otherwise stated. The initial letters “G.M.”
shall mean the Grand Master, “D.G.M.” the Deputy
Grand Master, and “G.S. and T.” shall mean the
Grand Secretary and Treasurer of the Society. The
words and letters “Pres.” shall mean the President,
“N.G.” the Noble Grand, “V.G.” the Vice-Grand,
“M, Sec.” Minute Secretary, “F.S.” Financial Secre-
tary, and “Treas.” shall mean the Treasurer of the
Lodge. “S. and F. Fund” shall mean Sick and
Funeral Fund, ‘M. and M.F.” shall mean Medical
and Management Fund; the word “month” shall
mean calendar month; “&c.” shall mean other mat-
ters or amounts not particularised. In the con-
struction and application of the General and Branch
Laws and Schedules words expressed in the mascu-
line gender only shall be understood to denote fe-
males as well as males.


Forms.
51. Any Lodge adopting any other form or forms
than those contained in schedules marked A, B, C,
D, E, F, G, H. I, J, K, L, and M or those hereafter
issued by the District Committee, shall be
fined one pound one shilling for each and every of-
fence.
Alteration of Laws.
53. Any Lodge desiring to make new laws, or alter
any of these laws, if agreed to by a finance or sum-
moned meeting of such Lodge, shall forward the
intended new or amended laws to the G.S. at least
three months before the Annual District Committee
Meeting is held, who shall immediately circulate
them amongst the Lodges, and Lodges may send
any amendments thereon within six weeks of the
annual District Committee Meeting, and six copies
shall be circulated when printed to all the Lodges,
and they shall be finally adopted or rejected, and no
law shall be made, altered, or rescinded except at
the Annual District Meeting. But nothing in
this law contained shall prevent any Annual Dis-
trict Committee Meeting appointing a Committee of
three or more members to prepare new laws, or
revise, amend, or vary those existing, also to re-
arrange and renumber them so that all the laws
may be under their proper heading and positions,
and they must be completed in time for the G.S. to
forward six copies to each Lodge at least fourteen
weeks before the Annual District Comittee Meeting
is held; and Lodges may send any amendments
thereon within six weeks, and six copies shall be
circulated when printed to all the Lodges, when
they shall be considered seriatim, and finally adopted
or rejected by a majority of the District Committee
Meeting in session. The District Officers may,
without notice from any Lodge, propose any new
law, or any alteration or amendment of any existing
law; the proposed new or amended law to be sent
to Lodges in manner prescribed above. Provided
always that if the Public Actuary shall require any
alterations in any law submitted to him the Execu-
tive may accept the alterations, and the same shall
be deemed duly made by the District Committee
Meeting.


S 3. These laws shall rescind all former general
laws of the Society, and shall come into operation
immediately upon their confirmation, as provided
for in section 8 of the Friendly Societies Act, 1886,
and all by-laws of Lodges which have hitherto been
made and confirmed so far as they are not inconsis-
tent with these laws and the said Act, shall be the
by-laws of such Lodges until they shall be altered,
amended or rescinded in pursuance of these laws.
SCHEDULE OF FORMS.
A
Form for obtaining Funeral Money on account of
Death of Member.
Surgeon’s Certificate.
This is to certify that M aged late of
died the day of 19 and I have no reason to
attribute death to poison, violence, or criminal
neglect, the cause of death being
Signed.
Residence.
Loyal Lodge, No.
This is to certify that M aged years
(insert whether married or single or widower) by
occupation was admitted by a member
of the above Lodge on day of 1 , and
that was not at the time of death, the
day of 19 , nor at any period within four-
teen weeks previous thereto, in arrear of contribu-
tions exceeding fourteen weeks, or suspended from
any other cause, and his representative (name in
full and what relation to deceased) is entitled to re-
ceive the Funeral Fund donation, which we hereby
claim on behalf of the Lodge.
N.G.
Fin. Sec.
Lodge Seal.
N.B.—lf the member was admitted by clearance
state where and when initiated, also the date of
joining this District.
If any member or wife dies out of the State of
South Australia, the Registrar’s certificate of the
District where the death occurs must be forwarded
when claim is made.


B
Form for obtaining Funeral Money on account
of Death of Member's Wife.
Surgeon’s Certificate.
This is to certify that Mrs. aged years,
wife of Brother died the day of 19 ,
and I have no reason to attribute her death to
poison, violence, or criminal neglect, the cause of
death being
Signed.
Residence.
Loyal Lodge, No.
This is to certify that Brother by occupation a
who was admitted a member of the above
Lodge by on the day of 1 , was not
at the time of his wife’s death, nor at any period
within fourteen weeks previous thereto, in arrear
of contributions exceeding fourteen weeks, or sus-
pended from any other cause, and he is entitled to
receive the usual donation allowed on the death of
a brother’s wife, and that he has not received it
from the Society or any Branch thereof on account
of the death of any previous wife, and which we
hereby claim on his behalf.
N.G.
Fin. Sec.
Lodge Seal.
N.B. —If the brother was admitted by clearance,
state where and when initiated, and also the date of
joining this District.
*3” If any member or member’s wife dies out of the
State of South Australia, the Registrar’s certificate
of the District where the death occurs must be for-
warded when claim is made.


C
South Australian Grand United Order of
Oddfellows.
Loyal Lodge, No.
Declaration on the Funds.
I hereby declare that I am too ill to follow my em-
ployment, and that my illness has not been occasion-
ed by intemperance or improper or immoral conduct,
and I therefore declare myself on the funds of the
Lodge.
Member’s Name.
Residence.
To the Financial Secretary of the Lodge.
I hereby certify that is suffering from
and is in consequence unfit to earn a liveli-
hood, and I further certify that to the best of mj'
knowledge and belief h illness has not been caused
by intemperance or immoral habits.
day of 19 ,at o'clock .m.
Surgeon.
(To be posted or delivered within three days of the
date hereof to the Fin. Secy.)
Members must obtain a medical certificate when
declaring on or off the funds of the Lodge (see
laws).
Contributions to date
Fin. Sec.
D
South Australian Grand United Order of Oddfellows.
Declaration off the Funds.
To the Financial Secretary of the Lodge.
I hereby certify that I have recovered from my
late illness, and am now aide to work.
Name.
Residence.
day of 19 ,at o’clock ,m.
Sanctioned by me Surgeon.
Contributions due to date
Fin. Sec.
Members must obtain a medical certificate when
declaring on or off the funds of the Lodge, and de-
liver or post to the Financial Secretary within three
days of the date hereof,


E
Form of Certificate to be signed by persons
previous to initiation.
South Australian Grand United Order of Oddfellows.
Medical Officer’s Certificate.
Loyal Lodge, No.
19
I hereby certify that I have carefully examined
M of by occupation and find to
be of sound constitution, mentally and bodily, free
from blindness, rupture, loss of arm or leg, and to
be now in good health; and I certify that has
no symptoms of and does not appear to be subject
to any affection or disease calculated to shorten
life, or to cause to become a permanent burthen
on the Lodge.
Signed, Lodge Surgeon.
Declaration of Age and Health.
I, by occupation born at
in on the day of 1 , and
now residing at being desirous of becoming a
member of the Loyal Lodge, No. of the
South Australian Grand United Order of Oddfellows
Friendly Society, hereby declare that when I was
last afflicted with illness it was in the year 1 ,
and for days or thereabouts. And I further
declare that I have never suffered from and am not
subject to fits, rheumatism, gout, asthma, spitting
*t blood, or any chronic complaint, nor any disease
particularly tending to shorten the duration of life;
that my age does not exceed years; that I am
(married, single, or a widower); my wife’s name
is and her age is , and that to my know-
ledge she has never been and is not now in an un-
sound state of health arising from any malady or
constitutional disease whatsoever, and as far as I
know is in good bodily health at this time. And I
do hereby agree that this declaration shall be the
ground of contract between the Society and myself;
and if any of the averments herein contained be not
true, the sum already paid, and any further sum
that may be paid by me to the Society, shall be for-
feited, and myself, and any person claiming through
me, shall be deprived of all benefits and advantages


to be derived from the said Society.
Witness my hands this day of 19
Signature of Candidate.
Witness —
Lodge Seal.
Every such declaration shall be signed in the pre-
sence of and be witnessed by the Financial Secretary
or some other member of the Branch or Society.
F
Form of Clearance to be given when Member
joined the Lodge by Initiation.
Loyal Lodge, No. of the South Australian
Grand United Order of Oddfellows Friendly So-
ciety, and of the Adelaide District, held at the
To all whom it may concern.
These are to certify that our well-beloved brother,
aged years, by occupation was regu-
larly initiated a member of our Lodge on the
day of 1 , and has since paid all dues and de-
mands up to the day of 19
In witness whereof we have subscribed our hands
and affixed the seal of our Lodge aforesaid, the
day of in the year of our Lord 19
N.G.
V.G.
Fin. Sec,
Lodge Seal.
Contributions, per fortnight. Funeral dona-
tion for member, £lO to £4O; on death of member’s
wife, £10; relief in sickness, per week.
Total sick-pay paid—Full, £ ; half £ ;
quarter, £ . Date of last payment,
G
Form of Clearance to be given Member when
Member joined the Lodge by Clearance.
Loyal Lodge, No. ,o£ the South Australian
Grand United Order of Oddfellows Friendly Society;
and of the Adelaide District, held at the
To all whom it may concern.
These are to certify that our well-beloved brother.
aged years, by occupation was regu-
larly admitted a member of our Lodge on the
day of 1 , having brought us a regular clear


ance from the Lodge, and that he was admitted
in this Lodge on the day of 1 , and has
since paid all dues and demands up to the day
of 19
In witness whereof we have subscribed our hands
and affixed the seal of our Lodge aforesaid, the
day of in the year of our Lord 19
N.G.
V.G.
Fin. Sec.
Lodge Seal.
Contributions, per fortnight. Funeral dona-
tion, £lO to £4O; death of member's wife, £10; re-
lief in sickness £ per week
Total sick-pay paid— full, £ ; half, £ ;
quarter, £ . Dale of last payment,
H
Form of Certificate for Delegate to attend
District Meeting.
Adelaide District of the South Australian Grand
United Order of Oddfellows Friendly Society.
We, the undersigned officers of the Loyal
Lodge, No. , hereby certify that were duly
appointed during hours of business to be our repre-
sentatives at the meeting to be held at
at o’clock m. on the day of 19
N.G.
V.G.
Fin. Sec.
Lodge Seal.
Attended, G.S.
I
Form of Letter of Recommendation to be given
Members when, visiting Lodges out of the State.
South Australian Grand United Order of Oddfellows
Friendly Society, Adelaide District.
We, the undersigned Officers of the Lodge,
No. do hereby certify that the bearer hereof
Brother is a regularly initiated member of the
Order, and we further declare that he has paid all
contributions up to the day of 19 . We
therefore request you to admit him as a visiting
member.
As witness our hands this day of 19
N.G.
Lodge Seal. Fin. Sec.


Date of
Declaring
on Funds.
Date of
Declaring
Funds
Duration
of
Sickness.
Complaint
Amount
paid at
Full-pay
Amount
paid at
Half-pay.
Amount
paid at
Quarter-
pay.
.
1 id
1 ■rH £
[ « *
<fc
P.
Wits
Days
FOR GRAND
MASTER.
FOR DEPUTY GRAND
MASTER.
Name.
Votes.
Name. Votes.
J
Form of Sick-Pay Book to be kept by the
Sick-Pay Officer.
K
Result of Voting for District Officers.
South Australian Grand United Order of Oddfellows,
Adelaide District.
Loyal Lodge, No. 19
We, the undersigned, having been appointed on
Finance Night, the day of 19 , as
Scrutineers, in terms of the 7th General Law, hereby
certify that the following is the correct number of
votes given for the undermentioned brothers as
District Officers for the year 19 : .
Lodge Seal. | Scrutineers.


L
Register of Marriage.
To the Lodge Secretary.
I, the undersigned (name in full)
a member of the South Australian Grand United
Order of Oddfellows, Lodge No. , do hereby
declare that I was married on the day of 19 .
to (name in full) and that the date of
her birth was the day of 1
Dated this day of 19
Signature of Member
Residence
Lodge Seal.
M
1. What is your name?
2. What was your age last birthday? years.
3. When and where were you born?
4. What is your occupation?
5. Where is your residence
6. Are you married?
7. What is your wife’s age? Does she enjoy
good health? Date of wife’s birth
Wife’s name.
8. Are you sound in body? Are you subject to
any periodical complaint which is liable to
render you unable to follow your usual em-
ployment, or which is calculated to shorten
life?
9. Have you ever been (or proposed to be) a mem-
ber of any Lodge of this Order? If so, state
reason of leaving, or not joining, as the case
may be, at foot.
Declaration.
I do solemnly declare the above statements to be
correct in every particular, and I will also faithfully
obey the laws of this District, and should I be found
guilty of a breach of the same I will suffer my name
to be erased from the books as unworthy to remain
amongst you, and also cease to have any claim
against the funds of the Lodge of this Society, either
personally, by my heirs, executors, or otherwise.
Signed
Witnesses N.G.
Fin. Sec.
Date
(State reason of leaving or not joining.)
Lodge Seal.


BRANCH LAWS.
Lodge Meetings.
1. Each Lodge shall hold its meetings at such place
as a majority of the Lodge at a meeting specially
convened for the purpose may decide. No Lodge
shall change its night or place of meeting without
first obtaining consent of the District Officers,
through the Grand Secretary under a penalty of
five pounds, to be paid to the District Management
Fund. Provided, nevertheless, that should any
Lodge-night fall on Christmas Day, New Year’s
Day, Good Friday, or other special public holiday,
the Lodge may, by resolution passed at previous
meeting, appoint any night after the usual Lodge-
night on which to hold the meeting, or may adjourn
to the next regular Lodge-night.
Lodge Business.
3. Lodges shall meet on the evenings appointed at
any time between the hours of seven and eight
o’clock as they shall by a resolution or by-law deter-
mine. Lodge business shall commence within
half-an-hour of the time of opening the Lodge, and
the Lodge shall close at nine o’clock, or as soon
after as the business is concluded, and no Lodge
shall be allowed to keep open later than ten o’clock.
Provided that it shall be lawful for any Lodge to
re-open in Committee with the consent of a majority
of a Lodge to conclude any special business, and no
other business shall be brought forward at such
Committee, which shall in no case sit later than
eleven o’clock, and any business transacted after
eleven o’clock shall be null and void, and any Lodge
offending shall be fined one pound one shilling, to
be paid to the District Management Fund.
3. Country Lodges, on obtaining the consent of
the District Officers, may hold their meetings month-
ly instead of fortnightly. This privilege not to be
considered a contravention of the preceding law.


4. In order to constitute a Lodge it shall be im-
perative that not less than five members be present,
including the Noble Grand or Vice-Grand, or a Past
President, and if five members be not present no
business shall be transacted, excepting the receiving
of contributions and payment of the sick.
5. The N.G. shall cause to be examined every per-
son who shall be in the Lodge-room before the
Lodge is opened. Any Lodge admitting a person
not a member of the Order into the room when the
Lodge is opened shall be fined twenty-one shillings.
It shall be discretionary with Lodges whether they
appoint an Outside Guardian or not, and if either
Guardian pass any brother in or out of the Lodge-
room during discussions or initiations he shall pay a
fine of five shillings.
6. Every member upon his first entrance into the
Lodge-room shall give the countersign to the N.G.
and V.G. before taking his seat, and also on his last
leaving the room, or be fined for each offence one
shilling. Members leaving the room without re-
ceiving the countersign from the N.G. and not re-
turning- that night, shall be fined one shilling, which
cannot be repealed.
7. The undermentioned fines shall be inflicted at
any Lodge or Committee Meeting by the N.G. or
other presiding officer, and no such fines shall be re-
scinded, unless upon appeal to a summoned meeting
of the whole Lodge;—
For entering or leaving the Lodge-room during
initiation, discussion, or harmony without the
consent of the presiding officer. One shilling.
For any officer leaving his position without the
consent of the presiding officer. Sixpence.
'For any Guardian allowing any stranger to enter
the Lodge. One shilling.
For not standing when addressing the presiding
officer. Sixpence.
For refusing to address any officer of the Lodge
by his proper title. Sixpence.
For disobeying the presiding officer when called to
order. One shilling.
For any member being in the Lodge-room in a
State of intoxication. Five shillings.


For any member knowingly wearing any regalia or
medal to which he is not officially entitled.
Five shillings.
For any member being guilty of any disgraceful
or improper conduct at the Lodge or any
Committee Meeting. Five shillings.
For any member not informing the Financial Sec-
retary of the Lodge of any change in his resi-
dence within one calendar month after such
change. One shilling.
For any member remaining at the Financial Sec-
retary’s desk after being requested to leave
by the presiding officer. One shilling.
For any member knowingly visiting any suspended
Lodge. One pound.
For any Noble Grand, Vice-Grand, Financial Sec-
retary, or Treasurer not attending his Lodge
at the time appointed for opening the same,
without sending an apology satisfactory to the
members present. One shilling.
For a like offence committed by any other officer.
Sixpence.
For any member being entrusted with any docu-
ment addressed to the N.G. of a Lodge, and
neglecting to deliver the same on the first
Lodge-night after receiving it. One shilling.
8. The three propositions shall be opened at the
commencement of Lodge business, viz., the sick and
distressed, the good and welfare, and for new mem-
bers, and when the minutes are confirmed, these
propositions shall be considered closed.
9. Lodges may, by majority at qny Finance or
Special Summoned Meeting called to consider finan-
cial matters, declare or strike a levy upon all their
members of not more than two shillings per member
per quarter, for one or more quarters, for the bene-
fit of the Sick and Funeral or Medical and Manage-
ment Funds, as the case may be, or to both of these
funds, if considered necessary; and any brother
allowing any such levy to remain unpaid for more
than fourteen weeks shall be suspended from all
benefits of his Lodge and District.
10. Any Lodge may establish a Benevolent, Con-
tingent or any other Fund, and may levy members
to an extent not exceeding sixpence per quarter to
each F'und.


11. Each Lodge shall appoint two or more Audi-
tors to audit the books and accounts of the Lodge,
and the Auditors shall make a report of the income
and expenditure of the Lodge since the previous
audit; one of the Auditors shall retire every six
months; and the Financial Secretary, Treasurer, and
Auditors shall attend at the time and place appoint-
ed, or be fined two shillings and sixpence each, un-
less a satisfactory apology be tendered. Provided
also that it shall not be compulsory that the Audi-
tors shall be members of the Order; and any Audi-
tor attesting the balance-sheet or returns without
first ascertaining its or their correctness shall, on
proof thereof, be fined twenty shillings. Retiring
Auditors shall be eligible for re-election.
13. No Lodge shall have power to appropriate its
funds for any purpose, except sickness or death, me-
dical and management expenses, or to assist their
own brothers or other members of the Order, or
for meritorious services rendered to the Lodge or
District by members of the Order under a penalty
of five pounds, to be paid to the District Manage-
ment Fund; but in no case shall the amount appro-
priated exceed three pounds three shillings, and
must be sanctioned by a Finance Committee.
Balancing of Accounts.
13. It shall be compulsory in every Lodge of this
Society to balance all their accounts up to and in-
clusive of the last Lodge-night in June and Decem-
ber in each year, and each Lodge shall balance their
respective accounts quarterly up to and inclusive
of the last meeting nights in the months of March,
June, September, and December. It shall be in-
cumbent on the Financial Secretary of each Branch
to forward to the Grand Secretary general state-
ments of the receipts, expenditure, and funds of the
Branch, with the December and June returns on
forms supplied by the District, and he shall also
prepare a balance-sheet quarterly and half-yearly,
as each Branch may determine in their by-laws, and
which shall be submitted to each half-yearly Finance
Committee for approval or otherwise. Any Finan-
cial Secretary failing to comply with this law shall
be fined ten shillings and sixpence, to be paid to
the Lodge, unless he gives a satisfactory reason
why he has not done so.


Trustees and Treasurers.
14. Every Lodge shall state in its by-laws the bank
in which its funds not invested pursuant to the said
Act shall be deposited, and shall appoint its own
Trustees and Treasurer, but the Treasurer of any
other similar Society shall not hold a similar posi-
tion in this Society, and every Treasurer of the So-
ciety or any Lodge thereof shall be responsible for
all such sums of money as may from time to time
be paid into his hands by the Financial Secretary,
or by any person on account of such Society or
Branch; and shall, when required, balance his cash
accounts and supply a duplicate thereof to the Lodge
or District Committee Meeting.
15. There shall be five Trustees, who shall be
elected and removed by , the Finance Meeting.
One Trustee shall retire annually, accord-
ing to seniority, but shall be eligible for re-election.
When a vacancy occurs the remaining Trustees and
Lodge Officers shall temporarily fill the position
until the next Finance Meeting when nominations
will be received, and the election shall take place.
Three of the Trustees shall sign all cheques, such
cheques to be countersigned by the Secretary.
Id. The Treasurer of each Lodge shall receive all
moneys paid on behalf of the Lodge, and pay all
accounts wh'en countersigned by the N.G.; but sick-
pay shall be payable on the production of the Sur-
geon’s certificate, when countersigned by Sec-
retary. At the end of each quarter he shall furnish
the Financial Secretary with an account of his re-
ceipts and expenditure, and the bank book shall be
produced for the inspection of members every
Lodge-night. The Treasurer shall give a bond in
a Guarantee Society approved by the Trustees, in
a sum of not less than fifty pounds, the premium to
be paid by the Lodge. It shall be optional with
Lodges to combine the offices of Treasurer and Fin-
ancial Secretary.
Lodge Sick and Funeral Fund.
17. This fund shall be called the Lodge Sick and
Funeral Fund. To this fund shall be paid balance of
members' contributions as provided for in Law 64,
the same to be apportioned at each quarterly bal-
ance; also all interest and rent accruing from invest-
ments and funeral money received from the Dis


trict. This fund shall pay all funeral money and
be chargeable with any sums expended in keeping
in good repair (rates, taxes, &c.) the freehold and
mortgaged property of the Lodge; also sick-pay to
the members and the le\des to the District Funeral
Fund. This fund shall be kept separate and dis-
tinct, and no moneys shall be used from this fund
for the advantage or otherwise of the Medical and
Management or other fund under a penalty of three
guineas for each offence, the fine to go v to the Dis-
trict Management Fund. Lodges requiring a levy
to meet the expenses of this fund shall make a levy
on all its members at a special summoned or Finance
Meeting.
Lodge Medical and Management Fund.
18. This fund shall be called the Medical and Man-
agement Fund, and all entrance, clearance, and hon-
orary members’ fees, fees for medical benefits for
family or for members of other Lodges, notices,
fines, forfeitures, and all other receipts whatever not
otherwise provided for shall be appropriated to this
fund, and to which shall be added mnepence per fort-
night of the contributions of all members, as pro-
vided in Rule 64, the same to be apportioned at each
quarterly balance. From this fund shall be paid
District fines, the fees paid for medical .benefits on
account of members and members’ families, rent of
room, salaries, remunerations, and all other expenses
for the management of the Lodge. Should at any
time the balance of this fund be more than is re-
quired to meet its expenses the Lodge may transfer
the whole or any part thereof to the Sick and Fune-
ral Fund. Lodges requiring a levy to meet tha
expenses of this fund shall make a levy, as provided
for in the case of the Sick and Funeral Fund.
Lodge Officers and Elections.
19. Lodges shall be governed by the following offi-
cers:—A President, Noble Grand, Vice-Grand, Sup-
porters, Guardians, and Wardens, Secretary, and
Min. Secretary.
30. The election for the offices of N.G., V.G., and
Minute Secretary shall take place on the last Lodge-
night in June and December in each year, and the
minor officers shall be appointed at the same time or
at the Finance Committee. All new officers are to
take their stations on the election night, and no per


son shall be deemed a Past-Officer unless he has fill-
ed the office to which he was elected at least seven
Lodge-nights during his term; and no Past-Officer
(except the Minute Secretary, who is eligible for re-
election) shall oppose any Qualified member for the
same office unless he has been out of such office
twelve months.
21. All propositions for candidates shall be re-
ceived on the night of election and on the two
Lodge-nights preceding; and to qualify a member
for the office of N.G. he shall have served the office
of V.G. or Minute Secretary. The N.G. shall ap-
point the Guardians, Wardens, and his Supporters.
To qualify a member for the office of V.G. he shall
have served a minor office six months. The V.G.
shall appoint his own Supporters.
32. Every member who accepts an office shall at-
tend at the time the Lodge is opened or send a sat-
isfactory apology, and if absent three successive
Lodge-nights (personal or relative sickness ex-
cepted) shall thereby vacate his office, and another
shall be appointed forthwith; but in case an elective
officer shall forfeit or vacate his office another shall
be elected after one Lodge-night’s proposition:
33. In case a sufficient number of members shall
not be willing to accept minor offices, Lodges shall
have power to make by-laws to compel members
to take office. Members so appointed shall be fined
two shillings and sixpence .if not present when offi-
cers’ roll is called on the first Lodge-night after
appointment.
24. The President shall be elected by Past Presi-
dents, and to qualify a member for the office of
President he shall have served the office of N.G. six
months. The President may be re-elected as often
as necessary, the retiring Noble Grand being eligible
for the office.
25. The names of Past Presidents shall be placed
on the Merit Board as soon as they have performed
the duties of their office satisfactorily, and all past
Officers arriving from England or elsewhere shall
be recognised here as Past Officers upon proof.
Financial Secretary and Duties.
36. The Financial Secretary shall hold office dur-
ing the pleasure of the Lodge, and shall keep all cash
accounts of the Lodge, enter in the fine book all fines


inflicted, and see that they are duly paid; conduct
all correspondence of the Lodge and keep copy of
same, prepare half-yearly balance-sheets, and enter
them in a book to be kept for that purpose; send
all sumonses and notices, by post or otherwise—
summonses to be issued at least forty-eight hours
previous to the holding of such Committee; make
out all returns for the District and Public Actuary,
and perform all other duties appertaining to his of-
fice not herein mentioned. The Financial Secre-
tary of any other Friendly Society or Branch there-
of shall not hold the position of Financial Secretary
of any Lodge of this Order. In case of resigna-
tion he shall give one month’s notice, and proposi-
tions for candidates shall be received two Lodge-
nights previous to the night of election, which shall
be a summoned Committee Meeting. All fines
lost or inflicted on the Lodge through his neglect
or inattention shall be paid by him. He shall keep
a bocjk in which the names and residences of every
member shall be registered on the night of his in-
itiation, together with the names of any person he
may wish to receive the sums payable at his death
(and each member shall have power to alter such
name on payment of sixpence), and shall also fur-
nish a new or amended list to the Lodge Surgeon
of the names of all brothers who are good on the
books at the end of each quarter, or be fined two
shillings and sixpence for each case of neglect.
Minute Secretary-and Duty.
37. The Minute Secretary shall take down on each
Lodge and Committee nights the minutes of all pro-
ceedings in a clear and concise manner* and read
the same at the close of the business when called
upon by the presiding officer to do so.
Finance and Lodge Committees.
28. Each Lodge shall hold a Finance Committee
at the end of every term of office, to which every
member residing within three miles of the Lodge-
room shall be summoned
29. When a Committee of the whole Lodge is
called the Financial Secretary shall summon all
members good on the books living within three
miles of the Lodge-room; each summons to state
the business to be brought forward; and any brother


leaving a Committee till it is declared closed, with-
out the permission of the N.G. or other presiding
officer, shall be fined one shilling, without appeal.
30. The necessity for calling a Special Committee
of the whole Lodge on any subject shall be decided
by a majority of the members present in open
Lodge, except in cases of extreme urgency, when
the Committee of Management shall act on their
own responsibility; but the summons shall state the
nature of the business to be transacted, and no by-
laws shall be made, altered, or rescinded, except at
a Committee of the whole Lodge, legally summoned,
and notice given previously. ■
31. If the N.G. of any Lodge shall neglect or re-
fuse to 'carry out the legal decisions of his Lodge
or a Committee thereof, he shall for the first offence
be fined five shillings, for the second ten shillings,
and for the third twenty shillings, as well as forfeit-
ing his office and all privileges appertaining there-
to. No motion shall be put to vote which is con-
trary to these laws. Should any member demand,
no motion or amendment shall be entertained unless
the same be handed to the presiding officer in writ-
ing.
Fines.
32. When a fine has been inflicted and recorded
for a violation of any Branch law or by-law, the
same shall not be remitted unless an appeal be
made to a Committee of the Lodge; the fine in all
cases to be paid previous to the appeal being heard;
but the N.G. shall have power, with the consent of
the Lodge, to rescind the fine for late attendance the
same evening, and any member being fined shall
have notice posted or delivered to him within four
weeks, or it shall be null and void; and any Finan-
cial Secretary failing to give such jiotice shall pay
the amount of such fine.
33. Any member being fined or levied upon when
absent shall be informed of the same by a written or
printed notice from the Financial Secretary within
four weeks, and such notice, if addressed and sent
through the post-office to the last known place of
abode of any member, shall constitute a legal de-
livery of the same. Immediately before closing
the propositions the Financial Secretary of every
Lodge shall read over every Lodge-night the names


of all members who will be out of compliance at
the close of the Lodge, or be fined two shillings and
sixpence; provided that any neglect so to call over
the names of members liable to suspension from be-
nefits, or to give such notice aforesaid, shall not
exempt any such member from the consequences.
The Sick-Pay Officer of every Lodge shall deduct
from the member’s sick-pay the whole amount of his
contributions, fines, and levies.
When Benefits Cease,
34. If a member shall not pay some portion of his
contributions on the Lodge-night when the same
shall exceed twelve weeks’ contributions in amount,
such member shall be deemed to have allowed his
contributions to have exceeded fourteen weeks, and
he shall be bad on the books of his Lodge. No
member shall owe more than fourteen weeks’ con-
tributions to his Lodge, nor shall he allow a fine
or levy imposed upon him (and of which, if he
were absent, he has received written or printed no-
tice) to remain unpaid for a like period; nor shall
he allow goods which he may have ordered and
received from his Lodge to remain unpaid for a pe-
riod of fourteen weeks; and if any member offend in
any of the matters above-named at any time within
fourteen weeks next previous to sickness or to the
death of himself or his wife, neither he nor his re-
presentative shall be entitled to the sick-pay for
such sickness, nor to any sum insured to be paid at
death; and any member so neglecting shall be out
of compliance and be suspended for a period of four-
teen weeks after such arrears, inclusive of fines and
levies, are paid, or reduced within the limits herein
prescribed; and he shall not be allowed to visit hi;
own or any other Lodge until he shall have com-
plied. Provided that any member out of compliance
under this law may, upon the first Lodge-night
after he has become out of compliance, pay a penalty
of five shillings, with the whole of the arrears due
by him; or upon the second Lodge-night pay a pen-
alty of fifteen shillings, with all arrears due. Pen-
alty to go to the Lodge Medical and Management
Fund. Such payment upon either the first or sec-
ond Lodge-night after he is under suspension shall
remove such suspension from the date of such pay-
ment; the member being in arrear exceeding six
months’ contributions shall obtain and produce sur


geon's certificate of health. If unable to obtain
such certificate, then he shall cease to be a member.
35. Re-admission of Members.-—Any member who
allows his contributions to exceed twelve months
may be re-admitted into his Lodge, upon payment
of all arrears and production of a certificate of
health, and declaration of age and health as herein-
before provided. But such member shall only be
re-admitted with the consent of the Lodge he be-
longed to, and the consent of the District Meeting.'
And such former member obtaining such consent
shall within eight weeks after the resolution of the
District Meeting granting such consent has been
reported to the Lodge shall pay or cause to be paid
all his arrears which would have been due to the
Lodge had he not ceased to be a member, and shall
produce the certificate of health and declaration of
age and health as provided. In all cases of re-
admission of former members a ballot shall be
taken and unless two-thirds of the members present
vote in favor of the candidates’ re-admission, he
shall be rejected. Provided that where the said
member or former member is residing beyond the
boundaries of the state of South Australia, his Lodge
shall be allowed to accept a certificate of health
granted and signed by a duly qualified medical
practitioner of the state in which he is residing, such
certificate to be countersigned by a justice of the
peace or a magistrate. And any former member
so re-admitted shall be entitled to all the benefits
of his former membership.
36. Every member of the Order shall make him-
self clear upon the books of his Lodge pn the last
Lodge-night of June and December, or once in every
half-year, as each Branch shall determine, or shall
be fined Is., without appeal.
37. All Branch Financial Secretaries shall give
written or printed notice to members whose con-
tributions exceed ten weeks, for which they shall
each pay threepence, which shall be deducted from
the first- money tendered by or for the member.
One notice shall be deemed sufficient in any one
quarter.
38. Any member of any Lodge in the Order run-
ning out through the non-payment of arrears, on his
re-admission shall be in the same position in regard


to any office he may have served as he was at the
time he ceased to be a member, and shall be privi-
leged to retain any previous rank or title.
Admission of Members.
39. Subject to these laws any person of good moral
character and in sound health, whose age is not
under sixteen years nor over forty years, may be-
come a member of this Society.
40. All persons desirous of joining any Branch of
this Society must be proposed by one and seconded
by another member in open Lodge. Every candi-
date for admission shall pay the sum of two shil-
lings and sixoence. The N.G. shall appoint two
enquirers to ascertain whether such persons are
respectable or not, and if a majority of the mem-
bers then present vote for or against his admission
by a show of hands, or ballot, if demanded by at
least two members, the N.G. shall declare him elect-
ed or rejected as the case may be. Any person
who has been proposed not presenting himself for
initiation within twelve weeks shall forfeit the pro-
position money, or if rejected the proposition money
must be returned. The certificate of birth, or other
evidence satisfactory to the Lodge, must be pro-
duced by all persons over thirty-six years of age.
41. Any person refused by one Lodge and obtain-
ing admittance into another without acquainting
its members of such refusal, shall, on proof being
made, be expelled, or suffer such other punishment
as a District Committee may determine. No Lodge
shall be allowed to initiate a person who may have
been refused in another Lodge in. compliance until
they have received the consent of a District Com-
mittee, under a penalty of twenty-one shillings, to
be paid to the District Management Fund.
42. Any member divulging a member’s name who
votes against a person becoming a member of this
Order shall be fined—for the first offence, five shil-
lings; second, ten shillings; and third, be suspended
for twelve months. And any member making
known Lodge business to any person not a member
shall be fined—for the first offence, ten shillings;
second, twenty shillings; and the third, be expelled.


Declaration' of Age and Health.
43. Every Lodge before initiating a friend shall
require him to obtain from the Lodge Surgeon a cer-
tificate of health (as per Schedule E), and present
the same to the Lodge within four weeks of the
date thereof, and shall require such member to sign
a declaration (as per Schedule E) as to the age and
health, or otherwise prove the same to the satisfac-
tion of a majority of the Lodge; and any Lodge
breaking this law shall be fined two pounds two shil-
lings, to be paid to the District Management Fund.
44. Members marrying after admission shall ob-
tain from the Financial Secretary of the Lodge a
certificate (as per Schedule L) to be filled in for
registration within three months under a penalty of
two shillings and sixpence, to go to the Lodge
funds, and if after a further period of three months
such certificate be not filled in the member shall be
suspended until he complies with the law. The
Financial Secretary of the Lodge shall send to the
G.S. all certificates received with the next quarterly
returns for registration in the District under a pen-
alty of five shillings for each case of neglect, the fine
to go to the District Management Fund.
Registration and Declaration Book.
45. A Registration and Declaration Book must be
kept by every Branch (as per Schedule M), and when
filled up and signed shall be read over by the pre-
siding officer before a candidate is admitted or a
clearance brother received. Questions to be an-
swered and declaration to be signed by all candi-
dates before their admission into any Branch of this
Order, whether by initiation or clearance.
Honorary Members.
4fi. Persons may be admitted as honorary members
at any age upon payment of an entrance fee of five
shillings and an annual subscription of ten shillings;
and in default of such payment three months after
it is due such membership shall cease. Honorary
members may vote on all matters but those of a fin-
ancial nature, may take an honorary office in Lodge,
but not in District, and may propose candidates
and express their opinions upon all questions, but
shall have no claim on the funds of the Lodge or


Order, and may have the services of the Lodge sur-
geon, on the doctor’s approval, the member paying
the Surgeon's fee. They shall not be finable for
non-attendance at any meeting, unless holding of-
fice.
Clearances from one Lodge to another.
47. The object of a clearance is to enable a mem-
ber residing at a distance from his Lodge to trans-
fer his membership to a Lodge willing to accept
him. The N.G. and Financial Secretary shall sign
all clearances, see that they are properly filled up,
and affix the Lodge seal thereto. No member shall
be entitled to demand a clearance, although Lodges
may grant the same, until twelve months after his
initiation. Any member drawing a clearance for
the purpose of throwing it into a Lodge in this
District shall do so within fourteen weeks of its
issue; and he shall pay all arrears of contributions
and fines due to the Lodge up to the time of its
granting clearance. He shall pay contribu-
tions from the' date of the clearance, and shall pro-
duce surgeon’s certificate to the Lodge accepting
the same, and also a joining fee of two shillings and
sixpence. Provided always that Lodges granting
such clearances shall be responsible for all sick-
pay to the member for six calendar months on the
same scale per week, and the Lodge accepting the
same after six calendar months from the date of
said clearance; also the scale of sick-pay shall be
endorsed on every clearance, and the total amount
of sick-pay drawn by the member at each rate, if
any, and the date thereof.
48. Any member drawing a clearance may throw
it back into the Lodge from which he drew it with-
in three months of its date by paying a fee of 2s. 6d.,
and amount of contributions due, and the Lodge
shall be bound to accept the same. In such cases
Surgeon’s certificate is not necessary. Lodges
granting a clearance shall pay the District levies
for the quarter in which it was issued. The Lodge
accepting clearance shall pay all subsequent dues,
and Lodges shall have power to refuse to receive
the clearance of any member, but his* own Lodge
shall be compelled to receive him, provided he re-
turns his clearance within three calendar months
from issue, after which he must produce a certificate


of health as for a new member. Any member ne-
glecting to deposit his clearance within twelve
months from its date shall cease to belong to the
Order.
49. Should a member fall sick at a distance from
his Lodge before he has been able to deposit his
clearance in another Lodge, he shall procure a cer-
tificate stating the nature of his sickness from a
legally qualified medical practitioner, or from some
magistrate, minister, or two respectable household-
ers in the neighborhood where such sickness occurs,
and forward it to his Lodge, who shall forward his
sick-pay in the best manner possible. Should the
member die under the above circumstances, the
Lodge shall cause him to be decently interred at a
cost not exceeding twelve pounds, which shall be a
first charge upon the funeral donation. The bal-
ance shall be paid to the legal representative of the
member on proof, as provided by the Friendly So-
cieties Act.
50. Every brother arriving in South Australia
from any other part of the world with a clearance
shall be required to produce a satisfactory certificate
of his own and his wife’s health, as for new mem-
bers, and pay contributions according to the scale
of the Lodge he joins for the whole period that
may have elapsed since he drew such clearance,
provided always that no clearance be accepted from
brothers over forty years of age; and should the
clearance be accepted, then an entrance fee of 3s. 6d.
must be paid by the clearance member.
Suspensions and Expulsions.
51. If any member be convicted of a criminal of-
fence or embezzlement by any Court of competent
jurisdiction, he shall immediately be expelled from
the Order, and if any member make known the se-
crets of the Order, damage, destroy, detain, or take
away the regalia, money, or other property belong-
ing to the Lodge or District, print or publish, or by
any means circulate any article or document so as
to bring the Order or any member into contempt,
or be guilty of fraud, disgraceful or immoral con-
duct, or use any unlawful means in procuring a
livelihood, if proof be made thereof, he shall be ex-
pelled, or suffer such other less punishment as a
Committee of his Lodge or District may think fit.


52. Before any member be expelled (except in
cases ,of conviction for a criminal offence or em-
bezzlement) by a District Committee, the N.G. shall
call a Committee of the Lodge to which the member
belongs, and to which every member correct on the
books (except sick or suspended members) residing
within three miles of the Lodge-rpom (country
Lodges five miles) shall be summoned.
53. Any member in the receipt of sick benefit im-
posing on the funds by stating himself sick and in-
capable of following any employment, usual avoca-
tion, trade, or calling, when he is able or actually
doing so, or resuming his employment before hav-
ing declared off, in accordance with the rules of his
Lodge, and general rules of the Society, shall be ex-
pelled, or suffer such other less punishment as a
summoned Committee of the Lodge called to try
such charge may think fit; and any member in re-
ceipt of sick-pay being found under the influence of
drink at any public or other place, shall for the first
offence of which he has been found guilty, return
or forfeit one month’s sick-pay, and pav a fine of
twenty-one shillings; for the second offence, after
being punished for the first, shall be fined forty
shillings, and suspended from all benefits for twelve
months; and for the third offence he shall be ex-
pelled.
54. No member suspended from sick and funeral
benefits of his Lodge by reason of non-payment of
contributions, fines, levies, &c„ shall be allowed to
vote or take part in the proceedings of his Lodge
or District, nor shall he be allowed to attend until
his arrears of contributions are reduced, by pay-
ment, below the amount specified in the District or
Lodge rules; and any member suspended from the
benefits for a given period for the violation of any
other rule, shall cause his contribution to be paid,
and shall be governed by the financial rules, but
shall not be allowed to attend any Lodge or District
Meeting until the expiration of such period. If
any member be suspended from benefits, until he
complies with the rules and regulations of his Lodge
or District, no contributions shall be received until
such act is performed, and in the event of non-
complance at the end' of six months his member-
ship shall cease.


55. Any member charged with committing an of-
fence which subjects him to expulsion not appear-
ing before a Committee to answer for the same
within one month after the commission of such of-
fence is made known to the Lodge, he having been
duly summoned, the summons to state the nature
of the charge preferred against him, and shall be
delivered or posted to him at ,his last known place
of residence fourteen days prior to the said charge
being heard. He shall then ‘be proceeded against
in the same manner as if he were present. Any
Lodge of this Order admitting or reinstating a
member who has been expelled from any Branch of
this Society without the sanction of a District Com-
mittee, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of five pounds
sterling to the District Management Fund, and the
person so illegally admitted shall forfeit his mem-
bership, and the money received by the said Lodge
(if any) shall be refunded to the person referred to
in this rule.
56. When a member is expelled the Financial Sec-
retary of the Lodge to which the member belonged
shall communicate the information to the G.S. for
publication in the next half-yearly report, after al-
lowing the expelled member sufficient time to appeal
to the District; and for every omission in this re-
spect on the part of the Financial Secretary of the
Lodge he shall be fined five shillings.
57. The name of an expelled member shall not be
inserted in the next half-yearly report, except in
cases of a criminal offence or embezzlement, until he
has had an opportunity of appealing to a Committee
of the District.
Disputes and Appeals.
58. All disputes between a member and his Lodge
shall be settled by a Committee of seven members
elected by the Lodge, who must not be personally
interested, and who shall elect their own Chairman;
each party to have power to object to three mem-
bers on the night of forming- such Committee.
Should the matter in dispute be of such a nature
that in the opinion of the Committee it would
subject the party to a greater penalty than three
guineas, it shall be referred to the next Finance Com-
mittee. Any member aggrieved at the decision of
such Finance Committee may appeal to the District
Committee within six months after the resolution


appealed against was passed. Any dispute arising
between any Lodges and its Trustees, or between
separate Lodges, or members of separate Lodges,
shall be settled by the District Committee, but
should any member or Lodge be dissatisfied with the
decision of such District Committee they shall have
liberty to appeal to the Special Board of Arbitration
of the District.
59. When any dispute arises, and the same is re-
ferred to a District Committee, a charge shall be
given to the District Officers in writing by the party
aggrieved, twenty-one days before the time appoint-
ed for hearing the case; and the party or parties
complained against shall be summoned to attend,
and be furnished with a copy of such charge at.least
fourteen days before the case is heard.
60. If a member prefers a charge against another
such charge shall be in writing, and lire same be
brought before a Committee and proved to be wil-
fully false or preferred in malice, he shall be fined
twenty-one shillings; and if he continues to prefer
such charge, and it again be proved false, he shall
for the second offence be fined two pounds two
shillings, in addition to I|he expenses incurred on
each occasion; and for the third be expelled, or suffer
such other punishment as a Committee may deem
proper.
61. In all cases of appeal the decision appealed
against must be complied with before such appeal
can be heard, except in cases of suspension and ex-
pulsion; but in cases where money matters are
concerned the Lodge or member shall be considered
as having complied if they deposit the amount in the
hands of the District Officers, and give notice of
appeal after the hearing of the case. All Com-
mittees formed for the purpose of hearing appeals
and settling disputes shall be deemed and are Arbi-
tration Committees.
62. Any member who may be summoned to attend
a Committee for the purpose of giving evidence
in any case, not attending, shall (unless a satisfac-
tory reason be given for his non-attendance) be fined
such sum as the Committee may decide, not exceed-
ing twenty-one shillings, provided his reasonable
expenses be guaranteed.


Contributions Scale.
63. The amount of contributions to be paid by
each benefit member, admitted on or before March
30, 1918, shall not be less than two shillings per
fortnight.
64. The amount of contributions to be paid by
each benefit member admitted or accepted by clear-
ance granted outside the state of South Australia,
on or after the Ist April, 1918, shall be according to
the following scale:—
16 years of age and under 34 . . 3/ per fortnight
24 years of age and under 27 . . 3/3 per fortnight
37 years of age and under 30 .. 3/4 per fortnight
30 years of age and under 33 .. 3/6 per fortnight
33 years of age and under 36 .. 3/10 per fortnight
36 years of age and under 40 . . 3/3 per fortnight
Sickness and Sick-pay.
65. Members shall be entitled to the sick-pay of
the Lodge from the date of their initiation. The
allowance to be paid to sick members shall be on
the following scale:—One pound sterling per week
for the first twenty-six weeks, ten shillings per week
for the succeeding twenty-six weeks, and if not cured
at the end of one year five shillings per week
66. Lodges shall be allowed -to reduce the amount
of sick allowance, if deemed expedient, at a Finance
Committee, below the fixed amounts in the preceding
law; notice of such proposed reduction must be
placed on the summons, so that every member is
cognisant of the proposal to reduce the sick allow-
ance; and if the majority are in favour of the reduc-
tion, then it shall remain so until altered by a
Finance Committee; the same course to be followed
in notifying the members, but in no case shall the
allowance in Law No. 65 be exceeded. In case a
member shall have received full pay or half-pay,
as may be, for a less period than twenty-six weeks,
he shall not be allowed to begin his twenty-six
weeks over again until he shall have ceased to re-
ceive any payment on account of sickness for two
years; but should he fall sick within that period
he shall be placed in the same position as when he
ceased to receive sick benefit, and be entitled to such
allowance; but should a member in receipt of the
quarter-pay allowance declare himself off the sick
benefits of his Branch and again fall sick withjn a


less period than three years, he shall not be entitled
to claim any other allowance than quarter-pay; and
the Sick-pay Officer of each Lodge shall keep a book
in which he shall correctly enter the duration of
every member’s sickness in their several periods
as each case of sickness occurs, with the amount
of sick-pay received, as per Schedule J attached to
these laws.
07. Any member whose sickness, ailment, or in-
firmity has been of such long duration as to reduce
him to quarter sick-pay, may, if recommended by
the Lodge Surgeon and approved of by the Lodge,
do or follow some light employment, and during
such permission the Lodge shall pay the fnember’s
fortnightly contributions only; and should the
member find that he cannot perform such light em-
ployment, then he shall resume his former position
as sick member on quarter-pay. Each Finance
Committee shall determine the length of time such
recommendation shall last.
68. The week’s payment for the sick shall be six
working days, and any portion thereof shall be paid
at the same rate, and members declaring on the
funds on or before twelve o’clock noon shall be paid
for that day, but not after that hour. Members
declaring off the funds after twelve o’clock noon
shall be paid for that day, but not if before that
hour. All payments shall commence and cease
from the date of the Surgeon’s certificate in con-
formity with the above. Surgeons to comply with
the above dating certificates, and in no case shall
such certificates be ante-dated or post-dated by the
Lodge Surgeon.
60. When any member has received the sum of
£75 for sick-pay during his membership, he shall
not be allowed to receive more than quarter sick-
pay for any subsequent illness, and any member
having received the sum of £l5O sick-pay shall only
be allowed to receive sick-pay at the same rate as
that of contributions payable by him; same to be
credited to his contributions on production of certi-
ficate signed by a duly qualified practitioner, and if no
medical practitioner be available, then the Lodge
may accept a certificate of a Justice of the Peace. All
certificates to be received at least once a quarter.
70. Surgeon for Members of Other Societies.—
Any member of any registered Friendly Society in
South Australia duly entitled to Surgeon's attend


ance, but who through distance or other satisfactory
disability is unable to obtain such attendance, may
be privileged to have his name placed on the Sur-
geon’s list of any Lodge in this District, located
where he may be residing, on presenting to such
Lodge a certificate of acceptance by the Surgeon
thereof, and the consent of his own Society or
Branch, with the quarterly medical fee, together
with a charge of sixpence per quarter for manage-
ment expenses, payable in advance each quarter.
Should the fee be not paid at the end of every
quarter, or prior to that, then the Financial Secre-
tary shall cause the member to be struck off the
Surgeon’s list.
Contributions to other Lodges, Surgeons’ Lists, &c,
71. Any member paying his contributions into any
other Lodge than his own shall pay all expenses of
postage and transmission of money to and from his
own Lodge, and the Lodge to which he may be pay-
ing shall charge such member one shilling per quar-
ter, to be paid in advance, which shall go to the
funds of such Lodge. And any such member may,
on the payment of the sum paid by such Lodge for
medical attendance (if he is in good health at the
time), be placed upon the Surgeon’s list, provided
the Surgeon is agreeable, and be entitled to his at-
tendance, and may either remain also on the Sur-
geon’s list of his own Lodge, or be allowed the
amount that would have been paid by his Lodge
for medical attendance, which shall be placed to the
credit of his contributions, in which case his name
shall be struck off the Surgeon’s list of his own
Lodge.
72. If any member remove to some distant part
and cause to be paid into his Lodge all moneys due
during his absence, he shall be entitled to sick-pay
in cases of sickness, provided he sends an account of
such sickness to the Lodge, certified by some duly
qualified medical practitioner, magistrate, minister,
or two householders, stating his complaint. A
certificate signed as above must be forwarded to
the Lodge every Lodge-night.
Declaration On and Oflf Funds.
73. That on receipt of a declaration on the funds
of a Lodge from a sick Brother, the N.G. shall ap


point two brothers to visit him if he resides within
the Lodge limits, each of whom shall report every
Lodge-night during his illness, or be fined one
shilling.
74. Any member obtaining a sick certificate shall
forward the same to the Financial Secretary of his
Lodge within three days from the date thereof, or
be fined one shilling for each day of neglect; and
any member after declaring off the funds of his
Lodge shall, before resuming his employment, pro-
cure the Surgeon’s certificate stating that he is
sufficiently recovered, and forward the same to the
Financial Secretary of his Lodge within three days
of the date thereof, or be fined one shilling for each
day of neglect; country Lodges six days, under
like fines.
75. Any member being on the Funds of his Lodge,
and being able to attend the surgeon, shall pre-
sent himself to the surgeon at least once a
week, and if unable to attend shall request the Sur-
geon to call on him at least once a week, or be fined
or suffer such punishment as the Lodge, or a sum-
moned meeting of the whole Lodge, shall deter-
mine. The Surgeon, however, to have the right
to suspend such law if he think fit, the member,
however, to notify the Financial Secretary of such
suspension by the Surgeon. .
76. Any member of the Society rendering himself
incapable of following his employment through
immoral, intemperate, or disorderly conduct, or by
quarrelling (if the aggressor), or accident arising
while under the influence of drink, shall not be en-
titled to sick-pay under any of the hereinbefore-
mentioned circumstances, and on proof being made
that sick-pay has been obtained by or for the mem-
ber, he shall be expelled, or suffer such less punish-
ment as a Committee of the Lodge or District may
think his case deserves. If any member afflicted
with insanity, permanent debility, or loss of sight
be provided for in some public institution, the Lodge
or District shall pay to his wife or family the sick-
pay, or shall have power, if there be no wife or
family, to retain the same for his benefit, or make
such other arrangement as to them shall seem
proper.
77. Any member being on the funds shall not be
allowed to be absent from his place of abode after
5 o’clock p.m. in winter (from the Ist April to 30th


September), and 7 o’clock in the summer (from Ist
October to 31st March), without the written sanc-
tion of the Surgeon attending him and consent of
the Committee of Management of his Lodge, which
must be left with the Financial Secretary, under a
penalty of ten shillings and sixpence for each of-
fence; and any member wilfully disobeying the Sur-
geon’s or Medical Officer’s instructions, or doing
any other act which in his or their opinion may
retard recovery, while in the receipt of sick-pay, will
subject himself to a fine of not less than ten shillings,
and forfeit one week’s sick-pay for the first offence;
for the second offence the fine shall be twenty-one
shillings and suspension from all benefits for three
calendar months. Should a member be found
guilty by a summoned Committee of the Lodge of
a third offence he shall be expelled.
78. That any brother residing out of his Lodge
limits and falling sick shall give notice to the
nearest Lodge, who shall pay him his sick-pay (pro-
vided they receive instructions from that member’s
Lodge to do so), and look after him the same as
one of their own members, and the Lodge he be-
longs to shall remit the amount due to that Lodge
at least once a quarter.
Surgeons.
79. Each Lodge shall elect one or more qualified
Surgeons upon such terms as the Lodge or a Com-
mittee of the same may think fit; and no person
shall be appointed Surgeon until he has passed the
South Australian Medical Board, unless three-
fourths of the brothers of the Lodge be in his
favour, and the consent of a District Committee be
obtained.
80. The Surgeon’s duty shall be to examine all
candidates for initiation, give his best professional
assistance, and attend members and their families
upon such terms as may be agreed upon, at their
places of residence in all cases when requested with-
in three miles of the Lodge-room (country Lodges
five miles). Should the member’s residence be at
a greater distance thap that before-mentioned he
shall pay the Surgeon such mileage as may be
agreed upon between the Surgeon and the Lodge,
The Surgeon shall report to the Lodge on each


Lodge-night the state and condition of each sick
member under his care.
81. Lodges may join any Friendly Societies’ Dis-
pensary, or make arrangements with the Surgeon for
the supply of medicines.
83. Should any complaint be made of the neglect
or inattention of the Lodge Surgeon tova sick mem-
ber, it shall be referred to a Committee of enquiry,
as provided in Branch Law 58; and should any
neglect be proved, the . Surgeon shall be fined not
less than ten shillings, nor more than five pounds,
and such fine may be d'educted from any moneys due
by the Lodge to the Surgeon.
83. Should the Surgeon of any Lodge resign or
vacate his office, the proposition for candidates to
fill the office shall be made on the same and follow-
ing Lodge-nights; the election to take place on the
Lodge-night following the vacancy. The Com-
mittee of Management to provide for any emergency
that might occur during the interval.
84. Any member employing other than the Lodge
Surgeon shall send in a certificate signed by such
medical attendant every Lodge-night, or be fined five
shillings for each case of neglect
Regalia.
85. The Regalia to be worn by Officers and mem-
bers shall be approved of by the District Committee
Meeting and be supplied by the District Office.


FEMALE BRANCH LAWS.
Name, Constitution, and Objects of the Society.
1. This Society shall be called the Female Branch
of the South Australian Grand United Order of
Oddfellows Friendly Society, and shall be conducted
by the General Board or Committee of Management,
as provided for in rules of the Male Society, and
shall be unlimited in its number of members. There
shall he Adult and Juvenile Branches, and the busi-
ness shall he conducted at the office of the Society,
in the City of Adelaide, as provided for in the gen-
eral rules of the Society.
2. The objects of the Society shall be to raise funds
by entrance-fees, subscription of the members, fines,
donations, levies, interest on capital, and profits
from fetes or socials, &c.; for the relief of members
in cases of ordinary sickness when unable to follow
any calling or duty; for insuring a sum of money to
be paid on the death of a member; for providing
proper medicine and medical attendance for mem-
bers, and for granting temporary relief in distress.
The whole of the objects and rules of this Society
shall be carried into effect in conformity with, and
subject to the rules of the before-named District
and the general rules of the Society. The whole of
the said rules of the District, and any alterations or
amendments hereafter made and duly confirmed,
shall be applicable to the members of this Society
in the same manner as if the said District rules were
inserted in the Branch rules. , All Branches shall
be under the control of the Executive Officers of the
Order, acting by and through the District Commit-
tee.


Management.
3. The general business of the Society shall be
managed by the Executive Officers of the South
Australian District of the Grand United Order of
Oddfellows Friendly Society, viz., the Grand Master,
Deputy Grand Master, and the Grand Secretary.
They shall perform the same duties, possess the
same powers and authority, and be subject to the
same restrictions and responsibilites as those they
are accustomed to in the District of the Male So-
ciety.
Treasurer and Funds.
4. Every Treasurer of this Society, or of any
Branch thereof, shall be responsible for all sums of
money that may from time to time be paid into'his
or her hands by the Financial Secretary, or any per-
son, on account of the Society or Branch, and shall,
when required, balance his or her cash accounts, and
supply the Financial Secretary with a duplicate
thereof. Before the Treasurer takes upon himself
or herself the duties of his or her office, he or she
must give security pursuant to the Friendly So-
cieties Act, 1886. The Bank of the Society shall
be the Bank of Adelaide, or’ such other Bank as
the Trustees shall from time time appoint, or the
Savings Bank of South Australia. All moneys re-
ceived on account of the Society shall be applied in
carrying out the objects and paying the expenses of
management thereof according to' the rules; and
such funds ap shall not be required to meet the
probable accruing liabilities shall be invested pur-
suant to the directions of the Friendly Societies
Act, 1886.
Funeral Fund.
3. A Funeral Fund shall be established and main-
tained by levies made upon all members as herein-
after provided for, all interest accruing on invested
capital and other receipts available for this fund.
All moneys received on account of this fund shall
be kept separate and distinct from all other funds;
and no payment shall be made from this fund ex-
cept for funeral expenses and rates, taxes, and re-
pairs to freehold property. The Trustees of the
District shall invest all moneys belonging to this


fund that may not be wanted for immediate use. They
shall sign all cheques on the Bank, which must be
countersigned by the Grand Secretary. The Trus-
tees shall do and execute all the functions required
of them by the Friendly Societies Act, 1886.
Funeral Allowance.
6. Upon the death of any member whose fines and
contributions are fully paid up, her husband, or
other legal representative, shall be entitled to re-
ceive the sum of ten pounds from the Funeral Fund
of the Branch. Provided always, that should a
member die before the expiration of twelve months
from the date of her initiation, her funeral allowance
shall be paid, subject, however, to the contributions,
levies, &c., due to her Lodge for that twelve months
being paid.
7. The levies to the Funeral Fund shall be regu-
lated by a resolution passed at each District Meet-
ing, and all returns and cash must be forwarded to
the Grand Lodge Secretary every quarter; any
Lodge failing to do so shall pay a fine of five shil-
lings, and any Lodge neglecting to send their re-
turns for two quarters, shall be suspended from all
benefits until one month after they comply.
Disputes of Claimants.
8. Should there be a dispute as to who is entitled
to receive the funeral allowance of any member, the
District Officers shall take the entire management
of the funeral into their own hands; and if there be
any overplus after all expenses are paid, the Officers
and Trustees of the District shall decide to whom
the remainder shall be paid.
Lodge Meetings.
9. Each Lodge shall hold its meetings at such
place as a majority at a meeting specially convened
for the purpose may decide. No Lodge shall
change its night or place of meeting without first
obtaining the consent of the District Officers,
through the Grand Secretary. Provided, neverthe-
less, that should any Lodge-night fall on Christmas
Day, New Year’s Day, Good Friday, or other special
public holiday, the Lodge may, by resolution passed
at previous meeting, appoint any night previous to
the usual Lodge-night on which to hold the meeting,
or may adjourn to the next regular Lodge-night.


Opening and Closing Lodge.
10. All Lodges shall be opened at the time and
place appointed, and shall not be kept open later
than nine o’clock, unless the presiding officer be re-
quested by a majority of the members present to
extend the time, but such extension shall not exceed
ten o’clock. And any officer who shall not be in
attendance within fifteen minutes of the time ap-
pointed for the opening of the Lodge, shall give a
satisfactory apology.
Management of Lodge.
11. The business of the Lodge shall be conducted
by the following officers:—Noble Grand, or N.G.;
Vice-Grand, or V.G.; President, or P.; Financial
Secretary, Treasurer, Supporters, Warden, and Guar-
dian, and such other members as the Lodge may
appoint, to be elected by ballot every six months.
Any officer absenting herself for three consecutive
meetings of the Lodge shall be held to have vacated
her office; and a successor shall be appointed on
such vacancy being declared by the presiding officer.
13. All propositions for candidates shall be received
on the night of election and on the two Lodge-
nights preceding; and to qualify a member for the
office of N.G. she shall have served the office of
V.G. or Minute Secretary. The N.G. shall appoint
the Guardians, Wardens, and her Supporters. To
qualify a member for the office of V.G. she shall
have served a minor office six months. The V.G.
shall appoint her own Supporters.
13. No past-officer shall oppose any qualified sister
who is a candidate for office unless such past officer
has been out of the office for which the proposal is
made twelve months. This rule shall not refer to
the Financial Secretary or Treasurer, who may be
elected during the pleasure of the Lodge.
14. There shall be a general change of officers
every six months, and those newly appointed shall
take their respective situations on the night of their
appointment. The election of officers shall take
place on the last nights in the months of June and
December in each year,


Finance and Lodge Committees.
15. Each Lodge shall hold a Finance Committee at
the end of every term of office, to which every mem-
ber residing within three miles of the Lodge-room
shall be summoned.
16. When a Committee of the whole Lodge is
called the Financial Secretary' shall summon all
members good on the books living within three
miles of the Lodge-room; each summons to state
the business to be brought forward; and any sister
leaving a Committee till it is declared closed, with-
out the permission of the N.G. or other presiding
officer, shall be fined one shilling, without appeal.
Trustees.
17. The Trustees of the Female Branch shall be
the same as the Trustees of the Male Branch.
Financial Secretary and Duties.
18. The Financial Secretary shall hold office
during the pleasure of the Lodge, and shall keep all
cash accounts of the Lodge, enter in the fine book
all fines inflicted, and see that they are duly paid;
conduct all correspondence of the Lodge, and keep
a copy of same; prepare half-yearly balance-sheets,
and enter them in a book to be keffi for that pur-
pose; send all summonses and notices, by post or
otherwise—summonses to be issued at least forty-
eight hours previous to the holding of such Com-
mittee; make out all returns for the District and
Public Actuary, and perform all other duties apper-
taining to his or her office not herein mentioned.
The Financial Secretary of any other Friendly So-
ciety or Branch thereof shall not hold the position
of Financial Secretary of any Lodge of this Order.
In case of resignation he or she shall give one
month’s notice, and propositions for candidates shall
be received two Lodge-nights previous to the night
of election, which shall be a summoned Committee
Meeting. All fines lost or inflicted on the Lodge
through his or her neglect or inattention shall be
paid by him or her. He or she shall keep a book
in which the names and residences of every member
shall be registered on the night of her initiation, to-
gether with the names of any person she may wish to


receive the sum payable at her death (and each
member shall have power to alter such name on
payment of sixpence), and shall also furnish a new or
amended list to the Lodge Surgeon of the names of
all sisters who are good on the books at the end of
each quarter, or be fined two shillings and sixpence
for each case of neglect.
Minute Secretary and Duty.
19. The Minute Secretary shall take down on each
Lodge arid Committee night the minutes of all pro-
ceedings in a clear and concise manner, and read the
same at the close of the business when called upon
by the presiding officer to do so.
Treasurer.
20. The Treasurer shall be appointed during the
pleasure of the Lodge. He or she shall receive
the Lodge moneys from the Financial Secretary,
give receipts for the same, and when required by the
Lodge to do so, shall lodge the whole or any of the
moneys in his or her hands in the Bank to the credit
of the Lodge. He or she shall produce to the
Noble Grand, Financial Secretary, and Auditors
the Bank pass-book and books of account whenever
demanded.
21. The Auditors of the Male Branch shall also he
the Auditors of the Female Branch.
Initiation of Members.
22. Persons of good moral character, of sixteen
and hot above forty years of age, may become mem-
bers of this Order. All candidates must produce
a certificate of health from the Lodge Surgeon. Any
candidate for admission making a false statement
to any of the questions contained in the certificate
of health, with a view to obtaining admission into
any Lodge in this District, shall, on proof thereof,
be immediately expelled.
23. All candidates must pay an entrance fee of
two shillings and sixpence, and be proposed and
seconded on a regular Lodge-night, and the person
so proposed must be initiated on the next, or any"
Lodge-night, within three months from the time
they were proposed, or forfeit the deposit-
money; the name, age, place of abode, and occupar.


tion of the intended members to be entered in the
minute-book by the Secretary and read to the
Lodge. The N.G. shall appoint two enquirers to
ascertain whether the person proposed bears a good
character, and is in other respects fit to become a
member; and such report shall be delivered from at
least one of the enquirers on the following Lodge-
night, or the Lodge otherwise satisfied before she
be allowed to be initiated. When that is done and
a doctor’s certificate of health is produced, and con-
sidered satisfactory, she may be admitted. En-
quirers neglecting to give in their rbport, either
verbally or in writing, to be fined one shilling each.
If a candidate be rejected her proposition money
shall be returned.
24. If any candidate is prevented attending on a
regular Lodge-night, the officers may call a special
meeting for her initiation. If a candidate has been
previously initiated she shall not be admitted with-
out permission either of the Lodge of which she was
last a member, or of the District Officers. Every
member, when initiated, shall be presented with one
copy of the laws.
Contributions.
35. The amount of contributions to be paid by
each member admitted or accepted by clearance
granted outside the state of South Australia shall be
according to the following scale:—
16 years of age and under 25 .. 1/4 per fortnight
33 years of age and under 30 .. 1/5 per fortnight
30 years of age and under 35 .. 1/6 per fortnight
35 years of age and under 38 .. 1/7 per fortnight
38 years of age and under 40 .. 1/8 per fortnight
Lodge Sick and Funeral Fund.
26. This fund shall be called the Lodge Sick and
Funeral Fund. To this fund shall be paid balance
of Members’ contributions as provided for in Law
37, the same to be apportioned at each quarterly
balance; also all interest and rent accruing from in-
vestments and funeral money received from the
District. This fund shall pay all funeral money and
be chargeable with any sums expended in keeping in
good repair (rates, taxes, &c.) the freehold and
mortgaged property of the Lodge; also sick-pay to
the members and the levies to the District Funeral


Fund. This fund shall be kept separate and dis-
tinct, and no moneys shall be used from this fund for
the advantage or otherwise of the Medical and Man-
agement or other fund under a penalty of three
guineas for each offence, the fine to go to the Dis-
trict Management Fund. Lodges requiring a levy
to meet the expenses of this fund shall make a levy
on all its members at a special summoned or Finance
Meeting.
Lodge Medical and Management Fund.
37. This fund shall be called the Medical and
Management Fund, and all entrance, clearance, and
honorary members’ fees, fees for medical benefits
for family or for members of other Lodges, notices,
fines, forfeitures, and all other receipts whatever not
otherwise provided for shall be appropriated to this
fund, and to which shall be added ninepence per
fortnight of the contributions of all members, as
provided in Rule 25, the same to be apportioned at
each quarterly balance. From this fund shall be
paid District fines, the fees paid for medical benefits
on account of members and members’ families, rent
of room, salaries, remunerations, and all other ex-
penses for the management of the Lodge. Should
at any time the balance of this fund be more than is
required to meet its expenses the Lodge may trans-
fer the whole or any part thereof to the Sick and
Funeral Fund. Lodges requiring a levy to meet the
expenses of this fund shall make a levy, as provided
for in the case of the Sick and Funeral Fund.
Honorary Members.
28. Persons may be admitted as honorary members
at any age upon payment of an entrance fee of two
shillings and sixpence and an annual subscription of
five shillings; and in default of such payment three
months after it is due such membership shall cease.
Honorary members may vote on all matters but
those of a financial nature, may take an honorary
office in Lodge, but not in District, and may pro-
pose candidates and express their opinions upon all
questions, but shall have no claim on the funds of
the Lodge or Order, and may have the services of
the Lodge surgeon, on the Doctor’s approval, the
member paying the Surgeon’s fee. They shall not
be finable for non-attendance at any meetings, unless
holding office.


Misappropriation of Funds.
29. Any Lodge expending its funds for any other
than sick or funeral purposes, or necessary working
expenses, shall forfeit and pay the sum of two
pounds to the District Management Fund, and be
suspended until such fine be paid; provided, how-
ever, that nothing herein contained shall apply to
the opening of new Lodges, when all charges made
by the District for goods and other expenses may
be paid out of the Lodge funds.
Sickness, in case of.
30. Any member who is not suspended for being
in arrears, if she become sick, or infirm, or incapable
of following any employment, if such incapacity is
not occasioned by immoral conduct, shall be entitled
to receive an allowance of ten shillings weekly for
twenty-six weeks, and (should the illness so long
continue) half-pay for twenty-six weeks, after which
time quarter-pay only shall be paid. If any mem-
ber.shall have received full pay or halfpay for a less
period than twenty-six weeks, she shall not be
allowed to begin her twenty-six weeks over again
until she shall have ceased to receive any sick-pay
whatever for two years, and should she fall sick
within that period, she shall be placed in the same
position as when she ceased to receive sick-pay.
Any member employing other than the Lodge Sur-
geon, shall send in a certificate, signed by such medi-
cal attendant, every Lodge-night, or the sick-pay
be withheld; but Lodges shall have power to regu-
late their payments according to the state of their
funds. Sick-pay shall not be allowed for accouche-
ments, nor for any sickness arising therefrom, if
such sickness occurs within two months from the
time of accouchement.
31. When any member has received the sum of
£4O for sick-pay during her membership, she shall
not be allowed to receive more than quarter sick-
pay for any subsequent sickness, and any member
having received the sum of £75 sick-pay shall only
be allowed to receive sick-pay at the same rate as
that of contributions payable by her; same to be
credited to her contributions on production of cer-
tificate signed by a duly qualified practitioner, and if
no medical practitioner be available, then the Lodge
may accept a certificate of a Justice of the Peace.
All certificates to be received at least once a quarter.


When Benefits Cease.
33. If a member shall not pay some portion of her
contributions on the Lodge-night when the same
shall exceed twelve weeks’ contributions in amount,
such member shall be deemed to have allowed her
contributions to have exceeded fourteen weeks, and
she shall be bad on the books of her Lodge. No
member shall owe more than fourteen weeks’ contri-
butions to her Lodge, nor shall she allow a fine or
levy imposed upon her (and of which, if she were
absent, she has received written or, printed notice)
to remain unpaid for a like period; nor shall she
allow goods she may have ordered from her Lodge
to remain unpaid for a period of fourteen weeks;
and if any member offend in any of the matters
above named at any time within fourteen weeks next
previous to sickness or to the death of herself, her
representatives shall not be entitled to the sick-pay
for such sickness, nor to any sum insured to be paid
at her death, and any member so neglecting shall be
out of compliance, and be suspended for a period of
fourteen weeks after such arrears, inclusive of fines
or levies, are paid, or reduced within the limits here-
in prescribed; and she shall not be allowed to visit
her own or any other Lodge until she shall have
complied. Provided that any member out of
compliance under this law may, upon the first
Lodge-night after she has become out of compliance
pay a penalty of two shillings and sixpence, with
the whole of the arrears due by her; or upon the
second Lodge-night pay a penalty of seven shillings
and sixpence, with all arrears due; and such pay-
ment upon either the first or second Lodge-night
after she is under suspension, shall remove such
suspension from the date of such payment, the pen-
alty to go to the Lodge Medical and Management
Fund.
33. Re-admission of Members.—Any member who
allows her contributions to exceed twelve months
may be re-admitted into her Lodge upon payment
of all arrears and production of a certificate of health,
and declaration of age and health as hereinbefore
provided. But such member shall only be re-
admitted with the consent of the Lodge she belonged
to, and the consent of the District Meeting. And
such former member obtaining such consent shall
within eight weeks after the resolution of the Dis-
trict Meeting granting such consent has been re


ported to the Lodge pay or cause to be paid
all her arrears which would have been due to the
Lodge had she not ceased to be a member, and shall
produce the certificate of health and declaration of
age and health as provided. In all cases of re-
admission of former members a ballot shall be taken,
and unless two-thirds of the members present vote
in favour of the candidates’ re-admission, she shall
be rejected. Provided that where the said member
or former member is residing beyond the boundaries
of the State of South Australia, her Lodge shall be
allowed to accept a certificate of health granted and
signed by a duly qualified medical practitioner of the
state in which she is residing, such certificates to be
countersigned by a justice of the peace or a magis-
trate. And any former member so re-admitted
shall be entitled to all the benefits of her former
membership.
Declaration On and OS Funds.
34. That on receipt of a declaration on the funds
of a Lodge from a sick sister, the N.G. shall appoint
two sisters to visit her if she resides within the
Lodge limits, each of whom shall report every
Lodge-night during her illness, or be fined one
shilling.
Imposition.
35. Any member on the funds going from home
during the day without leaving word where she may
be found shall be fined one shilling. Neither shall
she go out of her house dr lodgings after seven
o’clock at night in the summer (from the first of
October to the thirty-first of March), nor earlier
than six o’clock in the morning; nor after five
o’clock in the evening (from the first of April to the
thirtieth of September), nor sooner than nine o’clock
in the. morning (except by the written permission
of the Surgeon attending her, which must be left
with the Financial Secretary) under a fine of one
shilling for the first offence, and two shillings and
sixpence for each subsequent offence. And any
sick member not complying with the orders of the
Surgeon shall not receive any sick-pay until com-
pliance be made. And if any member shall declare
off the funds to avoid being placed on reduced pay,
and the same shall be satisfactorily proved at any


regular meeting of the Lodge, she shall be expelled,
or suffer such other less punishment as a committee
of the Lodge may determine.
36. Any member in the receipt of sick benefit and
found to be imposing on the Lodge by stating
herself to be sick and incapable of following her
employment, usual avocation, trade, or calling, when
she is able or actually doing so, or be found guilty of
any improper conduct, or resuming her employment
without a certificate from the Surgeon declaring her
off the funds, shall for the first offence refund one
week’s sick-pay and pay a fine of one pound; for
the second, be suspended from all benefits for three
months; and for the third, be expelled.
Visitation of the Sick.
37. Lodges may appoint, when necessary, Sick
Visitors, who, on receiving notice from the Financial
Secretary, shall visit all cases of sickness (if the dis-
ease be not contagious) at least once in each week,
if the sick member resides within three miles of the
Lodge’s place of meeting. The visitor shall be
fined sixpence for every case of neglect of duty,
unless a satisfactory apology be submitted and ac-
cepted by the Lodge.
Surgeons.
38. Each Lodge shall elect one or more qualified
Surgeons upon such terms as the Lodge or a Com-
mittee of the same may think fit; and no person shall
be appointed Surgeon until he has passed the South
Australian Medical Board, unless three-fourths of
the sisters of the Lodge be in his favour, and the
consent of a District Committee be obtained.
39. The Surgeon’s duty shall be to examine all can-
didates for initiation, give his best professional as-
sistance, and attend members and their families upon
such terms as may be agreed upon, at their places
of residence in all cases when requested, within
three miles of the Lodge room (country Lodges five
miles). Should the member’s residence be at a
greater distance than that before-mentioned she shall
pay the Surgeon such mileage as may be agreed upon
between the Surgeon and the Lodge. The Sur-
geon shall report to the Lodge on each Lodge-night
the state and condition of each sick member under
his care.


Lodges may join any Friendly Societies’ Dispen-
sary, or make arrangements with the Surgeon for
the supply of medicines.
40. Should any complaint be made of the neglect
or inattention of the Lodge Surgeon to a sick mem-
ber, it shall be referred to a Committee of enquiry,
as provided in Branch Law (Male) 58; and should
any neglect be proved, the Surgeon shall be fined
not less than ten shillings, nor more than live
pounds, and such fine may be deducted from any
moneys due by the Lodge to the Surgeon.
41. Should the Surgeon of any Lodge resign or
vacate his office, the proposition for candidates to
fill the office shall be made on the same and follow-
ing Lodge-nights; the election to take place on the
Lodge-night following the vacancy. The Com-
mittee of Management to provide for any emergency
that might occur during the interval.
, 43. Any member employing other than the Lodge
Surgeon shall send in a certificate signed by such
medical attendant every Lodge-night, or be fined
five shillings for each case of neglect.
Adopted at the Annual District Committee Meeting,
March sth, 1918.
/{JyfO C. E MOL TON,
f Grand Secretary.
Approved,
FRED. W. RICHARDS,
Crown Solicitor.
Confirmed in Executive Council,
H. L. GALWAY,
Governor.
April 25th, 1918.
