





of sktcr;
ESTABLISHED lax MAY, 1867.
LAWS.
Session of 1873-4.


(Sklwtk of Victoria.
ESTABLISHED Ist MAY, 1867.
Ordered to be Reprinted as Amended Aih December, 1873.
I. An Association shall forthwith be established, and styled
the Eclectic Association oe Victoria.
Objects and 11, The objects of the Association shall he the unrestricted
Principle. temperate investigation and discussion of any subject whatever
of general social interest and importance; to vindicate and
uphold the right and duty of free discussion simply; to
countenance or favour no particular views, doctrines, or
opinions whatsoever, but to discuss all with strict impartiality;
to hold debates at least once every month; to maintain a
library of standard and liberal philosophical works for the use of
members ; to reprint such essays and works, and publish such
papers of members as to the Association may seem desirable ;
and to accumulate funds with a view of ultimately purchasing
premises for a Lecture Hall, Library, &c., for the use of
members.
Membership 111. Candidates of either sex for Membership shall he
proposed and seconded at any meeting, and balloted for at the
succeeding meeting ; one vote in seven to exclude.
Subscription IY. Each person so elected shall become entitled to all the
privileges of membership on payment of a subscription of Ten
Shillings per annum, payable quarterly in advance.
Meetings. V. A meeting and debate of the Association shall be held
at the Eoyal Society’s Hall, Melbourne (until otherwise
resolved), on the first Thursday in each month, at half-past
seven, p.m.
Officers. YI. The business of the Association shall be conducted by
a President, Yice-President, Treasurer, and Secretary, together
with a Committee of Seven Members; three to form a quorum.
Elections. YII. The above Honorary officers shall he elected by ballot,
after being duly proposed and seconded at the Annual Meeting
in May in each year, and shall be eligible for re-election.
Committee VIII. The Committee shall meet at the call of the
Meetings. Secretary, and otherwise as agreed at the monthly meetings.
Absence from three consecutive meetings shall, failing satis-
factory excuse, disqualify, for further service upon it, except in
the case of the President.


IX. All special Committees of the Association shall cease Special
to exist at the Annual Meeting in May, when any of them Committees,
may, if desired, be re-elected.
X. Non-payment of the subscription in advance shall, upon Disqualifl-
the expiration of the second quarter, disqualify for mem- catlolU
bership.
XI. The Secretary shall report all such cases of disqualifi- To be
cation to each meeting, which may at once proceed to fill the rePorted-
consequent vacancies on the Committee, and to remove any
defaulter’s name from the Member’s list.
XII. The Treasurer of the Association shall receive sub- Treasurer,
scriptions, or any other moneys on account of the Association,
at any time ; and shall forward receipts for them to the proper
person before the next monthly meeting of the Association.
Should any member fail to receive a receipt for moneys paid by
him to the Treasurer, before the next meeting following the
payment, he should apply for it to the Treasurer ; and should
he fail to receive one before the second meeting after the
payment, he should apply in writing to the President and the
Committee, whose decision upon any disputed point shall he
final.
XIII. The Treasurer shall deposit all the subscriptions Funds,
received by him to the credit of the Association, in the
Commercial Bank, Melbourne, once at least per month ; and
produce the bank pass hook made up to date at each monthly
meeting. All payments shall be made by cheque signed by the
Treasurer and the Secretary.
XIY. At each monthly meeting the President or Vice- Chairman,
President shall take the chair, or in their absence a chairman
shall be elected at the hour appointed for meeting; and he
shall regulate the night’s proceedings, decide questions of and
keep order, state propositions, report the result of all ballots
and divisions, and carry into effect all the regulations of the
Association.
XV. At each meeting, the chair shall be taken at 7.30 p.m. Business.
The minutes shall then be read and confirmed. Ballots for
and nominations of new members or officers shall follow ; then
notices of motions or discussions upon motions. Lastly, the
subject for discussion at the next meeting shall be determined
by the meeting. At 8 o’clock the Chairman shall adjourn the
ordinary business under discussion, if any, to the next
meeting, or terminate it by taking a division, if the meeting
prefer it; and he shall call upon the proper member to intro-
duce the subject selected for the evening’s debate.
XVI. The debate shall then proceed thus :—The member Debates,
introducing the subject for discussion shall occupy no more
than thirty minutes in doing so, and may put his views in the
form of a definite proposition, so that, if desired, members
may vote in the affirmative or negative. No speaker except
the opener shall speak twice, unless in explanation, and
specially by permission of the meeting; and no speech shall
exceed ten minutes, except that of the opener, who shall
have fifteen minutes after the debate to reply, not later than
ten p.m.
WF9Q2I
/9 s on
\


Chairman XVII. If the President or Chairman desire to speak to the
may speak, question, he must do so before the opener’s reply.
Adjourn- XVIII. The adjournment of any debate shall he, not to the
ments. next ordinary meeting, hut to an intervening Thursday.
Promises of XIX. Any member undertaking to open a debate, or
Papers. adjourned debate, and failing to do so, shall pay a fine of one
guinea, unless remitted by the meeting.
Papers for XX. Members who introduce subjects of debate by reading
Library. papers, shall present one copy thereof to the library belonging
to the Association.
Visitors. XXI. Each member shall have the privilege of introducing
two friends to any one meeting, but not the same person to
more than two meetings in the year. Visitors shall take no
part in any of the proceedings, unless by desire of the meeting,
and can only be admitted on condition that they conform to
the XXIVth Law. Ladies may be introduced without other
restriction.
Audit. XXII. Two Auditors shall he appointed yearly at each
April meeting, to inspect the accounts and books of the
Association, and to report upon them to the annual meeting in
May, when the Treasurer and Secretary shall produce the
accounts and books for inspection.
Annual XXIII. When convening the annual meeting in May, the
Report. Secretary shall issue a circular epitomising the year’s pro-
ceedings for the information of members generally.
Publicity. XXIV. It is to be understood that for the present the
debates of the Association are to be regarded as private, and
are not to be communicated to the Press ; but general outlines
of the proceedings at any meeting may be sent to the papers
at the discretion of the Committee.
Alterations. XXV. No motion for altering the foregoing or introducing
new Laws shall be entertained at any meeting, unless notice
and particulars thereof shall have been given at the next
preceding meeting before the debate.


This hook is to the Library of the Association by, and is the
property of - -
It is issued for days gratis ; after that period
one shilling per week shall be charged, collected by the Librarian, and
paid by him to the Treasurer of the Association.
No more than one volume at a time shall be issued to any member.
No book shall be issued to any person not a member of the Association.
Any volume lost, mutilated, defaced, or soiled, to the dissatisfaction of
the Committee, shall, if required, be paid for to the Librarian at the
valuation of the Committee, by the member in whose possession it was
when so misused.
The above are the sole conditions upon which books can be borrowed
from the Library.
To Whom Issued.
Date.
Date of Return.
I. The Committee of Management shall he also the Library Com-
mittee of the Eclectic Association.
11. The Committee shall meet to inspect the Library and hooks at two
p.m. on the Saturday preceding the. annual meeting in May in each year.
ITT The Library shall he maintained and extended by donations or
loans of hooks from members, and by purchase by the Committee. In
the event of the Library being abolished, the hooks shall be returned to
their owners, and those unclaimed sold by auction to members.
IV. The Librarian shall keep a catalogue of all the hooks, and a clear
record of the members to whom, and the dates on which, any books shall
be issued.
V. The Librarian shall collect and pay to the Treasurer of the Associa-
tion all fines for over detention or damage, etc., as laid down in Rule VI.;
and he shall report to the Secretary monthly all such moneys which may
be due, and unpaid ; and shall issue no more books to defaulters.
YI. There shall be no additional subscription,—but membership of
the Association shall confer all the advantages of access to the Library ;
and in order that each member to whom any volume may be issued may
thoroughly understand the conditions on which he receives it, a printed
statement in the following terms shall be pasted inside the first cover
of it:
ECLECTIC ASSOCIATION OF VICTORIA.
YII. When a book is issued, the Librarian shall, enter the name of
the recipient and the date in ink, in the form (Rule YI.) pasted inside the
first cover of the book, and the same particulars in pencil against the
name of the book in the catalogue. On the return of the book, the
pencil entry in the catalogue should be rubbed out, and the date inserted
in the form in the book itself.


(Bdtdk of Widssm.
LIST OF MEMBERS.
Thursday, January Isth, 1874.
i A’Beckett, W. A. C., Hori., M.L.C., Parliament Houses.
Addison, Dr., Lying-in Hospital.
Armstrong, Elizabeth, Miss, Russell Street.
Bate, Mrs., Glen Iris, Malvern.
5 Beauchamp, Horatio, 28 Collins Street East.
Bell, F. G., 85 Chetwynd Street, Hotham.
Bell, Robert, 97 Little Collins Street East.
Bindon, S, H. M., 12 Temple Court.
Bonney, S. 8., care of J. Noone, Esq.
10 Bowley, Wm., 8g Flinders Street East.
Bowrey, John, Hoddle Street, Collingwood.
Bright, Chas., Yorick Club.
Brotherton, Henry, Public Works Office.
Burkitt, G. L., Myrniong Terrace, Drummond-st., Carlton
15 Cameron, Angus, William Street.
Cameron, R. 8., Carlyle Street, St, Kilda.
Carter, Charles, 71 Queen Street.
Clarence, A. W., Brasch Bros, and Co., Flinders Lane.
Clarke, J. T., 59 Queen Street.
20 Cook, E. D., Franklyn Street West.
Couch, Geo., Adderley Street, West Melbourne.
Craig, Robert, care of H. K. Rusden, Esq.
Date, E. P., Wangaratta.
Davis, William, 62 Victoria Street, Hotham.
25 Day, Christopher, 7 Queen Street.
Deakin, Alfred, Adams Street, South Yarra.
Delbridge, E., Moor Street, Fitzroy.
Dempster, A., Russell Street.
Douglas, George, Flinders Lane East.
30 Drew, John, Buckhurst Street, Emerald Hill.
Duerdin, James, Yorick Club.
Dwyer, Jeremiah, Temple Court,
Ellery, R. L. J., Observatory.
Elliott, John, Flinders Lane East.
35 Evans, Wm., Johnston and Campbell-sts., Collingwood.
Fairhurst, James, 298 Lygon Street, Carlton.


Fink, Theodore, 4 Collins Street East.
Forster, R. S., Bogong, Brighton,
Fyfe, W. S., Anderson Street, Emerald Hill.
40 Galt, Alexander, Public Works Office,
Garcia, Abraham, Elizabeth Street.
George, Henry, Smith Street, Collingwood.
German, J. L., Elizabeth Street.
Gillespie, Robert, Villars Street, North Melbourne.
45 Gregory, J. 8., 32 Temple Court.
Gresham, W. H., Hall of Commerce.
Grut, P. de J., Eng. Scot, and A. C. Bank, Collingwood.
Giinst, Dr., Collins Street East.
Haddon, F. W., Argus Office.
50 Harrison, Thos., care of G. S. Manns, Esq.
Harvie, Henry, Audit Office,
Hill, Frederick, Custom House.
Horsfall, Joseph, Gertrude Street, Fitzroy.
Howitt, W. G., Collins Street East.
55 levers, Wm., Warehouseman, Carlton,
Jeffrey, John, Park Street, South Yarra.
Kelson, Horatio, Savings Bank.
Kemble, John, g Rosslyn Street, West Melbourne.
Knipe, Geo., Collins Street West.
60 Langdon, M. W., at H. J. Langdon’s, Elizabeth-st. South
Laws, Horace, Bourke Street East.
Loewy, Benjamin, Turn Verein Hall,
Luke, M. A., Lonsdale Street West.
Manns, G. S., Nicholson Street, Fitzroy.-
65 Martin, A. P., Electric Telegraph Office.
Martin, J. W,, Lyons Street,tSandridge.
Mcllwraith, J., Little Collins Street East.
Mclntosh, C., 27 Cardigan Street, Carlton,
McKenzie, Allan, Trades’ Hall.
70 McKimmie, John, Bundoora, Upper Plenty.
McKinlay, William, Yorick Club.
Meyer, V., Henry Street, Collingwood.
Mickle, David, Electric Telegraph Office.
Miller, James, 61 Flinders Street West.
75 Moloney, James, Lonsdale Street East.
Neild, Dr., Collins Street East.
Nettleton, Peter, Victoria Street, East Collingwood.
Noone, John, Lands and Survey Office.
Osborne, Joseph, 27 Post Office Place.
80 Palmer, A. S., Bank of Australasia, Geelong.
Parker, G. 8., Oriental Bank.
Pearce, Thos., Boundary Street, Emerald Hill.


.s . ’
Pickersgill, J., 34 Collins, Street West.
Poole, William, Age Office.
85 Randell, J, W., The Hall, Smith Street, Collingwood,
Rhind, W. G., Bank Of New South Wales.
Rice, W-, care of E, W. Cole, Esq.
Robertson, Robert, sen., 23 Little Collins Street West,
Robertson, Robert, jun., 23. Little Collins Street West.
90 Ross, John, Tintaldra.
Rudd, Mrs., 3 Evelyn Street.
Rundle, J. R., Wangaratta.
Rusden, H, K., Office of Chief Commissioner of Police,
Sabelberg, J., Queen Street.
95 Scarlett, W., Johnston Stieet, East Collingwood.
Selby, Prideaux, Bank of Australasia.
Shaw, Francis, 28 Queensberry Street, Carlton.
Sievwright, Marcus, attan Street, Carlton.
Skamp, R. 8., 101 Collins Street West,
100 Smith, A. Brooke, Wangaratta.
Smith, A, K., Leicester Street, Carlton.
Smith, W. H., Market Street.
Stanford, T. W., Bourke and Russell Streets.
Stuart, Thos., Faraday Street, Carlton.
105 Sutherland, Robt., Co-operative Store, Bourke Street.
Tall, A. D., 2 Myrmiong Terrace, Drummond-st., Carlton.
Tate, Fredk., 13 Market Street.
Terry, Albert, Prahran Brewery, Chapel Street.
Terry, Alfred, Carlton Brewery,
no Terry, W. H., Russell Street.
Thomas, G. D,, 53 and 55 Elizabeth Street North.
Thomas, J. H., Wangaratta.
Thompson, J. W., Elizabeth Street.
Topp, A. M., 44 Elizabeth-Street.
120 Topp, S. S., Temple Court.
Tozer, Thos., cm a’Beckett Street.
Turner, H. G., (Commercial Bank.
Tyerman, J., 45 Drummond Street, Carlton.
Vincent, J. W., 16 Richmond Terrace, Richmond.
125 Walker, W. B.,,Messrs. Noyes and Reed.
Watson, William, care of J. Elliott, Esq.
Watson, S. G., Walwa via Bel voir.
Webster, Samuel, 25 Roden Street, West Melbourne.
White, J. W., Upholsterer, Madeline Street, Carlton.
130 Whitehead, J., Flemington Road.
Williams, J. R., Custom House.
Wright, John, 50 Elizabeth Street.
133 Young, Joseph,-Drummond Street, Carlton.


i 1 .


