

- 1
TT'T'i 111 r nTfTrn hit r-rrm tttt itiutit i i mm ifirmniin nrn iniiiirniimm »crt.
ww 'ip' 1 nun- —«mii' me M( )t , nr-ir >w mi' mu mii>- 'mi'" w i; ww* PLX
: 4
\i
:4
: i
LAWS & HABITS 1
II
: 4
: i
u
: i
[i
z %
- 4
- %
\ 4
Ur % :
PEOPLE I
u
: %
: J
; 4
U
■- i
: •:
h
: i
i
1
n
M
WHO LIVE IN OTHER WORLDS. !
1- -
| | ' [I
COPYRIGHT REGISTERED. J :
II
t f :
HECTOR ROSS, GENERAL PRINTER, 545 KENT STREEP SOUTH, f |
Near Liverpool Street. i ;
i
M
"ww ‘W -'ii l ' ww** ■ ■ "‘iu ll vf "(ic ‘ur uni; ■ip








PREFACE.
The author of this little work wishes to inform his readers
that he intends to continue his “ Experiences of Life
Beyond this World” in another edition.
“ Carlenent.”




CHAPTER I.
My story commences on the banks of the Darling River,
New South Wales. Close to that beautiful stream stood a
house of the old Australian bush type —slab walls and
bark roof. It contained six large rooms with wide verandah
all round the house; inside, its walls were lined with
calico. The furniture was such as you would not expect to
find, judging by the outside, but to anyone with an eye for
taste, it was plainly to be seen the trained hand of woman
had been at work, and I doubt whether such real comfort
and harmony ever existed in the centre of civilization as
that which reigned within that house. Its occupants
consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Winbrook and one daughter.
They were as noble a specimen of the human race as ever
this world produced. Miss W. was a beautiful girl of about
eighteen years of age; her eyes possessed a mildness, and
were so full of expression that further proof was unnecessary
to show that she possessed that disposition which makes a
woman admired by all the world. My introduction to this
family was quite by chance. All Australians know, or
have heard, of the hospitality of bush people, particularly
in years gone by. I lived about a hundred miles from this
spot, but having occasion to pass there with a mob of fat
cattle, and having to camp there that night, called to try
and procure a yard for the cattle, which was willingly
granted, and I was invited to stay the night. After getting
my cattle yarded and men in camp, I returned to my


friends who were w-aiting tea for me. After a refreshing
meal we all got seated in a very cosy room. Seeing that
Mr. Winbrook had taken me entirely into his confidence, we
talked over matters freely. Mr. Winbrook said :—Thirty-
four years ago I settled here, then a young man. It was a
hard battle to fight. I started with five hundred head of
cattle, and to keep them within bounds, with only the
assistance of two men, was a task not easily accomplished,
as we had to keep cattle in and blacks out, which were very
numerous and troublesome. One Monday night, I shall
never forget it. We had not been long in bed when my
good old dog gave the alarm which brought us on our feet
ready dressed, all but our boots. The first thing was to
look to our horses in a small paddock close to our hut.
From the way they were racing about, I knew at once they
had seen the blacks, and while we were in the act of
catching them a spear struck one of my men ; it caused
him to give a painful cry, which seemed to encourage
the blacks on. They now closed on us. My one man and
I had to fight or die. It was an exciting time, although i*
only lasted half-an-hour. I received a nasty wound on the
shoulder from a boomerang, fortunately it was the left
shoulder, or we were lost. After completely hunting them,
we returned to the horse paddock to look after our wounded
mate, who we found in great pain, but fortunately not so
bad as we expected. The spear had passed through his
thigh ; with great difficulty we extracted it, and by using the
best remedy I had at hand, he soon recovered. That is
the spear you see on the wall marked with a red ribbon.
All the others you see have a history of their own. Tired
and faint from the loss of blood I fell into a sleep as soon


as I reached home, but it did not last long. I awoke
thinking of the trouble that was before us next day with
the cattle. Daylight came at last, and we once more go to
catch the horses. They were still much excited. When
I reached them I was horrified to find my best horse
speared and dead. Pointing to the wall, Mr. W. said that
is the spear with the black ribbon. We now saddled up
and start, leaving our wounded mate in camp. As far as
the eye could reach, which means miles to a trained eye on
a clear morning, as you know, in this country, not a beast
was in sight. After riding all day, we only succeeded in
finding about two hundred head, which were very wild.
You will hardly believe me when I tell you it took three
weeks’ hard riding to muster the rest, and then to find many
dead and speared. These troubles and hardships I went
through for some years, but I am pleased to say fortune
favoured me, and I made up my mind to settle down.
Pointing to his wife and daughter, Mr. W. said : “ There is
my reward which has repayed me for all.” Mrs. W. rose
from her seat and embraced her husband. Miss W. did
the same. It made a picture of such real affection and
happiness I shall never forget. I congratulated Mr. W. in
procuring such happiness after so many trials. He thanked
me and apologised for keeping me so long from the ladies’
company. Miss W. proposed some music, which I was
very pleased to accept, it being a great luxury in the bush r
more particularly coming from such an able performer as 1
found Miss W. to be. After a very pleasant evening’s
music, Mr. W. said I must feel tired after travelling, so I
retired for the night to a comfortable bed to dream of
the happy scenes I had seen that night. After a good


night’s rest, I rose at daylight to start my cattle on the
road. Having done so I returned to the house, but found
no one up, it being still early. The sun was just showing
over the top of a belt of timber, which is seven miles distant
from the house. The scene before me was very grand-
While admiring this beautiful grassy plain I heard footsteps.
Looking round I met my friend Mr. W., who had been
watching me in this meditative mood. He wished me good-
morning, and asked me in his jolly way if I was thinking
of his early adventures on that now peaceful plain. I said,
“ No, but there was something about the spot I was looking
at which seemed to charm me ; a feeling I could not
describe, only by saying that for the time I seemed to be
enjoying perfect peace and contentment; the very air I
breathed seemed purer. It may be the happiness I have
seen in your house that makes me think this world is after
all better than I had judged it.'’ Mr. W. said he would
like to see human nature better, when our attention was
drawn to the bell for breakfast. On reaching the house
the ladies welcomed me in such a manner, that it made me
feel as though I had lived in the same house with them for
years. Mrs. W. made kind inquiries as to how I had slept,
and made me promise to call on my way back and make a
longer stay. After a delicious breakfast prepared by Miss
W., or Dolly as I shall call her in future, we parted, and I
found myself looking back several times to the spot where
I had spent such a pleasant night.


CHAPTER 11.
Having overtaken my cattle, I continued my journey to
Sydney, which took me five weeks. I was very pleased to
see them sold and off my hands. I sent my men home,
having made up my mind to stay in Sydney a few weeks.
I mostly went to some place of amusement in the evenings,
but my greatest enjoyment in all cities was to roam about
the outskirts. I found I could gain more general informa-
tion of what was going on, city people having their minds
too fully occupied with business to concern themselves
with matters that interest one like myself. One morning,
looking over the papers, I saw where a small farm or
market garden was offered for sale about 12 miles from
Sydney. Thinking it would pass a day away pleasantly I
went out by ’bus to see it. After walking about a mile
from where the ’bus put me down, I came to a large old-
fashioned brick house; everything about it had a very
ancient appearance; it was just one of those places that
would make one say: If that house could only tell all it
has seen. While standing and thinking in this way a nice
rosy-cheeked girl, I should think about fourteen years of
age, passed close to me driving a cow. She looked a little
frightened seeing me there looking so intently at the house.
Thinking I had better speak, to try and calm the poor
little anxious face, I asked her if her father was at home.
After saying a few kind words her face brightened, and she
said her father was working in the garden. I walked on,


and seeing who I took to be her father working close to-
the house, I walked up and wished him good-morning, and
said, seeing his property was for sale, I had taken a run up
to look at it. Mr. Bellwood was a man of about, I should
say, sixty years of age, with a kind and sensible face ; but
he looked like a man who had seen his share of hard work
and troubles which come to us all more or less. He
turned to me and said I was quite welcome to look round
and make myself at home, but before doing anything I
must come to the house and rest. I found the inside of
the house quite as ancient in appearance as the outside.
The lining of the walls had all disappeared and now
whitewash took its place, but it looked very clean and
comfortable. The furniture was old-fashioned, but
everything very tidy. I remarked to Mr. Bellwood that I
was surprised at him wanting to sell such a pretty and
comfortable home. He answered with a sigh, and said, “It
was a pretty and happy home once, but time has changed
that, as it does all things ; now I feel, for the sake of my
good children, I must make a change. Two years ago-
yesterday I lost my poor wife and was left with four
children, God bless them !” The old man could say no
more; the tears rolled down his cheeks. Just at this
moment the little rosy-cheeked girl I had seen with the
cow came in and said, “ Please, father, did you cut the
barley for the cow ?” “ Oh, no, my child ! I quite forgot
it; I will go now.” Mr. B. told me to rest myself until
he returned. I said if he had no objection I would
accompany him. He stopped and said something to-
Rosy, as I shall now call her, then we went into the
garden. I thought it the prettiest and most compact little


property I had ever seen. It was enclosed by a good
fence, inside of which was a belt of native timber that
formed a beautiful shade and shelter and an unbroken
circle for the outside boundary, and inside of that
was a hawthorn hedge right round without a break,
only where gates were required ; from the hedge to the
belt of timber measured about one hundred yards, and
being well grassed it formed a beautiful park or paddock
all round ; then inside of the hedge enclosure were the
buildings and market garden, with a beautiful running
spring of water through it. It was plain to be seen at one
time it had been beautifully laid out. as even now some
traces were left. After walking round Mr. B. just remem-
bered he had to take the barley. When we reached the
house we found everything in readiness for dinner, and I
was invited to join them. I find Rosy is the youngest of
the family; the other three are girls, all very ladylike, but
plain and sensible and very chatty. They all look forward
with pleasure to a change of life. Rosy has now lost all
her shyness, and takes great pleasure in asking me about
all that is to be seen in Sydney. After doing justice to a
good dinner, and complimenting the young ladies for the
way in which they had prepared it, Mr. B. and
I took another walk round. He took me to what
he called the farm-yard ; it was hidden from the
house by a belt of grand old pine trees. Here
stood what had been grand stables and other out-
offices, which formed a square with paved yard in the
centre; they were all built of brick and stone; some of*
the buildings were roofless, but the stables still afforded
shelter for man or beast. Mr. B. proposed we should walk


round the market garden. We came to a round waterhole ;
it was very clear, and appeared to be fed by the stream j
spoke of before. It being a pleasant spot, and from which
we could command a good view of the property, we sat
down by the edge of the pond. Looking into the water 1
noticed parts of a stone wall, but the grass being very long
it was almost hidden. I drew Mr. B.’s attention to it.
'“Yes,” he said, “many years ago that was a beautiful
fountain.” Looking at my watch I found it was getting
late, so we started to talk on business. I had taken such a
fancy to the place I made up my mind to purchase if we
could come to terms. I found Mr. B. insisted on cash
down, as he said he had only been getting a poor living
for some time by selling vegetables, and was now thinking
of going into business and letting his poor children see a
little of life. I think Mr. B. was wise, not having the means
to give them the comforts he would wish here. After a long
talk we came to terms, and I gave Mr. B. the opportunity
of remaining until he made all his arrangements for his
new life. He was very grateful for this, as so far he had
made no arrangements for the future. When all was
settled the poor old man gave a long look round the place.
I could see he felt it hard to part with his old home ; most
of us know what the feeling is when parting with a home.
I proposed we should return. I then began to think of
my returning to Sydney, and asked Mr. B. what time the
’bus would start. He said, “Oh ! my dear sir, you will not
get to Sydney to-night. The last ’bus has started long
ago ; you must stay with me to-night. We will do the best
we can to make you comfortable in our plain way.” I
thanked him for his kindness, and said I hoped I would


always meet with as much kindness as I had received that
day. Finding it impossible to get back without a long
walk, I accepted his kind offer. When we reached the
house we found the girls all busily engaged preparing tea.
Rosy seeing me come into the house seemed to know how
I was situated, and said she was so pleased I had to stay
the night. When I saw how earnest she looked I felt
pleased to think I could lighten the heart of one so pure
and natural. We chatted until the three sisters came to
tell us tea was ready. They all looked in the best of
spirits. Miss B. said we had better come and get tea oven
and then we would have some fun after. The tea-table
was tastefully decorated with flowers, and I could see they
had taken great pains in preparing everything, and I must
say I thoroughly enjoyed my tea. I gave the young ladies
great praise for their good taste, and they all seemed amply
repaid. After tea Mr. B. and I went outside to indulge in
a smoke. We took a seat under an old tree in front of the
house ; the old rustic seat we sat on Mr. B. said had been
there as long as he had known the house. He talked over
his early experiences in the colonies in mining; he said,
after many hardships, he was successful, which enabled
him to purchase this property. The girls now came to say
they had finished their work, and that we had better come
inside. Miss B. asked me if I was fond of music. I said
I was passionately fond of it, and considered it one of
the greatest charms on earth. She apologised for not
having a better instrument than a concertina. We have a
piano, she said, but it is very old and out of tune. I
thanked her and said the change of instrument would be
quite a treat. She started by playing some operatic pieces


excellently; in fact, I did not think the concertina could be
made to produce such music. Mr. B. then said he thought
I would like some songs. All their voices were splendid,
and there is no doubt they were born musicians. Rosy
sang “I cannot sing the old songs” with great taste, but
I do not think it fair to speak of one more than another,
for I have never in my life known a family who were all
gifted as they were, and it seems a pity they should be shut
out from society. After the music we had several round
games. lam sure I could not have enjoyed myself half as
much in Sydney ; and what did me more good than all was
to see the way they enjoyed themselves. Learning that
they had not seen much of Sydney since they lost their
mother, I asked Mr. B. if he would take them to Sydney
to-morrow at my expense, and I would accompany them.
He said he would, but it was imposing too much on my
kindness. The girls also thanked me, and I could see it
came from their hearts. Mr. B. said, “Now children, you
had better go to bed.” They wished me a hearty good-
night, saying we must be up early as the ’bus starts at 8
o’clock. Now that Mr. B. and I were left alone we took
to our pipes. I complimented him on the way he had
brought up his family. “Yes, sir,” he said, “I have done
my best in the past, and now, by this change, I hope to
fulfil my wishes towards them.” I remarked that the
house must be very old. “Yes,” he said, “it is, and it
has been a merry house in its time, more so than
you would think looking at its bare walls now; but time
changes all things.” He said, “ I think it only fair I
should tell you all I know about this old house. About
thirty-four years ago I bought this place and, after paying


cash for it, I had sufficient left to live comfortable ; but
having led a roving life and not accustomed to handle so
much money, I speculated foolishly in things I did not
understand and lost, and then I started market gardening.
In the good times I employed labour and did very well, but
even that has failed now, as you see ; but to return to the
house. Before I bought it it was occupied by Mr. and
Mrs. Winbrook.” This name startled me, but I concealed
my surprise from Mr. 8., not wishing to interrupt him.
“ Oh ! they were grand people, and were looked up to by
all classes for their kindness and generosity. The good
old gentleman told me when he bought this land where we
are now it was all bush for miles round, but he being
wealthy he soon made a palace of it. If you could only
have seen it when I did ; now you only see the ruins. The
old people had an only son which they adored, and well
they might; he was a good young man. When he was
about twenty-one years of age he had a wish to travel.
He started, and was away about two years when his poor
mother died in this house; it was a sad thing, she was
missed by all. The old gentleman never seemed to regain
his former spirits. Just after her death a letter came from
the son, in which he stated he would be home in a week.
Not knowing what was taking place at home, fancy his
feelings when he did come to find his mother dead and
buried ; but his return was a great blessing to his father,
but he was never the same man again, and in six months
from the time of his wife’s death he took to his bed never
to rise again, and the house was left with one survivor, the
son and heir. The poor young man, heart-broken, made
up his mind to sell all and go to fresh scenes. Seeing the


place for sale I bought it; you know the rest. lam told
the young man took up some country on the Darling River,
a very wild place then, but I have not heard anything of
him since, but only hope he is living and doing well, for
he deserved it.” When Mr. B. had finished speaking I
felt as if I had awoke out of a dream, for, as the reader can
see, that young man was the very Mr. W. I had spent such
a pleasant night with on the Darling River. When I told
Mr. B. my story he was amazed, and said it looked as if
some unknown power was at work to guide me to this spot,
and he said nothing could have given him greater pleasure
than to hear of Mr. W.’s success and happiness, for it was
a just reward. Mr. B. now looked at the clock and said,
“ My dear sir, it is one o’clock, and I am keeping you out of
bed.” I assured him the information he had given me was
so interesting that I did not feel in the least sleepy; but
considering what we had promised the girls, I told him
I would not keep him out of bed, so we retired. I found
my bed very comfortable. I tried to sleep, but could not
for some time. I thought of what INIr. B. had said about
being guided to this spot; it did seem strange to think
I had bought a property close to Sydney. Had anyone
told me I would be likely to do so I would have laughed at
the idea; but I have taken a great fancy to the place, more
particularly with the history attached to it, and do not
think I shall regret my bargain. After thinking in this
way I went off into a doze. I could not have been sleeping
long when I was awakened by a knock at my door. I
listened and recognised the voice of Rosy saying, “ Please
Mr. G., it is time to get up.” I was quickly dressed and
found the breakfast waiting. The girls chaffed their father


for sleeping- so long, it being an unusual thing for him to
do. I told them it was all my fault,, and thanked Rosy for
calling me, or I might have been late again for the ’bus;
but I said I would never regret missing it yesterday. They
all laughed heartily, and said they hoped I would call on
them again in their new home, wherever it might be. All
being ready we made a start for Sydney. I then began to
consider the best way to make it a pleasant day for all.
We reached Sydney safely and commenced the day in the
Botanical Gardens; from there I took them to all that was
to be seen, or all we were able to get through in the day,
only resting for refreshments. They all thanked me,
saying they would not forget this day’s treat, and I am sure
they would not; it was really a treat to me to see the way
they enjoyed themselves. I said I was afraid I had tired
them too much, but was sure Mr. B. would let them sleep
late to-morrow morning, as he had done himself. “ Yes,”
Mr. B. said, “ all day if they like.” I saw them safely into
the ’bus, wished them good-bye and safe journey home;
for a few seconds I saw the waving of handkerchiefs and
then they were out of sight. I had made an appointment
with Mr. B. to meet him in Sydney on the following day to
settle all our business in connection with the property,
which he kept, and we settled everything satisfactorily, and
he is now in possession of the money and I the property.
I was very pleased to learn the young ladies arrived home
safely, and were none the worse for yesterday’s outing.
Mr. B. has promised to let me know how he gets on in his
new undertaking. I wished him every success and we
parted, and I am pleased to say he appeared confident of
success and in good spirits.


CHAPTER 111.
I only remained in Sydney a few days longer, and am
once more on the road for home, not having much to
do when I get there for a few weeks. I intend calling on
Mr. W. and acquaint him of my strange experiences while
in Sydney. After ten days’ journey I find myself in sight
of Mr. W.’s house. It was a beautiful evening about the
middle of September, the sun just setting as I rode up
to the house. Mr. W. came to meet me, and shook my
hand in that firm and earnest manner which enables us to
distinguish a true friend. He assisted me to unsaddle my
horses and put them into the paddock, and I am sure they
were as pleased as I was the journey was so far over. On
meeting the ladies, Mrs. W. said she was very pleased I
had returned safely, as she felt quite uneasy the morning I
left there for Sydney, and felt sure something would happen.
She could not tell why she thought so, only that I looked
strange, and when Mr. W. told her of his meeting with me
in the morning, she felt more convinced, but she said you
know ladies are superstitious. I said I was sorry she had
had felt uneasy on my account, but something strange had
happened to me during my stay in Sydney. Nothing
unpleasant but eventful, which I would relate during the
evening. While we were talking the bell rang for tea and
I felt quite ready for it, not having had any dinner. Miss
W. looked charming and was very talkative. She said she
was looking forward to a treat, as she felt sure I must have


a lot of news from Sydney, and hoped I had enjoyed
myself. I said I had thoroughly, but was afraid she would
be disappointed in my description of all I had seen, but
would do my best. After tea Mr. W. and I went out to
enjoy our smoke. It was a beautiful evening. The moon
had just risen above the timber in the distance. The effect
was extremely grand, the month of September being the
most pleasant part of the year in this part of the country.
While we were thus admiring Nature, I just thought we
were staying away too long. Looking at my watch I found
we had been talking about an hour, so we went to join the
ladies. Mrs. W. said, “ Dolly and her were just talking
and wondering what those strange experiences of yours
were in Sydney.” I said it was too bad of me to keep
them so long in suspense. I then related all in connec-
tion with the property and Mr. B. When Mr. W. dis-
covered it was his father’s house I had bought his face
changed colour and he looked excited. When I had
finished speaking he said, “ Sir, when you left here fo r
Sydney you and I knew but little of one another, but from
this night I feel we are friends, and I feel proud to think
the grand old house has fallen into your hands. It was the
pride of my poor father and mother. What changes we
see in a life-time. Mrs. W. remained silent for some time,
but I could see she was much interested. When she spoke she
said, “ Mr. G., your story surprises me, and at the same
time gives me much pleasure. Mr. W, was only talking
about the old house a few days ago, and said he would like
to know whether Mr. B. was living, and intended the next
time he was in Sydney to call and see the old place if it
was still standing. But the news you have brought is a


treat, and your description of Mr. B. and his family gives
me greater pleasure ; what a comfort they must be to him;
Ido hope he will be successful. Mr. W. said, considering
the late hour, he thought we had better retire for the night,
as I must feel tired, and I must not think of leaving his
house for a few weeks. I said I would be most happy to
make a stay, but would take a run home in a few days to
see all was right there, and would then return. Dolly said,
“ Papa and I are going out to-morrow amongst the cattle,,
will you join us ?” I said I would very much like to do so,,
as I would like to make myself useful if I could. After
wishing all good-night I went to rest, and found myself
occupying the same room as I did on my first visit, I did
not feel sleepy, although tired. I could not help thinking
what a strange impression my story seemed to make on
Mr. and Mrs. W. I was afraid it would have brought back
painful recollections, which no doubt it did, but at the
same time I could see it had given them pleasure, and I was
very pleased it had done so. I do not know how long
I lay thinking, but I awoke just as the day was breaking,
and got up much refreshed. There was not a sound to be
heard in the house. I took a walk outside ; the morning
was beautiful, not a cloud in the sky, and the only sound to
be heard came from a large lagoon about half-a-mile from
the house. It was the home of thousands of wild birds of
all descriptions. Mr. W. has not allowed anyone to
interfere with them for years, and it is really a grand
addition to the place, being so near the house. While
listening to those wild notes, a strange feeling came over
me; it was the same as I had experienced the morning I
stood there before leaving for Sydney. While in this state


of mind I felt very contented. Suddenly I saw a white
mist gathering all round me; it became so dense that it
obscured all else from view. Then in front of me I saw
the form of a man, but of giant build. His face had such
a pleasing and friendly expression that it seemed to charm
and draw me towards him. He placed his hand on my
shoulder and said, “ I am your friend, follow me.” I did
so. The white mist seemed to part like a cloud then in
front of us. I saw a grand city with a clear blue sky over
head ;my eyes were dazzled. The buildings all glistened
like silver. My friend then turned to me and said, “ I
will not detain you longer this time, but I want you to
make a promise to meet me every morning while you are
staying with your friend, in the same, place we met this
morning, and at the same time.” I promised to do so. He
then placed his hand on my shoulder and said, “ Fear not.”
Then the same white mist appeared, and he was gone.
Then in an instant the mist disappeared, and I was standing
alone where I had experienced that strange feeling in sight
of Mr. W.’s house. Looking round me, I said to myself:
What is all this I have gone through ? —is it a dream, a
fancy ? No !it is real. As I intend making a study of this
new life that has opened up before me, I shall not refer to
Mr. W. and his family for a time.


CHAPTER IV.
The next morning I went to the same spot to meet my
friend as I had promised. At the same time by my watch
I felt the same change come over me, and then the white
mist appeared as before, and my friend was before me.
He bowed, and placing his hand again on me, said:
“ Follow me.” Again the mist cleared away, and I saw
the same city with its glistening walls, but this time I was
standing in the midst of a busy throng of people. I looked
in amazement at the splendour around me.
My friend turned to me and said, “ Fear not at what you
see; all information you require I will give you.”
I said I was anxious to know more of the grandeur now
before me.
My friend said, “You are now looking at a part of our
world, one of the planets you have been accustomed to
look at from your world.”
I said, “Is it possible that which to us is a mere speck
in the heavens is an inhabited world with all this splendour.
What can I do to repay you for revealing this truth to me ?”
My friend said, “ Continue leading a good life and you will
repay me, and also the great power who has placed me in
the position to reveal this to your world.” My friend now
took me through the streets of that great city. I will try
and describe the way they are laid out. They are very
wide, fully three times the width of the widest we have in
this world; they are about five miles in length, perfectly


straight, and running parallel. The streets where the front
of the buildings face has its pathways beautifully paved
with stone, which resembles our marble in quality but not
in colour, it being a bright red, and it takes a beautiful
polish. The pathways are covered overhead by one
uniform structure the whole length of the streets. It is
composed of a metal the colour of silver, but it always
retains its brightness. The ornamental work is beyond all
description. Each side of the street close to the pathway
there is a tramway. The carriages are very convenient,
being very low, so that you can walk into them from the
pathways. All the other part of the street is beautifully
laid out with trees and flowers, and large fountains are
playing every few hundred yards the whole length of the
street. You will see this street has no other traffic, there-
fore the public are enabled to combine pleasure with
business in this lovely street. The buildings are all
constructed with the red stone I have described. The
architecture is something wonderful. The sculptor’s
work is perfection. On the face of these buildings
animals of every description are represented, from the
largest to the smallest. Then the principal arts and
sciences are shown, but the work is so perfect it would be
impossible to describe and do it justice. The display of
merchandise in this street was superb. Looking at the
people in this street it seemed to me perfection had been
attained. Some were doing business in the grand buildings,
some were enjoying the splendid accommodation this street
afforded, and I could not see a face with any trace of
worldly care or trouble upon it. My friend and I now
passed from this street into the next through a magnificent


archway, paved the same as the pathways. These archways
were only about a hundred yards apart; and were only
used by the people to pass from one street to the other,
but anyone doing business in the buildings could pass
through them also, which were more like grand palaces than
places of business. On reaching the other street I found
it represented the back of the buildings. Therefore, one
street represented the front of the buildings and one the
back, the whole extent of the city. This back street was
indeed a business street. Next to the pathways there was
a double line of tramway for goods ; then outside of that
were other lines for passenger traffic, horses not being
used for any purpose in the city, but a conveyance is used
propelled by some invisible motive power, which is capable
of carrying enormous weights, and can be made to travel
very fast if required ; it can be stopped or turned in an
instant with the greatest ease. There are a great number
of these streets such as I have described. At the end of
each street the trams run up to the platforms, only leaving
an opening in the centre of each street for other traffic to
get out into a very wide thoroughfare, which formed the
only cross streets, one at each end of the city. There the
railways run feeding the city at every street, and lines from
these branching out in every direction. The magnificent
accommodation for the public and the constant stream of
traffic was surprising. All went on without that noise and
excitement so common to us on a railway line. The
engines, if I may call them such, seemed to have immense
power. A heavy train would start without the slightest
difficulty and quite noiseless. 1 asked my friend if they
used electricity for motive power. He said “ No;


the power you see used somewhat resembles it,
but it is a more refined or subtle fluid, and is
very much more powerful and less expensive. We
are now able to use it for almost any purpose. You have
seen the conveyances we use, which do away with the use
of horses in the city; they are propelled by the same power.
The loading and unloading of vessels is now made very
easy by its use, and also to propel the vessels themselves,
and for building purposes. The same power exists in your
world, but at the present time you are unacquainted with
it. You, no doubt, have noticed or heard of tables and
other bodies being moved or lifted from one place to
another in a house where Spiritualism is studied, or in
houses which some of your people call haunted houses; it
is this power the spirits use for that purpose, and there was
a time in your world when they greatly assisted your people
with it. Large bodies of stone were placed into position
for building; in fact, when they combined, nothing in this
respect was impossible. It was sometimes found necessary
to make man the medium when they were indirectly
assisting him. Then some men, seeing that they could
perform wonderful things by their will, abused the power
given to them ; they became self-conceited and ignored
the true source of this power. This assistance was then
only given to a few chosen people, but they became so
persecuted through the jealousy and ignorance of the
people, that the truth which was about to enlighten your
world soon disappeared ; but it will return to you again
when your conditions are favourable.”
Just as my friend had finished speaking a dense crowd
of people arrived on one of the platforms from the


incoming trains. I was very much struck with the wonder-
ful physical appearance of all those people ; they resembled
my friend in his giant form, and were almost one uniform
height. I remarked to my friend what a far superior race
of people his appeared to be to ours.”
Yes, he said, “they are; but there was a time when
they were inferior to yours. We have all the different
races, the same as you have, but by judicious marriage laws
we have attained what you see. Our conditions were no
more favourable than yours.”
But, I said, “ how was it possible you made such
advancement ?”
M} friend said, “ I will explain. At one time our
marriage laws allowed perfect freedom of choice, the same
as you are now doing in your world ; but what was the
result to a large proportion of the people ? Life was a
misery for the want of health and strength ; man and wife
vent together, one or both suffering from some incurable
disease; their children inherited the same, and so it went
on increasing in spite of all sanitary laws and medical skill,
which was far more advanced than it is now. In your
world, therefore, we found it necessary to enforce laws to
make marriage compulsory with healthy subjects, and
optional with those afflicted with incurable diseases, and
all those who were deformed in mind or body. All this
class were prohibited from bringing children into the
world.”
“But,” I said, “how could that be successfully carried
out ?”
“Very simply. All births are registered, and an annual
inspection by a staff of medical men employed by the State,


and all healthy subjects at the age of sixteen years are
provided with a certificate to that effect, which had to be
produced at any time during life if required. These medical
men were required to send in quarterly returns, showing the
health and condition of every person, to the departments
provided in each district, where a register is kept for that
purpose, and for births and deaths. All marriages were
also performed in the same department.”
“ But,” I said, “if that class did bring children into the
world, what remedy had you in such cases ?”
“Their children were not allowed to marry, but the
inducements given to those people made them conform to
the laws stricter than they would have done by force. All
medicine and the best medical attendance was supplied to
them by the State free of charge. Then they were
provided with a portion of land with house and improve-
ments required for the occupation each person wished to
follow, and they had the option of choosing the district
they preferred to live in ; and all those who were unable to
work received sufficient means of support. Therefore, you
see, they were provided for as long as they lived, and
received many comforts which I have not mentioned. In
a very few years the people found their condition so much
improved that they looked upon this law as a law of
Nature. Then our education system greatly improved the
state,of our people; it was compulsory and free and of a
very high standard, and the same supplied to all classes.
Great attention is paid to phrenology and music in our
schools, particularly the former, which I consider has been
the cause of a great deal of our success, as it was the
means of showing what walk in life young people were


best adapted for, and each natural talent carefully cultivated,
and the parents supplied with written instructions, showing
what pursuit their children were most fitted for; therefore,
children of all classes are able to rise in the world
according to the talents they possessed.”
“ Now,” my friend said, “ I have only given you a faint
outline of the reforms in the past which has brought our
people to what you see. The average height of the people
now is 6 feet 6 inches, with build in proportion ; the
average life-time is 150 years, but it is nothing unusual for
them to live to 200 years; deaths among children and
middle-aged people are almost unheard of now, as their
physical and mental nature is now able to resist what at
one time would have proved fatal.”
“But,” I said, “are all the people of your world as far
advanced ?”
“Yes; all the white population, as it only took a very
few years to show the people what a vast amount of suffer-
ing it had relieved us from ; but some of our black races
are still backward, but are advancing very fast.”
“But,” I said, “are these laws still in existence?”
Oh, no ! our marriage laws are as free now as they are
in your world, with the exception of the black races, who
are prohibited from mixing with the white blood.”
I said, “the description you give of your laws and their
results are marvellous ; but it must have cost an enormous
amount of money to carry them out ?”
“Certainly, it was a heavy expense, and so far I have
only described a part of our reforms, as I told you before;
but that expense was only temporarily, not as it was before
those laws came into force, when we had to support


hospitals, asylums, and gaols ; and, after all, misery, crime,
and want went on increasing and the continual expense
with it. Now those troubles are almost unknown to us.”
“But,” I said, “is it possible that you have no
criminals ?”
“No,” he said, “poverty, disease, drunkenness, and
unhappy marriages have been the root of all crime. Those
we have stamped out. Our people now have no longer
any cause or wish to injure one another, as all are able to
live comfortable by doing a fair amount of work, and by
doing so all have the same chance of increasing their
wealth, being all educated alike and following the occupa-
tions they are most fitted for. That is why in your world
you have so many failures. With you it is only the
wealthy who are able to obtain a high-class education,
while many in the ranks of the poorer classes possess
superior natural talents which have to remain dormant for
the want of the superior cultivation which they are unable
to obtain.”
I said, “ that great question, drink; how did you
manage to stamp it out ?”
My friend said, “The State reserved all right to sell and
deal with spirituous liquors in all parts. Stores were
erected by the State for its sale, but not to an unlimited
extent. Each person was allowed to purchase up to a
certain amount each month at a reasonable price. Each
person received a card showing what he had purchased on
that date, with his name attached, which had to be
produced when the next purchase was made and the card
renewed. The quantity allowed to each person was
supposed to be sufficient for moderate use; but if it was


found that any person could not use it in moderation, and
was the cause of any annoyance to the public or those in
their own homes, they were not allowed to purchase any
more for a term of six months, for the second offence
twelve months, and third offence three years, or, if it was
found necessary in extreme cases, they were prohibited
altogether.”
“But,” I said, “how did you find out whether the
people used it in moderation ?”
“ There is still a large staff of medical men paid by the
State to inspect all homes and report on the condition and
health of the people ; but we have no further trouble now,
as we have removed the first cause. Therefore, the rising
generations have no further desire to use it beyond
moderation, as you will see.”
Then I said, “ Have you no public-houses now ?”
“ Certainly not, as they used to be ; they are now houses
for the accommodation and comfort of the people, and are
only allowed to sell non-intoxicating drinks, which must
be pure. These houses are thoroughly inspected and all
drinks tested.”
My friend said, “ Follow me, and I will show you how
they are conducted.”
I now found myself inside a magnificent building,
situated in one of the beautiful front streets I have before
described. On the first floor a kind of counter ran right
through the centre of the building from one street to the
other. Both sides of this counter were beautifully fitted
up into compartments for the accommodation of the
people. On the counter all the drinks were so arranged
that the public could help themselves, it being worked by


machinery. All drinks were the same price, but varied in
quantity, and by placing the money on one side of a kind
of balance scale, where each kind of drink was situated,
each person was able to obtain the drink they wished.
The money placed in the balance carried it down a tube,
but the balance returned instantly to its former position,
bringing with it any change due to you if you had given
in more than the price of the drink. Then, just within
reach of you, was a very elegant piece of mechanism ; it
consisted of two trains, if I may call them such. They
were in constant motion, but slow enough to enable a
person to remove from them drinking vessels which they
carried. One train carried the clean vessels and the other
those that had been used. Both sides of the counter had
the same accommodation. Similar trains ran through all
parts of the building for other purposes. In the compart-
ments provided for refreshments very long tables were
arranged ; right along the centre of these tables there was
a partition about 4 feet high, composed of a beautiful
bright metal, and about every 3 feet on both sides of this
it was numbered, and a list of what the house provides at
each number. This list was in metal letters, and by
touching the name of each article you required, and placing
the money into the balance, as with your drinks, the order
was instantly sent to you by one of the trains in a
magnificent silver tray. Therefore, you will see the public
were able to obtain every comfort without the assistance of
attendants. We then passed into the next compartment,
fitted up as a library, with every description of reading
matter. I was astonished to see one paper before me ; it
was headed “ News from the Third Planet.” I said to my


friend, “is it possible you are able to obtain news from
other worlds ?”
“Yes,” he said ; “are you not now looking at a world
beyond your own which a short time ago you would have
thought impossible. But I will make it all clearer to you
in time.”
On the second floor of this building similar accommo-
dation was provided for ladies. I was astonished to see
the perfection this sort of house was brought to. What a
treat to see all enjoying themselves in a sociable manner—
no excitement, no flushed faces, all looked contented, with
no outward appearance of want.
I said to my friend, “ What a world of wealth yours must
be. I see no sign of poverty.”
“ No,” he said, “ I told you we had stamped that out.
Some are better off than others, but there is no want.
Our world is no more wealthy than yours, but it is
more equally divided; but this distribution of wealth
would have been useless before the people were in
a fit state to enjoy it. You see by moderate drinking
alone what money is saved. Then again, we have
other laws which prevents loss to a large extent to our
agricultural population ; the land is the principal source of
wealth in most worlds. In times gone by a very few
farmers made their business a success. Taking them as a
whole, they were a poor class of people. And why; one
man would try to grow a crop where the soil and situation
was totally unfit for it—in fact, the majority of that class
followed their own tastes and fancies, and the result was
ruin to themselves and a loss to the world ; now the land
is made to produce wealth. In every district agricultural


inspectors are appointed competent to judge what crop is
most suitable to the soil, climate, and position. Therefore
the farmer now is compelled to grow what is most suitable
to his land, and if it is found necessary enrich his land.”
“But,” I said, “it seems hard that a man cannot do as
he likes with his own land.”
“That is just the mistake made in former times.
A man went on cropping his land, spending money and
labour, and received no return, and disease in the crops
went on increasing. All men do what they think
best for their own welfare, and those they have to support;
but, if for the want of knowledge he fails and becomes
poor, is it not better that he should be directed in the
right course, so that he may enjoy the fruits of his labours,
and advance himself and the world he is in, and by so
doing secure the freedom and happiness the great power
intended him to have while in the flesh ?”
I said, “ Do you think similar laws to yours will ever
come into force in our world ?”
“Certainly,” my friend said. “You are now passing
through some of the stages we had to pass through ; for
instance, the drink question you were interested about. A
large number of people in your world are in favour of total
abstinence. That was carried out by us to a very large
extent, much more so than with you, but you are fast
coming to that stage which we found was the most unde-
sirable stage the world had seen. The first thing notice-
able was that the brain power of the people became weak,
then suicides and murders and all other description of
crime increased to an alarming extent. Man became
morbid, and lost that manliness and strength of will which


is so essential in all worlds. Altogether, we found we were
fostering an artificial state of civilization, and the whole
race was fast deteriorating ; all this was traceable to the
one cause, the want of stimulant.”
“But,” I said, “in our world our statistics show a
decrease in crime and altogether a change for the better.”
My friend said, “ Our experiences were identical with
yours ; we had arrived at that high state of civilization when
it seemed impossible to take a retrograde course, and it was
that, though the greatest evil we had to contend with was
drink, which in after years proved to be our greatest blessing.
But used as you see it now in this world, it has a more
beneficial effect on the mind of man than you suppose ;
man receives most of his knowledge from the spirit worlds
according to the capacity of the brain and other organs he
is possessed of, and the stimulant strengthens the system
and prepares the brain to receive this knowledge. Take
notice in your world, and you will find most of your clever
men have been, and are, drinkers under all the disadvan-
tages of your laws. In the first place, most of the strong
drink sold is impure, which ruins the constitution ; in the
next place, it is taken to excess, the cause of all trouble.”
I said, “Are all the people of your world enjoying this
perfect state, perfect I must call it with all the happiness
and harmony I have seen ?”
“ Yes,” my friend said ; “ what you see has extended over
the whole of our world, which is very much larger than
yours, and I may say we are one people in regard to all
laws for the good of the people, but they still enjoy the
rights of the country they are in.”
I said, “ How was this unity brought about ?”


“ First, by the laws I have described, and so far you have
only seen a part. These improve their physical, mental,
and moral conditions, then came the great secret of the
unity. You see man was now in a condition to receive
truth and knowledge from the advanced spirit worlds
directly, which enabled all to see that, by improving the
condition and being united, they were following the laws
of Nature, and by so doing it brought to them assistance,
which clearly showed without doubt to all that the future
state would be still more advanced; not like it was at one
time, when some doubted, some lived in fear, and some
never looked beyond the world they were in. Now all are
working with the one object—peace, unity, and advance-
ment, which makes the world they are in a paradise, as the
great power intended it to be, and not as it was, a place of
punishment, pain, and want.”


CHAPTER V.
My friend said, “ Follow me,” and in an instant a
magnificent scene was before me ; it was evidently a large
seaport city. We were now looking at a magnificent
wharf three miles in length, and looking at the shipping
from this I was astonished to find they were all constructed
of that beautiful metal I saw in that great city over the
pathways. The effect of this on the water was indeed
grand, and the beautiful clear bright sunlight upon this
added still more beauty to the scene. The huge ships
seemed to glide through the water as though they were
made of glass. Along this way were a magnificent lot of
warehouses, which extended in an unbroken line the entire
length of the way. Along the wharf an immense amount
of work was being carried on with the greatest of ease to
all employed, all loading being conveyed to or from the
way by tram lines, which ran in all directions. They
conveyed goods into the warehouses and through them
into a great thoroughfare running along the front of the
buildings. Here they were connected with other lines
runnin'g into all parts of the city. Looking at the front of
these buildings, they presented a very novel but beautiful
appearance. They were all constructed with very hand-
some green stone, and were all of one uniform height,
which formed a straight wall along the top. On this were
placed models of all the ships the world has known,
ancient and modern, and all constructed of the same bright


metal which I have described before. The ships of each
country were placed in line together, and the name of the
country they represented attached to each lot. These
models formed a continuous line for three miles. On the
bows of the last ship, representing one country, was placed
the figures of two men —one with the ancient style of dress
and armed according to the custom of his country; the
other figure represented the modern style, with no imple-
ments of war. On the stern of the first, representing the
next country, was two more figures, ancient and modern,
according to the style of that country. These figures faced
each other; the two ancient ones stood in fighting attitude
with drawn swords, daggers, or whatever weapons were
used in their time. The two modern figures stood un-
armed, with hands joined ; four figures were placed thus
between the ships of each country along the whole line-
It was a sight never to be forgotten ; the strange build of
ships used by man in countless ages past up to the present
time, then the contrast between the ancient and modern
man was very striking, all being life-size. It was plain to
be seen by this representation that this grand world was
united. Turning from this scene, I look at the great
thoroughfare running along these buildings, with all the
other streets of the city running into it, it being laid out
the same as the other great city I described, with back and
front streets. I was greatly struck with the respectable
and contented appearance of the working-classes, and the
wonderful amount of work they got through. Every man
seemed to be an expert at the work he was engaged in,
and all worked with that willingness which is so noticeable
when a man is taking an interest in what he is doing.


I said to my friend, “Is it possible all your working-
classes are as far advanced as those I now see ?”
“Yes,” he said; “they are even more advanced than
you imagine. This world now provides for all. In time 8
gone by the working-classes were at the mercy of their
employers, who, in most cases, compelled them to work
long hours for a very small return. The consequence was
they seldom had a chance of improving their condition,
even supposing they did save a little after years of labour.
Their constitution and energy were gone; and many of
those who were the cause of this were living in excess,
which was the reason of untold misery and ruin to their
class. Therefore, the State had to interfere by passing a
law which fixed the rate of wages and the number of
working hours for all classes. There are now only two
rates of wages paid to men. No matter what position a
man holds—whether he work on sea or land, whether for
the State or the people, whether he work bodily or mental
—the number of working hours are the same for all. Up
to 20 years of age the State only regulates the number of
working hours, which are six; from 20 to 50 years the
hours are increased to nine, and the rate of wages 12s. for
the nine hours. Then the next rate is for those holding
high positions of trust. If he is ruler of the State, he
receives no more; the rate is 245. per day. Then there is
another rate for women up to the age of 20 years. The
State only fixes the number of working hours, which are
five; from 20 to 40 years they are increased to seven, and
the rate of wages 65.; and those holding high positions,
125.; but woman’s work must not in any case be of a
laborious nature.”


I said, “ I cannot understand how all the working-classes
can be paid the same rate of wages. For instance, you
place the unskilled labour on an equal footing with the
skilled ; and then those holding higher positions, some
have much more responsibility than others.
My friend said, “It is quite natural for you to think as
you do ; but I will try to show you how unjust it would be
at the present day for one man to receive more than
another, now that all have the same chance of acquiring
knowledge. As all are educated alike, there is no difficulty
in finding men capable of filling any position. 1 hen, why
should one man receive a salary of thousands, while many
under him have quite as much ability, and in many cases
more responsibility, and in every case more work, and for
which he receives a salary which barely keeps his family in
the necessaries of life, while the man over him is enjoying
all the comforts money can bring for holding what is in
reality a sham position ? In times gone by, when education
and knowledge was limited, it was quite just and necessary
that men of that class should be paid at a higher rate to
instruct others who were less fortunate. But at the present
day why should one man receive sufficient to provide for
many ?”
“But,” I said, “how can an employer, who has a small
business and requires a manager or trustworthy person,
afford to pay 245. per day ? Then again, if a man is hold-
ing a high position of trust, where large sums of money are
placed in his charge, he receives no more than the man
who is superintending a class of work where he has no
moneys in his charge.”
My friend said, “ High salaries will neither ensure the


most honest or the most efficient men. You can see that
mistake in your world in many cases. You pay high
salaries to induce men to be honest, and then you find in
many cases that they abuse your trust. Every man should
be paid fairly for work done by him, but in no case should
he be paid for being honest—that is his duty, and if he
fails to be so, no amount of money you can offer will make
him otherwise until he has learned that the part he takes
in life is a duty, which is advancing himself and that of his
fellow-creatures. This can only be brought about by the
laws I have described. Then he is in a state to receive
the truth from more advanced worlds, which at once
removes that selfishness and jealousy so common to man in
his early stages. If we date from the time of the savage,
that selfishness existed. Then there was sufficient food for
all without cultivation, but the strong tribes secured the
best hunting-grounds ; by their strength they secured more
than they required, which was the cause of bloodshed and
starvation to the weaker tribes. Then came the stage
when cultivation and barter was introduced, but still the
strongest retained their power over the weaker. This
stage was infinitely worse than the first, as they then
formed themselves into two classes—the drone and the
worker, therefore, the worker led a life of misery to keep
the drone in idleness. Then came the stage when money
was used. Even this did not improve the condition of the
worker, as he was paid at such a low rate that he was never
able to rise above that state —in fact, he was more dissatis-
fied, seeing the comforts money brought, which he was unable
to enjoy, but the drone s wealth went on increasing, and
tyranny with it, and the workers were taught to believe that
40


this class was necessary for the advancement of the world.
This was called civilisation, and so it went on until we
reached the stage you are now passing through in your
world, when we supposed we were arriving at a high state
of civilisation, only to find that the main support of all this
—Man—was fast deteriorating, all for the want of proper
laws to improve his physical and moral nature. Once we
accomplished this, then came the true civilisation. Now,
in regard to one man being worth more for skilled than
unskilled labour, there must always be a class of work
which does not require skilled labour.”
“ If those employed at that class of work give their time
and energy to it, why are they not entitled to as much as
the skilled workmen ?”
“What causes you'to think this law unfair is that you
have a large proportion of people of the criminal and
degraded classes, who, you think, would not give a fair
return of labour for the money they would receive under
our law; but, you must remember, it is the want of these
laws that has established that class, and now you look upon
them as inferior beings, because their physical appearance
indicates that they belong to that class ; but you must
remember that the brain and other organs adapt themselves
to the surroundings, good or evil; and you can see that
both their physical and moral nature can be improved, as
man’s true nature is to be good and noble, as he was
in the commencement of all things, long before the
age of the savage ; but this and your future
state, when you leave the flesh, I shall treat
with later on. But, at the present time, unless you
introduce similar laws to those I have described, you will
41


all fall to the level of that class you now look down upon;
but once you turn the point towards improvement, you will
find you will advance much faster in all that is good than
you have done in the past, for true advancement is the law
of Nature, and, once you are prepared, you will find an
unlimited amount of assistance ready to support you. You
ask how an employer with a small business, who requires a
manager, can afford to pay 245. per day? You must
remember it is optional with the employer whether he pays
245. or 1 zs. per day, but in no case must it be more or
less.”


CHAPTER VI.
My friend said, “ Follow me,” and we passed into one of
those beautiful streets of the sea-port city. Three beautiful
full moons were showing in the sky. The light was equal
to day, but of that delightful soft nature that you could see
the smallest object on the tops of the highest buildings
which were towering into the sky. The effect of the
fountains playing in the moonlight, and the perfume and
elegance of the flowers, is more than I can describe. All
along this street immense crowds of people were assembled.
It was a strange sight looking at this giant race of people,
none of the female sex being under bft. in height; none wore
any description of head-dress at this time of the evening;
this added still more beauty to their graceful forms. Their
features were perfect, and all had that peaceful expression
on their faces which showed at once that they were far
removed from the cares and troubles of the world, such as
we too often experience. While I was thus admiring these
perfect forms of human life, the air was suddenly filled
with what I must call heavenly music. It seemed to come
from all directions—sometimes near, sometimes distant.
This perfect harmony in itself would be sufficient to stay
the hand of an army of millions in the heat of battle, and
for ever establish peace. Looking in the direction I
thought the music was coming from, I saw a beautiful
white cloud. It was travelling towards us ; it came nearer


and nearer, until it was about on a level with the tops of
the buildings ; then it became stationary; the music then
ceased ; a circle of light appeared round the cloud ; then
the cloud cleared away in the centre, forming a circle with
a beautiful ring of light on the outside of it; and in the centre
stood two beautiful forms representing man and woman, but
evidently of a much finer type than the people of the grand
world I am looking at now. They both bowed, with a
kind expression on their faces. The man said, “ Brothers
and sisters all, to-night I shall say a few words to you
about the world my companion and I have come from.
The natural conditions of our world are altogether different
from yours and those belonging to the same solar system.
With you the sun is the centre, therefore all the worlds
connected with it experience different climates. With us
the case is quite different. Ours is one immense world,
surrounded by a number of suns, therefore we have no
night, and the climate is the same all over the world, the
temperature being perfectly even at all times. It resembles
a mild summer in your most favoured positions, but the
atmosphere is much lighter and supplies life with more
vigour than you experience. Your atmosphere has a
depressing influence upon the mind and body; with us the
mind and body are ever active, from childhood to old age,
without that languidness you so often experience. Vegeta-
tion has continuous growth, it never being in a dormant
state, therefore we have successive crops, and every
description of tree bears its fruit, and the products in their
natural state are more than sufficient to supply the whole
world with food without cultivation, and will always con-
tinue to do so without any artificial means, with the


exception of preparing some of the produce for different
kinds of food, and by this means we are able to enjoy far
superior food and a greater variety than you can obtain by
cultivation. Our rainfall is the same all over the world,
falling at regular intervals, which is sufficient for all
requirements, but never in excess. This is the cause of
the superior vegetation, but not the principal one. The
suns that surround us take the most important part, which
are altogether of a different nature to yours. The light
they produce is more powerful without excessive heat,
although they are much closer to us than yours is to you.
Everything comes to maturity much sooner with us.
Human life is as far advanced at 15 years of age as it
is at 30 with you, and all kinds of plant and animal life
lasts very much longer than in your world. But, my
friends, I can only give you a faint outline of our conditions
to-night, but on future visits I will continue this subject
and give you a full description of our people and their
laws. Do not feel discouraged, friends, at what I have
told you to-night. You have now reached that stage when
knowledge and happiness will increase rapidly, pain and
sorrow will disappear, and the death of friends you love
will no longer cause you pain.”
After these few words the two beautiful forms bowed
with that perfect expression of kindness on their faces
which no words can describe. The ring of mist closed in,
a-ad the halo of light disappeared, and they were lost to
view, only leaving the white cloud, which moved slowly
away, and then the air again became filled with that grand
music which our world can only appreciate but never
describe. As the cloud disappeared the music gradually


died away and the immense crowds of people moved slowly
away. I thanked my friend for all I had witnessed.
He said, “ I am fully repaid now that I have succeeded
so far as to enable you to see and hear what you have. I
have been under great difficulties, but in future it will be
more easy.”
I asked my friend if that was the first visit of that
description to his world.
He replied, “ No; I told you the people of this
world were now in a fit state to receive knowledge. What
you have seen is only a part. Knowledge of every
description is supplied from many worlds.”
I asked him how the people knew when to expect these
visitors.
“ By certain signs which the people soon come to know.
For instance, to-night music was the sign which is mostly
used by those who come from advanced worlds. But at
some future time I hope to make you better acquainted
with all that is taking place in this world; but for a time I
am compelled to leave you. But next New Year’s Day, as
you call it, I wish you to meet me at this same spot, where
I shall leave you now. Continue leading a good life, and
all will be well with you. Follow me.”
I seemed to be travelling through space surrounded by
that white mist, but my friend was still visible. Then he
halted and said, “Remember your promise.” He placed
his hand upon my shoulder, and said, “ Farewell for a
time,” and then he disappeared. The dense mist instantly
cleared away and I was standing in sight of Mr. Winbrook’s
house.


CHAPTER VII.
I must tell you, dear readers, that twelve months have
passed since I last spoke to you of Mr. Winbrook and his
family, but I have spent a good deal of my time in his
house, but, so far, I have not told him of the new and
beautiful life opened out before me. A few changes have
taken place in that short time. I had occasion to go to
Sydney, and while there I paid Mr. Bellwood a visit. I
found him very comfortable in his new home. He had
gone into the farm produce business, and I am pleased to
say he has been very successful. The young ladies were
all well, and were very much pleased to see me. I was
very glad to see them enjoying so many comforts which
a city affords to those with means, and I must say they
deserve all the happiness this world can give. I have
made a great change in their old home. The old house is
pulled down and a very pretty and substantial one built in
its place. The old stables and out-offices I have reserved,
and was sorry to pull the house down, but decay from old
age had set in ; but it had served its purpose. Oh, that
every house could boast of the good lives spent within its
walls! I had the grounds put in order, but allowed the
old relics (such, for instance, as the old fountain) to
remain. One day, while walking alone through the
grounds, I stopped to have another look at the fountain.
I found by close inspection that its walls were perfectly
sound below the surface, but so overgrown that a stranger


would not recognise it. Walking away, deep in thought,
thinking of the happy hours that had been spent there before
the hand of death came to make all these changes, my
foot went suddenly into a deep hole. I fell over, and
found I had injured my leg. With great difficulty
I reached the house. I had an old man and his wife there
as caretakers. They were much surprised to see me in
that state. I told them where I had met with the accident.
The old lady said I was foolish to walk in the long grass
about the spring, as they were in the habit of calling it.
The pain was increasing, and I began to wonder how I
was going to reach Sydney, as I was unable to walk to the
’bus, and I knew it would take the old man a long time to
obtain a conveyance, he being a great sufferer from
rheumatism, but to my astonishment he was back with a
buggy and driver within half-an-hour, therefore I started
at once and reached my hotel about 8 o’clock in the
evening. I called a doctor in, and he informed me that
my leg was bruised and the bone fractured, but not
severely, but I found it bad enough to lay me up for six
weeks.
An event took place during that 12 months which lam
sure my readers will not be surprised to hear —that is, I
was engaged to be married to Dolly. I wonder what
another 12 months will bring.


CHAPTER VIII.
After leaving my spirit friend, I reached the house and
found Mr. Winbrook and Dolly preparing to take a ride
through some of the cattle. Dolly said I was just in time,
and asked if I would join them, to which I consented.
Mr. Winbrook selected a horse for me, saying he was capable
of doing all that man could expect from a horse. All
being ready, we mounted, and it was really surprising to
see the way Mr. Winbrook sprang into the saddle, and he
looked as if it would still take a rough horse to unseat him.
Dolly was riding a beautiful black horse. She was spoken
of by all in the district for her splendid horsemanship and
figure. It mattered not to her what vices the horse might
have, she was thoroughly competent to subdue and manage
him. We rode through some very fine cattle (all Short-
horns), which grow to an enormous size in that country.
After riding for some hours we came to a sandy ridge,
covered with a dense pine scrub. Mr. Winbrook said in
years gone by he had spent many a hard day in that scrub
riding after wild cattle, and it was also a great hiding-place
for the blacks. We came to a very pretty lagoon with
grassy banks, but surrounded by scrub. A small mob of
cattle were drinking. As we rode up Mr. Winbrook said,
“ Now, if we can take those home we shall be repaid for
our day’s ride. They are a lot I have not seen for a long
time.” Dolly said there was just a calf each for us, and she
would choose the red one. The calves were over 12


months old and were inclined to be wild in starting, but
we succeeded in getting them out of the scrub, which, I
must say, was due to Dolly’s superior horsemanship. She
rode through the scrub at full speed with as much ease as
a bird would have flown, without receiving a scratch, but
her riding habit suffered severely. Fortunately, a mob of
quiet cattle were on the plain about half a mile from u S-
When close to them the cow with the red calf broke back
to the scrub. After a long chase Dolly succeeded in
bringing them back. Her horse came across the plain at
a fearful pace ; when within a hundred yards of the quiet
cattle her horse seemed to almost disappear. I knew at
once what had happened. Her horse had gone down to
his chest into one of those cracks which are so common on
plain country. He rolled heavily over ; fortunately, Dolly
fell clear of her horse, but she received a heavy fall.
When we reached her she was, to all appearances, lifeless.
I at once started back to the water and brought my hat
full. Looking at my flask, I found it contained a little
brandy. We poured a little into her mouth, and in a few
minutes the colour began to return to her face ; then she
opened her eyes and looked wildly about. As soon as she
was able to speak she said, “ Where is the red calf.” We
assured her he was safe with the quiet cattle where she had
put them. On hearing this she seemed more calm. I
induced her to take some more brandy and water, and in
less than half an hour she assured us she had quite
recovered and was anxious to start home with the cattle.
Mr. Winbrook strongly advised her not to do so, but to
ride quietly home.' She looked up into his eyes and said,
“ Father, you know how far it is from my nature to disobey


you, but in this case I ask you to let me have my way. If
I go home without the cattle, I shall feel miserable and
frighten poor mamma.”
Mr. Winbrook said, “You are abrave girl; you shall do
as you tvish, but would you not like to change horses ?
Take mine.”
“ No,” she said, “it was not poor Jack’s fault. He was
exhausted when he came to the hole, but it is all over now.
We will try again.”
So we started and found the cattle where we had left
them, and after some trouble we got them safely home to
the yard. Mrs. Winbrook was anxiously looking for us,
and said she was pleased we had returned safely. It was
Dolly’s wish that her mamma should not know anything
about the accident for a few days, therefore the evening
passed off pleasantly. That evening we received our
weekly mail. City people would hardly believe how
anxiously we look for that day. What changes might and
do take place in one week.


CHAPTER IX.
The next day we branded the calves and put a special ear-
mark on the red one. That evening, after tea, Mr.
Winbrook and I went out for our usual smoke. Mr.
Winbrook appeared unusually quiet. It struck me he
might be thinking of Dolly’s accident, when suddenly he
said:—
“Mr. G., I have been going to speak to you many times
about the old house in Sydney. For some years I have
had a wish to buy the old place back. When I parted with
it I was young and overwhelmed with grief, and the world
before me appeared dark ; but as time passed on the clouds
gradually became lighter, and I felt I had a duty to per-
form by trying to take as noble a part in this world as
those did who passed away before me. I then realised the
mistake I had made by selling.”
I replied that I had no intention of parting with it; but
if it would give him one moment’s pleasure I would
willingly restore it to him.
Mr. Winbrook said, “ Now that I find you have no
intention of selling I am satisfied ; but if at any time you
should change your mind and wish to sell, give me the
first offer.”
I promised to do so, telling him that he was to consider
it still his property.
Mr. Winbrook said, “ There is one thing in connection
with the old place I wish to speak about. When leaving


it 1 sold almost everything, but there was one treasure I
could not see pass into strange hands. It was my
mother’s jewellery and family plate. I put it all into an old
iron safe which my father used for keeping valuable papers
in. In the dead of night I went into the garden and dug
a hole about 4 feet deep. I worked very hard. I then put
the safe into the hole; then I placed some slabs over the
top, and covered it carefully with earth and made the sur-
face level. After accomplishing this 1 lay down completely
exhausted, and slept until the day was breaking. I know
what I did was the act of a madman, but that night my
only wish was that the hidden treasures might remain there
untouched for ever. Since then I have often had a wish
to see them once more —not for their value, but in remem-
brance of those they belonged to.”
I stood in amazement listening to this strange story. I
said, “Do you think you could find the spot again ?”
Mr. Winbrook said, “Yes; many years have passed
since that dreadful night; but the place would be as
familiar to me to-day as when I placed them there.”
I said, “If they are still there they shall be found.
Now, I shall make a proposal. This month, as you know,
Dolly and I are to be married. We will all go to Sydney
together. It was my intention to have asked you to come
and make a stay at the old place, but I was doubtful
whether you had a wish to see it again ; but now that I
understand your feelings in the matter, it is only for you to
consent.”
Mr. Winbrook said, “We will go and talk it over with
Mrs. Winbrook and Dolly.”
When we returned to the house, Mrs. Winbrook said,


“ What a charm there must be in a smoke to have kept you
so long.” She said she thought it cruel that ladies could
not indulge in the same pleasure. When we made our
plans known, she said nothing would give her greater
pleasure than to see Mr. Winbrook accomplish his object
m finding the treasure, and independent of that she felt
sure it would do him good to see the place once more.
Therefore, we arranged to start that day week.
Addressing Mrs. Winbrook, I said : “ This is a strange
story I have heard to-night, and with your permission I
will tell you all a strange one which concerns myself, and
what I hope will some day concern all in this world.”
I then told all my experiences with my spirit friend.
When I described my first meeting, Dolly looked a little
frightened, but as I advanced they all became greatly
interested. Looking at my watch, I found it was getting
late. I need not tell my readers how delighted they were
with my story, and I am sure if it could be possible to
increase their happiness it had that effect.


CHAPTER X.
We are now on our way to Sydney. After a very pleasant
journey we reached it late in the evening, and then made
ourselves very comfortable for the night. The next day
we drove out to the old house, as I still call it. I had it
nicely furnished and put in readiness for our arrival. It
was a beautiful morning, and at the time of the year when
all vegetation looked its best. The ladies were much
pleased with the house. After lunch we all took a walk to
inspect the grounds. We were passing the old stables
when Mr. Winbrook suddenly stopped, his eyes fixed on
the old walls. He appeared dead to all but his own
thoughts. Then he turned to us with a vacant look upon
his face like one who has been suddenly awakened out of
a dreadful dream. We walked on through the grounds,
but Mr. Winbrook spoke not a word. Poor Mrs.
Winbrook looked very anxious. I advised her not to speak
to him for a time, but leave him entirely to his own
thoughts, and in a short time he would awaken from this
painful state, and when he did he would look upon all
around him with pleasure. It was only a return of the
grief he had suffered when left on this spot fatherless and
motherless. Mr. Winbrook was a few yards ahead of us,
when he suddenly stopped and fixed his eyes upon the
ground. When we overtook him he turned to me with the
same vacant look and said, “ That is the spot. Do you
see the slabs.” This time I began to feel anxious; his


eyes had lost all expression. I examined the spot, and at
once recognised it as being the hole I fell into when I
hurt my leg. I lost no time in procuring a spade from the
garden. Very little of the slabs remained that once
covered the hole. All watched me removing the earth
from the hole; but no one spoke, Mr. Winbrook still stand-
ing in the same position looking dreadfully pale. While
working with the spade I struck something hard. I knew
at once by the sound it was the old safe. It was not long
before I could see the old rusted plates. At the sight of
this I could see the life returning to Mr. Winbrook’s eyes.
I worked away until it became loose in the hole. I then
attempted to raise it. Mr. Winbrook came and assisted
me, but he still looked like one who was acting under the
influence of sleep, intent upon what he was doing, but dead
to all else around him. When we got it to the surface he
took the spade and gave the old rusted latch a few blows.
It yielded and revealed to us the beautiful treasures that
had been hidden so many years. Mr. Winbrook gave one
look at them, and then turned to Mrs. Winbrook and
Dolly, kissed them and said, “ Rejoice with me. The
wish I have had for so many years is granted,” The tears
then rolled fast down his cheeks. I walked away a few
yards until this painful scene had passed over. I knew it
was the turning point with him. He was a strong and
noble-minded man, and I very much doubt whether he had
ever shed a tear since that lonely night on this spot until
now. When I returned I found them all looking very
happy. Mr. \\ inbrook had regained his former cheerful
manner, but I could notice the traces of what had passed,
but the danger was over. The treasures I saw before me


made a strange scene, placed as they were beside the old
safe in the long grass. The diamonds sparkled as bril-
liantly as when last worn, and the gold was still bright,
but the silver was discoloured. Mr. Winbrook said their
money value was about ,£IO,OOO, but no amount now
would purchase them. We made our way to the house
with the prize. Mr. Winbrook said it had been a strange
day to him. “I feel,” said he, “as if I have had a long
and troubled dream ; all my past life has been before me,
from my happy childhood up to that dreadful night I told
you of. I remember leaving this house in the morning,
but from that time I remember no more until I saw that
safe in the hole.”
I thought it unwise to tell him all he had gone through
just now. The bell was ringing for dinner. After doing
justice to what was set before us, Dolly favoured us with
some music, and before the hour came for retiring to rest
all appeared to be in good spirits.


CHAPTER XL
Three very pleasant weeks have now passed since that
eventful day of our arrival at the old house, and to-day
Dolly and I are to be married. The house is all bustle.
As we are preparing to leave for Sydney Mr. Winbrook
presented Dolly with a beautiful leather case, saying:
“Treasure this for my sake, and God bless you.” Dolly
examined it and found it contained all that beautiful
jewellery, with the exception of two or three favourites
which he loved to see his mother wear. Those he gave to
Mrs. Winbrook. Dolly kissed her father and told him
that his present would be the means of shaping a path
through life for her to follow, the footsteps of her dear
mother and grandmother. The time was now at hand to
start for Sydney, and in a few hours the ceremony, so long
looked forward to, would be over. Dolly and I intend
spending a few days in Melbourne, and Mr. and Mrs.
Winbrook will remain in Sydney until we return. Poor
Mrs. Winbrook felt the parting very much, it being the first
time Dolly and her had been separated. After seeing all
the sights in Melbourne during the ten days we were there,
we returned to Sydney, and was once more in the old
house, in the company of Mr. and Mrs. Winbrook. There
was great rejoicing on our return. I assured them they
should never be separated so long again. Addressing Mr.
Winbrook, I said : “ I have been thinking over my future
plans, and am about to make a proposal. In the first


place, would you prefer making this house your home in
preference to station life ?”
“ No,” replied Mr. Winbrook ; “ much as I love this old
spot, I could never content myself away from my cattle.”
“Then,” -I said, “I will tell you my plans, that is if we
can come to terms. I want to buy sufficient land to build
upon somewhere close to your house on the Darling River,
I need not tell you why. Much of my time must be spent
there for the future.”
Mr. Winbrook replied, “That is a very small matter, and
I shall be most happy to sell you the land required. We will
go into town to-morrow and get it settled, as it is a great
mistake for a man to build his house until he first makes
his land secure.”
I went on to say I intended, as soon as possible, to sell
my present station property and buy a smaller one close to
his, which is now in the market, but the spot I had chosen
on his property would be my home, where I hope to make
a further study of life beyond this world. When Mrs.
Winbrook heard my plans she was enraptured, and said the
news would ensure her a good night’s rest. The next
morning Mr. Winbrook and I went into town. We made
our way to his lawyer’s office, and had the deeds drawn up.
The amount of land was to be three acres. Then came
the price, which Mr. Winbrook fixed at £lOO. Our legal
friend said, “ Surely there must be some mistake.” “ No,”
Mr. Winbrook said ; “you see this little affair is between
friends, but I wish it to be as binding as though it were
between strangers.” After concluding that business, I
went to make inquiries about the station property. I found
the terms satisfactory, therefore 1 bought it at once and
placed my own in the market.


CHAPTER XII.
Three months have now passed since Mr. Winbrook and
I went into Sydney to settle about the land for my new
home. During that time I have had a house built upon it,
and we are all once more on the Darling River, Mr. and
Mrs. Winbrook in their old home, and Dolly and I in our
new one. We arrived there just in time to spend our
Christmas holidays in the good old bush style. The first mail
day after Christmas brought me a letter from Mr. Bellwood,
in which he stated that a slice of luck had come to him quite
unexpectedly. For many years he had held some mining
shares in a reef, which was always a great favourite of his.
It was now giving a most extraordinary yield, and his share
was sufficient to give him a very comfortable income,
therefore he intended to retire. His object, he said, in
writing such a hurried letter was to try and buy back the old
house he had sold to me, but that if I would not sell he would
like to lease it; “but,” he said, “if you do not wish to sell,
do consent to lease it to me. I would only occupy it for six
months in the year, as I intend to live in town or travel the
rest of the time for the sake of the children, therefore if it
would be any convenience to you or our good friend, Mr.
Winbrook, you are welcome to occupy it any time we are
away.” He concluded his letter with good wishes to all,
and asking for a reply at once. I wrote a reply, congratu-
lating him on his success, but was sorry to state I could
not sell the old house, but would be most happy to lease it


to him on reasonable terms, and would accept his offer to
occupy it for a few months in the year. The news of Mr.
Bellwood’s success greatly surprised us all, but the most
strange part of it was him wanting to lease the house on the
above terms, as it was only a few days ago that I proposed to
Mr. Winbrook that we should all spend a part of the year
there, but the difficulty was what to do with it during our
absence ; but now this trouble is off my mind, and the
station property which I had placed in the market is sold
at a fair price.
CHAPTER XIII.
According to appointment, 1 met my friend on New Year’s
morning. As soon as I reached the spot I experienced the
same strange feeling ; then the mist surrounded me, and my
friend appeared, and the expression on his features indicated
more than words can tell how pleased he was to meet
me. He placed his hand upon me, and said : “ Follow
me.” I experienced all the sensations of travelling through
space at a rapid rate; then my friend halted, and the mist
instantly cleared away, and before me was a scene both
strange and dismal. It was evidently the ruins of a large city;
most of the heavy stone buildings still remained standing.
Grand as they were in architecture, the whole scene pre-
sented a barren appearance ; as far as the eye could reach
not a sign of life or vegetation was to be seen.
My friend turned to me, and said : “ You will, no doubt,
wonder what this scene before you represents. You are


now looking at a world which has ceased to support animal
and vegetable life, it being now a dry world. The vast
seas that once covered a large surface of this world have
all disappeared. For very many years the gradual dis-
appearance of the waters was scarcely perceptible, but it
was only a matter of time when the world would be left in
the state you see it; but long before the total disappearance
of the waters all life was extinct, caused by the sudden
climatic changes.”
Now my friend and I passed into one of the wide streets
of the city. It was a strange sight to see the handiwork of
man, in many cases as perfect as when in use ; in many
parts of the streets, where they were not obstructed by
fallen buildings, vehicles constructed of metal were stand-
ing, and by the position of these and many other things it
was evident the people were cut off suddenly in the midst
of their business and pleasure. Inside some of the
buildings unlimited wealth was lying, in the shape of gold
and silver ornaments and coin ; even human frames were
to be seen, and in many parts of the buildings they were
lying in groups, showing how suddenly death must have
come upon them. While wondering what all these
changes in Nature were for, my friend said, “ Follow me.”
Then I found we were at the extreme end of the city,
looking at the remains of a stone wharf; but, where the
waters had once been, all that remained to tell the tale was
a few ships lying on the rugged bottom; even some of
these were almost as perfect as when afloat.
I turned to my friend and said, “ Will this always remain
a dead world ?”
My friend said, “ That depends ; it is quite possible it


will again be inhabited, but to accomplish that other
changes will have to take place in Nature elsewhere, which
may not occur for a long time; but if the conditions
favourable to life do return, then the germ of life will again
appear and increase as you are accustomed to see it.”
“But,” I said, “the first germs of human life, how is
that accomplished ; is it by the will of the Great Power ?”
My friend said, “ I will try to explain ; but there is a
great deal which will remain a mystery to you while in the
flesh. Now, you only know human life as you see it in
your world, and in all worlds such as yours the flesh is of a
dense heavy nature, but in worlds of the highest order
human life is quite different; there the flesh is of a much
lighter nature, and the atmosphere supplies the body with
all the food that is necessary for its support, and the body
is so buoyant that they are able to transport themselves at
will to any part of the world, and they are not susceptible
to intense heat or cold, pain, or fatigue. They reproduce
and die, but live to a much greater age than the people
inhabiting the lower worlds, they being free from all bodily
ailments. In the infant state, from the time of birth, they
remain in a dormant state, until the mind and body is fully
developed, which takes but a short space of time. This is
the germ of human life I spoke to you about; it is from
this source your world and all others similar receive the
first germs of human life. These infant forms, while in the
dormant state, are wafted through space-to their destina-
tion by the will of the great people they have come from,
and the assistance of spirit-life belonging to their worlds.
Once they are under the influence of the changed condi-
tions of the world they are placed in, they gradually


undergo a change and become clothed with the dense flesh
you are accustomed to; then they awake from their
slumbers fully developed, perfect in mind and body, and
are then man and woman as you know them, but more
beautiful in form ; then they increase and form the people
I spoke to you about before the age of the savage.”
“ But,” I said, “do all these people become savages ?”
My friend said, “No ; the parent race who have
remained in that locality always remain in advance of the
savage, but even they in some worlds, after many ages,
degenerate, caused by force of circumstances ; but they
always retain a large proportion of the knowledge brought
into the world, which again develops itself when oppor-
tunity and necessity arises. It is those who have wandered
away from the parent race by chance and accident that
become the real savage ; the causes are many, and the
change so slow that it would be impossible for you to
understand if I were to explain them all to you. As soon
as they have lost all communication with the parent race,
they forget little by little of that purity and nobleness of
character first brought into the world, then the brain
becomes dwarfed, and the features change ; but this and
other innumerable causes are so slow that it would be
impossible for you in a life-time to understand the vast
changes that have taken place in the human race. Take,
for instance, the people of your world at the present time;
in some things you are advancing, but in many things,
which are essential to raise you to the standard of your
parent race, you are wanting, and, as I told you before, are
taking a retrograde course. Now, if you allow that to
continue, imagine the time it would take to retrace the
steps of progress you have made in the right direction.
64


CHAPTER XIV.
When my friend had finished speaking, I said : “Do those
great people, who have supplied our worlds with life, in
any way resemble our people in their laws and habits ?”
My friend said, “You must remember theirs is the
highest form of human life in Nature ; therefore, the laws
of Nature are all that are necessary to them, which they
are fully acquainted with, not only in their own worlds, but
in all others down to the lowest grades. Now, they not
only obey the great laws of Nature, but assist to keep many
of them in action ; but the conditions under which those
people live are so different from yours that it will be very
difficult for you to understand how far advanced they are
from the people of your world. For instance, their know-
ledge is unlimited, and to acquire that it is not necessary
for them to go through a course of education, which is so
essential in worlds similar to yours. As soon as they awake
from the dormant state I described before, the mind and
body is fully developed, and they draw from the fluids
contained in the atmosphere a constant and unlimited
supply of knowledge; then again, they are in direct
communication with spirit life and in unity with it. Now,
to carry that knowledge into effect, they have only to
exercise their will-power, which enables them to accom-
plish all they wish for their own requirements, and also in
assisting to carry out the great laws of Nature in all worlds.
You must remember the requirements of these people are
65


of a different nature to those in your world; but the
grandeur of their dwellings and their worlds is more than
I could convey to your mind, as all the artificial work in
your world is performed by hands, and you naturally
suppose anything performed otherwise must be the direct
work of the Supreme Power. Now, such is not the case.
All intelligent life takes its part in assisting to carry out
the great work of that Supreme Power, and the people I
speak of take a very important part. In your world your
duty is to obey those laws, and by so doing you are taking
your part ; but, until you improve the physical and moral
nature of your people, you are hindering those laws instead
of assisting them. I was speaking of the grandeur of
those worlds and the work of the advanced people. In
the first place, their worlds are not nearly so dense as
yours, and are more abundantly supplied with gases and
fluids than the lower worlds, and it is by combining these
by their will-power that they are enabled to construct their
mansions, which are perfection, like everything else that is
peformed by will. Imagine yourself passing through a
palace miles in extent, one solid structure, and composed
of the most beautiful transparent materials, tinted with all
the beautiful colours in Nature, many of which are
unknown to you; then the interior and exterior of those
grand mansions. The fine arts on every conceivable subject
are displayed. Imagine what you could accomplish in
your world in that one branch, with your limited knowledge,
if you could produce all that passes in your minds by will-
power ; for, as you know, no matter how well the hand
may be trained, it is incapable of performing all that your
mind dictates to you. The grandeur of those mansions is
66


again added to by the numerous supple materials those
people are able to produce in the same way. It is by these
means they are able to clothe themselves instantaneously
with more splendour than it is possible for your senses to
conceive ; then, as quickly, they can destroy those
garments, which at once return to their former state.
Now, you must not imagine these people are unable to use
their hands, for, as you can see, it is not necessary for
them to do so.”
I said to my friend, “ Have these people any rulers over
them, as we have ?”
My friend said, “No ; they being all equal and perfect,
they require no rulers. Envy, hatred, and jealousy do not
exist with them. These great evils are only to be found in
worlds where one class is dependent on another, caused by
one class having an undue amount of the wealth, comforts,
and knowledge of the world, and this class is trying to
suppress the evils which they are responsible for. Under
these conditions you require rulers, but even in your
worlds, as I have shown you, it is possible for your people
to live in unity, and each enjoy the great gifts of Nature;
the conditions are there waiting for you to embrace and
develop them. lam sorry to say I must now leave you,
but only for a time, as I have much to say and show you
in the future. In the meantime, continue leading a good
life and all will be well.”
My friend then said, “ Follow me.” Then, after a short
space of time he halted, the mist cleared away on all sides,
and before me was a scene of splendour, and we appeared
to be looking at a world grander than the one my friend
had just described to me. Oh ! that I could have had time
67


to have feasted my eyes on the perfect forms of life before
me; but it was but a glimpse, for the mist again cleared
and my friend said, “ Follow me.” Then again we halted,
and, placing his hand on me, said, “ Meet me on the
morning of your next birthday at our usual meeting-place.
Farewell.” For a moment his beautiful expressive face
beamed down upon me, and then he vanished. The mist
instantly cleared away, and I was standing in sight of Mr.
Winbrook’s house and within a few yards of my happy
home, which Dolly has indeed made it.
HECTOR ROSS, PRINTER, 545 KENT STREET SOUTH, SYDNEY.




