

LAWS AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
PROVINCIAL GRAND LODGE
OF THE
LOYAL ORANGE ASSOCIATION
OF
AUSTRALIA FELIX,
ON THE REGISTRY OF
THE GRAND LODGE OF ULSTER.
Mejbourne:
PRINTED BY H, M'COLL, AT THE"BANNER” OFFICE, LA TROBE STREET, EAST.
1854.




LAWS AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
PROVINCIAL GRAND LODGE
OF THE
LOYAL ORANGE ASSOCIATION
OF
AUSTRALIA FELIX,
ON THE REGISTRY OF
the grand lodge of ulster.
j&elfcotmte *.
„ M‘rOEL AT THE “BANNER” OFFICE, LA TROBE STREET, EAST.
PRINTED BY H M COLL, ATI
1854.


QUALIFICATIONS.
An Orangeman should have a sincere love and veneration for his
Almighty Maker, a firm and steadfast faith in the Saviour of the
World, convinced that he is the only Mediator between a sinful
creature and an offended Creator. His disposition should be humane
and compassionate: his behaviour kind and courteous. He should
love rational and improving society, faithfully regard the Protestant
religion, and sincerely desire to propagate its doctrine and precepts.
He should have a hatred to cursing and swearing, and taking the
name of God in vain ; and he should use all opportunities of dis-
couraging those shameful practices. Wisdom and prudence should
guide his actions; temperance and sobriety, honesty and integrity,
direct his conduct; and the honour and glory of his Queen and
Country, should be the motives of his exertions.


Kule I. That the Lodge shall consist of Masters, Past
Masters, Deputy Masters, Treasurers, and Secretaries of all
the Lodges in the Province.
2. That the Lodge shall meet for despatch of business on
the last Fridays of the months of January, April, July, and
October, and at such other times as the Provincial Grand
Master may think fit.
3. That at the Quarterly Meeting of the Lodge, held in
the month of July, in every year, the Members shall elect
out of their own body, the following officers, who shall hold
office for one year, viz. : A Provincial Grand Master, a
Provincial Deputy Grand Master, a Provincial Grand Secre-
taiy, a Provincial Grand Treasurer, and three Committee
Men,
4. That it shall he the duty of the Lodge, to watch over
the interests of the Orange Institution, and to decide upon
appeals and applications from the Private Lodges of the
Province, conformably to the general rules of the Institution,
as the exigencies of the different cases coming under their
cognizance may appear to require.
5. That all official communications sent to the Provincial
Grand Lodge, shall be transmitted through the Secretary of
the Private Lodge to which the Member or Members makiuo-
such communication shall belong.
6. That the Masters of the different Private Lodges shall,
within seven days of the quarterly meeting of the Grand
PROVINCIAL GRAND LODGE.


Lodge, make returns to the Provincincial Grand Secretary of
the names and residences of the Brethren in their respective
Lodges—distinguishing those who received the Purple Older,,
and of all individuals who have been rejected or expelled since
the last return.
7 That the expenses of the Provincial Grand Lodge shall
he defrayed from a fund formed in the following manner
The sum of one shilling from each Private Lodge, for every
Member admitted or initiated therein ; the sum of one shilling
for each Member receiving the Purple Order ; the sum of
two shillings and sixpence for every certificate issued from
the Provincial Grand Lodge ; and the sum of thirty shillings
for every Dispensation to a New Lodge.
8. That the Members of the Provincial Grand Lodge shall
be Honorary Members of every Lodge in the Province and
entitled to sit therein, and vote on all subjects, except the
distribution of funds, the election of Officers, and the admis-
sion of Members.


GENERAL RULES.
Rule 1. That the objects of the Orange Institution are,
“ mutual protection against all aggressions—the preservation
of peace and good order in the community—the relief of aged,
indigent, and infirm members ; and decent interment of them
and of their wives in cases of death.
2. The admission of Members is not regulated by any
other test than those of religion, character, and prin-
ciple ; hut no one can he initiated a Member of the Order
who is not free, of the full age of eighteen years, of the Pi o-
testant religion, and a loyal subject of the crown of Great
Britain, as established by the Constitution of 1690.
3. That no person who now is, or at any time has been, a
Roman Catholic, can he admitted into the Institution, except
by the unanimous consent of the Members of the Provincial
Grand Lodge.
4. That there shall he hut two Orders in the Institution,
namely, those of the Orange and Purple, and the same shall
be conferred in each Lodge, by the proper authority presid-
ing, viz., the Master, or in his absence the Deputy Master, or
First Committee Man.
5 That no Member of the Institution shall he eligible to
hold Office until he receives the Purple Degree, nor shall
any publican, or retailer of malt or spirituous liquors, hold
office in any Lodge.
6 That at all meetings of the Institution, the Brethren
shall appear in the Costume of the Order to which they be-
long viz : Those of the Orange Order, an Orange Collar,
and those of the Purple Order, an Orange and Purple Collar.


bv 7 knv h oW ft‘ e . f ° r " lmiss!o "- who has been refectaf
" -fi! ge ’ silall bc eligible for election in any other
Lori? 6 ? U V e S P ecial P erm 'ssion of the Provincial Grand
be bflWl f r W° s .ed in the same Lodge, he shall not
be balloted for nntd snffieient notice thereof has been given
to the Members of the Lodge. g
thft' , Ti | at the proposer of a candidate shall satisfy the Lodge,
wife 1? S "TO ° f the Laws into the hand? of the can-
didate before his initiation, for the purpose of making him
acquainted with the principles of the Institution. g
snni’th n ° L ° dge Shall initiate a member for a less
bc to Tl SCVen 11 , mgSand six P ence , nor admit an old mem-
D tol a less sum timn three shillings and sixpence.
10. That as the laws of religion and morality should he
observed with peculiar attention by all Orangemen, it is for-
imutneTor nffe 111 ’ 1 that an ? P erson shall
improper or offensive language in the Lodge Room, or appear
there in a state of intoxication. “
Tliat a.confidential Tyler shall remain at the outside
ot the door while the Lodge is sitting.
feur.ss.*” 1 • *■ “■ •»“
fp W L Uat lf T y u me Ti be . r of a Private Lo( % e be convicted of
!nv p J v:i an 7 ] of I Her Ma J es .ty s Courts of Justice, or follow
“ V ’ v ' or notorious practice contrary to law, or
prooTthereoTbe ‘ he M »
14. ihat there shall be two Festivals of the Order in every
year, the one on the twelfth July, and the other on the fifth
November, which all Private Lodges are obliged to observe.
15. That the Private Lodges shall meet respectively once
a month on such nights as may be mutually agreed upon.
16. That no business shall be transacted except in open
Lodge, and no business of importance shall be transacted at


tmy Lodge meeting which is not directed by the rules unless
previous notice thereof shall have been given at the preceding
meeting, r &
17. That every private Lodge shall have a Master, Deputy
Master, Treasurer, Secretary, and five Committee Men to be
chosen annually from among the Purple Members of the
Lodge at the usual monthly meeting in the month of June
in each year.
IS. That any dispute arising in a Private Lodf is to be
decided Tiy the Lodge in which the dispute arises, and the
parties must abide by its decision on pain of expulsion, savin-
however the right of appeal to the Provincial Grand Lod-e
whose decision shall be conclusive in all cases. ° ’
19. That every private Lodge shall have the power of sus-
pending or expelling any of its members, subject to the
approval of the Provincial Grand Lodge.
20 That Private Lodges shall have full power to make
Bye Laws for the regulation of their own proceedings, pro-
vided such Bye Laws are not repugnant to these rules.


OPENING PRAYER.
Gracious and Almighty God, who in all ages hast shown
thv Almighty power in protecting righteous Kings and States
—we yiefd thee hearty thanks for the merciful preservation
of thy true religion hitherto against the designs of its ene-
mies/particularly in sending thy servant, our glorious de iv-
erer WILLIAM THE THIRD, Prince of Orange, who
freed us from Tyranny and Arbitrary Power.
humble submission to the late dispensation of thy Divine
Wisdom which we confess to be a righteous punishment for
our sins, and for our indifference to those blessings whic i
thou hast bestowed upon us.
Yet we beseech thee, for thy honor and thy name’s-sake,
to frustrate the further designs of wicked men against thy
Holy Religion, and not to suffer its enemies wholly to triumph
ove r it—defeat their counsels, abate their pride, assuage
their malice, and confound their devices Bless, we beseech
thee every Member of the Orange Institution, with Chanty,
Brotherly Love, and Loyalty; make us truly respectable here
on Earth, and eternally happy hereafter.
These and all other blessing we humbly beg in the name
and through the mediation of Jesus Christ, our Lord an
Saviour. Amen.
CLOSING PRAYER.
0 Almighty God ! who art a strong tower of defence unto
thy servants, against the face of their enemies, we humbly
beseech thee of thy mercy to deliver us from those great and
imminent dangers with which we are now encompassed. 0
Lord o-ive us not up as a prey unto our enemies, hut continue
to protect the true religion against those who seek to over-
throw it; so that all the world may know that thou art our
Saviour, and Mighty Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
H. M‘Coll, Printer, La Trobe Street, East,




