



'^% erary k5/


*


*
V
- *
.
*
“


LAYS FROM AN AUSTRALIAN LYRE


\x
V'
H '


Cays from an Australian Cyre.
AUSTRAL.
4’ondmi:
CITY OF LONDON PUBLISHING COMPANY,
5, FRIAR STREET, BROADWAY, E.C.
[A U Rights Reserved .]


Of Su
%
*
C % <.4> '


6388
CONTENTS.
Lines to Oue Queen 1
In Memoeiam. H. R. H. Peincess Alice ... 3
In Commemoeation of the 91st Anniveesaey of New
South Waxes .... ... 5
The Unveixing of Captain Cook’s Statue, Sydney . 8
Shadow 12
Sunshine 13
A Hoxiday 14
On the ENCQUEAGF.TyrF.NT of Immigeation to Austeaxia . 16
What should be done with the Gaeden Palace r . 18
Whispees feom Austeaxia. (Part I.) 20
Whispees feom Austeaxia. (Part II.) . . . .22


Farewell to the Old Year (1876) . . . . 25
Welcome to the New Year (1877) . . . . 27
Summed Rale . . 29
A Missionary Wanted 31
Annie : Hee Life was a Poem 33
The Cuckoo 37
Poems eoe the Litte Ones —
Little Geacie 39
The Babt—What is it? . . . . . .41
Onlt a Baby’s Sock 42
On the Death of a Little Sunday Scholar . . 44
Thoughts 46
Josephine 48
The Approach of Winter in Australia , . .51
Thomas Carlyle at the Grave_of his Wife . . 53
The Old and the New 56
Ministering Spleits-
I. Faith 59
11. —-Hope 61


w
4
Chaeity oh Love ........ 63
Whispees from the Shell of Life—
I.— Little Beetie 65
ll. —The Peaely Gates . . . . . .70
Shnnylands; oe, Maetan’s Visit and Bessie's Awaeening—
Chaptee I. 79
Chaptee 11. 85
Chaptee 111 92
Chaptee IV 99
The Voyage of the ‘ Oeient ’ feom Sydney to London,
1881 103


,
-


LAYS FROM AN AUSTRALIAN LYRE
Jims to Our Outfit.
May 24th, 1877.
Hail to thee ! Gracious Mother-Queen
Long hath our warmest love been thine
Hail to thee ! Bright thy reign hath been ;
Pure and all lovely thy virtues shine :
We wish thee a blessing rich to-dav,
O «/ ’
Our words cannot breathe all our hearts would
Though many the nations deluged by war,
Though sadly the strife of empires hath waged.
Xo trumpet of battle is heard on thy shore,
Xo deadly feud in thy realms is waged ;
All speaks of earnest desire to avert
That terrible scourge for which so alert


Are savage barbarians, unholy men
"Who count not the lives of God’s people too
dear
For carnage and bloodshed, as oft and again
As their greedy vengefulness causes may rear:
But thy heart, oh, Lady ! is human and tender,
And wills not dark wishes and thoughts to en-
gender.
Most matronly woman ! Kind ruler by love 1
Most noble, illustrious, Empress!
Our unswerving loyalty fain would we prove,
To no other emotion give ingress;
We bless thee, loved Queenie, and pray that thy
reign
May still gain high honours, that never shall wane.
“ Many happy returns,” of this blissful birthday,
We wish thee, dear lady; Heaven grant that
our prayer
May fly swiftly up to the fount of all day,
And relieve thy full heart of dark harassing care;
So that peace and felicity long may remain
Strong links added still to God’s merciful chain.


our gdofafr grmcess %Xict.
A Nation weeps!
The darling of all English hearts !
Death the frail clay from spirit parts :
How sweet she sleeps 1
The nations mourn
*Sad-eyed, who once with wondering pride
’Mongst sick and dying oft espied
Her gentle form.
Dark, fateful day!
Just seventeen years have backward rolled
Since the deep knell the tidings told
Of his decay.
Albert the Good!
Who guessed that she, his darling child,
On the same day should cross the wild
And surging flood ?


Rest, peaceful dead!
No more shall harrowing sorrow chill
That loving heart; no dire news thrill
With awful dread.
E’en those will mourn,
Whose friends the “ Princess Alice ” chose
As pleasure boat, when to swift close
Their lives were borne.
Sorrow struck deep,
Deep in her spirit, “ finely touched
But now griefs waiting moans are hushed
In death’s calm sleep.
In castle lone
No mother’s gentle accents fall,
No voice responds to childhoodVcall
In tenderest tone.
God’s call has come.
And union sweet in heaven begun;
The mother clasps her little son
And sees her father’s home.


J« of tire 91st
of "gitfo olM.es.
[THE PARENT COLONY OF AUSTRALIA.)
Jantxaet 26th, 1879.
Australia ! Of Islands the queen!
Fair pearl set in glistening sheen !
Thy birthday we hail!
May city and vale
Ring the joy bells and sound the loud paean.
This day was a nation enrolled,
Along the mighty her name will be scrolled;
A future all glorious,
O’er rivals victorious,
Our much favoured land shall behold.
But a country’s true greatness and power
Consist not alone in her dower
“ Of rich earthly treasure ;
(God’s bountiful measure
Of beauty and health for each hour).


Not alone in her flourishing trade,
(Commercial successes oft fade;)
Not artistic improvement,
Nor science deep movement,
A country’s true greatness e’er made.
Where then must our loyal hopes turn,
When for thy weal, Australia, we yearn ?
Straight up to the mount
. Whence springeth the fount
Of true glory, for which our hearts burn..
Let us strive then with strong fervent will,
Helio-ion’s bright flame to instil;
O O '
That meekness and lowliness,
True Christian holiness,
Each heart’s deepest longing may fill.
This crusade for our opening New Year ;
A warfare ’gainst error’s dark fear;
•A thorough upheaving,
’ No citadel leaving
Unpierced by God’s light full and clear.


Aye ! then shall our sunny south land,
Become noble, illustrious, grand!
When we take for our guide
Him whose love has been tried.
Who holds all men’s hearts in His hand.


InMiaj of Captain Cook’s Statue,
Sjbitru.
Febettaey 18th, 1879.
The veil aside is thrown;
Revealed to thousand throbbing hearts
The image of his earthly parts,
Y ho traversed ocean lone ;
Y ho braved the seething surge’s swell,
Y here not a warning light or bell
Sent friendly flash or tone.
Though now in death he lies,
His world-wide fame shall ever live,
And to all time example give
Of lofty enterprise.
e students of the light-crowned spheres.
Ye learned geographers—long years
Ago he won the prize.


A century, aye more,
Hath swiftly passed, ’mid heaving sobs
Of tottering empires, mighty throbs
Of nations’ inmost core,
Since Cook in strong Endeavour mailed
Safe unto Otaheite sailed,
To swell fair learning’s store.
Upon that distant isle
He watched calm Venus shed her ray
Athwart night’s glimmering, starry way
With many a peaceful smile ;
She seemed to favour his intent,
And to his patient waiting lent
Her tender charms meanwhile.
At length that earnest gaze
Meets due reward; the orb is seen
Making swift transit o’er the sheen
Of Sol’s illuming rays.
This astronomic fact observed,
For other scenes his heart he nerved
To stem dark ocean’s maze.


The trusty ship is maimed ;
New Zealand first our hero sees,
Australia next, by favouring breeze,
His eager vision scanned.
All honoured be his noble worth 1
To him we owe our country’s birth
’Neath sway of British hand.
Again the deep to roam,
He left our sunny, sea-girt strand;
We follow not; he blessed our land.
Oh ! may it be the home
Where virtue makes her chosen seat,
And patriotism and justice meet
’Neath freedom’s arched dome.
Australia, bright and fair !
Be loyal-hearted, true and great;
In loving memory hold his fate,
Who, with high courage rare,
Discovered facts unknown by man,
Brought valued wealth to learning’s van,
Then—died by savage hate.


Oh ! every patriot here,
With heart and voice due praise accord
His name, whose acts mankind still laud,
In homes of hearty cheer ;
Brave Cook ! the simple name should start
In every leal, Australian heart,
A chord, deep, full, and clear.


£ I a b o hr.
o
Mat, 1879.
Dark and lowering fall the shadows,
Life seems wrapt in sable shroud;
Sombre hues and heavy frino'es
Drape each overhanging cloud.
Mist-like doubts and dull-eyed sorrow
Quench the tiny flame of joy;
0 er the soul in dark clouds brooding
Boding fears bright hopes destroy.
Hearts are weary with their aching,
Mind and body faint and fail;
Skies are plainting funeral dirges,
With a hopeless, smothered wail.


S un s hi nt
Mat, 1879.
Hush ! a tiny voice is waking
From the depths of dark despair,
Many a heart, erst heavy laden,
Bowed ’neath weight of anxious care.
Light and life are mutely thrilling
Every tissue, nerve, and brain ;
Skies are blue, and golden linings
' O O
Tint the sunlit clouds again.
O
Hope and sunshine, love and blessing.
Crown the new-born soul with joy,
Light of love and peace possessing,
Nought can e’er such bliss destroy.


§ o I i h a: jr.
Far from the haunts of sin and pain,
Under the hedgerows, down the lane;
Out on the bays bright dimpled tide—
In shady nooks where the violets hide —
On a rocky ledge by the white sea beach—
Foot-balling—cricketing —what, try to teach
An innocent mind the happiest way
To enjoy his health-giving holiday ?
Though the poet may love, in a dreamy hour,
When pensive musings assert their power,
To dwell alone by the grand, old sea,
And gazing ponder Eternity —
Methinks that happier thoughts will start
When a gentler Thetis hath stormed his heart.
And he turns with more than a poet’s zeal
To the speaking face, his fair ideal.


Aye! revel in Nature and glory in Art;
Exult in tlie gladness tlieir beauties impart;
But surely each critic will deem it but true
All joys are quite doubled when shared between
The children proclaim it, with shout and with
glee,
The elders confirm it, their gladness who see;
Aye! bright-eyed affection and dear trustful
love,
Shedding sweet influence around and above,
Make happiness perfect, and pleasure complete,
In woodland or valley, in palace or street,
Be our holiday spent then diffusing heart’s joy ;
In the sunlight of love let there creep no alloy;
Then—merry or thoughtful, at sport or at rest,
Our time, place, and method, will surely be
blest.


0u tIK of Immigration to
A question this of grave and deep import,
"W hose subtle pros and cons engage the thought
Of intellects most clear.
Shall these fair pasture-lands and sunny hills,
These verdant valleys fed by laughing rills,
To nature’s heart so dear,
Still waken only to the songs of birds ?
Ne’er thrill with joyous tones of human words ?
Nay ! lure the sturdy farmer with his train.
His hoard of silver stored for days of rain,
Fair wife and blue-eyed race,
To visit these broad fields and grassy dales ;
Then soon shall smiling harvests deck the vales
And forests bloom apace.
Give country homes to Erin’s famished sons,
Where warmth and plenty cheer earth’s fainting
ones.


But tempt not here the skilled mechanic band,
The finished craftsman, or the well-trained
hand,
With dazzling dreams of gold ;
Flood not our inland towns with labour’s tide—
There oft have eager souls with sorrow sighed
O’er hopes grown dim and cold.
Of high-class tradesmen we’ve a goodly store,
While patient Ceres vainly calls for more.
Then may the “ powers that be,” with heart and
mind,
Consider well a basis broad to find
On which to build the State ;
Bring suitable and willing hands from far,
Where wretchedness and poverty debar
The poor from happier state.
Yea, help domestic aid and farming skill,
Encourage wealth and art, our land to fill.


M|at h bone foitl; % <sarbctJ galact ?
In the basement store up the snowy wool;
Give the southern nave, with galleries and
tower,
To “Our Girls,” for a College and Grammar
School,
Where domestic worth with classic shower
And artistic skill may form their dower.
Let the northern nave, with its organ grand,
To the dome, with its regal fountain, stand ;
A rendezvous, where we still may meet
To list to instrumental music sweet,
And view those exhibits of art and skill
Which might be secured by the national will.
The eastern and western transepts fair
Convert into Parliament Houses, where
The laws of the land may be justly framed,
And no waste of the noble building blamed.


If any of these propositions should seem
Impracticable as a summer night’s dream,
Then let the bright Palace, though decked
such pride,
Be not e’en to public officials denied.
But oh ! let it stand in imperial grace ;
Sydneia’s last triumph ! its “ Beautiful Place.”


fißlrisprrs from Australia.
[TO OUR BROTHERS AXI) SISTERS IX THE
OLD WORLD.)
Part I.
A whisper across the ocean wave,
A breath from an island’s echoing nave ;
A chorus of weak but earnest tones,
A beacon of hope to the heart that moans.
There’s a land of promise most fair and bright,
A land whose fresh beauties entrance the sight ;
Where great tracts of country, smiling and glad.
Offer comfort and peace to the poor and the sad.
Words fail me to tell, though my very heart
sings,
Of the passing sweet joys that each happy hour
brings;
The dawn flush so roseate as day doth appear,
The sunrise so golden, the blue sky so clear.


The full morning glory, the noontide’s calm
flow,
The soft fading daylight, eve’s tremulous glow;
The unrivalled splendour of night’s myriad
eyes,
The moon’s queenly beauty that pales but ne’er
dies.
Oh! could you but learn of our blossoming
spring,
That wraps in its verdure the frailest wee
thing;
That covers the land with a mantle so gay,
You’d think earth was keeping her first
holiday.
’Twere vain to dilate on the long summer days,
When each bud trills its own tiny carol of
praise ;
The sun’s brilliant beams shining down over-
head,
The soft hush of simset when day’s care has
lied.


But note the rich harvests, the orchard’s sweet
wealth,
Sure tokens of plenty, sure promise of health ;
Ripe Autumn’s a season of rarest good cheer,
Tis one of the many good times of our year.
What knew we of winter; he scarce peers
around,
Ere spring blithely jostles him far underground ;
Just one month, or two at the most, he’s
supreme,
The rest of his days are as fair as a dream.
Paet 11.
Noble friends in the classic Old World,
Round whom waves the banner unfurled,
Of science and learnings’ true might,
’Mid music and poesy’s light! —
E’en here there are hearts
From whose depths there oft starts
A tone many list with delight.


’Neath skies of Italia’s deep splendour,
Where all things their glad homage render
To God, the great author of beauty,
We deem it our high, pleasing duty,
To waft a refrain
From our flower-decked main
Across the wide, fathomless sea.
Aye ! thousands of hearts beat as nobly,
And thousands of breasts brave as boldly
The internal battle and strife,
Pervading all great human life.
May due love and praise
Fill all our glad days,
Nor sins sad debasement grow rife.
Our cities just clasp the rich border,
Of art. Would the knowledge were broader
Come, master minds, full without measure,
Our welcome with hearty good pleasure.
Come, brighten our shores
With pure art, whose stores
Are enriched with heavenly treasure.


We long for the artist’s swift finger,
O O 7
To catch the soft tint wliile it lingers;
To picture our Rhine—river, reaches,
To outline our cliffs and white beaches,
To point the “ old story,”
’Neath Austral land’s glory,—
True love’s noble acts and kind speeches.
We pray that a pure, noble knighthood
Way spring from our strong, youthful band
That virtue with godliness plighted,
May shine o’er this fair, pleasant land,
May God give us grace,
His goodness to trace,
And ever on His side to stand.


Jfatefotll tc tlje oft §m t 1576.
Farewell to the good old year !
Farewell to its changeful hours !
Buried in smiles and tears
Alike are its thorns and flowers.
Oh ! hearts that so lightly beat;
Oh ! smiles that so sweetly shone ;
Oh ! memories, tender and fleet;
Gone ! cries the echo ; Gone !
Past every privilege given ;
Recorded all anger and sin ;
Alas ! how many have striven
The good paths to enter in ?
Silent are voices we loved :
Lifeless, dear, beautiful forms,
Completed their mission of love ;
Now—safe from earth’s perilous storms


cp
Yet joys of pure pleasure have glowed,
And mercies unnumbered have blessed ;
We thank Thee, 0 God, who’st bestowed
On Thy children much brightness and rest.
Then farewell to thee, swift-dying year,
We yield thee past pleasure and pain ;
Thy young sister draweth anear,
We’ll greet thee in her once again.


Mtlcmt to % Stto fear, isrr.
The roseate hues of morning tint the sky,
The birds sing carols gaily ere the sun is high;
Soft airs in balmy whispers stir the trees,
While Hope’s fair garments flutter o’er melodious
keys.
Bright dawns the sweet, fresh yearlet, pure and
calm,
In the cool and early sunrise life’s thanksgiving
psalm
Breathes a tribute offering through the flowery
sod
From the New Year’s bosom to its Maker, God.
Welcome ! bonnie maiden! tender, bright and
true ;
Hearty New Year’s greeting would we offer you
May the sunny promise of thy blushing youth,
Yield in full fruition, honour, love and truth.


In the coming season, hailed with thankful joy.
May no harsh words pain, no thoughtlessness
annoy;
In the “ good old way ” may many nobly run,
Till the race is finished and the prize is won.
Dark days may he looming o’er our pathway,—
still
We know that He who loves us will be with
us—till,
By His gracious favour, we have reached the
goal,
Gained the promised haven of the weary soul.
Oh ! blest Saviour, hold us ever close to Thee ;
May we rest more simply on the sinner’s plea;
In the distant future be our friend and guide,
O ?
Through life’s hidden years we ask for none
beside.


Summer gam.
Beautiful, beautiful rain I
Dropping in freshness down,
Cleansing the miry town,
Chasing away the frown
From sad hearts again.
Beautiful, beautiful rain!
Cooling the scorching heat,
Soothing the weary feet,
Making the heart more meet
To carry its pain.
Marvellous, summer rain !
Distilled from yon lessening cloud
Whose thunder reverberates loud,
As its wealth of blessing is bowed
O
Over the main.


Beautiful, beautiful rain !
Lovelier even than snow ;
Tbou makest the flowers to grow,
The streamlets in torrents to flow.
And swellest the grain.
Beautiful, heavenly rain!
Type of the showers that fall,
With oracious fulness, on all
O 3
Who answer the Master’s call,
And follow His train.
Blessed, and beautiful rain !
Sent by Our Father above,
In infinite wisdom and love,
His faithfulness ever to prove
Once and again.


[AN APPEAL TO THE YOUTH OF SYDNEY FOR A
MISSIONARY TO THE NEW HEBRIDES.)
No toiler in the islands of the sea !
No proved one, bearing partings Lord, for
Thee !
No manly heart to thrill at duty’s call!
No soldier-Christian, giving Christ his all!
Oh, youth, arise! what sphere of earthly might
E’er to thy ravished soul presents a sight
So noble, self-denying, pure and grand,
As breaking error’s chain in heathen land ?
Shall still the plaintive cry, in sad refrain,
Be wafted o’er the wide and whelming main ?
No labourer to sow the Gospel seed ;
No good Samaritan, lost souls to feed


With heavenly manna, (life-inspiring food),
And mercy’s cup of precious pard’ning blood ?
Is there no fervour ’mong the Captain host ?
No brave heart ready for the dangerous post ?
Lord, fan the flame of holy, burning zeal;
Make those whose glory is their strength, to feel
An impulse, mighty as the eternal sea,
Impelling thousand hearts to work for thee.


&Mit: §tx %ih fans a gom.
jAmrAET 21st, 1878.
I SEE her young, and bright, and fair.
With lustrous eyes and golden hair;
Merry and light of heart, and gay,
As sunshine’s sparkling, changeful rav.
Full of the eagerness'of youth,
Joined with an earnest love of truth
Impulsive, persevering, brave,
E’en when sickness languor gave.
O o
And as her body weaker grew,
Her noble spirit ever drew
Fresher, purer strength and power,
And toiled undaunted hour by hour.
Those who know her pencil’s art,
Can conceive a trifling part
Of the work her patient hands
Have fulfilled at love’s demands.


Ah, none knew of aching brain,
Oft o’ertaxed in wearying pain,
What the price such study cost, —
Perfect health for ever lost.
For soon fell to whisper low,
Tones that erst in joyous flow
Filled our hearts with gladsome mirth,
And blissful happiness on earth.
Again I see her speaking face
Uplifted to the Fount of Grace,
With rapt devotion written there.
While one she loved breathed forth a prayer.
But still hope’s cheering beams outspread
A brilliant banner overhead,
And soon she thought her place to take
Once more ’mongst those in learning’s wake
But God had better things in store
For this dear lamb, than earthly lore ;
He planned to take her to the skies.
Whither the pure in spirit flies.


E’en now I see her sweet, bright face
And note her simple, matchless grace,
One night I never shall forget —
Her radiant eyes —I see them yet.
I marked the glowing crimson cheek,
O O 7
The beauteous hues that death bespeak;
My spell-bound gaze admiring saw
That pure, fair loveliness, with awe.
I knew her life was measured then,
And weakness told the tale agfain;
O '
Her feverish flush and cough of pain,
Re-echoed still the same sad strain.
Month followed month, and weaker still,
The slender frame. No love or skill
Could charm away the racking pain,
No human power her life sustain.
At length our patient darling lies
On her death-bed. Life swiftly flies.
The quivering, laboured breath is drawn
In feeble pulses, weak and worn.


“ Good-by,” she whispered faint and low,
“ You’ll see me here no more below,
But up in heaven, you’ll meet me there,”
God grant it, is my fervent prayer.
One sitting near as life ebbed fast,
Murmured, “ God bless you.” (Oh the vast
Immeasurable faith God sends
To His beloved, when this life ends.)
“ God bless you; ” and she answered sweet,
“ Oh yes ! ” —She’s now at His dear feet.
Her spirit lightly fled away
To heav’ns’ gates, e’er break of day.
Oh, what a glorious morn is hers!
No sin, no pain, no sorrow stirs
Her heart from its great endless bliss ;
And Jesus Christ her lips doth kiss.
She’s safely folded in His arms,
His love her inmost being warms.
Her wistful eyes beam brightly now,
While perfect peace adorns her brow.


®{re Curkoo.
o
List ! list! list!
The Australian cuckoo calls ;
And its mate replies to the plaintive
Note, as its murmur falls.
Far in the eerie night
O
Rings the wild, woodland strain,
Like the voice of a friend now departed,
Rising to greet us again.
List! list! list!
Away on the wind it is borne,
Muffled and distant and sad,
As leaves fall in April’s grey dawn.
Oh ! bird of the shadowy grove,
Revelling in darkness and night,—
O'
Chant on thy melodious anthem,
We list with a dreamy delight.


Piercing the stillness oppressive,
Melt forth thy pure, spirit-notes,
Full cadenced, trembling and tender,
Thy song in the air sweetly floats.


POEMS FOR THE LITTLE ONES.
little fcrre.
[DIED AUGUST 2oth, 1877 ; AGED TEATS.)
Another little face has gone
Away from us for ever;
Another little hfe has run
Its course along the river.
Soft baby hands no more shall clasp,
Sweet lips no more shall quiver ;
Nor shall that fluttering breath e’er gasp
In burning, fitful fever.
Ne’er shall her wise and winning ways
Fill all our hearts with pleasure,
No longer at her merry plays
Shall we behold our treasure.


Sad is the home and lonely,
Where once her beauty shed
A brightening influence only,
For now—our Darling’s dead.
She’s gone to join dear Jesu’s band,
And be His cherished daughter ;
She dwelleth in the Children’s Land,
Where reigns the great God-Father.
Oh, hearts with anguish laden !
7 O
Oh, spirits sorely tried !
Still trust the little maiden,
With Him who for her died.
Be sure of this; He loves her,
With wisdom’s matchless love ;
And from earth’s woes has ta’en her
To perfect joy above.


Wfyt §alm —WttyvA is it?
Another tiny rill to join life’s widening stream,
And spread its sparkling beauty in truth’s
glorious gleam;
Another soul immortal to join the numerous
throng,
For earthly pain and anguish and heavenly light
and song.
Another flower to blossom in the warmth of
tender love,
To spread its perfume sweetly till called to
bloom above;
Another little sunbeam to glad the mother’s
heart,
A never-failing charm that bids dull care depart.
The third sweet token surely of our Father’s
matchless grace,
In that perfect, little form, and that innocent
small face.


a IBabg’s jsock.
’Tis only a little white sock,
Neither costly, pretty, nor new;
A baby’s half-worn-out, odd sock,
Twould be worth nothing to you.
Its fair little owner dwells far.
Very far away now, hut still
Lives near to our hearts, a bright star
Shining softly behind a hill.
Her sweet winsome beauty seems given
To chide all distrust and all fear,
To lift the sad heart still to heaven.
And dry every sorrowful tear.
Oh! think how her light little feet
Once gladdened a mother so dear,
Whom God in His wisdom thought meet
To take from our loving grasp here.


That pure one, so gentle and mild,
All tree from cold earth’s sinful leaven,
Whose tenderness guarded her child,
Till God called His daughter to Heaven.


% gratjr of a %Mt Smtkg Srjolar,
[DIED OCTOBER 9th, 1878; AGED 4 YEARS.)
She came to school so gladly,
Clasped tight by sister’s hand ;
Soon Jesus called our darling
Safe to His Happy Land.
She learnt that hymn, “ Oh won’t you
Be a Christian while you’re young ? ”
And now our little bright one
Has a white robe round her flung.
“ I want to go to Sunday School,”
Were the longing words she said,
As Masrerie started off alone
OO
Last Sabbath —now she’s dead !
Dear little ones, who hear of this,
When Jesus calls you home,
Oh ! will you love to hear His voice,
And say “ I’ll gladly come ? ”


Remember this—He loves you,
And shed His precious blood
That you might have your sins forgiven
And live in Heaven with God.


I) 0 U 3 \ t S.
I sit and muse o’er my fancies free,
And varied feelings arise in me.
The wind is sighing its plaintive call,
And evening’s curtain begins to fall.
A happy hour is this you see,
For thought can traverse the mighty sea,
And sweep at a single, fearless bound,
This great wide earth completely round.
I see each well-known tace at home,
And know they long for me to come ;
I know how close to them I chug,
My heart its love doth ever sing.
1 picture one in a distant land,
Far severed from home’s encircling band ;
Threading the mazes of glories new,
Hidden from our weak, Unite view.


And then I ponder o’er things div
The goodness of Him whose hope is mine;
When shall I see His lovely face,
And comprehend His matchless grace ?
Time is passing with winged feet,
Soon, soon, this heart no more shall beat.
Oh! to be safe with Jesus then,
And join the eternal grand Amen.
ANS f/t*


|osrj)ljhu.
Thy home is robbed of its pride and joy.
Fair Josephine 1
No anxious cares thy mind employ,
Fair Josephine !
So young, so childlike, and so gay,
As fresh and sweet as budding May
Thy smile upon thy wedding day,
Bride Josephine!
Mv heart turns back to childhood’s days,
Sweet Josephine !
And treasures up thy simplest ways,
Sweet Josephine I
Then with swift bound leaps onward tar,
And sees thee ’neath a northern star)
Bright hopes still thy companions are.
Bride Josephine 1


The summer days all swiftly fly,
Bright Josephine!
Dark cares ne’er on thy spirit he,
Bright Josephine 1
Dear, truthful, gentle, leaning one ;
Thy brief young life its course to run
In perfect womanhood begun,
Wife Josephine!
Ah ! soon, too soon for thee, fair child,
Loved Josephine!
Approached thy hour of sorrow wild,
Loved Josephine!
When, far from every early tie,
But not from God’s all-seeing eye,
A mother but bereaved dids’t he,
Our Josephine !
Still hope clung fast to thee, sweet wife,
Fair Josephine I
And firmly clasped thy precious life,
Fair Josephine I


Till death’s cold, keen, and glittering knife
Struck deep, and nature’s parting strife
Yielded, to one in strength more rife,
Lost Josephine
So vouhg, so innocent, so sweet,
Our Josephine 1
For pain and sickness how unmeet,
Our Josephine 1
Hearts sadly ache and throb for thee,
Child-wife and mother, mournfully,
In youth cut down thus suddenly,
God’s Josephine 1


ff Mixdtx hr Australia.
The summer is ended, bright nature declines,
Ripe Autumn is fast sweeping by,
Coy May’s changeful mood to winter inclines,
All swiftly the golden hours fly.
More weird moans the wind, more heavy the
rain
In torrents of moisture descends ;
While the distant boom of the ocean, again
Our hearts with anxious fear rends.
Yet sometimes the sun with his bright glory
shines,
And warms us for many a day.
Received by his beams e’en the cold snake re-
clines,
And forgets with us, that it is May.


But sure as are past those bright days that have
been,
So sure May glides onwards to June.
The dawn breaks more chilly, the blast grows,
more keen,
Cold winter will visit us soon.
The rivulets, streamlets, and rivers so low,
Soon swelling with great mountain floods,
In vast overflowings inundate below
Smiling plains, waving harvest, dark woods.
Then let us remember all those in distress,
And deal with a bountiful hand
To our brethren and sisters, that God may us
bless
When in trouble by sea or by land.


Ibomas fclgl t at tk §mk 0f bis SStife.
wo o
A grand old man with a care-lined brow
The earnest of feeling deep;
And, shining from hidden depths of soul,
Keen eyes, all unused to weep.
A heart that must cope in that sad sweet spot,
With its anguished grief alone ;
Not e’en his companion,* gentle, beloved,
May intrude by the hallowed stone.
Jlist a moment she stands, and wistfully scans,
The bowed form and silver-streaked hair;
Then turning aside, with a mute pathos bends
Her head in compassionate prayer ;
* His Niece.


While waves of such sorrow sweep over his
soul,
As only fine spirits can know :
Bereavement has purified, softened, refined
That nature so deep in its flow.
With more than a child’s abandon of grief,
Intensified, passionate, hushed,
The rugged old sage from his firmness unbent,
And wept o’er the frail precious dust.
“ Clean gone out now is the Light of my Life,”
Mourned the genius that shone among kings,
When the dear one who long cheered his
pilgrimage here,
Soared upward on white, seraph wings.
Noble man! with the tribute of worth to thy
name ;
We honour, revere, and lament
The wisdom and culture that led and adorned
Every circle that followed thy bent.


vpJ
♦
We lovingly add our weak tribute of praise,
To the fervent, intense, thoughtful mind,
That moulded with touch of such magical
power
The new, classic lore of mankind.
Ah ! when shall another Truth’s burnished
sword wield,
With majesty equal to thine !
Ah ! when shall another heroic Carlyle,
Deeds great and ignoble define 1


%\t 0I& auir % Ifafo,
Sorrow-freighted songs of labour,
Faintly-pealing bells of Time,
In tbe sad, dark distance quaver,
With a faint and dying cbime.
Mind o’erburdened with the straining,
Hearts o’erwearied with the strife ;
Love and Friendship little gaining
’Mid the fervid flow of Life.
Life! we call it ? this mad whirling ?
Life ! this rush of ceaseless care ?
Nay! but sin and darkness hurling
Bolts of death through tainted air.


Ah, the songs that sin hath chaunted !
Ah, the bells that death hath tolled !
Now would sad hearts, sorrow-haunted,
Fain fling back their hard-won gold, —
Fain relinquish every treasure,
Could they grasp the vanished year ;
Gladly quit each well-loved pleasure,
Could thev banish death’s dark fear.
Hark ! What voice so sweetly thrilling
Gently whispers words of cheer ?
“ Come to Me! whoe’er is willing ; ”
“ When thou callest, I will hear.”
Tis the New Year’s “ good news ” ringing
o o o
Purest blessings, free to all!
Truest, holiest gladness bringing ;
List! the Lord’s most gracious call.
Carry now thy shame and weakness,
Heavy with despair and doubt,
To the Saviour’s feet in meekness;
Leave earth’s aching void without.


c <•; , >
On the New Year softly enter,
Leaning on Christ’s arm of love;
Be His will thy magic centre,
Till He raise thy soul above.


igmistcrmoi Sprits.
I.— Faith.
AA ith low-bowed bead and shrouded face
A strong man mourns neglected grace;
While mists of doubt and darkness roll
In ’whelming horror o’er his soul.
Swift from the cloudless, sliming land,
Obedient to Divine command,
An angel clad with glittering wings,
A willing messenger forth springs.
Far through the boundless sea of night
She floats in virtue’s circling light;
O O '
Onward, still onward, till afar
Gleams many a large and brilliant star.
Undazzled by their flashing beams,
Still on the radiant spirit streams,
Ignoring spheres full brightly orbed,
Her thoughts by this dark world absorbed


At length in that sad room she steals
With shadowed liafht, as one who feels
O 7
Such pitying sorrow for our woes
As purer beings oft disclose.
List 1 now she whispers words of cheer
Within the quick-awakened ear,
And with that God-sent message stills
O
The soul distract by vexing ills,
«/ O
“ I’ll trust Thee still, all-loving Lord ! ”
7 O
The strong man cries. “ Thy help afford
To walk by faith, and not by sight,
Till heaven’s fair dawn chase earth’s long
night.”


ll.—Hope.
Aloxg the crowded, hustling street,
What varied face and form we meet!—
The eager, anxious, scornful, meek —
The quick, the slow, the strong, the weak—
Toiling with patient feet.
Pass on ! pass on 1 ye gay and glad ;
Our hearts turn now to mortal sad.
She comes I—a maiden, gentle, fair—
(Alas ! her dark eyes dim with care) —
In rich soft raiment clad.
Though matchless is her cultured grace.
And touching sweet her classic face,
No ray of hope’s illuming glows,
No happy play of feeling shows
Of any joy the trace.
But listlessly and sad she treads,
As one who nothing hopes or dreads—
Fearing no sharper, deadlier blow
Than that despairing, crushing woe
That snapt Love’s golden threads


Ah! God of Love! tlioult never frown
On bleeding hearts in field or town,
But when the Word of Nature’s marred
By human art, send silver-starred,
White angels fluttering down.
E’en now those fainting steps are stayed
By unseen and all-gracious aid ;
A spirit floats on pearl-hued wing,
Whose sunny tenderness doth fling
Faith gloamings o’er the maid.
o O
White-handed Hope her rainbow hues
Of tremulous brightness doth diffuse.
O’erjoyed by that celestial birth,
The tired soul gladly springs from earth
To bathe in heavenly dews.


Cljavito or |Cohc,
Divinest of the blessed three,
Perfection’s bride, crowned Charity !
Round thee, as planets round a sun,
The virtues fair their courses run.
Faith nearest wings her daring flight;
Hope shines beneath thy clear, soft light;
While gentleness and patience lie
Under the influence of thine eye.
Truth, purity, and meekness, all
Obey thy sweet, persuasive call;
Pale envy flies, pride disappears,
And penitence draws nigh with tears.
Oh ! calm effulgence ! beauty rare
To visit earth’s sin-tainted air !
Fain would we follow in thy wake,
As swift thou fliest o’er mount and lake.


The blossoms on the steep hillside
Breathe softer odours, ope more wide ;
The waters, erst like smoothest glass,
In dimpling eddies onward pass.
All Nature breaks into a smile ;
Birds, flow’rets, streams exult the while.
As, with a gracious, tender mien
Thou wing’st thy radiant course serene.
'•JSS


®risgcrs from tire SWI of %xft.
I.—LITTLE BERTIE.
It was a bright, fresh morning in the early
Australian spring. I had taken my two little
ones to spend the day at a favourite watering-
place not many miles from Sydney. The
children had been very happy for some time
building sand houses, and many a merry shout
ran through the ah as the sparkling waves
rolled up and demolished these unsubstantial
but highly-decorated habitations of mermaids
and other sea-fairies.
At last, thing of this amusement, Elsie came
to rest beside me for a while, and Bertie, my
little bright-eyed darling, looked up coaxingly
into my face, saying, “ Mamma, tan I tate my
boots off and do in ze water ? ”
“ I hardly know whether it would be safe for


such a tiny boy,” I replied, smoothing tho
tangled locks that hung over his brow.
“ I will be very dood and only do a very zittle
way,” pleaded the child. “Ah, mamma do zet me.”
Who could resist ? lat least could not; and
presently the wee figure was trotting along the
white sands and shouting for glee as his dimpled
feet touched the shining wave. The sea was
calm as glass, and the rollers that broke upon
the shore seemed only playing in their gentle
movements. Elsie was very wearv, and thinking
v «/ 1 O
to make a comfortable resting-place for her, I
took her a little farther up the beach and left her
in a shady spot, then turned to go back to Bertie.
That instant one of those large breakers that
occasionally sweep along the seashore, even on
the very calmest days, broke with a roar like
thunder, and the spray leapt up in a dazzling
shower.
Where was the little baby-figure ? Stooping,
in utter unconsciousness of the imminent danger
O
in which he was placed—stooping to pick up a
large shell, which his tiny hands could scarcely
clasp.


On swept the angry wave, and in half an
instant the little white-robed darling was carried
off his feet by the hungry devourer. Ah ! a
lifetime seemed included in that agonising-
o O
moment.
With a thrill of dismay and almost super-
human strength I rushed into the seething-
O O
waters, and ere the monster could again draw its
unlawful prey into the darksome depths I had
rescued the body of my darling. Yes, the lirst
look at those sightless eyes almost quenched the
spark of hope that lit my soul. With my wet
garments clinging around me I carried my
precious darling along the heavy sand to the
nearest house, scarcely noticing the white,
terrified face of the frail child who hurried
after me, unable to keep up with my unusual
rapidity.
Was the light forever gone from those laugh-
ing eyes, and the smile from those parted bps ?
Should I never hear again the innocent lispings
of the pure baby-soul, nor answer the quaint
questions with which he had so often puzzled
me ? The shell was still tightly clasped in the


cold fingers; I gently took it and gave it to
poor little Elsie, who stood by weeping bitterly.
Then we used every means to restore the sus-
pended animation, and the doctor gave us all
the hope he could, though I saw he felt very
doubtful that he would be successful.
Was that a sigh ?—so faint, we could scarcely
believe it. Yes ! a second time the fluttering
breath escaped !—a hush of breathless suspense.
Oh, joy ! the long-fringed eyelids trembled, and
presently unclosed. Was there ever such a
thrill of joy as shot through my aching heart
when those dear baby-eyes sought mine and the
sweet lips murmured, “ Mamma, have you dot
my s’ell ? ” Elsie immediately gave it to him,
and he lay quite still, but perfectly conscious for
a few minutes. We gave him a little nourish-
ment, and then he fell into a deep, untroubled
slumber, still holding his beloved shell in his
hand.
I now turned to Elsie, and the sight of that
suffering face upbraided me with neglecting the
delicate but unselfish darling. I took her on
my knee and soothed and comforted her until


the wistful grey eyes lost their troubled look
and the sensitive mouth became calmer.
We watched our newly-recovered treasure
together for a few moments, but soon the dark
o '
eyes also closed, and the two children slept in
that blessed unconsciousness that heals and
softens every trouble. I watched the sweet
faces, so utterly unlike, but yet so like in their
dearness to my widowed heart. Elsie, with her
dark, soft hair, and pure, spirituelle appearance,
so womanly already in her care and affection for
Bertie, whose sunny hair and rosy lips and
cheeks formed such a contrast to her own pale
delicacy.
And as I mused over -the future destiny of
my darlings, I breathed an earnest prayer that
they might both meet upon that shining shore
where the angry waves of death never snatch
from our embrace the dearest treasures ot our
hearts.


lI.—THE PEARLY GATES.
Part I.
Far away in one of the most beautiful districts
of New South Wales, on the side of a low hill,
almost surrounded at some slight distance by
bolder eminences, stands a large cottage shelter-
ed by a wide yine-embowered verandah, and set
in a luxuriant garden, the latter protected alike
from keen winds and the rays of the almost
tropical sun by a large and flourishing orchard.
Let us enter by the now open door and see what
scenes of life-history are being enacted within
those spacious rooms.
A simple picture is presented to our view.
Two young girls have just returned from a short
walk—one, very fair and exceedingly lovely,
leans back, evidently much exhausted, in an
easy chair.
“ How tired you are, dear,” said her companion,
lovingly touching the soft bright curls that


-clustered round the pale brow. “Rest there
while I bring you a glass of milk and some of
aunty’s light scones ; ” and without waiting to
hear the faint “ Never mind, Katie,” she left the
room and returned almost the same instant with
the light refreshment she found waiting for the
gentle invalid.
“ Oh, thank you,” said Alice, gratefully.
<( Nothino- seems to strengthen me so much
o o
as this fresh milk; ” and she tasted it with
evident enjoyment. “ You will have some, too,
will you not ? ”
While the girls are resting and partaking of
their slight repast, let me in a few words tell you
who they are. Katie Melville is an orphan,
whose aunt, her father’s only sister, gladly
undertook the charge of housekeeping until her
niece should care to undertake the responsibility
into her own hands. Alice Fortescue, her
dearest friend, and for many years her school-
fellow, is the eldest daughter of a large family
residing in one of the suburbs of Sydney, and is
now spending a few months with Katie in her
lovely home among the hills, Alice had long


been sadly delicate, and her mother, acquiescing
in the doctor’s opinion that a change inland
might prove beneficial, had felt it her duty to
accept the oft-repeated invitation, and, though
with many secret misgivings, had with a sorrow-
ful heart but a cheery smile sent her beloved
child to Hillside for the summer.
Fora few weeks the improvement was decided,
but, alas! the seeds of consumption were sown
in too favourable a soil to be killed by any known
agency, and the distressing symptoms soon re-
turned with painful distinctness. The brilliant
eyes, deep hectic flush, shortness of breath,
constant pain in the side and chest, and the
unconscious meanings during sleep, proclaimed
too surely the rapid strides the fell disease was
making upon the slight frame.
Katie’s aunt had written to Mrs. Fortescue
immediately she noticed the cessation of im-
provement in the health of her young guest;
and on the day of which I write she had herself
driven to the station to meet the anxious
mother.
“ I think I hear the buggy,” said Alice,


brightly, as the sound of wheels fell faintly on
the ear
“ What quick hearing you have,” said Katie,
looking with scarcely disguised alarm at the
flushed and altogether radiant appearance of the
sweet face. Scarcely could she keep back the
quick tears that sprang to her own lustrous
brown eyes as she noted the sad signs ol the
inward fever that lighted up with such mar-
marvellous brilliancy the thin, transparent
cheek.
She turned to the window to hide her emo-
tion.
“Yes, here they come. Don’t you move,
darling; the wind is quite cool this afternoon,
and there is a great draught in the hall."
“ But mamma may think I am worse if I do
not go to meet her;” and the thoughtful girl
stood up intending to walk across the room. A
deadly faintness overcame her, and she sank
back immediately among the warm soft rugs
upon the chan*. Thus they found her an instant
after. All the colour faded, a marble whiteness
on her cheek and brow, the soft blue eyes


appearing spirit-like, as with a great effort she
looked her loving welcome to her mother.
ith the magic touch of that well-beloved
hand came again the sweet sense of beinof a
little child tenderly and wisely cared for, and
soon our darling was so far recovered as to listen
with evident interest and delight to the account
of the doings and sayings of her little brothers
and sisters during her absence.
“ How could you leave them all to come to
me?”
“ Cousin Mary is staying with them, dear, so
I have no reluctance in leaving all the strong,
hearty ones while under her wise management
to come and see my own little snowdrop.”
Her mother’s fears were not so much excited
by this attack as might have been imagined, for
previous to her visit to Hillside Alice had been
sadly subject to similar faintings, and this had
not appeared so alarming as many former ones.
But her utter prostration next morning revealed
the steady progress made by the insidious
disease.


Part 11.
“Mamma, dear, I think we must go home
again very soon, or it may he too late, and
I long to see all the beloved faces again.”
“My darling we shall start whenever the
doctor thinks it safe; he promised to ride over
this morning. Ah, here he is now.”
“Well, said the doctor, in reply to Mrs.
Fortescue’s inquiries, “ if your daughter rallies,
as I expect she will, you may start by the end
of the week ; the journey will be very trying,
but nothing can be worse than the unsatisfied
longing to reach home.”
The medical man was right. Alice grew
decidedly better after learning his decision,
and on Friday said good-bye to her kind friends
with a bright face and hopeful heart.
If she became worse, Katie was to come down
and stay with her. “ But, oh 1 I cannot bear
to let you go,” said the affectionate girl, with
a great struggle for composure.


“ Could you be with us next week ? ” said
Alice ; “it would be so good to have you.” And
that was the last arrangement.
Little did they think what a meeting the next
would be.
The following Wednesday a telegram was
delivered to Katie, “ Alice is sinking rapidly;
come at once. ’ The paper fell from her
hands. “ Oh, she is dying, my sweet, sweet
Alice' ”
The same evening she arrived in Sydney, and
rapidly drove to Mrs. Fortescue’s residence.
Arthur Fortescue met her at the door, and in
answer to her mute inquiring whispered, “ Quite
conscious, and longing to see you.”
Calm outwardly, but with an agonising pain
at her heart, Katie entered the room. What a
change in those few days ! Propped up with
pillows, for she could not breathe lying down,
her wistful blue eyes speaking the thoughts she
was too weak to express in any other way, the
dying girl, beautiful even in death, patient and
uncomplaining, reclined, surrounded by the dear
faces she loved so well.


“ Dear Katie,” she faintly whispered, “ there’ll
be no more partings there ? ” yet human love
was strong, and for an instant her slight frame
was shaken with sobs as the reality of leaving all
earthly friends stirred her inmost soul.
This passed, however ; and as day by day she
grew weaker and weaker, the intense longing for
rest and home grew stronger. It seemed to
those who saw her that her vision beheld some-
thing they knew nothing of. At times her
heavenward-lifted eyes appeared to pierce
through every intervening cloud right into the
presence of God. Her faith was marvellous,
her patience perfect.
“ Oh, I wish my Saviour would come and take
me,” she said, the night of her release. “I am
so weary waiting for Him. Mother, do you
think He is angry with me for being so impatient
to go ? ”
“My darling, He knows your weariness and
weakness; He loves you to the end.”
And at last the Saviour came. With one final
farewell, one wave of the hand to all around, she
sank exhausted; longer and longer the pauses


between the short, fluttering breath, till at last
with one gasping sigh, one quivering struggle,
the darling child, faithful friend, and redeemed
soul fled to the pearly gates. Wide open were
they for the pure young spirit to enter in; and
at the blessed Saviour’s feet she rested in
complete and eternal bliss.


; or, Marian’s bisit anO Iteie’s
JVfoaknrimj.
CHAPTER I.
The sky was lurid with the glow of the setting
sun, which had just disappeared from sight
behind the low hills to the west of Suimylands:
everything was still with the soft hush of even-
ing, when suddenly the sound of a horse’s hoof
O '
broke the deep calm, and there appeared hi clear
outline against the background of bush and sky
a young Australian maiden, mounted upon a
sturdy little pony, a beautiful greyhound leaping
at its side.
As if struck unconsciously by the melodious
silence, the rider reined in her horse, and for
some ten minutes allowed the spell of the time
and scene to work its potent charm upon her
spirits. “Ah me 1 ” she exclaimed at last, “if
my life would only change like those heavy


lowering clouds, which the sun has just clothed
with such soft and tender radiance ! ” But
the dark grey eyes were lit by no gleam of
hope, and the pensiye mouth still retained its
mournful expression, though the whole of the
summer sky caught the reflected glory of the
departed god of day, and golden gleams and
rosy flushings only deepened the sorrowful
influence of some hidden thought that weighed
down her aching heart.
“ I believe I was almost enjoying this lovely
sunset; at least I know it had a soothing
influence over me for an instant; oh !if only
those sweet happy times of thoughtless and
careless ease could return once more. Yet, I
hardly know, there is more real life, after such
an awakening; painful, it may be ; yet still life,
of whatever kind it is, must be better than
ignorant though possibly, blissful dreaming,
(which most certainly was mine.) For, I was
happy in a heedless impetuous, and rather
selfish manner, caring little for anything but my
books and Brownie,” and here the speaker
lovingly patted her faithful four-footed friend.


81
“ Well, I suppose we must go home, but you
may take your own pace for the rest of the way.
I have ridden all my ill-temper away I think,
and I only feel rather miserable just now.”
Nothing very heroic in that speech, dear
reader ? No, but something sadly wrong in the
training of a healthy young girl, to cause such to
be the honest expression of her inmost feelings.
Bessie Franklin was an orphan ; not an heiress
in the common acceptation of the term ; but,
being left with a moderate competence of her
own at the age of twenty (when her father
died), she was also given the entire control of
her possessions, and was thus, in a measure,
her own mistress.
Poor girl! She grieved over the death of that
indulgent but unwise parent with the bitter
abandon of one who knows not where to flee for
consolation: and when, some twelve months
afterwards, came one who pleased her girlish
fancy, and seemed to sympathise with her
terrible grief and loneliness, she gave herself up
to the sweet association with a whole-hearted
devotedness that should have met with like


unselfish affection from him whom she so
idolized.
Alas that it was not so 1 Yet wherefore
alas ? The rude awakening from that youthful
dream was but the precursor of another and
more blessed awakening, when her long un-
willing heart should be freed from its ice-bound
barriers by the beams of the Sun of Righteous-
ness, who thenceforth should be the li«-ht and
joy of her soul.
Slowly, and thinking busily, the lonely girl
neared her quiet home. It certainly was very
dull to sit down to her solitary cup of tea, and
so she thought as she entered the pretty little
room where everything had long been waiting
for the young mistress who was not wont to
tarry so long after her accustomed time. Mary,
who had been Bessie’s nurse, and all the
substitute she had ever had for her mother (who
died when her little daughter was a few days old),
still watched over her darling, and being married
to John, an old retainer of the family, the two
managed to do everything that was necessary
in the modest homestead, and dearly they loved


the orphan who had to tight her own way in
this difficult and thorny life
“ Ah, Miss Bessie, an’ ye’re safe back again ; I
thought ye were lost,” exclaimed Mary, as John
haying taken Brownie, Bessie had walked
wearily into her own little sitting room, where
tea was daintily spread. A faint gleam shone in
the girl’s eyes as she noticed her old nurse’s
anxiety, and she kindly answered —
“ I was only dreaming a little, Molly, and did
not think it was so late.” After a few more
words the faithful woman withdrew, leaving: her
? O
bonnie lassie to discuss the tempting cakes and
luscious fruits before her. Not much progress,
however, could Bessie make in that direction, for
the old wound had been touched afresh that
evening and was rankling still. With a
dissatisfied movement she pushed her plate a
little from her, and leaning her head on her
hands was soon lost in vain dreamy thoughts.
Suddenly she seemed to recollect something,
and hastily rising, looked in the usual place, and
to her surprise and evident satisfaction, found
a letter which had arrived during her absence.


Rapidly scanning its contents, her expressive
countenance brightened into a positive smile, the
first for many days; and, with a little cry of
pleasure, she rang the bell to summon Mary to
hear the good news.
“ Molly 1 Molly 1 aren’t you glad ? Dear
cousin Marian is coming next week to stay a
whole month with me. Oh ! isn’t it good of her
to leave town when everything is so gay; ‘to
cheer me up a bit,’ she says; if she only knew
how I longed for her, but I didn’t like to urge
her too much when I wrote. Go and tell John,
and ask him to look whether the pony carriage
is all nice and bright; what famous drives we’ll
have together! I feel as if a load of care were
taken off my heart, and a whole flood of
sunshine let in; ” and Bessie spoke and acted
like a bright loving impetuous girl again,
and ran down herself after Mary to hold a con-
sultation with her two humble friends as to
what could be done to enliven cousin Marian’s
eagerly welcomed visit.


CHAPTER 11.
The following Tuesday morning rose bright
and clear, with all the roseate tints of early
summer. Bessie awoke with the first streaks of
lio-ht, and, being too much excited to remain
O * 7 o
longer in bed, was soon dressed and gathering
fresh flowers wherewith to beautify the house,
and more especially the room next her own
which she had set apart for her cousin’s use.
Let me see!—mignonette, roses, sweet Alice,
maiden-hair ferns, begonias; dear, dear, how
few flowers there are ! no violets, no pansies;—
well I suppose I must do the best I can with
these: oh ! here are some fine pelargoniums and
white geraniums. And gathering the flowers
selected, the speaker placed them carefully on
a small tray, and proceeded to arrange them
with loving fingers in her own quaint, artistic
fashion; and soon bouquet specimens, and


several pretty groups in open glass dishes
formed a pleasing and grateful show.
“ There, I think that will do,” said Bessie,
gazing with pardonable pride at the effects of
her handiwork; and forthwith the} 7 were dis-
tributed in sitting and bedrooms, a visible
token of the tasteful hands that threw a soft
spell of womanly presence and thoughtfulness
everywhere they moved.
Not another touch was needed; the smallest
things possible and impossible were all arranged
and re-arranged; and yet it would be another
half-hour before the time to start in the carriage
to meet Marian at the railway-station. “ Oh,”
exclaimed Bessie, “ I know what to do; ” and
she ran out to John, saying with her quietest
manner, “ I am going to walk towards the
station, will you start in half-an-hour, then you
will overtake me just before I arrive there.”
“ Certainly, Miss Bessie ; but do you feel able
to take such a long walk ? The sun will be
very hot, and you are not strong/
“ Oh, I’ll go slowly, and. keep in the shade, I
really cannot wait any longer; mind }»u are


ready to start in good time,” and after these
words Bessie passed out through the pretty
garden into the wilder country part to the
rio-ht of the house, and for a few minutes
walked briskly on. Presently her steps grew
slower, and as she mused over the meeting
with the dear cousin she had not seen for
•many months, a curious feeling of shyness, a
half dread, a wish that it was over, came o’er
the spirit of her dreams. “ Perhaps she will
think I require a little reproving, and may
imagine her visit will be the means of doing
me good; perhaps she will be very serious and
look lectures —well I won’t stand tha^! I don’t
want to be serious, I have quite enough of that
sort of thing here when lam alone. But I
used not to feel afraid of her; perhaps it is
because we have not met for so long that the
anticipation rather unnerves me ; how kind she
was to me always when I was a lonely little
child. I remember she would take me in her
arms, and tell me that dear mamma was in
heaven looking down on her little girl and
hoping she would grow up a Christian. How


is it I did not ? Will I ever be any different
from what lam now ? Oh it would be wretched
to drag through life with this weary unsatisfied
feeling ever at my heart. Who knows ? Dear
Marian’s visit may do me good in some
way.”
Here her meditations were interrupted by
the appearance of a gentleman who bowed
gravely but kindly to the maiden, and receiving
no encouragement to the exchange of further
civilities passed on. The current of her thoughts
thus broken, Bessie again walked along more
quickly.
“ What a comfort it will be to have some
companion with me whenever I go out. Ido
dislike meeting gentlemen when I am alone.
Of course Mr. Russell is very nice, but all the
t/ 1
same I prefer not to meet him; ” and the
diffident girl gradually resumed her sauntering
musing air. A pretty picture she made in the
o’ershadowed path, the flickering rays of sun-
light shone and sparkled over her bright hair;
and the delicate summer costume, crowned
with a drooping hat that half hid the serious


face, seemed the fittest robe for the dreamy
spirit that was enthroned within.
A moment or two later the carriage was
heard, and our Bessie quickly reached the
more open drive, and seated herself in the
little vehicle quite ready to forego the pleasures
of walking for a season. And now they are
at the station; the train has just arrived, and
with an anxious eye the girl scans each face
and figure that appears. Suddenly a gentle
voice exclaims at her side—
“ What, Bessie ! You here to meet me ! How
kind of you to come; ” and turning round the
true loving glance of Marian’s tender eyes met
her view.
Bessie could only reply, “ Oh yes ! of course
I came; where is your luggage ? Come along
then, John will bring it to the carriage,” and
she led her companion over to where Brownie
was quietly standing, utterly regardless of the
shrieks of the whistle or the rushing of the
train. Soon all was comfortably arranged, and
leaving John to follow in a cart that was
coming in their direction, the two girls started


on the drive home. Not much was said during-
that short half hour, but a feeling of rest
and peace stole over Bessie’s soul, and a great
content tilled her mind, as the secret influence
of the deep but unobtrusive sympathy of her
cousin made itself felt within her.
Everything looked fresher and fairer to her
eyes than for man}' weeks past, yet, notwith-
standing her more cheerful feelings, after a
O O J
short silence, Marian was surprised to hear a
deep quivering sigh escape her companion,
and turning to look at her saw an expression
of pain and dissatisfaction clouding the young
face.
“ What was that for ? ” said she, tenderly,
yet lightly. Such a sigh surely betokens
some hidden trouble. Is it a trouble still,
Bessie darling ? ”
O
“Oh ! I was only thinking how dreadfully
I should feel after you have gone again. But
J O C 1
there, I know you will say it is very foolish
to meet troubles half-way. I will try to enjoy
your society without a thought of the loneliness
that must come afterwards.”


“ Well, dear, we’ll have a little talk about-
that by and bye. I think you have scarcely
chosen the wisest plan to accomplish the end
at which you aim; but here we are at your
pretty nest, and you must show me all the
beauties of Sunnylands.”
Bessie performed the duties of hostess with
a Graceful air, entirely free from self-conscious-
O 1 *
ness once more, and was herself surprised to
find that the effort necessary to fulfil this duty
brought with it its own reward in a feeling of
happiness at the pleasure expressed by her
cousin at every turn.


CHAPTER 111
And now, will you not tell me the other
half of the reason for that despairing sigh you
heaved on the drive home this morning ? ”
asked cousin Marian, after tea, that same
evening, when the two girls were seated by
the open window enjoying the cool breeze,
laden with the scent of flowers, that just
moved the white lace curtains, like the cares-
sing wing of a passing spirit hasting on to
perform the remainder of its mission to the
weary toilers in town and country.
“Ah ! not yet,” pleaded Bessie. “ I am
afraid you might think me very wrong and
foolish ; and, indeed, the principal reason was
just what I said at the time.”
“ Well, let us see if we can find out the
best way to treat that part of the burden
first, to begin with. I am here with you


to-night, and, so far as we can tell, in a month
we shall be separated by many miles of sea
and land.”
At this, Bessie raised a quick imploring-
glance, plainly expressing her anxiety as to
what should follow. However, she said nothing,
and her companion continued with a loving-
smile, and laying her hand caressingly on the
beautiful young head—
“ Yes, dear, I am going far away, to India,
probably ; and I could not leave my lonely
little cousin without paying her a long visit
first.”
“ Have you quite decided, then, to be a
missionary ? ” asked Bessie, almost incredu-
lously. “ Oh! how can you go to that terrible
place ? ”
“ You know why,” replied Marian, softly r.
“to show the love I bear to my best Friend
and to try to lead others to enlist under
His standard. Has my little one here made
her choice yet ? ”
But to this there was no reply, and for a
long time there was perfect stillness in the


fast-deepening twilight of the long summer
evening.
With a yearning prayer for peace and trust
to rill the clouded young spirit, the noble
Christian pleaded earnestly and even passion-
ately at the throne of Grace, while the break-
ing but still rebellious heart of the younger
Sfirl was achinsr with its load of sin and
O O
sorrow
“ Why should you go away and leave me ? ”
at last moaned Bessie. “ I am miserable and
lonely ; I need you more than those ungrate-
ful children, who will never be able to appre-
ciate you. Anybody will do for them, but
nobody can help me like you.”
Marian sighed a little at the slightly sel-
rish tenor of this speech ; but, remembering
the girl’s injudicious mode of life for over
twenty years, and that it was more her mis-
fortune than her fault that she had grown up
thus, only tenderly soothed the lonely heart
with words of patient love.
“ But, dear, you know of a far kinder, wiser
Friend than 1 could ever be, who is longing,


even entreating, that you would cast all your
care upon Him. Just let Him remove the
burden from your drooping shoulders. Don’t
try to keep it there; it is too heavy for you
to bear. And He would fain carry it for you:
He loves you so.”
“ But, Marian, I am so wicked I feel I do
not want to get rid of it.”
Just ask Him to make you willing, dear,”
“ Oh! would He,” she exclaimed, a sudden
light breaking over her face; “ would He make
me willing to be contented ? I seem to
have a right to be miserable, and yet to think
that it is very unfair that I should be de-
barred from so many of the pleasures other
girls enjoy. I don’t feel as if I deserved
to have such an unhappy life, yet I waste
my health and spirits brooding over it; and
I get tired to death thinking—thinking how
I shall ever live through it.”
“ And does that very weariness not send
you to the Saviour, who longs to heal your
wounded soul? ”
“It never has ; it only made me angry and


dissatisfied with myself and everything else.
And now I feel ashamed to go to Him after
such scornful neglect.”
“He will never despise the cry of the
contrite,” whispered Marian. “Do not put it
oft' any longer. Go to Him this very night
and yon will find wondrous comfort and
consolation.”
And Bessie’s first real prayer was offered
up on that still summer evening : the icy
barriers were thawed, and the stony heart
became one of flesh.
An hour or two later, as they were retiring
to rest, Marian clasped her cousin in a loving
embrace, saying—
“Do you think you have made any step
towards the best way of bearing one part of
your trouble, through our little talk ? ”
“ Yes,” whispered the girl, tremulously,
“ and the other part, too, I hope ; but, still,
I feel I must enjoy you as much as possible
before you leave.”
“ That is quite natural, dear; but you seem
to forget that I enjoy being with you also.”


“Do you really ? ” asked Bessie. “ Why, I
am miserable company for any one ; but I
mean to be happier now, and I hope you
will not have any reason to lament your visit
to Sunnylands.”
“ Poor, poor child,” sighed Marian, when at
length she had closed the door of her room.
M ould that I could arouse her to some warm
vital interest in life. W hat a terribly morbid un-
natural state she is in: analysing her own feelings
and fighting against her bright, happy disposition,
as if happiness were utterly denied to her.”
And Bessie; do not ridicule her when you
read what her first act was when she found
herself alone.
A little desk lay open on a small table
beside the white-draped bed; and, leaning over
it, she extracted from thence a lock of black
shining wavy hair. Looking at it for an
instant in the old dreamy fashion, a mist of
unshed tears filled the gray eyes ; but in
another instant the once precious and now
only remaining link of him who had slighted
her fresh girlish heart was destroyed.


Then, throwing herself upon her knees, an
agonizing prayer went up to Heaven lor lor-
giveness, purity and peace ; and then, in very
exhaustion, the over-wrought girl crept into
bed, and slept deeply and unbrokenly till the
rays of the early morning sun awoke her to
a new, a higher and a happier life.


CHAPTER IV.
The following morning Bessie was standing
at the window of the breakfast-room waiting-
for her cousin, when the latter noiselessly
entered.
What arrested her attention at the first step
through the open door ? Was it the uncon-
scious grace of the slender figure in its snowy
morning dress, or the sweet fair loveliness of
the girlish face ?
Nay: something deeper than these; it was the
subdued, yet lofty expression of the thoughtful
countenance, the far-seeing look of the clear
eyes, the noble purjjose that shone in them as
the vei\ reflex of her awakened soul; and as
Marian looked spell-bound she felt in her inmost
heart that a mighty power for good lay latent in
the young and hitherto unsanctified energies of
her warm-hearted cousin.


Bessie soon realized the fact that she was not
alone, and turning met her guest with a loving
greeting.
“ You look so much better this morning,
Bessie ; have you been up long ?
“ Yes, a good while. How did you sleep ?
I hope you were comfortable.
“ Very, thank you, and I slept well. I see
you have been cultivating some faint roses,’
remarked Marian, touching the delicate cheek
that certainly glowed with a slight pink flush.
“ Have I ? ” said Bessie, blushing, “ I used to
have a good colour always —before
here she paused abruptly.
“ Yes, dear, I know; and soon you will be a
blooming rosy girl again; the sunny-hearted
mistress of Sunnylands.”
“ I shall be busy for an hour or two this
morning; will you take a walk in the garden ?
or if you would like to write letters there is
everything you recpnre in this da\ enport, and
we could post them when we drive out after
luncheon;” said Bessie, after breakfast had
been disposed of.


“ I will write lirst; and as you know I am
preparing to start for India, you will readily
understand that I found it necessary to bring
some sewing with me, so when we are at liberty
perhaps you could find some too, and keep me
company.
“ Oh! ” cried Bessie, “do let me help you ! 1
am longing so to begin doing something for
somebody else besides myself, and it would be so
pleasant to think of having done even the
smallest thing for you, when you are far away.”
“ I shall certainly not refuse your kind offer,
and there are several little articles I want made
that I know of old your skilful fingers will
model more tastefully than any of my other
friends, I cannot spare time for them myself,
and shall have to depend on either your’s or
someone else’s good offices if I am to get them
at all.”
Away tripped Bessie, and fairly astonished
Molly with her cheery, merry ways, and thought-
ful consideration; hither and thither she sped,
putting finishing touches everywhere, and
making final arrangements for the afternoon’s


drive; and when at length she found time to
step up to Marian’s pleasant room, and inquire
whether she was ready to receive her; a thrill
of genuine happiness diffused itself through
her being.
Yen' precious were the mornings which, from
this time to the close of that long-remembered
visit, the cousins spent together, sewing, and
talking of many sweet and comforting subjects.
Somehow or other the conversation generally-
veered round from ordinary topics, first to the
engrossing theme of India, then to that ot the
Christian life, and Marian was well fitted to
guide and sympathize with the inexperienced,
but now thoroughly earnest, seeker after
righteousness.
O
Bessie had many doubts and fears ; sometimes
of weakness and despondency, some vain re-
cfrettings against which to fight, but gradually
o o o
and surely a more settled calm stole over her
spirit, and a fuller trust pervaded her soul.
One afternoon, about a week after Marian s
arrival, the girls were taking a drive through
one of the loveliest parts in that district, and in


the midst of an enthusiastic burst of admiration
at some delicate fern fronds, which were growing
luxuriantly beneath a rock, through which a
tiny rill of water was trickling, they were
considerably startled by hearing a voice exclaim,
“Turn back quickly, there is an enormous
snake a few yards in front, I am just going to
kill it.” Scarcely waiting to thank the warner,
they did as they were advised, but would not
proceed far without waiting to express their
gratitude.
Bessie, of course, had recognized the voice,
and it was with a very frank bright smile that
she extended her hand, and then turned to
introduce her cousin.
“ Miss Warner, Mr. Russell, I suppose I should
say Dr. Russell,” she continued, “as I believe
you took your degree in England, and are now
a qualified practitioner.”
The gentleman bowed politely, and was
evidently surprised at the cordiality of the
young lady, who had always been so cold and
forbidding in her manner when they had
previously met.


However, with perfect good breeding, he gave
no token of his surprise, and after a few casual
remarks, and assuring them that he had finally
despatched his snakeship, bowed respectfully
and turned off into a foot-path that led to the
village a few miles to the east of Sunnylands.
“ Is that the Mr. Russell who went home three
or four years ago to obtain his diploma ? ”
inquired Marian.
“ Yes! Did I not tell you ? I had quite
forgotten him when he returned, but he re-
membered me distinctty. He is much liked by
the people whom he attends in this neighbour-
hood ; but I never cared to meet him; in fact,
I know it was wrong and selfish, yet I always
avoided him whenever I could. It seemed a
sorry welcome to give one who had been away
so long, did it not ? ”
“ Well, you need not treat him so distantly
now that he has rendered us both such good
service.”
“ Ah! that arrow struck the mark exactly.
The danger from which he had saved her
beloved cousin would always kindle a spark of


lovinsr remembrance in Bessie s heart; and
o
Marian knew it; and she longed in her true
tender soul that such a man—strong, brave, and
withal an earnest Christian —might win the
woman’s love of the susceptible girl who was
so alone in the world.”
She said nothing on the subject, but whether
emboldened by the presence of another, or
attracted with fresh power by the frank gleam
of Bessie’s soft eye, certain it is that Dr. Russell
managed in some manner, known only to him-
self, to meet the young ladies nearly every after-
noon for the next fortnight, sometimes on horse-
back, when he would ride along with them for
a mile or two, sometimes on foot, when the
pony carriage would stop and the trio enjoy
a few minutes’ cordial chat, and at the end of
that time he managed one afternoon to be just
at the gate of Sunnylands when they were
returning home to tea.
O
My readers may imagine what followed. With
a simple word of invitation Bessie welcomed
him to share their repast, and afterwards they
naturally took a stroll in the pretty garden,


and had an hour’s very enjoyable intercourse,
harmonized by a little music and singing, in
which all three excelled. Marian’s sweet soprano,
Bessie’s plaintive alto, and Dr. Russell’s rich
bass accorded well; and when the guest de-
parted at an early hour, the cousins felt and
expressed the pleasure they had enjoyed in his
society.
And now Marian’s much blessed visit was fast
drawing to a close. She was inexpressibly
thankful to see the change that was passing
over Bessie, and a hope was dawning in her
heart that soon the poor girl would have a
strong, faithful helpmeet to sustain her faltering
steps, and lead her up to grander heights, to
nobler deeds, and more holy living.
But this was not to be yet. Bessie had to
learn to depend wholly on that unseen, but
most tender Friend, who was able to supply all
her need. And with a childlike trust and
confiding affection, her path to holiness grew
fairer day by day, until the name of Bessie
Franklin became a synonym for bright unselfish
devotion through all the countryside.


“ Good-bye, my Guardian Angel! ” tearfully
whispered the sorrowing girl, as she tore her-
self away from the vessel in which Marian was
about to sail.
“God bless you, darling! and keep you for
aye unspotted by the world,” were her cousin s
last words. And slowly the vessel moved from
the wharf, and gradually faded from sight. But
the fruits of Marian’s mission to Sunnylands
will never fade ; and long years after two loving
hearts would oft commune, with tear-dimmed
yet shining eyes, of one who had pointed the
way to the sparkling rills of life and happi-
ness, and thank the Lord for his unspeakable
goodness in breaking the barriers of selfish
dreaming which had encased the young heart,
and in opening the flood-gates of light, whose
brilliant beams had been the means of “ Bessie’s
Awakening.”


jr* ffloynQe of t jrt orinit.
* , ; {FROM SYDNEY TO LONDON, 1881.)
A sky of softest azure and a sea of deepest blue,
A stately vessel riding, manned by a gallant crew;
The slanting rays of autumn athwart the
waters stole,
Pouring floods of radiance o’er many a grieving
soul.
Scarcely a ripple roughens the smiling deep
profound,
Scarcely a zephyr whispers, as on w r e swiftly
bound ;
But calm, serene and peaceful, old Ocean
gently laves
Our giant ship’s strong, iron sides with coy
and playful waves.
Our brave commander watches, his eye with
pleasure bright,
Fair Lady Moon forth stepping to crown the
beauteous night.


Orion’s brilliant belt with diamond brightness
beams,
And Austral Land’s bright Southern Cross
peculiar glory streams,
As on we glide, and life seems fair as
fleeting summer dreams.
O
The morning breaks with rosy light and
violet’s changeful hue,
The golden God of Day shines forth upon
the misty blue ;
The mists arise ; the vast expanse in glim-
mering sunlight glows,
The salt breeze through the yards and masts
with gathering freshness blows.
The land recedes as on we speed, (swiftly
and yet with ease),
And plough the unfathomed depths of the
smiling southern seas ;
Till bonnie New South Wales like a fair dream
fades away,
And evening shadows deepen upon the second
day.


Night comes amain, the vessel heaves
With ocean’s deepening swell ;
The mighty force of water weaves
Of power a magic spell.
Right gallantly onr ship rides on
’Gainst baffling wind and wave ;
vEolns makes her proudly don
Her colours true and brave.
The whistling gale screams hoarse and wild
The foam-capped billows roar,
The wooer, once serene and mild,
Now nears a captious shore.
With anger stirred, he madly rears
His grand, embattled front ;
And like otfended rage appears,
Or beauty’s wild affront.
Rejoicing in the glorious blast,
I trod the uncertain deck,
Clinging to friendly beam or mast,
When forced my steps to check.


But heavier still the swell arose
And fiercer blew the gale ;
White sheets of sweeping billows close
Round sloping deck and rail;
Like frighted ghosts some gentle fair
Reclined, on couches lashed, —
Though soon e’en these no longer dare
Where swirling spray-clouds dashed.
Still on we sped, all undismayed,
’Mid crashing roar and strain;
Our trusty ship the helm obeyed,
Like thing with heart and brain.
Morn rose, night fell; th’ uneasy hours
On leaden wings dragged by,
Till near the land-locked sunny bowers
Of Semephore we hie.
Oh, blessed rest! cessation sweet
From ocean’s restless roll;
With glad assurance tread our feet
Earth’s firm unyielding whole.


Yet long we may not linger here,
In blissful careless ease ;
But, scorning craven doubt and fear,
Confront the hostile seas.
And now to fresh, young Austral Land,
We hid a long farewell 1
And turn to seek a classic strand
Where art and learning dwell.
Farewell, rich gem! (unpolished yet), —
A future shall be thine
When all the world around thee met,
Shall see thy virtues shine.
Bay followed day, and still the swelling deep
Ceased not its booming, thunderous waves to
sweep;
Perpetual motion ruled our ocean home,
Forbidding health and longed for rest to come.
But when the treacherous land was safely
passed,
And through th’ unfretted sea we hastened
fast,


A deep, untroubled calm stole slowly on,
And sea and sky their peaceful livery don,
All through the happy weeks, alternate calm,
And blustering gales still found us safe from
harm.
Sometimes the waters like a mirror gleamed,
As ’neath a tropic sky we idly dreamed ;
And with a brilliance elsewhere rarely seen
The sun went down in gold and crimson sheen.
One night s sweet beauty ne’er shall I forget;—
The orb of day in passing glory set,
Eve’s curtain fell; and many a twinkling star,
Stole softly forth, to view the scene from far.
Across the bosom of the foam flecked sea,
A troop of moonbeams danced with sportive
glee;
1 be silver crescent, like Hope’s mystic bow,
Spread arrows tipped with light in glittering
row;
\N bite cloudlets shone like thoughts from fairy-
land,
Illumined by tair Luna’s ’chanting band.
Lit by the tender, tremulous beauty, pale,
Most ’witching sight, a wet and flowing sail,


Across the shimmering track of radiance sped.
A dash of white wings all too quickly ded.
With feelings touched, and spirit quite subdued,
The swiftly changing scene I mutely viewed;
Till in the darkness of the solemn night,
The young moon vanished from our ravished
sight.
Twere vain to tell how many glorious days,
And brilliant nights called forth our ardent
O
praise;
As through the Indian Ocean’s pathless waste,
Ricrht on to Babel Mandeb’s strait we haste.
O
There rugged cliffs the mouth guard narrowly
And rocky islands stud the famed Red Sea,
And soon we neared the old historic land,
The grand old hills of sacred Scripture scanned;
Anon that mighty work of modern art *
That brought two seas in union, once apart,
Meets our astonished gaze ; and on we glide
Where solid land erst checked the advancing tide.
Our noble ship a boating city seemed,
As through straight sandy banks we slowly
steamed;
* Tf e sue/ Canal.


Till, widening out, a novel sight appears ;
Upon a placid lake, a fleet nprears
Tall, tapering masts, and still at anchor rides,
Till past the narrow course the ‘ Orient ’ glides.
Time fails to tell how faded Africa’s shore,
And drear Arabia’s wastes are seen no more ;
How Port was reached, and what confusing
cries
And strange, new life assailed our ears and
eyes.
Then gladly we welcome the kingly sea,
Whose blue waves sparkling play
Though “ white squalls ” test the mariner’s skill
In difficult night and day.
What beauty and strength crown the world-
known bay
Where Naples proudly shines !
W hat towering mountains point the way,
To Herculaneum shrines!


See ! there Pompeii in heaps lies hid,
’Neath burning lava streams ;
There grand old works the Romans did,
And Virgil’s dark tomb gleams.
o o
These viewed, with a sigh of contentful rest
We turn to our floating home,
Our haven of refuge; with added zest
For a life on the salt sea foam.
Our captain harassed by anxious thought.
And nights of wakeful care,
With mind and body overwrought,
Is wooed to slumbers rare.
Sleep sweet and deep, to waken fresh.
Revived by Nature’s balm ;
God watch thee, and thy soul refresh
' 1/
Alike, with heavenly calm.
' V
Ayesleep when duty’s task is o'er,
With perfect, well-earned right;
And One above, now, as of yore,
Will guide life’s helm aright.


Away to the west, away, away,
We bound with a freedom lisfht,
O J
While freshening breezes toss high the spray.
As Italy fades from sight.
But hark to the sadly solemn tones
That fall on the thoughtful ear !
Mid laughter and mirth steal the dying
moans
Of a youth, with no kindred near,
To soothe his last anguish, or press a fond
kiss
On the white, sculptured, marble brow
Oh! painfully, wildly, his lone heart doth
miss
A mother’s dear sympathy now.
And still through the radiant, starlighted eve,
Right on to the fair midnight moon,
The parting soul lingers, as loth yet to leave
This fair earth in its young springtide
bloom.


But as the pale stars slowly melt from the
sky,
And the moon fadeth ghostly and white,
The freed spirit burst from its prison; to fly
To the fair realms of unfading lisfht.
o O
Lovingly, mournfully, tend the still form,
Scatter white roses around.
’Mid sunshine or starshine, mid storm or mid
calm
May we alike ready be found.
With deep-felt emotion and passionate tears
We wept o’er the vanished young life,
As hollowly slipt from its flag-covered bier
The clay casket, late scene of death’s
strife.
One long solemn plunge, that echoed again
As the slight form sank deep in the sea,
Then round to her course on the shining blue
main
Swung the noble ship, lightly and free.


Then onward we speed, till in the low west
Looms a fortress, all England’s great pride;
No hearts are unmoved, no dull eyes at rest,
As close by Gibraltar we glide.
Past sunny slopes of verdant Spain,
Past Portugal’s bold coast,
To Biscay gales, where once again
Old Neptune dares to boast,
Past Eddystone and Lizard Point,
To Plymouth swift we ply,
And there the bonny English hills
Meet our delighted eye.
Again we breast the salt sea foam,
’Mid channel’s treacherous wiles,
But mist and fog in dreamland roam,
And Nature brightly smiles.
The English Garden, fresh and fair.
Round Ventnor sweetly blooms ;
Past Beachy Head, the Foreland pair,
Till the vast City looms,


In giant strength and hurtling strife,
Before our spell-bound gaze ;
We scarce dare leave our ocean life
To tread earth’s blinding maze.
God of all wisdom, power, and might,
God of all varied ranks ;
For countless blessings day and night
Accept our heartfelt thanks.
Be the dim future fan’ or dark,
We know Thou’lt safely guide ;
With Thee our frail, slight human barque,
Will stem life’s roughest tide.
THE END.
CITY OF LONDON PUBI-ISHINO COMPANY, MKOADWAY, E.C.


*
.


3 1508 01624444 9


'
•V
■■ -
.
.


