

r.V
*■ ' t
p/e
uca W: m
aw) ms cmms): mmvMs


♦ ’ ' . *
• ' ' - . ‘ • ' ■ >. . „ •'*
. • •■ '3
. • - .
.1 , '
| '
■ ' \ . ■ . 1 , —
■* * ~ —
#•
' ' ' __
-
.
e - __ „ ~ '
- ' - ■ •
- ■ * s »
I . . . - ' . .-. , V
* .
* r 1 ‘ -*•*' __ * -■ •*■ * -
,
■ ■ i
' ?
••
- - , , - ’ ■ . ■ - „ * •• •: —
* / . s - . - .
' . £ ' . ■ ■: ' . ' ’ ■ '
‘ t - , ' y
" \ - • . • - -
-•r
*
.


Evxma Pin aw
KRAWWSS BY
JOYCE J/INES
I v —i i—
* I .
aw) ms mmzAVvmmx


I Q)
CHAPTER 1.
Lazy the Pig was sleeping.
Lying there on his puffy silk
cushion, with his trotters snug-
gled up and the curliest smile on
his fat face, he looked the most
contented pig in the world.
“Contentment”! That’s what
the man who made him years
and years ago had written on
the flat part of him —the part
that lay on the cushion. T lhe man had written HIS name, too:
“CONTENTMENT”
MARCIUS DOW.
Marcius Dow is a funny name ... but he doesn’t come into the story.
Neither does the Little Girl who owned the Pig, and who called him “Lazy”.
Because now the Little Girl is grown up and over the other side of the world.
No, Marcius Dow doesn’t come into it, or the Little Girl over the other
side of the world, or even the Auctioneer.
The Auctioneer was little and dark and quick, and he held Lazy up in
his brown hand, and called him “LOT SEVENTY THREE”, and told every-
body what a marvellous pig he was—which, of course, he WAS—and then
he cried out:
“What am I offered for this unique porcelain pig?” And that’s all that
Lazy heard. For after that he shut tight his half-open eye and went to sleep
again on his cushion, held high in the brown hand of the Auctioneer. He
didn’t even hear the Auctioneer cry:
“Going, Going, GON E!”
and bring down his hammer with a sharp BANG.
As you know, Marcius Dow doesn’t come into the story; neither does the
Little Girl on the other side of the world, nor the Auctioneer, nor even the
Packer or the Carrier’s Man.
All the Packer and the Carrier’s Man had to do was to pack Lazy the
Pig in straw shavings and put him and his cushion in a wooden box and drive
him to Mrs. Masterton’s house in the Square.
Mrs. Masterton’s maid, Moira, let
him in when the bell rang; and, when at
last Mrs. Masterton puffed in, very red in
the face after her exciting afternoon at
the Auction Sale, her maid Moira took
Lazy out of the box, shook his puffy silk
cushion till she was sure no straw shav-
ings were clinging to it, put Lazy on his
cushion on the table in the scullery and
then stood there looking at him.


So very fast asleep was he that he hadn’t heard even a whisper of
Moira’s question to Mrs. Masterton: p UA
“Where shall I put him, Madam?”
and he hadn’t heard even a whisper of Mrs. Masterton’s answer:
“Put him? Oh, I don’t know. Anywhere Anywhere Put him
. .. put him in ... in the CHINESE ROOM!” wneie * • • • ™ him
K c y I
17 SEP 19^
There she stood, her arms Dent, her
hands against the apron strings at her waist.
There she stood and looked at Lazy. And, as
she looked at him, she smiled. And then her
face creased up and she began to chuckle.
4 P • . the ckuck l e > Lazy’s eye opened just a
llir tiny an d heard her say:
II Jg fefcft Jr “Well, did you ever see the like, Cook?
lk What She’ll be bringing home next, goodness
only knows * A Pfe on a cushion! Well, for
gf mV-JK /IF mercy’s sake! A pig on a cushion! Look at
thermite of him, will you, look at the smile
~ x, La . z y had shut his eye again then. Which
was a pity. Because if he hadn the might have been spared the fright of his
CHAPTER 2.
T i,_^ l zy wri S£kd his shoulders round and opened his mouth and yawned.
Then he grunted contentedly. He didn’t know quite where he was; but it
was warm in here, and he was lying on his own soft puffy cushion and he
was very, very comfortable. Much too comfortable and sleepy to tother
Es did “ "•
in th^queerest^vay! 18 " aS dr ° PPing ° ff ’ Ws pink piggy nose tinkled “P
Sniff? Sniff? Sniff?
He’d never smelt anything like this before ... never.
Dead leaves?


\S •Softs' ""'
H
>&r .*"J
1 1
* Sv, v
No, it wasn’t that.
Smoke?
No, it wasn’t that.
Scent like the Mother of the Little Girl
who Owned Him used to use?
No, it wasn’t that.
It certainly was the queerest smell he’d
ever smelt in his life.
It was no use. He couldn t POSSIBLY
go to sleep again with this strange smell danc-
ing round his nose.
He’d better open his eye and look round.
He opened his eye.
And then he turned his head and opened
the other eye—the eye that was generally
lying against the cushion.
And he lifted his trotters, and his ears
pricked up stiffly. He went hot and cold all
. • i •1 _ Z m a *vt ft rw Am
over. His mouth was wide open in amazement, in terror.
WHAT WAS IT?
What was that queer thing that was staring down at him?
WHAT WAS IT? .
It was golden-red in most places, except on its front P art ‘{f
nose, where it was browny-black, as if the wood was trying to show tlmiugh
And it had wings like the wings of a great bird,and Orotoel
hands that were spread out at a level with its head. And there were gomen
bangles round its wrists and round its ankles. It had •‘Hie sticky up ears
and the face of a fierce man. Its lower lip was very long, and its smile
fiercer than the frown of most creatures. .
From it came that strange smell that had awakened a smeU mix
up of heavy scent and dead leaves and smoke and all sorts of othei things.
As Lazy stared up at the strange
creature, it slowly bowed its head three
times, and then it began to talk, and its
voice was deep and slow and rumbly:
“I am the Golden Eagle,” it said. “I
come from the Temple of Loy Yan, in the
Western Hills of China, where for nine
hundred years I have watched people come
and go. Many people have I seen and many
strange sights. But never before have 1
seen a pig on a cushion.”
“It . it’s comfortable on the cushion,”
stammered Lazy.. “It . . . it’s a good place
to sleep.”


M p
y v\
The Golden Eagle’s eyes goggled at him.
“Where I come from,” the rumbly voice
reproved him, “where I come from it is usual for a
person to introduce himself before making conver-
sation with another person.”
“Ohhh! I’m sorry,” said Lazy. He
was wide awake now—in fact his trotters
were quite tingly with wideawakeness
and his ears stood up very stiffly indeed
as he tried to remember just how the
Golden Eagle had introduced HlMself, so
that he could copy him. It seemed
tremendously important that he should
say exactly the right thing.
“I am Lazy the Pig,” he said at last.
“I come from . . . well . . . first of all
Marcius Dow made me—only he doesn’t come into the story
me ‘CONTENTMENT’ .... And then there was the Little Girl who Owned
Me. She called me ‘Lazy’, only she doesn’t come into the story either, be-
cause she’s grown up now and on the other side of the world. And then I was
put away in a cupboard, and. . . .”
“I suppose the Cupboard doesn’t come into the story either,” rumbled the
Golden Eagle.
“I don’t suppose it does,” admitted Lazy. “Neither does the Auctioneer
—although he called me a ‘Unique Porcelain Pig’.”
“That,” said the Golden Eagle, “is most interesting.” His voice was quite
pleasant as he said it, and his face was much more friendly.. “MOST in-
teresting,” he repeated. “A Unique Porcelain Pig. I must tell the others
about that.”
“The others?” squeaked Lazy.
“Certainly,” said the Golden Eagle. “There are many interesting people
for you to meet to-night. If you will be so kind as to
stand up.”
“But I CAN’T stand up,” protested Lazy. “I’m
sorry. I’ve got a flat part that rests on the cushion, and
I can only lie down and sleep. I’m sorry.”
“That cannot be,” said the Golden Eagle importantly.
“That cannot be.” And he moved his hands that had
been above his head and he said a few words that Lazy
couldn’t understand at all and then he clapped his hands
together three times. And, would you believe it, there
was Lazy standing up on his trotters like any ordinary
pink pig, with two sides alike. And there was the
cushion lying on the mantelpiece with the mark of where
his body had been.
Lazy grunted in amazement and excitement.


' '■%. I 13 ISiSafeM
This was certainly a Magician, this Golden Eagle.
But, thought Lazy, that wasn’t to be wondered at. One could learn a lot
of magic in nine hundred years, especially in a Chinese temple.
“Now,” rumbled the Golden Eagle, “Now, Unique Porcelain Pig, if you
are ready, FOLLOW ME!”
CHAPTER 3.
Lazy the Pig felt funnier than he had ever felt in his life. Can’t YOU
imagine what it would be, if you’d been lying on a cushion always, opening
and shutting one eye just when you felt like it and having a flat side that
rested on the cushion . . . and then suddenly having no flat side, but being
able to walk about on four trotters just like any ordinary pig in a pigsty?
And having to walk along a mantelpiece, too!
Lazy was frightened he’d fall off.
But, after a few steps, he began to feel quite safe, and then he looked
around him.
It really was an extraordinary place. Wherever he looked there were
strange faces, and all the strange faces seemed to be staring at him.
He trotted a little more quickly, so as to keep close to the Golden Eagle.
Among all these strange creatures the Golden Eagle was beginning to feel
like an old friend. He couldn’t believe that just a little while ago he’d been
frightened of him.
“First,” said the Golden Eagle in his rumbly voice, “first you must call
on the Mandarin.”
Lazy looked puzzled.
“A mandarin’s a little orange, isn’t it?”
“A Mandarin,” he said, “is NOT a little orange. He’s a very important
Chinese gentleman who bows all the time.”
“Why does he bow all the time?” asked Lazy.
“Sssh!” whispered the Golden Eagle. “It is usual where I come from for
a person to refrain from asking too many questions. Here is the Mandarin
now. Be ready to bow politely.”
The Golden Eagle bowed three times, and then moved to the back of the


Jm hEw*
AHmnHfik
4 ’ 4 ’■ ■ iKI® .*-
mantelpiece. With one hand he waved to
Lazy to step forward.
Lazy stepped forward, his trotters
trembling.
The Mandarin, sitting up there on his
high chair that was like a throne, looked
so very important. He wore a hat some-
thing like a basin upside down, and on the
top of the hat was a round shiny knob. He had ever so many
coats on. You could see bits of them—brightly coloured
long coats —peeping one from under the other. They made
the Mandarin look very fat and very rich and very important
indeed.
“Bow,” the Golden Eagle reminded Lazy in a rumbly
whisper. “Bow three times and introduce yourself.”
Lazy bowed three times in a rather wobbly way. He
couldn’t take his eyes for long from the Mandarin’s head,
which bowed and bowed all the time.
“Introduce yourself,” rumbled the Golden Eagle again.
“I ... lam Lazy the Pig, and I come from ... we 11....” He was going
to start all the story again, but to his relief the Golden Eagle finished up the
introduction.
“Honourable Wong Ho,” he said politely, “This creature may seem to you
of no account, but indeed he is a pig of quality and worthy to meet a gentle-
man of the House of Wong. For the Auctioneer who sold him described him
as a Unique Porcelain Pig.”
The head of the Mandarin bowed quickly and excitedly.
“A Unique Porcelain Pig,” he repeated. “A distinguished and honour-
able title. UNIQUE PORCELAIN PIG! Welcome, Unique Porcelain Pig.
lam happy to meet you. Most happy. I hope you will enjoy your visit, not
only to this humble representative of the House of Wong, but to the lesser
creatures who throng around him.”
“I’m sure I shall,” beamed Lazy, his pink face glowing with pleasure.
“Oh, I’m sure I shall.”
CHAPTER 4.
The conversation between Lazy and the Mandarin was interrupted by
the most extraordinary noise—or rather several noises all joined into one.
Lazy pricked up his ears, trying to make out what it was. It sounded like a
big trumpet, and a number of little trumpets,
some of which made quite a big noise and
others just a thin squeak.
“It seems,” said the Golden Eagle, “that
Mr. Elephant and his family want to make


your acquaintance. If the Honourable Wong will excuse us we shall go on our
way.” , . . ,
The Mandarin nodded his head politely—or rather Lazy imagined it was
politely* because, as Wong Ho was nodding his head all the time, it was aim-
cult to know just what each nod meant.
The Golden Eagle bowed his head three times to Mr. Wong, and Lazy
bowed his head three times, and the Mandarin bowed HIS head at least thirty-
three times before Lazy and the Golden Eagle moved in the direction from
which the trumpet sounds had come.
There at the edge of the mantelpiece stood a family of Elephants—-un-
usual-looking Elephants with tremendously big ears and very wrinkly legs.
They were dark red in colour and flecked with gold. And, against the gleam-
ing darkness of their bodies their ivory tusks showed out very white indeed.
They were all sizes, from a particularly large Father Elephant to a tiny Baby
one ... and they were all trumpeting away as loudly as their sizes would let
them; and all stretching their short necks to get a better look at Lazy the
Pig.
As Lazy and the Golden Eagle reached the group of Elephants, the
Baby one, who had been standing right on the very edge of the mantelpiece,
suddenly started to topple.
Quickly his Mother stretched out her trunk to catch
him.
But it was too late.
Over he fell, turning head over heels in the air ... over and
over ... until he landed on the rug by the fender.
ror they stood on the mantelpiece,
Elephants and Lazy the Pig and the
Motionless with horror
watching him ... all the Eh
Golden Eagle.
Even Wong Ho the Mandarin had got down from his high
chair that was like a throne and was standing at the edge of
the mantelpiece nodding his head from side to side, aghast at
the dreadful accident that had occurred.
Down below on the rug by the fender the Little Elephant
lay very still.
Up there on the mantelpiece
they all stood silently, looking
down at him.
It was the nimbly voice
of the Golden Eagle that
broke the silence:
“First aid!” he cried.
“First Aid! Dragons to the
rescue!”


times
CHAPTER 5.
) Up the mantel-
piece came hurry-
ing two writhing,
curling, twisting Dragons. They were
green and they were fierce, and from
their open mouths came clouds of smoke —smoke that smelt
strangely of the mysterious East.
“What’s that funny smell?” asked Lazy.
“It is usual..began the Golden Eagle. Lazy supposed
he was going to say the bit about refraining from asking ques-
tions —but then he changed his mind.
“Incense,” he explained. “Incense is the most important
thing for first-aiding fallen elephants.”
“Oooh!” said Lazy. He was going to ask another question,
but the Golden Eagle was much too busy to listen.
“Come,” he said to Lazy. “Prepare to fly down.”
“FLY DOWN!” exclaimed Lazy. “WHAT? ME?”
“Everybody knows,” rumbled the Golden Eagle, “that Pigs
Might Fly.”
He lifted his strange hands and said a few words that
Lazy couldn’t understand at all; then he clapped his hands three
Lazy felt a queer pricking on his back, as though some-
thing strange was working its way through.
“Wings!” The Golden Eagle nodded in a satisfied way.
“A fine airworthy pair of wings. Now, Unique Porcelain Pig, TRY \OUR
WINGS!”
“Ohhh, Nooo!” cried Lazy in a terrified voice; but the Golden Eagle took
no notice.
“Dragons, prepare for flight!” he commanded.
The Golden Eagle spread his own huge wings, and the Dragons spread
theirs, and Lazy, to his surprise, found himself moving his own fat shoulders.
And, before he could say “Turniptops” there he was in the air, flying down
with the others.
It was a marvellous feeling, flying through the air
a free, glorious
feeling.
But he didn’t have long
to enjoy it. For, in just a
few seconds, he had landed
with the others on the
by the fender.


CThe Golden Eagle knelt down,
and felt the Little Elephant’s
e said importantly, just as though he
vere a Great Doctor, “Ahhh! The
cover.” He made signs to the Dragons
;d.
ily Lazy gave a cry of horror,
ed toward him, the Dragons and the
;ried Lazy. “OHHHH, LOOKKKKK!”
le rug by the fender


J)
f
There
“Hold the tusks, Unique Porcelain Pig,” he com-
manded. “Hold the tusks .. . SO.”
Lazy held the tusks in his fat trotters, very care-
fully and very straight. And he watched with wonder
as the Golden Eagle once again lifted his strange
hands, once again said those few words he couldn’t
understand at all, and once again clapped his hands
three times.
And, would you believe it, all of a sudden the tusks
flew from Lazy’s trotters and went back into exactly
their right places in the Little Elephant’s face. And
there they stayed, tight and cosy, one each side of his
trunk, as if they’d never been out at all.
This was certainly a Magician, thought Lazy, this
Golden Eagle . . . this wonderful Golden Eagle who
was his friend.
lay the Little Elephant on the rug near the fender, with his tusks
again where they belonged, but lying very quiet and still indeed.
“Dragons,” commanded the Golden Eagle. “Dragons! The time has
come to first-aid the Fallen Elephant!”
The Dragons moved along until there they were one each side of the
Little Elephant. And then they began to puff. They puffed and they blew,
and the smoke of the incense poured from their nostrils, till Lazy thought he
would be choked with it.
But the Golden Eagle didn’t seem to mind it at all.
Again he nodded his head in a satisfied way, keeping his round eyes all
the time fixed on the Little Elephant, and keeping his strange hands raised
above his head.
And in a few moments the Little Elephant began to move.
It was just a little movement at first, and the Golden Eagle cried:
“More incense! More! Dragons, give MORE!”
The Dragons puffed and blew harder than ever, so hard that Lazy thought
they might burst into flames any minute.
But they didn’t.
It’s surprising the amount of puffing and blowing a Chinese Dragon can
manage.
Suddenly the Little Elephant began to shake. He shook and shook, all
his flabby bits wobbling like jellies. . . and then at last he rolled over
and got shakily to his feet.
The Golden Eagle made a sign to the
Dragons to stop puffing and blowing; and they
lay there on the rug looking very tired after
all their exertions.
“Now,” said the Golden Eagle; “now we
must devise a way of transporting the Little
Elephant once again to the mantelpiece.”


Lazy pulled the strings from round his neck j\a
and spread them out on the rug in front of him. JJ
And he sat there and thought. f A \ JSlfek
He was trying to remember back a long ) \
way—to the time when the Father of the Little
Girl Who Owned Him had come home from the f \
y f Hff |||||
Mr\7\
4 7T\ \ r iTl
/ ■ • /a// ]W //
f jj\ y \ \
W pp W 7\ ~a y') 1 n X si||s jggi
/
(/
“Devise?” repeated Lazy. “Transporting?”
“Think of,” translated the Golden Eagle. “Getting.”
He didn’t say “It is usual” this time, which Lazy thought
was a Good Sign.
“Ohhh,” he said.
And then after a while he suggested:
“Couldn’t you grow wings on him like you did on me?”
“Certainly not. For one thing he’s much too sick to
fly, and for another, don’t for one moment imagine that
I grow wings on everybody who wants them. Consider
yourself highly honoured, Unique Porcelain Pig.”
“Ohhh, I do,” said Lazy.
“Well?” rumbled the Golden Eagle, “Well? lam waiting for you to
Think of a Way.”
CHAPTER 7.
Lazy the Pig was thinking.
He was walking slowly up and down the rug by the fender, on his hind
trotters. His fore trotters were folded behind him, and his head was bent
in thought. His eyes were half closed.
And then he saw something that made them open wide.
It was a piece of frayed string at the end of the rug.
A piece of frayed string!
Lazy leaned down and pulled at the string. It come away in his trotter
a long, thick strand. He pulled again. Another strand came away. He
put the strands round his neck and pulled and pulled. And soon round his
neck there were dozens and dozens of strands of thick string.
He sat down on his haunches on the rug.
The Golden Eagle walked over and looked down at him. He seemed as
if he were about to ask a question and then decided not to interrupt. He
went back again to the Little Elephant.
Lazy pulled the strings from round his neck
and spread them out on the rug in front of him.


-> (n)
Sea. He was a sailor, and sailors, as
you know, are wizards at tying
knots. There is a special way of
tying knots that few people but
sailors DO know.
Lazy the Pig had often watched
this Sailor-Father doing it. And he
remembered. Yes, HE REMEM-
BERED.
He picked up two pieces of string in his trotters
and began to join them together. Yes, that was right.
That was the right way. As he worked, he became used
to tying, and the knots just went into place as quickly
as winking.
In almost no time at all there before him lay a
splendid hammock, all joined together with perfect
sailor’s knots. At each end was a long loop, and in the
middle of each side there was a loop, too.
Lazy was pinker than ever with pride as he looked
at his handiwork.
Slowly he got to his trotters. Slowly he lifted the
hammock and carried it over to the Golden Eagle.
Slowly he spread it on the floor beside the Little
Elephant.
The Golden Eagle looked down at the hammock. And
then he looked at Lazy.
“You have certainly Thought of a Way,” he said.
“The Perfect Way. You are indeed a Unique Porcelain
Pig.”
And, with great ceremony, the Golden Eagle bowed
low, three times, to Lazy the Pig.
CHAPTER 8.
The Little Elephant lay in the hammock.
The Golden Eagle put his head through the long
loop at one end. Lazy the Pig put his head through the
long loop at the other end. Each of the Dragons—who
had had a rest and now felt ready for anything—twisted
his long tail round one of the side loops.
Lazy the Pig held his breath.
It was only a little elephant, but even
elephant is a very heavy weight.
Could they do it?
COULD THEY?




Im 'vi \ \Sk !\
aMMSst
\ /
/
“One . . two .. . three . . rumbled the Golden Eagle.
“Now, FLYYYYYYY!”
Lazy moved his fat shoulders, willing his new wings to do
their work.
The Golden Eagle spread his huge wings,
and the Dragons spread theirs. And then Lazy
felt a dreadful weight pulling at his shoulders
till he was sure they must break. He closed
his mouth tight. He mustn’t give way. He
must stand it. HE MUST!
Slowly they flew into the air—Lazy, tin
Golden Eagle, the two Dragons—carrying
between them the Little Elephant in the ham
mock. It seem as though the journey would never be finished. But at last
it was.
On to the mantelpiece they lowered the hammock.
The Mother Elephant, with trumpetings of joy, hurried to her Baby and
stroked him tenderly with her trunk.
It was a beautiful sight to see.
But Lazy wasn’t looking.
He felt tireder than he had ever felt in his life. All he wanted to do was
sleep . . . sleep . . . sleep. . . .
Wong Ho the Mandarin himself stepped down from his high chair that
was like a throne and got Lazy’s cushion. He punched and patted and pum-
melled the cushion so that Lazy could sleep comfortably, now that he hadn’t
got a flat side any more.
And Wong Ho the Mandarin sat beside Lazy, fanning him with his fan
which he kept usually tucked into the collar at the back of his neck. He
fanned and he sang a song ... a lovely little Chinese song . . . until Lazy
was fast asleep and snoring in deliciously satisfied
grunts.
CHAPTER 9.
Lazy had gone to sleep to the sound of a lovely
Chinese song. He was awakened by sounds of an en-
tirely kind.
Bang Bang ... Ting Ting ... Clang Clang
Banging of gongs . . . ringing of bells . . . clashing
of pieces of metal together . . . and, too, the beating of
a wooden mallet on to a metal plate, which made the
loudest noise of all.
Lazy opened his eyes wide.
They were all clustered around his cushion—the
Golden Eagle, Wong Ho the Mandarin, every single one
of the Elephant family and the two Dragons; and as
well there were other people whom Lazy had not seen close before: two old
Monks, one with a long beard and a very high head, the other one fat and


\ \i i y
.i" I ■ \9ffZ1
ISSSSSsS ■*» \ V BI v IS^W
>1 f JBMBMaBMi fc SSsSlSc&m. y pe^ef^
smiling, with huge ears . . . two strange animals who seemed half Dogs and
half Dragons ... a lady in a flowered robe who was sitting on a high white stool
and playing some instrument that looked like a guitar... and an amazing man
whose face and body were deep blue and whose hair was flaring red.
It was this man who was making such an awful din beating his wooden
mallet on a metal plate.
They were all making a noise with something; and Lazy had difficulty in
stopping his trotters from going up to cover his ears, to keep out the noise.
But he knew that if he did that they would think him very rude indeed.
At last the noise stopped, and the Golden Eagle stepped forward.
“Unique Porcelain Pig,” he rumbled, “we, the inhabitants of the Chinese
Room, have assembled here to do you honour. Not only because as a pig you
are unique, but because you are a brave and clever creature.”
At this all the Elephant family trumpeted together in agreement, and
the Little Elephant stepped forward carrying in his trunk something that
looked like a large plum.
But the Golden Eagle waved him back.
“It is usual,” he said, “for people to introduce themselves before presen-
tations are made.”
Wong Ho the Mandarin spoke then.
“May it please you, Unique Porcelain Pig, to mount my throne for the
ceremony.”
“Oooh,” stammered Lazy, “Ooooh, 1... I couldn’t. After all, I’m only ...
only a pig ... and you’re ... you’re ”
“It would give pleasure if you would mount the throne,” said the
Mandarin.


One on each side of him, the Golden
Eagle and the Mandarin escorted Lazy to the
high chair that looked like a throne; and there
he sat, pink in the face with excitement, look-
ing at the circle of wonderful people who had
gathered together to do him honour.
CHAPTER 10.
IHv 7 \ Hljji j A One by one they advanced toward Lazy
lIP Sk/\ as on throne. One by one they
He \ 1 bowed three times, with great ceremony.
BHBHfWL-.K Jpl /) First the Golden Eagle—then the Man-
darin.
Lazy was expecting the Elephants to
come next; but it was the Blue Man with the
Red Hair who approached the throne. And
when he spoke his voice was deeper and rumblier by far than the voice of
the Golden Eagle himself.
“I am the Thunder Spirit,” he boomed. “I make the thunder in the skies
and I bring storm and tempest. But to you, Great and Unique Porcelain Pig,
I bring only soft words and good wishes. Long life to you, Great Porcelain
Pig.”
And with three more bows and a parting clang of his mallet and metal
plate, he retired to the back of the group.
Next came the two Dragons. They weaved and writhed and turned and
twisted their way toward the throne, bowed their heads three times till they
touched the ground, and then blew out great puffs of incense.
It was all Lazy could do not to shut his eyes, all he could do to stop that
tickling in his throat from turning into a cough. But he knew that to do
those things would be very rude indeed. So he managed somehow to keep his
eyes open, and his mouth shut and curled up in a smile, until at last the
Dragons had bowed themselves away and the two old Monks were approach-
ing the throne.
Lazy felt a bit silly sitting up there with the two venerable Monks bow-
ing to him and telling him their names, and telling him, too, all about the
Temple from which they came.
The next visitors were much better ... or at any rate they didn’t make
Lazy feel nearly so silly. They were the two Dragon-Dogs. They introduced
themselves together, speaking like a chorus of two; and running all the words
together:
“I-am-Dog-F o-and-I-am-good- at-guarding- and- most-of-all-I -should-
hke-to-guard-the- precious-person-of-the Unique Porcelain Pig.”
i a zy thanked them very politely and said how safe he felt now that he
knew they were looking after him. And then they, too, bowed themselves
away.


The Elephant family were the next to arrive,
and their introductions were followed by a presenta-
tion by the Little Elephant of the big plum, which,
he explained was the Plum of Long Life and
Happiness.
At that they all cried:
LONG LIFE AND HAPPINESS TO LAZY.
LONG LIFE TO
THE
UNIQUE
PORCELAIN
PIG.
And then they all banged their gongs and rang their
bells and clashed their pieces of metal together, and
the Thunder Spirit made the loudest noise of all
beating his wooden mallet on his metal plate.
Lazy felt very thrilled by all these attentions.
He was thinking it was about time he rose from
the throne and thanked them all, when he saw the
Lady in the Flowered Robe stepping down from her
stool.
She walked toward him, swaying gracefully and
bowing her head.
“I am Lotus Blossom,” she said simply; and then
she lifted her instrument that looked like a guitar
and began to play, very softly and yet in a strange
jangly way; and all the others joined in a song that
fitted with the jangly chords:
We, who live in the Chinese Room,
We, who come from a land far away,
We are happy to say
Good Day,
Long Life and Good Day
To Lazy the Pig.
We would go far to seek
A Pig so Unique
As Lazy,
Lazy the Pig.
Till life comes to an end
He’ll be always our friend.
It was such a beautiful song, and they all sang so beautifully, that Lazy felt
like crying.
As a matter of fact, he was just stopped in time by the rumbling voice of
the Golden Eagle:
“THE END OF THE PARTY HAS COME.”


I
r’Ttx
He looked at Lazy, and said in what was
meant to be a whisper, but really could be heard
from one end of the mantelpiece to the other:
“Say something, Precious and Unique Porce-
lain Pig. Say something. It is usual to thank
people who have given you a party, especially
with a present AND a song of your own.”
And so Lazy stood up and said in a shaky,
squeaky voice:
“Thank you. Thank you all tremendously.
It’s ... it’s been ... the most... scrumptious .. .
party I’ve ever had in all my life.”
And then, with his legs feeling as shaky and
wobbly as his voice, he came slowly down from
the throne of Wong Ho the Mandarin.
CHAPTER 11.
“Thank you very much,” said Lazy politely, “for letting me sit on your
throne.”
The Mandarin nodded his head in a very friendly manner.
“It was an honour,” he said. “Never before have I met a pig ... a live
pig . .. at close quarters. Although, you may not know it, but it was the
Chinese who first realised the deliciousness of roast pork.”
The Golden Eagle glared at the Mandarin.
“If I may venture to interrupt the Great Wong Ho,” he said, “it is usual
for such indelicate subjects to be kept out of polite conversation.”
The Mandarin nodded quickly and furiously.
“It is strange,” he said coldly, “that a Golden Eagle—a mere Earth Spirit
—should venture to question the manners of a member of the House of
Wong.”
The Golden Eagle’s smile became fiercer than ever. Two deep angry lines
appeared on his brow.
t beg to suggest,” he rumbled, “that Mr. Wong has used the word
MERE’ in error . . . and that he has forgotten the fact that for nine hundred
years, in the Temple of Loy \an, I have been venerated; and that probably
your illustrious ancestors have come to burn joss sticks in my honour.”
“I think that extremely IMprobable,” M
said the Mandarin. And then he turned Aftl
his back on the Golden Eagle and nodded W
to Lazy. FT JHK
“Come and stand by my throne,” he
commanded, “I wish to speak with you /
about many things.” / : s


For a moment Lazy didn’t know
what to do. At last he thought he had
better follow the Mandarin. But he felt
the Golden Eagle’s hand on his shoulder.
“Come with ME,” insisted the
Golden Eagle, “I wish to show you the
hangings of the Chinese Room, which
you have not yet seen. There is the
Tapestry of the Scholars, and the
Embroidery of the Lady of Loveliness
and the Scroll of the Babies. lam sure
that you. . . .”
The Mandarin turned back. He forgot altogether his Oriental polite
ness.
“The Unique Porcelain Pig stays with ME!” he shouted.
The Golden Eagle, still with his hand on Lazy’s shoulder, threw back his
head and laughed. He didn’t say anything—just laughed, deep down in his
throat. And somehow that laugh of his said more rude things than any words
could have said.
Quick as a flash the Mandarin put his hand up, took his fan, which was
tucked into his collar at the back of his neck, and hit the Golden Eagle in the
face with it.
For a moment nobody moved, nobody spoke.
Lazy was terrified.
He was wondering what on earth the Golden Eagle would do.
Even the Mandarin, it seemed, felt that this time he had gone too far.
He looked very upset and uncomfortable indeed. He stood there for a few
moments, and then he backed toward his chair that was like a throne.
And as he moved the Golden Eagle moved, too.
There was something frightening in the way he walked, very, very slowly,
very, very deliberately, his hands raised above his head.
The Mandarin sat on his throne, slumped up in a funny way, with his
head wobbling rather than nodding.
The Golden Eagle raised his hands high, rumbled those words that Lazy
couldn’t understand, and then clapped his hands three times.
All of a sudden the Mandarin’s head stopped nodding.
He sat there on his throne, perfectly still.
The Golden Eagle turned to Lazy. His smile was full
of triumph.
“Until the dawn of another day,” he said, “the great
Wong Ho’s head will nod no more.”
Lazy stared at the Golden Eagle.
And then at last he said timidly:
“But. . . but. ... If he can’t nod, won’t he .. . won’t
he get a frightfully stiff neck?”


(V > /k
> '^ N jf
The Golden Eagle rubbed his strange hands to-
gether. There was a queer cruelty in his smile.
“That,” he said, “is very probable. And this small
ailment may teach the Great Wong Ho that it is not
usual to strike with the fan so old and wise a person as
the Golden Eagle. Come, Unique Porcelain Pig, come
with me.”
CHAPTER 12.
Esmmm H ■ H
“I don’t know,” said Lazy to the Golden Eagle, “just
what to do with this.”
He held out the plum that the Little Elephant had given him.
“It is usual,” said the Golden Eagle, “for people to keep presents that are
given them. Especially so magnificent a present as the Plum of Long Life.”
“Yes,” said Lazy, “yes, I understand. And I’m not ungrateful or any-
thing. I think it’s a beautiful present. It’s just that it’s sort of awkward to
carry around. My trotters don’t carry things very easily, you know.”
“How should I know?” asked the Golden Eagle. “I have never had any
trotters myself. And how should I know, either, how you can carry your
Plum? After all, YOU are the Unique Porcelain Pig, who is now famous for
being able to Think of a Way.”
“Ohhh,” said Lazy, “Ohhhh dearrrr.” After all the excitement he didn’t
feel bright or clever enough to think of a NEW way. The Hammock Way
had just come to him ... as if something outside him had said: “Take some
string....”
Something tickled the side of his neck He looked round.
There, hanging round his neck, were several pieces of string he’d missed
and hadn’t used when he was making the hammock.
“If you’ll excuse me for just one moment,” he said to the Golden Eagle,
“I’ll make a String Bag for my Plum.”
The Golden Eagle stood there and watched Lazy making the knots. He
was very quick at it by now, and in no time at all there was a very smart
string bag hanging by a long loop from his shoulder, and in it—scarcely
heavy to carry at all—was the Plum of Long Life and Happiness.
“Very good,” said the Golden Eagle.
“Ding How. Very good indeed. You are
indeed a Unique Porcelain Pig.”
Unique Porcelain Pig! Unique
Porcelain Pig! Lazy was a bit tired of
being called a Unique Porcelain Pig! It
was such a long silly-sounding name. He
had liked much better his old names:
“Contentment -by - Marcius - Dow” and
“Lazy”. He liked Lazy best of all. He




long robes who sat under a golden tree heavy with white blossom. The more
important-looking of the two sad gentlemen was leaning his back against the
tree and looked quite comfortable. He wasn’t doing anything really —just
staring into space. And, even when the Golden Eagle spoke to him politely
and introduced Lazy to him, he didn’t take any notice at all . . . just kept
staring over their heads away into the distance.
It is usual,” said the Golden Eagle in a rather annoyed voice, “It is
usual for a scholar and a gentleman to acknowledge an introduction, especi-
ally when introduced to someone as distinguished as the Unique Porcelain
Pig.”
j ? he less im P° rtant - lookin & of the two sad gentlemen, who up till then
had been busy with his books and his writing-brush, now looked up, and started
to apologise in a soft voice.
“Great Golden Eagle,” he said, “will you pardon my master, who is at the
moment cogitating on a problem of great moment.”
What s cogitating?” whispered Lazy. “And why is one moment greater
than another?”
“Sssh,” rumbled the Golden Eagle. “It is usual ... oh, cogitating means
thinking hard and great moment means importance.”
“Ohhh,” said Lazy.
, . f ha PPy>” said the sad-looking gentleman who hadn’t a tree to rest
his back against, “I am happy to meet the Unique Porcelain Pig. And, now,
it you will excuse me, I will return to my studies.”
As Lazy and the Golden Eagle flew off again, Lazy said:
They weren’t very polite, were they? They weren’t very glad to see us.
Don t you think we’d better fly back to the mantelpiece so that I can sleep?”


t mm
zsmv'JKr
“I think nothing of the
kind,” rumbled the Golden
Eagle. “It is usual, when a
friend takes you visiting, to
refrain from commenting
on the manners of the
people he visits.”
“Ohhh,” said Lazy, “I’m
sorry.”
The Golden Eagle in-
clined his head.
“Now,” he said, “we
shall visit the Lady of
Loveliness.”
CHAPTER 14.
As they flew along, Lazy
was wondering what the
Lady of Loveliness would
be like. Lotus Blossom
hadn’t looked much like a
blossom ... so perhaps the
Lady of Loveliness wouldn’t
be lovely. He was quite
SURE she wouldn’t be lovely
at all.
But he was wrong.
The Lady of Loveliness
was so very lovely that he
caught his breath,
and lost his balance,
and had to keep his


. jmSk _
\ 111
wings flapping madly—otherwise he’d have
stopped flying altogether and have fallen
through the air, head over heels, like the Little
Elephant falling from the mantelpiece.
The hair of the Lady of Loveliness was piled
high, and in it there were flowers. From her
ears, almost hidden by her black hair, hung long
golden ear-rings. Her long-sleeved gown was
a glory of colour, and her smile was the sweetest
thing that Lazy had ever seen. Over her head
bats circled, and in her hand she held —Lazy
blinked, for he could hardly believe his eyes!—
in those long beautiful hands she held a Plum,
larger, but otherwise just the same as the one
Lazy carried in the string bag that hung from
a long loop over his shoulder.
The Lady of Loveliness bowed three times,
leaning right out of her embroidery. She smiled
at Lazy, and when she spoke her voice was as
sweet as her smile:
“I am a Lady of Long Ago,” she said, “and
I am happy to meet the Unique Porcelain Pig,
who is known also as Contentment-by-Marcius-
Dow and also as Lazy. Lazy is the best and the
loveliest of names, and you are the best and
loveliest of pigs, because you have aided the
Little Fallen Elephant, and you have behaved
as a gentleman pig should behave, doing every-
thing that everybody wanted you to do, when
all YOU want to do is to sleep.”
Lazy’s pink face went quite red. He tried
to stammer out his bit about “I am Lazy the
Pig”—but the words wouldn’t come. Anyway,
what was the use of saying anything, when the
Lady of Loveliness knew every single
thing about him, even that his eyes were
nearly dropping from want of sleep.
He pig-paddled in the air (just the I y
same as YOU dog-paddle in the water)
and tried hard not to stare at the Lady
in the embroidery, who was so much
more beautiful than anybody he had seen in all
his life.
She and the Golden Eagle were talking—
but Lazy didn’t hear a word they were saying
—and the Golden Eagle had to touch him on the


/ i gggaa ' i '
fSSf as he —Lazy
CHAPTER 15.
shoulder twice before he realised that it
was time to go visiting the Scroll of the
Babies.
The Babies were fat and jolly and
friendly, and they danced on their scroll to
please and amuse Lazy.
But, although he said his piece and
bowed most politely, he wasn’t really think-
ing of them at all. All he could think of
was the Lady of Loveliness, who knew
everything there was to know, and who
carried a Plum of Long Life just the same
as he—Lazy the Pig—was carrying.
When Lazy and the Golden Eagle flew back to the mantelpiece, they
could see at once that something was happening . . . that something was
wrong.
They were all gathered round Wong Ho the Mandarin—all of them —
every single one of the Elephant family, the two Dragons, the two old Monks,
the two Dragon-Dogs, the Lady-with-the-Guitar, and the Thunder Spirit;
and they were all talking at once and making a frightful noise, with the
Thunder Spirit, of course, making the most noise of any of them.
At the appearance of Lazy and the Golden Eagle, they all began to speak
at once, and their words, of course, all got jumbled up together.
At last the Thunder Spirit hit his wooden mallet on his metal plate with
a tremendous bang, and signed to them all to keep quiet. And he addressed
the Golden Eagle in his deep, deep voice:
“With very great respect to the Venerable Golden
Eagle,” he boomed, “we have decided that the same
Venerable Golden Eagle has done things which it was
not proper that he should do. And these same things
he must undo.”
The Golden Eagle smiled very fiercely indeed.
“It is usual...” he began. But the Thunder Spirit
interrupted rudely.
“These things must be undone,” he shouted.
“First, the Unique Porcelain Pig must be a Unique
Porcelain Pig no longer.”
At that all the others started to clap and make
noises, and Wong Ho tried his hardest to nod his head.
But, of course, he couldn’t.
“Kindly explain,” rumbled the Golden Eagle. His
voice was thick with fury.


.ifea V~\ ,n. w&C f
|§ 3 ft gjjy
Ev-H I*". EBay / tSSSm
. Jyj V ‘-j' psy ./ ftSjr
“We, the Inhabitants of the Chinese Room,”
boomed the Thunder Spirit, “agree that, al-
though we LIKE the Pig, he has been made too
much of. Who is he that he be put above us?
Not,” he went on more politely, “that he
WANTS to be put above us. He is a pleasant
and modest pig. But you, Golden Eagle, have
given him ideas above his station.”
The others clapped and made noises again.
“So we demand,” boomed the Thunder
Spirit, “we demand that the Pig be once again
given his flat side that rests on the cushion, and
that those ridiculous wings be removed from
his shoulders.”
At this speech the others clapped and made such furious noises that even
the Golden Eagle looked uncomfortable for a moment.
He seemed to be puzzling the matter over, and after a while he said in
his dignified way:
“It is usual for the person in question to be consulted on such a matter.
Unique Porcelain Pig, do you wish your wings to be removed and your flat
side to be given back to you?”
Lazy looked at the Golden Eagle, towering above him.
And then he looked at his cushion, lying there on the mantelpiece, look-
ing so soft and puffy and comfortable.
He didn’t want to offend the Golden Eagle. But, oh, he DID want to go
to sleep.
At last he said:
“Yes, please,” in a very little and squeaky voice.
The Golden Eagle glared at him furiously, and all the others clapped and
made pleased noises.
And slowly, very slowly, the Golden Eagle lifted his strange hands and
said those queer words that Lazy couldn’t understand and clapped his hands
three times—and in a second Lazy felt a pricking on his shoulders. And
when he twisted his head round he saw that no longer was he a pig with
wings ... a pig who might fly.


And the Golden Eagle lifted his hands
again and said the words again and clapped
his hands again, and Lazy felt his new
round part melting away and his flat side
coming back . . . the flat side that read
“Contentment by Marcius Dow.”
And he sank down on the cushion,
snuggling down into the soft puff of it, and
curling his mouth up in a smile of complete
contentment. Sleep ... sleep ~ . sleep. ...
So fast asleep he was that he didn’t hear the
Thunder Spirit demand that Wong Ho the Mandarin
should be able to move his head again; and he didn’t
hear the Golden Eagle roaring and yelling and
rumbling that nothing on earth or in the heavens
would persuade him to make that happen until the
dawn of another day. And he didn’t hear the angry
cries or see all the creatures on the mantelpiece of the
Chinese Room beginning to hit and punch and scratch
and fight and knock each other about as much as ever
they could. Especially the Golden Eagle.
No, Lazy the Pig heard none of those things. He
just lay there on his puffy silk cushion, with a curly
smile on his face, fast asleep and utterly contented.
CHAPTER 16.
It was morning.
Moira, Mrs. Masterton’s maid, was pulling up the
blind in the Chinese Room.
And then she looked round and shrieked.
“HELP! MURDER! POLICE!”
Mrs. Masterton came running into the room,
looking very fat in her dressing gown and very red in
the face.
“What is it? What’s the matter? What on
earth’s happened?” she cried.
“Look!” shrieked Moira. “LOOK! ! !”
With a trembling hand she pointed at the mantel-
There sat the Mandarin, with his head quite still,
looking very queer indeed. All the Elephants were
jumbled together in a heap and the Little Elephant
had lost his tusks again. The two Dragons were all
twisted up and looked most peculiar. The Thunder
Spirit’s wooden mallet was broken, and Lotus Blossom


had lost the top part of her guitar. Each
of the Dragon-Dogs had a crack in his
green porcelain face. The Monks hadn’t
been broken at all, but one of them —the
one with the high head and the beard —had
lost his staff. But that was of bamboo, and
only needed putting back again where it
belonged.
The Golden Eagle looked worst of all.
He was all over scratches and marks, and
* v Wr his bracelets were gone. His expression
seemed to have altered, too, and instead of
looking fierce he looked sorry.
_ _ ___. * i •«i * i
his bracelets were gone. His expression
seemed to have altered, too, and instead of
looking fierce he looked sorry.
Only the hangings on the walls were untouched. The master still stared
into space; the student still bent over his books. The Babies still danced and
played happily and the Lady of Loveliness smiled as beautifully and
as sweetly as ever.
“What have you been doing?” shrieked Mrs. Masterton at Moira.
“ ’Twasn’t me, Mum. It must’a’been burgulars, that it must!”
“Burglars! Rubbish!” cried Mrs. Masterton very angrily. “You’ve been
careless, that’s all. Rushing round with that duster of yours, breaking
things.”
“Oh, but I didn’t, Mum.”
“Breaking things!” shouted Mrs. Masterton again. “Look at them .
all my valuable things.” And then she quietened down. “Anyway,” she
said, “I was getting a bit tired of those Chinese ornaments. A bit tired of
them. Take them all away and put them in the cupboard. One of these
days I’ll bring them out and have them mended. One of these days.”
So Moira brought in the auto-tray and put them all on it. .. the Golden
Eagle, Wong Ho the Mandarin, the two Monks, the Dragons, the Thunder
Spirit, all the Elephant family, the two Dragon-Dogs. She was just lifting
up Lazy and his cushion, when Mrs. Masterton stopped her.
“No, leave him,” she said. “He’s all right. He looks so comfortable
there. I fell in love with him as soon as I saw him at the auction sale. A
unique Porcelain pig, the auctioneer called him. Funny, I didn’t notice that
he was holding that fruit. What is it? A plum? Funny idea. But he IS
rather amusing. Yes, leave him there.”
“What about the hangings?” asked Mrs. Master
ton’s maid, Moira.
Mrs. Masterton considered.
“Oh, take away those babies. And take away
those men under the tree. You can leave the em-
broidery of that Chinese lady. She’s really rather
lovely. Yes, leave her there.”
And Mrs. Masterton went out of the room.
And Mrs. Masterton’s maid, Moira, took down the
Scroll of the Babies and the Tapestry of the Scholars.


III *
mR
H H
.*
H ■ :x
08 ®“ BWUH ™ *
And she rolled them up and put them on
the lower part of the auto-tray .. . and wheeled
the auto-tray out of the room.
CHAPTER 17.
After a long, long time Lazy the Pig woke
up. f
He opened his eye half way. y
And then he opened it wide and stared
round him in surprise.
They were all gone . . . the Golden Eagle,
the Thunder God, and all the rest. Had he
dreamt his Chinese adventures, or had they
been true?
And then he gave a great grunt of relief
and pleasure.
There on the wall facing him was the Lady of Loveliness. She was smil-
ing down at him. Her long-sleeved gown was a glory of colour, and her
smile was the sweetest thing that Lazy had ever seen. Over her head bats
circled, and in her long beautiful hands she held a Plum, larger, but other-
wise exactly the same as the one Lazy carried in the string bag.
The string bag! He hadn’t GOT the string bag any longer!!
He felt sick with horror.
Ohhh! Ooooh.. ..
And then
There was something round and fat in between his trotters.
ww ttigtss uu ■ ■ ■
“’.riiirr -"'“ i
of pmTect' content 6 S ’° Wly Cl ° Sed S ' eep and his mouth curled up in a smile
And, if ever you go to Mrs. Masterton’s house
m the Square, you will see for yourself Lazy the
Y. lng there sleeping, on his puffy silk cushion,
with his trotters snuggled up, and with a big Plum
between the two front ones, and the curliest smile
on his fat face, looking the most contented pig in
the world.


W —
■ \


Sk. } / I jf „
✓ J / \ 0\
. U. {.
11l
3 1508 01701054 2


• r \
. , ■■
_ 'S- i r ' ‘ ‘ S ' -
% ' y' .
* . • r - _ • • r . ‘ * - - , '
* - 4
# — ' ♦ -
V ■ . •
V ‘ . . , ' N
A — ' * . * - ***■-' __ ' *
-■* < /
? - . ■ • . ,
-• ■ ■— ■ ' ‘ ' 1 ■»
■ i, , . , ‘ . - " ' \ • ’
.
. • . . f ' if -- * k ‘ ' , - *
• - ,
1 - •* - - • - \
- * A
,\
■ i " *
.. •' ' v
’- . A -
' • .
j . ' ■ ' > - > -
’-r - - * - - >* x . ✓
' ‘ \ - ’
_ * . v\ .
h ' ' • ’
/ -
« " •
.r • ' ■ . ’ — T - • * ' • 2 - - -
« ' ' ~ ‘ '
’ - , - • '
I
' ' - \
- '
.
/” « ■
• - /
y
*
. N
’
v.' a i %
• -w
■r ■ . *' / .
. - ' ' _ — ’ ' . , x •» -
X
*
• — . ■ , / •»
* - 1 .f*.
Eirv ■ > .-V < * iL*-* ■* , " - A - - ' . IVfc.- '


All rights reserved
Wholly set up and printed In Australia by Ramsay, Ware Publishing Pty. Ltd., 129 King
fat., Melbourne. Wholesale distributors: P. W. Cheshire Pty. Ltd., 338 Lit. Collins St., Melb.
