

Leading Questions
OF THE DAY.
Bi
STEPHEN SULLIVAN
. AND
J. O’BYRN E .
PRICE - OISTEJ SECIII.IIiXISrGr.




Leading Questions
OF THE HAY.
BY
STEPHEN SULLIVAN
AND
J. O’BYEN E.
PEICB - ONE SHILLING.




CONT ENTS.
PAGE
Why Protection has grown in New South Wales - - 5
Why America became Protectionist - - ' 11
• . - 13
Civilisation and Protection
Protection Applied in New South Wales -
23
Employers’ Advantages -----
Capital Punishment
qo
Corporal Punishment -------
35
Freetrade in Law ------
Politics and Nationalities ------ 41
Non-representative Parliament ----- 47
Electoral Rights ------- 50
Religious Freedom - - ----- 53
Freetrade in Medicine- - 56
r;q
Federation -
Conclusion - - " - - 61




Leading Questions of the Day
WHY PROTECTION HAS GROWN IN
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Five years ago Protection was weak, both in
town and country. Only 4 per cent, of electors
believed in it. In Parliament its advocates were
few, and their advocacy feeble.
Now it has over 40 per cent, of the voters. In
town and country it divides rule. In Parliament
it has 49 per cent, of the voting power.
Some of its Parliamentary advocates possess
high ability. They bear a less proportion to the
bulk than do the able men on the Freetrade side,
but they are strong enough to carry their party
along.
How was this change, effected in five years ?
It was not by the merits of the cause. The cause
acquired no new merit during that interval.
Whatever merit it had it had a generation ago.
Thirty, twenty, ten years ago it was what it is
to-day.


The change was not brought about by the
special advocacy of talented men on platform or
in Parliament. The talented men of the party
are new to the cause. They were not
but captives. They did not make Protection take
hold, but were themselves taken hold of.
Five years ago the ancient advocates of the
system were hoarse or silent. Believers in it
were cold.
The embers of Protection were set aflame at
the Statue and in the Domain. These were the
fiscal foci. Men were willing to work, but there
was no work for them. Sir Alexander Stuart
gave only words; Sir Patrick Jennings gave words.
With wives and children on the brink of starva-
tion those men called for work. Mr. Dibbs also
gave words, and, for a time, Sir Henry Parkes
gave but words.
When too late, Sir Henry Parkes gave work.
During these years the unemployed found no-
help at the doors of trade, no help at the hands
of Government. As a last resort they turned
their faces to Protection.
Protection is the first-born of greed and neces-
sity. The policy thrives on calamities.
Had the colony been prosperous these five years
Protection would be puling in dark places to-day.


Had not hunger so fiercely raged many, who are
to-day Protectionists, would De looking tor
Cobden medals.
These men have not pushed Protection on. It
was the unemployed who pushed both them and
Protection on. These men did not convert the
country to Protection. It was the unemployed
who converted both them and the country.
Instead of being causes they are effects.
At the start there were Protectionists as well as
Freetraders among the unemployed. The mass
were neither one thing nor the other. All
wanted work. Government invented delays.
Every day’s delay was an incitement to Protec-
tion. Cheap bread is dear to the man who has
no money. Want of work is want of money.
Protection means work almost at once. But a
State which accepts the duty now pointed out
would provide work actually at once. When the
State so provides, the cost is distributed over the
whole population. When Protection provides,
the cost falls principally on the poor. If the
work be reproductive the profit when the State
acts will come back to the population. .If it be
Protection that acts the profit will go into the
hands of monopolists.
That is the point. Men were left idle under
a series of governments. Anything was better
than that compulsory idleness.


Those various Governments neglected duty.
Protectionists have turned the crime to their
advantage. The neglect of duty had nothing to
do with fiscal principle. It originated in a wrong
view of the obligations of Government.
The safety of the people is above fiscal laws.
It is above the Constitution—if by the Constitu-
tion is meant the laws of the Constitution.
. Eve iy citizen has a right to work or to food
given man honorable way. That is part of the
advantage of citizenship. He is partner in the
commonwealth. If he be successful the State
gams ; if unsuccessful, his adversity is the State’s
concern. It must give him work or it must
support him.
w 7?° Ve - r J n ? Qent is tlie Executive of the State.
• learns that the safety of any class is
jeopardised it is its duty to stand by that class,
t therwise, there is no advantage in citizenship.
Members might as well be aliens.
Ihe unemployed numbered regularly 5 000
Sometimes they spurted to 10,000. Overthe period
between the resignation of Sir Alex. Stuart and
the wreck of the Dibbs Ministry, fully 40,000
men felt the pinch of want of work. More
feared their turn was coming. Verbal platitudes
had no chance against necessity. Philosophical
theories were cobwebs before it.


The men demanded work.
There was work at clearing in the scrubs of the
colony. Government would not give that. A
Land Bill to encourage private individuals to
make improvements was wanted. Government
would not give that, A Local Government Bill
which would enable municipalities ana public
bodies to employ labour was wanted. Govern-
ment would not give that.
Government would give no work or put it in
the power of private individuals to give worn.
Therefore, these thousands threw themselves
on Protection.
Some of them disliked Protection. Many
thou edit it a national pestilence. Many cal led it
a plague. But only on its wings was hope.
Only in its voice was promise. Only in its beak
and fangs was food.
The influence of these 40.000 spread over the
country. The cry for Protection went like fare.
Squatters, defrauded of a Land Bili, and tearing
a Land Tax Bill, leaned to it Selectors and
traders, defrauded of a Local Government Bill,
and pressed with debt, welcomed it Over the
country, victims of bad Government were pre-
pared to try anything new.
It was the lack of employment that called upon
Protection.


There is a lesson in this for Freetrade, Pro-
tectionist, and all forms of Government. No
large mass of persons can be left to drift. If
trade will not absorb, Government must employ.
If Government does not, it will in wild times
find revolution. If it stand idly by, it will in
peaceful times find principles espoused which it
will take years to kill.
In the agitation between Freetrade and Pro-
tection which has disorganised Government, and
paralysed Parliament, the country is paying for
its neglect of the working-classes in their time of
need.
The thousands of pounds the Casual Labour
Board spent finally upon them is nothing to what
must yet be spent in the strife of party, in the
delay of business, to undo the consequences of
neglecting them so long.


WHY AMERICA BECAME PROTECTIONIST.
It is a mistake to say that the United States
adopted the theory of Protection as against the
theory of Freetrade.
It was English Protection, become tyrannous,
that she opposed.
All America wanted was the commercial free-
dom which New South Wales has now.
She had metals, and she wanted to erect iron
mills. Lord Chatham, speaking for English
Protection, declared he would not let America
make a hob-nail.
She had wool, and wanted to erect woollen-
mills. She had flax, and wanted to erect factories
to work it up. England declared that neither
mill nor factory should be built in the land.
America built mills and factories. England
prohibited the articles thus made to be traded
from one part of the country to another. She
altogether prohibited their exportation.
To give effect to these prohibitions she stationed
officers through the country. To support these
officers she taxed the American people. That
caused the War of Independence.


It is historical distortion to say that America
revolted against foreign trade. She revolted
against Protectionist statecraft. All she asked
was to be left free as New South Wales now is.
New South Wales can build as many mills and
factories as she pleases. She can send her pro-
ducts around the country or export them, as she
thinks fit.
The maxim of Protectionist England was that
manufactures in the colony should be discouraged
or prohibited. The maxim of Freetrade England
is that the colonies are to study their natural
resources and manufacture wherever manufac-
tories can be carried on with advantage.
New South Wales has now all that America
went to war to gain.


CIVILISATION AND PROTECTION.
The early world despised Protection. Aristoc-
racies, oligarchies, democracies equally condemned
it. Athens once closed her markets against
Megara, and a cry of indignation went up from
every city in Greece.
The statecraft of those days made the mass of
citizens more comfortable than they are now.
Minds were then freer and higher, and intellectual
life more active than to-day. The best literature
of the human race was then produced. The
liberal education of to-day rests on the models of
that time. Men fought for principles, worked
for principles, died for principles. They were as
strong in arms as in words.
Republic vied with republic, but the rivalry
was founded on a basis of fair play. Each State
sent its products to the neighbouring States. If
one State excelled in one product, another excelled
in another. Each welcomed what the other sent
There was a similar interchange in art and
literature. To obtain the best in mind and
matter was the first of public duties.


A free intellect inspired free work.
Protection is the negation of this. It walls in
the mind. It narrows the individual to himself.
It is self.
“ It is a poor centre of a man’s actions—him-
self,” says Bacon. That is true of the community,
of the State.
Athens, Argos, Thebes and other republics and
democracies were related to one another, as the
colonies of Australia are. Protection they called
barbarism—the most ignoble form of statecraft.
New South Wales is not asked to vie with
Victoria in art or science. Protectionist statecraft
forgets these things When it talks of building-
up a nation it sees only products of field and
factory. These are not the nation.
If a nation will not make its own chairs and
coats unless foreign chairs and coats are kept out,
then it will not make its own literature and art
unless foreign literature and art are kept out.
Protectionists must go that length, or they
should not move at all. If they go that length
they will be logical, but their system will be
worse than it is.
. mental life of Australia depends on free
interchange with the mental life of the world.
Industrial life is on precisely the same footing.


A country begins by producing provisions.
The abundance of the provisions makes artisans
settle there. They select industries in accordance
with the localities. In some places some articles
can be more easily made than in others. One
locality has mines of one kind, another of another.
One has timber of one sort, another of another.
Workers in wood settle where timber abounds.
Miners settle around mines.
Natural interchange consists in the worker in
wood sending out his chairs and tables, and taking
in return axes and saws from the worker in
metals.
Protectionist statecraft will not let axes and
saws into the timber country, nor will it let chairs
and tables into the metal.
It will make the metal country strive to grow
timber, and the timber country search for metal.
That is not natural development. It is a
tyrannous interference with healthy natural laws.
Protection and tyranny have affinity for one
another. For a hundred years from 1670 the
“lords of trade” ruled England with an iron
hand. The language of Mildmay and Gee and
Cantillon breathes physical violence. These were
the Protectionist writers of the period. During
that period six hundred penal laws to fostejr
Protection were placed on the Statute Book.


The man who broke one of these laws forfeited
his goods for a first offence. If he offended again
his right hand was cut off, and nailed up in the
market-place of the town in which he lived. If
he offended again he was put to death.
The early civilisation which spurned Protection
was right. The latest civilisation which bans it
is also right.
PROTECTION APPLIED IN NEW SOUTH
WALES.
Too much attention is given to comparisons
between England and America,and to comparisons
between New South Wales and Victoria.
The fiscal system is only one of many things
affecting the progress of a nation. With a bad
fiscal system a nation may thrive, and with a
good one go back. * *»s
Natural advantages, industry and intelligence
more powerfully affect the destiny of a nation
than does its mere fiscal policy.


New South Wales, under Protection, but with
a strong Land and Public Works policy, would
progress faster than under Freetrade with a
weak policy.
Comparisons between countries are, then, of
little more than suggestive value, unless they are
made so comprehensive as to include all factors
towards development. To make them thus
comprehensive would fit them for the study, u
not for the platform or the general public.
Too many masses of figures have been all eady
paraded. It is right that men should study
figures, and from them construct principles, but
there is no use in throwing them from platforms.
Neither friends nor opponents remember them
two minutes.
The speaker himself would forget them only he
has them written down on a piece of paper in
his hand.
The present popular system of comparing
countries with one another is, then, unsound and
theatrical.
One side is as able as the other at it, but neither
makes a convert by the practice.
By staying at home, what is wanted will he
more clearly seen.


If Protectionists want to call new industries
into being they merit assistance. There may be
a difference as to how that can best be done, but
there can be no difference about the desirableness
of doing it.
But what are the new industries thus desired ?
There are in Victoria, after twenty-two years’
Protection, 63 establishments carrying on indus-
tries which are not carried on in New South
Wales.
These are:—
Organ builders...
4
employing ...
.. 34 hands
Pianoforte makers
4
99 ...
... 16 „
Powder, etc. ...
7
99
.. 100 „
Shot
2
99
... 4 ,,
Nail ...
2
9 , ...
... 15 „
Cutlery ...
7
... 41 „
Pattern ...
4
99
... 18 „
Enamel mantels
4
99 •••
... 64 „
Gasalier... ...
2
99
... 22 „
Earth closet makers ...
3
99
... 39 „
Iron safe makers
2
99 •• •
... 29, > r
Looking glass
3
,j ...
... 132 „
Essential oils
10
99 •••
... 69 „
Salt
6
99
... 95 „
Hosiery,...
3
99 •••
... 70 „
Total
63
Total ...
... 748


But there are in New South Wales 41 establish-
ments carrying on industries which are not carried
on in Victoria, and in these establishments 1890
persons are employed, thus :
Musical instruments
and toys
... 2 employing ...
... 6 hands
Sugar
... 36
...1640 „
Kerosene
... 3
... 244 „
Total
... 41 Total...
...1890
If it is fair to argue that a Protectionist
Government has given those 748 persons employ-
ment, it is equally fair to argue that a Freetrade
Government has given these 1890 persons em-
ployment. As far as public policy is concerned
a comparison between Victoria and New South
Wales shows, under this head, that New South
Wales is not worse, but better off than Victoria
in employments peculiar to her.
This is an application of the argument of
contrast.
*' As regards industries peculiar to each colony it
is then seen that New South Wales has more of
these than Victoria. That is she employs more
men by 1142 on work not attempted in Victoria,
than Victoria employs on work not attempted in
New South Wales;


Victoria has, therefore, more reason to wish to
transplant new industries from New South Wales
than the latter has to transplant from Victoria.
And if Protectionists desire to found and nurse
the new industries named, they cannot hope to do
better than Victoria has done. That is, after the
expense of twenty-two years’ nursing they will
have work for only 748 persons. And these 748
may be simply withdrawn from the 1890 em-
ployed on natural production.
On the ground of founding and nursing new
industries, then, Protection is wholly out of
court.
Therefore, it must turn to nurse industries
already in being.
But, first, industries which have come into
being without Protection have given a clear
demonstration that they can exist without
Protection.
Again, how is the nursing to be equitably
distributed ? At present there are at least four-
teen industries in New South Wales in a more
flourishing condition than the kindred industries
are in Victoria. Hands employed are tests of
condition.
Surgical Instrument Makers
VICTORIA.
N.S.W.
33
70
Ship Builders
37
.. 683


Victoria.
N.S.W.
Dock Makers
176
309
Picture Frame Makers...
49
52
Paint, Varnish
13
20
Sails and Tents
53
69
Butter and Cheese
88
.. 1124
Aerated Waters
... 1106
1111
Boiling Down
110
135
Soap
379
397
Tanneries
... 1587
. 2167
Gas, Coke
715
. 1021
Ice
50
211
Smelting
81
,. 2009
Total....
... 4477
.. 9378
Now, do Protectionists intend to encourage
these industries, or do they not ? If they do,
what is the ground ?
Under the tariff now in force these industries
are discovered to be twice as flourishing in New
South Wales as they are in Victoria.
Nothing remains for Protectionists but to reject
these from the operation of their scheme.
Then there come the industries which are
ifeafly on a level.
Victoria.
N.S.W.
Saddle and Whip Makers
567
Furniture
.. 1175
Clothes
331 9.
124


Victoria.
N.S.W
Meat Curing
317
Flour Mills
628
Fruit Preserves
370
Sugar Refineries
210
Total
8279
.. 6703
As these industries are, under the present
tariff, so nearly on a level with those products in
Victoria, there does not seem to be any efficient
reason for proceeding now to nurse them.
What, then, is the case 1
Protectionists are driven down either to operate
on an insignificant number of industries, or they
are obliged to tax all round, whether the indus-
tries show they need or do not need assistance.


EMPLOYERS’ ADVANTAGES.
If establishments already in being be protected
the protection will amount to a money gift to
the proprietors of these establishments.
Take boot factories. There are 57 of these in
New South Wales. One of these sells £lO,OOO
worth of boots in the year. The others sell more
or less. The first one will do as an illustration.
Protectionists will protect boots to at least 25
per cent. That firm will, as soon as the duty is
imposed, raise its prices 25 per cent. It made
£lO,OOO under Freetrade. Without one hour’s
additional work it will make at the start £12,500
under Protection.
Who receives this £2,500 1
Those proprietors.
They did no work to earn it.
The Protectionist party gave it to them.
Protectionists say that the duty will call up
other firms to compete. No doubt that is true,
but it will take time. In the meantime that
firm continues to receive as a present from
Government £2,500 per year.


While the new firms are preparing to start,
that firm will extend its operations, and thus
double or treble that £2,500.
The same thing holds true in respect to the
proprietors of carriage and harness factories, to
the proprietors of furniture factories, to the pro-
prietors of clothing factories, to the proprietors
of every factory whose industry is protected.
And what will the workmen get ? More
regular employment is all they are promised.
The men who are employed now will get no rise
in wages, but their masters will get rises in
profits amounting to hundreds of thousands of
pounds.
If Protection were a science, if it were not a
mere jump in the dark, it would formulate some
concurrent scheme which would give the general
community back the proceeds of this State-infla-
tion.
Until it does so, it should be resisted firmly.
If there be industries not yet established capa-
ble of being called into life, let these be named
and considered on their merits.
But to begin now to protect the 3170 indus-
tries already carrying on business, some of them
more prosperously, others as prosperously as in
Victoria, is to make the country pour hundreds


of thousands of pounds into the pockets of the
proprietors of those establishments, without any
extra work on their part to deserve it.
Nor is it even clear that the promise of more
continuous work will be fulfilled. As soon as
increased work is established fresh workmen will
flow in, will be invited in, will be brought in.
Before one year passes the men will have the
same fight for work which they have now.
Only the employers are assured of gain.
If ever such a scheme triumphs Labour should,
on the day the tariff becomes law, combine and
strike for increased wages. If the labourers don t
they will get nothing and will have to pay for
Protection besides.


CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
Freetrade and Protection are not the only
questions that require attention.
The way these have been worked has, how-
ever, made them all-absorbing. It is, therefore,
absolutely necessary to come to some final de-
cision respecting them.
Then the public mind will be free for other
work.
Criminal Law reform is wanted.
The Criminal Code of New South Wales is the
worst in the civilised world. It is unscientifically
constructed and barbarously inspired.
It is the work of criminalists more than of
lawyers. Those who administer it are in danger
of having their judgments affected by its rancor
and violence. They will give license to accusers
and less than liberty to the accused.
The greater the atrocity of the crime imputed
the less the reliability of accusers will require to
be substantiated.
That is an axiom in every country ruled by
violent laws.


It is acted upon year after year in New South
Wales.
The main purpose of the Code appears to be
to kill and maim.
In Great Britain, only two offences are capital.
Why are twenty-two capital in New South
Wales ?
Most of the countries of Europe have discon-
tinued capital punishment, except for high treason.
Many of them do not execute even for this.
They all executed for a number of offences one
time. Fully two hundred crimes entailed death,
But as education advanced they saw that killing
one person did not prevent another from com-
mitting a similar crime.
They tried the effect of remitting the death
penalty in certain cases. Statistics proved that
what education taught was true. There was no
increase in the number of those crimes.
They, therefore, remitted again and again until
treason to the State remains the only crime which
entails death.
The reason why high treason is still capital in
so many countries is that the culprit is regarded
as an enemy to the entire State, and thus, as in
war, the State is called upon to use its last
weapon in defence.


Even for this, however, imprisonment should
be enough.
But except for this, Europe has almost
unanimously abolished the death penalty.
Tuscany, Holland, Portugal, Russia, Roumania’
Saxony, and Prussia have all abandoned it. Italy
abandoned it a year ago. The death penalty is
on the Statute book in Belgium, but it is inoper-
ative. In his long reign the present King never
signed one death warrant.
Ten of the United States have rejected the
death penalty.
Have capital offences increased in the countries
which rejected iU Ample records show they
have not.
If they have not, it is the moral duty of every
other country to try the experiment of abolition.
If without trying a country goes on executing,
its executions are blind murders.
In the twelve years following the abolition of
the death penalty in Rhode Island there was no
increase in murders. In the four years following
it, in Wisconsin, there was no increase. In the
seventeen years following it, in Michigan, there
was no increase.
Extant records show this. And it has been so
elsewhere.


It is true that in some of the cantons of
Switzerland a return was made to capital punish-
ment a few years after its abolition. There is
force in this, but when examined such instances
are found to be few and the circumstances
exceptional.
The fact is that the overwhelming majority of
countries which have abolished capital punisi-
ment for murder are witnesses that the abolition
was not followed by an increase of murders.
The fact is also that only an insignificant
minority of these countries returned to the use
of capital punishment.
These two facts constitute a command that
every other country shall try the effect of abo-
lition.
From the start reason opposed capital punish-
ment.
Whence does the State derive the right to
execute ?
The State is only a collection of individuals
and whatever is wrong or immoral if done by the
individual is wrong or immoral if done by a
million individuals.
The individual may slay in self-defence. The
State may slay in self-defence. That is all the
right the'individual can pass to the State. If


the individual can effectually restrain his anta-
gonist, and if instead of restraining him he kills
him, that individual is guilty at least of man-
slaughter.
Whence does the collection of individuals
derive a right different from this ?
A compact among them does not confer a right,
it confers a power. Power not founded on right
is immoral.
Judgments are fallible. Having a choice of
courses, it is immoral to take that course which
can never be retraced. It is erecting a present
opinion into an eternal decision, If a man is
imprisoned by error he may be reached by new
knowledge. Those who execute can never recall
the act.
Whence does any man derive the moral right
to mortgage all his future knowledge 1 Whence
does he derive the right of assenting to the
system ?
It is futile to say that persons have not been
wrongfully executed.
In 1820 there were 46 persons hanged for
forging Bank of England notes, and several of
these notes were found afterwards to be good.
Sir Fitzroy Kelly reports that there came under
his own observation 22 cases of capital convic-
tions, seven of which were mitigated and the rest


executed, and the innocence of the whole 22 was
afterwards established.
It is as futile to think that mistakes ceased
with the last generation. The liability still exists.
The other day a man would have been executed
in Sydney did not a chance remark in Queens-
land lead to an investigation which proved the
conviction an utter blunder.
Killing is immoral, because it is founded on
power, not on right. It is again immoral, because
it treats a judgment that is fallible as if it were
infallible.
But if, with prisons at hand, killing is thus bad
as authorised in England for two offences, what
is it when in New South Wales it is authorised
for twenty-two ?
It is multiplication by 11 of the evils of capital
punishment in England.
For intent to murder, eighteen offences are
punishable with death. These are—administering
poison, causing poison to he taken, administering
a destructive thing, causing a destructive thing
to he taken, wounding, causing grievous bodily
harm, setting fire to a vessel, setting fire to a
chattel therein, setting fire to tackle, setting fire
to apparel, setting fire to furniture, casting away
a vessel, destroying a vessel, destroying or damag-
ing a building by gunpowder or other explosive


substance, placing any matter or thing upon or
across a railway, throwing any matter or thing
upon or across a railway, removing a sleeper or
other thing belonging to a railway, and displacing
a sleeper or other thing belonging to a railway.
Not one of those eighteen offences is punish-
able with death in England or in any country in
Europe.
Why are they so punishable here ?
But the absolute question is, Why with prisons
at hand are the evils of capital punishment
courted at all ?


CORPORAL PUNISHMENT.
The State is empowered to punish criminals,
but only in ways which will not shock any large
portion of the law-abiding community.
Apart from arguments on the subject, there
can be no doubt that the use of the lash seems to
many an unnecessarily brutish method of punish-
ing wrong-doers.
If the State cannot obtain its object any other
way, then these people must be overruled. But
if it can attain its end otherwise, it is under
obligation to avoid outraging the feelings of the
innocent.
When the State flogs, it punishes not only the
criminal but those to whom that form of torture
is revolting.
There is no use in saying that every form of
punishment is revolting to some one. Of course
it is. But the question is :Is there a consider-
able and influential portion of the community
opposed, on humane or other grounds, to this
particular kind of punishment ?
It cannot be denied that there is.
With other punishments at hand it is, then, bad
statesmanship which selects this.


For three hundred years Europe flogged.
During the last fifty years every country in
Europe has laid'aside the lash. Even Russia has
dropped the knout.
. England flogs, but the last time the question
was put to a vote in Parliament, 126 voted against
and only 194 for the punishment.
Scotland does not flog. Not one of the
American States adopted flogging. Tasmania
does not flog.
All these places imprison and put to hard
labour.
Why does not New South Wales, instead of
choosing a form of punishment which revolts a
large section of the well-behaved, adopt the form
which suffices all over Europe, all over America,
in Scotland and in Tasmania ?
Arguments flow from these facts. It can be
shown that the countries which do not flog are
as free from the types of offence for which
flogging is considered a cure as are the countries
which apply the lash.
Scotland is as free as England, Tasmania as
New South Wales. All argument is crystallised
in that.
Why should any considerable section be
affronted by the barbarity of a law which can
be thus done without ?


FREETRADE IN LAW.
The principle o£ Freetrade should extend be-
yond manufactures and agriculture.
It should be the,foundation of the professions.
The office of advocate should be open to every
person.
Every person should have a right to audience
in court, either in his own case or on behalf of
another.
If he undertakes work he does not understand,
and spoils it, he should be held liable for the
harm done.
That was the case in early times.
Law here is a monopoly. Barristers and
solicitors are all protected.
Freetrade lawyers should go straight for a free
bar.
Sir Robert Wisdom, when a barrister, went for
it. Sir John Robertson, Judge Foster, and Mr.
G. H. Reid favour it.


Those who do not go for it should give Protec-
tion to 'others.
Solicitors of any country seeking admission as
solicitors of New South Wales must pay 40
guineas before they are allowed to work.
Solicitors, as trades-unionists, are entitled to
charge an entrance fee, but they are only entitled
to use unionists’ powers.
Here they obtain the sanction and warrant of
Government to poll-tax competitors.
Carpenters, as a union, may or may not charge
immigrant carpenters an admission fee. If,
however, the immigrant chooses to refuse to pay,
Government does not interfere.
If carpenters went to Government and de-
manded authority to put upon every immigrant
carpenter a poll-tax of 40 guineas, this demand
would be at once denounced as Protection.
Yet that is what the solicitors of New South
Wales have done, and the Government have con-
curred in the demand.
It may be said that this is only a rule of court,
but that is merely a quibble. All responsibility
centres in Government.
Unless Government will authorise all unions
to put poll-taxes on immigrants in their respective


branches, the privilege granted to legal unions
should be cancelled.
Otherwise, some are made to live under Free-
trade, while Protection to the point of monopoly
is given to others.
A prisoner charged with a criminal offence is
at the mercy of monopolists. If he be tried in
the Supreme Court he must employ both attorney
and barrister. If he be a poor man, where are
the fees of these to come from ? A barrister of
good rank will demand £5O or £lOO.
It is true that in capital cases the court assigns
a barrister to an accused person without means.
But unless the accused be an aboriginal the
barrister is not paid.
Thus barristers of good rank avoid the work.
It often happens that accused persons know
laymen better able to defend them than a junior
barrister who takes the case up just before the
trial begins. They should have the liberty to
call upon these persons.
In time, some of those persons might devote
themselves wholly to advocacy, but it is manifest
that only those would do so who had proved
themselves possessed of exceptional abilities.
If they gave these proofs, then Freetrade
demands for them the right to practice, and


justice demands that an accused person should
have the right to employ them.
The fear that an undesirable class of men
would adopt the business of advocacy if this
were allowed is practically groundless! No
accused person would employ a disreputable
person, as he would thereby be prejudicing his
case. Besides, a rule of court could regulate as
to the main elements of character.
A man capable of being a legislator is capable
of being an advocate. There is more reason for
making legislation a monopoly than for making
advocacy.
There are branches of the law which require
technical skill, but by making the advocate
responsible for his ignorance or neglect he would
be sufficiently restrained. He would practice only
in the departments which he understood.
Some lawyers say that it is for the public the
profession of the Law is hedged in. Protection
from what ? Judge Foster says that many
attorneys’ clerks are superior to their masters in
knowledge of law. Why not allow these clerks
audience in court ? Is it for the protection of the
public that they are debarred from practice ?
Manifestly it is to protect not the public, but the
attorneys.


Sir George Grey introduced a Bill into the
Legislature of New Zealand, empowering laymen
to act as advocates in all courts. The principle
was approved of throughout the country, and
was accepted as being in favour of, and not
against, public interests.
It is said that the present practice protects the
court from the presence of advocates of bad
character.
This has been answered, but it may be added
for the benefit of those who take shelter here
that Judge Foster thinks that on the score of
character things are as bad under the present
system as they could be under the proposed one.
Sir Robert Wisdom said that some of the lowest
of the low are practising in the profession, and,
that things could not be worse if the doors were
thrown open and everybody admitted.
But this is beside the true question. Character,
like ability, is to be judged of by the public,' not
by a party, not by a union interested in keeping
numbers down.
The man whose character and ability are high
should have unrestricted access to the public.
The public should be his sole judge.
If the public want to employ him, and a
corporation get in the road, that corporation is


employing in its interest one of the worst forms
of Protection, '
Protectionists have a right to claim the vote of
every lawyer who is not prepared to open the
courts to- lay advocates.
If a guild of barristers are justified in claiming
and retaining a monopoly of litigants’ work, why
should not a club of bankers or journalists claim
a monopoly in the work of investors or thinkers ?


POLITICS AND NATIONALITIES.
Protection is supposed to have a peculiar charm
for Irishmen and Roman Catholics. It is amusing
to read the theories advanced in explanation of
that supposed fact. Some of these theories
show that the authors gave the subject great
study. But the conclusions arrived at show
that their studies were wrongly directed.
First, as to Roman Catholics. Where is there
evidence that anything in the Catholic faith
disposes to Protection. Its very genius excites,
as far as it can be applied to practical politics, a
Freetrade sentiment. The spiritual nature of
man is the same the wide world over. Over
that great field there is not one spiritual customs
house. There is nothing to correspond with
either ad valorem or specific duties. The Scotch-
man’s soul is as good as the Dutchman’s, and the
Chinaman’s as good as either. All stand on a
common footing in the great religious mart.
If the Chinaman can save his soul on little,
there is no cry raised to exclude him from heaven
on that accoant. He is as welcome as the English-
man who must work day and night from year’s
end to year’s end, for a similar result.


If any application be made of the spirit of the
Catholic Church it must be in the direction of
Freetrade. Undoubtedly its tendency is opposed
to Protection.
Individual clerics may be, of course, Protec-
tionist. But they are Protectionist just as in
France some clerics are Protectionist, as in Ger-
many some are Protectionist, and as in England
some are Freetraders. It is not because they are
Roman Catholics they are one or the other. They
will be no worse Catholics if they are neither.
Like laymen, they used their eyes on the facts
about them and formed conclusions which may
be right or wrong, but with which their religion
does not deal.
If a larger body of them appear on one side,
some apparent ground for suspicion may be set
up. But before it be declared to be solid, natural
allowances should be made for the gregariousness
of mind. Men go with the flock. If an energetic
layman go one way, a tide of laymen will set in
that direction. So with clerics.
A crowd of them together only shows that there
is an energetic mind in their midst. If the crowd
be Protectionist, that is accidental. Put an ener-
getic Freetrade mind in the front and soon it will
be in the centre of another crowd.
If one crowd be greater than the other the
difference is to be ascribed to political selection
and not to religious influence.


Coming directly to New South Wales, Bishop
Ullathorne, who exercised great ecclesiastical
influence in this colony in the early days was a
Freetrader in the only sense that Freetrade had
then a voice. Archbishop Polding did not interest
himself deeply in politics, but when he did his
views were Freetrade ones. Archbishop Vaughan
was a confessed Freetrader. There are in the
present New South Wales Parliament members
who possess autograph letters from his Grace to
that effect. Cardinal Moran, the present occu-
pant of the highest office in the Australian Church
does not profess Freetrade, but in his lay and
church policy acts on its principles.
One fact should satisfy Protectionists on this
head—he is utterly opposed to the exclusion of
the Chinese.
No eminent dignitary of the Catholic Church
in any land ever formally advocated the doc-
trines of Protection.
Then, as to Irishmen. Subtle reasons are
circulated as to why the majority of Irishmen in
New South Wales are Protectionist. It is true
that the majority of this majority are Roman
Catholic, but what has been said shows that it
is not their religion which makes them Protec-
tionist.
Recourse is had, therefore, to their national
history. It is said that they are Protectionist


because Freetrade ruined the industries of
Ireland. No greater perversion of history can
be put in words.
It was Protectionist Governments in England
that ruined the trade and industries of Ireland.
English landlords found the export of Irish
cattle so great that the rents of English pasture
lands should be reduced. They appealed to the
Government, and a Caroline law forbade Ireland
to breed cattle.
Ireland turned to sheep and proceeded to
manufacture wool. English manufacturers com-
plained again to the Government, and Ireland
was forbidden to export woollen articles to
England or to any part of the world.
Ireland’s geographical position gave her advan-
tages in trading with America. English traders
again complained, and the Protectionist Govern-
ment enacted that no articles could be brought
from the colonies to Europe without being first
unloaded in England.
Ireland’s linen trade was similarly ruined.
When 100,000 citizen soldiers fell into rank
under Charlemont and Flood, they raised their
voices in one loud passionate cry for the abolition
of legislative restrictions.


It is a fact of history that they on that
occasion turned in the direction of the Protec-
tionist Government of England the muzzles of
two cannons, labelled “ Freetrade or this !”
And there are subtle reasoners going about
who say that the greater number of Irishmen in
New South Wales are Protectionists, because
Freetrade killed Irish industries !
Swift, Grattan, Flood, Curran, Sheil, O’Connell
were all Freetraders.
It may be said that since England adopted
Freetrade Ireland has been as badly off. That is
nearly true, but the cause is to be found in bad
landlaws, and the inevitable consequences of a
bad past.
Why then are so many Irishmen in New South
Wales Protectionists ? It is clear that religion
and the late ruin of Ireland have nothing to do
with it. These direct in a contrary way.
It is possible that the explanation lies in the
fact that Irishmen are accustomed to fight on the
weak side. They feel at home when great
majorities are against them. Standing on the
weak side for generations, they have come to
regard weakness as right.
This may not be the full explanation but it is
in part explanatory. The rest may be accounted
for on the natural ground of party combinations.


. It is possible that the majority of Scotchmen
are also Protectionist.
It is not necessary to deal with the state-
ment that most Irishmen are Protectionist out of
hatred to Sir Henry Parkes. Sir Henry Parkes
wantonly assailed Irishmen in the past. But the
times were exciting and they are past, and no one
regrets more than Sir Henry that wild words
and unnecessary acts escaped him. There are
persons who will never forgive him. Day and night
they will follow him with an eye of implacable
revenge. But how numerous are these ? How
powerful are these ?
Those who say that most Irishmen adopt Pro-
tection out of hatred to Sir Henry Parkes look
through magnifying glasses and into one or two
small haunts.


NON-REPRESENTATIVE PARLIAMENT.
The present Parliament can scarcely be looked
to with respect. The men are as able as in
former Parliaments, but the majority affirmed a
decision which deprives them of moral power.
That was voting themselves payment.
Payment of members is a sound principle. It
should have been the law long ago, Legislators
in all countries but England are paid, and signs
show that soon they will be paid in England too.
It is not necessary to prove the principle
sound, as we have now the fact.
But members entered the House as unpaid
men. The first argument for the measure was
that while the Legislature was unpaid electors
were restricted in their choice of candidates.
That is, that many in the present House would
not be in if payment had been in force at the
time of election. If they say the present House
would have been returned even if payment of
members had been the law at the last general
elections, then payment of members was not
necessary at all.


The whole force of the argument was that
electors had not got the right members, and
never would get them till the certainty of pay-
ment enabled talented poor men to come forward.
The present House, by voting itself payment,
affirmed that its members comprised all the
talented poor men.
It thus stultified itself.
It is manifest that there are men there who
would not be there if there had been payment at
the beginning of the year.
They are standing in others’ boots.
They are pocketing others’ money.
Each will say he is not of them. But each
must admit that such are there. How many ?
Possibly as many as carried the measure.
As these could not be removed and proper men
elected, it was the duty of Parliament to go at
once to the country, or make payment of mem-
bers take effect from the next general elections.
The fact that the House has thus gone in for
money irrespective of what electors think indi-
cates that they will stay collecting the money as
long as they can.
The one fact follows from the other.


Some good may come out of this.
The Premier will be able to do what he likes.
Members may restrict and even obstruct, but
they will help to keep him in a majority on
important divisions.
They will atone for this assistance by being
bitterly hostile in debate.
Notwithstanding the advantage of the Premier
having his way, however, the state of things is
unhealthy for Parliament.
The Premier cannot be always right.
An end of the present Parliament and a general
election on the basis of payment are imperatively
necessary.


ELECTORAL RIGHTS.
Parliament should be the voice of the people.
That is its claim to existence. Many, when they
enter the House, claim to be only themselves.
They mistake that attitude for independence.
The representative of two men is better than
either. The representative of two thousand is
really two thousand.
But he can only represent that which intelli-
gently votes for him. If he be true, he never,
in a high political sense, represents the man who
votes against him. He may get him a bridge or
a dam, but that is not politics. The returned
member who assures those who voted against him
that he will represent them as faithfully as those
who voted for him, is unlikely to have talent
enough to do either harm or good.
Minorities have a right to representation. In
an ele'ctorate of 1,000 voters, returning one
member, there may be three candidates, two of
whom poll 300 votes each, and the third 400, and
yet this last will sit as representative of the
electorate. The very ballot papers on which he
is. returned show that three-fifths of the voters
voted against him.


Thus, a majority of any Parliament may be
unrepresentative of their electorates.
Neither does a member represent the voice of
the people who is returned on land-votes. At
many elections the contest is close. While
owners of land can vote as persons and again as
land-owners there is no certainty as to whether
the winner represents persons or building sites.
It is true that property is entitled to confer
some advantage on the possessor. The idea was
originally sound. But it has been killed by the
definition given to property. Education is pro-
perty, talent is property, reputation is property.
Are these allowed to confer advantages under
the electoral system 1
As they are not, all property qualifications
must be cancelled and all men placed on one
electoral level.
Men are not equal by any means, and by giving
one man one vote the stupid boor is placed on a
level with the intelligent citizen. That is not-an
idealistic reform. It is only better than the pre-
sent system which often gives the stupid boor four
votes, three for allotments and one for himself,
and the intelligent citizen one only.
The tendency of democracy is to absolutism.
In all reforms that should be borne in mind as
a law of the times. Every expedient resorted


to to prevent it reaching the goal must fail. The
sense of force is in the air.
When democracy becomes absolute it may be
worse than absolute monarchy. It will be harder,
fiercer, and in conflict with it there will be no
escape. The man who fights a despot to-day falls
back upon the love of the people. When he
fights the absolute people, on whom can he rest ?
And for ever single opinion will be civil crime,
and there will be men who will commit it.
Hitherto, democracies when they neared abso-
lutism created an absolute monarch. This may
happen again.
But for the present the people demand and
must obtain the boon of one man one vote. They
must obtain something like an approach to a
representation of minorities. They must obtain,
as they have already proved with sufficient force,
an elective Upper House.


RELIGIOUS FREEDOM.
The religion of an opponent, unless it be con
sidered that his creed is subversive of national
progress, should not be made the subject o
political criticism.
It does not follow, however, that it should not
be at all referred to.
Where several creeds exist it is interesting and
necessary to know in what proportions they
contribute to guide and rule the State.
The knowledge is educationally and histori-
cally valuable.
But it is one thing to refer to it with these
objects and a totally different thing to refer to it
with the view of exciting traditional antipathies.
An illustration may be found in recent pro-
ceedings in Parliament. A question arose as to
the proportion of Roman Catholic teachers em-
ployed in the State schools, anci Sir Henry
Parkes declared that it was proper to have the
creed of each teacher known.
That was the assertion of a thoroughly sound
principle. The State should be in a position any


day to say what proportions of the various creeds
and of the non-creeds serve the State in import-
ant capacities.
Who will say that religion should be excluded
from census returns ? The principle is exactly
the same.
It is also the duty of Government to be more
than a spectator in this matter. When in the
offices at its disposal grave disproportions mani-
fest themselves an effort at just distribution
should be made.
No man’s creed should be a disqualification for
a post, but the fact that he wants to go where
his creed already gravely preponderates calls for
interference.
He is not disqualified because of his creed ; he
is disqualified because he wants to attach himself
to a mass already too powerful in that particular
department.
And as with creeds so with non-creeds.
The State should recognise equally the pro-
portional claims of all.
That is the only way to repress sectarian senti-
ment. But for the State to exercise thatppo r er
it must know the religious profession of its
subjects. t .
To. ban all mention of religion in public life is
to surrender to sectarianism most of the avenues


of public life. To recognise all religions openly,
but to favour none, is a policy which the past
and present enforce.
Religion is not a thing to be hidden away as
if the national life were ashamed of it. Nor is the
negation of creeds. All are exercises of intellect,
or should be, and the man or party who believes
or disbelieves should be encouraged to do so above
board
The State that speaks with baited breath and
shivers all over when anyone mentions religion,
is going on wrong lines.
It is right to put down bigotry in public life
But that can only be put down by public candour
and out-spokenness. Silence, privacy, darkness,
feed it.
Bigots are narrow-minded. The more light
falls on them the more dazed and helpless they
become.
A man’s politics may be sound, although his
religion is - unsound. That is why it is nearly
always irrelevant to bring in his religion in
assessing the value of his politics. Similarly his
politics may be unsound, although his religion is
sound.
The general inference then ia that unless some
public good can be shown to come from it, the
politician should be taken simply as a politician.


FREETRADE IN MEDICINE.
There should also be Freetrade in Medicine
If a man has devoted himself to a particular class
of study he is entitled to offer the results to the
public,
As in Law, so in Medicine, an organized body
get a trade into their hands and forthwith draw
up rules to keep it as much as possible among
themselves.
That is Protective spirit of the deepest dye.
Medicine is not a science, it is an art. In its
lowest branches contradictory judgments may be
formed ; in its highest, they are sure to be formed.
Different temperaments create differences in
diagnosis, different experiences cause differences
in treatment.
To have gone through a medical curriculum
confers only a supposition that a practitioner
knows something about some forms of disease.
Beyond this he is standing in the dark.
To claim for him the sole right to heal is to
assert for him a Protection which is tyranny.


A trained medical man deserves to have advan-
tages over an untrained one. Other things being
equal, the trained man is to be preferred But
his advantage should end there. He should not
be allowed to claim the whole field as his.
The untrained man may have devoted more
time and as good a brain to special studies. The
difference between him and the trained man may
be a difference in scholastic accomplishments only.
Then let the trained man describe himself by
his accomplishments. Let him add to the fact
that he is a healer the scholastic or medical
titles which he has earned. Let those titles
discriminate between him and men otherwise
qualified. Let others be prosecuted if they assume
the titles.
The State should not go farther, unless it sets
out to protect the shoemaker and the coatmaker,
Jin less it sets out to protect the tinker and the’
baker.
Every man has a right to set up in the busi-
ness for which he believes himself qualified. The
Public are his customers, his patrons. Anyone
likes can start as watchmaker. Why does
?> ot an unskilled man go into this business?
because he knows that he would be obliged to
pay for damage caused by his ignorance, and
knows besides that the public would soon note


his want of skill. The same principle applies all
round.
An untrained medical man might kill a patient.
This is possible, but the fact of his being un-
trained will make him more timid in resorting
to drastic experiments than the trained man.
The untrained man in whose hands a patient
dies loses his reputation, and will be prosecuted
for his ignorance or neglect.
The public should be left to judge between
them. It is the public that are the sole masters.
When the Government steps in and takes a side
it simply protects that side. It gives that side
a monopoly.


FEDERATION.
Every Australian desires a United Australia. A
desire so largely entertained is destined to be
realised.
But as it has grown in the heart, in the mind,
so it must grow in fact—gradually, imperceptibly.
It cannot be moved into a fact by politicians,
newspapers. These may make it glow in the
heart or the mind, and thus prepare it to pass
into fact at a supreme summons from without.
But they must await the summons.
Bismarck spent a life in acquainting State
with State, but the Confederation refused to be
born till it heard the summons of Napoleon 111.
So it was in America, so it was when ancient
States and cities made Leagues.
The federal spirit is present wherever civilisa-
tion is present. The act of federation is the off-
spring of a reciprocal sense of danger.
The colonies of Australia are aware of no
reciprocal sense of danger. On the contrary,'
they have a reciprocal sense of safety. While
that subsists, politicians toil in vain for the com-
plete federal act.


If, under factitious enthusiasm, they consum-
mate a charter, in the hour of danger when the
people speak from the fullness of their own desire
that charter will be the first thing destroyed.
The existing Federal Council illustrates this.
Before a serious move towards federation can
be made that Council must be dissolved.
Anybody attempting any function on behalf
of the people must be elected directly by the
people or directly by Parliament.
When Federation arrives the Freetrade prin-
ciple will be as it is to-day. It may for a while
lose the world, but it will dominate Australia.
With the wider base of all Australia it will then
regain the world.
New South Wales Protectionists, if logical,
must resist a Federation. If they advocate a
Federation with intercolonial Freetrade, they
sacrifice their farmers, they sacrifice those infant
industries which thej' - have argued require Pro-
tection.
• They therefore must openly oppose federation,
or they must covertly oppose it by supporting
the impossible Federal Council.
* v- iw


CONCLUSION.
These are not the only questions deservino’
consideration. The present Land Bill is only a
stop-gap. It pleases, as better than the old, but
falls short of the promise of the new.
Practical men who have lived in the interior
should be levied on for information on this
question. A Parliament of city intelligences
will only go from bog to bog.
Irrigation and water-conservation are also
questions on which minds familiar with the
interior should be encouraged to speak freely
and exhaustively. y
These questions, however, with that of Local
Government, are properly outside the lines of
party. Discussion on them will be voluminous
and may be acrimonious! but much of this
Z l . J be owin g to the fact that few leading speakers
ha 7 e studied the questions fully, and that
os e wh o will have studied the questions fully
W not be leading speakers.
W : ere parties will split will be on the question
dlrecfc taxation. The abolition of the present
ants of Protection will entail the necessity
ot raising revenue from other sources.


Income, Land, Property, these must be
reached; Land, because it is the foundation ot
all; Property and Income, because they are its
twin children. If property and Income can.be
reached through Land, in a way that will be im-
mediate and as little expensive as the levying on
them directly, then all all revenues should be
derived from Land.
But a prime consideration is immediateness.
Large incomes should be taxed without delay.
Property which costs so much to protect should
pay substantially for the protection. If a scheme
l taxation through land will immediately reach
the absentee, the holder of debentures and bank
shares, the foreign mortgagees of mining ma-
chinery and station improvements, and it the
public mind can be immediately got to under-
stand the scheme, then let it prevail.








