

Presbyterian
Church,
LEARMONTH.
1907
1857
Jubilee
Celebrations.




Learmonth
Presbyterian Church
Jubilee Souvenir


Presbyterian Church, Learmonth.
The Manse, Learmonth,


Learmonth
Presbyterian Church.
JUBILEE...
MEETINGS
Sunday, June 7, 1908 :
Services : 11 a.m. and 7.30 p.m.
Preacher : Eev. J. A. Forrest, Geelong
Wednesday, June 10:
Concert, Temperance Hall, 8 p.m.
Chairman : Mr. John Baird, J.P.
(President Ballarat Shire Council)
Thursday, June 11, 3 p.m.:
Chairman : Mr. Wm. Rain.
Mrs. Jas. Baird, sen., will lay the found-
ation stone of the Sunday School Hall.
3.30 p.m.: Thanksgiving Service in Church.
Mrs. Wm. Rain will unveil a Memorial
Tablet to the Rev. R. Hamilton, M.A.
4.80 p.m.; Afternoon Tea.
Saturday, June 13, 3 p.m.:
Children's Service & &
Preacher ; Rev. J. A. Crockett,
Brunswick.
Sunday, June 14:
Services : 11 a.m. and 7.30 pm.
Preacher: Rev. J, A. Crockett,
Brunswick.


A SHORT HISTORY
OF THE
Learmonth
Presbyterian Church.
"ZSw -vqjQN the 13th March, 1857, a meeting
" was held at the farm of Messrs.
Robertson and Ross, Burrum-
beet, to take into consideration
the erection of a Church, Manse and School
House at Weatherboard Hill, in connection
with the Free Church of Scotland. The follow-
ing were present ; —Messrs. Robertson, Ross,
Strachan, Hossack, McDonald, Howard, Draffin,
Laidlaw, Blair, McDougall and Gilchrist. The
following Committee was appointed to carry
REV. G. MACKIE.
out the object in view : Messrs. Robertson,
McDonald, Hossack, Draffin, Gilchrist, Laid-
law and Strachan, with the Rev. Mr. Hastte
as Treasurer, Mr. Howard as sub-Treasurer,
and Mr. A. McPherson Grant as Secretary.
At a meeting hold on the Bth of June, 1857,


it was resolved to build the Church on the
north side of Lake Learmonth. This meeting
was adjourned to meet at the house of Mr.
Alexr. McDonald, Lake Learmonth, on the
12th of June, when it was resolved to apply to
MR. JAS. HOSSACK.
MR. JAS. BAIRD.
the Government for a building site on the
north west corner of the Reserve situated on
the north side of the Lake. On the 7th July,


it was decided that the Minister should hold
Divine Service at the Burrumbeet School House
once every Sabbath for at least 12 months after
his induction. It was also agreed that the
dimensions of the Church should be 50 x 28
feet and 12 feet walls. On the 12th October,
1857, a meeting was held at the residence of
REV. JOHN DOWNS.
Mr. McDonald. There were present :—Rev.
Geo. Mackie(Chair), Messrs Howard, Strachan,
Robertson, McDonald, Hossack, Gilchrist,
Draffin and Laidlaw. It was resolved to build
upon a por Jon of a 45-acre block on Uie east
side, of the Lake. It was also resolved to apply
to the Presbytery of Geelong for Ministerial
supply of Gospel Ordinances.
In the meantime the Church and Manse
were erected, for we find that on the Ist
January, 1858, a meeting was held in the
Church, when it was agreed to apply to the
Geelong Presbytery for the services of the
Rev. Geo. Mackie for three months. Three
weeks later, at a meeting of the Commit-
tee held at the Manse, Lake Learmonth, it
was arranged to hold services alternately at
Lake Learmonth, Mount Blowhard, and Bur-
rumbeet, and the Rev. Geo. Mackie was autho


rised to treat with the Government for the land
on which the Church was built.
REV. ROBERT HAMILTON, M. A.
MR. WM. BREWSTER.
On March 10th, the Rev. W. Henderson, of
Ballarat, presided at a Congregational Meeting
held in the Church, when a call was given to
the Rev. Geo. Mackie. The stipend was fixed
at not less than £350 and not more than £4OO.
The Mount Blowhard Committee agreed to pay


one-third of the amount. The first Trustees
of the Church property were; —Rev. Geo.
Mackie, Messrs. Angus Gilchrist, Alexander
McDonald and James Hossack. On March
2drd, 1859, the first Annual Meeting of the
Congregation was held, and it was resolved to
sever connection with the Mount Blowhard
MR. WM. RAIN.
portion of the charge. Mr, R. B. Williams
was elected Secretary of the congregation in
the room of Mr. Grant, and Mr. Jas. Baird was
elected on the Committee. On the 2nd Sabbath
of May, 1859, the first Communion Service
was held : Messrs. James Brewster and Robert
Dickie officiating as Elders. During the same
year the following were elected and ordained
and inducted as Elders of the congregation ;
Messrs. Robert Dickie, James Baird, James
Hossack, John Mackie, sen., Alex. McPherson
Grant, and James Brewster. In October, 1860,
the Rev. Geo. Mackie resigned the pastorate of
Learmonth and Burrumbeet, owing to failing
health. In March, 1861, the Burrumbeet por-
tion of the charge formed themselves into a
separate congregation with a Committee of
their own, instead of a joint Committee. On
June 20th, 1861, the Rev. John Downs was


inducted by the Presbytery of Ballarat. About
a year afterwards Mr. Downs accepted a call
from Clones. At this time the arrangements
existing between the Learmonth and Burrum-
beet congregations terminated, and a new charge
was formed, consisting of Learmonth and The
Springs (now Waubra). Burrumbeet joined
with Windermere in forming a separate charge.
REK. J. A. CROCKETT.
In March, 1863, Rev. J. B. Steel, of Cres-
wick, presided at a Congregational Meeting,
when a call was given to the Rev. Robert
Hamilton, M.A. The ordination of Mr. Ham-
ilton took place on May 20th, 1863. In March,
1900, Mr. Hamilton resigned the charge and
retired from the active ministry of the Church
owing to failing health. During Mr. Hamilton’s
long ministry of 37 years, two substantial stone
churches were built, one at Learmonth costing
about £1250, and one at Waubra costing about
£BOO. In addition to these the present Manse
was completed in 1890, and cost about £B7O.
In the same year the sum of £132 was contri-
buted to the Jubilee Fund of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria.
In August, 1865, Mr. Wm. Rain was elected
Secretary of the congregation, and has held
the office ever since.


The foundation-stone of the present church
at Learmonth was laid by the late Sir Samuel
Wilson, of Ercildoune, on the 24th November,
1875, and the church was opened practically
free of debt on the 19th March, 1876. In the
year 1881 the present fence in front of the
church was erected by the late Mr Alexander
Wilson, of Mount Emu, at a cost of £42, and
presented to the congregation.
REV. J. SMILEY, B.A.
On the 27th May, 1877, Messrs. Wm. Brew-
ster and Wm. Eain were elected and ordained
to the office of ruling Elders in the congre-
gation.
On the 28th November, 1900, the Rev. J. A.
Crockett was inducted as Minister by the Pres-
bytery of Ballarat. At the end of February,
1904, Mr. Crocke twas translated to Brunswick
and the present Minister, the Rev. John Smiley,
B.A , was inducted on the 23rd November,
1904. On the 18th October, 1907, Mr. John
Baird was ordained to the office of ruling Elder
in the congregation.


The following are the Office-bearers for
1908: -
MR. JNO. BAIRD.
||Urtister— Rev. John Smiley, B.A.
€lb CVS— Messrs. Wm. Rain (Session Clerk)
and Jno. Baird.
Committee —Messrs. Jas. Baird (Mill), D. Blair,
D. Brewster, R. Christie, R. Findlay, G.
Fraser, J. McKerrow, C. Medwell, A. Rob-
ertson, W. D. Sara and D. Stewart.
port. Organist— Mrs. Jno. Baird.
port. %sst Organist— Miss Gumming.
port. '(Treasurer— Mr. Jno. Baird.
pon. —Mr. Wm. Rain.
Jsttnbaj) jsejjoo! Oeaejrers—
Mr. Wm. Rain ( Superintendent),
Misses M. Stewart, G. Stewart, Jean Baird,
Mr. M. Lynch.
