

Leaves
From my Life
BY
ALEXANDER WEATHERHEAD
NANGUTTA, N.S.W.










LEAVES FROM MY LIFE
BY
ALEXANDER WEATHERHEAD
OF XAXG-UTTA, TWOFOLD BAY,
BEING
FIFTY-SIX YEARS’ EXPERIENCE
OX THE
I'SOUTH COAST OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
AUSTRALIA.
TOE TRIVATE CIRCULATION,\
<jp£ g<t:
•PRINTED EY W. T. CAMPBELL, AT THE ! ‘EREE PRESS” OEEICE.
18 9 1.




PREFACE.
Ix a young country like this, which, has been the home of my
adoption, where progress becomes every day more apparent, it
may interest my friends to gather from a few incidents in my
life the state of society existing here some fifty years ago.
During my residence here I have seen vast changes taking
place, the land which on my arrival was in a state of nature anti
inhabited only by aborigines, I see now occupied by a large ancl
prosperous population. The difficulties which an early settler
had to contend with cannot be well understood by those who
now visit for the first time our sunny country, but all my
troubles and piivations were cheerfully shared by one who is
now no more. My race having been very nearly run, being now
in my eighty-second year, I think I have got to the foot of the
hill, and am patiently waiting my turn to cross the river, and
while waiting I may as well jot down a few events of my life in
a plain, way.
ALEX. WEATHEKHEAD.
fy~Lt£u JXjkj 5 - (r?




LEAVES FROM MY LIFE.
IWeLL, to begin,, I was born on the banks of tile;
Tweed?, on the English side, but I must have'
been endowed with the instinct oi a Scotchman, as when young
I began to work to the south until I got into the county of
Durham. When in my twenty-fourth year I took to my-
self a helpmate. Before we were married twelve months
there was a birth, next a death, and the extra expense
caused us to think more about some things than we had
done before, so on looking over the shipping news in the
papers I soon made up my mind to go to Sydney, a rare
thing at that time from country parts. About that time
I saw the father of the late John Hawdon, Esq. of Moruya,
he gave me a letter to his son, there -was a younger son,
Joseph, getting ready to go l to Sydney at the same time, lie
went to London before us. There were two small steamers
running between Middlesborough and London, the James
Watt and Majestic, we went by the latter. After a few
days in London, we left by the ship David Scott, and got on
very well until off the Cape of Good Hope, where, as the
Yankee would say, “I guess it knows how to blow.” We
were going before a stiff gale with close reefed fore and
main topsails and jib, and the sea was very high. At four
o’clock a.m. at the change of the wheel she shipped a heavy
sea, the bulwarks between tlie fore and main chains were
carried away, the stanchions all broke off close to the deck.
She was an eight hundred ton ship, a large one at that
time. About nine o’clock the fore topsail split when she
came to the wind. Though not pleasant the scene was
really grand as she came meeting the sea. Where the bul


walks were' gone there was a white foam eight or ten feet
high, then it came over her taking the nettings off the top
of the bulwarks on the other side, she was then left naked
as all the sails -went away in pieces making a noise like
thunder. We laid to then until the next day with only a
tarpaulin on the mizen rigging, but they got more sails up
and got under weigh again next day, and got to' Sydney
with no further mishap. She made a very good run, we
left London on the 10th of July and dropped anchor in
Sydney on the 25tli of October, that was in 1834, fifty-six
years from the time I am writing, so you see I am not a
new chum. I was not a poor man wdien I landed in Syd-
ney, I had a good sound constitution, a good wife and a
letter to Mr. Hawdon,, that was about all. We spent one
day looking about Sydney, the next, day I started to find
my way to Ellerslee on the Cowpasture where Mr. Haw-
don lived,, I got to Parramatta, where I got good directions
for Ellerslee, but found it was further than I expected ; be-
fore I got to Liverpool I was overtaken by a man driving in
a gig, he offered to give me a ride to Liverpool for a shil-
ling but I would only give him sixpence, so he drove on a
little way then he stopped and took me up.. 1 thought to
stop at Liverpool that night,, but there was too- much of a
rough mob about, so I had a glass of beer and went on
again. About four miles further on was another public-
house at the cross-roads, but it appeared no better, so I still
pushed on but soon found the twilight was not so long as in
England, it soon got dark, then I saw a light off the road a
little, I made for it and found two men, they were putting
up a new house, they were then at supper and asked me to
have some, which I accepted. I then found I T ould have
to go a long way before I found any place to stop at, so I
asked them.to let me stay \yith them, they said they had no,
way of putting me up, but I pointed out there were plenty
of shavings, so I stopped there and got a good sound sleep..
The next day I got to Ellerslee and found Mr. Hawdon at
home and engaged with him to go to Bergalia, the new
country as it was then called, I stayed a day at Ellerslee,
then started back for Sydney. I made for the same place
where I slept in going and was made welcome, I wanted to,


pay them hut they would not accept anything. I w r as told
the time the coach left Liverpool, so I started very eaxiy
and got through Liverpool before it, so when the coach
'Came up I got on, I gave the guard a shilling and told him.
when I got far enough for that he could tell me, but he
never told me and I did not think it my place to remind
him of it, so I rode all the way to Sydney.. I think I man-
aged pretty well for a new chum. When we got to Brick-
field Hill, the coach going slow it was not much trouble for
me to get down, as I saw my wife and a shipmate. She
had been greatly troubled as she had heard so much about
bushrangers and their doings, however I was back again.
Three days after I got back to Sydney a man with two
horses and a cart came to take us and our luggage to Ellers-
lee. Before we left England «■ Mr. Robinson told me he
had a nephew in Sydney, but had not heard anything of
him for some time. Rather strange to relate before we left
Sydney, I was going along George street, of course meeting
many people, though not so many as one would meet now,
I was on my way to post a letter, I met one young man and
I said to myself that is Robinson. I turned back on the
other side, turned again and met him and had a better look
at him, is your name Robinson I asked, yes, he replied.
Have you any relations in county Durham ? Yes. What
part ? Auckland. I was right, there must have been a
strong family likeness, we had a chat together, 1 saw him
no more. Mr. Hawdon told me he was not doing well.
But we must get on our way to Ellerslee ; we enjoyed the
trip very much as our driver kept pointing things out and
who the different places belonged to; Sam Terry owned a
good deal hen. We had to stop one night by the way at
a very quiet inn, the weather was nice and warm, but still
we almost had an extra cover on the bed, I say almost, it
was in this way, we were early up but had not got out of
the room when about a yard of plaster came flap on to the
bed, however, we were up and did not need such a cover.
Well we got to Ellerslee, Mrs. Hawdon and my wife were
soon great friends, both coming from the same part at the
'other side of the pond. After a few days we made a start
for Bergalia, Mr. Hawdon had a flock of sheep at Ara-


'liran so lie sent a bullock dray and two men with us. "We
left the most of our luggage to be taken back to Sydney to
go by sea to Broulee, as the dray could go no further than
Araluen. We sometimes slept in houses, but most of the
way under the dray ; the two men were very attentive and
kind, of course we had our own bedding and there were
wool packs and a large tarpaulin, and by way of a partition
the men slept under the pole. Women got very scarce the
further we got along. I cannot recollect much about the
places we passed, but I remember at Jimbecumbene they ap-
peared to be working a large dairy. Then at Braidwood, a
station at that time belonging to Dr. Wilson, we stopped
there a night, there were three or four men, and a Mr. Tay-
lor was manager. The next day we got down to Araluen,
there was no white woman at Braidwood then, but a good
many blacks, the most of them dressed in the same suit
they were born in. The mountain we went down to the
valley was very steep, they slung not a sapling but a good
sized tree behind the dray. Mrs. W. went down on her
stocking feet. I believe that was the first dray that was
taken down the mountain on its own wheels. Mr. Burnell
was there then and had a dray but they took the wheels off
and took it down on a slide. After we w T ere down the
mountain and making towards the station we were over-
taken by Mr. Hawdon and his brother who had gone to
Sydney after us. He thought it was a wild looking coun-
try. We got a little hut to stop in, of course the two Mr.
Hawdons went to stop with Mr. Burnell. It looked very
pretty in the valley, nice and green and there w T ere about two
acres of wheat which looked very well, it was then Novem-
ber. Well in the Old Country 1 had seen fox hunts and
hare hunts, but the first hunt I saw in this country was at
Araluen, a rum hunt. Now I must explain that hunt, we
brought from Ellerslee amongst other things a keg of ruin,
I suppose for the sheep washing and shearing, it came all
right and was taken to Mr. Burnell’s, I suppose they got
some of it that night hut the next morning it was gone, so '
not the dogs but all the men were laid on for the hunt,
they hunted all day but never got on the scent, I suppose
there were some who did not want to. The next morning


ihe sheep were taken up the creek to a very good place for
washing them, we soon put up a brush yard and got to
work. The Mrs. was with us, her job was to keep the billy
going for tea, now she had a small basket with a cover or
lid to it, amongst other little things in that basket was a
bottle of whisky Mrs. Hawdon had given her, my job was
to catch the sheep and throw them into the water, I got
very hot, and instead of a drink of tea she gave me a dram
’of whisky toddy, that was all right, but not being used to
it and being very hot I soon began to feel it, I tried to hide
it but got more giddy until in throwing a sheep in I went
head first with the sheep into the water, then I very quietly
said to one of the men, you go and throw them in and I
will take your place. I was afraid some of them would
take notice and think I had been in at the death of the
hunt the day before. I was soon all right, I suppose the
ducking did me good. The next morning our few things
were put on a pack bullock and we made a start again on
our journey, there was a horse for my wife, we called at
Merricumbene, there was a little man there they called
Billy Tatem, we had a pot of tea and went on again, we got
to Buckenboo, and stopped that night. There were two
men there, they were very kind, hut 1 found they had a rare
breed of fleas, there were no single ones they appeared to
he all married with large families. We started early next
morning and got to Mullenderry for dinner. The late Mrs.
Flanagan was living there, but no other white woman, and
she was not far from .confinement, Mrs. W. soon went back
there again as nurse, As the tide was coming in they
thought it would be too high for the Mrs. on the horse so
one of the men named Abram Ivnight, or better known as
Bungey, (that was what the blacks called him as he was a
shoe-maker) had a log canoe, so he took Mrs. Weatherhead
over in that, and she was the first white woman that ever
crossed to the south side of the Moruya River. Well we
got to Bergalia, we got a small slab hut that was to be our
home, the Mrs. rather lost heart for a time, I suppose she
thought of the nice little house she had at home, it was a
great change, no glass windows in those times. Now as
we were done with the two men that had come from Ellers-


lee I will give a short account of them. They were both
prisoners and assigned servants to Mr. Hawdon, the one
whose name was Jeffrey had been a married man at home,
about two years after we came here he went out of his
mind, and in crossing the Moruya River, it being too high,
he got drowned, he had Pilgrim’s Progress with him at the
time. The other whose name was Sam Barr, a rough and
ready straightforward fellow, he had been a boiler-maker at
home. After he got his freedom he, with some other help
built an iron punt for carrying goods up and down the river.
There was a small cutter running between Moruya and
Sydney at that time, captain and owner, old Billy Woods, he
was the first to sail into the Moruya River. There was
some cultivation going on then, Mr. Hawdon had Riora
where he had taken up has land grant, and cultivated part
of it, then there was Mullenderry, so that both Sam Barr
and Billy Woods had plenty to do. Some years afterwards
Barr had a small vessel built, the Sam Barr was her name,
she was lost whilst loaded with potatoes from Pambula,
Barr was on board and was drowned, with one of Thom-
son’s sons who used to live in Pambula, there may still be
some one who recollects the 'occurrence. Old Thomson
built the hotel at BoydtoAvn; that was the end of both the
men who travelled so far with us. Now I must pass on to
the 18th May 1835; when Mrs. W. was put to bed she had
a daughter, since dead. We had a woman whom Mrs.
Flanagan had got up from Sydney.
About latter end of June Mr. Hawdon brought his
family to Bergalia, he then began to get sheep on to Ber-
galia, so in the spring we shifted the cows up to Bodalla,
got yards and other buildings up, and got started to dairy
ui November, so we were the first to go there to live. Mrs.
W . did all the dairy work, I was Jack of all work. We got
a good deal of land ploughed and put in corn and potatoes,
1 did not like the bullocks, so before ploughing time again I
got Mr. Hawdon to get a horse plough and harness, I got
an aged mare that had worked in the gig, but had never
been in the plough, she was quiet, and they sent me a
colt, so I soon had them at work two or three hours a day.
Mr. Hawdon came up one day, he was riding a strong young


horse lie had bought, lie thought he would be too heavy for’
saddle, so I got him to leave him with me and he rode the
old mare home, so I soon had a very good pair for plough.
But I must move on- as I have a long, way to go, Well,
we were two years at Bodalla, and I will picture bush
life in those days. In February, 1837 Mrs. W. was put
to bed, she took bad early on a Sunday morning, 1 sent a
man to Bergalia to see if he could get a nurse. The
Mrs. was very bad all day until four in tbe afternoon’ when
she had a boy, that was the first child born at Bodalla,
unless black ones. Now I felt rather in a fix that day’
and in case we might be in the same fix again I began to
study doctor’s books, and it was just as well I did. °But I
will only mention one case, when our eldest daughter had
to be confined we had her at Nangutta, I thought she would
be all right as she had her mother, and- when the time came
I was in bed asleep. But the Mrs.- came and awoke me and.
told me there was something wrong, she seemed greatly-
put about. I told her it would be all right, I was soon up
and found it was as I had been told. But I was not Ion"
there until the child-was born all right, But you will say,
did the man get back to Bodalla with the woman,, oh yes'
he got back on the Thursday, the Mrs., was then getting on
well, I was a good nurse, at least she told me so. Now
that is a bit of bush life in the olden times.
Now I got to know in an indirect way,, that if I left Bo-
dalla I need not be long without a place ; however I did
not want to change, as the three years were about up with
Mr. Hawdon. Wages were very low at that time, but Mr..
Hawdon increased ours every year by five pounds. But
wages were getting up,. Melbourne and Adelaide were being
spoken about; Mr. Hawdon offered the usual advance, but
1 wanted more,. I may as well say here what the wages-
were,, so that men may see what they have to grumble about
now ; Mr. Hawdon’s offer for our fourth, year was forty
pounds, and I wanted fifty, I knew 1 could get more, but I
did not want to leave as we liked Mr. Hawdon,. but he would
not come up, he told me there were lots of free men coming
into the country.. Now that was Mr. Hawdon’s way, he
would never count the cost, he was not a good speculator*


always doing tilings too hastily, I pointed'out that if lie got a
fresh man in my place everything would be strange to him
for a time, but he could not see it, and it was not my place
to say all I thought. As I said further back I was Jack of
all work, milkman, stockman, ploughman, or anything that
had to be done, I may say as the old song says :
“ I can plough and sow, reap and mow,
And be a farmer’s hoy,”'
Mrs. Weatherhead did all the dirty work, and sometimes
went into the yard, some of the black gins minding the
children. Well I said to Mr. Hawdon, there is ten pounds
between us, if Igo you will loose that in two weeks. I
\ised to bail up and bring the calves out. I knew things
would not go on well for a while. However, I went over to
(rundary and engaged with Mr. Morris, I had not to ask
the second time for more wages than I wanted from Mr.
Hawdon, and no dairy work for Mrs. Weatherhead. I may
as well finish with Bodalla, Mr. Hawdon got a man for the
dairy, then he got a stockman, then an old man as over-
seer, then when ploughing had to be done he had to send a
man from Kiora. Now the last butter we sent to Sydney
was sold on the wharf for two shillings per lb.; but the
first that went from the new dairyman was sold for seven
pence, he was then discharged for making bad butter, the
dairy was lost for the season, so there were a feiv ten pounds
lost.
Well when I got to Gundary Mr. Morris soon left to go
to Nangutta, he had formed a station there, he was the
first who owned Nangutta ; from there he went to try and
find Gippsland as he had heard there was good country out
that way, it had no name then, and was unoccupied ; he
did not find it. Well I saw. there were some stores wanted,
so I sent to Sydney for them, and amongst other things I
sent for fifty pounds of tobacco, but eighty pounds came ;
the Government men we had were allowed so much a week,
then there were ticket-of-leave men, and some free men
about, and we sold tobacco and other things to them. Well
Old Billy Woods sent his man up with our things in the
boat, it was night when he came, I had gone to bed, but
when called I was soon up, and down at the landing place,.


But some persons were there before me and the tobacco was*
gone. That was too bad as Mr. Morris as well as myself 1
were always kind to the men. There were often complaints
of hard masters, but it was often the fault of the men. Well
I took it pretty easy and did not say much, but on the Sa-
turday some of the free men wanted money, our money then
was an order on the agent in Sydney, so I gave them what
they wanted, I knew pretty well what they wanted it for,
there was most likely some grog which had come to a party
lower down the river, so on the Sunday morning I was up
and saw most of the men, some-of them very tipsy, but I
could not draw from them who'had the tobacco. After din-
ner I rode to the- shanty, I met the owner outside and at
once said-, L—-s which one of our men offered to sell you
the tobacco last night? he at once said Tommy the shep-
herd, oh thought I, I have got that pretty easy, but how
must I manage now ; well I kept quiet, but on the Monday
morning I sent two men away with the sheep to have them
washed, it was a small flock, they had to go a good distance
to get to the fresh water, so on Tuesday morning I started
with more men, more than was really wanted, but I thought
it best to have a few of them together, then I spoke about
the tobacco, told them how well they were dealt with, and
pointed out how often all the men on the place suffered
through the deeds of one or two-, now you will not be all
home to-niglit, if that tobacco is put where I can get it on
Thursday morning there might not be much more about it,
but if not, I mention no names, but there are two of you
here who will have to go to Braidwood, and mark what 1
say, one of the two will never come back to Gun d-ary. Well
on Thursday morning I was up early and was looking about
when two little black boys who used to go and hunt the
cows up came running to me crying out massa, massa,
me find him, the tobacco had been placed on top of a post
away from the yard, so I got the tobacco all but about four
pounds, I then went to Tommy the shepherd, he slept in
the watch box, I helped him out of it and told him to go
and get ready to go to court, he was surprised that I thought
it was him. I did not mean to go to court, but he did not
know that, as if it had been followed up-it would have been


id job for him, he-came to the Mrs-:- for her to beg him
so I told him he could take the sheep out, that I would
ik it over, I thought at the time he would have a mate
at it was three years before 1 knew who he was, then I
found it was not the one 1 thought it was.
There was a large block of good land which they were
cultivating all with bullocks, but I got a plough and harness
up from Sydney, and broke horses in for the plough. When
we got the maize off I began to plough, I soon had two pairs
of horses, but not one man on the place to work them* so I
worked one pair in the forenoon and the other pair im the
afternoon,, with a bullock team at the harrow. I got about
twenty acres done and set it out in nice sized lands, got the
dairyman to bluestone the wheat and have it taken to the
paddock towards night, then early in the morning I would
go and sow it, a man would get the horses up and feed
them. As soon as I had breakfast I took one pair until
dinner, then away with the other pair; I was not long in
having twenty acres of wheat in, I was not an eight hour
man. When I got the horses nice and quiet, the first man
I got to go with them was Jack Sawyer, I think lie died
about Bega, there may still be some who remember him.
I may as well say here that the first to form a station at
Eurobodalla was Mr.. J. Badgery, uncle to some of the
Badgerys we have now ; the first at Wagonga was Mr. F.
Hunt. There was no commissioner in those days, the first
Commissioner for Crown Lands was Mr. Lambey.
Well, everything went on very well until the spring of the
year, Mr. Joseph Hawdon had been overland to Adelaide
with cattle, he was a pushing young man, and took the
first lot of cattle into Melbourne, and the first lot to Ade-
laide. I was told what a grand place Adelaide was, and
what a grand place it would be for me to go to, and I was
inclined to listen to it all;. and as Mr. Hawdon would be
starting with another mob of cattle just about the time my
twelve months would be up with Mr. Morris, it would be
a good chance for me to go ; Mr. Morris advised pne the
other way, and made me a good offer to stop with him, but
after a bit of wavering I decided I would go. I was allowed
to take a certain number of cattle, and find my own horses


and to be at no expense. So on tbe 10th November, 1688,
I made a start for Adelaide ; Mrs. Weatherhead was to stop
for some time at Gundary beiore going to Sydney ; but
Mrs. Hawdon went and saw her, and would not hear of her
stopping there, she must go to Bergalia, so all our things
were sent to Bergalia, and the gig sent for Mrs. Weather-
head, and she stayed there until it was time to go to Syd-
ney. Mr. Hawdon had a small craft of his own then, I
think they called her the Alligator, so Mrs. Weatherhead
had a free passage to Sydney. There was only one vessel
then running to Adelaide, the brig Nereus, so that Mrs.
Weatherhead was eleven weeks in Sydney waiting for the
brig, and when she did go, they got near the Five Islands,
off Wollongong, when they had a gale, and she sprung a
leak, and had to put back. Hie cargo had to be shifted in-
to the Abercombie schooner, so that my poor Maggie had
her troubles with three small children; however, she got
to Adelaide all right, I was on the look out. The brig
Nereus belonged to some of the Solomons, one of the lead-
ing auctioneers in Sydney then was a Mr. John T. Wilson,
he invited a lot of lids friends to a dinner, and while they
were mustering to the dinner party, Mr. Wilson was off
with the Nereus, and got clear off, there was no steamer to
follow him. I suppose this 'incident is almost forgotten
now, it caused a good deal of talk at the time, but I must
get on my journey.
We started with five hundred cattle, we went by Araluen
and Braidwood, it was a tough job to get them up the
mountain, then -away by Lake George and Yass. The
country was very thinly populated then, so that we did not
yard the cattle often; we stopped one night at the Long
Swamp, there was an inn there kept by T. Hiland; we had
a dram or two, some of our men were rather fond of it, a
great fault when on the road with cattle. We had all got
to bed in our tent and asleep, and it must have been about
midnight when a constable came to us, he had got the
name of one of our men, for lie was looking into the tent
and shouting “Janies Parsons.” I was the first to wakp,
and asked him who he was, and what he wanted. He said
lie was the cliietf constable of Queenbeyan, I saw he was


very tipsy. However, this J. Parsons went .out, then it was,
“ What’s your name sir?” “James Parsons.” “Are you
a free man?” “Yes.” Then he must have us all out and
ask our names, and if we were free. But one he had up,
“What’s your name sir?” “Henry Benson.” “Are you
a free man?” “ Ask my ,” well it was some place at
the lower part of his back. The constable, whose name
was Kinsliley, then got Benson by the shirt collar, Benson
told him he would knock that white hat off, and no sooner
said than done, the white hat went, then there was a tussel
with them. To see them wrestling by the light of the fire,
they showed a great contrast, the one fully dressed, even to
the top coat, the other with nothing on but the shirt, and
that a very short one, it put me in mind of Burns’ Tam
O’Shanter, so I shouted, “Weel done Cutty Sark.” But
they soon went down, then another man ran and kicked the
constable, but he was barefooted, and must have hurt his
toes, as he went to work with the heel, I went then to try
to protect the constable, but when I got them to leave him
alone, he took a pistol out of a breast pocket, that made
things no better for him, as they closed on him again and
took the pistol from him and threw it away, he got two or
three more blows before I got him away. He stopped at
the inn, I was going to say that night, but it must have
been morning. Before we left we went up to see him, they
found his pistol and took it to him, but Benson wanted the
price of a new shirt before he gave it up, but lie was let off
by standing drinks; his face was a good deal swollen, so
Mr. Kinsliley did not gain much by his visit to our camp,
he had no business there, and he was the worse for drink.
There was too much drink to be got by the way. At one
place we were making to stop, Benson went on to see if we
could get the yards, so we let the cattle draw along, but no
Benson came back, so we got to the place and put the cat-
tle into the yards, and soon found there was a keg of rum
amongst them, Benson was drunk and asleep, they were
very noisy. I and another man stayed at our own tent.
The next morning this man and I took the cattle out, and
drove on, thinking the others would soon follow —not they
—’Only two men with five hundred cattle, to save the horses


’we drove on foot, it was a hot day, and on passing a place
1 went for a drink, they were making cheese, so I took a
hearty drink of whey, our men did not come up to us. We
got to a place near night where there were two old men,
and there were good yards, so we put the cattle in, some
that were rather thin we left out; the men and dray did
not come that night. The next morning early I got the
horses and the cattle gathered together, but I was feeling
very pnwell, and had to lay down; the other men had
started early, they got the cattle out, I was not able to go,
so I had to be left behind, I was very bad all day, it must
have been the whey that caused it; towards evening I felt
I was getting better, and had a fancy for a drink of milk,
but when I asked for that I was told it was all set, those two
old men I suppose were on halves or some such lay; it was
strange after my being so bad all day that the surly dogs
would not let me have a drink of milk, hut I was not to be
done that way, as they were taking the thick milk out to
the pigs, I saw where they had to go so I watched for a
chance, and set or not set, I had a good drink out of the
first cooler I came to ; it was all wooden coolers in those
days, no tin dishes. I was not sorry to leave the old men
next morning, and overtake our mob again. When we got
to the Murrumbidgee crossing place at Gundagai there was
another grog shop, and the river was pretty high, from the
snow, I suppose, as there was not much rain, and it was a
very dry time. We got the cattle all over that evening
without any mishap.
The next day we got all our things over with the help of
a log canoe, then moved slowly to the Murray at Howlong,
that station belonged to Mr. Joseph Hawdon then,became
to us there, and Mr. Chas. Benney, who was to be our pilot
to Adelaide, he was with Mr. Hawdon with the first lot of
cattle, they then followed the Murray down, but we were
going more by the coast, making for Lake Alexandrina, and
as the country we had to go through was unknown, they
thought it best not to have too large a mob, three hundred
was thought to be enough, the others were sent on to Mel-
bourne. We must have been a full month at Howlong, the
feed was pretty good by the river side and between the river


•and the outer bank, but outside that was as dry as chips.
We got ready for a start, we bad two drays, one of them
could be taken off the axles and used as a punt. There was
Mr. Benney, pilot, four of us to drive the cattle, two bullock
drivers, one elderly man to drive a few sheep and act as
butcher, the cook and another man, well we call him store-
keeper, and two black boys; we went by the Ovens and
made for the Goulburn River, but we left the road keeping
a little more to the south, and whenever we came to a bit
of good feed, such as a swamp, we stopped to eat it off; we
stopped a short time at the Broken River, I am not sure
now but I think it was on the west side of the Goulburn
River, it was where the Blacks killed a lot of men some
time before, the men were travelling with sheep belonging
to Mr. Faithful, I think there were fifteen men, eight of
them were killed, I thought it was seven, but not long ago
I saw in a paper that it was eight; they must have been
badly provided with firearms, I did hear that they only had
one gun, and that not a good one. It must have been a
lonely road for poor Johnny Burke, that was one of his
stopping places, when he came there to stop for tbe night
he saw eight dead men. But you will say who was Johnny
Burke? well I must tell you, Mr. Joseph Hawdontook the
contract to run the mail from Melbourne to Yass, that was
the first mail that was run there, and Johnny Burke was
the first mailman, he must have been a brave fellow to
travel by himself through a wild country, but he did it
bravely, very likely he was working for his freedom, if so he
was well deserving of it.
Well, when we got I think some fifty miles from Mel-
bourne we turned off to the north; the prospect was not
good, through its being such a dry season, there had been
great fires, 1839 is often mentioned as one of the very dry
years, so we had some miserable black country to get
through, but when we came to any grass that had been left
we made the most of it. We got to the vicinity of Port-
land Bay, the Hentys were there then, but we did not see
any of their belongings, we were inland; I suppose we had
come over the top of a good bit of gold, oh well we did not
want it then, we were done with the grog shops. We


stopped two days here, and shod some of the horses. From:
here we did not know what we had to go through as we
were the first to go that way, we were not troubled with
too much water, part of what we did find was salt, there is
a great many salt lakes over on that side. We got along
middling, often being very short of water for the cattle, we
always carried water in the drays for our own use, when
the cattle had water in the day time we let them go at night,
but if they had no water we had to watch them at night,
as they would ramble too much, but when we had got a
long way things began to look bad, we had seen no water
for two days, when we came to a pond, but it was very
brackish, we would not let the horses drink it, well Mr.
Benney did not like the look of the country, it was too flat,
no hills, he thought sixty miles would take us to Lake Alex-
andrina, so it was thought best to push on with the cattle,
so the teams were to stop, and it was thought by digging
away from the brackish hole they might get better water,
so we had an early dinner, and started with the cattle, ex-
cept about twenty of the weakest, and some of the horses,
we took some flour and tea and sugar, we had a good moon
at the time, so we kept going until about nine o’clock, it
was nice and cool, we had a good sleep; our party then was
Mr. Benney, four of us to drive the cattle, and the two black
boys, the others were left behind. The next morning we
got a good start, we had no cooking, the day got very hot
and we had to camp a long time, but we moved on again
and got a few more miles rubbed off, we laid down and had
a sleep, I did not sleep well but kept on dreaming, it could
not be nightmare from eating too much; the next morning
we got a start made again, but we were all very dosey, the
cattle looking very bad, and the horses not able to carry us..
Well we got along for a bit but two of our men began to*
jack up, Benson and Moncrief, I was greatly deceived in
Benson, but not in the other, well I got them mounted, we
had been walking most of the time for the last few days.
Well, we got underweigh again, but by and bye Benson’s
horse laid down with him, so we had to camp until after the
middle of the day, I then put Benson on one of my horses..
Now those two men riding just let the horses go where they


liked, that was in tlie midst of the cattle; it might have'
been about five o’clock, both men about the one time turned
their horses outside of the cattle and rolled off, fairly giving
up; that lets one see how some men give up, and lay down
and die; now for the others of us, Mr. Benny kept moving
on ahead, sometimes riding, sometimes walking, his horses
were stronger than ours, they had not had so much work,
he was a thin man, and looked very washy then, but he
was tough, the other whose name was Moorhead never gave
up, but just kept walking along at the one corner of the
cattle; the two black boys were a party by themselves that
day, they would lay down for a spell, then come crawling;
on again. As for myself, I must say I was the strongest of
the lot, but still when we let the cattle stop I cannot say
whether I laid down or fell down, but I must have had a
bit of a fainting fit, in two or three minutes, however, I w as
up again, and felt as fresh as if I had had a feed. Things
did not look very bright, then Mr. Benney and I had a talk
together, I pointed out a small heifer that I thought I could
catch and kill for the blood, he wished I could, so after a
little dodging I managed to throw a tether rope over it, and
got it down, I cut the vein on the one side so that the blood
would not come too quickly, we drank it warm, it was not
disagreeable, blood however, doesn’t quench thirst, it was a
little salt, but still it must have done good. I cut some
slices of the meat, put it bn the fire, and thought to have
a feed, but no, I could not swallow a bit, none of the others
tried, some of them looked miserable, quite different with a
pint of blood from what jhey would be with a pint of rum;
well we all laid down until about the middle of the night,
when Mr. Benney spoke to me and told me the cattle were
on the move, what was to be done ? I said let them go, he
told me they were going right pointing to a star, well I got
the horses and put the saddles on, then we tried to get the
men up, no not one of them would move, so we thought it
best to give them two hours more, I let the horses go, they
could not go far, they were like their masters could not eat.
About two o’clock I got them together again, one of them
I found in the same place both times, it was lying down in
3t bit of scrub, he meant to die there. The men got up then,


there' was a* few of the cattle left, tliere was one a bull,-lie
would not get up, so we had axiotber drink of his blood.
The few cattle were no trouble to drive, they followed the
tracks of the others for about seven miles, when we came on
the mob all lying on a flat; daylight was breaking, we went
to a little ridge and made a fire and lay down. But very
soon Mr. Benney spoke to me and said, the cattle were on.
the move again, and going back the way we had. come, SO'
that would not do, I did. not know what to do, it was almost
hopeless to ask any of them to go with me, however, I
pitched on one of the black boys and used some soft soap,
and got him to go with me. We went and got the cattle
back and drove them on a bit further, then in going back
to the camp we came on a. bare spot, it looked as if water
had been on it not long; since, so I went to work with a
stick and my hands and got down perhaps 15 inches when
the water came in grand, I soon had,my head in and swal-
lowed a mouthful, but oh what a blow, it was as salt as
brine, lam not sure that I did not cry. We had been away
perhaps two hours, and, as we were getting to the other
men, the other black boy was coming from the other side
of the ridge shouting out he had found water a little sweet
and a little salt, so we were soon bustling off to it, it was
a blackfeilow’s well, but very little water in it and very
dirty, it was perhaps just as well it was so, we got about
half a pint each, and that was both meat and drink as, it
was half mud. Mr. Benney was not there, he thought he
saw a smoke not far off, he went towards it and found the
lake, what he though was smoke had been a bit of fog rising
off the water. When he came with the glad tidings we
were busy baking cakes on the coals, we had cleaned the
well out deeper than it had been and there was soon plenty
of water, we had managed to give the horses about two
quarts each, and that was quite enough, one of mine, a
mare, when she gpt it she dropped, and stretched out as if
she were dead, however after a short time she got up again.
The cattle we could do nothing with but let them go into
the lake, it was a good place: with a good bottom and no
bank. They did better than we expected, there were only
two died, they were dead soon, after they had drank the


water. We liad lost our tea and sugar, but we liad flour,
so we bad to do with bread and water for a few days, with
the exception of a goose we shot, there was a great many
geese on the lake but we could not get another one.
The next day Mr. Benney started back to bring the others
on, when he got to them they had plenty of water, the
working bullocks and the other cattle we left with them
strayed away and found water about three miles from the
camp so they were all right, so we joined together again.
There were a great many blacks about the lake, but they
kept away from us, they had not seen many white people
then. Sometimes as we went along if we came nigh any
bla.cks they were as wild as hawks, one time as we were
gathering the cattle together, some appeared to be on the
march, but when they saw us they went off double quick,
there was one woman who dropped her child, it was ten or
twelve- months old, I tied an handkerchief round it, they
would not come back to find it; it is after they get more
acquainted with the whites that they are to be feared. In
one part we travelled through we often saw sculs lying
about and did not know the meaning of it, but we found it
out, it appeared when they died they were not buried, but
a scaffold was made six or eight feet from the ground be-
tween two low trees where the dead body was laid with his
net or other belongings when in life. It was somewhere
about the 1 same quarter that we saw some very superior huts
for blacks, let me see if I can describe them : well, at the
end was the doorway abofft three by two, with a step down,
the floor about eight feet long, that was dug, say eighteen
inches deep, then the walls of earth about four feet high set
back about eighteen inches so as to have a seat all along
the sides and one end, then covered with branches and
grass, then a foot of earth over all, no fire kept inside, a fine
cool place to sit in, all very neatly done ; one would say
there must have been a white man amongst them. But I
must go back to the lake, after we get everything gathered
together again, we moved on slowly,, when we came to the
river we still kept going up looking for a place to cross, it
was not for putting them in so much as for a place for them
getting out on the other side; about twenty miles up we


’found a place, so we got the punt off and got it made water-
tight, the river '-was very wide and deep as we had all the
large rivers in one there. It was very still, so still that we
-could not see which way it was going, there had been so
little rain for a long time. Well we got everything over
and got a start made again, we kept making for Mount
Barker, from there towards Adelaide, there is fourteen or
fifteen miles of what is called the Teirs, that is a rough
hilly country. But we went for two days along the back of
those hills looking for a good place to form our camp. Then
we put up a large log yard so that the cattle could be put
iin if necessary. Mr. Benney and I rode into town to have
a look about. I felt disappointed, I could see nothing bet-
ter nor as good as I had left, however I was there, I soon
made up my mind what to do, that was to sell my cattle,
and go to work with horses and carts, so I went out and
brought my few cattle in and sold them, the most of them
privately. Cows fetched twenty pounds each, one had a
bull calf which fetched thirty-one pounds. Tliree-year-old
steers twenty to twenty-two pounds each, that was a long
price, but everything was high, draught horses from one
hundred pounds up, everything was very brisk for a time,
a great many people coming from the old country. There
were a great many buildings going up so there was plenty
of work for horses and carts, drawing bricks and stone, and
bringing people’s luggage up from the port. There was a
good bit to be made, but again everything one had to buy
was very dear. I have paid one pound per bushel for oats,
hay, gust bush hay, one pound per cwt. Some people did
very well for a time, and others it was pitiful to see. Some
tradespeople that may have been doing middling -well at
home found no work to do in Adelaide, -and if they had a
little money it soon went, house rent high, and beef a
shilling per lb., and everything else in proportion. There
was one family I brought up from the port, they appeared
to be nice people, the man was a hatter, so his trade was
no use there. Poor things, after they had been there a
while I have seen their little girl with little things for sale,
such as a child’s dress or other little thing, the man poor
fellow went out of his mind. That "was only one case out


of'many. Well, after a while things began to look dull,
there was no cultivation as yet, it was all out and nothing
in. Cattle, sheep, and horses from M. S. Wales, then from
Van Dieman’s Land draught horses, hay, oats, potatoes,
and flour, so that the money was being drained otit until it
appeared there was net much left, so I began to think
about another move. T found it hard to get money in that
was owing to me, some I never got; and in selling out I
had to take less than half what I had given twelve months
before. Now we meant to get back to N. S. Wales again.
There were two small schooners to leave about the same
time, the one for Hobart direct, the other for Melbourne
and Hobart, I wanted to go to Hobart as I thought there
would be cattle ships between there and Twofold Bay, and
I would go there, so I took our passage to go in the Chal-
lenger for Melbourne and Hobart, as I thought to have a
look at Melbourne. So on the 18tli of June, 1840 we left
Adelaide, we had some stormy weather between there and
Melbourne. There was not much to see there then, but
we were thankful we went that way, the other schooner,
named tire Maria, was lost with all on board, I think there
were sixteen passengers, there was one family named Har-
vey who went from Sydney at the same time that my wife
•and children went to Adelaide, the father and mother and
five children all gone. I believe all hands had got on shore
from the wreck and were murdered by the blacks. We got
to Hobart, but found there was no cattle shipping for
Twofold Bay. Hat cattle were bringing a high price in
Sydney, so they were shipping cattle there.
We had to wait two or three weeks in Hobart for a ves-
sel going to Sydney, at last we got one and got to Sydney.
When we got there who should I meet but Mr. Morris from
Moruya. He was then selling Gundary and Nangutta.
When he saw me he thought to run off the bargain, he made
that sure he could do it that he engaged me again for two
years to go back to Gundary, but he had to stick to the
bargain, then he recommended me to the buyers, Abecrom-
bie and Co. I engaged with them to come to Nangutta,
they would have done as well if they had run off the bargain,
they were merchants in Sydney. Cattle at that time were


bringing high prices, so many bad been taken away to
Stock Victoria and South Australia. They told me the
price they were giving, it was four pounds ten shillings per
head for the cattle, and fifty pounds per head for horses.
I told them at once they were giving too much; I thought
cattle might keep up for a short time, but horses would be
down very soon. They told me they got all calves under
months old given in, I asked what time the bargain
would go from, from May last, they said, I told them the
calving time would be September and October, so that they
would get very few calves. How I knew so well that prices
would not keep up was by just leaving Adelaide, I saw there
how the prices were coming down, the demand was over.
You will say Morris must have done well, I think not; if
the one party knew nothing of the country, Morris was lost
in the town, it was not all cash. Then he took a long lease
in some part of Sydney, and run some brick houses up on
it, but things got very dull, he tried to sell, but could not,
so he gave up the lease. He did not live many years, he
left one son and two daughters, the son served his time as
a tanner, the two girls were sent home.
Now I had to think what would be wanted for Nangutta,
there would be very little there, as it had been an outside
cattle station, with two men on it. So I got tin milk dishes,
butter kegs, tubs, iron pots, and other things. Then I had
to look for some small craft that was trading along that
way, I found there was one going to Broulee soon, her name
was the Fanny, I think not more than twenty tons. I
bargained with them to take my family and a good bit of
cargo to Twofold Bay for twenty pounds.
After a few days we got a start made, and got on all
right to Broulee, then I got a few bags of wheat from Gun-
dary, and we got a start made for Twofold Bay, they got a
blackfellow for pilot, as they did not know where the bay
was, we got along past Montague Island, and in the after-
noon the blackfellow pointed to some high land, and said it
was Twofold Bay, I could not say if it was or not, but in
the night they thought they were far enough, so they laid
to until daylight, just at gray light the blackfellow was
looking out, when all at once he thought he knew where he


'was, he says “by G—d, gab owe that one,” well they knew
that much, if it was Cape Howe they were too far south,
however after it got lighter, I saw it was the Dromedary,
but they would not have it, but I was sure of it by my being
so much about Bodalla, and sometimes along the beach be-
tween the Wagonga and the Tuross. I was pretty sure
where we were, so I. got them to go on again, we had a
light north wind, so they went along looking into every
place for Twofold Bay, the last place we gave a look at I
think must have been Pambula, then with a bit of sailor’s
talk they would go no further, so they turned to go back,
but the wind being north they could not turn as we would
with a dray, they had to stand out, and as they did they
opened Twofold Bay, but they would not believe it was the
bay we wanted, however, as luck would have it, there was
a heavy bank of black clouds coming up from the south,
then the skipper asked me if I was willing for them to run
into that bay for shelter, as he thought there was going to
be a storm, of course I was willing, so we turned again and
made for the bay, but when we got to the north head the
wind dropped, so they had to get the sweeps to work to
help her along, we met some pieces of whale; but still they
would not believe it was Twofold Bay, when we got to the
middle head we saw a whaling ship, and when I asked them
what place this could be, they got sulky and would not
speak, however, we were soon at anchor, and there was soon
a little house allotted to us, and we thought we were better
there than at sea that night, as it did blow,a real sou’wester.
I told one of the whalers I saw three whales near Moruya
on the previous morning, and that they were coming this
way, the answer was “ we got them this morning.” The Im-
lays had a whaling station at each side of the bay, whales
had been very plentiful that winter. There was one white
woman there, a Mrs. Ritchie, her husband (had been there
as a ship carpenter and had died there.
The three brothers Imlay were owners of all about the
bay, and all the Bega country, Towamba, and other places
at that time.
Well, after a day looking about I started for Nangutta, I
. got a blackfellow to go with me, we walked up to Towamba


that day, tlie next day to Nangutta. When i got there I
found two men putting up cow bails and other work, and
one man as stockman, there ought to have been another as
pack-bullock man and liutkeeper, but he had left. Every-
thing had to be carried on pack bullocks in those days, so
after a day the stockman and I started for the bay with two
horses and three bullocks. When we got there we packed
up what we thought would be first wanted. Now there
was Mrs. Weatherhead, three small children, and a young
girl we brought from Sydney, so we got on very slowly, and
had to camp half way to Towamba, we managed to get to
Towamba next day; the late Tlios. Doyle and two boys
were there, the boys tailed a lot of heifers on foot. The
next day we got to Perico, there were three men there with
two flocks of sheep belonging to the Imlays. The next day
eighteen milks to Nangutta, we managed with a hard tus-
sle. What would some of the people in London think of
oiu next door neighbour being twelve miles off, I suppose
they would think we had more room than they had. As we
expected two or three more men to get the cattle mustered,
we must have more things out from the bay. Men were
too scarce about here then, to think of getting one to go
with the pack bullocks, I knew very little about packing,
but thought I would try it.. So I started with three bullocks
and managed very well.
Mr. Morris and Mr. Urquhart came to have the cattle
mustered, and as there were no paddocks then, as we got
the cattle in we had to put a brand on them and let them
go again, so as we would know fresh ones from what had
been in, we got through that job; Genoa was our heifer
station then.
I saw we could not do much with the dairy that summer,,
so I did not try to get more men, I thought the best thing I
could do was to get the things out from the bay, so I went
to work with a will, it was something new for me, but they
say change is lightsome, and I got along very well. I broke
in two or three young bullocks, the way I managed that, I
first looked for a quiet bullock with a quiet eye, and better
to be a little sharp at the wither than too broad, rope him
sound the horns, tie him to the fence and leave hint for a


while, then put the saddle on and let him go in the yard,
he is likely to bellow and buck; when he gets over that,
have two bags with something not too heavy, get that on
and put on the sursingle, then let him go, he might buck
again, but he soon gets used to it, then he is fit to go with
the other bullocks and carry a light load home. Now I
would start on a Monday morning, go to Towamba twenty-
five miles, the next morning up early, get the bullocks and
put the saddles on them, there were no bells in those days,
we used hobbles. Sixteen miles from there to the bay over
very rough country, I would try to get to the bay about the
middle of the day, let the bullocks go, they were in a pad-
dock as there was a fence from the edge of the sea bank,
and by where Axam’s hotel is now, then the yellow bluff
at the shipping yard. Then after I got dinner I got the key
of the store and got the loads all weighed and strapped.
There was a lot of clumsy things to go on the .quietest
bullocks. Next morning get the bullocks into a small yard
up the hill from the wharf, opposite Silk’s house, I had to
carry all the loads up there, the stores were the same as
now at the end of the wharf. I then had breakfast, got
the loads on and got to Towamba, the next day home. I
kept on going until I got everything home, I think it was
eighteen times I went to the bay, and walked all the time
except once I took a horse, it was too slow, and in the
morning the horse would bo one way and the bullocks
another, it was well I got a good stock of boots at Hobart.
I think before anyone would do the same work now there
would be a strike.
Now I often see stories of snakes in the papers, so I may
as well tell one here. Soon after we got here Mrs. Weather-
head and the girl cut some grass to put in a bed tick, it was
a new tick meant for feathers, so when the grass got dry
they filled it and sewed it up. When Mr. Morris and Mr.
Urquliart came they slept on it, The next morning Mr.
Morris said I think there is a snake in that bed. 0 non-
sense ! Well it may be a lizard, I felt something like that,
at the same time scratching his trousers with his thumb-
nail. However there was no more thought of it. But three
or four 'weeks after, we had then got the feather bed home,


Mrs. Weatherliead was going to take the grass out and put
the feathers into the new tick, so she slit it so as she could
pull the grass out with her hand, I was about and heard
her give a screech, I went to see what was up. “ 0 there
is a snake.” “0 I suppose a bit of a lizard.” “No it is
a snake.” There was a good bit of the grass out, so I got a
stick and shifted it, when I came to the last bit there was
the snake, she had pulled it out with the grass. It was a
brown snake about eighteen inches long and quite lively.
There was no harm done, but how did the fellow live so
long in such a place ? If it had been winter it might have
gone to sleep, but it was the beginning of summer.
Well, I had a visit from Mr. Campbell who was then
superintendent at Gundary, vgot him to send me a couple
of men, so we got a bit of wheat in and other work done
through the winter. In the spring we started to make a
bit of better, it had to be carried to the bay on bullocks,
but I had a man to go with me now. It generally sold
pretty well in Sydney. There was not much demand for
cattle, the third summer I was here we took five hundred,
a mixed lot to Bergalia, the Company had bought that place,
but I began to think things were not going on well, so I
gave notice to leave. In the winter I went to Sydney, and
was surprised to find Abercrombie had failed, it was a blow
to me, I thought to get one hundred pounds that was ow-
ing to me, but no, they kept putting me off, I got an ac-
knowledgement and tried to sell it, but that would not do,
and it did not do for me to be hanging on about Sydney,
so as there were some things in their store, I got some
barrels of American flour and some leather, I thought I
could pay a shoemaker with that as well as money. Then
they gave me orders to go to some stores to get what I
wanted, so by paying double prices at these stores the sum
soon got small.
That was about the time of the first election, when
Wentworth and Bland got in, the rough mob wanted Coop-
er and O’Connell, there was another candidate named
Husseler. The mob meant to put their men in by force,
they acted in a most shameful manner. I saw them march
along George street, some of the houses had pailings in


front, these were soon demolished. The shopkeepers were
getting things inside, but at one store there were two or
three bundles of pick handles, the mob got hold of these
and tried one of them on a man’s head at Brickfield Hill,
he appeared to be a working, man, he had a bit of ribbon on
his breast, which was not their color, so for that they killed
him. Then they went to the Haymarket, that was the
polling place, then there was a rush to Wentworth and
Bland’s flagstaff, it was a long pole and well set in the
ground, but it had to come down, the flag was soon in bits,
then the poor pole got such a thrashing from end to end,
and such yelling and jumping. Of course their men were
left out, no wonder. At night, they went about smashing
windows and doing other damage. Sam Lyons suffered
greatly through the breaking of windows in Lyon’s Terrace*,
the glass could not be replaced, at that time in the colony;.
I think there is still a great many of the same breed of <peo*
pie in Sydney.
At this time Boyd, was causing a bit of a stir,, he- had*’
bought land at Twofold Bay,, and was then beginning to
build what was afterwards known as Boyd Town.. He had
a steamer running between Sydney and Launceston', they
called her the Seahorse,, she called at Boyd Town.. I went,
to Sydney in her. I heard she had been on a sand bank at
Launceston and broke her back, she was condemned when?
we got to Sydney; through her not going back they en-
gaged a cutter called the George to take a cargo of dressed
stone for the building of the hotel at Boyd Town. I took my
passage in her and got my bit of cargo taken to Boyd Town,.
They had a hulk there as a receiving store. We had fine
weather, we were three or four days coming.. I had when
a boy been amongst boats on the Tweed, SO' I was not very
stupid on board a small craft, and I often took the tiller.
As I was steering one afternoon, we were a good bit off the:
land, I kept bearing in a bit, when Ned, our. skipper, would
sing out keep her away, I thought myself sailor enough to
answer aye aye sir, so I kept her away for a little, then-
bearing up again, then it was keep her away, then I said
I think Twofold Bay is in there. Twofold Bay—by what
the sailors say—no, a long way to go yet; but I would.


have it we were off the bay. There were three masons who'
had gone to Sydney when I did, some of them were inclined
to think with me, so the square sail was taken off her, and
we made for the bay. It was a fine calm night, we lay be-
tween the heads until daylight, when they did not think it
was Twofold Bay, and I could not see anything to make me
sure of it. There was a light wind springing up from the
west, so we got under weigh again, by and bye we got to
Green Cape, at that time called False Bay, we went a little
inside of it, I saw that it was not Twofold Bay, there was
too much sandy beach at the end of it, we saw smoke on
the south side. I told the skipper if they would lower the
boat I would go for one, as if I could get to speak to the
blacks, I would find out where we were, so we got the boat
out, but when the blacks saw us making towards them, they
made off, so we had to go back. We kept going on close in
to the land, they called me up in the night to see if this
was the bay, I could see no bay, it may have been about
Nagey. The next morning the wind was against us, a good
job too; they were close hauled and getting off the land a
bit. I would not say anything until it was light enough to
see the hills, then I saw where we were. As we were off
the land a bit, the hills showed very plain, there was Genoa
Peak and I could trace the hills right round to Nangutta.
We were off Malagoota, the mouth of the Genoa River, I
had been down there and knew it well, so I told them they
would have to go back to where they left yesterday morning.
Malagoota is to the south or rather to the west of what is
called Gabo, that is not the original name, it must have
been some one wanting to get the native name, and asked
some blackfellow, and instead of giving the native name he
has given the white people’s name, Gabou Island, just what
a blackfellow would say for Cape Howe Island. Well, after
coasting along and hooking a few barracoutas we got back
to the bay before night, we were told we were seen leaving
the bay the morning before. People now could scarcely be-
lieve it, but it shows how little it was known at that time. -
It was well the weather kept fine.
Soon after that people began to get to what is Eden now,
the late Mr, George Barclay was the first to have a store’


there, the next was Mr. Solomon. The first to have an inn
was the late Mr. James Rixon.
After I had got back we soon left Nangutta, we first
went to Walagara, near the junction of the Timbillica and
the Genoa Rivers. It was a poor place, but we had not
many cattle then. I had bought twenty-three cows with
calves at foot, and twenty heifers two years old. We were
not long there when a gentleman came with one hundred
head, he was not long from home, the son of a vicar, he had
a bit of money, he wanted to put his cattle over the river.
I told him to wait till to-morrow and I would help him, so
they rigged their tent. The river is wide and deep in places,
but I knew a place where we could cross. The next morn-
ing I got a pack bullock in, his nose had been bored, so by
putting a cord through it he would lead like a dog, so they
got the cattle together, then a man took my bullock and
led him through the river, and the cattle followed with very
little trouble. The gentleman then took a fancy for the
bullock, so I sold him, and as Mr. R. was going to get some
things round from Boyd Town in a small craft, I took flour
for the bullock. I got my things round at the same time ;
the difference between the flour and the bullock left me in
debt ten shillings, that T could not pay just then, it was a
rare thing to see a shilling then. I told Mr. R. it was a
poor part of the country for him to come into; the likes of
me might scrape along, but it would not do for him. Mr.
McLeod was with him, he that was at Buckenbo, I thought
he ought to have known better, they are both gone now.
Well they soon shifted the cattle down to the coast, then
they saw that would not do, so he bought the goodwill of
Narira, a place below Bega, so they had to muster the cat-
tle to take them away, I went with them down to the coast,
and helped to put a yard up, then we got the cattle and
brought them to where they had them first. There were
two of their cattle among mine, so they were to go up the
side they were on next day to Timbillica, and I would cross
the river to my own place, look for those two and take them
to Timbillica. I still owed the ten shillings, but I managed
to get a pound note and put it in my pocket. They were
at Timbillica when I got there, I saw Mr. R. sitting on a


log and went towards him with the note in my hand, but
before I got np to him he says, Mr. Vv 7 eatherhead you
owe me ten shillings ; well, now, I thought that very sharp,
I and my horse had been over a week with them, and
meant to help them to watch the cattle that night, which I
did, and helped them away a bit next morning. Well, poor
fellow I suppose it was done without a thought and he was
.getting through his money, now he could not give me the
ten shillings then, and it was a long time before I got it,
but I did get it by order on some one, they took it at Boyd
Town, I got two bushels of wheat for it, We had shifted
up to Timbiiliea then, and I must have got a step up in the
world as I had given up the pack bullocks and took things
in and out on a slide, but it was not much improvement.
Taking kegs of butter in it did not matter much in crossing
file rivers, but in coming back had to unload and carry
things over the rivers, not very pleasant if one had a bag
of salt. Well, when I got within four miles of home I hap-
pened to see that my wheat was running out of the bag, it
had got a hole punched in it . I had lost the half of it. The
next morning the Mrs. and I started along the road with a
wing and shovel and a bag. There w r as a Mr. Bobinson
staying at our place that night, he was protector of Aborig-
inies over Melbourne side ; he was going our way so went
along the road with us. When we came to the train of
wheat, he appeared sorry for my losing the wheat, and got
off his horse ; I thought he. was going to help us to pick it
up, and so he did, he would walk along leading his horse
and when he would come to where it was thick he would
stop and lot his horse eat it. Some people are very thought-
less. When we thought to shift up to Timbiiliea from
Walagurah, there was a man came to us ; lie was a man
wo had at Nan gut ta ; he was going to the whaling at the
Bay, but it was too soon for that, so he would help me to
do any work for a while, and 1 took the chance. lie and I
went to Timbiiliea to split slabs lor a house, so we put up
a bark hut and stayed there. The Mrs. and the girl we
brought from Sydney, but the children we left by them-
selves. One afternoon the Mrs. went to bring the cows in,
but did not find them where she expected. She had a dog


'Wit'll her and she knew by watching him he would go on
the track of the cows, which he did, and she followed him
for some distance into the ranges. Then when she found
them she was not quite sure which way to drive them home,
but kept driving in the direction she thought was right;
one cow got troublesome and did not want to go, so she let
that cow go where she liked as her calf was in the pen and
she must come home ; the others had their calves with
them ; if she had driven the others after that one she would
have been right as she was driving them the wrong
way. Then she found she was astray, and left the cows
and tried to find her way home. Bat it soon got dark, so
she had a long night in the bush, and it was winter. No
fire the next morning, she could not tell where she was, but
she thought to make for the Genoa Biver and follow it up.
She could not have done it even if she had known where to
make for it. About the middle of the day she saw our own
hut, but did not know whose it was until she got closer to
it. Well, “ there is nothing bad but might have been
worse” as the wife said when her husband got his leg broke,
“it might have been the cow.”
We soon after that shifted to Timbillica, put up two large
bark huts, and had to live in them awhile until I got a
house up, but we were quite content. The spring was com-
ing in now. The Mrs. milked the cows in a make-shift
yard, so that I could keep going to get the house and a
small dairy up. I got through a good deal of work. The days
got longer and I made the most of them. I was always
fortunate in having plenty of work. I was never one of the
unemployed. Well, after I got the house up I began to
put up yards, when I got them on towards a finish the
sole came off one of my boots, and left only the inner sole ;
I was very jolly, saying it would be a good dancing pair.
When T went to Wangrabel, there was a Scotch family
there, and some of them played the violin. But I had a
dance sooner than I bargained for. In the afternoon the
boy was bringing the Cows up, and as we went to put them
in the new yard for the first time, they were going the
wrong way, so I ran to turn them, and in doing so trod on
something sharp which made me dance a few steps. When


I got the cows headed for the yard, I sat down on aTog'and
took the old boot off. The Mrs. saw there was something
up and came over to me. There was a hole in the middle
of the heel, it was bleeding freely. We could not see
anything, so thought what had gone in had come out again ;
but it felt very sore. We put a poultice on it that night,,
but next morning I could not put it to the ground. It kept
me awake all night. Well, I did not fancy being laid up,
so I got something to use as a crutch. It kept very pain-
ful, and after two or three more days it was getting no
better. I began to think what I could do. I said before
that I took leather instead of money in Sydney ; could I
make anything out of that leather, now ? I will try it. I
got an old. boot and took it to pieces to see how it was made,
then I turned to and made a pair of lasts, and went to work
to make myself a pair of boots. I only had one awl; I had
a tough job of it, but I persevered, and got a pair of clumsy
boots made. But afterwards I got some more awls and
other things.. I tried again and got on better. I then
made lasts for the children and made their boots : in time
I could make a very good boot and used to tan my own
sole leather, so by getting a sore foot I learned a new trade
and I did. not lose much by it. But my foot was in no hurry
to get better ; after a time it got sore and festered at the
ankle ; I thought something would work out there, but no,
it broke and healed again ; still the heel kept sore. We
kept using marshmallows and other things. One morning
when washing it we saw a black speck in it, I touche d it
with my penknife, we still kept poulticing it for a few more
days when I got it out, it was time, for it had been in there
nine weeks ; it was one inch long, it was a burnt stick,
sharp at the end, that went in, the ragged end was where it
broke off.- About this time everything was very dull. Nan-
gutta, after I left it, was kept on in the name of Campbell
& Co., but it had to be sold ; Mr. P. Imlay bought it. Fif-
teen shillings per head for the cattle, and five pounds for
the horses, station given in, that was a come down.
The Boyds were making a stir now. They started a boil-
ing-down establishment at Boyd Town so there was a good
many hands kept there. There was a demand for butter


and other things, then they had stores there, and tlieir'
motto was, if you are poor we will keep you. They got
drays for sale both new and second hand, so some of us got
a dray, then we wanted a road to get out and in; but we
did not apply to the Government, I dont think ever we
thought of the like. We went to work and cleared a road
from°Timbillica to the Kiah Eiver, about twenty-five miles,
there were John Rixon, Tlios. Doyle, Jas. Allan and my-
self, they are all gone but me. Things were rather rough
then in many ways, but I was as happy, I was going to say,
as a king, but a king was never so happy. I was like the
farmer at home, I ate when hungry, slept when sleepy, and
worked all the rest of the time. Then I was blessed with
as good a helpmate as ever was imported from the old
country.
While we lived at Timbillica I went to Eden and Pam-
bula, I was away a few days, there was rain while I was
away, the rivers were up a bit, but right enough to cross
until I got to- the Timbillica Creek, it was very high, too-
high to cross r so I coo-eed to the Mrs., she and the girl
came down, the girl went back to the house and got a toma-
hawk and a feyv matches, they fixed them on the head of
the collie dog, then I called him over, so I had a fire and
cut a sheet of bark for shelter. My horse behaved very
well, lie did not offer to cross. It was too late to get any-
thing more that night, but the next morning the Mrs. was
down with some hot tea in a lolly tin, and some hot cakes,
so I sent the dog to her, she got it fixed on his head, then
I called him to me again, and as I was ready for breakfast
I enjoyed it, then I got a quart pot and tea and sugar, the
dog would go and come whenever I told him. I was there
three days, and then went lower down the Creek to where it
was wider, the Mrs. went with some cords, got the end of
a small one over by the dog, then got a stronger one over,
so I sent the horse over, then got the rope over again and
tied it round my waist, and walked in until I found I was
deep enough, then I said pull now, the Mrs. in her hurry
slipped down the bank and let me swing down 4 stream a
bit, but she soon recovered and got me out, I could swim
a little, but had not confidence, it was running too rapidly.


A short time after this Mr. John Alexander, now of
Bericoe, who was then a boy of 12, was returning from
Eden and the creek being up he was washed off his horse.
It was nearly night and very cold, with stormy weather, and
our girl who was outside getting wood for the morning’s
fire thought she heard a coo-ee, and presently we saw a
horse coming from the crossing place. I then ran to the
creek and found that young Alexander was on the trunk of
a tree, holding on to a large branch, and up to his waist in
the water, i could not get him out on the side I was on,,
so I told him not to be afraid and I would soon rescue him.
I got my horse from the stable and a light rope and went
up the creek to where it was much wider, and got near him
on the other side, I then threw him the end of the rope
which he tied round liis waist and I pulled him out. We
soon had h.im in the house where a change of dry clothes,,
and afterwards a warm bed, restored him.
Doyle was at Merrimingo at that time, but he thought to
better himself by going to Wog Wog, so when he left Mer-
rimingo we shifted up there. I then applied for a license
to take in all I had been occupying. We then had good
cultivation land, so I always had plenty of grain, and if
prices got up I could send away either wheat, maize, or oats,
so we could always rub along. We did most of our own
work, and never went into debt, and I have stuck to the
same thing all along, out of debt out of danger. We had
our little house on a little rise by the side of a water hole
about a quarter of a mile from the river, and we never
dreamt of a flood. But at the time of the Gundary flood,
it paid us a visit at Genoa. We had rain, but it must have
been much heavier up country. I think it was May, the
winter was begun, we had a young lad with us, early in the
morning he called out to me saying master you had better
get up, the water is coming into the house, and the dray is
almost covered, I thought it must be the waterliole running
over, I never thought of the river. But I was soon up and
saw there was no time to put off. My eldest son and I
looked for the best place to get away, it was back water,,
the river had got over the bank lower down, so it was run-
ning up between us and the range. . But it was all round


ft’s, the best way. was.to make in towards the river. We 1
went back and got some blankets and two of the smallest
children and took them through the water, then went back
and got a few things. We had to hurry, so we could not
take much away. The lad had disappeared, he had gone
to look for a horse for the Mrs. to get through the water
with,- but she walked through it, it was up to the breast.
We got round the water to a high point, it was raining
heavily and no shelter; we had some trouble to get a fire
to burn. I then went to where I knew there was an adze
and a mortising axe. I then got two- or three sheets of
bark to make a bit of shelter; but just then we got a good
supply of bark, some twenty sheets that I had in a heap
down at the house came floating towards us, so we got that
on shore, then got a good big tent up. But we were in a
sad plight, and dripping wet and no clothes for a change,
strange, no one caught the least bit of a cold by it.
I had got a large bam up, and found that was on about
the same level as the house, but a better get away from it,
we had killed a lot of pigs and had them salted in the barn,
but the water rose over four feet there and in the house.
I got a side of the pork for present use, all the rest was lost.
Balt, sugar, tea and other things all gone, when we got
down to the house again it was in a sad plight. For about
a week we still had to sleep in the tent we had put up. I
had at the time enough wheat cleaned to put over the win-
ter but it was all spoiled, so I had to go to Timbillica. I
had wheat in the barn there, so I thrashed and cleaned a
bushel and tied the straw in two long bundles, and put the
wheat on the saddle, a bundle of straw on each side, and
myself in the middle, so it looked a respectable load on the
horse. In those days the wheat was ground with steel
mills.
Well, in time we got things put straight again, and
thought there would be no more such floods; but I think
it was two years after we had another, but we saw it com-
ing, and some things were shifted up to the tent and other
things were put on the loft, but the flood got high enough
to play Old Harry with us, it was ten feet deep at the house,
two feet on the loft, so our tea, sugar, and all such things


•were lost. The back part of the house was taken out and
the dairy gone. It was in the winter, so we only had eight
•cows milking, they were on some low ground where the
water could come up between them and the range, they
were all drowned and a young bullock with them, out of
the eight calves we managed to save one. Well, thank
goodness, I was sure of constant work for some time, first I
had to fix the house so that we could live in it, then I had
to go to the Bay to get tea, sugar, and other things, then I
went to work to split slabs for a new house. I still had
the young man I spoke of, and my eldest boy was getting
useful. Then we got some blacks to strip bark for cover-
ing it. It was all bark instead of shingles in country parts,
it made a good warm roof.
Well, in time I got a good house up with five rooms in
it, then there was a dairy and new yards with cow bails to
be got up, and the barn to be taken down and put up again.
In speaking of the barn, in putting it up again, my work
was nearly finished, or if the work was not, I was nearly
being finished myself. It was a large barn thirty feet by
eighteen, then a seven feet skillion all round. As I was
too weak-handed to get the plates up I lashed forks to the
posts then ropes over them, I had the most of the lifting,
the others took in the slack of the ropes. When the plates
were got to the top of the posts in that way they were
easily put in their places. In getting one of them up, it
was at the full height, at one end I had made the rope fast
and was in the act of walking through under the plate
when the rope broke. I had a cabbage tree hat on, the
plate would hjave a drop of five feet above my head, it hit
the rim of my hat, and scraped the skin off my nose, and
just touched my knee, but did not hurt it; that was a close
shave, but my end was not to be then.
In time we got pretty snug again; when the slabs of the
house got shrunk I closed them up, the finishing work in-
side was a job for the Mrs., such as plastering the seams
between the slabs, but if I said that it was done with cow
dung some people might be shocked, so I wont say anything
about it.
The price of cattle was still ■ low, boiling down for the


tallo\y and hides was, in full swing. Mr. .P. Imlay earn®
round our way, he was buying stores to fatten for boiling
down. I sold what bullocks I had, they were four, five and
six years old, the price was fifteen shillings per head de-
livered at Bega. Those were the good-old times, that must
have, been an 1850. Then the next thing, there was some
talk of gold being found, so there was soon a prospect of
better times. The next buyer of store bullocks was a gen-
tleman from Gippsland, he got some about this part, his
price was two pounds ten shillings per head, then they had
to help him to Gippsland with them, he tried hard to get
mine, but I would not deal. It was as well I did not, for
the next year I got one pound per head more and delivered
■them only twenty miles from home.
The gold soon made a great difference in many ways,
the people left other work, and went off to the diggings.
People went from those parts and took their teams of bul-
locks with them, then the carriage got up here through the
want of teams. Thirty pounds per ton to Cooma from Eden
was paid then. Everything else went up, I sent wheat to
Sydney and got sixteen shillings per bushel, and sold oats
and maize at Eden for nine shillings per bushel. Some
difference to what it used to be, I saw in the papers once
that someone wanted one thousand bushels of maize, his
price was eleven pence per bushel. There got to be a great
demand for working bullocks, I sold some at long prices.
Then everything got into a more steady way again.
I am now going back to give my first trip with the slide
from Timbillica to Boyd Town. I had five cwt of butter on
the slide, I had four good bullocks, but I had made the
slide too narrow, I found that out by hard work. I had
the load well lashed on, as where I had to go was very
rough. At Narababa there was a small paddock which
had been put up by a man named Nelson who took some
cattle there but had taken them away again. I meant to
get there the first day, the distance being thirteen miles,
but I got along very slowly, I, or rather the slide capsized
eleven times that day, and I had to lift it up every time
with its load, sometimes I had to make holes for my toes
so that I could get a good lift. It was a hard day’s work,


>nd to mend the matter, after the middle of the day it
came on a thick mist, and looked very much like rain, as
we often see in dry weather. I was making towards a creek,
in driving along, as I thought all right, I came upon my
own track going bach again-. It was nearly night and the
fog very thick, so I unhooked the bullocks and tried to find
the creek which I soon did; but it was getting dark,
I could not find the crossing place, it v 7 as very scrubby and
no track. At last I chained the bullocks to a tree, and got
a fire, but in my hurry I had left my grub and even m\
coat at the slide, I only had the one chain between the
bullocks, I chained the leaders to the tree with that, ane
thought the other two would think they were fast, but ii:
time they found they were not and wanted to .get away,
so I took my knife and got some strips of bark and plaited
a rope and fixed them, then I sat and wished for daylight,
when it did come the first thing was to look for the crossing
place, then go for the slide, and after that to go to the little
paddock and let the bullocks .go. It was then time to loot
after myself as I was ready for breakfast. I stayed there
that day, but net to rest, I went to work to clear a track.
The next day I got a good start and got along middling
not so many capsizes. 1 did not .go the way they go nov
I kept more as if I Avere going to East Boyd, then took a
point down to Corcoran’s Flat. P. Whalen was livim
there then; a good hearted felloAv aauis Paddy. He was a
home when I got there about five o’clock, he saAv I looked
jaded, so he told me to go and sit down and he would le;
the bullocks go and take them to Avater. The first thing
did was to go and have a few minutes in the river, which
freshened me greatly. The next morning he found out lie
had to take a feAV bags of potatoes into Boyd Tovra, am
we could take my bullocks and some of lhs and so take m v
load on the dray. Such kindness-ought not to be forgotten.
On another occasion when I went to Boyd Town 1 put on
a pair of cloth trousers, but found they Avere not so good
the moleskin, they left me m the Highland garb before
got home again. The road Avas very scrubby, and a gren
deal of sharp prickly scrub which did not agree with niv
cloth trousers, they began to go and kept going until I k '


ffhe second leg of them twelve miles from home, all I had
then was a flap behind and another in front. My bare legs
had to feel the scrub then. When I was drawing near
home I cooeed, so the Mrs. and the girl were at the creek
before me, and were on the bank looking for me, and the
way they did look as I got towards them, I think the Mrs.
was not sure whether she ought to cry or laugh when she
saw the blood on my legs, then the style of my dress, but
the laugh gained the day. It put me in mind of a black-
fellow I saw dressed once, he had on a pair of old boots and
a waistcoat. Ah well, that was in the good old times.
When I began to write this I thought I would just put
down a few bits, but I begin to think now I am like some
people who start to talk and don’t know when to stop.
There is no doubt if some men had been in my place all
through, they could have written a very interesting little
book. But it will be easy to see writing is not my trade.
Well you see it is seventy years since I was at school, in
those times there were a few who got polished, but the bulk
of the youngsters were left in the rough or nearly so, I be-
long to the latter class. lam something of the style of a
farmer, who was in the north country, named John Watson.
John was at Church one Sunday, the minister after ex-
plaining some part of scripture, said that was how he ex-
plained it, but some commentators did not agree with him.
The next morning the minister saw John coming towards
the manse with a load on his back, so he went out to meet
him. He says “ dear me John you appear to have a heavy
load, what have you got.” “Weel sir,” says John, “I
heard you say in the pulpit yesterday that common taters
‘didna’ agree wi’ ye, so I lia’ brought ye a bag o’ my best
kidneys.” Now in these days all the youths get to know
'the difference between a commentator and a common tater.
Well, 1 will go a little further in my plain way. I said
further back Mr. P. Imlay bought Nangutta, he kept it for
a few years, but never made much out of it. Cattle being
at a low price, they were neglected and went wild. When
he sold there was some mismanagement. Mort sold them
as P I brand, whereas the old brand was a heart, so they
objected to the heart brand. Imlay was :afraid of a law


suit, and agreed to take one thousand pounds as a lump'
sum for everything. The buyers, Melbourne men, did well
by it, they took a good lot of cattle off it and sold them in
Melbourne at a good price, then sold out for five thousand
pounds. The buyer, whose name was Sullivan,.thought he
could pay it off with cattle, and have a good few left. But
I knew he had made a bad job of it, and told- him so the
first time I saw him. I told him when he wanted to sell
Nangutta I might give' him* a- bid. He did not think he
would sell very soon, but after he had two years getting all
the cattle he could, lie found it was true what I had told
him. He then came to me to let me know he wanted to
sell Nangutta. He wanted one thousand pounds for the
goodwill of the station, I offered him eight hundred and let
him know I would give no more. He then asked if I would
give him three weeks. Tes you can have three weeks I
said 1 , and if you can get more take it. However, at the end
of three weeks he came back and took my offer, half cash,
the other half when the place was transferred to me, when
I heard that was done, I went to Bombala to see the Com-
missioner. I found then the rent had been increased from
thirty to eighty pounds. Rather sharp for the new tenant.
I got one hundred and fifty pounds for the place I was
leaving.
Well there was one blessing, I was sure of constant work
for a long time. There was a large bash paddock, every-
thing else was a wreck, not even a bit of a garden, and not
a hut, I wont say house, fit to live in. I added a bit to one
old thing to do us for a while, then I got two sawyers and
a carpenter, and got a decent house up. There was a great
deal of work to be done, then we had a great deal of rough
riding. I bought the brand of the cattle and horses for
thirty-five pounds from Mr. Sullivan, what were left were
very wild. We got a good few cattle, but it was rough
work, one horse was gored to death, another was ruptured
with a horn. We got some of the horses, but there is a
great deal of danger in going after wild horses in rough
country, and often getting some of our good horses lamed,
so we found it was best to shoot them.
Some people have a great deal of shifting about before?


they get to what they may call home. We must have got
home when we got to Nangutta the second time, that P
thirty-three years ago. During that time we have beer
like other people, we have had rough times and smootl
ones. Nangutta was an out of the way place and is yet
People say well you are well off in some ways,, you worn
have many people troubling you for subscriptions for differ
ent things. But if we have not that there are other trou
bles, if there is children to go to school we must have our
own school master; or if we required a doctor, say four
visits the bill would come in for fifty pounds. Then our
nearest Post Office was twenty miles; and we have kep*
our orvn roads. I have never asked the Government for
one shilling, so I have not been a troublesome subject.-
Then we have always kept an open house for all callers,
some will say you wont have many in such an out of the
way place. A few years ago there were two Melbourne
gentlemen came here one afternoon, they thought we would
not be troubled with many callers, but before night they
thought otherwise, as there were four more for a night’s
quarters. After that some of the family kept an account
for twelve months, and there was one short of four hun-
dred in the year, but there was no account of meals given
away. I then kept an account for one month, and there
were 3'B’ callers and 82 meals, most of them stay all night,
some of them thankful, some not. A few years ago a China -
man came and stayed all night, then went to Genoa River;
after a few days he came back and stayed another night
About two weeks after, a man came from Towamba want
ing to buy pigs; it was Mr. C. Roberts, he came on the
Saturday evening, we did not trouble about the pigs on
Sunday, on the Monday they went for nine good barrows
that used to run about a mile from home, they were always
about the same place; but on that day they could not find
them, the next day the same, no pigs. I told them they
must go to Chinatown next day, which they did, but saw
nothing of the pigs, some of the Chinamen there were very
kind and wanted them to stop there all night, and they
would feed their horses. But they came back to a plac '
where a shepherd lived whose name was Johns, the next


day tliey came home, but in coming tliey heard that a*
Chinaman had been seen on the outskirts looking for pigs*
that he had lost. I told them that those were our pigs,,
and that they must go back again. The next morning-,
Roberts started back for Chinatown, they had told Johns,
that they had lost some pigs, so when Roberts got back to -
Johns’ place he was told that a Chinaman had been there
and offered him two pounds if he would let some of his
boys go and find the pigs for him. Johns asked him where
he bought the pigs, he told him he bought them ait Towam-
ba. Johns then told him he had stolen them from Nan -
gutta, and that the police were looking for him. Then he
almost jumped out of his old boots, saying which way that
fellow know. He was surprised at the news getting about
so soon. When Roberts heard this he went no further, in
coming back he found the tracks of the pigs and got them,.
That was the same Chinaman wh®' had stayed here two
nights a little before,, lie had seen the pigs in coming and
going, and I suppose he thought it a good chance. If lie
had not lost them our people would have caught him with
them, as it was it saved a lot of trouble -
Now the Mrs. used to be very kind to- the Chinamen as
she thought other people- were not- She would often give
them a bit of something to eat on the road, and as she of-
ten made honey beer or mead in the summer slie often
gave tliem a bottle of that for the road. But when that
one came and stole the pigs, she was never going to be kind
to them again. It was not long, however, before she seemed
to forget all about it. That was only one ;• take the run of
them, I don’t think they are worse than our own sort of
people, we have often seen them very grateful, often they
have sent us a packet or two of good tea.
Not so very long ago we had a traveller, an Englishman,
he had been bushed without a blanket, he got here in the
morning, it was just beginning to rain, and kept wet for
two days, which rose the creeks a good bit. This traveller
appeared a decent sort of fellow, a painter by trade, and
was very good at taking pencil sketches. He went on to a
ridge one day and took a sketch of the place, he told us
when he got to where he could get larger paper he would


Copy it arid send it to us by post. He stayed here until the
creeks went down, he was here a week. Often when I have
thought tramps were in need I have given them two or
three shillings when leaving. Now I thought this Mr.-
Painter’s funds were very low, so I gave him four shillings
when he was leaving,- and sent a lad with him- for fourteen
miles so as he would have a horse over all the Creeks on his
way to BoUibala.- But he forgot to send the sketch, now I
cal! that as mean as the Chinaman. I heard of him some
time after, he was then in* the lockup at Bendoc, he may
have gone there to take a sketch of the cell.
Well, lam coining towards the present times. Since
we came to Nangutta we have been getting along like other
people, sometimes well, at other times getting pulled up by
a dry season. Our losses by drought sometimes have been
heavy, never more so than in 1865-6, oUrloss that summer
was fully three hundred head of cattle, then to mend the
matter, when rain came and we had plenty of grass we got
the pleura, and that stuck to us a long time. I kept account
of the deaths until I had four hundred-, I then gave it up.
I think it was in 1868 I began to buy land over on the
Bega' side. I bought from 1 four or five different people un-
til I got towards thirteen hundred acres, that is all freehold
now. Well, through that,- and we had a daughter married
over on that side, I used to ride over there now and then,
sometimes drive oyer and take Mrs. Weatherhead with me.
To drive over at that time was not a pleasure 1 trip, as the
roads were very bad.- If it happened to be a wet season half
of the way from Bombala to the top of the mountain was
little better than a bog, and there were plenty other places
not much better. At one time when we were over it came
on very wet, there were two or three floods one after anoth-
er; we were six weeks from home that time. I started
as soon as I thought I could get along, I found the Box
range very bad, great ruts washed in it, and other places
very bad. Before we got to Rocky Hall- Mrs. Weatherhead
got pitched out, it was a heavy waggonette we had, she
went between the wheels, one of the hind wheels went over
her back, and her face got bruised. She got up quick told
me I had killed her, then laid down again. Was she Irish?’


t Oil no, slie belonged to tlie neighborhood of Canny, New-
.castle. I could not get out quickly enough, when I tried
to steady the horses one of them made a bound and broke
a swingle-tree, but I got them ton fence on one side of the
road and tied them up, it was a good while before she
could get over it.
Such roads would not do for a sailor I heard of long ago,
Jack had come home with a lot of money in his pocket
likely prize money at that time, so of course Jack must
spend it. There were no railways then for travellers, it
they could'afford it there were the mail coaches, or the
post chaise which was kept in all towns at the head inns,
they were very snug inside, closed in, and on the top flat
and smooth. The post boy, as the driver was called, rode
on the near side horse. So Jack engaged one ot these to
have a ride, instead of going inside he got on top. So
bowling along on a good road they overtook a traveller on
foot who spoke to the driver. Jack looked down and asked
what the lubber wanted. The driver said he as asking or
a ride sir. Oh well, said Jack, you can stow the b m-
the bold, hut heshant come on deck, so the traveller got a
snug seat inside. Jack would soon have been ower j lan
the hold if he had been on roads such as we were.
One thing brings on another, I have heard of another
sailor not on shore, but at sea, they had a heavy gale and
the ship was greatly damaged, so much so that they
thought they must go to the bottom, so .they were
having prayers before they went, when one ot the men
broke out laughing, but assistance came and they were
saved Then they wanted to'know what Jack was laugh-
ing at when they were having prayers. Now it appears
the cook had a very red nose, so Jack thought asut was red
;t must he hot, and what made him laugh was to think how
the cook’s nose would blubber when he got ante the water.
At another time when driving over to Bega the roads
were very slushy, and a great many places very bad. Jn
going along somewhere near Wyndham I saw a man mend-
ing some of the worst places by putting hushes m the holes
and then covering them over with earth, so that it looked
-better until a heavy load came along. One always, expects


'to'SSe things better as they come towards a town, in that T
was not disappointed, at least I saw that they had a differ-
ent way of filling up the bog holes. There was then a
nasty hole on the south side of where Frog’s Hollow bridge
is now, when I got there tiro hole was filled up, not with
bushes, but with a dead bullock, a worker I suppose, it ap-
peared to fill the hole nicely. I dont know whether it had
made a solid job of it, I did not go over it, nay horses had
been in that hole before, so they shied away from it. But
kll those rough times will soon be forgotten.
There are still a few people as they travel along the
macadamised roads who will think what they used to be.
A great many of the old hands who had the rough times
have passed away..
Five years ago my dear old wife was taken from me, we
had been married nearly fifty-three years, so it was no
wonder that I felt very lonely. I was old and could not
ride about as in former days, but had to be sitting about
the house thinking over old times. I went over to Bega
»md was away about a month, but when I came borne my
poor old wife was not on the look out for me. Ah well, as
the man said to his pillow when he had to get up, the
dearest friends must part.
I soon went over to Bega again and put a bit more time
away, then when I came home again, 1 soon made up my
mind to take a trip to the old country. When I did go 1
bad been fifty-two years from England, and fifty-four from
the Tweed, my native home.. When I left there were my
father and mother, four brothers and three sisters. When
I got back I found one brother and all my sisters, one of
them older than myself, and I was then seventy-seven. An
old age to take the trip, but I stood it very well, in going I
w r as troubled for a rime with dysentery, not very bad, but
still it made me feel uneasy, until one morning one of my
snip mates came to me looking very sad and told me about
ms troubles, and I found lie was suffering from the same as
I was, so when lie told me what was up with him, I told
um I was glad to hear it, then to see the look he gave me
caused me to laugh, I saw he was going to be offended
«ien l. told him I was the same way, and was glad I had a


mate, I think it did both of us good when we found it was
not a solitary case. , ■
Well, I got to London by the Carthage on the 3rd ot
July, and found it pretty warm for Old England. It was
the time of the Colonial Exhibition, so I stayed three or
four days, then took the train for Berwick-upon-Tweed. I
thought I would soon find a sister there, which I did. I
did not let them know I was coming, I thought to take
them by surprise, but a letter got there three days before
me, it was directed to me, but one of my brother’s sons,
named after me, got it. Then they were all on the look out
for one of my sons, as they thought me too old to pay them
a visit. The letter was not sent by any of my own family
or they would have been sure, so it was still a surprise for
them to see me after such a long absence. . I stayed a day
with my sister, I hired a pony and trap and sister and 1
drove to the other side of the river, where I saw another
sister and her husband. The next day my sister and I took
the train for Eyemouth, about ten miles from Berwick, on
the Scotch side, where my brother has a large boat building
business. I need not say how pleased they all were to see
the old man from Australia. I made my head quarters
there and was soon quite at home. My brother’s wife and
all his large family showed every kindness to me. They
are all teetotallers, but the old mother saw that I had a
dram every night before I went to bed. My brother is four
years my junior, and for his age was very active. After a
few days my brother and I started for a trip to Newcastle,
Shields and Middlesborough, where I saw my eldest sister
and some nephews. It was there my wife and I took the
steamer for London. At that time there were only a few
houses, it is now a large town with some very good build-
ings and a very pretty park; the iron works set that going.
We then went to St. Helen’s, Auckland, the place where
we lived before we left England. I knew I would find ho
relations there, but I had a great desire to see'it again. X
oply found one old woman there who recollected me; I
felt very sad looking about there, I went into the house we
had lived in, then I fairly broke down. I gave the sexton
half-a-crown to take me through the church yard, Ah yes?


what could I expect after being away fifty-two years. In,
going back we went to a place called Whitley not far
from the Tyne, that was where my wife and I first became
acquainted, I found two of her sisters there, she had three
brothers when we. left, and her father and mother, now all
gone. News soon flies about there. The next morning
there were two nieces from Newbiggin, a place about ten
miles away, to see their uncle, they wanted me to go to
their place, but I thought my brother would want to get
home, so I had to promise to come back again, these were
relations on my wife’s side. We then, my brother and I,
got back to Eyemouth.
After another week we started for Edinburgh, Aberdeen
and Fraserburgh, that is far north, one of my brother’s
sons was there. The herring fishing was in full swing
then. We stayed a few days and made back again, we
took the more easterly line in going back, crossed the Forth
lower down than where the Forth bridge is now. We got
back again to Eyemouth, then at times some of my brother’s
family and I would get a trap and have a drive to some of
the places about, I acted as driver. Then 1 started for
another turn round to Newcastle, Shields and Sunderland.
I had one of my brother’s sons with me this time. I found
nephews or cousins at different places, they have been like
Topsey, they have “growed” since I was in England before.
Then we went in by Whitley again, and then to Newbiggin
to see my two nieces I mentioned above, and found them
very comfortable, I stopped there two or three days then
off home again. Then after a while I started for another
trip, I had another of my brother’s sons, one of his daugh-
ters and a widow lady, so I had a good escort this time.
We went to Edinburgh, Glasgow and to Largs, on the west
coast, we stayed a night there with kind friends, then back
to Edinburgh, where we spent two or three days with some
friends, then we made home again after a very pleasant
trip.
I soon began to think about N. S. Wales again and
wrote to secure my passage by the Valetta. So it was not
very long until I bade farewell to Eyemouth and Berwick
and started for London. One of my sisters had a son and


daughter in London, so I took her with me, and one of my
brother’s daughters, and his youngest son who was m a
bank, but they gave him three week’s leave of absence, it
was a treat for the young people, they had never been m
London before, and the exhibition was still open. 1 was
with them a few days, the Valetta sailed on the 24tn of
September, when they saw me on board, where we took
our farewell of each other. So then I was on my way
again to my adopted home. We got along very well, only
it was very hot in the Red Sea, but that is always expected.
We all kept pretty healthy both going and coming, though
two died each way, but it might be said they werq done
when they came on board. _ ,
Now I will just make one long step from London to Syd-
ney, it was just six months to the day from the time I lelt
it. Then after a few days I was on board the Bega tor
Merimbula, where friends were on the look out for me, so
I was soon up to Wolumla, where I had my own horses
and trap to drive home to Nangutta, where they expected
me, some came a few miles on the way to meet me, and were
all pleased to see me home again after my long round about.
My son’s wife is now mistress at Nangutta, and we could not
have a better one, always cheerful and kind, and that goes
a long way to keep an old man in a good humour .
Well, after being home again for some time I drove over
to Bega, and when there I thought I would like to see
Moruya again. So I got a sister of my son’s wife to go
with me, it was a treat for her and good company for me,
so we made a start, but when we got to Brogo it came or*
wet, so we had to stay there at the hotel three days. But
as we were acquainted with Mr, Blanchard and his family
we were quite at home. In two more days we were at Bo_
dalla, the next day we went on to Moruya, where I found
I was a stranger, yet there were some who knew my name.
The next morning Mr. E. Hawdon came to see me, and I
was glad to see a son of the late Mr. John Hawdon, we had
a chat then, and in the evening he came again and brought
Mrs. Hawdon with him. Then the next morning he came
again and took me to see Mrs. Forster, widow of the late
Mr. Thos, Forster. ; I was pleased at receiving so much


kindness from a son of my old master. Mrs. Forster theii
took me to see Mr. Emmott, when I found that gentleman
was from nearly the same part of England as I was. We
were both married in the same church, and both had our
golden w T edding. I drove over and saw Mrs. Flannagan,
she was frail, and still looked middling well, but' she has
since gone.
Well, we got turned about to make our way home again;,
we got to Bodalla, stayed a day there and had a look round.
There were great improvements there since I first knew it,
there must have been a lot of money spent there. As I
went by the way of Eurobodalla, I came back by Tilba
Tilba, but could not say much for the road either way.
When we got back to Brogo we spelled another day, Sunday,
and the next day got back to Wolumla. Then after a few
more days I made a start for Nangutta and got there all
right, and as I think that my travelling is over it will be as
well for me to drop my anchor.
Nangutta, March, 1892.’
PRINTED BY W. T. CAMPBELL, BEGA, N.S.W,








