

Lecture on Education:
“NATIONAL, SEOULAR, COMPULSORY, AND FREE,”
DELIVERED BY THE
Rev. Dr. James S. White, M.A. & L.L.D.,
AT SINGLETON
ON THE 5TH JANUARY, 1875,
BEING THE REPLY TO A LECTURE, ON THE SAME SUBJECT,
BY THE
REV. DR. McGIBBON, M.A. & L.L.D.
West Maitland:
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, HIGH-STREET.
MDCCCLXXV.




LECTURE
ON
EDUCATION:
“ NATIONAL; SECULAR, COMPULSORY, AND FREE,"
DELIVERED BY THE
2Ac\). Hr* 3iameg £?♦ & !LJL*P«>
AT SINGLETON,
ON THE 5th JANUARY, 1875,
BEING THE REPLY TO A LECTURE, ON THE SAME SUBJECT,
BY THE
KEY. DR. McGIBBON, M.A. & L.L.D.
Baiilaiii =
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, HIHH-STREET.
HDCCCLXXT,




LECTURE ON EDUCATION:
"NATIONAL, SECULAR, COMPULSORY, AND FREE.”
ON the 9th November last, I delivered a Lecture on Educa-
tion: “ National, Secular, Compulsory, and Free.” The
subject excited much interest. Several comments appeared in our
local newspaper. After the lapse of rather more than a month
(supposing the objectors had had ample time to state their objec-
tions) I proceeded to avail myself of my right, as the opener of
the debate, to reply by a second Lecture.
It seems, however, that although I had afforded my opponents
such a long season of grace, I was, even after a lapse of a month,
premature and even presumptuous in attempting to reply with a
view to close the debate. The Rev. Dr. McGibbon had not
spoken, and of course until the oracle had vouchsafted its utter-
ances, “no dog had a right to bark.” In the case of ordinary
men, perhaps a month for consideration and reply would have
sufficed, but men of a great mind require a great while to make
it up.
Dr. McGibbon says that he had read my lecture some weeks
before, but that he had abstained from noticing it. He alleges
two reasons for having done so, viz : —its “ total weakness and
absurdity,” and his “ long acquaintance with the author.” As
to his first reason. If the Lecture in question was so totally weak
and absurd, why did he not give you credit for discrimination
enough to discover the fact, and let it alone altogether ? Why
did he cross the big sea and come all the way to Maitland and
Singleton to answer it ? Why did he follow the unexampled
course of answering it in two places, and avail himself of the
patronage and prestige of the League to enable him to do so the
more effectually ? Was it Hercules at the distaff, or was it Quix-
ote at the windmill ?As to the second reason assigned, —“ his
long acquaintance ” with me, he does me, I fear, an undeserved


iionor. At the best it is a strange and unsatisfactory reason.
Well he did, nevertheless, speak, and in two places. For replying,
as for his original determination not to reply, he gives his reason.
His reason for replying was the “very favourable criticism of the
Lecture by the Australian Churchman, the organ of the Church
of England. Does Dr. McGibbon then wait for the decision of
others before venturing upon a course of duty ? Has he so pro-
fitably studied the maxim “ know thyself,” as to have discovered
that his own judgment on an important question, is not to he
trusted ? Is the very favourable criticism of a highly respectable
organ of a highly respectable and influential body sufficient
to excite the Dr.'s bile and set him on ? Tantaene dnimis
coelestibus irae.
I shall not defer my reply to Dr. McGibbon's Lecture until it
be very favourably criticised by the press, lest I should have to
postpone it till the Greek calends. Dr. McGibbon ridicules the
idea of my regarding the Primary education of the children of
the colony as a matter which concerns God, the Country, and
Truth, and as a matter of transcendant importance. I always
thought, that even the most trifling affairs of this world concerned
God, without whom a sparrow does not fall to the ground, and
before whom the very hairs of our head are all numbered, much
more a matter so important as the Primary education of children,
which is, after all, their education for life and death and eternity.
I always thought that the Primary education of children of to-
day, who are to be the men and women of to-morrow, concerned
the Country-—most deeply and vitally concerned it, I always
thought that Truth, especially revealed Truth, was regarded bv
Christians as an important element in Primary education and
all education—nay, that no education could be complete, or even
truly beneficial without it. I hold the same opinion still, lam
surprised and grieved and ashamed to think that any “ master of
Israel ” should differ from me on this point, especially one, who
for a time at the least, occupies the chief seat in the Presbyterian
Synagogue.
Dr. McGibbon in speaking of my Lecture is prodigal of such
words and phrases as “ fallacious,” “ absurdities,” “ crudities,”
“ misrepresentations,” “ false facts,” “ false reasoning,” “ blun-
dering insolence,” and the like. If an opponent fails to realize
the importance and dignity of his subject and sacrifices self-
respect, that is no reason why I should do so. It shall be my
aim to prove rather than to affirm, and to convince rather than
to vituperate.


Ut fugerem, exemplis vitiorum quaeque notanda.
As to the sin of using original poetry, it is peculiar to refined
and accomplished men.
Dr. McGibbon states that I designate the present system of
Public education “ infidel ” and godless.-” Others have so
designated it. I never did. I have always regarded it as, with
modifications, admirably adapted to meet the exigencies of certain
educational conditions of our population. It has about it the
savour of Divine truth, scenting its garments like a mixture of
myrrh and aloes, and here and there, where it recognizes the use
of all of the whole Bible, the full and unmistakeable fragrance
of Divine things. In the League’s system, when finally and
fully developed, there will be no moral good, and only so much
intellectual and physical good, as the absence of moral good
permits as a residuum. In Pandora’s box, Hope remained after
all the “ ills that flesh is heir to ” had escaped and settled among
men, but in the League’s system, even Hope herself—the Hope
of life, of death, and of eternity, will be driven forth, or extin-
guished.
The League’s system is essentially bad. There is a gangrene
in its very vitals—an incurable ulcer, for which there is nothing
else than eradication, as shall be shown. Dr. McGibbon, mis-
representing my statements and sentiments with respect to tic
Public school system, asks how I can be “ content to have sue 1 a
system established in the bush ? ” If it were possible, I would
have Denominational schools in the bush as well as m the city.
But knowing that the question of education is eminently a prac-
tical and not an abstract one, that the number of the different
sects in the bush would not warrant the establishment of an
efficient school for each of them, or indeed in some places of a
school at all—that the money element is not to be ignored in a
practical question, and that education in secular knowledge is
better than no education, and that the present 1 üblic school
system supplies such knowledge and something besides, even
more desirable, I consistently and cordially appioie of that,
establishment in the bush. I have always done so. I shall
always do so. ....
Dr. McGibbon makes me ask f will you compel every child to
go to the school of the State? Will you compel the children of
the rich to mix with the children of the poor. I never asked
these questions.
Dr. McGibbon savs that “ the Public school books contain as


much Bible truth as is ever taught in Sabbath schools, and more
than is ever read in Denominational schools.” If this is the
fact, the only inference to be drawn from it is, that neither
Sabbath schools, nor Denominational schools do their duty, and
that there is all the more reason that the friends of Bible truth
should be the more watchful and jealous over the amount of
Bible truth taught elsewhere.
But Dr. McGibbon’s statement is inconsistent with fact. The
children of the Sabbath school and of Protestant Denominational
schools read the whole Bible, with small exceptions. Let the
teachers answer ! In the lloman Catholic schools a Douay
Bible is kept for reference on the great doctrines in which we all
agree, and on those on which we differ. Let the teachers answer !
Dr. McGibbon seems quite content that even less of the Bible
should be read in Sabbath and Denominational schools than is
contained in the Public school books. As a Christian man, as
a Christian minister, he is easily satisfied. Dogs eat the crumbs
that fall from their master’s table.
The Public school books, the Dr. says, are “ secular, and they
are religious, but their religion is that which is eminently fitted
to make happy and virtuous the life which is guided by it.” If
happiness and virtue are the great ends of life, then, whatever
is fitted to make us happy and virtuous, is fitted to subserve
the great ends of life. All else must be superfluous, or worse.
Dr. McGibbon says that the Public school books are fitted to
subserve this end ; therefore any other books, or instrumentalities
are superfluous, or worse; therefore, all the Bible, except the por-
tion of it quoted in the scripture lessons, is superfluous, or worse.
Therefore all the Bible, except these portions, should be destroy-
ed. But Protestants say that the Bible, the whole Bible, is
necessary to make us happy and virtuous; therefore, either
Protestants are wrong, or the Dr. is not a Protestant. After all
this, why should he, if he really represents the principles of the
League, complain of the League’s being suspected of a design to
do away with the Bible as such ? But of this more anon.
Dr. McGibbon says that the “ League do not contemplate the
monopolising of the training of the children,” and that “ I may
well lament my ignorance and want of intelligence in supposing
that they do so.” By education, I intended, and clearly indi-
cated that I intended, Primary education. Do not the League
contemplate the establishment of a system of Primary education
co-extensive with the requirements of the colony ? Do not the
League contemplate universal compulsion with respect to this


system ? Do not then the League contemplate a monopoly of
Primary education ?
In saying, that they do, I am at a loss to know wherein I
have erred. Nor has Dr. McGibbon succeeded in leading me
to the truth. Indeed, if I am in error, I should decline his
guidance, for, if the blind lead the blind both fall into the ditch.
Dr. McGibbon professes to be disgusted with the man who
can <e argue from Churches to schools.”
I venture to affirm, that it is not illogical to argue either from
Churches to schools, or from schools to Churches. They have
much in common. Things that have anything in common may
be compared and it is legitimate to argue from one or more such
things to one or more others If the State compel children to go
to school and punish parents for their children's absence, by fine,
or imprisonment, the State may, on many similar grounds,
punish, by either fine or imprisonment, those who do not go to
Church. People were actually fined and imprisoned, in the days
of Elizabeth, for absenting themselves from Church. lam aware,
that there were political reasons urged in justification ; but I am
aware also, that reasons, similar to those urged in favor of en-
forcing attendance at school, were mainly relied on. If the State
endow Sectarian schools, as I shall show it ought to do, the State
on the same grounds, should endow Sectarian Churches.
Dr. McGibbon, with his usual courtesy, characterises my
statement, that the conduct of the League in the matter of Pri-
mary education, is like that of the a dog in the manger,” as.
“ false in fact,” and a “ blundering piece of insolence,” and
affirms that the object of the League is “ to shut out the dog
that with the door shut the oxen may eat and enjoy themselves.
Foeunrn liabet in cornu : Fuge longe.
I do not hesitate to reiterate my statement, that if the
numbers of the Church of England and the Church of Rome
had borne the proportion to the other sects which the other sects
bear to them, we should have heard less on this subject. But
suppose a stable furnished with the most nutritious and sweetest
hay that ever tempted the bovine appetite—that a dog defiled it
—that the door was opened, and the oxen invited, even by the
dog himself, to enter and partake ; would they do so ? No, the
veriest starveling would scorn the proffered provender. The State
has provided a system of Primary education so far good and
acceptable. That system, Dr. McGibbon would injuriously
affect, and render repulsive to the moral sense of the Christian
people. He would take away the nutritious and grateful, and


leave only the husks. In vain may he lift up his voice, and cry
aloud in the streets. The Christian people of the colony will not
respond to his invitation.
Dr. McGibbon says, that “ those who are contending for the
use of the whole Bible” would carry us back to the “dark ages.”
I always thought that Protestants named certain ages “ dark ”
because that, during them, the Bible, which is in their estima-
tion, the great and true enlightened, was a sealed book—inacces-
sible to the people in the vulgar tongue, and unknown to them
except through the medium of extracts in the manuals of worship.
I always thought that Protestants regard the printing and free
circulation of the Bible, in their own tongue, as marking the in-
auguration of the dawn of the age of light, of right reason and
improvement and amelioration. If this opinion is correct, and I
believe all Protestants, at the least, agree with it, it is Dr.
McGibbon, who, by excluding the Bible, as it was excluded in
the dark ages, or by giving us only extracts from the Bible, as
they were given in the dark ages, would carry us back to the
dark ages. Those who contend for the use of the Bible, the
whole Bible, would carry us forward to the perfect day of en-
lightment, moral, spiritual, and intellectual, and to all excellence
of which light is at once the symbol and the instrument. Those
who are contending for the Bible are engaged in a good war-
fare : they are fighting a good fight—'a fight against “ the
enemies of God and Christ, of virtue and liberty, of light and
peace.”
Dr. McGibbon cavils at my style as well as at my facts and
sentiments and applies hard names to both.
If it were worth while it would not be difficult to shew that
Dr. McGibbon’s lecture, printed from his M.S., be it remembered,
is, as a piece of English composition such as even a “ Public
school boy would ” (to use his own language) “ detest.” Speak-
ing of the Churchman 3 s favorable criticism, he says, “ I am
glad that the other side have given his lecture its cordial approval.
"What I now ask for myself is simply this—that a similar privi-
lege may be given to my reply.” The cordial approval of the
Churchman , then, is & ■privilege, and Dr.. McGibbon asks simply,
that a similar privilege, i.e. a similar favorable criticism may be
vouchsafed by the Churchman to his reply. This is too bad
in a champion of even Primary education. The Lecture is full
of such blunders. Ex uno disce omnes.
Dr. McGibbon says that the Saxon wrongs enumerated by
O’Connell were “ that it was forbidden to Catholics to educate


their children,” " that Catholics were prevented from teaching
their children their religion,” and “ that the poverty of the people
rendered their training and improvement impossible.” These
were not all O’Connell’s wrongs. There were wrongs, religious
and political. But let this pass. As to the first wrong,
O’Connell could not have complained “ that it was forbidden
Catholics to educate their children,” for the fact was patent to
him and to every Catholic, that Catholic children could have
been educated in the schools of the Protestant establishment ;
that that establishment would have been most happy to under-
take the business of their education; and that their education was
one of the great objects contemplated in setting up that establish-
ment. What O’Connell complained of, all that he possibly
could complain of, was, not “ that it was forbidden to Catholics
to educate their children ” but, that it was forbidden them to
educate their children as Catholics, —the very objection urged by
the Catholics of this colony against the League’s system. I
need not pursue the argument further.
Dr. McGibbon states, that “if the League succeed, the State
will teach nothing in religion but what is common to all.” W iiat,
in the Scripture lessons of the Public school books, is common
to all? Nothing! Leaving individual diversities of opinion
out of the question and speaking only of sects, there is nothing
in them common to all. The portions quoted from the New
Testament are not common to Christians and Jews. No part
of the Scripture lessons is common to Christians and Jews and
infidels, of whom there are upwards of ten thousand in the
colony. One sect receives part and rejects part. Other sects
reject tfie whole. One sect accepts part, in one sense, and
another, in another sense. One sect receives all, as “ written by
holy men of old, who spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit,
and as the only rule of faith and practice. Another sect
regards and denounces the whole as a “cunningly devised fable”—
a transparent imposition and an erroneous and fatal guide. There
is nothing common to unrenewed men but a desire to ignore God.
In order to teach nothing of revealed religion, but what is common
to all, the State must teach none of the Bible. It must exclude
the Scripture lessons from the school books, and make its system
not only unsectarian, but unchristian and irreligious, so far as
revealed religion is concerned.
I stated that three-fourths of the population demand the use
of the entire Bible in the Public schools. Dr. McGibbon styles
this assertion my ipse dixit “ without a single fact in proof. The
B


result, so far as it has gone, of the general election of members
of Parliament, in which the education question was made a testing
one, may be accepted as furnishing facts for or against my state-
ment. That result shows, that but a small minority of the popu-
lation are in favor of the principles of the League. Of this small
minority, some object to “compulsory,” others to “free” educa-
tion, and some to both. They are divided. But a mere shred of
the small minority, in favour of the League’s system, either
approves or accepts it in its entirety.
How many members yet elected professed to approve of, and
accept, the League’s system in its entirety ? Not above two or
three. Of those yet to be elected how many profess to approve
of and accept the League’s system in its entirety? Judging
from their addresses, not one in fifty. On the other hand, the
great majority, nearly the whole, of the members who have been
elected profess to approve of the present Public school system, the
system which recognises Denominational schools, and provides for
their support and extension. Some of the candidates openly
avowed their approval of the use of the entire Bible in the Primary
schools. One of them, to his everlasting honor, declared on the
hustings, that “ he would submit to any extremity rather than
consent to the exclusion of the Bible from the Public schools.”
He was elected by a very large majority by the very constituency
among whom the education question has been most keenly debated,
by the very constituency which had, the night before, listened to
Dr. McGibbon’s Lecture, and applauded it. The question has
been put to the community and answered by it, and answered so,
that in saying that three-fourths of the population are in favor
of the use of the entire Bible in the Public schools, I fell very far
short of the truth. Surely the verdict based upon a plebiscite
will satisfy Dr. McGibbon on this point.
As to the necessity of all the whole Bible, in order to its sub-
serving all the great interests of mankind, what says the author
of the Bible himself? “ All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness.” Not a part of the Bible, but all
the whole of it.
The Jews were strictly enjoined by God to read the whole of
the Law in public, and to teach it in private to their children;
and that Law contains almost all the passages which some
impiously pronounce objectionable. The Church of England
provides, that “ all the whole Bible (or the greater part thereof)
shall be read over once during the year.” In all Cathedral
churches this is done. The Church of Scotland enjoins that all
the canonical books, (constituting the common version), be read
in public. To the pure all things are pure. But even if it were
otherwise, “Who art thou, 0 man, that repliest against God?”


What right have we to take from, any more than to add to, the
things written in God’s Word ? ,
Dr, McGibbon animadverts severely on my “ confusion of ideas
and “'muddled brain.” Things are always affected by the medium
through which they are viewed. If we look at them through
they appear green. It is a peculiarity of those
who have looked too long upon the wine when it is red, and
moveth itself aright in the cup, to fancy that they themselves are
the only sober persons in the company and to speak and act
accordingly. “ Saltat Milonius, ut semel icto, Accesit ferver cupiti
numerusque lucernis
Dr. McG-ibbon ridicules the idea of Australians being the
finest type of Celto-Anglo-Saxon race. Let any intelligent man
compare the heads of the children in our schools with the heads
of children in schools in England. Let any man read the records
of the achievements of Australians in all the great seats of learn-
ino, in England, and deny the fact. Out as lir, MeGibbon is not
an Australian, any more than I am, there was surely nothing in
the statement necessarily ridiculous. Even if both of us were
Australians, still judgment would go on the rule and not on the
exception.
Dr. Me Gibbon seeks to illustrate the reasonableness, desrre-
ableness, and necessity of compulsion in Primary education by a
little matrimonial drama in three acts—a marriage, a birth, and
a death. He might have spared himself and his audience the
exercise of his dramatic powers, for his illustration is un-
fortunate as his arguments. The cases would be parallel it the
State compelled men to marry, compelled them to add to the
population, and compelled them to “ shuffle off this mortal coil ?
and imposed fine and imprisonment on those who refused to
worship at Hymen’s altar, &c. But the law does not do this.
The law merely compels married people, after they have done that
which nature dictates, and religion sanctifies, to record the fact
publicly. The cases would be parallel, not if parents were com-
pelled to send their children to school, but if, having sent them
to school of free choice, as they marry, they were compelled to
register the fact of their having done so. The illustration, then,
is utterly inapplicable. It will not stand the test of analysis.
Compulsion in education cannot be supported on any ground
satisfactory to the instincts of our race. Wherever it has been
tried it has been regarded as tyrannical and cruel. It has been
most emphatically, and all but universally, condemned and repu-
diated in this colony. Neither Dr. McGibbon s logic, nor his
rhetoric, nor both together, has made it appear otherwise, or
persuaded the people to submit to it. The results of the late
general election must, I think, convince him of this.


Like every other taste, the taste for education needs to be
acquired and cultivated, and time is necessary for the cultivation
of it. Parents in all cases may not see the desirableness of it
all at once, especially uneducated parents. But let the present
generation experience its advantages, and they will be more
anxious to secure them for their children ; and so on from genera-
tion to generation, till every parent will recognise and perform
his duty in this most important matter as a labor of love —not of
constraint, but of a willing mind—not from the fear of the
policeman, but from fear of conscience and of God.
. Dr. McGibbon ridicules the idea of objecting to free educa-
tion, and supposes that he has triumphantly established the fact
that education free of charge is the right thing, when he has
asserted that, as the State pays eightpence of every shilling ex-
pended in the public education of the colony, it ought to pay the
remaining fourpence. This is a prodigious non sequilur. This is
a reversal of the logical maxim to argue from universal to par-
ticulars, and not from particulars to universals Just see what
would follow from carrying out this principle ! The State pays a
part of the passage of immigrants, therefore it should pay the
whole. The State assists gold mining, by providing police pro-
tection, therefore the State should pay all the expense of sinking
shafts, &c. The State assists Hospitals, therefore the State
should wdiolly support these institutions. The fact is, there is
no absurdity to which Dr. McGibbon’s ratiocination would not
lead.
The state very properly assists in bringing immigrants hither,
but it very properly insists that, at the same time, their friends
and relatives should bear a part of the cost. The State very
properly assists benevolent institutions, but the State also very
properly insists that the community should do its part by volun-
tary donations. So the State very properly assists Primary
education, but the State also very properly insists that parents
should do their part in bearing the cost of their children’s educa-
tion.
What is got for nothing is not valued. What is not valued
is neither used so diligently nor improved so highly as what is
paid for. Education, wholly free of charge, would be lightly
thought of, and made but little use of. It would tend to
destroy that feeling of independence and self-reliance which
lies at the foundation of manly character, and which cannot
be too highly valued as a national attribute. Besides, it would
involve to those who derive no direct benefits from Primary
education, an amount of injustice which, even the practical neces-
sity of the State could not justify. It would be making them pay
one shilling for that for which the practical exigencies of the State
require them to pay only eightpence.


1 trust, that the lines of Hood will long express the feelings of
our people, in respect of all unnecessary gratuitous assistance.
“ No parish money or loaf,
No pauper badges for me,
No alms I ask, give me my task,
Here are the arm, the leg,
The strength, the sinews of a man,
To work and not to beg.”
Hr. McGfibbon says that the Denominational system involves
the “ monstrous wrong ”of indiscriminate endowment. “ I admit
that the Denominational system does involve botb the principle
and practice of endowment, but not of indiscriminate endowment
under any form under which it has been extended in this colony,
and that if it did, it would not be either a monstrous wrong, or a
wrong at all. . .
Hitherto the Primary schools of four Christian denominations
only, out of many, have been endowed. Is that indiscriminate
endowment ? Must there not be discrimination in endowing only
Christian and not non-Christian sects ? But even if the endow-
ment by the State was indiscriminate, it w r ould not be therefore
wrong, mucb less monstrously wrong.
The State has two functions—one primary, the other secondary.
It may lawfully and beneficially exercise both. Ihe primary
function of a State is to preserve life and property, taking these
terms in their widest sense. The secondary is to preserve and
promote the happiness of the people. Indeed it is said by some,
that u Salus populi suprema lex,” the happiness of the people is
the great end of government. On this point I raise no discus-
sion. It is enough for my argument that the happiness of the
people be admitted as a legitimate end of government.
Now the State is bound, in the first instance, and above all
things, to discharge its primary function, but if, along with the
due discharge of this, it can exercise its secondary function, it is
bound to exercise it, and the more especially if the exercise of
this secondary should materially aid in the exercise of the primary
function. On this ground the State endowment of schools at all
is defensible, and on this ground only.
A man’s religious sentiments have much to do with his happi-
ness, they have much to do with his interests, they have much, to
do with the interests of society, much to do with the preservation
of life and property, and therefore much to do with the primary
function of the State.
A man must be taught his religious sentiments (at the least
very wise and good men think so). But how shall he be taught
without a teacher, and who will teach without reward? The
teacher must be paid. The labourer is worthy of his meat. The


State may therefore pay the teacher, not only without violating
its primai’y duty, but in furtherance of it.
The State then may endow schools in which religious instruction
is given, and the teacher who gives it. It may do this legitimately.
But what kind of religious instruction is to be paid for by. the
State P The religious instruction embodying the religious princi-
ples of the State itself. Our State is Christian : therefore our
State may legitmately pay teachers to give instruction in the prin-
ciples and practice of Christianity, There is an obligation upon
the State in this case, almost tantamount to that belonging to its
primary function. In this case the duty to pay one to teach
Christian faith and practice is almost tantamount to the duty of
protecting life and property, It is all but a duty pertaining to
its primary function.
But what of the diversity of the Christian sects ? Their name,
no doubt, is “ legion," for they are many ,■ but they are legions of
the same army. There is more in common to them all than there
is peculiar to any. Their differences are neither so numerous
nor so great as their agreements. They all teach the two great
commandments on which “ hang all the law and the prophets,"
“ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and
thy neighbour as thyself.” Teaching this, they all co-operate
in securing life and property, and so, in aiding the State in
the performance of its primary function, and in preserving
peace and good order, and so, in furthering the interests of the
State. The State, therefore, should endow the schools of all, on
the ground of expediency, just as it should provide fleets, armies,
police, &c.
As to the distinctive doctrines, government, worship, and dis-
cipline of the several sects, the State has nothing to do with them
in the question of endowing their schools. It is enough for the
State that they teach the duty of fearing God and honouring
the King, which embodies the two great commandments in a
political form. This is the duty with which it is concerned in
respect of its subjects. It is not for the State, in the face of this
teaching, to scrutinize every item of their faith, &c., and to pro-
nounce upon it. For the State to do this is for the State to usurp
the place of conscience, and to enter a domain from which both the
law of nature and the law of nature’s God forbid it to enter. The
State’s business is eminently a practical business. Bacon says
that philosophers make laws for the stars. Only practical men
can make laws for a State —men who know what manner of beings
men are, and in what manner of circumstances they are placed,
and who legislate accordingly, always looking hopefully and confi-
dently to the ‘'good time coming," but never losing sight of the
“present necessity," and who work “with such machinery as


they have,” doing what their hands find to do, and doing it with
their might. .
Hence it is the duty of the State to consider not which of the
sects holds the greatest amount of absolute truth, hut how many
of them hold so much of the truth as practically concerns and
assists in the business of good government. It is the business of
the State, in interfering with the education of the people, to con-
sider from what style and kind of teaching “ the people will learn
most good with the smallest mixture of evil.”
It is the business of the State to consider, not what mode of
teaching is absolutely the best, but by what mode the people will
learn most, If the State find, that in the case of a section of the
community, a minister, with a surplice, will teach the fearing of
God and the honouring of the King more acceptably, and there-
fore more effectually than a minister with a Geneva gown, or no
gown at all, it is its business to pay the minister wearing the
surplice to teach that section. It would be tyrannical and foolish
to compel them to listen to a minister with a Geneva gown, or
without any gown. The teaching would be less effective—not
effective at all—or positively injurious ; and the State might find
that in such case, for every minister with a Geneva gown, or no
gown at all, endowed, it was making a thousand enemies, instead
of furthering the business of good government. The State which
understands its duty, and desires most efficiently to perforin it,
will be indulgent to these prejudices of the people, which do not
affect injuriously either the primary or the secondary objects of
government, and are not only perfectly consistent with good
citizenship cn the part of those who hold them, but eminently pro-
motive of it. This applies to all the Christian sects, and to others
also as citizens, who, while they hold and teach the duty of fearing
God and honouring the King, differ in respect of, let me say,
either the doctrine of predestination, the form of church govern-
ment, the propriety of abstaining from certain kinds of food on
certain days, kneeling at the communion, or the mode of dealing
with ecclesiastical delinquencies. Let the State deem the people’s
views, with respect to these matters, prejudices if it please. These
prejudices are beyond the sphere of its legitimate interference.
In these matters the State will leave each sect to be fully per-
suaded in its own mind.
The State, in consideration of the fact that they nevertheless
all assist it in the performance of its duty, ought to provide for
them all the means of instruction, and in consideration of the fact
that this instruction will be most effectually given, when given
according to the prejudices (if you please to call them so) of each,
the State ought to endow them in their distinctive characters, to
endow Protestant schools as such, Homan Catholic schools as
such, &c.


There is, then, no monstrous wrong in endowments, not even in
indiscriminate endowments, as they are erroneously styled—so
far, at the least, as the Christian sects are concerned. There is
no wrong at all in them. They are right and beneficial. Nor do
those who are loudest in denouncing’them regard them as such,
if we may judge of their principles by their practice.
Many of those who refuse endowment from the Treasury because
it pays what they call truth, and what they call error, not only
accept, but solicit grants of public land for church or school pur-
poses. This, it is true, is not accepting money, but it is certainly
accepting money’s worth, which is much the same thing, and that
which may be converted into money. Surely, those who refuse a
certain number of sovereigns from the State, because those whom
they regard as in error receive a certain number of sovereigns also,
cannot conscientiously and consistently accept a certain number
of sovereigns from the State in the shape of a piece of the State’s
land.
Surely they who regard it as right in the State to endow with
land themselves, in common with those who, in their view, are in
error, cannot regard it as a wrong, a monstrous wrong, for the
State to endow what they call truth and what they call error with
money. Surely they themselves are acting unconscientiously and
inconsistently in the matter of the land, as others are alleged to
be doing in the matter of the money. “ Thou that preachest
a man shall not steal, dost thou steal ? Thou that abhorest idols,
dost thou commit sacrilege ? Thou that makest thy boast of the
law, through breaking the law, dishonourest thou God.” Let
objectors first pull the beam out of their own eye, and then shall
they see clearly to pluck the mote out of a brother’s ey9.
Dr. McGibbon says, “ The League takes in hand to decide
nothing. It knows neither Protestant nor Catholic. It dictates
not a single word to either. What it proposes is, that in our
Public schools Protestants and Catholics shall be exactly the
same, but the names and party of both the one and the other
shall never be heard in them.” I thought that the League had
taken in had to decide that education—“ National, Secular,
Compulsory, and Pree,” was the best Primary education for the
colony ; and that alltheir meetings, deputations, and writings, were
for the purpose of telling us so, and of convincing us that they had
come to a right decision, and of inducing us to act upon it. I
thought that they knew both Protestants and Catholics distinc-
tively, and knew them too as parties so quarrelsome and belligerent
that it was necessary for them to step in, and by their system of
education to compose their differences, soothe their chafed spirits
and make them friends. I thought from passages in Dr,
McGibbon’s own public history, that, grieved with their dissen-
sions, he had, out of the fulness of a loving spirit, sought to bring


them together with the cords of love as with the bands of a man
teaching them no longer to
« Fight like Devils for conciliation
And hate each other for the love of God.”
but to live together in peace and charity, I must have _ been
mistaken. Probably my mistake arose from my “ confusion of
ideas” and “lack of logic/’ which caused me to judge by the
rule of contrary.
Just mark what the League proposes to do ! They propose
that “in our Public schpols, Protestants and Catholics shall be
exactly the same! ” What a consummation ! How devoutly to
be wished for! There is a slight shade of dubietv, however, over
the new and startling proposal. It is not said whether the
Protestants are to become all Catholics, or the Catholics all Pro-
testants, or whether, Protestants and Catholics having been
amalgamated, they are to come forth as a new product, partaking
of the qualities of both, but exhibiting the peculiarities ot neither.
Let us wait patiently and hopefully for the realizing, of this pro-
posal —this new avatar in the history of sect —this wondrous
transmutation of ecclesiastical species !
When, by the marvellous results of their thaumaturgian pro-
cess, the League have established the efficacy of their principles,
the record of their operation will be entitled to rank even before
“ Ovid’s metamorphoses ” —and to be read as the sixth Public
school book. The Magicians of the “ Arabian Nights ” will hide
their diminished heads in presence of the League’s more potent
sorcerers, and the conjuror’s cloak, like the boxer’s belt, be
awarded them by an admiring and a grateful country—all denomi-
national simpletons and drivelling Biblers notwithstanding.!
While the process of transmuting Protestants into Catholics,
and Catholics into Protestants, is going on, in the League’s
schools, the “ name nor party of both the one and the other shall
never be heard.” Oh no, they’ll never mention them, their name
will ne’er be heard. It is to be a silent process. So it ought to
be. It is a great process, and all great processes are silent. How
could the “name” or “ party ” of either one or other be heard when
they were transformed, Protestant into Catholic, and vice versa,
or inter alios, for no one would know whether he was himself or
somebody else. All that could be said would be what the old
woman said when she was disguised with strong drink “ This is
nome ”_ an d that of course would be uttered with the bated
breath of bewildered astonishment. But, after all, the trans-
formation is to be only in “name ” and “ party,” not in thought
and affection—a transformation not of the inward, but of the out-
ward man. They are to remain still the same, Protestants to
remain Protestants, and Catholics Catholics. This is really too


bad to liave our hopes and expectations raised, only that they
might be the more effectually dashed. If my “ logic would
puzzle a Philadelphian lawyer,” the Dr.’s process would puzzle a
conjuror.
But seriously, the League’s system will never remove or mitigate
sectarian differences. If I thought it would, I would go a great
length to espouse it. I would sacrifice for peace, anything but
purity. It is partly because I conceive that the League’s system
will aggravate sectarian heartburnings and dissensions,. that I
oppose 3 it. “ The name or party of Protestant and Catholic is not
to be heard in the schools” we are told. Dr. McGibbon cannot
be serious. If sectarian religious instruction is to be given in the
schools by ministers of religion, they must visit the schools. A
Church of England minister is announced at the door. The teacher
orders the Church of England children to muster from the four
corners to receive religious instruction. The Church of England
children muster as such, are marched out as such, in the face of
their companions of other churches. Next day the Priest calls:
he is announced, The Roman Catholic children are ordered to
muster. They muster from the four corners as such, they are
marched out as such, in the face of their companions of other
churches. Is not this course of proceeding calculated to call
attention to religious differences ? Is it not calculated to make,the
children think of them ? Is it not calculated to compel them
to think of their differences of creed, ana to engender and inflame
religious differences? In the Denominational schools, on the
other hand, the children are apart. Difference of creed is not
forced upon their attention, much less does it excite their evil
passions.
It is impossible to do away with sects. It is not in the con-
stitution of man to have universal agreement in matters of religion,
any more than in other matters. Quot liumines tot sentenliae.
There will, there must always, be sects, so long as man is consti-
tuted as he is. To seek to do away with sects is visionary, perhaps
undesirable. All that can be done is to mitigate their hostility.
This for the reason assigned, I think the Denominational system
does'. Let us cite facts. “By your fruits ye shall know them.”
In Ireland the Public system has been in operation for many years.
A generation has grown up under it. Is Ireland free from reli-
gious discord ? Little more than a year ago one of the most dis-
graceful sectarian riots recorded in history took place in Belfast.
In Scotland, where Denominational education is universal, theie
have been no such scenes. Take our own town and district—we had
here, some years ago, Denominational schools for the four leading
sects. We have still a Church of England and a Roman Catholic
school. Surely, according to the theory of the League, we should
have been “a proverb and a bye-word” for sectarian strife. But I


reioice to say that it has been far otherwise. We have been at
peace among ourselves. We have been united, and strong, and
successful in the prosecution and completion of every wor o
nublic interest. We have been the envy and the model of our
neighbours. Nay, we were borne through a season most trying
to sectarian feeling, without the ruffling of any of the relations of
Se! wlTcMo thisday, has left its ugly sear on the fan face of
fearlessly!’‘where are the grounds on which to charge
hatreds or feuds ? X believe that our Australian populafton lives
as harmoniously as any population in the world-as any popuia
tion wholly Protestant"or wholly Catholic. I believe, that for our
misunderstandings, strifes, and dissensions, the ordmary irritation
of competing secular interests, will fully and satisfactorily accouni .
It is a libel to say otherwise. To assign as a reason for suppi
Lg Denominational schools in this colony, the enmity of the two
great denominations-Protestants and Catholics-.s to assign a
reason which has its existence only m the imaginations of those
who alleee it P Why provide for an evil which does not only not
Txist but which doesVot even threaten ? Why provoke an evil
by unnecessary and insultingly presuming on lts ac^a^P 0 f lble
existence ? Why libel our people in the eyes of the world ■
Dr. McGKbbon reiterates the oft repeated , a
el \ d °r ent n°ninsTtr-—’'t lore Ibose schools are
arbitrary, nnjnst, and t answer to the oqec-
tion Cn In W< 1832 the population of the colony consisted almost
entirely of members of the Churches of England Home,
Scotland and the Weslevans. Those belonging to other sects
Scotland, anc y s * t In f act 1U the census taken
only for Protestants and
Boman Catholics. The column for Protestants was mtended or
the Church of England, the members Protest
column for them
r/retiM&t iz&sp&piz
rfsXrtnnmher It any other sect to forn£» ngregation
much less to build a place oi worship, Ho place ot worship
o when m snT was the .state of things, Sir Richard
Bourke’s Act was passed, endowing the Churches of Englan ,
Koine, and Scotland, and the Wesleyan Church, and their schools,


according to their respective numbers, as shewn by the previous
census. In Sydney, at that time, there was only one congregation
in connection with the Church of Scotland; for I question whether,
at the period referred to, the second congregation in Bathurst-
street had been formed. If it had, it was composed merely of
dissentients from Dr. Lang’s congregation. The Wesleyans had
only one very small place of worship in Prince-street. The num-
bers of adherents of the Church of Scotland and Wesleyans
together was insignificant. The numbers of each separately con-
stituted but a mere fragment in comparison with those of the
Church of England. I mention this fact to show that the Govern-
ment, in extending endowment to them, acted in a liberal and
generous spirit. They extended to them endowment on precisely
the same principle as that on which they extended it to the much
more numerous and influential members of the Church of England
and the Church of Eome.
Now I ask, did the government act arbitrarily or unjustly in so
endowing them ? Did the government, in so doing, do wrong to
the members of any other sect ? Could any other sect complain
that any portion of their contribution to the funds of the State
had been bestowed upon other and hostile sects ? Could the
government take account of mere individuals in the matter of
endowment ? That the government was prepared to stretch their
principle of endowment to the very furthest limits, so as to
embrace all who could fairly avail themselves of it, is evident from
the fact that they made it include members of the Church of
Scotland and Wesleyans —a small minority. Surely in not endow-
ing the other sects, the government legitimately acted on the
maxim De minimis non curat lex. Since 1832, the state of things
has changed in the colonial ecclesiastical world. The numbers of
adherents of the Churches of England, Eome, and Scotland, and
of the Wesleyans, has much increased absolutely, and they have
changed their relative proportions, and other sects, who, in 1832,
were counted by tens or units, are now counted by hundreds and
thousands. Sects, unknown altogether in 1832, have sprung up.
This was to be expected, and the Church Act anticipated and
provided for the change. As the number of the adherents of
the four bodies in question increased, the amount voted for their
endowment would have been increased. As their relative propor-
tions changed, their respective grants would have been modified.
Sects that had not received endowment at all would have been
endowed, in all cases, according to the census, in terms of the
Act. But in course of time, when the voluntaries became suffi-
ciently numerous to claim in terms of the Act, they refused
endowment from the Treasury, and finally the Act was repealed,
at the instance of the very parties who complain of injustice
and wrong.


Dr. MeGibbon, unfortunate in illustration as in argument,
seeks to shew by the parable of a sinking fund, that one sect
does pay tor another. He says “suppose £IOO,OOO to be paid
for the support of schools out of the public revenue, of course
that money comes from the common taxation of the whole people.
Well, is it not therefore as plain as that two and two make four,
that the money of the Congregational body, and of the Baptist
body, and of the Unitarians, and of all the other sects which
refuse to accept of denominational aid, goes to support the sects
which do accept that denominational aid. If twelve persons pay
into a fund, and four draw out their portion for some special end,
that the money of the remaining eight is applied to the common
good of the whole twelve. This is as really a compelling of the
remaining eight to pay for the special end of the four as could be
enforced in any other way.” Enforcing a compelling 1 This is
worse than bad logic ! But to proceed. I must confess that Dr.
McGibbon’s reasoning is not so plain to me as the fact that two
and two make four. It seems to me no plainer than the fact
that two and two make five, or that Dr. MeGibbon either under-
stands the subject on which he “ pretends to lead public opinion,”
or that he is capable of expressing himself with propriety.
According to Dr. McGibbon’s supposition, the four would receive
twice out of the common fund to which they had all equally con-
tributed, and out of which they all had a right to take only once
and equally; but in the matter of the endowment of the schools,
the case is different. The twelve sects (say twelve) do not
equally contribute to the public revenue: they have not a right
to take equally from it. They contribute only according to their
relative numbers, and have a right to take only according to
these numbers. Then again, according to Dr. McGibbon’s sup-
position, “ the four” take twice. But the four endowed sects do
not take twice. They take only once. Surely if the Church of
England children are educated in an endowed Church of England
school, they are not educated also in a Public school. They get
education only in one school, not in two; the education of each
child is paid for, not twice, but only once. But further. Sup-
pose that the public revenue is a common fund, and that all have
a right to take from it equally: then his illustration establishes
my case. Let us go back to 1832, to the circumstances in which
the Act was made and provided. At that time only the members
of the Churches of England, Borne, Scotland, and the Wesley-
ans contributed to the public revenue, for they w r ere the only
people in the colony, alw r ays excepting the units or tens before
mentioned.
The members of these four churches took, out of their common
fund, and they only, for they only had created itj and they took
rateably and equitably, in terms of the census. They took only that


which was their own, by law and equity, and nothing more. At
this day they are so taking.
But let us take things, not as they were in 1832, but as
they are in 1875. Suppose the State established Denomina-
tional schools, and endowed them according to the last census,
Congregationalists, Baptists, &c., would not then be paying
for the education of the Church of England and Roman
Catholic children, and for the education of their own children at
the same time ; if the amount of endowment to each sect was
apportioned according to the respective numbers of each, in the
terms of the census. True, under such an arrangement, the Congre-
gationalists, e.g., would receive only about one shilling for every
pound sterling received by the Church of England, but then there
are twenty-two members of the Church of England, or rather
more, to every Congregationalist in the colony. In other words,
the Church of England people contribute more than twenty-two
times more to the public revenue than the Congregationalists, and
surely they are therefore entitled to take out of it twenty-two
times as much for any object on the propriety and desirableness of
which all are agreed. Such an object is Primary education. I
am not concerned with the voluntary element in this matter. All,
or the overwhelming majority of our population, are in favor, of
State-endowed Primary schools, Even the voluntaries, including
the Congregationalists, Baptists, &c., whatever may be their
principles, do, in practice, avail themselves of Sate-endowed edu-
cation. # .
If the Denominational system of Primary education were substi-
tuted for thenon-Denominational, there would beno more injustice
done to any sect, in a financial point of view, than is done under
the present Public school system, and much less than would be
done under the system proposed by the League, and the cost to
the State would be no greater. There would be less violation of
the National conscience, than there is under the present Public
school system, and very much less than under the system proposed
by the League. I think this is too plain to require further argu-
ment or illustration.
Dr, McGibbon says, “ Not one of the League men would object
to the Bible being used in the Public schools; not one of them
is fighting to exclude the Bible.” To wlntt then do the League
men object? Eor what are they fighting? They avowedly
object to the use of any portion of the scriptures in the system
of Public primary education, which, by offending any, may inter-
fere with the complacent universal adoption of it. They are
avowedly fighting for the establishment of a system of Primary
education, which, by being free from everything offensive to any,
may be acceptable to all, Now the extracts from scripture con-
tained in the Public school books are the only element to which


they object, because they are the only element with winch they
are offended. The Jews object to the extracts from the b<ew
Testament. As an eminently practical people, their objections
may not find expression in clamour, but nevertheless they must
and do object to them, They submit to have them taught to
their children, not because they approve of them, but because
they cannot help themselves. All the non-Jewish and -
Christian portion of our population must and do object t
scripture extracts altogether. If they submit to have them
taught to their children, they submit from necessity, not from
choice • “ Tor wrath and not for conscience sake. To suppose
that the non-Christian portion of our population approve ot tie
scripture lessons in the Public school books, is to suppose that
thev are guilty of a gross inconsistency; nay, it is to suppose an
impossibility. The Jew who wishes his child to read and believe
the New Testament extracts of the Public school books, is no
longer a Jew, The other non-Christians who desire their children
to read and believe the scripture extracts of the Public school
system, are guilty of inconsistency ; they are no longer non-
Christian. But the Jews and other non-Christians may allow
their children to read these extracts without asking them to
believe them—nay, under prohibition not to believe, them, and
under the injunction to treat them as cunningly devised fables,
or soul-destroying errors! So they may. Possibly, nay probably
so they do. But is not a system which render such things
necessary, or which countenances such things, demoralizing.
The League would not be a party to such a system. Never.
Take away the scripture extracts, and the difficulty with respect
to the non-Christian part of the population (say twelve thousand
in number) is gone, To conciliate them, to. do anything that
can be regarded as acceptable to their consciences, the League
must exclude the scripture extracts altogether from the Public
But even with respect to the Christian portion of the population,
the scripture extracts in question are variously, interpreted an
variously understood by them. They are not m ie same se s
acceptable even to all of them, and unless they are acceptable m the
spirit, as well as in the letter, is it not folly to talk ot acceptable-
ness 9 To really conciliate the Christian portion of our population,
and reconcile them to these extracts, the League must, with . the
lessons give some interpretation which meets the views
of and conflicting secV They cannot do thm.. The
only thing the League possibly can do to make a ground 0 f Primary
education on which the whole population can possibly meet, not
in appearance merely, but in reality is to exclude the Scripture
extracts altogether. They are, by their avowed principles and
object, inevitably shut up to do this. The only common ground


on which the population can really meet in the business of Primary
education is a ground cleared of all Scripture truth as such.
The League in their secret heart know this. The League are pre-
pared at a convenient season to exclude even the Scripture
lessons from the Public school books.
The establishment of a system of Primary education is the
avowed chief object of the League, The retention of any portion
of Scripture in the school books is only a very secondaay object:
that which is very secondary must give way to that which is Pri-
mary, when the two come into competition. They do come into
competition in the present question; therefore the League must
exclude all Scripture lessons from the school books,
But hear themselves on this subject! Although young, the
League are of age to answer for themselves. On the Ist Sep-
tember, 1874, a meeting in favor of uniform education was held.
Out of that meeting the League arose. All those prominently
concerned in it hold the principles of the League. The chairman
of the meeting in question —the man who was supposed to hold
intelligently and cordially the views of the League, said “If we
were to have general education, and that to secure that object we
should have to exclude the Bible from our schools, he should
consent that it should be so; because general and compulsory
education was the first thing to be considered, and was certainly
the only thing that ought to be considered in so far as the State
was concerned.” The Rev. Mr. Greenwood said, “I cordially
concur with the observations which have just fallen from you, Mr.
Chairman.” If the other gentlemen who spoke had disapproved
the chairman’s sentiment in reference to the exclusion of the
Bible, surely they were bound to express their disapproval, If
they objected to the exclusion of the Bible, surely they should
have said so. They gave no expression of dissent; and silence
means consent. We are warranted in inferring, we are bound
to. infer, that nationality and compulsion in education are their
primary objects, and that, for the sake of national and com-
pulsory education, they are willing to exclude the Bible
altogether from the business of Primary education in the
colony.
The League, then, regarding nationality and compulsion as the
chief end of their aspirations and efforts, and the use of the Bible,
either in whole or in part, as a matter of mere collateral import-
ance, are bound to object to the use of the Bible either in whole
or in part, and to fight against such use of it. They have said
so themselves and they are fighting against it. How Dr.
McGibbon can assert the contrary appears to me, and must
appear to you, most wonderful. Dr. McGibbon himself says
that if the League succeed, the State will teach nothing of religion


in the schools but what is common to all. Inasmuch as there is
nothing in revealed religion common to all, the State, if the
League succeed, must, according to Dr. McGibbon himself,
exclude the Bible altogether from the business of Primary
education.
Nor is this all. The League cannot consistently with their
own principle stop at this point. They affirm that sectarian
teaching in schools engenders and inflames hatred among child-
ren, and causes and embitters feuds; therefore they seek to do
away with sectarian teaching in them by the schoolmaster. But
is there any difference, either in itself or in its results, between
the sectarian teaching of the schoolmaster and that of the minister
of religion ? Sectarian teaching is sectarian teaching whether
by the minister or priest, as well as by the schoolmaster; nay, it
is likely to be still more sectarian as taught by the minister or
priest. How then can the League consent to sectarian teaching
in the schools by ministers of religion ? They too, with their
Bibles, must be excluded as pestilent fellows from the schools.
But sectarian teaching is the same in itself, and in its results,
in the case of men as in the case of children. The League, then,
to secure uniformity and peace, must put aside all sectarian teach-
ing in churches as well as in schools. They must establish
churches in which, as Dr. McGibbon says, the terms Protestant and
Catholic shall never be heard, nor their distinctive doctrines either.
They must find some common ground of religious belief, out
of revealed religion, on which all men may meet. But inasmuch
as such ground cannot be found, in the case of men any more
than in the case of children, all revealed religion must be swept
away, and men be left, as the French were at the Revolution,
to worship reason irrationally.
This is no imaginary picture. Consider the matter for your-
selves, and say whether the principles of the League do not point
unmistakeably in the direction indicated —whether they do not
render necessary the exclusion of all revealed religion, not only
from the schools, but from the country itself. The League offer
you education —“ national, compulsory, and free” ; but it is at the
cost of your religious principles. They will grant you the boon
of compelling your children to go to school, and of submitting
to compulsion for nothing, if you will divest yourselves of your dis-
tinctive Christain principles, and of all your Christian principles
together.
This is all they ask in order to your entitling yourselves to have
your children taught the combinations, variations, and permuta


tions of the twenty-six letters of the Alphabet, and the nine digits,
and the cypher, which realize the sum total of secular knowledge*
“ Sirenes contant, &c.”
“ Walk into my parlor says the spider to theily.”
"Will you respond to the invitation? Will you be deceived by
the device, and lured by the offer ? Will you accept stones for
bread and serpents for fish ? Will you purchase “ harm and loss”
in all your interests, tyranny and degradation in all your nature,
at the sacrifice of your Christian principles, which distinguish
you from your fellow Christians ? lam persuaded better things
of you, and things that pertain to high principle and immove-
able stedfastness.
Finally, the system of Primary education which I advocate
■would be truly national, secular, compulsory, and free. Truly
national because adapted to the instincts of our race, and there-
fore embracing the whole circle of revealed truth. Truly secular
because subservient to our interests, not only for the ages of
time, but for those of eternity. Truly, compulsory because en-
forced by dictates of right reason, and the impulse of sanctified
affections. And truly free because purged with every taint of
degradation, whether of our physical, intellectual, moral, or
spiritual being. This is the system which I advocate, This is
the system, the only system, worthy of you. This is the system
for which you may well do, suffer, and sacrifice. This is the
system which secures to you the Bible, and the right to read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest its all important truths, under
your own vine, and under your own fig-tree, none daring to make
you afraid—which secures to you this Christian ease, which is
your true birthright, without the sacrifice of the Christian dignity
which springs from the proud consciousness of owing no man
anything.
I conclude by saying that I have taken up every point in Dr.
MeGibbon’s lecture. There is nothing which I have not touched.
I have endeavoured to answer his objections fully, fairly, and
temperately. How far I have done so conclusively, it remains
with you to decide.
HENRY THOMAS, GENERAL PRINTER, WEST MAITLAND.




