

LECTURE
SETTING FORTH
THE COEEUPTION OF RELIGION
IN THE
|)res(jDterian Cjrarc| 0f Victoria,
fIX/Z7
If/SV
Delivered February Ist, 1866, at Lethbridge,
Rev. PETER MACPHERSOI, A.M., Edin. & Melb.,
Free Church Minister of Meredith and Lethbridge.
“ There are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the
circumcision; whose mouths must be stopped ; who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake.”— Titus i. to, n.
MELBOURNE:
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURKE STREET WEST.
MDCCCLAVJ,


THE CONGREGATION
OF THE
Free Presbyterian Church, Lethbridge
THE FOLLOWING LECTURE,
DELIVERED AT THE ANNUAL MEETING, FEB, I, 1866,
IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED, BY
THEIE PASTOR.
LECTURE.
The following lecture is intended to be a sequel to the one
delivered on Tuesday night, at the Annual Congregational Meet-
ing, at Meredith. At that lecture, attention was drawn to the
Union movement in Scotland ; evidence was adduced to show that
the Free Church of Scotland was rapidly abandoning the
position taken in 1843, and that her actings had been such,
in many ways, as not to command respect. But our more
immediate field of observation and sphere of duty is in
this colony. What claims has the Union movement here
to be forced upon us as a sacred product of the Holy Spirit ?
The Presbyterian Union is a fact. Presbyterianism has grown
up into a great tree, whose shadow covers the land, its branches
extend to the extremities of the colony, and invade neighbouring
territories. It is one of the four religious powers in this country.
The beasts of the field repose under it, and the birds of the air
lodge in its branches. Its pretensions are considerable, it is fair
enough to analyze and ascertain what kind of atmosphere it is
in which this tree is growing.
The Union movement is divisible into two periods. That
between 1853 and 1859, has been pretty fully recorded. The
materials have been published, from which an estimate may be
made of the way in which the negociations were carried on to
consummation. Mr. Hetherington’s hoisting neutral colours till
he got the Free Church squadron out to sea, then boldly and per-
sistently hoisting the black flag of undisguised Erastianism is now
to be taken as matter of history. Then the scuffle on board the
Free Church fleet, and the “ rough and ready ” orders of Dr.


Cairns and Mr. Tait to pitch overboard every one who made any
demur to the voyage —this, too, we pass over as matter of history.
The experience, also, of the Tree Church during the latter
period we must pass over in a mere breath. The power which
could divert the deeds of St. Andrews into the Union, notwith-
standing a congregational vote to the contrary ; and that could
secure the removal of one set of trustees for the Scots College,
and get others appointed in their place—the interests of adenomi-
nation being swamped in the process —is not to he despised. The
Church that patronizes a minister, (Rev. A. Simpson) following
in the footsteps of another to hand over a building out of its
lawful destination, in one case, and in another that gives every
shelter and encouragement to those who seize a property
(that in which we are now assembled) shows that the increas-
ing numbers of the Church represent some variety of talent.
The Presbytery of Geelong and the Presbytery of Melbourne
both breaking through the rules of the Church, to welcome men
who came to them in such circumstances as Messrs. Fleming and
Dron, and yet both obtaining a resolution of indemnity from the
Assembly, are facts which go far of themselves to photograph
the great Presbyterian Tree with a very dense atmosphere about
it. These are practical illustrations of the way in which the
Church gives effect to the second table of the law.
When a Church can put on a bold face to these things, she
affords a very legible commentary on her morality. It is not
considered honorable, even by men of the world, for the
numerically strong to brow-beat and jostle the numerically weak.
There is neither manliness nor Christianity in crushing into a
Union those who have declared, over and over, that they have the
strongest moral repugnance to the means taken to effect the
Union, and to the manifestations of worldliness which have
emanated from it after it was effected.
But while these things speak for themselves as to the way in
which the Presbyterian Church exhibits the second table of the
law, let us see if she makes some amends by any unusual
attention to the first. If the Church is the pillar and ground of
the truth, —if in it are exhibited the power of God and wisdom of
God unto salvation, —if it is to exhibit the pattern of whatsoever
things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report, —
though she does come behind in the second table, how does she
stand, by her public manifestations, to the first ? Supposing it be
granted us that the Presbyterian Church, in her ardour to plant a
godly and united church in this colony, has manifested
mistaken zeal in using “ rough and ready ” expedients to
extirpate a few non-conformists —how does she exhibit herself
when the disturbing element is not in the question at all ?
The Presbyterian Church has waxen great, and advertises
largely. It is known to the ends of the earth that the minimum
stipend allowed to her ministers, is £3OO a-year, and a free
house. Of course, if there are advantages of which a Church may
lawfully come into possession, she may avail herself of them—


supposing she does so lawfully. But where churches, and prin-
ciples, and the handling of the truth of God are concerned,
these things have to be delicately dealt with. A standing adver-
tisement of £3OO a-year, and free house, addressing itself so
forcibly to secular interests, may have unsatisfactory develop-
ments. As a matter of fact, the exhibition of gold from Victoria
has been followed by a sort of clerical rush. The Erastian and
the Eree Church Minister, mutually protesting in Scotland, jostle
each other in making for the Golden Church. The powerful
stimulus of the Presbyterian atmosphere has had a very natural
effect on surrounding denominations. The Independent, who
has held out for twenty years or more, is now convinced, and
seeks admission to the Presbyterian Church. The ministry is
recruited from a large number of Protestant denominations.
The influence wielded by the Church, is not to be denied.
What then is the moral and spiritual atmosphere in which this
church moves ? How does she operate by precept and example
to keep herself unspotted from the world, and bring credit upon
the grace of God ? We have an extensive field to traverse ; we
must run the more rapidly over it. We must begin somewhere ;
let us start at Geelong —a citadel of Presbyterianism in the
colony. There is an evening’s entertainment. It is not
the common-place tea meeting. Taking this last-named institution
in its fuller development, as a stage between the church and the
theatre, the entertainment of which we speak is an advanced
stage between the tea-meeting and the theatre. The programme
of operations gives a list of between 30 and 40 small performances.
Casting the eye down this list, we observe it is allotted to a young
lady and gentleman to represent Dalilah (sic) and Samson.
Again, a young gentleman recites Daniel v. Dishclout; a young
lady is named to recite Mary at the sepulchre ; and the very next
piece on the card is given thus —“ Humorous piece—Colonel
Divers and Martin Chuzzlewit.” This profane medley was pre-
sided over by a minister of the Gospel —or, shall we rather say,
of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. The “ entertainment,”
so designated on the card, was opened with prayer. It is not an
unnatural suggestion, in such circumstances, that the parties who
came crammed with Daniel v. Dishclout, and Jefferson Brick,
must have been conscious of a sort of odd feeling of incongruity
somewhere. However it happened, the people sat dbwn during
the inaugural prayer. The question of attitudes at divine service
has been stirred in the Presbyterian city of Geelong, and,
perhaps, the people had strong and conscientious convictions
on the subject. Or, it may be reasonably supposed that
those who came to divert themselves with Martin Chuzzlewit
had no thought of Divine Service in the case, and so made no
demonstration. The arrangement of materials is profane enough,
but the cope-stone was put upon the profanity by the address of
the presiding Minister. Will it be believed by the simple folks
of Melrose that the Bov. A. J. Campbell, the minister referred
to, besides inaugurating Messrs. Jefferson Brick, Daniel, Dishclout,


&c., with prayer, also urged upon the people the importance of
their children having an interest in the blood of Christ ?
We may be reminded that Mr. Campbell is a prominent minis-
ter in connexion with the mission schemes of the Church, a most
Calvinistic and Evangelical preacher, &c. Perhaps it is true. Be it
so ; but, we add—Mr. Campbell’s patronising these profane enter-
tainments will effectually neutralise his preaching. He might
confine himself to the simple Word of Hod —it would be
made void by such associations as those pointed out. The
Apostle Paul himself would have nullified the effect of his own
inspired Epistles if he had followed them up in such a manner.
Shall Ave err in declaring that a very small amount of true
spiritual feeling would instinctively have recoiled from such a
profane admixture as was served up for that evening’s entertain-
ment, on the 10th of March last, in the hall of the Mechanics’
Institute, in the Presbyterian City of Geelong ! In this state of
things there is no real ultimate quarrel betAveen Mr. Campbell
and the world. He may open meetings Avith prayer, and this
may be tolerated as a mere Scottish prejudice, Avhich he is giving
good ground to hope he will get over in time. Mr. Campbell
may grow rich on this practical theology, but will it not bring
leanness to the soul ?
Again : —We read of the ancient pagans instituting festivals at
Avhich they gave vent to the most extravagant feelings in the
wildest manner. They allowed themselves to be Avrought up into
a sort of phrenzy, and during this excitement they did and said
outrageously absurd and ridiculous things. There were the
greater and lesser Dionysiacs in honour of a pagan god; the
racing and boxing associated Avith them were of a religious
character. Now, we have lived to see not a little of the old
heathen festivals performed in connexion Avith Christian Churches.
Have we not read of the genuine old pagan furor coming over
hard-headed men of business, merchants &c., &c., and under the
inspiration of it, has not a horse-shoe been sold and resold,
purchased and repurchased, till it realized fifty guineas ? Of old
this Avild desire for fantastic merriment took shape in the toAvn
and country Dionysiacs ; so, besides the fooleries at the sale and
the games, there is the civic aspect of these fooleries at the
Bazaar and the calico Ball. Does any man’s common sense
begin to get the better of him, and is he feeling inclined to
slink aAvay ashamed, let him remember the religious aspect of the
question. Charitable Institutions and Churches are to profit by his
folly. What a stimulus it Avas of old to the poor dark pagan to
think that what might appear so foolish to himself was in honour
of a God ! Was not the fantastic horse-shoe liberality at the
sale stimulated by considerations marvellously like those of the
poor old pagan ? Besides the charitable institutions chosen to be
degraded by the fooleries referred to, we find the names of the
Presbyterian Churches at Essendon and Gisborne. It is due,
hoAvever, to the minister of the latter place, Rev. J. Meek, to
record that he declined to accept the money Avhich Avould have


fallen to his share. The amount which was apportioned to
Essendon was £756 10s. 3d.
Again:—We read in a published report —regarding a Pres-
byterian Church in Collingwood,—“ The committee had gone too
far to draw back, and felt it their duty to proceed Avith the build-
ing at all hazards, trusting to their Divine Master to carry them
safely through the undertaking ; and thus far their efforts have
been crowned Avith success.” The language here is strange and
objectionable enough. But Avhat were the exertions made, and
hoAV was the faith of the committee actually manifested, according
to the expressed assurance that their Divine Master Avould carry
them through at all hazards. In a list of devices for raising
funds, Ave read the folloAving in the same report, —“ by means of
collecting cards, social meetings, bazaars, pic-nics, or any other
legitimate devices, by which the funds can be augmented.” The
report is signed by “ James CaldAvell, chairman; J. M. Tait,
secretary.” Passing over the suspicious nebula of “ any other
legitimate devices,” there is that bright star of the first magnitude
in the constellation, viz., bazaars. The public prints have been
teeming with scores of reports, each giving some neAv phase of
trumpery trickery, and deceit, and petty falsehood, by which
these institutions are conducted, till the climax appeared in a
notice given by the Attorney-General in the Government Gazette ,
(November, 1864), asfolloAvs:—“ Gambling forreligious, charitable,
and other purposes, by means of raffles, has been lately carried
on to a considerable extent in Melbourne, and in various parts of
the country, &c.” What churches have been treating as “legi-
timate devices,” are pronounced gambling, by the Attorney-
General. This is no mere incidental, or individual trip, which
gives an unfair illustration of a general character. The State has
found that the excitement of lotteries, for common purposes, is
detrimental to the good order and morality of the community.
It engenders a reckless and gambling propensity, Avhich is dan-
gerous to the individual and to society, and therefore it is re-
strained by legal enactments. On the other hand, the Church
finds that some of this excitement can be turned to account.
The money that men will not spend at the call of duty to the
truth of God, they will spend to gratify the thirst of the gambler.
On the ground of public morality, the State will not build its
public institutions with funds raised in this Avay. Eor churches
and manses, however, both the means, and the money, are good
enough. That brief notice in the unexpected region of the
Government Gazette, will be like a fossil bone, from Avhich a Pro-
fessor Owen can construct the Avhole animal, telling its instincts,
and the character of the very atmosphere in Avhich it lived.
From scores and scores of public reports, we learn that a
large number of the churches and manses in the Presbyterian
Church have been desecrated by fooleries more or less trifling or
disreputable. But if Christianity borrow from paganism, why
should not paganism borroAv from Christianity ? It is not
wonderful that we read in ordinary course, of the public
baptism of two engines on a goldfield! The peculiarities of a


standing ordinance of Giod’s house are mimicked, for the occa-
sion, in the very secular matter of inaugurating two engines at
Spring-dallah. There were priestesses of old —so here two young
ladies are put forward to desecrate the Divine Ordinance by going
through the mock ceremony, amid the cheers of a semi-pagan
multitude. Buffoonery is almost a standing institution of the
Presbyterian Church; Robert Burns bids fair to become its patron
saint; when it is fashionable to decry Scottish prejudices, it is
nothing out of the way to supersede St. Andrew by a more
congenial and convivial successor. A lecture on Robert Burns
is announced with as much gravity from the pulpit as a lecture
on St. Paul, and, from the reports, we fear much oftener. No doubt
there is much more fun to be knocked out of Tam O’Shanter
than out of the Epistle to the Romans.
This unexpected rebuke from the Attorney-General opens our
eyes to the fact that the atmosphere of the Presbyterian Church,
amongst others, is far from being healthy. This is no cavilling
of pietists and puritans; it cannot be accused of discontent and
envy; it comes from the pages of that unsectarian paper the
Government Gazette. But there is more from other quarters;
we find an instructive statement in a speech made at Camper-
down, by E. Longmore, Esq., M.L.A. for Ripon and Hampden.
He was speaking of the “ false-swearing, bribery, and corruption,”
which took place at land sales ; he says that to “ such an extent
was that carried on, that even a Presbyterian minister was bribed
to become a medium,” Now supposing this to be correct, how often
had that minister enforced the principle of nipping evil in the
bud ; had he never come across the commonplace warning—and
perhaps repeated it —that those who end with the gallows or the
jail, began by telling lies to their parents, and breaking the
Sabbath ? Perhaps the petty swindle of the lucky-bag at a
bazaar, was the first step towards bribery and corruption at a
land sale; sharing in the system of falsehood by which the
“ Post Office” is carried on, is no bad preparative to “ false-
swearing” at the “ Land Office.” What are called, or miscalled,
“ white lies” have a fatal tendency to become “ black lies,” in
steady course of time.
The Minister of Justice, declared in a lecture some time ago,
that the clergy had lost influence. This only proves a fixed rule
between cause and effect. Men have their wives and daughters
allured away to conduct the extensive business of a bazaar.
According to scores and scores of reports, they become most
accomplished adepts in the work. But are there not men of
honorable feeling who entertain nothing short of scorn and
contempt for these things as adjuncts of a church ? If they do
not wish their children to be taught the ready art of tampering
with truth at the “ Post Office,” is it enough to be told that
the proceeds are for a church P If a man objects to the
transparent swindle of the “lucky-bag,” is it sufficient to tell
him that the shillings go to build a manse P If he disapproves of
Aunt Sally, is it enough to be assured that her ladyship


m l
61$ UO -v
6 a • NOV 1992
ri£/27 \w .. &
. .. 8
was inaugurated by a minister; or, at least, by a person wearing
a white neckcloth, and that this individual perhaps initiated
the business by-prayer ? Can intelligent men have much respect
. for Churches which resort to gambling practices to raise funds ?
Is not the liberality, of the “horse-shoe” pattern more sug-
gestive of paganism than of Christianity ? Does it raise the
clergyman, or his cause, in the estimation of honorable
men, to know that he gets benefit in some way by the
crowds that may squeeze in to enjoy the intellectual treat of
the sack, the moral power of the wheel-barrow, or the
spiritual exercise of the hurdle ? Dr. Cairns, with his usual
blustering and blundering, rushed to the rescue when the
Minister of Justice made his statement. But what was the
defence ? a virtual plea of guilt. Dr. Cairns acknowledged he
had his fears for the clergy of this colony, and what Avere
these P that they would be overborne by the love of the world
and the love of pleasure. —(Weekly Review Ist Oct. 1864.)
As usual, this champion did more damage to his friends than to
his foes. His fears were doubtless well grounded, but the
Doctor can set up no claim as a prophet for merely giving a
future reference to what has been taking place wholesale all
round him.
The usual business of the annual meeting having been dis-
posed of, —
W. J. Reid, Esq., of Woodbourne, Meredith, proposed a vote of thanks to
the Lecturer, and coupled with it a proposal that the Lecture just delivered
should he published. It was enough to stir feelings of indignation to hear
of such profane doings as those referred to. It was right that Christian
people should be warned against them; such a lecture was very seasonable at
the present time. A mere notice in the newspapers was not sufficient to
secure the desirable ends which might be accomplished by a more extensive
circulation. He would propose that it be printed and circulated in the shape
of a pamphlet, and in this event he would himself willingly contribute half
the cost.
Hugh MacYean, Esq., of Strathvean, who was present, seconded the
motion, and indicated his approval and appreciation of the Lecture. He also
announced his willingness to contribute towards publishing and cir-
culating it.
Rev. P. MacPhekson expressed the gratification which he felt in this
recognition of any service which he had rendered in exposing the evils which
had been referred to. He felt all the more satisfaction from the circum-
stances of the case. He knew well the power and extent of the influences
which he was resisting, and that he must pay the penalty of doing so. If he
had provided an attractive programme for an evening’s amusement, and
fooleries to gratify idlers and pleasure-seekers, he would have had more
chance of an overflowing house. But it was in such ways that ministers
were fattening on the degradation of religion. He would not consent to
sacrifice his manliness by falling in with such influences, to say nothing of
higher considerations. It was natural enough that worldly men should
patronise ministers in the things referred to, still he had no doubt discerning
persons entertained thorough contempt for them, and would find occasion
for expressing their contempt. As to the publication of the Lecture, the fact
was, he had prepared it with that view. He intended himself to have published
it as part of his testimony against the existing evils adverted to, and to have
deposited copies of the pamphlet in the public libraries, that the evidence of
a witness living at the present period might be of use in after times.
