

GOVERNMENT SCHOOL OF MINES AND OF
SCIENCE APPLIED TO THE ARTS.
Lectures on Gold
FOR THE INSTRUCTION OF EMIGRANTS
ABOUT TO PROCEED TO
AUSTRALIA.
Delivered at the Museum of Practical Geology.
SECOND EDITION
I DAVID BOGUE, FLEET STREET.
IP ~ < * y \ f ££s&
■ ’v.-s2»w.f- V,.' -,v . ,rr. •*. •■' . . SR- ■■■“£**• i*- -v








LECTURES ON GOLD
FOR THE INSTRUCTION OF EMIGRANTS
ABOUT TO PROCEED TO
AUSTRALIA.
J. BEETE JUKES, M.A. F.G.S.
EDWARD FORBES, F.R.S.
LYON PLAYFAIR, C.B. F.R.S.
W. W. SMYTH, M.A. F.G.S.
JOHN PERCY, M.D. F.R.S.
ROBERT HUNT, KEEPER OF MINING RECORDS.
gelitofo at tin glimmm 0f |ra.ctical ieologn.
SECOND EDITION.
LONDON;
DAVID BOGUE, 86 FLEET STREET.
MDCCCLIII.


LONDON:
Printed by G. Barclay, Castle St. Leicester Sq.


The following Lectures were delivered in tire
Museum of Practical Geology, in consequence of a
request from the Council of the Society of Arts.
A deputation from that Society, appointed to
confer with the Director and Professors of the
Government School of Mines and of Science
applied to the Arts, stating that the necessity of
a course of Lectures on Gold had been urged
upon them by intending Emigrants, it was
thought that the resources of the Museum of
Practical Geology and of the Government School
of Mines would afford great facilities for such a
course of Lectures as would prove instructive to
Emigrants about to proceed to Australia; upon
which suggestion the course now printed was
immediately arranged.




CONTENTS.
The Geology of Australia, with especial Reference
to the Gold Regions. By J. Beete Jukes, M.A.
F.G.S., Local Director of the Geological Survey of
Ireland; Author of “ Sketch of the Physical Struc-
ture of Australia” ... ... ... ... ... i
On our Knowledge op Australian Rocks as de-
rived FROM THEIR ORGANIC REMAINS. By EDWARD
sf Forbes, F.R.S 39
rf
The Chemical Properties of Gold, and the Mode
of Distinguishing it from other Substances
RESEMBLING IT. By LYON PIAYFAIR, C.B. F.R.S.
The Dressing, or Mechanical Preparation of Gold
Ores. By W. W. Smyth, M.A. F.G.S. ... ... 91
The Metallurgical Treatment and Assaying of
Gold Ores. By John Percy, M.D. F.R.S.
The History and Statistics of Gold. By Robert
Hunt, Keeper of Mining Records ... ... ... 167




LECTURE I.
ON THE GEOLOGY OF AUSTRALIA, WITH
ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE
GOLD REGIONS.
J. BEETE JUKES, M.A. E.G.S.,
LOCAL DIRECTOR OF THE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF IRELAND ; AUTHOR OF
“ THE VOYAGE OF THE FLY,” “ SKETCH OF THE PHYSICAL
STRUCTURE OF AUSTRALIA,” &C. &C.




J. BEETE JUKES, M.A.
THE GEOLOGY OF AUSTRALIA.
I appear before you to-night, ladies and gentlemen,
as the representative of Professor Ramsay, who is absent
from London on the duties of the geological survey. In
his absence Sir H. De la Beche has requested me to give
the following Lecture, because, having some years ago
visited Australia, and seen something of all its colonies,
and parts of the coast not yet settled, I could speak with a
little more confidence than one who was an entire stranger
to it.
As I must necessarily suppose that the majority of
those I am now addressing are unacquainted with the
science of geology, you must allow me to commence with
such a rapid sketch of some of the outlines of the science
as will enable you to understand certain terms that I
must use when speaking of the geology of Australia.
All large accumulations of earthy matters, whether hard


or soft, are, for convenience sake, termed geologists
“rocks.” These are of two kinds, stratified and unstra-
tified. The stratified have all been deposited in water,
and are, therefore, also called aqueous rocks, and consist
principally of sand, clay, and lime. The sandy rocks are
sand, sandstone, gritstone, gravel, pudding-stone, or con-
glomerate ; the clayey rocks are clay, clunch, marl, shale,
and slate; and the lime rocks, chalk, limestone, marble,
&c. These rocks having been gradually and successively
deposited in water through an immense series of ages,
have necessarily a certain order or sequence. One set of
rocks was deposited in the earliest ages; these, as being
the first formed, are called “ Primary ” rocks. In suc-
ceeding ages another set was formed, which are called
“Secondary;” and after those another, which are called
“ Tertiary and it is clear, from the very nature of their
formation, that the order of their relative ages must be the
order of their superposition, or the way in which they
repose one upon the other. The “ Secondary” rocks can
never be found under the “Primary,” nor the “Tertiary”
under the “ Secondary.” As, however, no one rock or set
of rocks is continuous over the whole globe, it is clear that
there might be many places where, for instance, no Se-
condary rocks had ever been formed, and in those cases
there might be Tertiary rocks resting directly on the Pri-
mary ones. The geological sequence, or regular series of
rocks, therefore, might be broken, but could never be
inverted. There may be no place in the world where the
whole series of aqueous or stratified rocks repose one upon
the other in one complete unbroken series; but there is


no place where one rock or set of rocks, after being once
found above another set, will ever be found below it.*
Nearly all stratified or aqueous rocks are what is
termed fossiliferous, that is to say, they contain the remains
of animals and plants : the leaves and the stems of trees,
shells, fish, and other marine and freshwater animals, and
sometimes the bones and harder parts of animals that lived
upon the land.
This part of geology will form the subject of the next
lecture. I mention it now, in order to explain the mean-
ing of one term especially. The Primary, Secondary, and
Tertiary sets of rock, as also the several parts into which
those great classes of rock can be subdivided, are each
characterised by containing peculiar sets of fossils. Geo-
logists, therefore, adopt terms having reference to these
fossils by which to designate the series of rocks. One of
these terms is “ Palaeozoic,” which means “ characterised by
ancient animals.” The Palaeozoic rocks may be said to
include the Primary rocks as far down as fossils have been
found in the latter.
The unstratified rocks have all been molten or fluid by
the action of heat, and are, therefore, called igneous rocks.
They are almost all very hard, and their internal structure
is usually crystalline ; the small particles of which they
are made up, instead of being rounded grains, like those of
sandstone, are, more or less perfectly formed crystals.
* In very highly disturbed and contorted districts,, such as the
Alps for instance, a set of rocks may he tilted over and placed bottom
upwards, but that has evidently nothing to do with the original order of
their formation.


interlaced and entangled one with the other. Igneous
rocks are of various kinds, such as “ lava/’ the produce of
volcanoes; “ basalt/’ a heavy black rock, the crystals of
which are scarcely discernible, even with a microscope,
and which often forms columns more or less perfect, like
those of the Giant’s Causeway ; “ greenstone/’ which differs
from basalt chiefly on account of a slight difference in its
mineral constituents; and various kinds of trap rocks up
to porphyry, syenite, and granite. Granite is a confusedly
crystalline mass of three minerals, called quartz, felspar,
and mica. These unstratified, or igneous rocks, observe no
order of position either in time or space. They were all
formed below the others originally, in the bowels of the earth,
whence they have been thrust and protruded upwards by
those great disturbing agencies of which the earthquake
and the volcano are superficial symptoms.
You will easily understand that when great masses of
igneous or molten rock were thrust in among, and pro-
truded through, the aqueous rocks, these latter must have
been greatly affected by the intense heat of the former,
and sometimes so much so as to lose, more or less entirely,
their original characters of aqueous rocks and assume many
of those of igneous origin. We have, therefore, from this
source a third class of rocks intermediate between the
other two, a class which from their altered condition are
termed Metamorphic, or transformed, rocks. The principal
varieties of these are gneiss, which is like laminated
granite, mica slate, chlorite slate, &c., and clay slate.
Any of the aqueous rocks, whether Primary, Secondary,
or Tertiary, may become altered or Metamorphic rocks;


but as the Primary rocks are the lowest, and therefore
nearest to the source of heat, and, moreover, are the oldest,
and have therefore had more chances of being affected by
it than the others, so the Metarnorphic rocks are usually
Primary rocks, and most commonly lie at the bottom of
those Primary rocks. The most general characteristic of
the Metarnorphic rocks is to split riot along the grain of
their bedding, but in some given general direction across
the bedding. This superinduced fissile structure is called
the “ cleavage.”
When the igneous rocks were intruded by main force
among the aqueous ones, lifting them up and pushing
through them, they naturally caused cracks and fissures to
run in various directions. To many of these cracks and
fissures the molten rock gained access and filled them up,
forming what are called “dykes” and “veins;” others,
however, were not so immediately filled up, but remained
more or less open until subsequently filled with mineral
matters accumulated by a more slow and gradual process.
As the igneous rocks cooled, moreover, they themselves
cracked, or were acted on, by subsequent disturbing forces,
which caused fissures to run through them as well as the
surrounding aqueous rocks. All these fissures or veins
have since been filled (we have no time to attempt to
explain how) by minerals in a more or less pure or un-
mixed state, and frequently in a crystalline form. Of these
minerals quartz is probably the most abundant. Quartz is
usually a white compact opaque stone, but sometimes
forms long finger-like transparent crystals, and is then
called “ rock crystal.” It may be called “ pure flint.”


Besides quartz, however, many other minerals accu-
mulated in these veins, and among them many metals, such
as lead, tin, copper, silver, and gold. The other metals
are rarely found pure, but occur as ores combined with
other substances in such a manner that they often lose all
their metallic appearance, and can only be recognised by
the practised or scientific eye. Gold, however, most fre-
quently occurs pure, or, at all events, so nearly so that its
metallic nature can be at once recognised. It occurs in
these quartz veins either in crystals or in rudely shaped
lumps and masses, or in small flakes and grains, and
sometimes is diffused through the mass of the quartz in
such a minute state of subdivision as to be quite imper-
ceptible to the eye, although in such quantity as to be
very profitable to the miner.
The metals mentioned above, then, usually occur in
narrow, more or less upright veins, which are nothing more
than comparatively small cracks or fissures traversing the
whole mass of rock in which they are found. These veins
are rarely more than a few feet, sometimes only a few
inches wide.
The metals are not entirely confined to such veins, as
sometimes they are found in strings, or nests, or irregular
masses, in the body of the rock, or disseminated through
it in a state of fine subdivision. It is very rarely, how-
ever, that any considerable quantity of gold or other metal
is thus found dispersed in the body of a rock.
There is one other general geological subject I must
briefly lay before you, and that is the formation of drift
gravel, sand, or clay,—those loose, unconsolidated mate-


rials which are so commonly found lying between the
vegetable mould and the main body of the solid rock,*
It is well known that not only have all the stratified
rocks, comprising the far greater portion of the globe,
been formed under water, principally under the sea; but
also that, since their formation, they have been raised into
dry land, again depressed beneath the sea, and again re-
elevated, and this process repeated, perhaps, many times.
This alternate elevation and depression of the land has,
moreover, taken place more or less quietly and gradually,
the result of which is, that every portion, nay, every square
inch of dry land, has passed through the influence of tides,
and currents, and breakers, and all that destructive action
which we now see taking place along our own coasts daily.
The result of this is, that the last time the land slowly
emerged from the sea, the breakers, the weaves, and the
currents, knocked off fragments of rock, w 7 ashed and rolled
them, and swept them about until they had rounded them
into boulders or pebbles, pounded them into sand, or
ground them down into mud or clay. These clays, sands,
and gravels, the washings of the rocks, have finally been
left lying about in patches here or there, or spreading
over more or less of the surface, sometimes covering large
tracts, both high and low, sometimes accumulated only in
hollows or pre-existing valleys and depressions. When
the waters in which these superficial accumulations were
deposited, acted on rocks containing gold, whether the
* It must be remembered that “ rock ” in the mouth of a geologist
may mean soft sandstone or clay. It is his general term for all con-
siderable masses of earthy matter.


gold were disseminated through the mass of the rock; or
confined to the quartz veins traversing it, fragments of the
auriferous rock would, of course, be detached equally with
pieces of all other rocks. These fragments, either slightly
water-worn, or altogether broken and ground down, would
afterwards be found in the drift clays, sands, and gravels.
But it is important to remark, that these drifted materials
would, in all probability, be much richer in gold than the
actual gold-bearing rocks themselves. This arises from
the circumstance, that water moving with a given force or
velocity, communicates motion to matters suspended in
it, or lying on its bottom, according to their shape and
specific gravity. Now the specific gravity of quartz and
of most other heavy compact rocks is about 2h, whilst
the specific gravity of gold is 18 or 19. Gold, therefore, is
somewhere about seven times as heavy as any rock or
stone with which it is likely to be associated. A current
of water accordingly having sufficient strength to bear
along sand or pebbles of quartz or any other rock, might
not be able to move the fragments of gold associated with
them. Speaking roughly, it might be unable to move
grains of gold the size of a pin's head, while it swept
away fragments of rocks as big as peas. Moving water,
therefore, has done for the auriferous rocks formerly, just
what the miner would do now, break it, namely, up into
fragments, sweep away the lighter particles, and leave the
gold behind it.
No conceivable current of water would be able to
carry very far large fragments of gold, or even large frag-
ments of quartz, or other rock containing much gold.


Whenever, then, you find these large fragments, you may
be sure you are not far from their parent site. Gold
dust, on the contrary, especially if in the form of scales or
spangles, may be carried over very considerable distances.
In this way the actual total amount of gold may be pretty
equally distributed over large spaces of auriferous drift,
because the currents that had force enough to move the
larger fragments a few hundred yards, would carry all the
smaller ones miles away. In the one case, rich lumps
would be dropped sparingly here and there; in the other,
scales and dust would be sown broadcast, as it were,
equably over the wide spaces where the currents began to
lose their force and velocity. The same reasoning applies
to the case of rivers. When we find gold in the sand of
rivers, we must not, therefore, conclude that it was the
actual water of the river that detached it from the
parent rock. Doubtless it may do so sometimes, and to
a small extent, but it is exceedingly unlikely that any
river should have the chance of attacking many such
auriferous spots in its bed. As the old drift would be
naturally accumulated in the lowest hollows and depres-
sions of the surface of the rocks, or in the old pre-existing
valleys, and as the rivers of a country naturally follow
the same course, it is from these loose and incoherent
materials that a river derives its store of gold. A river
traversing a country of auriferous drift is engaged in re-
sifting and re-assorting the materials that have once been
sifted by the waters in which the drift was formed, carry-
ing all the matters that fall into it forward, but soon
depositing the heavier among them and sweeping off all


the lighter particles into lower regions. As a river winds
through its valley, it attacks first one bank and then ano-
ther, eating into the base of a cliff where the full force of
the current is shot against it, causing the perpetual
falling of small portions of it into its waters, carrying
those portions on, and then depositing them below in places
where the force of the current is checked.
In examining a river for gold, therefore, it is the inside
curve of its bends where sand-banks and spits are accumu-
lating, or wherever the force of the current is slackened,
and the materials carried by it are consequently dropped,
that should be first searched. Similarly, where a river
has cut down through the drift to the solid rock below,
especially if hard jutting ribs of rock stretch across it,
as is often the case, gold is most likely to be dropped on.
the upper side, and in the holes and crevices of these
rocky bars, where they check the force of the stream, and
catch any heavy matters that might be rolled along at its
bottom.
Rivers are, indeed, great natural cradles , sweeping off
all the lighter and finer particles at once, the heavier
ones either sticking against natural impediments, or being
left wherever the current slackens its force or velocity.
A cradle is a wooden trough with several “ cleets,” or
ribs fastened across its bottom. Into the head of it is
placed a quantity of auriferous sand or gravel, water is
poured over it, and motion communicated by rocking and
tilting the cradle. The running water carries off all the
lighter matters, and leaves the heavy stones and lumps of
gold either in the head of the cradle, or accumulated at its


bottom against the “ elects/’ fastened across to arrest
them. Turning the bed of a river, then, wherever such a
manoeuvre is practicable, is like a miner examining the
bottom of his cradle; and if it happens to be done at the
right spot, where there are several natural “elects,” or
bars, or where there are holes in the rock for the gold
to drop into, it is likely to be rewarded very richly by the
accumulated result of centuries of natural gold washings.
We can now understand the difference between what
are called “wet diggings” and “dry diggings;” the
former are those carried on in the bed of a river, the latter
in the general spread of drift lying over the country.
We can now also understand why it is that gold washing,
or the extraction of golden fragments from the drift of
a country, is much more profitable than gold mining.
In gold mining, vast quantities of hard rock have to be
quarried and removed, to be crushed by powerful ma-
chinery, and to be washed over and over again, or to be
treated by other expensive processes; while in gold
washing, or separating gold from drift, all the mining
and the crushing, and a good part of the washing and
sorting, of materials have been already done for the
miner by Nature.
There is one other possible reason why auriferous
drift should not only be richer in gold than the mass
of the rock from which it is derived, but also why the
first deposited auriferous drift of a country, after the
formation of the gold, should be richer than any sub-
sequent one. Sir E. Murchison, in his account of the
auriferous chain of the Ural, has remarked that the gold


there must be of comparatively recent geological origin,—
that it is newer than any rock or earthy deposit in the
country except the drift. The sands and gravels (now
sandstones and conglomerates) of the old Palaeozoic, Se-
condary or Tertiary rocks, although made up of the detri-
tus of the Ural chain, do not contain a grain of gold.
It is most probable, therefore, that there was no gold
in the Ural during the period of their deposition ; and
that the gold was only deposited in the veins of the Ural
rocks just previously to the formation of the drift. Now
it is believed, that auriferous veins (contrary to what is
often the case with other metals, such as copper and
lead) are richest near the surface, and get poorer the
deeper they are followed. If that be the case, it follows
that those portions of the auriferous quartz veins that
were broken up during the period of the drift, being the
most superficial portions, were comparatively richer in
gold than equal portions of those now forming the super-
ficial part of the rocks would be. Consequently, the
auriferous drift derived from them would be propor-
tionately richer than an equal quantity of similar drift
would be if formed now. It may not be a quite suffi-
ciently ascertained fact that gold veins are richest nearest
the surface, but if they are the above reasoning holds
good.
Having thus glanced at a few facts in general geo-
logy, I will now proceed to give an almost equally slight
sketch of the geology of Australia.
You all know that Australia is one great compact land
nearly as big as all Europe, with a large island, called Van


Dieman’s Land, on the south-east of it. The straits be-
tween Van Dieman’s Land, or Tasmania, and the continent
of Australia, are called Bass’s Straits. They are about
130 statute miles across. The straits that separate Australia
from New Guinea are called Torres Straits; they are about
140 miles wide. Bass’s Straits are about in the same south
latitude as Spain in the northern hemisphere. Torres
Straits are in a similar latitude to that of Sierra Leone.
Sydney is in the corresponding latitude to that of Salee in
Morocco.
u The great physical features of Australia, as far as they
are at present known, may be very briefly described.
“ 1. A long but not lofty mountain-chain runs along the
whole eastern coast, crossing Bass’s Straits into Tasmania,
and running under Torres Straits to the shores of New
Guinea.
“2. On the landward, or western side of this chain, are
great plains, declining gradually to the west, but at first
often broken by detached ranges or groups of hills. These
plains are, on the south, traversed by the Rivers Murray
and Darling and their tributaries, disemboguing into Lake
Alexandrina; in the centre, by Victoria River (and perhaps
some others), which drains into Sturt’s central desert; and
on the north by the small rivers which run into the
southern portion of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
“3. West of the tracts thus described appear immense
desert plains, spreading far and wide through the heart of
the country, extending to the sea-coast round the Gulf of
Carpentaria on the south, round the Great Australian


Bight on the north, and all along the north-west coast
from North-West Cape to Collier’s Bay.
“As minor but sufficiently important features, may be
mentioned, —
“4. The mountain-chain of South Australia, running
north from Cape Jervis to the singular horseshoe-shaped
depression of Lake Torrens.
“5. The high land of Western Australia, running north
from Point D’Entrecasteaux and King George’s Sound to
the neighbourhood of Shark Bay.
“6. The high land which forms the coast from Collier’s
Bay to Wickham’s Victoria River, and seems to stretch in
an east and west direction across the interior of Arnhem
Land, south of Port Essington, to the western shores of
the Gulf of Carpentaria.”*
The Great Eastern Chain. —This is in no case a single
ridge of mountains. It is a broad tract of elevated ground,
from which rise many mountain-ranges of very various
size, character, and extent. These are sometimes steep
and broken ridges; sometimes mere table-lands. Great
spurs frequently strike out on either hand, forming lofty
and broken ranges of mountains, running to the sea-coast
on one side, and striking into the interior on the other.
On the west side of the chain there appear to be fre-
quently small detached ranges, running north and south,
or parallel to the main chain, occurring at intervals for
two or three hundred miles from the water-shed. This
* Sketch of Physical Structure of Australia.


seems to be more especially the case in the province of
Victoria.
Van Dieman’s Land, or Tasmania, is a mountainous
island, the highest points of which are 5000 feet above
the level of the sea. From Count Strzelecki’s description,
granite shows itself in considerable force in several parts
of the island; but the most conspicuous rock is a massive,
largely crystalline greenstone, which forms great ridges
called “ tiers/’ running in various directions and enclosing
small isolated valleys, usually called plains. These plains
are commonly composed of sandstone, with subordinate
beds of shale and limestone, and one or two beds of coal,
belonging to a palaeozoic formation, probably not greatly
differing in age from the Devonian rocks of Europe.
From the north-eastern point of Van Dieman’s Land a
chain of high rocky islets, consisting chiefly of granite,
leads across Bass’s Straits to the granite ridge of Wilson’s
Promontory. From this point the water-shed of the Great
Eastern Chain runs north and north-east to the Australian
Alps, gradually rising in elevation till it attains in Mount
Kosciusko the altitude of 6500 feet. These mountains
are usually called in Australia the Snowy Mountains, and
if not covered by perpetual snow, are covered by it for a
sufficiently great portion of the year to give rise to the
perpetually flowing stream of the Murray River from their
western flank. Granite, and other similar rocks, together
with mica slate, and other metamorphic rocks, compose
these mountains. Palseozoic sandstones, however, occur
on their flanks, and are seen near Melbourne, and coal
has been found at Western Port. From the Australian


Alps to the Moreton Bay district the chain continues with
its water-shed at a distance of from 70 to 100 miles from
the coast, none of its peaks apparently rising higher than
about 4000 feet above the sea. Granite frequently shows
itself in great force, covered by metamorphic rocks ; and
these again covered by palaeozoic rocks, of which hard
thick sandstones are the most conspicuous feature. One
great palaeozoic tract occupies the country around Sydney
for many miles, spreading also over all the Hunter River
district. North of Moreton Bay the constitution of the
chain is only known from observations made upon the
coast, and those made by Hr. Leichardt in his overland
journey to Port Essington. He describes many fossil-
iferous sandstones and limestones, probably palaeozoic, and
mentions the occurrence of coal; he also describes large
granite tracts with metamorphic rocks, and great masses
of basalt and greenstone, and other igneous rocks. Simi-
lar rocks form the many mountain-ranges that strike out
upon the coast, as observed by myself when Naturalist
to H.M.S. Fly. From Cape Upstart to Cape Melville
especially, many great granite ranges, the summits of
which were in several instances 4000 feet high, were
observed. North of Cape Melville the hills gradually
decline in height, rarely equalling 1000 feet, but being
still often composed of granite, till about Cape York they
are not more than 400 feet, composed chiefly of porphyry.
The submarine continuation of the chain, however, may
still be traced across Torres Straits by a line of steep
rocky islands, 700 or 800 feet high, composed of granite
or similar rocks up nearly to the shores of New Guinea.


The length of the chain, measured from the South Cape of
Tasmania to the northern part of Torres Straits, is 2300
statute miles in a direct line.
In sailing along the coast one is frequently struck with
the strange outline of the hills. The Pigeon House, Hat
Hill, Mount Camel, Mount Dromedary, Cape Upstart,
Mount Funnel, are names that were suggested to Cook by
these strange forms. In attempting to traverse them, the
deep narrow gorges and ravines, the frequent and lofty
perpendicular precipices, are found to be their most pre-
vailing characteristics.
Three miles at the back of Hobarton rises Mount
Wellington, 4200 feet above the sea, ending in grand pre-
cipices of huge columnar greenstone. So numerous are
the dark gullies and ravines that indent its flanks, that
people have been lost in endeavouring to ascend it, and in
some instances no trace of them has ever since been dis-
covered, notwithstanding the most diligent search. An
immense unbroken forest of gum-trees (the bush) increases
the intricate and impenetrable character of the country,
while dense scrubs or thick impervious belts of bushes and
shrubs occur in the lower and moister grounds.
The late Captain Booth, when Commandant of Port
Arthur, in Van Dieman’s Land, lost his way in a scrub
within three or four miles of his own house, and was only
discovered at the end of five days’ search by the united
efforts of the troops under his command. Count Strzelecki
had to abandon all his horses and baggage, when exploring
Gipps’ Land, and only extricated himself and his com-


panions by many days* cutting through the scrub, some-
times only advancing two or three miles a-day.
The “ bush,” or the comparatively open forest of gum-
trees, is like a great untidy expanse of gravel walk, covered
with small ironstone nodules, with here and there a little
brown straggling grass, like living hay. The trees stand
pretty widely apart, with little or no underwood, their bare
lofty stems not branching for a considerable height, and
having loose strips of ragged bark, like worn-out matting,
hanging from them. The leaves are few, small, and scat-
tered, giving but little shade, so that it is often hotter in
the bush than in the open country, as the trees impede the
free current of the air. Old prostrate rotten tranks and
dry broken branches lie here and there on the bare brown
ground, often blackened from fire, the living upright trees
frequently exhibiting a scorched and blackened surface
from the same cause. The gum-trees spread over the
rockiest and barest ground, where scarcely a particle of
what we should call soil is to be seen. Sometimes, espe-
cially on the seaward slope of the hills at the foot of the
precipices, where some moisture falls and soil accumulates,
a different description of forest is found, called “ brushes.”
These, especially as we go north towards the tropics, con-
sist of lofty and umbrageous trees, with great cable-like
creepers or lianas climbing from tree to tree, while groups
of elegant palms rise here and there, or clusters of tree-
ferns, with their tentlike canopies. “ Plains” in Australia
are open, park-like districts, with merely clumps of trees
standing at intervals, the undulating ground being covered


with fine grass, that after rains is rich and luxuriant,
rising to the horse’s belly as one rides through it. This,
however, in long droughts, dies and withers away, and the
“ plains” are then mere undulating expanses of sand and
dust.
A stranger, at first landing in the country, is always
struck and unfavourably impressed with the sombre and
monotonous tint and aspect of the evergreen vegetation.
When the eye, however, is a little accustomed to this, it
soon begins to detect shades and variety of beauty; and in
the spring month of September, when refreshed by the
winter’s rain, the vegetation assumes somewhat of the
greenness and freshness of our own insular climate.
In order to give a little more definite notion of the
country, I will rapidly describe the neighbourhood of Syd-
ney and that of Port Phillip.
On approaching Port Jackson, the coast is found to
consist of perpendicular cliffs of white sandstone, varying
from one to three hundred feet in height. They are broken
through at one part by the opening that leads into the
sandy and desolate harbour of Botany Bay; and a few miles
north of that is a small indentation that Cook considered
to be merely a boat harbour, and called Port Jackson from
the name of the look-out man at the mast-head. On sail-
ing at this indentation, however, it is found that, like
scenes at a theatre, one portion of cliff here stands back
from the others, and admits of an entrance on either side
of it. The entrance on the right leads into the North and
Middle Harbours, which are still pretty nearly as lonely
and deserted as when Cook first sailed along the coast.


The entrance on the left leads into Sydney Harbour, a
long lake-like expanse of blue water branching into a mul-
titude of coves, and bays, and winding arms, bordered for
the most part by perpendicular cliffs of white sandstone,
but with sandy beaches here and there. Four or five miles
from the entrance stands the city of Sydney, surrounded by
coves and bays, stretching its now handsome lines of houses
and well-built suburbs over a great extent of ground, and
assuming somewhat of a metropolitan character worthy of
its extent of country, A long winding arm of the harbour
runs seventeen miles farther up to Paramatta. Beyond
this we find a wide, gently undulating plain, but little
raised above the sea, for the next thirty or forty miles.
This low land is composed for the most part of dark shale,
which rests upon the sandstone that surrounds Syd-
ney. On approaching the hills the sandstone comes up
again to the surface from beneath these dark shales, and
rises very gradually on to the flanks of the Great Chain,
which here goes by the name of the Blue Mountains.
The distant aspect of the Blue Mountains is that of a
moderate level-topped ridge, with a few eminent peaks and
bosses rising from it here and there. It formed, however,
for many years an impassable barrier to the colonists, the
reason of which we shall easily understand if we come to
examine it more closely.
I once had a good view of the Blue Mountains from
the top of a lofty rock on the east side of the Hawkesbury
Biver not far from Mulgoa, The river here flows north
and south, parallel to the course of the mountains, run-
ning in a small ravine, of some 200 feet depth, along the


foot of their eastern slope, and receiving the drainage of
that portion. From this ravine the ground sloped gently
upwards to the west for many miles, till it attained a
height of upwards of 2000 feet. It had a uniform general
surface, so that its horizon formed a straight line, over
which a few peaks appeared rising to about 3000 feet.
This gently-sloping inclined plane, if it can he so called,
was worn and furrowed by an infinite number of winding
and branching gullies and ravines, so that its whole area
seemed about equally divided between these furrows and
their separating walls of rock. Each gully had perfectly
precipitous sides, with overhanging ledges of rock jutting
out at intervals, and the deep bottom of each was occupied
by the bed of a dark torrent, that then was for the most
part dry, or had only a little trickling stream from one
deep pool to another, but after long-continued rain would
he filled by a furious rush of water foaming along the
whole bottom of the ravine. Ear as the eye could reach,
one great inextricable maze or net-work of these deep,
impassable glens branched in every direction, with
sometimes but a few yards of ground between them.
Still the whole country w 7 as covered by the everlasting
“ bush/’ or forest of gum-trees, so that it was only from
some higher cliff than usual, like that I was upon, that
anything like a general view of it could be gained.
The higher we go on to the flanks of these hills, the deeper
and grander do these ravines become, so that, as described
by Mr. Darwin and Mrs. C. Meredith, they at length
assume the character of great gulfs or bays, 1000 or
1500 feet deep, with grand vertical precipices of this


height winding round them in headland after head-
land, like the cliffs of some great sea-shore. At the
one near the Weather-boarded Hut, on the Bathurst
road, Mr. Darwin says one could drop a stone from
the summit of the cliff and see it strike the trees be-
low, while it would be necessary to make a circuit of
sixteen miles before a place could be found allowing of
a descent into the valley. These ravines are characteristic
of the sandstone formation mentioned before, and are
shown on a smaller scale in the many winding arms and
bays of Port Jackson and Broken Bay, and other harbours
on the coast. We learn, from the sections of Count
Strzelecki, that underneath the sandstone, on the flanks of
the Blue Mountains, are certain shales containing beds of
coal. These coal-beds rise also from under the sandstone
at Bulli, and appear in the cliffs of the Wollongong and
Illawarra district, fifty miles south of Sydney. They also
appear from under the same sandstone at the Hunter
Biver, one hundred miles north of Sydney, where they
are worked at Newcastle. We see, then, that the country
between Sydney and the Blue Mountains is slightly
basin-shaped, the Sydney sandstone rising up from under
the central shaly district in every direction, and the coal
appearing wherever its lower beds come to the surface.
I estimated the thickness of this Sydney sandstone at 800
feet; Mr. Dana assigns it a thickness of 1200.
If we cross the Blue Mountains towards Bathurst, we
find metamorphic and granitic rocks rising from under
this palseozoic formation, and forming all the country for
some distance to the west. Bathurst Plains are them-


selves 2300 feet above the sea, almost surrounded by
mountains, among which spring the upper branches of the
Macquarrie River. About thirty miles west of Bathurst is
a group of hills called the Conobalas, 2300 feet higher
than Bathurst, or 4600 feet above the sea. These hills
are said to be formed chiefly of mica slate; and on their
flanks, in the bed of the Summer Hill Creek and the
Lewis Ponds River, the first gold was found.
On approaching Port Phillip we sail up an open bay,
with comparatively low wooded land all round it. At its
north-western corner is a narrow opening, scarcely per-
ceptible till w r e enter it; passing through which we find
ourselves in a large expanse of salt water that looks at
first like another sea. It is, in fact, thirty or forty miles
across, but on reaching its centre, the low shores, with
just the tops of the trees, are visible on the horizon all
round. On our left is Geelong, and before us is the Yarra-
Yarra creek, with Melbourne on its banks. Par in the
distance, on our right, can be seen some of the ridges of
the Great Eastern Chain, stretching from Wilson’s Pro-
montory towards the Australian Alps ; while, more to the
left, groups of conical hills rise at intervals from the plain
twenty or thirty miles distant, and 2000 or 3000 feet in
height. In the neighbourhood both of Geelong and Mel-
bourne are found beds of hard sandstone, their strata con-
torted and tilted at various angles with the horizon ; these
are most probably pakeozoic sandstones; upon them rest
horizontal tertiary rocks. At New Brighton, south of Mel-
bourne, these tertiaries are dark brown ferruginous sand-
stones with casts of sea-urchins and sea-shells, and the leaves


of dicotolydenous trees. Near Geelong they are soft yel-
lowish limestones, with the same marine fossils. Dark
streams of black cindery lava may be traced here and there
in both localities, sometimes decomposed on the surface
and covered with vegetation; but in many places still as
bare as if recently ejected from a volcano. I am not
aware, however, of any actual crater being known in this
immediate neighbourhood.
From Port Phillip to the Glenelg River the tertiary
limestones probably stretch almost continuously, broken
towards the north by many hills, some of which are extinct
volcanoes with their craters still perfect. North of these
are several north and south ranges of considerable altitude,
of which the Mount Alexander range and the Pyrenees
appear to be granitic and metamorphic, the Grampians,
composed principally of thick sandstones, probably palseo-
zoic, resting upon igneous rocks. Granite shows itself
in the upper part of the Glenelg, its lower portion flowing
through picturesque cliffs of the tertiary limestone.
From the Glenelg to Lake Alexandria, and the Mur-
ray, are plains of tertiary limestone, part of which is
called the “ Biscuit Plains,” from some curious flat circular
concretions like biscuits in shape and appearance, lying on
the surface of the ground. All the lower part of the
Murray River is surrounded by the tertiary rocks, which
in South Australia are called the “ fossil formation.”
The mountain-chain of South Australia, celebrated for
its copper and lead veins, is composed principally of
gneiss, mica slate, chlorite slate, and clay slate. The rocks
are frequently traversed by great quartz veins, but there is


said to be no granite anywhere in the chain. It is possible
that to this circumstance may be due the absence of gold,
but too little is as yet known of the cause of the occurrence
of gold in any place to warrant us in directly asserting
this. The plain around Adelaide between the hills and
the sea is again composed of the tertiary limestones.
■ In the interior of South Australia, Captain Sturt
describes, east of Lake Torrens, Stanley Range as exhibit-
ing granite, and Grey Range as composed principally of
quartz rock. He penetrated N.N.W. from the latter nearly
into the heart of the Australian continent, finding every-
where a vast, almost impenetrable desert, except in the oasis
of Coopers Creek. He describes large tracts as covered
by ridges of loose sand, 100 or 150 feet high, the base of
one touching the base of the other, and running in
parallel lines in each direction to the horizon. He likewise
traversed a great flat, depressed tract, which he describes
as an ironstone plain on which his hoofs rang, but
left no track. Beyond that was still a sandy, uninhabit-
able desert, the only living things being a few blades of
dry grass here and there, and a few small jerboas.
This great desert plain is in just the corresponding
latitude to that of the desert of Sahara in the northern
hemisphere, and seems to have much of its character.
Three years ago Dr. Leichardt set off from Moreton Bay
to endeavour to cross it to Swan River, and it is feared
that he and his companions have perished in the attempt.
Between South Australia and Western Australia, the
shores of the country only are known; they were surveyed
by Captain Flinders by sea at the beginning of this


century, and were traversed on land by Mr. Eyre albout
fifteen years ago. Along the great Australian Bight, Ifrom
Anxious Bay to Cape Arid, a distance of more than 700
miles, there is for the most part one unbroken cliff ffrom
400 to 600 feet in height, composed of the horizontal Ibeds
of the tertiary limestone, with granite appearing from
beneath it, both on the eastern and western extremity.
The interior of the country appeared to be an arid level
plain, stretching unbroken into the boundless interior.
Not a water-course of any kind was met with, and Mr.
Eyre made three successive journeys of seven or eight days
a-piece, with only so much water as he could carry with
him on horseback on each occasion. The water was only
procured from places where it trickled out at the base of
the cliffs.
The mountain-chain of Western Australia is rather an
elevated district than a mountain-chain, with groups of
hills rising from it here and there. It is composed of
granite and metamorphic rocks, exactly such as those in
which gold is usually found, but we have as yet heard no
accounts of its discovery. Neither does it at all follow
from the nature of the rock that gold necessarily exists.
Gold is never found in situ except in such rocks, but
hundreds of square miles of those rocks may anywhere
occur without the presence of gold. In penetrating from
the settled parts of Western Australia, towards the in-
terior of the country, they have hitherto always come on
large desert tracts of sand, covered with shrubs and bushes
that love an arid soil. These are called the “ sand plains,”
and look as if they were the edge of the great desert


interior. On the western coast there is a tertiary plain,
some twenty miles wide, about Swan River, between the
hills and the sea, composed either of a soft red sand-
stone, or a fine white, slightly calcareous sand, sometimes
compacted together into an imperfectly consolidated
limestone.
About lat. 29°, palaeozoic rocks and coal were found,
some years ago, by Messrs. Gregory, completing the
analogy between the eastern and western coasts; the
palaeozoic rocks having in each case the same fossils.
Along the north-west coast, from Shares Bay to the
Buccaneer Archipelago, another low and desert tract
occurs—all the voyagers describing it as a great illi-
mitable plain covered by salsolaceous plants, fronted by
low sandhills running along the back of the beach. This
is probably another extension of the great central desert.
From Colliers Bay to Wickham's Victoria River,
however, the country is again described as lofty and
broken, the rock being principally a very thick-bedded
sandstone worn into precipitous gullies and ravines like
the Sydney sandstone.
Dr. Leichardt described a similar sandstone country
rising into a high table-land in the country west of the
Gulf of Carpentaria, forming bold and lofty cliffs, from
which he had great difficulty to descend, about 150 miles
south of Port Essington. At the foot of these cliffs he
found granite and similar rocks.
The northern part of Arnhem Lend, between Anson
Bay and the Gulf of Carpentaria, is low and fiat, composed
of soft red and white sandstones, highly ferruginous.


which are supposed to be tertiary, but with but lilittle
evidence in support of the supposition.
Round the head of the Gulf of Carpentaria, and ddown
its eastern shores to Endeavour Straits, is a low, sanndy,
and utterly desert tract, traversed by a few salt-wwater
creeks, but with little or no fresh water ordinarily flowwing
into their heads. Neither Dr. Leichardt nor Capbtain
Stokes saw anything but an apparently illimitable pblain
stretching into the interior, south of the Gulf of CCar-
pentaria.
I have spoken frequently of the dry and arid charaocter
of Australia. It is necessary to say a word or twoo of
Australian lakes and rivers. Under ordinary circuum-
stances, lakes and rivers in Australia are not at all to) be
supposed necessarily to have any water in them. Tldiey
are mere hollows, depressions, or channels, where waater
may he occasionally after heavy rain. Lake George,, in
New South Wales, is commonly occupied by several fifine
farms. In the singular great horseshoe-shaped depression
of Lake Torrens, in South Australia, you will see in oone
of Arrowsmith’s maps, “ There appears to be water in tthe
centre of the lake.” Mr. Eyre, in fact, rode eight or tten
miles into the lake without finding water, but only sroft,
swampy, muddy ground, which got wetter as he proceedeed,
till he at last could go no farther. His calling it a laike
was quite understood in Australia, and Captain Sturt speaiks
of it likewise as a lake; but it was the cause of some
severe, but quite undeserved, animadversions in the “ Athe-
naeum,” at the time of the appearance of Mr. Eyre’s book.
In the same way the rivers—though, like other rivers,


winding through their valleys, with well-defined banks
and cliffs—are, for the most part, mere dry water-courses,
full of sand and gravel, with pools of water occurring
occasionally, and, perhaps, a little trickling stream running
or oozing from one to the other. Sometimes one of these
pools or water-holes will be several hundred yards long,
occupying the whole bed of the river, with deep, clear
water, winding in steady reaches, and apparently bank
full, when suddenly it ends quite abruptly, and the bed of
the river beyond is covered by grass and bushes. It is as
if a number of people, having set to work to deepen the
river-bed in several places at once, had dug down a con-
siderable depth and carried on their work for different
distances and then all suddenly left off, the intermediate
spaces remaining untouched, and the excavation they had
made had then absorbed all the water and left the re-
mainder dry. This very extraordinary character is not
confined to any one portion of the country or to any kind
of river, but is common to the smallest “ creek” or brook,
and the largest river, such as the Darling, to the water-
courses of New South Wales, Victoria, and Van Diemair’s
Land, and to South and Western and Northern Australia.
The only exception seems to be the River Murray and
the rivers that, rising on the Australian Alps, are fed by
their melting snows, and thus supplied with water enough
to keep up a perpetual stream.
It very often happens, also, that some of these water-
holes are salt, sometimes as strong as brine, while others
immediately adjacent are quite fresh. This is the case,
too, with wells; the water of one well wall be undrinkable


from its saline and aluminous flavour, while another
within less than a hundred yards will be beautifully fresh
and pure.
We come now to the auriferous character of Australia.
Sir R. Murchison, in his address to the Geographical
Society in 1844, alluded to the possibly auriferous cha-
racter of the Great Eastern Chain of Australia, being led
thereto by his knowledge of the auriferous chain of the
Ural, and by his examination of Count Strzeleckfls speci-
mens, maps, and sections. Some of Sir R. Murchisom’s
observations having found their way to the Australian
papers, a Mr. Smith, at that time engaged in some iron
works at Berrima, was induced by them in the year 1849
to search for gold, and he found it. He sent the gold
to the Colonial Government, and offered to disclose its
locality on payment of 500/. The governor, however,
not putting full faith in the statement, and being, more-
over, unwilling to encourage a gold fever without suffi-
cient reason, declined to grant the sum, but offered, if
Mr. Smith would mention the locality, and the discovery
was found to be valuable, to reward him accordingly.
Very unwisely, as it turns out, Mr. Smith did not accept
this offer; and it remained for Mr. Hargraves, who came
with the prestige of his Californian experience, to re-make
the discovery, and to get the reward from Government on
their own conditions.
This first discovery was made in the banks of the
Summer Hill Creek and the Lewis Ponds River, small
streams which run from the northern flank of the Cono-
balas down to the Macquarrie. The gold was found in


the sand and gravel accumulated, especially on the inside
of the bends of the brook, and at the junction of the two
water-courses, where the stream of each would be often
checked by the other. It was coafse gold, showing its
parent site to be at no great distance, and probably in
the quartz veins traversing the metamorphic rocks of the
Conobalas. Mr. Stutchbury, the Government geologist,
reported on the truth of the discovery, and shortly after-
wards found gold in several other localities, especially on
the banks of the Turon, some distance north-east of the
Conobalas. This was a much wider and more open val-
ley than the Summer Hill Creek, and the gold accord-
ingly was much finer, occurring in small scales and flakes.
It was, however, more regularly and equably distributed
through the soil, so that a man might reckon with the
greater certainty on the quantity his daily labour would
return him. At the head of the Turon River, among
the dark glens and gullies in which it collects its head
waters, in the flanks of the Blue Mountains, the gold got
“coarser,” occurring in larger lumps or nuggetts, but
these being more sparingly scattered. The reason of
these circumstances, which are common to all auriferous
regions, has been given in the former part of this Lecture
when speaking of the power of moving water.*
* In many newspaper accounts and letters received from the dig-
gings, the gold is described as having been evidently in a state of
fusion; this is in all probability quite a mistake. Its having been de-
posited in small holes, crevices, and interstices of the quartz rock, and
subsequently rolled, and perhaps partially discoloured on the surface,
so that it assumes such forms as melted lead is seen to do, probably
gave rise to the notion.


With the subsequent history of the “ gold diggings”
of Australia, the discovery of many rich auriferous districts,
both in New South Wales and Victoria, you must all be
more or less familiar.
In Mr. Arrowsmith’s map, appended to the Parlia-
mentary Report just issued, all the auriferous spots are
marked in yellow. They occur at intervals along the flanks
of the Great Eastern Chain, or on its lateral spurs and
subordinate ranges through an extent of country about one
thousand miles in length, about as far as from London to
Gibraltar or the confines of Turkey, or as from London to
Iceland in a straight line. The principal localities marked
on this map are Grafton Range and Burnet River, north
of the Condamine; Stanley Creek and Canning Downs in
the Moreton Bay district; several spots in the neighbour-
hood of Liverpool Plains; the Turon and Conobalas on
the Macquarrie, below Bathurst; the Abercrombie River
at the head of the Lachlan ; some spots on each side of
Breadalbane Plains; the Braidwood and Araluen diggings
in the Shoalhaven district; Lake Eimeo in the Australian
Alps; and Ballarat and Mount Alexander and Mount
Blackwood, north-west of Port Phillip.
In every one of these localities granite and metamor-
phic rocks occur, and quartz veins are frequently spoken
of. This is an important fact to bear in mind.
In scarcely any of them do we find mention made
of the gold being seen in the actual rock, but in the drift
clay, sand, and gravel, or lying loose on the surface of the
ground. The hundredweight of gold, indeed, found by
Dr. Ker north of Bathurst, is described as a block of


highly auriferous quartz, lying among a lot of other loose
blocks, evidently derived from a broad quartz vein running
up the hill behind them. Such a mass, indeed, could
hardly be transported far from its original site by any
conceivable current of water.
The superficial drift in which the diggings have been
carried on varies in thickness from a few inches to twenty
or thirty feet. The following is an extract from a Lecture
given by a Mr. Gibbon, in Melbourne, and reported in
the “Melbourne Argus,” giving an account of the Bal-
larat diggings : —“ On the surface of the earth was turf,
in a layer of about a foot thick, below which was a layer of
rich black alluvial soil, and below that grey clay ; below
that again was a description of red gravel, which was
sometimes very good; then red or yellow clay, in which
gold was found; and then a stratum, varying in thick-
ness, of clay streaked with various colours, and scarcely
worth working ; and the next stratum was of hard white
pipe-clay, which was a decided barrier. Immediately
above it, however, was a thin layer of chocolate-coloured
clay, tough and soapy. This was the celebrated blue clay,
and was very rich.”
“ The ground on which the diggings were situated was a
sloping bank. The blue clay is found near the surface on
the brow of the hill, that is, at the depth of about a foot ;
but it is sometimes necessary to dig twenty feet before
arriving at it.”
Mr. Latrobe, Governor of Victoria, describes the Bal-
larat diggings as carried on through,—•
“1. Red ferruginous earth and gravel.


u 2. Streaked yellowish and red clay.
“3. Quartz gravels of moderate size.
“4. Large quartz pebbles and boulders; masses of
ironstone set in very compact clay, bard to work.
“5. Blue and white clay,
“6. Pipe-clay.
“In some workings the pipe-clay may be reached at
the depth of ten or twelve feet, in others not at thirty and
upwards/” *
To enter farther into the details of the several dig-
gings would be alike tedious and useless. I must refer
you for them to the two Parliamentary Reports published,
the one in February and the other in June, and to the
many small publications with which the shops are now
swarming. f
My object to-night has been to give you such a rough
sketch of the geology of Australia, and of the geological
facts and principles that ought to guide any one in his
search after gold, as may he of use to those intending to
emigrate there.
In conclusion, I may perhaps be allowed to utter one
word of advice.
Gold-digging is very hard work—just such work as
you see navigators at in a railway cutting, or brick-makers
in a brick-pit. You must work hard all day, lie hard all
* “ Parliamentary Report,” June 14th, 1852.
f At the instance of Mr. Latrohe a geological survey of the province
of Victoria has been determined on, my late colleague in the geological
survey of Great Britain, Mr. A. R. C. Selwyn, having been appointed to
the office of geologist.


night, with but little shelter, often with scanty food, and
with nothing of what you have probably been accustomed
to consider necessary comfort. If you find you have no
luck at the diggings, or if your health, or strength, or
resolution fail you, do not, therefore, give up or despond
altogether. You go out to dig for gold , do not he ashamed
to dig for anything else. I speak to those now who have
been hitherto unaccustomed to manual labour. Recollect
it is the avowed object of your voyage, and the only thing
you have to trust to. If you fail to dig up gold, there
are lands to be ploughed, sheep to be herded and sheared,
cattle to be tended, corn to be sown and reaped; every
one of these fully as honourable occupations as digging for
gold. Go, then, with a bold and resolute heart, deter-
mined to get your own living by the strength of your own
arms and the sweat of your own brows; and be assured,
that industry and perseverance lead to fortune in Australia
with fewer impediments and uncertainties in the way than
in any part of the world.




LECTURE 11.
OUR KNOWLEDGE OE AUSTRALIAN ROCKS AS
DERIVED EROM THEIR ORGANIC REMAINS.
EDWARD TORRES, E.R.S.
PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY IN THE GOVERNMENT SCHOOL OF MINKS,
AND OF BOTANY IN KING’S COLLEGE, LONDON.




EDWARD EORBES, E.R.S.,
OUR KNOWLEDGE OF AUSTRALIAN ROCKS AS
DERIVED FROM THEIR ORGANIC REMAINS.
Of the six lectures constituting this course mine has
least concern with the main theme Gold. That pre-
cious substance is neither the object nor, excepting in
rare cases, the reward of natural-history labours. My
duties in connexion with the Museum of Practical Geology
have reference entirely to the organic world as it existed
during the long-past geological epoch, a world in which
gold plays no part. My discourse, therefore, must be like
the play of Hamlet with the part of the hero omitted.
Yet, as even in that great drama, there are scenes in
which only subordinate characters appear, necessary to
the understanding of the plot, so in a course of lectures
upon the chief among metals there must be one at least
devoted to the making clear of collateral geological ques-
tions, of some consequence to the searcher for gold and
the settler in Australia.
Intending emigrants frequently inquire how they may
get some knowledge of geology, such as might be useful


to them in the country to which they are bound. To all
who have the time I would strongly recommend the read-
ing of some elementary work of geology in connexion with
an examination of the collections of fossils, displayed in
stratigraphical order in the galleries of the Museum of
Practical Geology. By doing so they may at least fami-
liarise the eye with the general aspect of the characteristic
organic remains of different geological epochs. Although
the specimens there arranged are British, they really con-
stitute a key to the geology of the world.
That a knowledge of the meaning and leading bearings
of fossils is of consequence to the emigrant may be plainly
shown by referring to those books and guides which pro-
fess to give some geological information. In most of these,
terms are used such as palceozoic, secondary, and tertiary,
which mean nothing without an acquaintance with the
comparative ages of organic remains. They are words
founded upon considerations connected with the fossils
contained in the rocks so styled. In the matter of gold
it is often said that this substance is found in the newest
tertiaries, or in connexion with palceozoic mountain-chains,
whilst no explanation is given of what is meant by these
terms, or how the reader is to distinguish between a ter-
tiary and palseozoic rock when he sees them. I think it is
possible for any person, even though uninstructed in
geology, to attain some knowledge respecting these distinc-
tions, Moreover, it does not concern gold merely, but,
since the gold-seeker, whether he be fortunate or disap-
pointed, is likely to acquire a taste for mineral observation,
it is well that he should learn those elements of the sub-


ject that may serve him when he takes to soberer pursuits
or when he settles in a colony. To pretend to teach even
a small amount of natural history in a single lecture would
be absurd. But so much may be taught as may prove
useful by affording some insight into the mode of dis-
tinguishing between formations by their organic contents.
This process, as applied to Australia, is the chief subject
of this discourse, which is supplementary to the general
account of the geology and physical geography of that
country.
My object in this lecture is to give a brief and popular
view of the classification of Australian rocks, as deter-
mined from the examination of the organic remains con-
tained in them; to state in plain and untechnical language
the grounds upon which we draw conclusions respecting,
their relative antiquity; to lay down some simple rules for
recognising the fossils which afford the best clue towards
the discovery of their ages ; and to indicate the bearing
of these conclusions upon the gold-searching and other
practical questions. I cannot speak from personal know-
ledge of Australian strata. I have never been in the
country, and have derived my acquaintance with this sub-
ject mainly from the accounts of Australian geology drawn
up by competent observers, and from examination of col-
lections of Australian fossils brought to England by able
explorers. We have a fine collection of this kind in the
Museum of Practical Geology, chiefly consisting of the
original specimens described or noticed in that valuable
work, the “Physical Description of New South Wales and
Van Dieman’s Land,” by Count Strzelecki. The re-


searches made by that gentleman, the collections sent
home by Sir Thomas Mitchell, those brought to England
by my colleague Mr. Jukes, the personal observations of
Mr. Darwin, the American geologist Mr. Dana, and the
Rev. W. D. Clarke, the valuable essays upon Australian
fossils by Professor Owen, Mr. Lonsdale, Mr. Morris, Mr.
Sowerby, and Professor M‘Coy, have furnished ample
data upon which to base a fair notice of the characters of
Australian rock-formations as exhibited in their fossils.
On this side of the world geologists recognise three
great groups of stratified rocks, called palaeozoic, mesozoic
or secondary, and tertiary . The first term is applied to the
oldest fossiliferous rocks, — such as the slates of Wales,
the mountain limestone of Derbyshire, the coal-measures
of the north of England. Next in order of age come
the second group, —such as the lias of Lyme, the oolites
of Bath and Portland, the chalk of Kent. Newest, and
above all the others, are the successive members of the
third group,— such as the clay upon which London stands,
the crag of Suffolk and Norfolk, the escars of Ireland, and
the till of Scotland. As each of the instances thus indi-
cated differs in age from the others, it will be understood
that each great group has within itself many subdivisions.
Now each of the groups, whether great or subordinate,
is distinguished by the prevalence of certain kinds of fos-
sils. These fossils are remains of creatures that lived when
these formations were deposited in the condition of sedi-
ment, either subsiding in a sea, or it might be, in some
instances, in a lake, marsh, or river. We know from ex-
amination and comparison of these fossils that there have


been numerous creations of entirely distinct assemblages
of organised beings during the time when the world was
in a manner being prepared for the advent and for the
operations of man. And we have learned by experience
to recognise the peculiar aspects of the fossils which
distinguish one epoch in time from another. All over
the world an instructed geologist is able, after a brief
examination, to pronounce upon the probable age of a
rock provided it contain fossil remains. Once having
found such a rock, and ascertained its date, he is furnished
with a key to the probable age of the strata which lie
beneath it, or crop out from under it, and of those which
lie upon it.
Of the three great classes of rocks (the term rock, be
it observed, as used by geologists, has no reference to the
hardness or softness of a stratum) the first and third are
distinctly recognisable in Australia. That there are both
palceozoic and tertiary strata in that vast country abund-
antly developed, is now quite certain. It is not clear, in-
deed it is very doubtful, whether there be any secondary
rocks there, although, as we shall presently see, some
important Australian strata are believed by certain geolo-
gists to belong to that class. Others, and lam inclined
to agree with them, doubt not only whether we have any
evidence of the existence of Australian secondary rocks,
but also whether there ever were such strata formed within
the present area of Australia; in other words, we hold
that, not improbably, Australia was in the condition of
dry land during the long ages when the oolites and chalk
strata of Europe were in course of deposition.


In order to give a useful view of the relative ages and
fossil characters of Australian strata, I shall now attempt
a classification of them in descending order, i. e. taking the
newest first, and going downwards, as it were, to the oldest.
But it must be borne in mind that at the surface of the
soil you may as readily have an old rock as a new one,
though never a new rock beneath an old one, except in the
rare case of some convulsive overthrow. Beginning at the
very newest, we have, first:
A. Rocks now in process of formation. —These occur
wherever we have a rising of the land going on; a common
occurrence, for the land, geologically speaking, is more
unstable than the sea, rising in one place and sinking in
another, though slowly and imperceptibly. New rocks
are forming in the neighbourhood of the coral reefs, and
in many places round the coast. In all these new-made
strata the imbedded organic remains are of the same genera
and species with creatures that are now living. Rocks of
this class are of little consequence to the settler, although
very interesting to the scientific observer. In King
George’s Sound and other localities are rocks which appear
to have been formed out of blown sand, and which contain
concretions probably resulting from included stems of
plants.
B. Superficial Drifts and Bone-hreccias. —A great part of
the north of Europe and of North America is covered here


and there, sometimes over large expanses of land, by accu-
mulations of sand, gravel, and clay, evidently of recent
date as compared with the strata upon which they rest,
but older than modern alluvium, as is plainly demon-
strated by the remains of different assemblages of ani-
mals, and here and there of extinct creatures found in them
in not a few localities. In the northern hemisphere the
contents of the greater part of this drift indicate the pre-
valence of a cold climate during its deposition. In strata
connected with it, either below and immediately preceding
it, or above and intervening between the drift epoch and
the present, are often found remains of remarkable extinct
quadrupeds, such as the elephant, tiger, hyena, hippo-
potamus, and others not now living in Europe, and be-
longing to species of those animals not now found alive
at all. There is a parallel phenomenon in Australia. In
alluvial deposits on the Condamine river, westward of
Moreton Bay, there are found bones of extinct quadrupeds,
and an ossiferous breccia, or angular pudding-stone, in caves
explored by Sir Thomas Mitchell, in Wellington Valley,
210 miles west of Sydney. At the sources and on the banks
of the Macquarrie are similar bones, all testifying to the
former existence of a distinct race of quadrupeds from that
now living in these regions. The minute examination of
these bones made by Professor Owen brings to light the
interesting fact that all these extinct creatures, though dif-
fering as species, and some of them generically, from those
now inhabiting Australia, were formed on the same extra-
ordinary plan, being marsupial animals, kangaroos, wom-
bats, and quadrupeds allied to the opossum, though many


of them were gigantic in comparison with their relatives
now living.
It appears extremely probable that the drifts, or accu-
mulations of water-worn detritus, in which gold has been
found in such abundance, are to be classed with tertiaries
of the epoch of these extinct animals. This is distinctly
the case, as has been shown by Sir Roderick Murchison in
Russia, and you have already been told how he anticipated
from geological analogies the probability of the discovery
of gold in Australia. The Rev. W. B. Clarke, that active
and enterprising geologist, now residing in Australia, states
that the “bone caverns and unsepulchred relics of the
gigantic diprotodon and nototherium, are in the auriferous
rocks and detritus of Australia.” In California gigantic
fossil bones are reported to have been found in the gold-
bearing drifts. The mere presence, however, of such
organic remains in a drift is not necessarily an indication
of the likelihood of finding gold there. Other conditions
are requisite for the fulfilling of this result. It is in drift in
the immediate neighbourhood, and on the flanks of ancient
mountain-chains, disturbed pakeozoic rocks, that we should
look for the precious metals, whilst at the same time the
presence of the bones in question may afford a good indi-
cation that it is the right kind of drift we are exploring.
In Van Dieman’s Land there is a yellow limestone at
Hobart Town, remarkable for containing extinct land-shells,
and kinds of snails not now known in the colony. At
Franklin’s Village, in the same island, sea-shells were
found in muddy sand at a depth of 140 feet, about fifteen
miles from the sea, that were different from those resem-


bling existing Australian kinds. There is reason for
thinking that these beds are of more recent date than the
next to be noticed, and that they may possibly be of the
age of the gigantic kangaroos and wombats, or at any
rate of the date of the commencement of that epoch. In
Van Dieman’s Land also beautiful preserved trunks of
silicified trees are met with, the tissues of which exhibit
all their minute structure under the microscope. Near
Hobart Town there is found a deposit of travertin con-
taining impressions of the leaves of plants: these were
collected by Mr. Darwin, and examined by Mr. Robert
Brown, the most illustrious of living botanists, and the
man who first opened out to science the richness and sin-
gularity of the Australian flora. But none of these relics
of plants were recognised by him as identical with, or
even closely resembling, existing Tasmanian kinds. One
of the leaves resembled in shape that of a fan-palm, and no
plants with leaves so constructed now grow in Van Die-
maids Land.
C. The older Australian Tertiaries .—ln the work of
Count Strzelecki there is a figure of a fossil shell called
Terebratula compta, from Port Pairy, near the south-east
corner of New Holland, “ associated with casts of Nucula,
Lucina, >> and other species of shells* “in an elevated
beach.” I have received the same shell from inland strata
on the banks of the Murray, where it is found along with
numerous other shell-fish and fossil sea-urchins of un-
described species. The same formation has been noticed


by several observers, especially by Captain Sturt, as exten-
sively diffused in Southern Australia, and considerable col-
lections are contained in the museums in England, taken
from these beds. On the map of the gold districts in
Australia, constructed by Mr. Arrowsmith, you will see
“ oyster-shells” marked in places, but far away from the
gold. These localities are on this old tertiary. Among a
considerable number of shells brought from Melbourne, I
recognise species of Ostrea, Tellina, Venus, Leda, Lucina,
Fossils of Australian Teetiaeies.
a. Echinolampas. 6. Spatangus. c. Terebratula Compta,
Pecten, Modiola, and Cerithium, all shell-fish, but all kinds
appearing to be different from living sorts. There are also
sea-urchins of several kinds, all very different from any
that I know of now living in the seas around New
Holland. These fossil sea-urchins belong to the genera
Echinolampas, Brissus, Spatangus, Echinus, and Scutella.


Having in the course of my examination of the pro-
ductions of the Australian seas, carefully and extensively
collected in many localities from Port Dalrymple to Cape
York, during the surveying voyage of H. M. ship Rattle-
snake, under the late lamented Capt. Owen Stanley, 8.N.,
and also of much of the collections made by Mr. Jukes
during Captain Blackwood’s voyage, acquired a knowledge
of the Echinoderms and shell-fish of this part of the world,
I can speak personally with much confidence respecting
the probable age of the Australian tertiaries placed under
this third head. I believe them to be much older than
they have hitherto been considered, and so far as we can
compare them with European ■ strata, to be probably the
equivalent of middle (or miocene) tertiaries. In many
respects these fossils bear a striking resemblance to those
characteristic of the miocene strata of the Mediterranean,
a likeness especially indicated by the forms and characters
of the sea-urchins, which in this case, as at Malta and
Corsica, are the best preserved of the relics. This simi-
larity is dependent partly upon the presence of species of
genera which are now extinct. Their contrast with the
prevailing kinds of the same sets of animals now inhabiting
the coasts of Australia is very striking, whilst at the same
time there is a sufficient affinity to indicate the truly ter-
tiary character of the wide-spread formation in which they
occur.
I). The Sydney Sandstone. —This extensive formation,
occupying very considerable areas in New South Wales,


and in places being as much as 1400 feet in thicknesiss, con-
sisting of soft, yellowish and reddish sandstones, ppassing
into conglomerates above, and sometimes into argillaceous
slates below, is undistinguished by organic remains, tlthough
in all probability of marine origin. A few vegetabble im-
pressions, traces of coal, and remains of fossil treess, have
been noticed. The strata are usually horizontal. It is
believed by all its describers to pass into, and be iin dis-
tinct connexion with, the coal-formation underneeath it.
It makes a barren and unproductive region, “ a wcorld of
stone quarries and sterility, or desert plains of red ssand,”
as Sir Thomas Mitchell has strongly, but apparently with
great truth, stigmatised it.
E. In the coal-hearing strata, said to flank the Aus-
tralian and Tasmanian Cordilleras for 1200 miles, under-
lying the Sydney sandstone, and consisting of sandstones
and shales, separating seams of coal, abundance of organic
remains have been found. These are almost all of vege-
table origin; but, in two or three instances, remains of
fossil fishes have occurred. In consequence, chiefly, of the
researches of Professor Agassiz, the geological relations of
extinct tribes and genera of fishes are so well known, and
have proved to be so constant, that the discovery of relics
of these animals is of no small importance in a scientific
point of view. The fishes which have been found—one
of them is figured and described by Mr. Dana belong
to palaeozoic types; and may be paralleled by forms known
to be characteristic of the uppermost portion of the car-


boniferous system in the northern hemisphere. This is
very significant, since the evidence of age yielded by the
fossil vegetables of these beds would rather indicate that
they are members of the secondary series of rocks, and
that they may be compared with our oolites. In the old
coal-measures of Europe and North America curious fur-
rowed, scored, and fretted stems of vegetables, called
Calamites, Sigillaria, and Lepidodendron, mostly very dif-
ferent from any plants now existing, are found in great
abundance. But, although the Bev. W. B. Clarke has
stated that he has found fossils referrible to these kinds
in Australia, none has ever been brought to Europe which
can fairly be considered as such. I have seen the sup-
posed Lepidodendron mentioned in the list of rock speci-
mens printed in one of the recently-issued Government
blue-books, and can safely say that it is very doubtful,
and, in all probability, nothing of the kind. Nor will
Mr. Jukes, who has been quoted as having observed these
fossils in Australia, admit that he had seen any distinct
instances. On the other hand, the coal-plants of the
coal-fields in New South Wales and Van Dieman's Land
bear a striking resemblance to those of Burdwan in India,
and to those of the carbonaceous shales of oolitic age in
Yorkshire. As, according to our present experience, the
greatest supplies of coal are furnished by strata of the
upper palaeozoic group, this question about the age of the
Australian coal-bearing strata becomes of economic in-
terest. Mr. Morris and Mr. Dana incline to the belief,
that during the epoch called carboniferous, when the great
coal-bearing beds were deposited, the vegetation of the


New-Holland area differed materially from that of the
northern hemisphere, and may have assumed that aspect
which we associate with the notion of an oolitic type in
Europe. Mr. M'Coy, on the other hand, in his valuable
and well-illustrated memoir on the Australian fossils, con-
tained in the Woodwardian Museum at Cambridge, re-
gards these coal-plants of New Holland as oolitic, and the
beds containing them as of much newer age than those
below. But all competent observers who have examined
the strata on the spot, especially Mr. Jukes, Mr. Clarke,
and Mr. Dana, assure us, that the beds pass into each other,
and are not only conformable — i. e. lying on and parallel
to the beds below—but also evidently in sequence, i. e.
deposited without the intervention of a long interval of
time. The peculiar fossil fish, already alluded to, supports
this view, to which, after consideration of the arguments
on both sides, I certainly incline ; and would, therefore, set
down the coal-fields of Australia and Van Dieman’s Land
as formations of the carboniferous sections of the palaeozoic
era, —which, in other words, means as equivalents of the
most productive coal-fields of the northern hemisphere.
Glossopteris Brownxana and Phyllotheca, Australian Coal-Plants.


The fossil plants of the Australian coal-shales are
often beautifully preserved, and owing to being black, or
very dark, on a ground of lilac shale, make very elegant
specimens. Most of them are small ferns, chiefly simple-
leaved kinds, mingled with plants resembling the Equi-
setum, or mare’s tail of our wet meadows, and remains of
trees of the pine tribe. The mare’s-tail-like plants belong
to the Phyllotheca Australis, and have a foliage arranged
in wheels, that recalls the aspect of the pretty Astero-
phyllites of our English coal flora. The commonest and
most characteristic of the Australian coal-plants is the
fern called Glossopteris Browniana. In its combination
of reticulate veins with a simple frond, it differs from any
palaeozoic European ferns. Portions of large trees are not
uncommon in these coal-measures, all allied to the pine,
as can easily be determined by an examination of their
microscopic structure. You will observe, that in this
region, where we might expect to find remains of gigantic
tree-ferns especially prevailing in a fossil state, none has
been certainly made out. During the epoch of the de-
position of these coal-beds in Australia this province was,
probably, in the condition of low swampy land, where the
vegetable remains were accumulated and preserved in
lagoons, to which they were conveyed by floods. This
notion of their origin is supported by the fact of then-
containing no marine remains.
F. j ßeds containing Upper Palaeozoic Shells and
Corals. —All over the world we are enabled to recognise


palaeozoic strata by their peculiar animal contents. The
shapes of the shells of the corals contained in them are
admirable guides. They include so many peculiar forms
of ancient life that we cannot easily go astray about them.
Now below the coal strata in Australia there are grey and
red, very clayey sandstones, with limey concretions, that
contain fossil shells in great abundance and perfection.
There are but few remains of plants in them, but such as
occur are remains of coniferous stems, similar to those in
the coal-beds. The shells and corals have been thoroughly
examined, described, and figured. Attention was, I be-
lieve, first called to them and to the epoch they indicated
by Dr. Buckland, when describing Mr. Oxley’s collec-
tions, and afterwards by Dr. Fitton, in his appendix to
Captain King’s “ Researches.” They are very interesting
in a natural-history point of view, and of some value as
affording indications of good soil. Several of them, such
as those called Spirifer glabra, calcarata, and attenuata, are
exactly identical with kinds that are characteristic of upper
palaeozoic limestones in Europe. Along with these are
others, especially the bivalve shells called Pachydomus,
Eurydesma, Astartilia, &c., which have never been met with
in rocks of any other part of the world. Many of them
are large and conspicuous. For practical purposes the
Spirifers are perhaps most serviceable. These are bivalves,
somewhat resembling cockles, but easily distinguished by
their unequal valves, one of which has a fold and the other
a depression down the centre, whilst there is a more or less
developed area or triangular flattened space between the
beaks at their backs. M r hen they are perfect two spiral


arms are found coiled up in their interiors, hence their
name. The abundance and variety of these shells and the
presence of Productus, another bivalve (the upper lid of
which is like a closed fist, and often rough with spines or
scale-like markings, and the under valve flat or concave), are
good clues to the age of the rocks in which they occur.
The very large-swollen smoothish bivalves, like inflated
river-mussels, found in these Australian rocks, are kinds of
Pachydomus. As the valves of these shells are found
usually united and undisturbed, and in some places swarms
of a kind are congregated together, it is surmised that they
were suddenly destroyed. Univalve shells of peculiar types
occur along with them; these are mostly allied to the
Trochi , or top-shells.
Upper Paljsozoic Fossils.
a Spirifer. b Productus. c Pachydomus.
G. Older Palceozoic, or Silurian Rocks. —These, the
oldest rocks preserved to us with their organic contents.


are now known with certainty to occur in Australia; strata
containing their characteristic fossils having been found
there by the Rev. W. D. Clarke, who announces a rich
harvest of specimens and species, few of which have,
however, yet been seen in England, so that we cannot say
with certainty how far the majority correspond with those
of the northern hemisphere. Yarralumba, Yass Plains,
and Burragood, are recorded Silurian localities. Among
the best clues to the recognition of the older palaeozoic
rocks, by means of their fossils, are the abundance and
variety of the remains of Trilobites. These curious bodies
are the relics of ancient Crustacea, or animals of the crab
tribe, but wholly different from any now existing, and not
known in the fossil state in any strata that are not
palaeozoic. Moreover, in the upper palaeozoic rocks, the
genera and species of trilobites are few; in the lower, very
numerous. They may be recognised by their iointed
They may be recognised by their jointed
Lower Palaeozoic or Silurian Fossils.
Pentamerus. h The Trilobite called Ci
h The Trilobite called Calymene
bodies, furrowed by two longitudinal grooves, so as to
divide them into three parts, a middle and two side-lobes,
terminated at one end by a three-lobed head, and at the


other by a tail marked with a central axis and sulcated
sides. The Calymene, or Dudley trilobite, is found in the
Silurian strata of Australia, just as in Europe. Very cha-
racteristic shells and corals also mark the Silurian system.
VIII.
H. Eeneath the lower palaeozoic beds we have meta-
morphic rocks, such as mica slate, gneiss, supposed to be
stratified rocks changed by actions, whose nature is a
matter of discussion. Whatever the change has been
caused by, the result is, that all traces of organic remains
are obliterated. In these rocks gems occur, and it is in
them we should look particularly for precious stones of
various kinds. They rest upon rocks of igneous origin;
but these last are not necessarily older, for we find them
often sending jets and veins into the stratified rocks above
them, which, whenever it occurs, is a proof of their being
of newer date.
In rocks of igneous origin, of which there are many
and varied sorts in Australia, no fossils are found except in
those rare cases where animal or vegetable bodies have
become invested in a stream of lava or overwhelmed by a
volcanic shower.
In this brief enumeration of the fossiliferous strata of
Australia, I have not attempted to describe their extension
and boundaries. Those features of the geology of this
island-continent are sketched by Mr. Jukes, and indicated
in the map which he has constructed. They are ad-
mirably laid down in the great map of New South Wales
and Van Dieman’s Land, constructed by Count Strzelecki,


deposited in this Museum. But we have much yet to learn
respecting the geology of even the best explored parts of
these countries; and if any of my audience visit unex-
amined districts, they will do a service to science by care-
fully collecting and noting the relative positions of the
fossils, bones, shells, or corals that they may find in the
rocks or soil.
I shall now briefly call your attention to the connexion
between the fossiliferous rocks noticed and matters of
economical interest.
I. Gold. —l have already said that this metal is found
either in connexion with palaeozoic rocks, or in tertiary
drifts of a very recent epoch, yet of anterior origin to the
general physical features, and appearance of the animals
and plants now indigenous to Australia. Of the mineral
character of these rocks and drifts as presented in that
country, it is not for me to speak: indeed, a far better notion
of it than I could possibly give, you can obtain by perusing
any documents on the subject signed by Mr. Stutchbury
or Mr. Clarke; and there are several papers by those
gentlemen among the documents respecting discovery of
gold in Australia, ordered to be printed by Parliament. I
mention their names only, because being able geologists
their observations and descriptions of the rocks which they
have personally explored are more precise and valuable
than those written by persons unacquainted with neology.
Bear this in mind about gold, that it is useless io waste
your time in searching for it in the older tertiarijs, or in
secondary rocks, though none of the latter appeariig to be
as yet discovered in Australia, you are not likely to go


wrong through them. The older palaeozoic, the meta-
morphic rocks, that lie beneath them, and the newest
tertiaries, all taken in connexion with mountain chains,
are our best guides in this matter.
11. Coal. —It may possibly be of some use to remind
you of the signs of coal, that this valuable substance is of
organic origin, and consists of vegetable matter. Also,
that it has been found most abundantly and valuable
in connexion with the upper palaeozoic rocks. In places
where no coal is seen, its presence may be indicated by
traces of characteristic coal plants on the layers of stone.
In Australia, for example, the tongue-shaped fossil fern,
name Glossopteris Browniana, and of which I have given
a woodcut, would be regarded as a certain indication of
carboniferous strata, and finding fragments of stone with
such and similar fossil impressions, might indicate to you
the neighbourhood of coal-bearing rocks in a district in
which no coal had hitherto been discovered. But though
coal is found in some quantity here and there over the
world in tertiary strata, as a general rule tertiary districts
are very unproductive of this valuable mineral. Yet much
good gold has been thrown away, in vain searches after
coal in districts so constituted, where no geologist would
have thought of wasting his money for an instant. A
caution on this point may be of value, and it may also be
well to say, that every strong sandstone is not a coal-
measure sandstone, and every blue limestone not a carboni-
ferous limestone; the fossils only, in the absence of clear
evidences of superposition, can enlighten you on this point.
111. Settling on Land. —lt would appear that the


geological character of the soil is worthy of the considera-
tion of the settler when he chooses land. The Australian
tertiaries do not carry many recommendations, unless in
the neighbourhood of older strata, and of eruptive rocks in
a decomposing condition. Of the older Australian rocks,
the Sydney sandstone is agreed to be barren and unproduc-
tive. The shell-containing palaeozoic strata, on the other
hand, are attractive to the agriculturist. If this prove to
be the rule, as would seem not improbable, the obser-
vation of the character of fossils in a rock may afford
some useful and profitable hints to the man who is seeking
where to pitch his tent for life. As a rule, districts where
the foundation is a rock abounding in fossils, provided
other conditions be equal, are to be preferred to those
constituted of unfossiliferous formations. This will apply
to many countries besides Australia. The frequently
disturbed condition of the older fossiliferous strata aids in
promoting their agricultural value. In all cases, however,
the mineral constitution of the rock itself, and the presence
or absence of superficial drift, should be carefully regarded
and constitute elements of the calculation.
IV. Diamonds. —As these precious bodies are pro-
bably of vegetable origin (a notion long ago held by
Sir Isaac Newton and rendered still more likely by the
researches of Sir David Brewster), and possibly even a
crystallised gum, I may fairly claim them as fossils, and,
therefore, coming under my dominion. lam anxious to
call attention to the chance of their being discovered in
Australia and likelihood of being overlooked. Some time
ago Mr. Tennant, who has kindly permitted me to exhibit


these specimens illustrative of the condition in which
diamonds might be expected to be found, urged the
search for them upon persons going to gold regions,
especially California, reminding us of their great compara-
tive value, diamonds in their rough state being worth about
50/. an ounce. They have been found associated with gold,
in several parts of the world, as in Brazil and Russia, and in
similar drift, especially in the ferruginous concretions of
pebbles forming the beds of rivers running through the
gold-drifts. But in seeking for them you must not
mistake every glittering and transparent crystal for a
diamond. These may he “ Bristol diamonds ” or “ Irish dia-
monds,” but are sorry substitutes for precious stones. This
morning I saw one of these glittering crystals of quartz
picked up in California by an unlucky adventurer, who
refused 260/. for it there, and brought it to England to
learn that it was worthless. Had he known that diamonds
a Quartz-crystal.
h Diamond-crystal.
never assume the form of a six-sided prism, with six-sided
pyramids at its ends, he would not have built castles in the
air upon this imaginary jewel. Look for crystals that are
eight-sided, such as are two four-sided pyramids, for
example, joined base to base. In this shape, and in the
form of cubes and dodecahedrons, true diamonds occur.
Do not trust to tile or hardness. Mr. Tennant, who has
much practical knowledge on this matter, has sent forth


some valuable warnings about tbe danger of such rude
methods of treating diamonds, which are really very brittle
gems, and may sometimes be broken more easily than
quartz.
Diamonds are reported to occur in a rock called
Itacolumite, a quartzy micacious schist, and this is often
said to be their parent rock. They are also said to occur
in soft micacious sandstones. Rocks very similar to those
which enjoy the reputation of being diamond-containers
occur in Australia, The Itacolumite itself is a metamor-
phic rock. I do not anticipate success in a search for the
diamond in the rock which might be its matrix, but men-
tion these facts as confirmatory of the chances of our yet
finding the diamond in Australia. Other gems may occur,
but they do not come within my province, being of a truly
mineral and not of an organic origin.
Throughout this lecture I have been advocating the
study, even superficially, of fossil remains on purely econo-
mical grounds, in the hope that some knowledge of them
may prove useful to those who would seek fortune, com-
fort, and competence in a distant land. I would not have
done so did I not conscientiously believe that information
of this kind is of value to my hearers. But I should
scarcely feel that I had done my duty unless I urged upon
your attention the study of natural history, in any or all
its various branches, for less utilitarian reasons. To those
who are about to settle in the colonies I would urge, most
earnestly, whilst they seek to benefit their bodies, not to
forget the culture of their minds. I would urge them to
remember that reason is the grand gift of God to man.


and that the noblest use of wealth and best blessings of
comfort are the enabling us, freed from harassing struggles
and cares, to cultivate that reason. It might be that you
will find yourselves away from books, away from all sources
of public instruction, even away from the cheering sound
of human converse. How, then, are you to cultivate the
gift divine of intelligence ? Easily and everywhere. There
is no spot in the world where the book of nature is not
spread open —full of interest—free for every man’s perusal.
When the emigrant’s hard day’s labour is over, and he
rests upon the grass, or the rock, or the mountain-side, or
on the plain, or on the sea-shore, let him waste no time in
repining thoughts or idle longings, but let him look at the
flower, or any living or dead creature that may be near
him, the being that lives now and the relics of that which
lived myriads of years before man enlivened those wilds;
let him observe the exquisite beauty of its conformation,
the skill displayed in the construction of its several parts,
the superhuman wisdom and care evinced by the adapta-
tions of its structure, and cheerfully and firmly believe that
the Divine Presence thus manifested among the insigni-
ficant denizens of the solitude will not forget him.


List of the principal Works in which Descriptions and
Figures of Ausralian Fossils are contained.
Three Expeditions into the Interior of Eastern Australia. By
Major T. L. Mitchell, Surveyor-General, London,
Boone, 1838.
In this work are contained figures of the bones found
fossil in the caves at Wellington Valley, and descriptions of
them by Professor Owen. Also figures of some upper palaeo-
zoic fossil shells, with descriptions by Mr. G. B. Sowerby.
Geological Observations on the Volcanic Islands, visited during
the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle; together with some brief
Notices on the Geology of Australia and the Gape of Good
Hope. By Charles Darwin, M.A. F.Pi.S. Loudon,
Smith, Elder, and Co., 1844.
In the appendix to this volume are descriptions by Mr.
George Sowerby of palaeozoic shells from Van Dieman’s Land.
There are no figures.
Physical Description of New South Wales and Van Dieman's
Land. By P. E. de Strzelecki. London, Longman
and Co., 1845.
There is much information about Australian fossils of
various ages in this valuable book, with full descriptions of
them by Professor Owen, Mr. Morris, Mr. Lonsdale, and Mr.
G. B. Sowerby. There are many excellent figures of the
species described.


On the Fossil Botany and Zoology of the Bocks associated with
the Coal of Australia. By Frederick M‘Coy. A series
of papers contained in the “ Annals of Natural History ”
for 1847 (Yol. XX. of the First Series). London, R.
Taylor.
This is a higidy valuable and abundantly illustrated me-
moir, and contains a full account of the large collection of
specimens sent by the Rev. W. B. Clarke to Professor Sedg-
wick, and now contained in the Woodwardian Museum, at
Cambridge.
Geology of the United States' Exploring Expedition under
Commodore Wilkes. By James D. Dana. New York,
Putnam (no date, but published in 1848 or 49).
In this important volume there is much original informa-
tion concerning the geology of New South Wales, and de-
scriptions and figures of numerous palaeozoic fossils.
The above works should be consulted in connexion with
Mr. Jukes’ “ Account of the Physical Structure of Australia.”




LECTURE 111.
ON THE CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF GOLD,
AND ON THE MODE OF DISTINGUISHING
IT FROM OTHER SUBSTANCES
RESEMBLING IT.
LYON PLAYFAIR, C.B. F.R.S.
PEOFESSOE OF CHEMISTEY, GOVEENMENT SCHOOL OF MINES.




DR. LYON PLAYFAIR
THE CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF GOLD.
It is important for intending Emigrants to the Gold
Regions to possess such knowledge, with respect to the
chemical characters of gold, as may enable them to
recognise its presence, even when its quantity is too small
to be visible to the eye. It is a matter of every-day
occurrence for chemists and mineralogists to have brought
to them glittering substances resembling gold, often
obtained at great expense and with much labour, and
which generally resolve themselves into iron and copper
pyrites or yellow mica. A small amount of knowledge
would have prevented the disappointment usually attend-
ing such mistakes, for the characters of gold are well
marked and incapable of being confounded with those of
other metals when they have once been learned.
It will be my duty to point out in plain and simple
terms the methods of distinguishing gold by what
chemists term the “ wet way; ” as it will be that of my
colleague, Dr. Percy, to explain to you the metallurgical


processes for obtaining gold in the “ dry way// At the
same time it will be desirable to direct your attention to
the properties of some other precious metals which may
occur to you in your search after gold; and also to point
out the means by which you may readily distinguish those
substances which are so frequently mistaken for the noble
metal.
Gold has justly been considered the noblest of metals
from various physical and chemical properties. It is
unchangeable in air, and does not rust like iron, copper,
and other ignoble metals. It is of a bright reddish yellow
colour when in a coherent state, and is very dense. It is
highly malleable, or, in other words, it may be beaten into
thin leaves of a thickness not greater than the
of an inch. A single grain of gold may be beaten into
a leaf which wall cover 56| inches, and may be drawn out
into a wire 500 feet in length.
Gold requires a strong heat to melt it, the temperature
necessary for that purpose being about 2840° Fahr.; and
when melted it is almost fixed in the fire, though if placed
in the focus of a burning mirror, it gilds a silver leaf hung
over it, thus showing that it is converted into vapour to a
small extent.
It has already been mentioned that the colour of gold
in its coherent state is of a reddish yellow colour. When,
however, it is in a fine state of division, this colour is not
observed. Gold precipitated in a metallic state from
solutions is blue when diffused through water and exa-
mined by transmitted light; but if allowed to settle, it is
brown by reflected light. If gold-leaf be examined in a


strong light, by allowing the rays to pass through it, the
colour is found to be sometimes green and sometimes
blue.
The density or specific gravity of gold is so charac-
teristic of this noble metal, that it is important you should
be able to determine this for yourself. The term “ specific
gravity ” means the relative weight of equal bulks of
different substances, their weight being generally referred
to water taken as unity. Thus, if we suppose one cubic
inch of water to weigh 3, then a cubic inch of silver would
weigh 10 - 4, a cubic inch of quicksilver would weigh
13-5, and a cubic inch of gold 193. Gold has, therefore,
a very high specific gravity, being nearly 19 \ times
heavier than the same bulk of water. It is obvious,
therefore, that the determination of this point is an im-
portant means for its recognition. The mode of obtaining
a specific gravity is very easy, and simply consists in
ascertaining accurately its weight in air and then immers-
ing it in water and weighing it again. In water it will
be found to weigh less than it did in air, and this loss in
weight is exactly equal to a bulk of water precisely the
same as the bulk of gold weighed. To obtain the specific
gravity of the specimen, you have to divide the original
weight in air by the loss of weight in the water, and the
result is the specific gravity. I make the following expe-
riment roughly to show you how to proceed. I tie a
horse-hair round a sovereign, and hanging it to the
bottom of the pan of a balance weigh it in air. A tumbler
of water is now brought below it, and the sovereign is
immersed in the water ; and as it now weighs considerably


Weight of the sovereign in air. . .
Weight of the sovereign in water
Grains.
. . 123-25
. . 116-35
Loss in weight . .
. . 6-90
less, the weights in the opposite pan are removed until
the balance is restored. The following are the records of
the experiment—
Now, to obtain the specific gravity, I have only to divide
the first number 12325, by the loss in weight G’OO, and
the_ result 17 - 86 is the specific gravity of the sovereign as
ascertained by this rough experiment. This is not pure
gold, but a mixture of gold with other metals, and weighs
therefore less than the same bulk of pure gold. It is
possible even to calculate from the specific gravity of an
auriferous quartz how much pure gold is contained in it;
and as this knowledge is important I give the necessary
formula in a note, although it is much more complex than
the former. #
Having thus alluded to some of the more prominent
physical properties of gold, we must now examine some of
its more important chemical characters. But it would be
*lf the weight of metal=M and the density of jaetol
density of water
Weight of rock = E and the density of rocl £ = r ,
density of water
Weight of rock and metal =W,
Apparent weight of rock and metal in water=Q,
Then
M _m [ W—r (W-Q) j
p>_r [ m (W—Q) —-W ]


obviously useless to describe to you the refinements of
chemical testing, or to show you processes which could
only be successfully performed with all the resources of a
well-appointed laboratory. I prefer, therefore, to de-
scribe to you methods of detection which you may use
with materials easily derivable from any druggist’s shop.
Gold is not attacked or dissolved by aqua fortis (nitric
acid), or by spirits of salt (muriatic acid), when they are
separate, but it readily dissolves when a mixture of these
acids is heated with it. This depends on the circum-
stance that chlorine is formed' by the mutual action of
these acids, and that element is the proper solvent for
gold. The mixture of nitric and muriatic acids is called
aqua regia, from its power to dissolve gold. It is pos-
sible that you may not be able to procure nitric acid, and
in that case, if you throw bleaching powder into water
containing the gold, then add spirits of salt, and heat the
mixture gently, the gold will be dissolved by the chlorine
evolved. Even if spirits of salt are unattainable, then by
throwing some common salt and saltpetre into water, and
then adding a little oil of vitriol, chlorine will be pro-
duced, and the gold will dissolve. Alum may be substi-
tuted for the oil of vitriol, but not with advantage. In
all these cases you must use either glass or earthenware
vessels, and the substance supposed to contain gold should
be ground to a fine powder.
Having dissolved the gold by any of the means above
mentioned, we have now to examine its chemical behaviour
to various tests. It is, however, necessary to add to the
solution some carbonate of soda, in order nearly to neu-


tralise the excess of acid before we apply the tests. To
the solution of gold we add a solution of green vitriol
(sulphate of iron), and immediately you observe that a
brown precipitate is formed; this is metallic gold in a
very fine state of division. If the solution be mixed with
a considerable quantity of water, the liquid on the addi-
tion of the green vitriol is coloured brown by reflected
light, and blue by transmitted light, and this is obvious
even when 40,000 parts of the liquid are present; if the
liquid amount to 80,000 parts, it is coloured sky-blue;
with 160,000 parts, it becomes violet; with 330,000 parts
of liquid the violet tint is still very obvious; but with
640,000 parts it is with difficulty perceived.
To another portion of the solution we add a solution
of salts of tin, and you observe that in the mixture we
have a purple or reddish brown precipitate known as
the purple of cassius. The exact shade of colours ob-
tained depends upon the extent to which the solution is
diluted, but the test is equally sensitive with that just
described.
Some organic compounds precipitate gold readily, and
are very useful in recognising its presence; but care must
be taken that no free nitro-hydrochloric acid is present.
For this purpose, an excess of carbonate of soda should be
added, and then the organic acid, until it tastes distinctly
sour. Thus if to a portion of the solution we add oxalic
acid, and heat the mixture, the gold is thrown down as a
brownish powder, or, in certain circumstances, in the form
of a soft, yellow, spongy mass. A Seidlitz powder may
be used instead of oxalic acid, and when the mixture is


boiled the gold is precipitated in the form of a nearly
black powder.
Gold has a powerful affinity for mercury or quicksilver,
and readily unites with it. If the gold be in the state of
fine powder, or of scales, an excess of quicksilver readily
licks it up, forming an amalgam. This property is used
by the metallurgist to remove gold in circumstances in
which mere washing would not be sufficient. When the
compound or amalgam of gold and mercury is obtained,
it is easy again to separate them, because mercury being
volatile, is driven off by the application of heat, leaving
behind the gold in a pure state. One of the processes of
gilding depends upon this circumstance. You will find that
this behaviour of mercury to gold receives important ap-
plications, as will be described in the succeeding lectures.
I shall return to the consideration of the mode of
testing auriferous quartz when it is presented to you;
but before doing so it may be useful to refer to the
chemical properties of some other metals, which are not
uncommonly associated with gold.
The first to which I refer is silver, a metal readily dis-
tinguished in its separate state by its colour and other
physical properties, and easily enough recognised by its
chemical behaviour to reagents. Silver is usually of a white
colour, but when in a very fine state of division it is of a
dark grey. It is harder than gold, but softer than copper,
and being very malleable may be beat into thin leaves, and
from its tenacity may be drawn into fine wires. It melts
at a lower heat than gold, and in the fused state ab-
sorbs oxygen, which escapes on cooling and produces the


spitting as the metal solidifies. The specific gravity of
silver is only 10 - 4, or about one-half that of gold, and its
proper solvents are nitric acid or sulphuric acid. The
former acid dissolves it readily, forming nitrate of silver or
lunar caustic. Oil of vitriol (sulphuric acid) dissolves
silver when heated with it, and this solvent is used to
refine gold containing silver, —the latter dissolving while
the former remains unattached. Certain proportions be-
tween the metals are required for their effectual separation.
When the silver is dissolved by the oil of vitriol, a few
fragments of copper suffice for precipitating it from the
solution, and it may thus be readily detected. If a solution
of common salt or of muriatic acid be added to a diluted
solution of the silver salt, a curdy-white precipitate (chlo-
ride of silver) is formed, and this is peculiarly character-
istic of this metal. The chloride of silver is soluble in
ammonia, and may thus be distinguished from many other
white precipitates. The precipitate may further be tested
by putting it into a crucible with carbonate of soda, and
exposing the mixture to a strong red heat, when a button
of pure silver will be obtained.
Platinum is another metal frequently associated with
gold. Platinum is of a light steel grey colour, but is
one of the noble metals, and ranks in price between gold
and silver. After these two bodies it may be considered
the most ductile of the metals, although it is more tena-
cious than them, and will support greater weights on
equal thicknesses of wire than any metal except iron
or copper. The specific gravity is about 21 5, and is
therefore greater than that of gold. It is very infusible.


and does not melt by itself in the strongest heat of a
forge. Platinum, like gold, requires a mixture of nitric
and muriatic acid to dissolve it; neither of these acids
attacking it when separate. The various solvents al-
ready described under gold will equally act upon plati-
num, although less readily. These properties render this
metal of great value in the chemical arts; and large stills,
costing several thousand pounds, are used in the sulphuric
acid manufactures. Platinum, when dissolved, and the
acid neutralised by carbonate of soda, is deposited as a
black powder if the mixture be boiled with a Seidlitz pow-
der (or with tartaric acid and soda). The addition of sal
ammoniac and spirits of wine to a strong solution of plati-
num causes the deposition of a yellow crystalline precipitate,
characteristic of this metal. Oxalic acid does not preci-
pitate platinum as it does gold. It is very desirable that
those who go to the Gold Regions should look well for this
precious metal, as it is likely to escape the notice of the
common observer from its less glittering appearance.
I have now to call your attention for a few moments
to the substances lying before me, and which from their
yellow colour and shining appearance have been frequently
mistaken for gold. The first of these is yellow mica, a
light substance of small specific gravity, and having none
of the properties of gold. The specimen which I hold in
my hand was part of a cargo brought from the Arkansas
in mistake for gold, the adventurer being nearly ruined
by his ignorance. Some time since, when one of my
colleagues resided at a sea-port town, a ship arrived from
Ichaboe, having as part of its cargo a number of bags of


supposed gold. This “ gold,”— in reality yellow mica,—
had been found on the surface and swept up by brooms into
bags, in which it was preserved as a great treasure. Two
dealers in the precious metals went to examine it, and one
prudently brought a portion in the evening to my col-
league to assay. The other, hoping to steal a march on
his fellow-trader, went on board and bought the whole lot
in the middle of the night, at a high price, the material
being utterly worthless in a commercial point of view, and
not containing a grain of gold.
You observe on the table this elegant mahogany box,
with its secure lock and Government seal. This box was
forwarded to this institution only a few days since, and
was supposed to contain specimens from a newly-discovered
gold region in one of our neighbouring islands. The
specimens are in reality only iron pyrites, so often mis-
taken by novices for the precious metal. As this is one
of the most common mistakes, I now proceed to describe
how you may distinguish iron pyrites from gold by very
simple means. If you took its specific gravity, all doubt
would vanish, —or even an examination of its hardness
would dispel the illusion, for a scale of gold would readily
be taken up on the point of a needle, while iron pyrites is
too hard to be thus seized. If you throw a little pyrites
on a shovel and heat it over the fire, the smell of sulphur
will be very obvious, and the yellow compound will be gra-
dually roasted to the colour of red iron rust. You may
put a piece upon a bright shilling, and heat it over the
flame of a lamp, when the smell of sulphur may be
perceived, and the silver will be tarnished. To satisfy


yourself further, you may dissolve a little of the suspected
mineral in muriatic acid, to which you have added a few
drops of nitric acid; and then the solution will give iron
rust on the addition of ammonia, a black ink on the
addition of an infusion of nutgalls, or a bright prussian
blue on adding prussiate of potash. After these tests no
doubt could be entertained that the metal under exa-
mination was iron, and not gold. It does, however,
sometimes happen that iron pyrites is gold - bearing,
although the amount of the noble metal is so small as to
require a practised hand for its detection. Iron pyrites
occurs abundantly in this country, and it would scarcely be
a profitable speculation to send it home. Copper pyrites,
however, is equally mistaken for gold, and is much more
valuable as a mineral than iron pyrites. It may be
roasted like the former, and leaves a reddish-black ash,
exhaling the smell of sulphur. If dissolved in acids it
gives characteristic actions, which render the presence of
copper easily distinguishable. Clean iron, such as parts
of an iron hoop, or clean iron nails, thrown into the solu-
tion, cause the precipitation of copper. This experiment,
apparently showing the conversion of iron into copper,
deceived the alchemists in their researches, and gave
much support to the idea that one metal may be trans-
muted into the other. The action depends, however, upon
a simple exchange, the iron going into the solution, in
proportion as the copper goes out. In some districts, it is
customary to economise the copper from streams passing-
over copper pyrites; which, by percolating it, oxidise
and convert it into sulphate of copper, from which copper


is extracted by throwing in pieces of old iron into the
stream. Besides the metallic deposition of copper, by
means of iron, the chemical tests are very decisive, and
lead to the ready detection of copper when existing in
solutions. Ammonia added in excess, that is, until the
solution smells strongly of it, precipitates any iron which
may be present in the form of iron rust; but keeps
copper in solution, communicating to the liquid a deep
blue colour. Prussiate of potash, added to the copper
solutions, produces a mahogany brown precipitate, even
when the quantity of metal is present in very small
quantity. Carbonate of soda precipitates copper in the
form of an apple-green compound. Copper ore in the
latter form exists abundantly in Australia, and is sent
over to this country with great profit, being smelted in
South Wales.
It may be useful to recapitulate, and to give in a
tabular form more precise reactions for the different
metals to which we have alluded, because these may be
useful to those who are enabled to obtain the reagents
referred to, although some of them may be unattainable
under ordinary circumstances in the Gold Regions.
Tests for Gold.
Tests or Eeagents. Eesults.
In acid solution, brown precipitate ;
Green vitriol (sulphate of iron) < if very dilute solution, only a blue
colouring.
In dilute solution, a purple red co-
Salts of tin (proto chloride of tin) I louring; when strong, almost
brown precipitate.


Tests for Gold— continued.
Tests oe Reagents.
Results.
Metallic zinc
c Precipitates metallic gold as a vo-
( luminous brown precipitate.
(No precipitate; after some time a
Potash, (in excess) .
• s green colouring and slight pre-
' cipitate.
Ammonia
( Yellow precipitate (fulminating
’ { gold).
„ , , „ , , , ( No precipitate in cold solutions, hut
Carbonate ot soda, or carbonate I J . .
of potash
( when heated voluminous preci-
' pitate like oxide of iron.
Bicarbonates of soda or potash
No precipitate.
„ , . „ . ( Behaves like ammonia, carbonic acid
Carbonate or ammonia . . {
I being evolved.
Oxalic acid / Dark, greenish black precipitate,
( more quickly produced by heat.
Tartaric acid and soda . . Dark precipitate when boiled.
Sulphide of ammonium and \ .,
i t, u j r, i > Hark brown or black precipitate,
sulphuretted hydrogen . j
These reactions are so characteristic that it is impos-
sible to mistake gold for any other metal. The tests most
easily applied by persons unaccustomed to chemical mani-
pulation are sulphate of iron, salts of tin, and oxalic acid.
The following table gives the general tests for silver: —
Tests for Silver.
Tests oe Reagents.
Results.
Potash i Brown precipitate, becomes black on
’ ( boiling.
. . ( Brown precipitate, soluble in excess
Ammonia ... J r f
I of ammonia.
„ , ,01 i , ( White precipitate, soluble in aii-
Carbonate of soda or potash .1 1 1
\ moma.
„ , , n . f White precipitate, soluble in excess
Carbonate ot ammonia . . < 1 L
' of reagent.
t,, , , „ , ( Yellow precipitate, soluble in am-
Phosphate of soda . . . < .
t moma.


Tests for Silver— continued.
Tests or Reagents. Results.
Oxalic acid f I n neutral solutions white precipi-
‘ I tate.
Sulphuretted hydrogen and sul-)
. .■, „ ■ 1 Black precipitate,
pmde of ammonium . .) 1 r
~ ( White curdy precipitate, soluble in
Muriatic acid or common salt .1 “ J 1 ’
1 ammonia.
Zinc or copper . . . . Precipitates white metallic silver.
(In neutral solutions white metallic
Sulphate of iron . . . ) s jl V er
The most easily applied of these reagents is the
solution of common salt, which gives a curdy white pre-
cipitate, easily recognised by its solubility in ammonia.
If the silver be dissolved in sulphuric acid, its precipi-
tation by copper is very characteristic.
The following table gives the reactions of platinum
Tests for Platinum.
Tests or Reagents.
Chloride of potassium or chloride
of ammonium (sal-ammoniac)
Potash or ammonia
Carbonates of potash and am- (
monia \
Carbonate of soda
Sulphate of iron
Oxalic acid
Salts of tin (protochloride of i
tin) I
Sulphuretted hydrogen and sul- (
phides . ~ , \
Tartaric acid and soda
Results.
Yellow crystalline precipitate pro-
duced readily by the addition of
spirits of wine.
With chloride of platinum acts like
the chlorides of potassium and
ammonium.
In chloride solution yellow precipi-
tate.
No precipitate.
No precipitate.
No precipitate.
Dark brown red colouring, no preci-
pitate.
Dark brown nearly black precipi-
tate.
On boiling, metallic platinum falls
as black precipitate.
2i nc _ _ ( Slowly precipitates metallic plati-
num as black powder.


The most easy test is to take the solution of platinum
in aqua regia and add to it carbonate of potash (pearl
ashes) or ammonia, when the yellow precipitate will be
observed; it appears more quickly on the addition of
spirits of wine.
Having now described the properties of the different
metals which it is desirable to look for as being frequently
associated with gold, I may shortly describe to you
how you should proceed with a mineral to be examined.
Supposing you have auriferous quartz, reduce it to powder
and boil for some time, in an earthenware or glass dish,
with aqua regia. Pass the solution, after diluting it with
water, through a filter, then allow it to cool, and add a
solution of carbonate of soda until no more effervescence
takes place. This precipitates all the other metals which
may be present, except gold and platinum. Now filter
from the former, and add a solution of oxalic acid until
it does not cause effervescence and has a sour taste ; then
boil; if there be any gold present, it will be precipitated
as a black powder. Throw, again, on a filter of blotting
paper, add salts of tin, when a reddish brown colouring will
appear if platinum be present. On the first filter mixed
with the quartz, will be the silver, if any be present.
Wash this with ammonia, and to the solution which comes
through add muriatic acid until the smell of the ammonia
disappears, and the silver will be thrown down as a white
curdy precipitate.
The following plan may also be used. The solution in
aqua regia should be concentrated by evaporation, until it
is of small bulk. About three-fourths of its bulk of spirit


of wine should now be added, and then a saturated solu-
tion of sal-ammoniac. The platinum is thrown down as a
yellow crystalline precipitate, while the solution filtered
from this, and boiled with oxalic acid, deposits gold.
All the methods to which I have alluded are plans for
detecting the precious metals by the wet way, and do not
require to be used on all occasions, as my colleagues will
fully explain to you the general indications for ascertaining
their presence by mechanical devices or by the process of
dry testing, which, in many respects, is the best adapted
to the purposes of the miner.
I have now endeavoured to impart to you the means
by which you may recognise gold in doubtful cases, and
I trust that the knowledge may occasionally prove useful.
You are now called upon by one of those eventful periods
which have occurred in the history of many nations, to
people a land infinitely fertile in resources, impelled by
a desire to obtain wealth by pursuing its direct repre-
sentative. The desire to attain gold, which caused so
copious a stream of emigration from America to Cali-
fornia, and now produces so large a flow from this country
to Australia, is only the repetition of a desire which at all
times in human history has exerted a most important
influence in the advance of civilisation, and in the dis-
covery and developement of neglected natural resources.
This desire became the passionate madness of philosophers
and nations for a thousand years, and has left its records
in the history of alchemy. It passed over the world like
an epidemic, leaving traces of its presence everywhere,
though in some countries it became more deeply rooted,


and exerted greater influence on national character than in
others.
The Arabians, when Bagdad, Bassora, and Damascus
flourished as centres of commercial activity, hunted for
gold by the labours of their philosophers, and kept up the
desire for it by the reveries of their poets. Genii raised
palaces of gold, andthefruit trees produced only the precious
metal. Gems of wondrous price and treasures of the king
of metals were the reward of their heroes and travellers,
just at the time when bloody and cruel giants inhabited
our own country, and when Scotland and Ireland were
the scenes of fantastic tricks by capricious and fitful
fairies. Then Germany revelled in her witches, who rode
on broomsticks, and sprites, whose occupation it was ever
to fill hogsheads with the purest wine ; while the rivers
of France ran beauteous nymphs, immortals easily wedded
to mortality. But in all countries, one after the other,
giants, dwarfs, witches, fairies, sprites, and nymphs, dis-
appeared before the stern chase after gold. Chemistry
recognises that her greatest discoveries arose in this pur-
suit, not directly but indirectly. The search after the
transmutation of the baser metals into gold led to the
discovery of a philosophers stone very different from that
which occupied the attention of the earlier alchemists.
In the answers which Nature gave to the ill-defined
and impulsive questionings of the alchemists, were apparent
that the true philosopher’s stone consists not in the direct
discovery of gold, but in the developement of Nature’s laws,
which enable us to add to the resources and happiness of
the human race. The real philosopher’s stone of the


alchemists was the science of chemistry created by their
researches. By it we have learned to add immensely to
our comforts and enjoyments. The earth now yields to
us increased abundance in conditions where in absence of
knowledge she would have proved unproductive. Metallic
ores, formerly unworkable, are now reduced to metals
absolutely requisite to our everyday comforts, more precious
even than gold, and which enable us to join the remotest
parts of the earth by bands of constant communication.
All countries are now found to have resources of immense
importance to an ever-increasing civilisation, and the
sciences which can render them productive are the true
philosopher’s stone, changing base materials into gold.
Depend upon it, then, your search after gold is, as it
has always hitherto proved, a means by which civilisation
will in the end be materially extended. But recollect that
gold in itself is only an empirical representation of actual
material wealth, which really consists in the full develope-
ment of all natural resources. The only true method to
ensure wealth will be that you neglect not the gifts which
God has placed at your disposal. The country to which
you intend to emigrate is full of natural resources, still
very slightly developed. In a more thorough developement
of its agriculture, in the cultivation not only of wool and
of tallow, but in the conversion of those nutritious parts
of animals now thrown away into excellent and portable
food, there is much wealth to be obtained. There are
many minerals there, less luring than gold, but more
certain in their return, and far more useful to the every-
day comfort of mankind. Recollect, then, that while we


hail with pleasure, as all history justifies us in doing, the
desire for gold which forces so strong a tide of emigration
to Australia, that history also tells us, that the consequent
good generally arises from collateral causes rather than
from the one which produced the original impulse.
Though disappointment will doubtless attend many of
those who see only the philosopher’s stone in the drifts
and quartz of the Gold Regions, those who read God’s
teachings as displayed in Nature will find a more sure
way of transmuting valueless materials into gold, by going
out with the steady desire to improve and develope the
natural resources of their adopted home, in the firm belief
that success will attend their efforts, if they avail them-
selves of that knowledge of the Creator’s works, which He
has permitted His creatures to attain, with a view to
advance their comfort and happiness in this world.




LECTURE IV.
ON THE DRESSING, OR MECHANICAL
PREPARATION OP GOLD ORES.
WAEINGTON W. SMYTH, M.A. F.G.S,
INSPECTOR OE MINES TO THE DUCHY OE CORNWALL.




WARINGTON W. SMYTH, M.A. F.G.S.,
ON THE
DRESSING, OR MECHANICAL PREPARATION OF
GOLD ORES.
In the history of the various nations of the earth, during
those times of which any trustworthy accounts have been
handed down to us, there never was a period at which the
discoveries of gold followed each other in such quick suc-
cession, aroused so much attention throughout the civilised
world, and were productive of such momentous results.
And yet it will be advisable, preparatory to commencing
the subject of which I propose to give you a sketch, to
remind you of the descriptions of similar events, which
may be gleaned from the records of past times, that you
may be aware how much has been thought, written, and
done on the same subject, and not imagine, with some,
that the conditions under which the gold occurs are new,
or that novel and crude ideas on the extraction of the pre-
cious metal are to be preferred to any past experience.
I will only recall to your attention, that in all pro-
bability, from tradition and early history, the discovery of


gold in the sand and gravel of streams would appear to
have been the first step in the recognition of metals, and
that, in almost all, perhaps in all, the countries of Europe,
Africa, and Asia, greater or smaller quantities of gold have
from very early times been washed by simple contrivances
from the auriferous deposits. The old stories of Midas,
and of the Argonauts and the Golden Fleece, the histories
of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, the descriptive col-
lections of Strabo and Pliny, all tell the same tale of the
wide distribution and early utilisation of stream-gold;
whilst the discovery of massive golden ornaments in the
graves of early tribes, remote from the seats of Mediter-
ranean civilisation, and in lands where little or no gold is
now obtained, attests in a wider manner the same facts.
Occasionally, indeed, the success of the gold-streams
has been great enough to produce a pulse of excitement
which has vibrated for a while through a district, but has
been hushed down again, to use the geologists 5 expression,
both in time and space, or, in other words, has been soon
forgotten from the want of printed description, and has
not been transplanted to other countries, from the small
facilities of communication in those days. Take, as an
example, Bohemia, now producing no gold, but many of
whose valleys strike the traveller with surprise, covered as
they are with heaps of the upturned sand and silt of the
river beds. In the year 760 the poor people turned out
in numbers to wash gold from the river sands south of
Prague, and three men were able in the day to extract a
mark (half a pound) of gold; and so great was the conse-
quent rush to “ the diggings/ 5 that in the next year the


country was visited by famine.* We read of a recurrence
of similar events several times within the next few cen-
turies, although here, as elsewhere, the general attraction
to surface-spread riches has subsided into regular and sys-
tematic mining.
From the early times of which I have spoken, to the
present day, workings of this kind have been carried on
continuously in some few countries, whilst in others tin ore
has been extracted by methods very similar in their general
features, from superficial deposits of precisely the same
character; and as this latter class of work is extensively
practised in our own country, it will be important to pay
some attention to the mode of “ streaming ” in Cornwall
and Devon.
With respect to the modes of occurrence of gold a
good deal has already been told you by my colleagues; and
I will only advert to those points which must guide us in
the choice of some among the various processes for extrac-
tion. As the title of my lecture includes the mining of
gold, I must remind you in the commencement, of the dif-
ference in the two classes of deposit in which that metal is
found, the lodes or veins , which intersect the solid rock in
a direction more or less perpendicular to the horizon; and
the drift-beds, or “ streams,” in which the gold mingled
with gravel, sand, or clay, has been deposited by the
mechanical action of water, upon the surface of those
rocks, which are penetrated to unknown depths by the
lodes.
* Abhandlung von dem Alterthmne des bohmischen Bergwerks,
von M. G. Korner. Schneeberg, 1758.


To the former class belongs more specially the art of
mining; to the latter the simple operations which our
Transatlantic friends have aptly termed “ diggins,” al-
though even in the latter, after the heavy commonplace
labour of moving earth or stones, must be appended a cer-
tain degree of skill for the successful extraction of what-
ever precious particles have there been placed by natural
causes.
It must be very clear to all present, that if I were
requested to take twenty folio volumes, and read them
through to you in the course of an hour, not even locomo-
tive-engine speed could avail me; and thus, I must pre-
mise, is it equally impossible to attempt to bring before you
any of the details of mining, or even of what I wish more
particularly to dwell upon, the mechanical preparation of
the ores ; but in the same manner as I might read out to
you the title-pages of those volumes, and give you a few
words on their contents, so I hope to be able to lay before
you something of interest and utility in describing the
principles of the chief operations, and the action of some
of the apparatus which has been employed.
Gold-mining, properly so called, is, like other mining,
an art requiring the employment of capital, and of a skill
only to be acquired by years of experience. There is no
art practised by civilised man which requires for its full
developement the application of so many sciences and col-
lateral arts. But although so essential to the miner,
scarcely any of these are necessary to the gold-washer or
streamer, who must trust chiefly to the strength of his arm
and the buoyancy of his health, albeit the occasions must


be many on which he would be greatly aided by some of
those branches of knowledge to which I have alluded.
The apparatus which he employs must necessarily be
simple, so as to be conveyed from place to place, to be
easily repaired if injured, and not to require any of those
niceties of manipulation which would cause him to lose
time in acquiring, for the sake perhaps of only small
quantities to be saved from waste.
It is true that to render “ streaming ” successful on
the large scale, where poor places must be taken into
account with rich, and where we must deal more with the
average, and less with the prizes, improved apparatus and
arrangements must, as I shall presently show, be brought
into play.
We must now suppose that you understand the nature
of the drift-deposit of gold, best exemplified at the present
day in Siberia, California, and Australia; and the difference
between this comparatively ancient deposit, and the fine
sands annually brought down by rivers, some of which are
also found to contain gold in workable quantity. The
latter are of course found literally at the surface, the
former may be met with under a cover of from one to
seventy feet in thickness,* consisting of soil, peat, sand,
gravel, or generally any materials capable of being washed
down by the waters. The modes of working the two
must be identical in principle, although from the modern
sand being generally fine and sharp, a modification must
* Seventy feet is the greatest thickness of cover yet met with in the
Russian gold stream-works, at Krestowosdwischensk, in the Ural
Mountains.


be made in apparatus intended for the other, mixed as it
may be with clay, or with large boulders.
With respect to mining on the one hand, and digging
on the other, I will therefore not enter into further detail;
but since the nature of the subject allows it, and it may be
useful to some among my auditors, I will consider the
subject of the dressing and washing, or the mechanical
manipulation of gold ores generally, including as well
those derived from lodes as the lumps, and grains, and
dust, to be obtained from the stream-deposits.
The nature of the subject allows it, because with some
(here unimportant exceptions,) the gold occurs in both
cases native, and is therefore for the most part to be sepa-
rated from the other substances which accompany it by its
greater specific gravity; or where necessary, this separa-
tion may in both cases be aided by taking advantage of
the readiness with which gold amalgamates with quick-
silver. The great point of difference is this, that for the
stream-works Nature has pulled down the highest, proudest
and richest parts of the lodes, and so triturated and washed
up the materials, that the streamer has the heaviest part of
the work already done for him; whilst the miner, who
attacks the poorer, but more lasting, deep-going lodes,
must aid himself with all the resources of an art so nice,
that whilst an entire community may be seen in one place
supported in prosperity by an ore of given produce, total
loss and ruin may be seen in another to result from a
treatment of a similar ore without due knowledge of prin-
ciples and practice of the “ dressing,” or mechanical pre-
paration.


The processes by which ores, whether of gold or other
metallic minerals, are prepared for the metallurgist, may be
divided into three heads, viz., the washing, the trituration
or reduction in size, and the separation of the useful from
the waste: whilst other operations, as riddling for the
sorting by size, and amalgamation, may be superadded at
various periods of the routine through which the ores have
to pass.
We will devote a short space to the consideration of
these three divisions before proceeding to the description
of some of the apparatus employed for one or more of
these purposes together in the dressing of gold more
specially.
Ist. The washing is necessary not only to clear off mud
and dirt from the larger fragments, and to enable us by
sight to recognise them; but to set free small particles of
useful mineral which are enveloped in clay, and would be
lost without a sufficient stirring in a stream of water.
It is evident that a very different amount of this opera-
tion will be required for ores or “ stuff” from different
localities; and the mode of applying it may also vary from
a mere fall of w r ater of a few inches in height, under which
the fragments are moved to and fro, to a variety of appa-
ratus by which manual labour is in great measure saved,
and by which either a simple, or a compound sorting, is
simultaneously effected.
Thus the first treatment of the small ore from the
mine, as well as of the earth or sand from stream-works,
is the pouring of water from a small height, either from a
scoop or from a continuous supply, whilst the material is


raked to and fro over a grating or sieve, to separate the
large lumps.
When it becomes desirable to separate the mixed ore
and stone into several different sizes, the water carrying
with it the fragments which have passed through the
upper grating, is led over another placed a few inches
lower, in which the orifices are smaller; then again simi-
larly over a third, formed of wire net: again over a fourth,
and perhaps a fifth and sixth, of punched iron or copper-
plate : and thus a perfect assortment as regards size is
obtained, although at the expense of a large amount of
wages, since a boy must be placed at each of the gratings
and sieves mentioned, to pick over the coarse stones
which refuse to pass through his particular sieve.
Among the various means of effecting the same object
with less manual labour, I may instance the inclined cylin-
drical sieves employed in some of the Russian gold-wash-
ings, one of which, lately constructed, may be seen at Mr.
Walker’s in the City Road; and which being made of
strong sheet-iron, punched with round holes, and set in
revolution about an axis, has the material tipped in at the
upper end, and by aid of a continual flow of water allows
the small to fall through into a sloping table beneath,
whilst it pours out the large stones at the lower end of the
cylinder; and thus works up a very large quantity in the
day. Again, the annular sieve employed in some of the
large Russian machines, where the earth is continually
worked up by travelling knives, is better suited than the
last to thick and tenacious deposits, and will be described
presently. As a third example, I may point out to you


the conical sorting-drum of Mr. Rittinger of Schemnitz, in
which; by a very simple arrangement, four different sizes are
divided from one another, whilst, with the expenditure of
1| horse-power and the labour of two men, it operates
upon as much as ten to fifteen tons of mixed ore and
stones in twelve hours.
As regards the second division, the trituration, I need
say but little, inasmuch as Nature has already played the
part of the machinist for the gold-streamers. You must
not however forget that, besides the pure gold and the
waste, which it will be your object to separate the one
from the other, there may probably occur (in some of the
districts, at all events) large quantities of fragments of
vein-stone or gangue, such as quartz, or other earthy mi-
neral, containing gold in sufficient quantity to render it
worth dressing. It may, therefore, be useful to enumerate
to you the four chief modes of reducing in size pi’ior to
separation. The simplest method—that generally em-
ployed at small mines which have not the advantage of
machinery, is to bruise down the ore by hand with a heavy
flat piece of cast or wrought iron, attached to a short han-
dle, and termed a hucker. With a material of moderate
hardness, such as the generality of copper and lead ores,
and where no large quantity has to be treated, this method
may pass muster, but in other cases must be replaced by
one of the two following :
Where the ore is to be reduced to a medium small
size, as from the size of beans to large grains of sand, the
crusher or grinder is employed, —a machine almost peculiar
to this country, and to be seen in its more complicated


aspect in the lead-mines of the north, in its simpler form
in Cornwall and Wales. The principle is that of a pair of
rollers of hard cast-iron, almost in contact and revolving
towards the space between them into which the ore is
thrown. They are worked by steam or water power, more
rarely by windmills, or on a small scale by horse-power or
by hand.
If, however, the valuable portions of the stone be ex-
tremely minute, as is most commonly the case with gold
and tin ores, it is evident that a piece of spar as large as a
pea may contain a particle of gold or tin ore as large as a
pin’s-head, which unless the whole is farther reduced in size
will be totally lost. Here, then, come into play the stamps,
where a range of massive beams, shod with heads of iron,
and weighing each from three to eight hundredweights, are
lifted up in a vertical direction and allowed to fall on the
ore, which is enclosed in a trough, and rests on a hard
foundation, either of beaten stone or of iron. The details
of their construction, and for the mode of outlet of the
stamped “ stuff,” are not to be understood, much less cri-
ticised, without long study; but one point in their action
deserves to be particularly noted, as being one of the chief
items on which success in this operation depends. If, as
I have before mentioned, with an ore of a given character,
the fragments are too large, it is clear that we may lose a
large proportion of what we seek to obtain. If, on the
other hand, we allow it to be stamped too small, the valu-
able substance is “ stamped dead,” or, in other words,
brought down to such an infinitesimal size that it floats
away with the water, and cannot by any artifice be sue-


cessfully caught. Take a large hammer and gently crack
a nut with it, and you have an illustration of what a
stamp-head ought to do: it ought, if possible, to crack
the enveloping shell of stone and set free the kernel of
metallic mineral unbroken.*
The fourth method of trituration includes the grinding-
very small by edge-rolls, by the Mexican arrastras, and in
mortars, all of which are only applicable in exceptional
cases, from the great loss that would result in dressing by
aid of water where the whole is reduced to so fine a state
of comminution.
We have now to cast a glance over the third and most
difficult set of processes in the preparation of ores—the
separation. The one principle which is to guide us all
through is the difference of specific gravity between the
valuable and the worthless substances, whence it will be
clear that the heavier the metal we wish to save, and the
lighter the waste, the more readily and completely will the
operation be effected. Of the contrivances used for this
purpose, though I must begin by saying that their name
is Legion, I may give you a general idea by first explain-
ing that their action depends either on the suspension of
the fragments in water, and the consequent fall of the
heaviest to the bottom first, or on the flow of a stream of
water down an inclined plane, depositing the heavier par-
* This loss, as regards gold, is very much more serious than would
he imagined, and is due, in great part, to that property, malleability,
which enables us with such ease to distinguish it, by aid of a hammer-
face or a penknife-point, from other yellow minerals, such as iron and
copper pyrites, which, being brittle, cannot be hammered flat or cut.


tides first, and carrying tlie lightest away with it to the
lower end of the plane.
Among those in which the particles have to be sus-
pended in water are the jigging -machines, so very rarely
applicable to auriferous ores that I may overlook them
here ; and the dolly-tub, or keeve, — a tub of wood or iron
containing water, into which the material is thrown with
a shovel, and where it is kept in continual agitation either
by the same shovel or by means of a spindle with vanes.
The settlement of the heaviest portion, clean and to itself,
is much assisted by occasional blows on the side of the
vessel. The same principle has recently been proposed
with certain modifications for the washing of auriferous
sands.
Of the inclined planes over which the stream of water
holding the particles in suspension is made to flow, it will
be sufficient to point out to you a few of the principal
classes. Among the most important to the gold-dresser
are those fixed troughs which are intended by the rough-
ness of their floor to catch the grains of gold as they pass;
those used in Hungary are placed, several together, imme-
diately below the stamps, and are eight feet long by sixteen
inches broad, with a fall of twelve inches ; their bot-
tom is covered with pieces of coarse canvass, which are
gathered up every two or three hours and carefully washed
in a tub of clean water. Should they be left too long, a
coating of slime forms upon them, and the gold will then
slip away; and to obviate this defect, Mr. Hoffmann, of
Ruszkberg, applied a long piece of canvass, passing over
rolls at the head and foot of his trough or frame, rotating


like an endless chain against the current, and dipping un-
derneath into a chest of water. The same method has
been applied by Mr. Brunton to the “ framing” of tin
ores.
Sometimes, instead of canvass, the roughness of un-
planed boards is found available, or scratches made with a
sharp tool, or, again, grooves cut across the board, or, lastly,
the skins of animals. All these modifications are, however,
insufficient to do more than make the first step in the
separation, and various others of the inclined planes must
be employed in addition. One great division of these is
built of considerable depth, in order to allow the accumu-
lation of the orey material for several hours together, after
which it is dug out with a shovel to be further treated
elsewhere. These are the “ buddies” and “tyes” of Eng-
lish miners (“ schaufel-heerd” of the Germans), and vary
in form and quantity of water used according to the nature
of the materials to be handled. The other class is allowed
to be covered only by a very thin deposit, which is then
delicately stroked on the surface by a wooden hoe or a
besom, or by a gentle flow of water ; and when sufficiently
freed from slime is washed off into two or more receptacles
for the various qualities of deposit, according as they are
taken from near the “head” or the “tail” of the “frame.”
These tables, the “ kehr-heerde” of the Germans, vary ex-
ceedingly in their construction and manipulation; and are
sometimes, with great advantage, suspended in a peculiar
manner by chains, and jerked by machinery at intervals
against a block of wood.
From the last-mentioned tables I am brought naturally


to the mention of the gold-washer’s bowl, or vanning-dish,
a little implement which affords the most simple method
of separation on a small scale, and depends on the same
principles as the above-mentioned moveable tables. It is
constructed of some hard and close-grained wood, and
varies in form in different districts, being circular in Brazil,
and oval in parts of Transylvania and Hungary; whilst the
size varies from three feet in diameter to small ovals of
barely a foot in length, as used in Mexico. This bowl is
used sometimes for actually washing auriferous alluvium,
but can of course work but a limited quantity in a given
time ; more generally they are employed either as a means
of assaying (like the "vanning” of tin on a shovel in
Cornwall), or for the purpose of still further cleaning and
separating the particles of gold as they are brought from
some of the other concentrating processes.
A quantity of the material to be operated on having
been mingled and well stirred by hand with water in the
bowl, it is shaken from side to side and circularly, with a
variety of movements suited to the form and to the nature
of the ore, only to be acquired by long practice. The set-
tlement and separation of the gold is partly assisted also
by striking one end of the bowl occasionally so as to arrest
the course of the particles for the moment; and, finally,
several different layers or lines of mineral matter may be
distinguished from one another, the gold occupying the
lower position, then the magnetic iron, then the pyrites,
and, lastly, other waste.
I may now proceed concisely to describe some of the
apparatus which has been employed in various districts for


the combination of two, at least, of the principles of treat-
ment which I have enumerated, and will commence with
the extraction of stream-tin, since that process, so analo-
gous to the extraction of gold from alluvial deposits, may
be seen in action in Cornwall and Devon. Whilst ordinary
labourers are occupied in removing the cover or cc over-
burden,” which contains no useful ore, the tinners at work
on the “ tin-ground,” in the bottom, have put together a
rough “tye,” a wooden box somewhat like a coffin in
shape, nine feet long, two and a half feet deep, four feet
wide at the upper, and eighteen inches at the lower end.
One or more of the men are engaged in bringing harrow-
loads of the material to be tipped into the head of the box
or tye, over which a continual stream of water is flowing
from a height of one and a half or two feet, and is so spread
by the guidance of a piece of board as to fall in a thin
sheet on the minerals beneath it, and thus to wash them
thoroughly. At the same time, a second man is con-
tinually riddling out and picking the various larger frag-


ments and pebbles by fishing them up with a “ prang;” or
grate of iron bars at the end of a shovel hilt. The large
pieces are then picked over by hand, long practice enabling
the tinner at the first glance of his eye to detect whatever
is worth saving; and the stream of water, flowing with
the smaller grains along the bottom of the box, is con-
stantly separating the tin ore from the other substances,
leaving it accumulated near the “head,” whilst the others
are carried down towards the “ tail” of the tye. A subse-
quent cleaning is effected in a very similar tye, when the
material is first washed under a preparatory fall of water
on a head-board or box before it falls into the body of the
tye, which is here of greater length.
To the simplest contrivances for gold-washing belong
those employed in Transylvania, chiefly by the gipsies. A
board of six or seven feet in length, and with a number of
notches or grooves cut across it, is placed in an inclined
position, or a similar board is covered with rough cloths,
or two or three shorter grooved boards are placed in a
series; and the auriferous sand, mingled with water, is
made to flow evenly downwards from the top, whilst the
metallic particles, caught in the grooves or in the cloth, are
afterwards concentrated in the separating-bowl. Very
similar is the mode practised on the Rhine, whose sands
contain in a part of its course a small proportion of gold.
An open box, with a wicker bottom, to act as a sieve, is
set on trestles near the river-side, often on the very sand-
bank which is to be worked for gold, and an inclined board
of a few feet in length, covered with loose rough cloth, is


so placed as to catch all the drippings through the sieve
caused by the continual pouring of water with a scoop over
the sand which is thrown into the box. Every now and
then the cloths are taken up, and all the material adhering
to them washed into a bucket of clean water ; and, lastly,
once a-week, the precious metal is amalgamated with quick-
silver by aid of a sort of separating-bowl suspended by
cords from the ceiling of a room.
In the remarkable work of Agricola, on Mining, pub-
lished three hundred years ago, are descriptions and draw-
ings of a variety of apparatus for the extraction of gold and
tin ore, to one of which I must draw your attention.
The “ stuff,” or sand and gravel, is thrown into a rect-
angular box, the bottom of which is formed of a perforated
plate, and being well stirred by hand, the coarser portions
are raked out on one side, whilst the finer fall through
with a stream of water into a wooden canal or tye, some
eight feet in length, divided into a number of compart-
ments by slats or flaps of wood easily removed at pleasure.
The sediment, therefore, fills one of these compartments
after another, the richest occupying the cells at the upper
end, the poorest being at the lower, and the contents of
each are separately removed to be farther concentrated in
the small washing-bowl.
This latter implement is represented in
spirited cuts as of various forms, often blackened on the
interior, in order the better to show the grains of gold,
and sometimes of larger size, to allow of the washing of a
large quantity of sand by this means alone. Of these


some were suspended by strings, whilst others were used
floating on the water, by a person standing in the stream,
who dexterously, by aid of handles, agitated the sand and
water in its cavity, much as before described when the
bowl is held in the hand.*
Very similar to the above described tye used by the
Moravians in the time of Agricola, is the “ cradle ” intro-
duced from Virginia and Carolina into California, and
thence to Australia. This, however, instead of being fixed,
is mounted on rockers, so that by means of a handle it
may be swayed to and fro, and its general construction is
probably known to my auditors from the woodcuts of the
Illustrated London News. The length is divided into
partitions, the contents of each of which are afterwards
concentrated separately in the bowl. A great deal of
manual labour is required for the cradle, since, besides
those who feed it with fresh material, and those who
remove the waste from the lower end, one man must con-
tinually (according to the usual practice) pour on water
with a scoop, and another gives the rocking motion with
one hand, whilst with the other he stirs up the fresh-
brought “stuff” on the sieve, breaks up the clods, if
tenacious, and occasionally loosens the sediment forming
in the tye, when it becomes too firm. There can be no
doubt, that by this method the loss of fine gold is very
great; and in some cases the length of the divided tye has
* In Sir John Pettus’s “Laws of Art and Nature,” published in
1683, is a description of gold-washing, and of some very useful apparatus
for the purpose, translated from the German of Lazarus Broker.


been increased with a view to retaining some of what
would otherwise be lost; but the disadvantage then
follows, that the whole machine becomes too heavy for one
man to handle, and also requires too much attention to
keep the sediment stirred. The simplest proof of the rude
working of the cradle is the fact, that already, in California,
some of the sand has been operated upon a second, and
even a third, time with advantage. In a few instances
in the United States some quicksilver has been placed in
a few of the upper partitions, to aid in arresting the
gold; whilst at the point of exit a slip of gold rubbed
over with quicksilver was fixed, to catch the stray particles
on their way to the “ wild flood.”
Let me now say a few words on the machines used in
Siberia, the chief constituent parts of which are much the
same, viz., a sieve and a long tye with partitions, hut where
the sediment in the latter is continually worked to and fro
by claws or scratchers. In the smaller apparatus, at which
eight or ten men may be employed, the sieve or grating,
firmly fixed, is feet square. The tye, into which the
fine sand is carried by an inclined plane, is 16 feet long
by feet wide, with an inclination varying according to
the more or less loose nature of the sand, from 24 inches
to 16 inches, and having its bottom curved in the arc of a
circle. Above the tye, and placed in the direction of its
length, is a wooden axis turning on gudgeons, and having
fixed to it in the under side as many arms as the tye has
compartments, each of which arms is fitted with a number
of claws or blunt knives; and by an alternating motion
given to the axis by two men holding a lever attached to


it, the claws pass backwards and forwards in an arc, and
keep the sediment in continual agitation.
The partitions in the bottom are ribs of 2 inches high
and 2| inches wide, held by screwbolts and nuts; and are
removed every now and then for the washing out of the
concentrated auriferous sand, the more frequently as the
sands are richer in gold.
A great variety of machines have been proposed, one
after another, at the Russian gold stream-works, but the
principle of that just described appears to be most generally
approved, and has been carried out on a much larger scale
by aid of horse of steam-power. Four tyes, similar to
that just described, are ranged two and two on opposite


sides of a large annular or ring-shaped sieve formed of
plates of cast-iron perforated. In the centre of the ring
stands vertically an axle, which is made to rotate, carry-
ing several radiating arms fitted with knives, which keep
passing round and round over the grating, tearing up and
mixing together, all the various auriferous material which
is tipped into the machine from above; whilst sufficient
water for its dilution is poured on from jets led from a
trough, or launder, carried round the sieve at a small height
above. On each of two sides is a small square grating or
picking table, at which a man continually rakes out the large
stones which refuse to pass through the sieve, and throws
what is useless into a waggon to be wheeled away. When
the whole is set to work, the fine material falls through
the sieve into an inclined plane, which leads it into the
tyes, where it is continually agitated by stirrers, as before
described, and whence the sediment is at last carefully
extracted.
The limits of a lecture will not allow me to go farther
into details respecting this or other machines; but it may be
useful, at a time when so many ludicrous methods of washing
auriferous deposits are proposed, to note that this Siberian
machine is able to operate on 200 tons in a day, with the
labour of eight horses, twenty men and six boys, including
ten men for removing the waste, if in a level country
without advantages for clearing it away. Yet it must be
remembered, that to handle successfully an apparatus of
this kind, where from the great scale of operation a small
error must produce serious results, considerable skill ought
to be possessed by the manager, proper discipline should


be maintainable among the work-people, to keep every-
thing fairly going, and a sufficient extent of the gold-
bearing drift must be within command, to warrant its first
erection and regular action.
Another modification is the gold-washing apparatus by
Agte, in use at Alexandrowsk.
a a. Truncated cone of perforated sheet-iron, fixed by an iron frame,
cc, to a horizontal axis, h b, which is made to revolve by a water-
wheel about thirty times in a minute.
(I d. The opening at which the cylinder is charged.
d'd'. The opening at which the large pebbles roll out over the
board, //. Both these openings may he closed or opened at pleasure.
e e. Inclined plane, by which the sand which passes through the
sieve is carried down to—
gg. The tye, or long trough, the plan of which is a truncated cone,
and which has its bottom concave.
h h. The axis above the tye, to which are affixed arms carrying iron
knives to stir the sediment, and making twenty to twenty-five oscilla-
tions per minnte.


This apparatus, on the small scale represented, and
employing four men for charging and for picking the
pebbles, &c., will operate upon from twenty to forty
tons in ten hours.
A very similar machine, called houdarui, has been used
on the river Chapcha, having this difference in its arrange-
ment, that the long axis of the sieve runs in the same
direction as the tye.
Finally, in the choice of apparatus you must be guided
chiefly by the following considerations;—lst. What is the
quantity of soil and sand that it will operate upon, with
an average quantity of water, in the course of a day ?
Some of the amateur inventors are apparently very little
acquainted with sand or stone, tonwise. 2dly. That the
whole material may be so efficiently stirred and broken
when in clods as to prevent the loss of particles by their
being enveloped in clay. 3dly. That the length be suffi-
cient to prevent the loss of too great a proportion of finely
comminuted gold. 4thly. That as few men as possible be
required to work it.
All the apparatus described above will turn out the
gold still so much mixed with other substances, as
magnetic iron, pyrites, &c., that it requires to be further
concentrated. The powder so obtained is commonly of a
gray colour, and termed gray schlich; for its further
cleaning it must be very delicately treated on one of the
uncovered tables or frames of which I have before spoken.
That used in Siberia is 7 to 10 feet long, by 3 or 4 feet
broad, the inclination being variable according to circum-
stances. The frame is divided into an upper and lower


part by a lath nailed across the bottom; and tbe workman
standing upon it in wooden shoes mixes the sand with
water, and gently moves it against the current with a
wooden hoe or colrake. The precious metal thus arranges
itself chiefly near the head-board of the frame, and when a
certain amount is deposited he rakes it with his hoe
just strongly enough to draw down the waste particles
over the lath to the lower division, and yet not strongly
enough to disturb the richer deposit. This delicate
operation must be continued till he has got rid of all the
coarse fragments, after which he diminishes the flow of
water, and by light brushing raises again all the slime
which may still remain, and as much as possible of the
magnetic iron ore, and takes up the remainder, the “ black
schlich,” as the product of his manipulation. That which
has settled in the lower half of the frame is then brought
upwards, and passed once, twice, or thrice, through the
same operations. The proceeds of this “ fine-washing,” as
it is termed, for which the most skilful workmen are
required, may be then dried, and freed from a further
quantity of magnetic iron by the use of a piece of load-
stone, or a magnet.
The “ gold-trough ” used in Hungary for the analogous
purpose of cleaning the powder or meal obtained from the
gold-cloth tables above referred to is about 8 feet long
by 1| broad, with an inclination of from 2 to 4 inches per
foot: it is used in a very similar manner to the above, a
little broom of heather or birch being employed instead
of the hoe for raising the particles which are to be sepa-
rated from the gold. In Transylvania its dimensions are


much larger; and it is fitted with two traps in its floor,
into which the different qualities of “ schlich ” are swept
at different stages of the process. The resulting products
are sometimes farther concentrated in the bowl to a state
fit for melting, or are subjected to amalgamation.
Particulars of a much more detailed nature, however
wearisome to a general auditory, would be indispensable
to those who wish critically to take in hand these sub-
jects ; and I have to regret that the preceding descrip-
tions have occupied so much of our time, that I can do no
more than allude, in passing, to the last-mentioned pro-
cess of amalgamation, so important where we have to deal
with gold obtained from actual mining. Such gold,
generally in minute particles, is mingled with various
other minerals and rocks, — as pyrites, zinc-blende, quartz,
&c.; and can only be extracted after the whole has been
reduced by stamping to a very small size. In Hungary,
and also in the Salzburg Alps, the amalgamation is com-
bined with the stamps in a very simple and efficient
manner. Close below the stamps “ cofer/ 5 or trough,
the water, carrying with it the pounded particles, is led
into shallow bowls of cast-iron, in the bottom of which is a
layer of quicksilver. In each of these bowls a “ runner/ 5
supported on a central spindle, revolves by machinery,
and stirring the mixture which has flowed in brings it in
contact with the quicksilver, and then allows it to pass out
by a spout. After passing through two of these bowls,
the sand or slime is led over a series of cloth tables, where
some little gold and quicksilver, along with auriferous


pyrites, &c., is caught up, whilst the rest passes away to
he further treated by buddies and frames.
Very similar apparatus has now been at work for many
years in some parts of Brazil; and to give you an idea of
what may be done with poor ores, when system and skill
are brought to bear, I will give you in round numbers
the average produce obtained from the stamped ores at
Schemnitz, in Hungary, in 1842, which you will recollect
had to be broken from the solid lodes at depths extending
to 200 fathoms. The total quantity stamped was above
40,000 tons, and the average of the useful metals ex-
tracted from 50 tons was, —gold, 3 oz.; auriferous silver,
derived from the separating processes, huddling, &c.,
31 lbs.; lead, similarly obtained, 8a cwt.; the ratio of
gold to the other materials being here as 1 part to half
a million.
Or take the case of a particular mine called Siglisberg,
not producing lead with the stamp ores, the ratio of gold
was as 1 part in 760,000; of auriferous silver, 1 in 24,000.
To compare with this economical extraction of minute
quantities the manipulation of the Siberian gold washings,
we find that a common average of the sands worked to
profit is | oz. in 100 cwt.; or 1 part in 320,000.
In conclusion, it may be permitted me to address to
you a few remarks on a point of the highest moment
to those among you who are about to seek your fortune
in a distant portion of the globe, to us who remain behind,
and to the civilised world at large.
The pursuit of gold, actual, tangible, metallic gold.


has been generally, and not without reason, stigmatised
by all classes of writers, —by poets, philosophers, histo-
rians, and moralists, as productive of disastrous results to
the seekers themselves, an.d to the community in general.
I have myself been a wanderer in regions, where the
sudden discovery and publication of gold stream-works
have for a time paralysed other branches of industry, upset
the ordinary relations of employment, and locally unhinged
the framework of society. This has been exhibited on a
small scale in Transylvania, before the horrors of the late
civil wars devastated her fair valleys; and we have more
lately seen how some of the same results have occasionally
occurred in California. But the Anglo-Saxon element,
which has in the last-mentioned country so generally
succeeded in repressing these too natural disorders, is
destined, we may hope, to play a noble part at the
Antipodes, by proving to the world how much a spirit of
self-reliance combined with the love of order may effect,
in withstanding the incitations of unjust cupidity.
You, who have here experienced the blessings of
reasonable freedom, and of the upright administration of
law, must stand forward for the preservation of similar
advantages in your adopted country. There may very
possibly be some among you wbo think that, pressed by a
heavy taxation, they have, under our British regime, too
much to pay for this security of person and property.
But as one who has painfully toiled, heavy laden with
weapons, through some of those Eastern lands, where law
is a dead letter, and where every man must protect him-
self as he best may, let me impress on you the conviction,


130 DRESSING, OR THE MECHANICAL PREPARATION, ETC.
derived from facts and from conversation, that to the
industrious of such countries no sacrifice would appear
to be too great for the purchase of the blessings to which
I have alluded; and that many an honest, persevering
man would give up, not one-tenth, but nine-tenths of
what he possesses, to secure himself impartial justice, and
the preservation of his life and earnings against the attacks
of the unprincipled.
A motley crowd must shortly be assembled in those
gold-fields of Australia, hitherto almost a wilderness, and
among them will, doubtless, be found some unruly spirits,
whom ignorance and avarice together may incite to tur-
bulence and evil; but we may reckon confidently on the
superior training and inbred love of good which will
characterise the majority of those who are now proceeding
from among ns, to support the endeavours of the authori-
ties in maintaining peace and order under circumstances
of great difficulty, and to spread around them that feeling
for enlightenment and rational progress so essential to
the lasting prosperity of their newly-born community.
With every wish for the individual success of those
who intend to seek for wealth by honourable toil, we may
fearlessly expect that their united efforts, so long as they
are not forgetful of themselves and the well-tried institu-
tions which they leave behind them, will at the same time
contribute to the honour and advantage of the colony,
the mother-country, and of civilisation.


LECTURE Y.
THE METALLURGICAL TREATMENT AND
ASSAYING OF GOLD ORES.
JOHN PERCY, M.D. F.R.S.
LECTURER on metallurgy at the government school of mines and
SCIENCE APPLIED TO THE ARTS.




JOHN PERCY, M.D., E.R.S.,
THE METALLURGICAL TREATMENT AND
ASSAYING OF GOLD ORES.
The present lecture is essentially and entirely practical.
It was not originally prepared with the slightest view to
publication. Without copious illustration by specimens
and experiments, it is very difficult to communicate inform-
ation of value to an audience such as the writer had the
honour to address at the Museum. For certain reasons,
however, it was considered expedient to publish this short
course of lectures under the sanction of the respective
lecturers, especially as the publication of them was pro-
posed by several other persons without the co-operation
of the lecturers. And it is well known that the lecturer is
frequently made to say the opposite of what he did say, if
the reporter be not well acquainted with the subject. To
guard against such accidental misrepresentation was cer-
tainly the chief reason which induced the authors of this
volume to commit their productions to the press.
The author has endeavoured to expound the principles
concerned in the metallurgical treatment and assaying of


gold ores, and to give as much detail as he conceives will
be specially useful to those who may wish, in Australia, to
educate themselves in these matters. Great practice and
close observation will alone produce skill in the very
responsible and important department of assaying, and
the reader is cautioned to be at first extremely distrustful
of his results, until he has verified them by repeated trials.
Assays must be correct, or they are worse than useless, as
erroneous results must necessarily tend to heavy pecuniary
loss, either to the buyer or seller.
Composition of Gold Ores. —Gold almost always occurs
in the metallic or native state, generally in small particles,
but occasionally in pieces of considerable weight. It is
never pure, being almost invariably alloyed with silver, and
containing frequently small proportions of copper and iron.
The accompanying table presents the composition of native
gold from various parts of the world. And it will be
observed that while in some specimens the proportion of
silver is very small, in others it forms a considerable per-
centage.
The proportion of silver varies not only in specimens
of native gold obtained from different regions, but even in
specimens from the same auriferous district. In Hungary
gold is met with in combination with tellurium and other
elements; and in Brazil an alloy of gold and palladium
has been discovered. Gold frequently exists in certain
kinds of iron pyrites, which occur abundantly in this
country, as well as in other parts of the globe. [Specimens
of gold were placed before the audience extracted from


iron pyrites from Alston Moor, in Cumberland, from
Wicklow, in Ireland, and from California.]
Composition of
Gold
Ores,
LOCALITY. AUTHORITY.
GOLD.
SILVER.
COPPER. IRON.
Siberia and Ural,
Schabrowski
Borusohka..
Katharinenburg
Gozuschka .. •
Do. .
Do. .
Do. .
Awdejew
0-36
0-06 0-08
Africa.
Anamaboc
Do. ..
T. H. Henry
Do
0-15
0-10 0-36
America,
North of Brazil.
Eivot
0-3 g &
p p
Gongo Soco
Ojas Anchas
Santa Eosa de Osos
Marmato
T. H. Henry
Boussingault
Do
0-50 3-58
Do.
Eose
Titiribi, Columbia
California .......
T. H. Henry
0-87 Iron.
0-29 0-24
Canada
Australia,
Bathurst
T. H. Henry
Europe
Transylvania.
Wicklow ...
Mallet


It appears doubtful whether in every instance the gold
exists in pyrites in minute metallic particles, or whether, in
some instances at least, it may not be present in combi-
nation with sulphur. Gold is thus widely diffused over
the surface of the earth, though rarely in sufficient pro-
portion to make its extraction profitable.
The public cannot be too urgently cautioned against
the error of supposing that where gold is found, there is
necessarily an opening for the investment of capital. Of
all metallurgical processes, the extraction of gold is gene-
rally the most costly. It is true that occasionally large
pieces have been discovered, but they are rare exceptions.
To extract sixteen shillings* worth of gold from the pyrites
of the vein called the “ back-bone/* near Alston in Cum-
berland, on the authority of my friend, Mr. Pattinson, of
Newcastle-on-Tyne, it would be requisite to expend a
sovereign. No sooner, however, are the marvellous dis-
coveries of California and Australia made known, —and
marvellous, indeed, they are, —than we are informed of
the existence of a similar El Dorado in this country; but
the evidence which has hitherto been advanced in support
of this statement is, in my judgment, insufficient.
I would take the present opportunity of insisting
strongly upon the necessity of exercising the greatest
caution in the sampling of gold ores. Careless sampling
can only mislead. Assays of individual specimens may be
accurate; but they are worse than useless if the assayer
has not operated upon an average sample of the ore. I
would advise the capitalist, to whom prospectuses of gold-
mining schemes may be submitted, not to be allured with


glittering specimens of gold-ore, with assays yielding a
high produce, and with the glowing statements of san-
guine promoters, or enthusiastic adventurers, without hav-
ing ascertained on good evidence that the samples which
are presented to his notice are really average samples of the
ore, and that something like a continuous supply may
reasonably he expected. If such specimens do not repre-
sent an average, they become what the Cornish miner calls
“ Slocking-stones,” which are at all times enticing and
dangerous to the inexperienced and unwary, and never
more so than in the case of auriferous ores. I consider
that in uttering this advice, which I believe to he specially
needed at the present time, I am simply discharging a
duty which, in virtue of my appointment, I owe to the
public.
Melting of the Gold-dust. —The first metallurgical
operation to he considered is the melting of the “ gold-
dust,” as it is received from the “ gold-washer.” Good
black-lead crucibles* are heated in a common melting
furnace (such as is employed by the brass-founder), and
the “ gold-dust ” is then carefully introduced, having been
previously mixed with a little dried borax. When the
metal is melted, a slag will be found swimming on the
surface, which must be thickened by the addition of hone-
ash, and then skimmed off. The metal is cast into bars by
being poured into open iron ingot-moulds of the usual
dimensions. The mould should be previously warmed and
* Black-lead crucibles of this kind are made by Mr. Euel, of 176
High Holborn.


oiled by wiping the surface, which comes in contact with
the melted metal, with a piece of tow dipped in sweet oil.
Some refiners in melting the “ gold-dust” add to the
metal when melted a small quantity of “ corrosive sub-
limate/’ and stir at the same time. Effervescence, the
effect of the volatilisation of the sublimate, takes place.
This is an old practice, and by some metallurgists is
regarded as useless. It seems, however, probable that by
thus introducing a volatile body into the metal, and so
causing agitation throughout the mass, any small particles
of extraneous matter, which might be detached from the
surface of the crucible, and become diffused through the
metal in casting, may be brought to the surface and
removed with the slag. Before using the “ black-lead ”
crucibles it is customary, with some persons, to coat the
external surface with fire-clay by dipping them in a cream
of fire-clay and water. The crucibles which have been used
should be kept, as they will retain a portion of gold,
which must be extracted in a smelting operation. The
dimensions of the crucibles may vary according to cir-
cumstances.
Smelting of Gold Ores. The term “smelting” is
technically applied to a process, or series of processes,
by which a metal is extracted by the agency of fire from
the substances with which it may be combined or mixed
in nature. In the consideration of the smelting of gold
ore, the metallurgist should be acquainted, not only with
the composition of the native alloy of gold, but with the
various foreign matters with which it may be associated.
The most important of these are as follow:


1. Silica, of which quartz or common sand almost en-
tirely consists.
2. Other earthy matters, as clay.
3. Oxides of iron, especially magnetic oxide.
4. Iron pyrites.
5. Galena.
6. Blende.
7. Complicated ores of gold, like many of the South
American, which contain iron and copper pyrites, galena
and blende, arsenic and antimony, and various earthy
matters.
Smelting of Gold associated with Silica. —ln California,
especially, large veins of quartz have been found con-
taining gold diffused through the mass in variable pro-
portion ; and much has, of late, been said and written
respecting the smelting of what has been called “ gold
quartz,”—in other words, of the extraction of the metal
from the quartz in the furnace. I do not pretend to
give any opinion at present respecting the precise
conditions in which it may be desirable to smelt the
quartz in preference to stamping and washing in the
manner described by Mr. Smyth. Taking it for granted
that it is expedient to adopt the smelting process, I shall
simply describe what I conceive should be the prin-
ciples to guide the smelter. But the reader must be
cautioned, that however simple the operation of smelting
may appear to him, yet that, to carry on successfully even
the simplest process of smelting, considerable experience
is absolutely necessary. Only they who are practically
acquainted with metallurgical operations of this kind can


adequately appreciate the necessity of this caution. In
the management of a furnace there are a hundred points,
a knowledge of which can only be acquired by practice,
and which it would be impossible to communicate by
description.
When a piece of quartz containing gold diffused
through its mass is exposed to a degree of heat even far
exceeding that of melted gold, no separation of the metal
takes place, owing to the infusibility of the quartz. The
metal, indeed, is melted and liquid, but it is obvious that
as it is present only in very small proportion in com-
parison of the infusible quartz, it must necessarily remain
diffused as at first. But if a substance be added which, at
a high temperature, shall combine with the quartz, and
produce a fusible compound, then it is equally obvious
that the gold will, by virtue of its high specific gravity,
rapidly fall to the bottom of the vessel in which the
experiment is performed. Now, carbonate of soda is a
substance wdiich would act in this manner upon quartz.
It would render it fusible at a high temperature, or cause
it to “flow;” in other words, it would “flux” the quartz,
and would, consequently, be designated by the metal-
lurgist as a “ flux.” The product of this combination
is a “ slag,” which, in this particular instance, is a true
glass, very similar in appearance and other respects to
common crown or window-glass. But as the gold would
occupy only a very small volume compared with the
quartz, it would be difficult to collect it without very
sensible loss in a crucible, still more so in a furnace,
whether reverberatory or blast. It is, therefore, desirable


to add a something which shall serve the purpose of
diluting and collecting the gold, and from which it may
afterwards be readily extracted. Of all substances lead is
generally the best for this purpose, and has accordingly
been uniformly employed in all smelting operations with
gold ore hitherto carried on. As in the amalgamation
mills mercury is employed to seize hold of and amalgamate
with the minute particles of gold, which might otherwise
escape, so lead is used with the same object in the smelting
of matters containing gold. The part which mercury
plays at the ordinary temperature is that which lead plays
at a high temperature.
In order to facilitate the combination of the quartz
with the “ flux ” (which for the present we suppose to be
carbonate of soda, although the metallurgist would, on
the score of expense, be entirely precluded from the use
of that substance on the large scale), it must be reduced
to a comparatively fine state of division by crushing in
one way or other, otherwise a very considerable time
would be required to effect the perfect combination, and
the combination must be perfect to ensure the satisfactory
separation of the gold; for, as Mr. Smyth remarked, in
reference to the stamping or crushing of gold ores, if
particles only as large as a pea be left undissolved by the
action of the flux, those particles may contain gold, and
so a considerable loss of the precious metal may result.
In the ore-furnace of the copper-works at Swansea, it is
true that comparatively large pieces of quartz may be
seen diffused through the slag, but this must not furnish
ground for supposing that a similar slag might be tole-
rated by the gold-smelter.


Although carbonate of soda could not, for the reason
stated above, be used by the smelter, yet there are various
substances which will readily “ flux ” quartz, and may be
had at a sufficiently cheap rate. Lime, in certain pro-
portions, alone will at a high temperature combine with
quartz, and produce a fusible slag, but the fusibility would
be much aided by the addition of oxide of iron. Hence a
mixture of lime and oxide of iron in suitable proportions
may be conveniently employed by the smelter. When
practicable, it would be desirable to obtain the oxide of
iron by roasting, —that is, burning, with the free access of
air, —an auriferous pyrites, such as the Californian, for then
the proportion of gold would be increased by that con-
tained in the pyrites, from which, possibly, it could not
otherwise be profitably extracted. Lime and clay in
certain proportions produce a fusible slag with quartz.
The common and well-melted cinder of our iron furnaces
is composed practically of those three constituents.
Quartz and fluor spar will also melt when mixed in certain
proportions and exposed to a high degree of heat. Oxide
of iron alone will suffice. The common and very fusible
slag of the puddling-furnace is chiefly composed of oxide
of iron and silica. Various experiments and facts on this
important practical subject will be given at the end of the
lecture for the purpose of reference, but the metallurgist
will be readily able by a few experiments to obtain the
knowledge he may desire, if he will remember the leading
facts just mentioned.
It must not be supposed that the unpractised metal-
lurgist will experience no difficulty in conducting such
operations on the large scale. The corrosive action of


lime, and especially of oxide of iron, on the material, such as
fire-brick, of which furnaces are constructed, is very great,
and sometimes extremely perplexing. One great point
should be to keep the bed of the furnace (if reverberatory)
protected as effectually as possible by a stratum of melted
metal. If oxide of iron be employed, the reverberatory-
furnace is to be preferred, because in the blast-furnace a
considerable portion of the oxide of iron would certainly
be reduced, and a corresponding quantity of metallic iron
liberated long before the mixture attained the degree of
heat requisite for the combination of the silica with the
oxide. I much regret that in the very limited space
of a single lecture it is utterly impossible to enter
upon various important practical details concerning the
construction of furnaces, which, to be properly treated,
would require a volume of text illustrated with numerous
drawings.
The lead may be added to the mixture of ore and flux
either in the metallic state or in a state of combination,
from which the metal may be set free. Common
litharge, mixed with charcoal or coal-slack to the extent
of about five per cent, may be employed; or galena,
mixed with a sufficient proportion of scrap-iron to de-
prive it of its sulphur and liberate the metallic lead.
A mixture of galena and litharge in certain propor-
tions, or galena roasted to a certain degree mixed with
iron, or the lead-slag which comes from the “ ore-
hearth,” or the reverberatory-furnace, may be similarly
used when ground to powder under the edge-roll and
mixed with charcoal or other carbonaceous matter. This


lead-slag is generally the most convenient and least
expensive material for the purpose. It contains a
considerable percentage of lead, which, when under
the conditions mentioned, is evolved, and, percolating
through the mass as it subsides by virtue of its high
specific gravity to the bottom of the furnace, carries
along with it any particles of the precious metal it may
meet with in its course. Lead-slag has long been exten-
sively used, both at Sheffield and Birmingham, in the
refining of “ sweep,” or the dust of jewellers' and silver-
smiths' shops. The “ sweep "is mixed with the ground
slag and coal-slack, and smelted in the reverberatory-
furnace. Some scrap-iron is also occasionally added for
the special purpose of combining with any sulphur which
may be present in the slag. It is especially important to
make this addition, to prevent loss of silver in the slag.
Formerly thousands of tons of lead-slag, rich in lead, were
thrown away, but have of late been greedily sought after,
and worked to considerable profit for the lead.
Some years ago Anossow, a Russian, proposed to smelt
the gold sand of the Ural with iron, alleging that a very
much larger quantity of gold could be so obtained than by
the most skilfully conducted process of washing.* His
statements, indeed, respecting the advantage of the use of
iron for this purpose are obviously so exaggerated as to
render them unworthy of confidence. Experiments are
reported to have been made on the large scale, and to have
perfectly succeeded; but the best proof of the want of
* Anleitung zum Gold, Platin, und Diamenten-Waschen. Von Dr
Carl Zerrener. 1851, P. 50.


success is the fact that Anossow’s process has never been
adopted, as it unquestionably would have been had only a
fraction of what he had stated in regard to it been correct.
Cast-iron was employed simply as a vehicle to collect the
gold instead of lead. The iron was dissolved by sulphuric
acid, and the gold remained in the insoluble residue.
Some experiments have been made at the Museum on
this subject, which indicate that if it were advantageous
on the score of economy cast-iron might be so applied.
The metal may either be added directly, or in the state of
a common oxide of iron under conditions favourable to the
reduction of a portion. When cast-iron is melted with
gold an alloy seems to take place, from which the greater
part, if not the whole, of the gold may be extracted by
melting the cast-iron in contact with lead, which abstracts
the gold.
Recently many notices have appeared in the news-
papers respecting another smelting process for quartz con-
taining gold.* It is secured by patent, and, as I have
received information concerning it from several persons
without any restriction as to secrecy having been imposed
upon me, I consider myself at liberty to make some
observations upon it. The quartz is crushed to a small
size, and “ fluxed” with a mixture of lime and oxide
of iron. Plates of wrought-iron are from time to time
introduced into the furnace and withdrawn when the sur-
face is found to be coated with a film of gold. They are
* It may now be stated that Mr. Longmaid is the inventor referred
to, and that the author having submitted the following description to
that gentleman, no objection was offered on his part to the publication.


then plunged into melted lead, which dissolves off the pre-
cious metal, and afterwards again put into the furnace.
This process is constantly repeated, and the gold, it is
asserted, is thus obtained both more economically and in
greater proportion than it could be by the process of
stamping, washing, and amalgamation. The slag is stated
to be free from gold, as I think it must necessarily be
under the circumstances. The use of wrought-iron in
this process I believe to be quite original. Expe-
rience will soon decide whether the invention is really so
practically valuable as is maintained. There is evidently
a constant loss of wrought-iron, and a considerable expen-
diture of manual labour, and lead is the ultimate solvent.
It requires, in the first place, to be shown, in proof of
the efficacy of the process, not whether the slag is free
from gold, as it must be under the circumstances, but
whether the whole of the gold is directly extracted; and,
in the second place, whether this method of smelting is
cheaper than that in which lead is directly employed.
There is also another point deserving of special at-
tention : it is, that as the gold certainly in very great
measure exists in the quartz in the metallic state, it must
necessarily, in part at least, penetrate through the melted
mass, and come in contact with the bed of the furnace,
escaping the plates of iron. But the bed of a furnace in
which the smelting is effected must consist of some very
refractory materials other than iron itself ; and so far as
I am aware there are no such materials which are
impermeable to melted metal. It is true that the bed of
the furnace may rest upon plates of iron, as is the case in


many reverberatory-furnaces, and so ultimate loss of gold
may be prevented. It is, however, far from desirable that
any quantity of a precious metal should, so to speak, be
locked up even for a short time in the bed of a furnace.
Some idea of the extent of this permeation of the bed of a
reverberatory-furnace may be formed when it is stated that
even in the modern construction of the reverberatory-fur-
naces in use at the copper-smelting works at Swansea, some
tons of metal may be so infiltrated. I have seen in various
metallurgical works the beds of reverberatory-furnaces
constructed with the greatest care, to diminish as much
as practicable the temporary loss of metal from permea-
tion, but when the beds have been removed in the process
of repair a comparatively large quantity of metal has been
recovered from them. Probably the inventor has devised
some satisfactory means to prevent this temporary loss;
for, otherwise, the infiltration even of a few pounds of
gold would, from loss of interest, be virtually an important
item in the cost of the process.
Another vehicle which is applied to collect the gold in
the process of smelting is iron pyrites. When common
iron pyrites is heated to a certain temperature without
access of air, it loses half of its sulphur, and the product is
a fusible sulphide of iron, such as is produced by bringing
a roll of sulphur in contact with a bar of iron heated white
hot in a smith’s forge. Let there be given, for the sake of
example, an ore consisting of auriferous iron pyrites and
quartz ; when such an ore is mixed with the appropriate
“ flux” for the quartz, as already described, and exposed to
the requisite heat, a slag will be obtained, and below r the


slag will be found a stratum of sulphide of iron containing
the gold. This stratum is called a “ matte,” a technical
expression adopted from the French. If, then, this
“ matte” be roasted, that is oxidised, by heating it
with the free access of air, and the product be mixed
with a fresh quantity of crude auriferous pyrites, and
smelted again, a second “ matte” will be obtained which
will contain the gold from the two portions of ore em-
ployed. The gold is thus capable of being concentrated in
sulphide of iron. The process may be again repeated
until the precious metal has been sufficiently concentrated
to admit of its profitable extraction. The final “ matte”
is then melted in contact with lead, which deprives it of its
gold, the impoverished sulphide of iron floating on the
melted lead. The roasting of the pyrites may be effected in
large heaps in the open air, at the bottom of which is
placed brushwood or other convenient fuel to ignite the
mass, which, when once ignited, continues to burn. In
this process the silica and oxide of iron must be so adjusted
as to act as mutual “ fluxes,” and there must always be
present sufficient sulphide of iron to form a distinct stra-
tum, This process has long been practised in Hungary.
Extraction of the Gold from Lead. —This is invariably
effected by what is termed cupellation, a process in use
from the most remote antiquity. When lead is heated to
a temperature above its melting point, it rapidly combines
with the oxygen of the air, or burns, the product being
yellow oxide of lead; and when the temperature is raised
to about bright redness this oxide melts, and is then known
as litharge. But when gold is heated with access of air,


even at the highest temperature of our furnaces, it neither
volatilises nor combines with oxygen. Melted oxide of lead
very readily permeates various substances; such, for in-
stance, as the refractory material of various crucibles.
One of the substances most readily infiltrated by it is
bone-earth, burnt and reduced to fine powder, and then
compressed into a solid state in a mould. Into a small,
short hollow cylinder of iron beat some pounded and sifted
bone-ash; then place upon the surface of the bone-ash,
which should be made concave, a piece of lead of the size
of a small shot. Direct upon it the outer point of a blow-
pipe flame. The lead will rapidly oxidise, and the surface
of the small melted globule of lead will be seen to be
covered with an iridescent film in rapid motion. This
film is melted oxide of lead, which is no sooner produced
than it is immediately absorbed by the bone-ash with
which it comes in contact, just as a drop of water is ab-
sorbed by a piece of blotting-paper. But no sooner is this
film removed than it is replaced by another, a fresh surface
of metallic lead being exposed to oxidation. There is thus
a continuous production and absorption of oxide of lead,
and at length every trace of metal disappears. When cold,
the bone-ash will have a fine yellow colour due to its im-
pregnation with oxide of lead; and daring the course of
the process of oxidation vapour will be observed proceeding
from the globule of metal, which is the vapour of metallic
lead in the act of conversion into oxide. If, instead of thus
treating a shot of pure lead, an alloy of gold and lead be
similarly treated, then the lead will disappear as before,
and the gold will remain on the surface of the bone-ash as
a shining globule. If, however, a small shot of copper be


treated in the same way upon the bone-ash, it will melt
and rapidly oxidise; but the black oxide of copper, owing
to its infusibility at this temperature, will not pass into
the bone-ash, but will remain on the surface. If, on the
other hand, a certain proportion of lead be added to the
copper, and the operation be then conducted as before, the
oxide of lead will combine with and dissolve the oxide of
copper, and both will completely pass into the bone-ash,
which, on cooling, will be found to have acquired a blackish
colour. Pure copper requires not less than sixteen or
seventeen times its weight to lead to be thus absorbed.
Hence it follows, that not only may lead be readily sepa-
rated from gold by this process of cupellation, but that
gold may be deprived of copper by cupelling it with lead;
and what is here said of gold is also true of silver. On
the large scale it would not be desirable to cupel an alloy
of lead and gold alone, but always to add a certain pro-
portion of silver both for the purpose of diluting the gold,
and so diminishing the chance of loss, and to prepare it
for the subsequent operation of “parting,” or the separa-
tion of the silver. Native gold, it has been remarked, is
nearly always alloyed with a certain proportion of silver,
which must be dissolved out either by nitric or sulphuric
acid. And, in order to this, the gold must be alloyed
with from two to three times its weight of silver. Hence
it is desirable to insure the presence of at least this ratio
between the silver and gold in the lead.
Cupellation, or refining, on the large scale. —The English
method is as follows : A piece of bar-iron, about half an
inch thick and four inches deep, is bent into the form of an
oval hoop, and the ends of the bar are welded together.


On the lower side are attached a series of parallel flat bars
of iron in the direction of the short diameter of the oval.
The dimensions of the apparatus may vary considerably,
according to circumstances. The long diameter generally
does not exceed four feet, and the short two feet six inches.
Pounded and sifted bone-ash is mixed with about one-
tenth by measure of fern-ashes, or one-fortieth by weight
of American pearl-ashes, and moistened sufficiently to
become coherent by pressure.* The hoop above-men-
tioned is then placed with the cross-bars downwards upon
a solid floor, and the bone-ash beaten firmly into it with
a mallet or rammer until it is entirely filled, or the bone-
ash is level with the upper edge of the hoop. This done,
the surface is carefully scooped out, so as to form a shallow
concavity of about two inches and three-quarters in depth,
and leave a wall of bone-ash all round of about two inches in
thickness, except at one end, where the bone-ash is cut out
so as to leave an open space between it and the iron; but
the thickness of bone-ash at this end, which is called the
breast, is about five inches. The apparatus thus pre-
pared is technically called a “ test.” It is allowed to dry,
e d
H f ..JM IBF |[*~
" B " BMMBB IWsssa BUSSS! 1
6 6 b 6 - A
Drawing in section and plan of a test from Karsten’s Metallurgy.
a a Iron hoop. hh Transverse bars. c Cavity.
d Breast. e Space between tbe breast and the iron.
* On the Smelting of Lead Ore, by H. L. Pattinson, F.E.S.;
“ Transactions of the Natural-History Society of Northumberland,” &c.,
toI. ii. part 1, p. 169. The best description in the English language.


143 METALLURGICAL TREATMENT AND ASSAYING
when it is placed in a furnace constructed in all respects
like an ordinary reverberatory-furnace, except that a space
is left open in the bed of the furnace to receive the test,
and that the long axis of the arch is very short. The
test, in fact, forms the bed of the furnace, in which it is
adjusted with the long diameter transversely. It is sup-
ported in its place by iron bars placed underneath between
the two walls of the furnace. At the end opposite to the
breast, and through a space left in the side of the furnace,
the nozzle of a pair of large double bellows, or a fan-
blast, is introduced. The furnace having been heated
to a sufficient degree, which can only be known by ex-
perience, lead containing the silver and gold is placed
upon the test, so as to fill the hollow cavity when
melted. Oxidation proceeds rapidly, the blast is directed
on the test, and the litharge at first sinks into the test,
which it soon saturates, and then begins to flow through
a channel, which must be cut in the surface of the breast,
or wall of bone-ash, at the opposite end of the test, so


that it may run over the end, and not come in contact
with the iron. It was for this reason that the bone-
ash was directed to be entirely removed at this end, as
the melted oxide of lead would exert a powerfully cor-
rosive action on the iron. In proportion as the li-
tharge is formed, lead is gradually supplied to the
test, which is easily done by lading it into a channel
from an iron pot outside the furnace kept filled with
melted lead. After the lapse of a certain time, the
channel through which the litharge first flows becomes
much corroded, and must then be stopped. A fresh
channel must be made by the side of the former across
this end wall or breast of the test, and the operation
continued as at first; and again it will be necessary, in
the course of the process, to construct a third similar
channel. Iron pots on wheels are placed below the fur-
nace to receive the stream of melted litharge. In this
manner several tons of lead may be refined on the same
test. Towards the conclusion of the operation some
striking appearances are presented. As soon as the last
portions of lead are removed as oxide, the silver suddenly
assumes a bright and resplendent surface. Shortly after-
wards, as it cools, its surface is suddenly thrown into
agitation; cones, or little craters, sometimes several inches
in height, are thrown up, from which oxygen gas escapes
with violence, projecting particles of silver with con-
siderable force. This phenomenon is termed “ spitting/*
or “ vegetation/* It has been shown that “ fine,** or pure
metallic silver, when melted, has the property of dissolving,
so to speak, much more than its own volume of oxygen,
which escapes with violence at the moment of solidifica-


tion, giving rise to the eruption from the surface described.
Generally it is usual to employ one test with a flat bottom
of bone-ash to concentrate the silver in the lead, and a
second with a concave bottom to conclude the operation
of cupelling or refining. In the Museum is a beautiful
cast of a cake of silver, of the weight of 3000 ounces,
which was prepared on a test for the Great Exhibition
of last year by Mr. Pattinson. It is scarcely necessary
to remark, that in properly conducting the process of
cupellation, simple as it may seem, much experience is
required. After the operation, the test, with its cake
of silver, is withdrawn from the furnace, the silver re-
moved and cleaned, and the bone-ash saturated with
litharge knocked out and preserved for subsequent treat-
ment, as it contains a considerable quantity of lead in
the state of litharge, and some silver also.
On the Continent the process of refining is con-
ducted differently. The test is not movable, but is, in
fact, the bed of the furnace itself, which is shaped into
a circular cavity, sloping from the sides to the centre.
This bed consists of a kind of marl, which is firmly
beaten in and allowed to dry. The roof of the furnace,
on the other hand, is movable : it consists of a flat dome
of bricks, built in a strong, circular hoop of bar-iron,
which is attached to a crane by three or more chains.
The furnace is provided with a blast, which enters by one
or more apertures at one side. The lead which is refined
in these furnaces is generally very impure. The greater
part of the impurities rise to the top after the furnace
has been in operation for some time, and are skimmed off
and placed by themselves for further treatment. The


purer litharge then follows. The operation is continued
till the lead is removed and the silver left fine. The
furnaces are large, some tons of metal being introduced
at once, and worked off continuously without further
addition until the conclusion of the process.
Assaying of Gold Ores .- —By assaying is meant the
determination, by a ready method, of the proportion of
metal existing in any given ore. Assaying is said to be
either “wet” or “dry,” according as the agency of liquid
solvents or of “ fluxes” and fire, is employed. For practical
purposes in the determination of gold, the latter process is
always adopted, while in the subsequent separation of the
silver the former is resorted to. Formerly the silver was
separated by a “dry” method. The processes of “ dry”
assaying may be regarded as smelting processes in minia-
ture. It will not, therefore, be necessary to explain the
principles upon which this important department of the
subject is founded, as the principles already enunciated,
in reference to the smelting of gold ores, apply equally to
the assaying of these ores.
Quartz containing Gold. —Reduce the quartz to fine
powder by triturating in an iron mortar. Trituration is
much facilitated by heating the quartz to redness and
plunging it in cold water.. Above everything be particular
in obtaining an honest and fair average sample. This is a
matter of paramount importance, and of no small difficulty
in many cases. But let there be honesty of intention, and
that difficulty will generally be surmounted. The sam-
pling generally devolves upon the miner, but the assayer
and ihetallurgist should also understand the business.


Assayers of great experience and high integrity may occa-
sionally commit unintentional mistakes. Thus, a few
years ago, two small pigs of lead from South America,
very rich in silver, were offered for sale. They were
assayed by assayers of very high standing. Portions had
been taken from the top and bottom of each pig, with a
view to obtain a fair average. I had occasion to attempt
to verify the report of the assayers. Portions were
taken from the same parts of each pig as in the first
instance; but the results did not agree with the report,
nor did my assays agree with each other on taking fresh
portions. It was, therefore, certain that the composition
was not uniform, and that the portions taken for the pur-
pose of assaying in neither case represented an average.
The pigs were accordingly sent again to the same assayers.
Each pig was melted separately, and while melted a sam-
ple was taken. A second report was given, which differed
from the former to the extent of 1000 ounces and upwards
to the ton! In the sampling of gold ores most especial
care should be taken, as the precious metal exists irregu-
larly diffused through the mass in particles of very dif-
ferent size, and as minute errors in sampling will neces-
sarily be greatly multiplied, when the quantity of gold per
ton is calculated from the assaying of, it may be, 500 or
1000 grains of ore.
Method by Fusion. —Of the sample make at least two
assays, in order to test the correctness of the result.
Weigh 500 or 1000 grains, and mix intimately with
about the same weight of dry carbonate of soda, and
half the weight of red-lead, with five per cent of char-


coal, or, instead, use granulated lead. The precise quan-
tities are not very important. Let there be plenty
of carbonate of soda, of which it is better to take too
much than too little. Then introduce the mixture by
means of the copper scoop into a Cornish or black-lead
crucible, previously heated to redness. Fix it solidly in
the assay furnace by surrounding it with fuel. Heat cax*e-
fully and watch the operation. Effervescence will take
place, owing to the displacement of the carbonic acid from
the carbonate of soda by the silica, and from the combina-
tion of the carbon with the oxygen of the red-lead. Con-
tinue to heat, raising the temperature towards the last to
bright redness, until no further effervescence occurs and
the slag appears clear and well melted. Then take the
crucible immediately from the furnace, and as dexterously
and as rapidly as possible pour as much of the slag as you
can into one of the two hemispherical cavities of a suitable
cast-iron ingot-mould, and the lead with adhering slag
into the other. It is well previously to oil the mould, as
before mentioned. Examine the slag to see if any shots
of lead are contained in it. If there are, they must be
carefully separated by trituration and washing with water.
Take out the button of lead and strike it carefully on the
side, on a bright anvil, with a hammer, and so detach
adherent slag. The gold will be found in the lead, which
is to be cupelled in the way to be subsequently described.
In the absence of carbonate of soda, lime and clay, or lime
and oxide of iron, might be employed. It is worthy of
remark, that the Californian gold-bearing quartz contains
a very sensible amount of magnetic oxide of iron. This


may be readily proved by carefully washing the triturated
quartz in a bowl, drying the blackish residue, and extract-
ing the oxide of iron with a magnet. At the Museum, the
presence of this oxide, which is not conspicuous in the
ore, has always been found in considerable quantity by
this method. I have examined a very rich sample of auri-
ferous magnetic oxide of iron, which found its way from
California to Birmingham more than two years ago.
To determine the presence of gold in auriferous pyrites
proceed as follows : —Reduce to fine powder and roast on
a shallow dish of refractory clay, heated to low redness in
a large muffle, until the odour of burning sulphur has
ceased to be evolved. The temperature must be very gra-
dually raised to bright redness as the sulphur burns away.
Oxide of iron is the product. Of this take 1000 grains or
more and mix with 500 of dry carbonate of soda, 300 to
500 of red lead mixed with charcoal, or the same quantity
of granulated metallic lead, and about 500 of dried borax.
Heat, and, in other respects, proceed as before.
Instead of pouring out the contents of the crucible into
the ingot-mould, the whole may be left to cool, and when
quite cold the crucible may be broken. The button of
lead at the bottom must be struck edgewise on the anvil
to detach adherent particles of crucible and slag. .The
fuel should be either charcoal, coke, or anthracite. Each
has its peculiarities, which will be soon understood by a
little experience. At the Museum, anthracite, as free from
ash as possible, has been employed with advantage, its use
having been suggested by my friend Mr. Henry. An-
thracite appears to be characterised by the following


qualities,—its power of producing an intense heat in a
short time over a space confined to a few inches above the
bars.
The assayer must, in many cases, make a few prelimi-
nary trials respecting the proper mixture of “fluxes” when
he is called upon to assay an ore which is manifestly
different from what he has been accustomed to operate
upon. He should remember that borax is especially the
“ flux” for metallic oxides, and carbonate of soda for silica.
Frequently a mixture of the two is requisite.
In some cases in which metallic sulphides may be pre-
sent in considerable quantity, and the assayer wishes to
avoid the trouble of roasting, the cautious and gradual
addition of nitre may be made, or red-lead in excess without
carbon, a sufficient quantity of lead being reduced to carry
down the gold, and the sulphur of the sulphides oxidised
at the expense of the oxygen of the red-lead, or of the
nitre, as the case may be. To explain all these points
properly several lectures would be necessary; but the pro-
cesses given will, it is believed, be found most useful to
the emigrant to Australia who may wish to make himself
acquainted with the art of assaying.
Scarification. —This process of assaying ores of the
precious metals is very simple, effective, and of general
application. It is founded upon the principle that oxide
of lead, when melted, has the property of combining with
and dissolving silica and various metallic oxides. The ore
is reduced to powder and heated in a shallow cup-like vessel
with several times its weight of lead free from silver. This
vessel is called a “ scorifier,” and should be made of re-


fractory clay, and be as compact in structure as possible,
in order to resist tbe corrosive action of melted litharge.
The operation is conducted in a “ muffle,” at a tempera-
ture at or above that of melted litharge. In proportion as
the lead oxidises, the foreign metals present, whether in
combination with sulphur or oxygen, are attacked and
dissolved in the litharge; and at length, on continuing
the process for a sufficient length of time, a clear stratum
of melted litharge is observed covering a button of lead.
As in many cases the lead employed should be eight times
the weight of the ore, the button may be reduced to a sixth
or eighth of the original lead. The contents of the scorifier
should be rapidly poured into a circular ingot-mould, and
when cold the adherent litharge may be detached from
the button of lead by a few blows on the side with a
hammer. This button contains all the precious metals,
which may be subsequently extracted by cupellation. By
repeating this process upon a fresh portion of ore, mixed
with a proper quantity of lead, and introducing the button
first obtained, a second button of the same weight as the
first may be procured, containing all the precious metals
from the two quantities of ore. And by repeating the
process, in like manner, the silver and gold present in a
large quantity of ore may be concentrated in a small but-
ton of lead. In the course of the operation it is occa-
sionally desirable to add a small quantity of fused borax.
Before using the “ scorifier” some assayers are accustomed
to rub over the surface of the cavity with red oxide of
iron or haematite; and certainly there appears to be no
disadvantage in this practice, the object of which is to


prevent the contact of the litharge with the substance
of the scorifier, and consequently its corrosive action.
Just at the last part of the operation, the heat should be
increased so as to render the litharge very liquid. It is
convenient to employ the lead granulated, that is, divided
by pouring the melted metal in a small stream into cold
water. The button obtained should be soft and ductile;
and if it is not, either the “ scorification” has not been
carried far enough, or sufficient lead has not been added.
Cupellation. —The principle and mode of conducting
this process on the large scale having already been ex-
plained, it now only remains to describe the mode of
cupelling by the assayer. It is necessary to remind the
reader, that to perform this department of assaying much
practice and skill are required. Extreme accuracy in the
determination of the proportion of gold especially is obvi-
ously of paramount importance, as a minute error becomes
enormously multiplied when the quantity in the ton is
calculated from an assay of 500 or 1000 grains of ore.
The cupel is a little vessel of bone-ash, having a shallow,
concave surface. Cupels are of various sizes, so as to be
capable of absorbing variable quantities of litharge. The
bone-ash is sifted and moistened with water. Instead of
water, a slightly glutinous liquid, such as beer, has been
long employed by some, and is mentioned in ancient
works on assaying. A mould is required to form
cupels. It consists of two parts; a short, stout hol-
low cylinder, either of cast-iron or gun-metal, the diameter
of the cavity being somewhat greater at the top than the
bottom, and a plunger of the same metal, having the


lower end turned convex, so as exactly to correspond to
the concave surface of the cupel, and fitting loosely into
the cylinder above mentioned. A sufficient quantity of
the prepared bone-ash having been put into the mould,
the plunger is introduced and struck several times with
a mallet; it is then withdrawn, and the cupel, which
is formed, may be readily thus forced out by pressing the
lower and smaller end with a cylindrical piece of wood
of slightly less diameter. The cupel is then placed in
a warm situation to dry. To proceed with the assay.
The lead containing the gold or silver is placed upon
a cupel, previously heated to the proper temperature
in a muffle, and the process conducted in the manner
already described. In the cupellation of gold alone, the
temperature should be considerably raised towards the
latter part of the operation; but it would be well, when
the assayer may have reason to know pretty nearly the
produce of gold, to ensure the presence of at least two
or three times more silver than gold, which can readily
be done by the addition of a little fine silver to the lead
upon the cupel. As soon as the brightening of the
metallic bead is observed, the cupel must be slowly cooled
by drawing it towards the mouth of the muffle; but the
cooling must not be too rapid, otherwise there may be
very sensible loss by spitting. It is occasionally con-
venient, in order to insure gradual cooling, to invert
over the cupel containing the bead another heated cupel.
When cold, detach the bead, place it between a pair of
strong forceps, so as to leave the lower or flat side free,
squeeze gently, to detach adherent litharge from that side.


and clean off the last trace of litharge by a common
scratch-brush of brass-wire, or by a very stout bristle-
brush. If the operator should at any time require a
larger cupel than he may have by him at the time, he
may use as a substitute a cupel placed upon another cupel
inverted . After each cupellation, the surface of the cupel
should be carefully examined, to ascertain whether any
minute globules of metal have been left. The presence
of tin or nickel materially interferes with the process,
as neither will pass into the cupel by the aid even of a
very large quantity of lead, but will remain on the surface
as a sort of slag, in which particles of precious metal may
be entangled. In this case the process of scorification
may be resorted to with advantage before cupellation.
Although silver is not appreciably oxidised or vola-
tilised when melted alone, yet it is so in cupellation by
virtue of the presence of lead. It becomes, therefore,
necessary to determine the amount of loss under varying
conditions, so as to be able in the calculation of the per-
centage to add the loss occasioned in the operation. [A
table for this purpose is added at the end of the lecture.]
When copper, or other base metal, is present, the
proportion of lead added must be regulated by the pro-
portion of base metal. [A table is also added containing
the necessary information on this subject.]
Parting. —As has been before stated, in order to dis-
solve out silver by nitric acid from a given alloy of gold,
the weight of the silver must exceed about three times
that of the gold. When practicable it is always desir-
able to have this relation, for if the silver be present in


sensibly greater proportion, then it will not be possible to
obtain the gold in a compact form, and the operation will
be rendered more difficult. Let there be given an alloy of
the kind mentioned. Hammer it flat on an anvil, and roll
it out between a pair of small rolls to about of an inch
in thickness, from time to time annealing it by heating
it to redness and allowing it to cool. Then twist it into a
spiral coil, or as it is termed, “ cornet.” Then put this
cornet into a proper parting glass-flask, (which is conical
and increasing in diameter from the neck to the bottom,)
containing nitric acid free from chlorine, and of about L 3
specific gravity. The acid must always be tested for
chlorine, by adding a drop of a solution of nitrate of
silver to it, which, if chlorine be present, will instantly
render it milky. Heat the flask gently on a sand-bath.
Effervescence will take place, and the silver will dis-
solve, leaving the gold in the form of the original cor-
net, of a deep blackish brown colour. When effervescence
has entirely ceased, carefully decant the solution without
letting the cornet of gold fall out. Add a fresh portion of
stronger nitric acid and boil. Decant the solution as
before, and replace it with distilled water. Renew the
water several times, always keeping the cornet in the flask,
and at length carefully invert the cornet into a small
smooth crucible, and heat gradually to low redness. The
gold cornet will thus contract and acquire the characteristic
golden colour. Weigh it. If there be more silver than
sufficient, or if the particle of gold obtained in assaying is
very minute, then the operation of parting and washing
must be conducted with extreme care to prevent loss; and


in some cases it may be necessary to use a very small filter
and proceed with the usual precaution of the laboratory.
The filter will have to be burnt in a porcelain crucible, and
the gold weighed in it.
In assaying native gold cut off a piece weighing some-
what more than twenty-four grains. Roll it out. Cut
from it two pieces weighing exactly twelve grains, for
the purpose of a double assay. Add about three times
as much silver to each, and the proper quantity of lead.
It is convenient to wrap up the whole in a piece of
thin sheet assay-lead. Cupel and part. Gold is always
estimated in value in relation to standard gold, which
is an alloy of gold and copper in the proportiou by
weight of 22 to 2. Such an alloy is said to be 22
carats fine. If it contained 23 parts of gold by weight
in the 24, it would be 23 carats fine, or 1 carat better
than standard. If, on the other hand, it contained only
21 carats, it would be 1 carat worse than standard.
The report of the assayer is always given in relation to
standard. Tine or pure gold would be 24 carats fine, that
is, there would be no alloy. Hence 12 grains is a conve-
nient weight of gold to assay, as you have to multiply by 2
to determine at once its relation to standard.
The silver contained in the solution of nitrate of silver,
obtained in the process of parting, may readily be re-
covered by various means. One of the simplest is as fol-
lows : —Add excess of common salt, which will throw down
the whole of the silver as white insoluble chloride, which
speedily becomes slate-coloured by exposure to light.
Collect this, and put it into a vessel containing water


acidulated with, hydrochloric acid, then introduce some
zinc or iron. The silver will thus be rapidly restored
to the metallic state in the form of a dark grey powder.
Wash this with water; dry it, and fuse it in a crucible
with about five per cent of its weight of nitre. The silver
thus obtained “ spits,” and is very brittle; but becomes
malleable simply by re-melting. The separation of silver
from gold in the large way is generally effected in this
country by nitric acid, and the silver recovered as above.
The necessary description of apparatus and general appli-
ances would require too much space for this lecture.
Sulphuric acid is also very extensively employed on the
Continent to effect “parting” on the large scale.
EXPERIMENTS, etc., REFERRED TO IN THE
LECTURE.
1. Auriferous quartz, California. Of “ tailings,” or quartz, which had
been crushed and imperfectly washed, were weighed 600 grains
Carbonate of soda (dry) .. .. .. .. 600 „
Eed lead ~ .. .. .. .. 500
Charcoal .. .. .. .. .. 20 „
The mixture was made by trituration. The button of
lead obtained yielded by cupellation a globule of gold (con-
taining silver) weighing 0 - 43 grains, or 23 oz. 7 dwt. 14
grains per ton. After parting by nitric acid, the gold weighed
20 oz. 11 dwt. 11 grains.
2. Of the same “ tailings ” were weighed .. .. 16 oz.
Eed lead .. .. .. .. .. 12 „
Carbonate of soda (dry) .. .. .. 12 „
Charcoal .. .. .. .. .. 180 grains
The mixture was made by trituration. After exposure to


a high degree of heat a transparent light-green glassy slag
was obtained, and a cake of auriferous lead.
3. Of the same “ tailings ” were weighed .. .. 1200 grains
Lime .. .. .. .. .. .. 2080 „
Iron ore, containing 2800 grains of sesquioxide of iron, and 1200
grains of silica, and of the value of only five or six shillings per
ton, after railway carriage of sixty miles .. 4000 grains
Metallic lead (granulated) .. .. .. 1000 „
Charcoal (to reduce the sesquioxide of iron to the state of prot-
oxide) .. .. .. .. .. 148 grains
These ingredients were mixed by trituration, and the
mixture was exposed to a white heat for an hour in a black-
lead crucible. The slag thus obtained was well fused, black,
and glassy. Some metallic iron was separated.
4. Of the same “ tailings ” were weighed .. .. 850 grains
Eoasted auriferous iron pyrites .. .. 1000 „
Lime .. .. .. .. .. .. 750 „
Metallic lead .. .. .. .. 500 „
Charcoal .. .. . • • • • • 38 „
The mixture was made as before, and similarly treated.
The slag was well melted, and of a dull-green colour.
5. 100 parts by weight of sulphide of lead or galena require not less
than 23-3 parts of iron to be reduced to the metallic state. It
is always desirable to employ a larger quantity of iron than is
necessary.
6. 100 parts by weight of red lead require not less than 3 - 8 parts of
charcoal to be reduced to the metallic state.
7. 70 parts by weight of protoxide of iron combine with 30 of silica
to form a very fusible slag. It is similar to that generally pro-
duced in the iron “ puddling” furnace, and called “tap-cinder.”
8. About 15 parts by weight of alumina, 38 of silica, and 47 of lime,
combine to form a fusible slag, which is similar to that generally
produced in the iron “ blast-furnaces ” of the country, and which
is called “ blast-furnace cinder.”
Table showing the proportions of lead required in the
cupellation of alloys of silver and copper in different pro-


in 1000 parts; the second the weight of lead required to
cupel 1 part by weight of the alloy corresponding in the
first column; and the third gives the ratio in weight which
must exist between the lead and copper, in order that the
former may he perfectly removed by the process of cupel-
lation.
i.
ii.
m.
1000
3
950
3
60 to ]
900
7
70 „ 1
800
10
50 „ 1
700
12
40 „ 1
600
14
35 „ 1
500
16 to 17
32 „ 1
400
16 „ 17
27 „ 1
300
16 „ 17
23 „ 1
200
16 „ 17
20 „ 1
100
16 „ 17
10 „ 1
Pure copper
16 „ 17
16 „ 1
portions. The first column represents the weight of silver
The following table gives the loss of silver which occurs
in the cupellation of alloys of silver and copper in different
proportions, and consequently indicates the proportion of silver
which must be added in compensation for this loss. The
first column gives the weight of silver in the 1000 parts ;
the second, the actual weight of silver found by cupelling
an alloy of silver and copper containing the weight of silver
corresponding in the first column; and the third, the actual
loss in weight of silver. No special table is requisite for the
cupellation of gold, because, for other reasons than those
mentioned in a former part of the lecture, it is always
desirable that the gold subjected to cupellation should be
alloyed with three times its weight of silver. And in this


case the information in the first table will apply, as the
alloy of gold and silver to be cupelled may be treated with
the same proportion of lead as is required for the silver
alone in any given alloy of that metal and copper.
998-97
973-24
947-50
921-75
896-00
870-93
845-85
820-78
795-70
770-59
745-48
720-36
695-25
670-27
645-29
620-30
595-32
570-32
545-32
520-32
495-32
470-50
445-69
420-87
396-05
371-39
346-73
322-06
297-40
272-42
247-44
222-45
197-47
173-88
148-30
123-71
74-34
49-56
24-78


FURNACES.
Reverberatory .—Annexed is a drawing, in section and plan,
of a reverberatory-furnace at the copper works of Swansea.
Fig. 1. Longitudinal section :
a. The fireplace.
b. The fire-bridge.
c. A space left hollow, so that air may circulate through and the
bridge be kept cool.
d. The roof of the furnace.
e. The bed of the furnace, which in this case is made of sand.
f An opening in the roof, through which material may he introduced.
g. An opening at the end, from which slag may he skimmed, &c.
Fig 2. Plan of the furnace.
The letters correspond to the same letters in Fig. I.
Scale, four feet to half-an-inch.


Muffle furnaca. and Muffle. —Annexed is a drawing of a
convenient furnace of this kind for performing the operations
of cupellation and scarification. It is similar to that used at
the Mint in Paris. It is very portable, and consists of
three parts, which may be adjusted upon each other, as seen
in the drawing. The muffle, which is shown in situ, is a small
chamber of fire-clay, open at one end, and of the shape
represented. There are small apertures either at the end or
sides, so that a current of air may he drawn through. The
dimensions of the muffle are as follow : —Diameter, 5| inches;
width, 5\ ; height, 3|; thickness,
The French muffles are very thin, and consequently
enable the operator quickly to regulate the temperature by
opening or closing the aperture above the muffle through
which the fuel is introduced. The fuel should be charcoal.
The furnace itself is made of refractory clay, hound by pieces


163 METALLURGICAL TREATMENT AND ASSAYING
of hoop-iron. Messrs. Knight, of Foster Lane, have an exten-
sive collection of good portable furnaces ; and Mr. Newman,
of Regent Street, also manufactures a convenient furnace
of this kind.
Small portable blast furnace, which may frequently be
used with advantage.
Annexed is a sketch of a furnace of this kind, which was
devised by my friend, Mr. Ekman of Gottenburg, in Sweden,
for the assaying of iron ores. It is nothing more than a
small Sefstrom’s furnace. Fashion two pieces of stout sheet-
iron into the form of a common hat, and make one of these
a a Outer cylinder.
h h Inner cylinder,
c c Fire-clay lining.
d d Space between the two vessels.
e e Openings for the passage of air.
f Tube connected with the bellows.
g g Movable hoop of iron.
vessels smaller than the other; then invert the small one into
the large one, and fasten the rims together. There is thus
formed between the two vessels an air-tight chamber. Into
the outer one fix at the bottom a piece of tubing of sheet-iron,
which may be connected with a pair of double bellows, or a
common fan-blast, such as is commonly sold in the shops for
a few shillings. Make eight holes of |-inch diameter in
the central vessel, and at three inches from the top.
Line this vessel with fire-clay, half-inch thick, through which
make holes corresponding to those in the iron vessel. Thus,
by blowing into the tube at the bottom of the outer vessel,


the air is forced into the central chamber through eight holes.
By this means a very high temperature may be obtained,
sufficient, if need he, to melt manganese. Around the top
of the central chamber place a hoop of sheet-iron of two
inches wide, so as to form an additional space for fuel.
The ends of this hoop are left free, and may be brought
together and fastened in any convenient manner. When
not in use, the hoop may be placed round the outside
of the furnace for the sake of portability. Charcoal must
be employed as fuel, and should be broken in pieces about as
large as the end of the thumb. The dimensions of the fur-
nace are as follow ; —Height, 6 inches ; diameter, ; interior
cylinder, SJ; depth, SJ. Fire-clay, thickness | inch; holes,
3 inches from the top of interior cylinder; iron hoop, 3
inches wide.
Crucibles. —Black-lead crucibles consist of a mixture of
plumbago and refractory clay.
Fire-brick and clay crucibles may be made of a mixture of
burnt and unburnt clay, in the proportion of about one mea-
sure of the former to two or three of the latter. The use of
the unburnt clay is to diminish contraction, and so prevent
cracking.
The most convenient size of the Cornish crucible, of which
a sketch is annexed, is 3| inches deep (outside jaaiiisa*,
measure), and 3 inches diameter at the top. These _|li I
crucibles are invaluable, and bear sudden and great W
alternations of temperature without cracking.
Cupels. —Annexed is a drawing of the mould which has


previously been described, and of the tongs which may be
used in this process. Cupels may generally be considered as
Cupel.
cfcm ztlZZZZ
capable of absorbing their own weight of lead. Dimen-
sions of mould: —Interior diameter at top, 1 inch; interior
diameter at bottom, ; depth, 2 inches.
Scarifiers. —Convenient dimensions are as follow:—Dia-
meter at top, 2 inches; height, f; interior dia-
meter, l£; depth,
Ingot Mould. —Dimensions : Length, 5| inches; width, 2\ ;
depth, 1; diameter of cavities, If ; depth,
a
Parting-glass Flask.


List of Apparatus and Materials required.
Balances, one for weighing roughly comparatively large
quantities, and a delicate assay balance. Crucibles, various.
Ingot-mould. Tongs, for crucibles, scorifiers, and cupels.
Assay furnace and muffles. Scorifiers. Cupels. Copper
Scoop. Anvil. Hammer. Small pair of rolls. Small
cutting shears and scissors. Chisels for cutting off pieces
of metal. Forceps. Files, flat and three-cornered. Scratch
brushes. Parting-flasks. A few stoppered bottles and fun-
nels. Assay lead, free from silver, granulated and rolled thin.
Red lead. Carbonate of soda (dry). Borax (dry). Nitre.
Nitric acid, pure.
Messrs. Knight, of Foster Lane, have always on hand an
extensive and excellent assortment of assaying apparatus.




LECTURE YL
THE HISTORY AND STATISTICS OE GOLD.
ROBERT HUNT, Esq.
KEEPER OF THE MINING RECORDS.




EGBERT HUNT, Esq.
ON THE
HISTORY AND STATISTICS OF GOLD.
It may appear to many that a Lecture on the History
and Statistics of Gold must prove of but little value for
those who are about to try their fortunes in a new land,
who are looking eagerly forward to the realisation of
property, either directly, by searching for the precious
metals; or indirectly, by availing themselves of the new
circumstances which must of necessity arise. That these
may be points of interest they are, perhaps, ready to
admit, but they scarcely apprehend the utility of the
consideration.
When first a wish was expressed that, as Keeper of
the Mining Records in this establishment, I should under-
take a lecture on the history and statistics of gold, I felt
some difficulty; but a careful consideration of the subject
has led me to believe that I can be of a little service. I
shall be enabled, I hope, to show you, by the historical
evidences which we possess, that there is an order in the
respective discoveries of gold deposits which approaches to


something like a law of distribution; and the study of the
facts which history affords must lead to the inference that
it is improbable any very extensive commercial changes
will arise from the discovery of extraordinary quantities
of gold in Australia, California, or elsewhere. Moreover,
from a knowledge of what has been, we may infer, with
much probability, what will be; and I believe the history
of gold-finding will show that modern El Dorados, like
those of old, are not likely to yield unlimited supplies;
and thus an advantage will be gained in checking the
extreme hopes of the sanguine, and dividing the attention
of industrious emigrants between the sources of wealth,
always earned with difficulty in the gold-field, and those
yet more important sources of individual happiness and
national prosperity, which are to be found in the legitimate
occupations of the artisan, and the quiet pursuits of the
agriculturalist.
Many fears have been expressed lest the great influx
of gold into this country should produce a considerable
difference in its value. It will be evident to all, that if
gold, instead of being worth four pounds an ounce, as it is
at present, should, from some extraordinary supply, sud-
denly fall to three pounds an ounce, that every man
possessed, say of one hundred sovereigns, would find their
value sunk to 751.; and those who had incomes, say of
400/. per annum, would discover to their sorrow that they
could only realise 300/. worth of any other article which
the necessities of their existence might require in exchange
for gold. The question appears to have been very seriously
entertained by many able writers; amongst others, by the


author of the money articles in the “Times” of June 25.
Now, it is not my intention to enter into this question;
but I believe I have obtained some data to show that there
are opening out sources through which any quantity of
gold likely to be discovered may be diffused to the pro-
duction of much good, obviating the necessity for that
change in its value so much dreaded by some. Without
further prefatory remarks, I will at once enter on my
sketch of the history of that metal which now engages
attention.
A slight consideration of the circumstances under
which gold is found will sufficiently explain its very early
discovery by man. Gold differs remarkably from the
other metals, with a very few exceptions, in the fact, that it
is found in nature in its metallic state. Iron and copper,
tin, lead, and silver, are ordinarily discovered in chemical
combination with oxygen, sulphur, arsenic, or carbon; and
the few exceptional occurrences of these metals in an
uncombined, or, as it was formerly called, virgin state,
are to be cited rather as mineralogical curiosities than as
common productions. Gold is, however, always found
native or metallic, and even in those cases where we find
this precious metal disseminated through masses of oxide
of iron, and sometimes of sulphurets of iron and copper,
it is probably in a state of mechanical mixture, and not
in chemical combination. Therefore, as a metallic mass,
curious by its yellow colour, it would attract the eye of the
most uneducated man, whereas the other substances likely
to lie in his path would offer no features of attraction to
his scarcely awakened powers of observation.


Again, as you have learned from the previous lectures,
gold, from the circumstance of its having been formed in
those rocks which are most exposed to atmospheric action,
is found in the debris of the mountains. By the dis-
integrating influences, of the atmosphere, of changes of
temperature, of the action of water, and particularly by
the effects of ice, fragments of rock are continually broken
off. These are borne by floods into the valleys and
rolled into pebbles by the constant action of flowing water.
Amongst these, pebbles, or particles, of gold are discovered.
The summer heats, by drying up the waters, rendered those
beds which had formed river channels and the courses of
winter torrents, paths for the journeys of migratory man;
and here we can easily imagine the early discovery of gold.
It was, of course, in the first instance, used in its pure or
native state, in the same way as it is at the present day
employed by the inhabitants of Africa. Certain it is that
gold must take its place as the earliest metal known, and
in the first records of man’s progress it is indicated as a
standard of man’s position. The sacred historian speak-
ing probably of the Euphrates as the river Pison , says it
“ encompasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is
gold, and the gold of the land is good.” Of Abraham we
are told “ he was rich in cattle, and in silver and in gold.”
Again, in that exquisitely beautiful sacred poem, the book
of Job, written probably by a contemporary of Abraham,
we read those remarkable words, “ Surely,” says he, “ there
is a vein for the silver and a place for the gold where they
fine it.” From this we learn that metallic veins contain-
ing silver and gold had been discovered and worked. Job


subsequently informs us “ that the earth hath dust of
gold,” showing that he was familiar with the fact of the
distribution of gold in sands and soils. Up to this period
it does not appear, however, that gold was used as money,
as we find both it and silver passing from hand to hand
by weight. When, however, after his trial the wealth of
Job was restored in addition to the cattle and the money
which his visitors brought him, we have the very interest-
ing piece of information, that each of them brought also
an earring of gold, thus proving the use of this metal at
that time as a personal ornament. Specimens of similar
rings, usually called ring-money, have been found in the
bogs of Ireland, some of which are in the Museum of
Practical Geology; and the Africans, at the present day,
manufacture rings and armlets of a similar shape in gold.
Prom the sacred writings we also gather some facts of
importance as regards the use of manufactured gold.
It must have been beaten into thin plates at a very early
period, as we are told “the ark of shittim-wood was
covered with gold, both on the outside and the inside,” as
were also the “ staves,” the “ wooden table with its staves,”
the altar of burnt-incense, and the boards which formed
the sides of the tabernacle.
Herodotus informs us that the Egyptians were accus-
tomed to gild wood and metals; and we learn that Solomon
caused various parts of the Temple to be overlaid with
gold, and more particularly, the doors of the oracle, in
which were carved cherubim, palm-trees, and open flowers;
thus showing that gilding was applied by the Hebrews
to ornamental decoration, as we apply it in the present


day. Beckmann, in his “ History of Inventions,” says,
“ The Hebrews probably brought the art of gilding with
them from Egypt, where it seems to have been very old,
as gilding is found not only on mummies, the antiquity of
which indeed is uncertain, but, if I am not mistaken, in
the oldest temples on images. It appears, also, that in the
time of Moses the Hebrews understood both the art of
gilding and of overlaying with plates of gold.” The
researches of the chemist indicate a knowledge even
beyond this. On a mummy recently unrolled the name
was found written in an indelible ink; this ink was found,
by analysis, to contain silver, and, from the action on the
linen cloth, the inference is that it was dissolved in nitric
acid, that it was, in fact, identical with the permanent
marking-ink of the present time. This certainly indicates
an advanced state of chemical science; and if the Egyptians,
possessing nitric acid, also had the means of liberating
muriatic acid from their salts, either of soda or ammonia,
they would have the materials necessary for the solution
of the golden calf which Moses destroyed. This may,
however, have been a gilded figure merely, and destroyed
by grinding to powder, and nothing more.
In the history of gold we must not fail to remark
particularly the periods when it appeared to have been
accumulated in great abundance. The reign of Solomon
appears to be the first of which we obtain any authentic
account. That Hebrew king collected in a single year
six hundred threescore and six talents, or, perhaps, about
300,000/. in value of our present money; we learn also
that the ships of the king brought from Ophir 420 talents


of gold, or 190,800/. The language in the hook of Kings
is as follows, “ His throne was of ivory, overlaid with the
best gold, that all the drinking-vessels were of gold, that
all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were
of pure gold; none were of silver, for that metal was
nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon;” and, in
short, “ the king made silver to he as stones in Jerusalem.”
Ninus, the founder of Nineveh, is said by Diodorus to
have “ possessed himself of all the treasures of Bactriana,
among which was abundance of gold and silver;” and
the same author informs us that Semiramis, the founder
of Babylon, erected statues of beaten gold,—that of Jupi-
ter being forty feet in height and weighing a thousand
Babylonian talents, and those of Bhea and Juno equalling
it in size and magnificence. From the accounts given by
Diodorus it is inferred that Semiramis had collected as
much gold as would amount to 11,000,000/. of our own
money.
Darius, king of Persia, about 480 years before the
Christian era, drew tribute in gold from the several pro-
vinces into which his kingdom was divided, which
amounted, according to the calculation of Gibbon, to
3,350,000/. sterling. We learn from Herodotus the
curious fact, that “ the gold and silver were melted and
poured into earthen vessels, and these when filled were
removed, leaving the metal in a solid mass; when any was
wanting, a piece was broken off of the capacity which the
occasion required.”
The wealth of Croesus, king of Lydia, who lived 540


years before Christ, has become proverbial. The presents
which he made to the temple of Delphi amounted to 4000
talents of silver and 370 talents of gold, which is nearly
equal to 3,000,000/. sterling. The following story from
Herodotus is instructive, —it illustrates the wealth of the
king, and the manners of the time:—“When Croesus
sent his Lydians from Sardis to consult the oracle at
Delphi, they were received with hospitality by the family
of the Alcmseonidse at Athens, and, on their return,
acquainted their master with the kindness they had expe-
rienced. A member of that family received an invitation
to visit Croesus, and on his arrival was presented with as
much gold as he was able to carry. To improve the
value of the gift, Alcmseon made use of the following arti-
fice ;—Providing himself with a large tunic, in which were
many folds, and with the most capacious buskins he could
procure, he followed his guide to the royal treasury;
there, rolling himself among the golden ingots, he first
stuffed his buskins as full of gold as he possibly could; he
then filled all the folds of his robe, his hair, and even his
mouth, with gold dust. This done, with extreme difficulty
he staggered from the place; from his swelling mouth and
projections all around him, resembling anything rather
than a man. When Croesus saw him he burst into
laughter, and not only suffered him to carry away all he
had got, but added to it other presents equally valuable.
The family from this circumstance became exceedingly
affluent, and Alcmseon was enabled to procure and main-
tain those horses which gained him the victory in the


Olympic games.” From this story we learn the important
fact that the wealth of Croesus was principally in gold as
found in nature.
In the consideration of our subject, the story of
Pytheus is of much importance. He is said by Hero-
dotus to have entertained Xerxes and his whole army,
and when asked the amount of his wealth, to have replied
to that monarch, —
“ I conceal nothing from you, and will not affect igno-
rance, but fairly tell you the whole. As soon as I heard
of your approach to the Grecian sea, I was desirous of
giving you money for the war. On examining into the
state of my affairs I found I was possessed of 3000 talents
of silver, and 4,000,000, wanting only 7000, staters of
gold of Darius.” These metallic treasures have been
estimated at 3,600,000/. of our money. Pytheus kept the
whole of his subjects and slaves searching and mining for
gold, until at length, through the want of food, he was
induced to order that one-fifth instead of the whole should
in future be compelled to devote themselves to these
operations. This amelioration appears to have been due
mainly to the intercession of his wife, that lady regretting
that her husband's thirst for gold should lead to the
sacrifice of the lives of his subjects. It appears from this
that wealth was only amassed by petty despots, who did
not hesitate to condemn all the subjects of their states to
the slavery of mining.
Pericles, to animate the Athenians in their defence
against the Peloponnesians, stated the money in the
citadel to be 1,169,350/., and in addition, that the gold


in the statue of Minerva, which if appropriated by the
public must he replaced, amounted to 124,800/., and
that the revenues from tributary states amounted an-
nually to 116,250/. We thus form a tolerably correct
idea of the wealth of Athens at the time when the
illustrious Pericles presided over its destinies.
Numerous instances might be quoted to show the
wealth of individuals in Egypt and Greece; but it is
scarcely necessary to do this, since we cannot arrive
thereby at any very correct idea of the amount of gold
existing in these countries. In the time of Ptolemy Phi-
ladelphus, it is stated by Appian that the Egyptian trea-
sury contained no less a sum than 178,000,000/. This
was obtained by collecting with an armed force all the
silver and gold of the people; and this armed force was
not the regular army, but organised bands of robbers.
The Homans possessed immense wealth, as might be
expected from the character of the people and their im-
mense possessions. We learn that Augustus obtained by
the testamentary disposition of his friends 32,291,666/.
sterling; and Tiberius left at his death the enormous
sum of 21,796,875/. sterling, which Caligula is said to
have squandered in a single year.
Vespasian, at his accession, estimated the money
which the maintenance of the commonwealth required
at 322,916,000/.
Pliny commences a chapter on gold : “Oh ! that the
use of gold were clean gone. Would God it could possi-
bly be quite abolished among men, setting them, as it
doth, into such a cursed and excessive thirst after it —if


I may use the words of most renowned writers —a thing
that the best men have always reproached and railed at,
and the only means found out for the ruin and overthrow
of mankind. What a blessed world was that, and much
more happier than this wherin wee live, at what time, as
in all the dealings between men, there was no coin han-
dled, but their whole trafficke stood upon bartering and ex-
changing ware for ware, and one commodity for another;
according as the practice was in the time of the Trojan
war, as Homer (a writer of good credit) dooth testified’
When w T e read of the extreme extravagance of the
Roman emperors and consuls, we can well understand
the application of this. Caesar, before he set out for
Spain, is stated to have been 2,018,000/. in debt. He is
reported to have bribed Curio with 484,370/., and the
consul Paulus by 279,500/.
Anthony, on the Ides of March, when Caesar was
killed, owed 320,000/., which he paid before the Kalends
of April out of the public money; and squandered, ac-
cording to the statement in Adams’ “ Roman Antiqui-
ties,” more than 5,600,000/. The manufacture of gold
appears to have been carried to a great degree of refine-
ment among the Romans. From Pliny we learn that
gold was beaten to such a degree of thinness that one
ounce of gold was extended to 750 leaves, each four
inches in size. Lucretius compared the Roman gold-leaf
to a spider’s web; and Martial described it as little other
than a vapour. It is not uninteresting to learn from the
German monk, Theophilus, that the process of gold-
beating was similar to that now practised; the thin gold


being beaten between leaves of parchment, which was
covered with burnt ochre in very fine powder, to prevent
the gold from adhering to the skin. Pliny informs us
that gold-leaf was applied to marble with a varnish, and
to wood with a cement called leucophoron. This author
also describes with great accuracy the process of gilding,
by combining the gold with mercury, and volatilizing the
latter metal by heat.
Up to the time of Augustus the wealth of the world
appeared to flow into the lap of Rome, when the produc-
tion of gold from the Roman mines in Illyria and Spain
suddenly ceased; and for a long period the world re-
ceived no new accession of metallic wealth. Jacob has,
with much research, constructed a table showing us the
rate of diminution to which the enormous wealth of the
Augustan period was subject. It is a curious and in-
structive compilation :
Quantity of Gold and Silver in the
Roman Empire.
Ypov Yoot* £
14 ' ~ .. 358,000,000 446’ .. .. 96,692,332
50 .. .. 322,200,000 482 .. .. 87,033,099
86 .. .. 287,980,000 518 .. .. 78,229,700
122 .. .. 259,182,000 554 .. .. 70,406,730
158 .. .. 233,263,800 590 .. .. 63,364,057
194 .. .. 209,937,420 626 ~ .. 57,027,652
230 .. .. 181,943,678 662 .. .. 51,324,887
266 .. 163,749,311 698 .. .. 46,192,399
302 .. .. 147,374,380 734 .. .. 41,573,160
338 .. .. 132,636,942 770 .. .. 37,415,840
374 .. .. 119,373,248 806 .. .. 33,674,256
410 .. .. 107,435,924


To assist us in our inquiry as to sources from which
the ancients obtained their gold, the following remarks
from the “ Cosmos” of Humboldt will be found valuable,
relating as they do to the progress of navigation among
the Greeks:—
“ Whatever doubts may remain as to the particular
locality of the distant ‘ Gold Lands/ Ophir and Supara,—
whether these gold lands were on the west coast of the
Indian Peninsula, or on the east coast of Africa, —it is not
the less certain that this active Semitic race, early ac-
quainted with written characters, roving extensively over
the surface of the earth, and bringing its various inhabit-
ants into relation with each other, came into contact with
the productions of the most varied climates, ranging from
the Cassiterides to south of the Straits of Bab-el-Mandel,
and far within the region of the tropics. The Tyrian flag
waved at the same time in Britain and in the Indian
Ocean. The Phoenicians had formed trading settlements
in the most northern part of the Arabian Gulf; in the
harbours of Elath and Ezion Geher, as well as in the Persian
Gulf at Aradus and Tylos, where, according to Strabo,
there were temples similar in their style of architecture
to those of the Mediterranean. The caravan trade, which
the Phoenicians carried on in order to procure spices and
incense, was directed by Palmyra to Arabia Felix, and to
the Chaldean or Nabathaesi Gerrha, on the western or
Arabian shore of the Persian Gulf.
“The expeditions of Hiram and Solomon, conjoint
undertakings of the Tyrians and Israelites, sailed from
Ezion Geher through the Straits of Bab-el-Mandel to


Ophir. Solomon, who loved magnificence, caused a fleet
to he built in the Red Sea, and Hiram supplied him with
Phoenician mariners well acquainted with navigation, and
also Tyrian vessels, ‘ ships of Tarshish/ The articles of
merchandise which were brought back from Ophir were
gold, silver, sandal-wood, precious stones, ivory, apes, and
peacocks. The researches of Gesenius, Banfey, and Lassen,
have made it extremely probable that the western shores
of the Indian Peninsula were visited by the Phoenicians,
who, by their colonies in the Persian Gulf, and by their
intercourse with the Gerrhans, were early acquainted with
the periodically blowing monsoons. Columbus was even
persuaded that Ophir (the El Dorado of Solomon), and the
mountain Sopora, were a part of Eastern Asia —of the
Chersonesus-Aurea of Ptolemy. If it seem difficult to
view Western India as a country productive in gold, it will
be sufficient, without referring to the f gold-seeking ants/
or to Ctesias* unmistakable description of a foundry, in
which, however, according to his account, gold and iron
were welded together, to remember the vicinity of several
places notable in this respect. Such are the southern
part of Arabia, the island of Dioscorides (Diu Zokotora of
the moderns, a corruption of the Sanscrit Doissa Sukhatara),
cultivated by Indian settlers, and the auriferous east African
coast of Sofala. Arabia, and the island just mentioned to
the south-east of the Straits of Bab-el-Mandel, formed
for the combined Phoenician and Hebrew commerce in-
termediate and uniting links between the Indian Peninsula
and the east coast of Africa. Indians had settled on the
latter from the earliest times, as on a shore opposite to


their own, and the traders to Ophir might find in the
basin of the Erythrean and Indian seas other sources of
gold than India itself,”
Herodotus informs us that the people living near the
sources of the Indus obtained a large quantity of gold
from the eastern border of the great Bactriana, and the
desert steppes of Gobi. Much was obtained by washing
sands, and more by digging; and both Herodotus and
Pliny tell us a strange story of gold being turned up by
enormous ants “ not so large as a dog, but bigger than a
fox,” and that from these ant-hills the Indians obtained
the greatest quantity, which they supplied to the monarchs
of Persia. Humboldt has shown that this story arises
from the double meaning of a word. Herodotus, again,
tells us that “ in the north there is a prodigious quantity of
gold, but how it is produced I am not able to tell you
certainly. It is affirmed, indeed, that the Arimaspi, a
people who have but one eye, take the gold away by
violence from the griffins;” but, says the father of history,
“ I can never persuade myself that there are any men who,
having but one eye, enjoy in all other respects the nature
and qualities of other human beings.”
Pallas, in his Travels, describes the remains of these
mines; they were also visited by Lepechin and Gmelin,
on the south-eastern borders of the Ural Mountains.
They were the work of a nomadic people, in all proba-
bility the Scythians. The following descriptions of these
old gold works on the Uralian chain, chiefly from Gmelin’s
Travels, are of much interest, particularly as this gold-


producing region still continues to yield treasure to the
efforts of industry.
The extent of the works show that the workmen
must have been numerous, whilst an inspection of them
proves that only the first rudiments of the science of
mining could have been known to them. Besides some
implements the use of which is unknown, there were
wedges and hammers, all of copper, that had been smelted,
but without any particle of gold in them. Instead of
sledges, they seem to have used large stones of a long
shape, on which are to be seen marks which show that
handles had been fastened to them. They seem to have
scraped out the gold with the fangs of the boars, and
collected it in leather bags or pockets, some of which have
been found. With such imperfect implements, the work
of excavation must have required the labour of a great
number of hands for a long time, and in some cases must
have exhausted their patience. In one instance, after
having proceeded to some depth, and reached a bed of
hard stones, the work, after penetrating a little way, had
been abandoned. Some of the pits are twenty fathoms in
depth, shaped like a bell, and are about seven feet in
diameter. The passages and props are well executed, but
the former so narrow and low that it must have been
difficult to have worked in them. The natural pillars left
to support the roofs are in some instances still effectual
for that purpose, and in these are still found small portions
of copper ore, containing particles of gold; in other
instances the supports have given way, and in them are


found some human hones, probably of those who had
been buried in the ruins. That a great number of people
were employed, is inferred from the numerous fragments
of earthenware which are found scattered to a great
distance around. It appears that only the richest ores
were worked, and some of them must have been smelted in
the mines; for in the rubbish of one of the supports
which had fallen in there have been found melted copper,
and the implements for smelting it. Some of these
implements also have been found on the surface near the
pits. The operation of crushing as well as washing the
ores was performed in the rivulets, and, as is supposed, the
latter was omitted in the rich ores, which were found on
elevated spots. The smelting, whether in the mines or
on the surface, was performed in small furnaces, of which
Gmelin observed near a thousand in the eastern parts of
Siberia. They were made of red bricks, and in them
pieces of melted copper, from two to three pounds in
weight, have been found. The height and breadth of
these furnaces were about two feet and the length three
feet. There were holes on both the front and back sides,
but which of them was appropriated for the bellows could
not be discovered by any marks. In the neighbourhood of
these furnaces there are large heaps of scoriie; but no
one has had the curiosity to ascertain what metals, if any,
they contain. It may be presumed that a long period
must have elapsed since the works were in activity, for
the roots of large fir-trees have spread themselves among
the stones that are heaped against the sides of the fur-
naces.


It is evident much gold was produced from the mines
of Nubia and Ethiopia. These mines, like those of the
Uralian chain, produced a copper yielding gold, which
the Africans knew how to separate. Belzoni discovered
that a very extensive tract had been worked in the Sahara
mountains : from these sources the Pharaohs derived
their wealth, which was, however, obtained at much hu-
man suffering, and immense cost of human life. Jacob,
from a very close examination of the subject, is led to
infer that not less than 6,000,000/. sterling of the pre-
cious metal must have been produced annually from those
mines; and a large proportion of this appears to have
been gold. This may, therefore, be regarded as another
source from which gold has been obtained, and spread with
advancing civilisation over Europe and Asia. Commencing
the history of the ancient gold-seeking with a quotation
from Pliny, I will venture to extract another from Dio-
dorus with reference to these Ethiopian mines : “ Nature
teaches us that gold is obtained by labour and toil, is re-
tained with difficulty, creates everywhere the greatest
anxiety, and its use produces both pleasure and grief.”
There were rich silver mines in Attica; gold mines in
Thrace and in the island of Thasus. Thessaly produced
ores which were rich in gold; and Epirus rich silver
mines. From these sources the Athenians drew their
wealth.
The Homans obtained their wealth from various
sources —Upper Italy, the province of Aosta, the Noric
Alps, Illyria. From this district, at one period, gold
was abundantly obtained—partly in large grains on the


surface, and partly in mines, so pure that an eighth part
only was lost in the processes of smelting and refining.
Its great quantity caused a decrease of one-third in
the price through all Italy, and induced the proprietors
to employ fewer workmen in order to raise the value.
The Tarbelli, a people at the foot of the Pyrenees, also
streamed extensively for gold.
The discovery of gold in our country requires some
brief attention. The Romans were incited to the con-
quest of Britain by the reported wealth of its inhabitants
in gold and other metals; and Csesar, in his Commentaries,
says, that one reason of his invading the Britons was,
because they assisted the Gauls with their treasures.
Cimboline, prince of the Trinobantes, which included
Essex, is stated to have coined gold money instead of
rings; it having been the usual custom to coin such rings
as are found in the bogs of Ireland. Of this, Sir John
Pettus says in his u Podinse Regales/’ “ This was pro-
bably the mine afterwards discovered in the time of
Henry IV.” This is not correct. Instead of any such
mine being found, Henry IV., by his letters mandamus,
commands Walter Pitz Walter (upon information of a con-
cealed mine in Essex) to apprehend all such persons as he
in his judgment thinks fit, that do conceal the said mine,
and to bring them before the king and his council, there
to receive what shall be thought fit to be ordered.
The Welch Triads celebrate princes as being possessors
of golden cars; and in all probability this induced the
Romans to penetrate into the principality. That the
Romans worked the Gogofau or Ogafau mine for gold.


near Pampsant, Caermarthenshire, has been clearly proved
by the investigations of my colleague, Mr. Warington
Smyth. A Roman station is indicated by the remains
of pottery and ornaments found on the spot. Seve-
ral gold ornaments, and a very beautifully-wrought gold
necklace, probably manufactured in the locality, are in
the possession of the owners of the property. Mr. Smyth
finds in the characteristic features of the workings on the
quartz lodes at Ogofau, the same distinguishing features
of Roman industry as mark the Roman mines of Tran-
sylvania.
Small quantities of gold have been picked up in
Cornwall from the earliest times, particularly in the tin
stream works; and in the reigns of Edward I. and 111.
there were considerable works at Combmartin in Devon-
shire ; between 300 and 400 miners being sent for out of
Derbyshire, were employed in them; and the produce
was so considerable - as to assist the Black Prince in his
wars against Prance. In the reign of Henry 111. a cop-
per-mine, which was worked at Newlands, in Cumber-
land, is said to have contained veins of gold as well as
of silver. The Patent Rolls in the Tower record several
grants, made by the sovereign to individuals, of privilege
to search for gold and silver. In 1390 Richard 11.
granted to John Younge, refiner, all the gold and silver
found in any mine in England, paying to the crown a
ninth part, to the Church a tenth, and to the lord of the
soil a thirteenth part. It may be here mentioned, as in-
dicative of the spirit of occult philosophy which prevailed
in those times, that in 1444 a patent was granted to


John Cobbe, “ That, by the art of philosophy, he might
transform imperfect metals from their own proper nature,
and transmute them into gold or silver.”
Pennant says, “In the reigns of James IV. and Y. of
Scotland, vast wealth was procured in the Lead Hills, from
the gold washed from the mountains ; in the reign of the
latter, not less than to the value of 300,000/. sterling. In
another locality, the Scotch explorers, we are told, found a
piece of thirty ounces weight: there were works in several
places ; but these, if not exhausted, have long been
abandoned. About the year 1796, considerable excite-
ment was produced in Great Britain by the discovery of
some large specimens of virgin gold in alluvial soil in the
county of Wicklow, in Ireland, and metal to the value of
10,000/. was obtained; but the cost of the labour is said
to have exceeded that sum. One of the masses weighed
twenty-two ounces, and was supposed to have been the
largest specimen of native gold ever discovered in Europe;
which, however, would not have been correct, if we may
credit the accounts of the Scotch specimen mentioned
above.
The Hungarian gold mines do not appear to have been
worked before the eighth century, and the mines of Sweden
and Norway not until a still later date. During the middle
ages w T e find evidences of a continued production of gold,
particularly in the gifts to the monasteries, abbeys, and
churches ; but, the probability is, that from the period
when the Romans caused gold to be sought for diligently
in all parts of the world unto the discovery of the New
World by Columbus, the portion of gold added to


that already obtained was only sufficient to supply the
annual waste by wear, &c. Of silver the supply appears
to have been larger, hence we read of enormous votive
offerings in the shape of silver doors, candlesticks, altar-
rails, and images.
In 1493 Columbus discovered America; the first
natives he met in Hispaniola had ornaments of gold about
their persons. At first Columbus thought he had arrived
in Asia, and as this was considered in those days to be
the land of gold, the great navigator and his companions
formed the most exaggerated ideas of immense treasures
with which their toil was to be rewarded. Washington
Irving informs us in his “ History of Columbus,” that an
Indian gave a handful of gold-dust for one hawk’s bell.
The gold obtained from the Indians appears to have been
always small, and procured by washing, since Peter Martyr
records as a remarkable fact the discovery of a lump of
gold weighing nine ounces.
After twelve years’ occupation of Hispaniola, the Spanish
governor required each individual native above fourteen
years of age to pay every three months a Flemish hawk’s
bell of gold-dust, equal to about twenty shillings in silver
of the present day; and the Caciques were, many of them,
called on to send to the Spanish treasury as much as ten
pounds weight of gold in three months. Por those inter-
ested in the progress of the discovery of gold in the new
continent I must refer to Mr. Irving’s “ Columbus,” and
to the “ Voyages of the Companions of Columbus.” We
learn from Humboldt that from 1493 to 1500, America fur-
nished to Europe gold and silver of the value of 53,000/.


Orando, in 1503, despatched about 70,000/. worth;
but most of his ships were wrecked, and but little of this
reached Spain. To 1519 the annual produce of gold was
never greater than 53,000/. Cortez at this period con-
quered Mexico, and he obtained at Chaleo, as presents to
himself, 70,000/. sterling, in gold. Montezuma, when he
took the oath of fidelity to Spain, paid 65,000/. worth of
gold into the chest of the army. And Bernal Diaz says,
that on taking Tenochtitlan, 80,000/. fell into the hands
of the Spaniards.
Pizarro landed in Peru in 1537, and in the twenty-
five years which elapsed between this and the discovery of
the mineral wealth of Potosi, America forwarded to Spain,
according to the careful calculations of Humboldt, 630,000
pounds’ worth of gold per annum; thus the produce of
gold in the sixty-three years which followed the discovery
of America, amounted to 17,058,000/. sterling. The
mines of Potosi were discovered in 1545 by an Indian,
and in twenty-one years the produce of silver was
39,185,990 pesons; this was equivalent to an annual
produce of 380,000/. sterling. You perceive when we
examine with care the romantic statements of the enormous
wealth of the nations of America, that they sink into com-
paratively humble figures. Europe was agitated by the
discovery of Potosi in a similar manner to the agitation
produced by the discovery of gold in California; and in
many respects the Spanish nation then exhibited a similar
degree of excitement to that produced by the discovery of
gold in Australia among ourselves.
Prom careful calculations made by Jacob, from mate-


rials furnished by the Spanish writers and by Humboldt,
it would appear that the sum which formed the stock of
money current in Europe at the latter end of the sixteenth
century would be composed of the stock existing at the
time of the discovery of America, —
Equal to .. .. .. . • £34,000,000
That produced in the 112 years, after making
allowance for the loss by natural wear .. 138,000,000
£172,000,000
Deduct from this what had been conveyed to
Asia, and what had been applied to pur-
poses of commodities of all kinds .. 42,000,000
£130,000,000
the stock of gold and silver coin in Europe at the end of
the year 1599.
Of the discovery of gold in Brazil a few words must
suffice.
Dr. Walsh says gold was first known to exist in the
Brazils in 1543. The Indians made their fishing-hooks
of it, and from them it was discovered that it was found
in the beds of streams, brought down from the moun-
tains. But the first ore found by a white man in that
country was in the year 1693; this discovery led to the
colonization of the Minas Geraes, and to all those evils
resulting from the “ cursed lust of gold,” with details of
which the history of South America abounds.
Dr. Walsh mentions that, at a very early period, “two
parties meeting on the banks of the river, where San Jose
was afterwards built, instead of agreeing in their objects,
and pursuing together their operations, set upon each


other like famished tigers, impelled by a hunger still more
fierce—the auri sacra fames. A bloody encounter ensued,
in which many were killed on both sides, and the river
was from thenceforth called the Rio das Mortes, or the
River of Death.” “ The vicinity of this river,” proceeds
our authority, “everywhere attests the extensive search
for gold formerly pursued here, as it was for a length of
time considered one of the richest parts of Brazil, from
the profusion of the precious metal found on its surface.
All the banks of the stream are furrowed out in a most
extraordinary manner, so as to be altogether unaccount-
able to one unacquainted with the cause. The whole of
the vegetable mould was washed away, and nothing re-
mained but a red earth, cut into square channels, like
troughs, with a narrow ridge interposed between them.
Above was conducted a head-stream of water, let down
through these troughs, which were all on an inclined
plane. The lighter parts of the clay were washed away,
and the gold remained behind.” This is a mode of
operation which might be adopted on a large scale in the
auriferous fields of Australia, provided a combination of
interest could be brought about.
From 1600 to 1700 the entire supply of gold for
Europe was obtained from America, whose mines are
estimated in the one hundred years to have produced
337,500,000/, worth of the precious metals. Of this
33,000,000/. were sent to the Philippine Islands, India,
and China; and it is estimated that 60,000,000/. of gold
were employed in decorating churches, and for ornamental
purposes generally; and if 34,000,000/. is allowed as the


In ten years
from 1700 to 1709
£10,777,298
99
1710 to 1719
13,697,297
99
1720 to 1729
17,131,921
99
1730 to 1739
18,860,355
59
1740 to 1749
23,302,633
99
1750 to 1759
26,197,936
99
1760 to 1769
23,506,012
99
1770 to 1779
34,912,858
99
1780 to 1789
40,318,948
99
1790 to 1799
48,191,711
99
1800 to 1809
47,142,814
This is an exact return from the several
mints.
The gold and silver of Mexico which
did not pay duty and passed into other
channels, is said to he
£304,039,783
60,000,000
Equal to an annual product, during the
whole period of 110 years, of
£364,847,739
£3,316,706
loss by wear and other causes—a very low estimate—the
amount of coined money in 1699 in Europe will be
297,000,000/. sterling. During the eighteenth century
the supply of gold and silver was still mainly derived from
the Americas, — the great mine of Valenciana producing
125,000/. sterling per annum for forty years, and the
district of Zaccatecas adding largely to the amount,
although these were rapidly failing towards the end of the
century. The following table from Humboldt puts the
produce of this period in the clearest light;—
The contraband trade was very extensively carried on
during this period, and it is supposed that in addition to
the following quantities paying duty,—


Peru .. .. ..
£100,169,524
Columbia
57,341,668
Chili
19,532,166
Buenos Ayres
96,25O,0Gu
£273,293,356
There must be added an amount of con-
traband
£68,323,339
Vice-Royalty of New Spain
Value of Gold and
Silver in Dollars.
,. 23,000,000
Yice-Royalty of Peru
6,240,000
Captain-Generalship of Chili
.. 2,060,000
Yice-Royalty of Buenos Ayres
.. 4,850,000
Vice-Royalty of New Granada
., 2,990,000
Brazil
., 4,360,000
43,500,000
making more than 340,000,000/. to be added to the pro-
duce of Mexico. According to the most careful estimation
there was produced between 1700 and 1810, —
Spanish America .. .. .. £706,464,434
Portuguese America .. .. 80,000,000
£786,464,434
The gold dust of Africa, with the gold and silver of
Europe, may be estimated at the annual value of 900,000/.,
and the annual value of the precious metals from Spanish
and Portuguese America being 7,000,000/., the annual
increase of the wealth of Europe during the last century
was at the rate of 8,000,000/. This launches us upon our
own times, when science has been made available to
economise the products of nature. It is not easy at once
to estimate the produce of the precious metals since 1810.
Mr. M f Culloch, mainly relying on the authority of
Humboldt, estimates as follows for the annual value :


Mexican
Dollars.
17,500,000
Peruvian
. .
5,210,000
Bolivian
• •
3,000,000
Chilian
• • • •
2,500,000
Panama
. .
1,000,000
Brazil
1,500,000
30,710,000
Equal to 5,600,000h per year.
In 1828
Dollars.
46,000
1832
.. 678,000
1834
.. 898,000
1838
.. 435,000
1841
542,117
Taking the dollar at 45., this will give 8,700,000/. as
the total produce of the American mines. The gold coined
in the mints of the Mexican Republic in 1840 and 1841,
was
1840. 1841.
Dollars. Dollars.
Mexico .. .. ~ 71,207 97,628
Guanaxunto .. .. ~ 487,168 440,240
Duranto .. .. .. 248,082 155,140
Chihuahua . . .. .. 63,050
The American mines in 1840 were estimated as fol-
lows :
Carolina, Georgia, and other parts of the United States,
have produced considerable quantities of gold. The fol-
lowing reduction from an enlarged return will sufficiently
show the value of this supply :
The great increase of gold has, however, been from the
mines of Russia. The Russian pood is equivalent to about
forty pounds troy.


In 1830 the gold washings of Siberia produced
5
1836
105
1837
132
1841
358
1842
631
1847
• •
.. 1700 poods.
1848
« ,
1660
1849
• .
1530
1850
• .
1490
1851
••
1266
7546
Poods.
Mr. MUulloch, quoting from a Russian journal, informs
us, that in addition to the above quantity of 631 poods in
1843, the silver from the mines of Kolyvan yielded in the
course of the same year 30 poods of gold; while the
washings and mines in the Ural mountains yielded no
fewer than 310 poods: making a total of 971 poods, equal
to 43,571 lbs. troy, which, at 46/. 14s, 6d. per lb., is
equivalent to 1,989,138/. 11s.
Sir Roderick Murchison is disposed to consider the
production of gold at the present time in Russia to be
nearly equal to 3,000,000/. sterling per annum; and,
from the following returns, it will be seen how near the
truth is the estimation of this eminent geologist.
We learn from a communication from Russia, with
which we have been kindly favoured by Sir Roderick
Murchison, the quantity of gold and silver raised in
Russia since 1847.
Gold:—
Equal to about 296,9321b5. troy, in five years.
Silver, about 1300 poods per annum.


From Erman’s “ Archives” we find that in the year
1851—
The gold-washing of the Uralian Washing and
Amalgamation Works produced
332 poods.
67 „
The Nertsohinsk works
The remaining West and East Siberian
Washings
1107 „
Total washed gold obtained in Russia in 1851 1507 „
Produce of Altai Mountains and of Nerts-
chinsk Siberian works added .. .. 39 „
1546 poods.
Which is 300 poods more than Sir Roderick Murchison’s
account, producing 64,9331b5. troy of gold during last
year.
It is now well that we should examine the present rate
of increase of the precious metals in Europe. This lam
only enabled to do from the necessarily short time I
have had at my disposal for so large a subject by giving
the imports into this country, which are as follows, for the
years 1850, 1851, 1853, as furnished me from the books
of the Bank of England :
Gold
Imported
To June 30,
1852.
South America
Africa
Russia ..
Turkey ..
California
Australia
United States
£287,000
60,000
237.000
262.000
700,000
£185,000
28,000'
905.000
140.000
1.300.000
40,000
3.300.000
£33,000
15,000
00,000
150,000
1,100,000
2,600,000
2,000,000
Supposing
importation to
continue at
same rate to
end of year.
£2,000,000
5,200,000
4,000,000


We may also infer
very nearly the
the
actual produce of
the mines in Mexico by
Total Amount of Gold
and Silver coined in the
Mints at Mexico for
Twelve Months, 1849.
Chihuahua
Guadalajara
Guadalupe y Calvo
Guanajuato
Mexico
San Luis Potosi .
Zacatecas
Durango
Culiacan
SILVER.
$332,208
938,890
1,045,185
10,661,600
2,430,778
2,052,268
7,129,920
1,483,569
929,571
$27,003,989
TOTAL.
$382,208
960,542
1,045,185
11,523,080
2,556,698
2,052,268
7,129,920
1,508,626
1,246,876
$28,355,405
Gold, $1,351,416 at 4s, £270,243 4 0 These figures will be
Silver, 27,003,989 5,400,797 16 0 | truthfor iSSI!* 16
Spain.
The value of silver produced in Spain in the
year 1851 amounted to nearly
South America.
St. John del Eey
Imperial Brazilian
truth for 1851.
42300,000 0 0
Mariquita and New Granada Co.
42119,683 4 10
8,000 0 0
13,395 0 0
The produce of a single mine for a period of twenty-
five years will show the general character of a gold
since the prevailing conditions are exceedingly similar.


Statement of
Produce
Soco M
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths,
lbs. oz. dts, grs.
203 8 13 7
349 1 2 11
Ist 6 mths,
2d 6 mths.
661 6 7 14
1348 5 15 2
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths.
588 789
473 7 0 23
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths.
.. 2037 4 12 15
.. 2153 7 1 17
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths.
.. 1442 7 19 7
1597 10 4 13
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths.
.. 1503 1 9 10
.. 1528 9 3 19
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths.
.. 1830 4 18 22
.. 2371 9 15 20
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths.
.. 1123 10 14 12
.. 1864 6 15 14
Ist 6 mths.
2d 6 mths.
665 4 4 6
988 3 0 0
of Gold at Gongo
Mine
lbs. oz. dts. grs,
Ist 6 mths. .. 665 10 14 0
2d 6 mths, .. 408 6 0 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 662 7 4 0
2d 6 mths. .. 337 5 0 14
Ist 6 mths. .. 817 5 17 9
2d 6 mths. .. 580 310 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 570 9 8 7
2d 6 mths. .. 472 519 18
Ist 6 mths. .. 824 410 17
2d 6 mths. .. 564 6 7 21
Ist 6 mths. .. 748 6 9 6
2d 6 mths. .. 276 11 0 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 410 3 17 12
2d 6 mths. ~ 520 2 9 12
Ist 6 mths. .. 621 2 17 10
2d 6 mths. .. 369 8 11 8
Ist 6 mths. .. 307 8 14 8
2d 6 mths. .. 298 10 12 12


Produce of Gold
), &c.— continued.
lbs. oz. dts. grs.
lbs. oz. dts. grs.
Ist 6 mths. .. 411 8 19 12
2d 6 mths. .. 162 9 1 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 86 4 7 0
2d 6 mths. .. 86 8 1 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 95 7 0 0
2d 6 mths. .. 150 0 17 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 90 2 6 0
2d 6 mths. .. 67 4 15 0
Ist 6 mths, .. 178 10 15 0
2d 6 mths. .. 116 4 15 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 68 4 16 0
2d 6 mths. .. 72 7 1 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 68 0 17 0
2d 6 mths. .. 91 7 1 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 45 0 10 0
2d 6 mths. .. 61 1 1 0
Statement of
Produce
prom “ Ban anal.”
lbs. oz. dts. grs.
lbs. oz. dts. grs
2d 6 mths. .. 66 5 17 12
Ist 6 mths. .. 143 6 11 0
2d 6 mths. .. 94 10 16 0
1848.
Ist 6 mths. .. 3 1 13 0
2d 6 ruths. .. 175 4 0 0
Ist 6 mths. .. 49 9 17 0
2d 6 mths. .. 15 5 5 12
Ist 6 mths. .. 149 11 3 0
2d 6 mths. .. 93 0 8 0
Prom the information wi
kindly furnished by Messrs,
a which I have been most
Mocatta and Goldsmig, I
learn that the aggregate production of the precious metals
in Mexico and South America does not appear to have
increased at all within the last four or five years. The


amount of silver received into England in 1851 was about
5.000. value, and of gold about 11 or 12,000,000/.
in the whole. The United States are said to have coined
62.000. dollars in gold; and France about 200,000,000
francs in the same year.
It has been estimated by some that 23,000,000/. of
gold and silver will be added to our store of precious
metals this year. This appears to be one of the exagge-
rated statements arising out of the fever of the day : we
shall not receive more than 11,000,000/. from the
United States, California, and Australia; and if we receive
3,000,000/. more from all the other sources of supply, it
will be as much as we may expect. Many former sources
of supply are cut off, and the probability is that we shall
not receive nearly so large a quantity. Let us examine
briefly the rate of produce in the Australian mines :
The Sydney district produced, from
29th May, 1851, to 81st Oct. 1851, 67,152 oz. of gold, value £214,886 0
Or to Nov. 10, 1851, 79,340 „ „ 257,855 7
And to Dec. 31, 142,975 „ „ 464,668 15
In the Victoria district, to the end of December,
1851,
Ballarat produced 25,108 oz. value £75,-324
Mount Alexander 30,007 „ 96,021
In December, there was shipped from Victoria, 145,116 oz.
On the Bth January „ „ 76,188 oz.
Only about two-fifths of the gold realised is sent by the
Government escort; hence there is much difficulty in ar-
riving at the actual amount. But the imports to this
country may be safely relied on as representing the maxi-


mum produce of our colonial gold fields and the aurifer-
ous districts of America. The question has arisen. May
we expect the price of gold to be lessened from the influx
of this metal ? Annexed are some of the rates of value of
a pound troy of gold at different periods :
Value of the Troy Pound of Gold.
& s. d. Year. & s. d.
15 0 0 1549 .. 34 0 0
13 3 4 1005 .. 40 10 0
14 0 0 1626 .. 44 10 0
16 13 4 1718 .. 40 14 6
20 16 8 1817 .. 40 14 6
27 0 0
Which is the price at which fine gold still continues: the
gold of our standard being at 3/. 17s. 9 d.
The arguments relative to the currency and the alter-
ation in the standard of value go somewhat beyond my
subject. I give you facts, which may be relied on, and,
with these, I must leave others better acquainted with
commercial economy than myself to deal. Howbeit, let it
not be forgotten that the exportation of coin from Eng-
land is rapidly increasing, and the English sovereign is
becoming every year more extended as a medium of ex-
change. Formerly the Spanish dollar passed everywhere,
and now the English sovereign is taken as current coin
over three-fourths of the globe ; and its exportation keeps
pace with the importation of raw gold.
From November 1850 to June 1851, the Bank of
England issued 9,500,000 sovereigns, being at the rate of
18,000,000 a-year; and so great is the demand for our
gold coins that Sir John Herschel informs me since


November last there have been coined at the Mint 3,500,000
sovereigns and half-sovereigns, and the rate of produc-
tion can scarcely keep pace with the increasing demand.
This must have a material influence in maintaining that
stability which is desirable in our standard of value.
It may be interesting to know, that from a very correct
account kept at the Bank when the light coin was called
in in 1843, that 13,000,000/. were received light, and that
36,000,000/. still circulated of full weight; 40,000,000/.
may therefore be regarded as the quantity of gold coin in
circulation, allowing from three to four per cent for the
natural wear of the coin.
The following table gives, over an extended period,
The Coinage of Great Britain.
Reign of
Silver.
Total Money.
James I.
Charles I.
Charles 11.
James 11.
William &Mary
Anne
George I.
George 11.
George 111.
George IV.
William IV.
Victoria:
1837 to 1841
1842 to 1847
3,666,389
3,465,188
4,177,253
2,113,638
2,314,889
2,484,531
8,492,876
11,662,216
75,753,443
36,147,700
14,000,000
4,991,210
29,886,457
1,807,277
9,776,544
3,722,180
2,115,115
7,093,074
618,212
233,045
304,360
6,996,765
2,216,168
2,800,000
889,102
2,440,614
5,473,666
13,241,732
7,899,433
4,228,753*
9,434,963
3,102,743
8,725,921
11,966,576
82,750,206
38,363,868
5,880,312
32,327,071
Total Coinage of 32 years, ending 1847.
Gold. Silver. Cop]
Silver. Copper.
£90,029,383 £13,590,000 £248,210
This included J 1,596,799 of base money coined for Ireland,


As adding to our national wealth, the production of
silver must not he forgotten. This subject is equally
extensive as the subject of gold, and one, therefore, into
which I cannot enter further than to state that the British
Isles produce annually 674,458 ounces, value 168,614/. ;
the Spanish lead imported yields 166,700 ounces, worth
41,675/. ; and the silver ores and argentiferous copper ores
imported give not less than 150,000/. of this metal.
I intended entering into a consideration of the quan-
tity of gold which every year is employed in arts and
manufactures, and thus regularly removed from the stock
of our circulating wealth. Mr. M c Culloch, following
Jacob, estimates the present annual consumption of the
precious metals in the arts as follows: —
The United Kingdom .. .. £2,500,000
France .. .. .. .. 1,000,000
Switzerland .. .. .. 450,000
The rest of Europe .. .. 1,600,000
North America ~ .. .. 500,000
Making a total consumption of £6,050,000
From information with which I have been most
obligingly furnished, I learn that in Birmingham not less
than 1000 ounces of fine gold are used every week, and
that the weekly consumption of gold-leaf is as follows:
London .. .. 400 ounces.
Edinburgh .. .. 35
Birmingham .. .. 70
Manchester .. .. 40
Dublin .. .. 13
Liverpool .. .. 15
Leeds .. .. 6
Glasgow .. .. 6
584 weekly.


of which, an eminent gold refiner informs me not one-tenth
part can be recovered. For gilding metals by the electro-
type and the water-gilding processes, not less than 10,000
ounces of gold are required annually. One establishment
in the Potteries employs 3500/. worth of gold per annum,
and nearly 2000/. worth is used by another. The con-
sumption of gold in the Potteries of Staffordshire for gild-
ing porcelain and making crimson and rose colour varying
from 7000 to 10,000 ounces per annum.
The consumption of gold and silver in Paris has been
fairly estimated at 14,552,000 francs a-year. The wear
upon gold coin in circulation is about four per cent per
annum; and from this knowledge and the foregoing
details we may deduce the fact that nearly 2,000,000/.
a-year is necessary to maintain the metallic currency at
its present value; therefore a supply of between 8,000,000/.
and 9,000,000/. is necessary for the arts and manufac-
tures, and the purposes of coinage; and when we add to
this our constantly increasing exportation of coin, it
appears that the influx of Australian and Californian gold
will produce but little change in its value in Europe.
In the very rough sketch of the history of gold which
I have given you, I hope I may have sufficiently indicated
the fact that there is evidently a law of distribution and a
providential order in the sequence of discoveries. Man
started on his race of civilisation from the great plains to
south of the Caucasus. The Indus and the Euphrates
were the earliest spots from which he obtained gold.
Nubia and Ethiopia on the south, and Siberia on the
north, in the course of a short time handed up their auri-


ferous treasures to gratify human necessity and to indulge
human luxury.
Europe then began to unfold its golden stores, and
Illyria and the Pyrenees, together with* the lands of the
Hungarians, and many parts of Germany, to the Rhine,
were sought successfully for gold. Our islands yielded
something to the store; and then the new world of the
Americans opened by Columbus a source from which the
old world was to supply its golden waste. On and on
still westward rolled the golden ball—which, in many
respects, was not unlike the ball of the Oriental tale
until, at length, it rested in California. Europe and Asia
rush equally to that new El Dorado, and the man of China
is found at the side of the English gold-streamer. Then,
as if to double the girdle, the islands of the Pacific and
our own Australia open their exceeding stores.
My colleagues have taught you where and how you
are to discover and work for gold. My humble task has
been to give you some idea of the rate of production
during the time of history, and to endeavour to dispel the
idle dreams of golden mountains and of golden rivers.
Gold is in Australia; but it will not increase either your
health or your happiness. You possess within yourselves
mines of richer treasure than those of Mount Alexander—
take them with you as treasures which you will not barter
for gold—and may all happiness attend the possessors
of a Briton’s unwearying industry , the inheritors of an
Englishman’s contentment.
ERRATUM.
Page 162, line 5 from bottom, for f-inch, read i-mcb—Dr. Percy’s
Lecture.




Africa, annual value of gold-dust
from, 195
Agricola, description by, of appa-
ratus for the extraction of gold
and tin ore, 109
Agte, gold-washing apparatus by,
at Alexandrowsk, 114, 115
Alomar-on, artifice employed by him
to procure gold from Croesus, 176
Amalgamation, processes of, 117,
118
America, progress of the discovery
of gold in, 190-195 ; annual value
of the mines of, 195,196
Anossow, his process for smelting
the gold sand of the Ural Moun-
tains with iron, 134
Aqueous rocks. See Stratified Eocks
Arrowsmith, Mr., his map of the
places where gold has been dis-
covered in Australia, 34, 50
Assaying, of gold ores, 145; the
“wet” and the “dry” processes,
71, 86, 145 ; of quartz containing
gold, 145, 146; instances of mis-
takes committed by assayers, 146 ;
method hy fusion, 146-148 ; of
gold in auriferous pyrites, 148,
149; apparatus and materials re-
quired for, 164, 165
Auriferous rocks, action of water
upon, 10,11; remains of animals
discovered in, 48
Auriferous veins, why richest near
the surface, 14
Australia, lecture on the geology of,
3 ; its extent, 14, 15; its physical
features, 15-31; its mountains,
16; peculiar appearance of its
INDEX.
hills, 19; nature of the “bush”
in, 19-21; “ brushes” in, 20 ; its
“ plains,” 21; its coasts, 29 ; its
interior desert, 27, 29 ; its lakes,
80 ; peculiar features of its rivers,
30, 31; its fossiliferous strata,
46, 59
Australia, South, mountain-chain of,
celebrated for its copper and lead
veins, 26; geology of, 26, 27;
interior of, 27
Australia, Western, mountain-chain
of, 28; geological features of, ib.;
“ sand-plains” of, ib.
Australian fossils, collection of, in
the Museum of Practical Geology,
described by Count Strzelecki, 43,
44; collection of, by Sir Thomas
Mitchell, 44 ; hy Mr. Jukes, ib.;
list of principal works in which
descriptions of them are con-
tained, 66, 67
Australian mines, rate of present
produce of, 202
Australian rocks, classification of,
43-45; those now in formation, 46
Australian tertiaries, fossils of, 49-
51
Ballarat diggings, account of, by
Mr. Gibbon, 35; by Governor
Latrobe, 35, 36
Bananal mine, detailed statement
of produce of gold at, 201
Bank of England, annual issue of
sovereigns from, 203
Bathurst Plains, 25
Beckmann, on the history of the
art of gilding, 174


Bible, notices in the, of the em-
ployment of gold, 172, 173
“ Biscuit Plains,” why so called, 26
Blast-furnace, small portable, ac-
count of the, 162
Blue Mountains, 22; grand appear-
ance of the ravines of, 23 ; geo-
logical features of, 24
Bohemia, excitement produced by
the discovery of gold in, and its
unhappy results, 94, 95
Bone-breccias, remains of animals
to be found in, 47, 48
Booth, Captain, lost in the “ hush,”
Brazil, discovery of gold in, 192
Britain, gold and silver discovered
in ancient and more recent times,
187-189
Buckland, Dr., on the upper palaeo-
zoic shells and corals of Australia,
56
“ Bush” in Australia, description of
the, 19-21
Clarke, Rev. W. 8., on the hone-
caverns of Australia, 48 ; on the
coal-bearing strata, 54, 67; on
the rocks where gold is to he
found, 60
Clay, formation of, 9
Coal, geological features which indi-
cate its presence, 61; advice to
persons searching for, ib.
Coal-bearing strata of Australia,
extent of, 52; organic remains in,
52-55
Coinage of Great Britain in different
reigns, 204
Copper ore, its abundance in South
Australia, 82
Copper pyrites mistaken for gold,
81; experiments for distinguish-
ing it, 81, 82
“ Cradle” for gold-washing, de-
scription of the, 110, 111; defects
in, 111
Croesus, his vast wealth, 176
Crucibles for melting gold-dust, 127,
163
Cupels, 163
Cupellation, 138-140; the English
method of, 140-144; the Conti-
nental, 144; by the assayer, 151-
153
Dana, Mr., on the coal-hearing strata
of Australia, 54-67
Darius, amount of tribute in gold
levied by him, 175
Darwin, Mr., description of the ra-
vines of the Blue Mountains, 24;
on the geology of Australia, 66
Diamonds, the probability of their
being of vegetable origin, 62 ; are
found associated with gold in
Brazil, Russia, &0., 63 ; mistakes
committed in searching for them,
ib.; difference between them and
quartz-crystals, ib.; advice to
persons seeking for them, 63-69
Diggings, “wet” and “dry,” dif-
ference between, 13
Dykes, formation of, 7
Egyptians, knowledge possessed by
them of the art of gilding, 173 ;
amount of gold and silver pos-
sessed by them in the time of
Ptolemy Philadelphus, 178
Ekman’s, of Gottenburg, furnace,
description of, 162
Emigrants, words of advice to, 37,
64, 65, 88, 89, 118-120,207 ; how
they may best acquire a know-
ledge of geology, 42 ; urged to a
study of natural history, 64 ; im-
portant that they should possess
a knowledge of the chemical pro-
perties of gold, 71
England, amount of gold and silver
received into, in 1851, 202
“ Fine-washing,” description of the
process of, 116
Forbes, Professor, Lecture on our
Knowledge of Australian Rocks as
derived from their Organic Re-
mains, 41
Fossils, prevalence of various kinds
of, indicates different epochs of
rocks, 4, 44; classification of
those discovered in Australian
strata, 46


France, annual consumption of gold
and silver in, 20(1
Geelong, 25; geology of its neigh-
bourhood, 26
Geology, outlines of the science of,
3-10, 42—46
Gibbon, Mr., his account of the
Ballarat diggings, 35
Gilding, the art of, known to the
Egyptians and ancient Hebrews,
173, 174
Gmelin, M. on the mines of the
ancient Scythians, 183-185
Gold, found in quartz veins and in
streams, 8, 95,171; how detached
from rocks, 10 ; in what parts of
rivers to be searched for, 12;
of the Ural mountains, why of
recent geological origin, 14;
where, and by whom, first dis-
covered in Australia, 32 ; what
rocks to be found in, 48, 60 ; lec-
ture on the chemical properties
of, 71; substances resembling it,
ib.; its ductility, 72; heat re-
quired to melt it, ib.; its colour
in various stages, ib.; its density
or specific gravity, 10, 73; method
of obtaining its specific gravity,
74; formula for calculating from
the specific gravity of auriferous
quartz the amount of, contained
in it, 74, note; various means
by which it may be dissolved,
75; how to recognise its pre-
sence in solutions, 76, 77 ; has
a powerful affinity for mercury,
77, 98, 111; silver and platinum
often associated with it, 77-79;
yellow mica and iron and copper
pyrites frequently mistaken for
it, 79-82; tests or reagents for,
and their results, 82, 83 ; how to
detect it where its presence is
doubtful, 85, 86; the effect ex-
erted on the advance of civilisation
by its discovery at various times,
86, 87; advantages which have
arisen to chemistry from its pur-
suit, 87; the rapid succession of
discoveries of, at the present time,
93; discoveries of, in ancient
times, 94; effect of its discovery
in Bohemia, 94, 95, in Transyl-
vania, 119, in California, ib. ;
what proportion it bears to other
metals in its native state, 118 ;
process of the extraction of, from
lead, 138,142 ; process of parting
silver from standard and pure,
155; lecture on the history and
statistics of, 169 ; amount of, pos-
sessed by nations and individuals
at various times, 174-179 ; manu-
facture of, by the Homans, 179 ;
rates of value of a pound troy of,
at different periods, 203 ; increase
of exportation of, from England,
203 ; amount of, in circulation in
England, 204; amount used in
Birmingham, 205; in the Pot-
teries, 206 ; wear and tear of, ib.;
probability that the influx of Aus-.
tralian and Californian, will pro-
duce little change in its value, ib.
Gold-dust, process for melting the,
127, 128
Gold-leaf, weekly consumption of, in
London, Edinburgh, and in other
towns, 205, 206
Gold ores, lecture on the dressing,
or mechanical preparation of, 93 ;
apparatus for separating, from
magnetic iron, pyrites, &c. 115-
117 ; lecture on the metallurgical
treatment and assaying of, 123 ;
composition of, in various parts
. of the world, 124-126 ; necessity
of exercising caution in the sam-
pling of, 126, 127 ; caveat to spe-
culators in, 127; processes for
smelting of, 127-138; foreign
matters associated with, 129; pro-
cesses for assaying of, 148, 149
Gold-trough used in Hungary, 116
Gold-washing, why more profitable
than gold-mining, 13, 96 ; appa-
ratus required for, 99-115; pro-
cess adopted in Transylvania,
108, on the Ehine, ib., in Sibe-
ria, 113-115
Gongo Socomine, detailed statement
of produce of gold at, 200, 201


Gravel, formation of, 9
Great Eastern Chain, geological fea-
tures of the, 16, 23
Greece, gold and silver mines in,
186
Hargraves, Mr., the first officially to
discover gold in Australia, 32;
receives the reward promised by
government, ib.
Herodotus, on gilding wood and
metals by the Egyptians, 173 ;
his account of the Arimaspi, 183
Humboldt, M., on the progress of
navigation among the Greeks and
on the sources whence the an-
cients obtained their gold, 181,
182 ; on the amount of gold ob-
tained from America from 1700
to 1809, 194
Hunt, Robert, Esq., Lecture on the
History and Statistics of Gold,
169
Igneous rocks. See Unstratified
Rocks.
Ingot-moulds, 164
Iron pyrites frequently mistaken
for gold, 80; means by which it
may be distinguished from it, 80,
81; how employed in the smelt-
ing gold ore, 137
Itacolumite, a metamorphic rook in
which diamonds are reported to
occur, 64
Jackson, Port, why so called, 21;
nature of the coast surrounding
it, ib.
Jacob, Mr. on the quantity of gold
and silver at different times of
the Roman Empire, 180; on the
produce of the mines of Nubia
and Ethiopia, 186; on the amount
of money current in Europe at
the end of the sixteenth century,
192
Jukes, J. Beete,M.A., Lecture on the
Geology of Australia, 3 ; his col-
lection of Australian fossils, 44,
51; on the coal-bearing strata,
54; his geological map of Aus-
tralia, 59 ; his “ Account of the
Physical Structure of Australia/’
67
Ker, Dr, description of the hundred-
weight of gold found by him, 34,
35
Land in Australia, which best for
settlers, 61, 63
Latrobe, Governor, his description
of the Ballarat diggings, 35, 36
Lead, how employed in smelting of
gold ores, 131; process of extrac-
tion of gold from, 138-143
Lead Hills, Scotland, gold ob-
tained from, 189
Lead-slag, employed in the refining
of the dust of jewellers’ or silver-
smiths’ shops, 134
Leichardt, Dr., unsuccessful attempt
to cross the desert plain of South
Australia, 27; description by, of
country west of Gulf of Carpen-
taria, 29
Longmaid, Mr., his process for
smelting auriferous quartz, 135,
136
M‘Coy, Mr., on the coal-plants of
New Holland, 54
M‘Culloch, Mr., on the annual value
of the American mines, 195,196 ;
on the annual consumption of the
precious metals in the arts, 205
Melbourne, 25
Mesozoic rocks. See Secondary
Rocks
Metamorphic rocks, origin of, 6;
varieties of, 6, 59; why com-
monly primary rocks, 7; pre-
cious stones occur in, 59
Mexico, amount of gold obtained
by Cortez in, 191
Mica, yellow, frequently mistaken
for gold, 79, 80; instances of
such mistakes, ib.; has none of
the properties of gold, ib.
Mitchell, Sir Thomas, collection of
Australian fossils by, 44, 66
Mocatta and Goldsmig, Messrs., on
the production of gold and silver


in Mexico and South America,
201
Morris, Mr., on the coal-plants of
Australia, 53, 66
Muffle furnace and muffle, descrip-
tion of, 161
Murchison, Sir E., on the recent
geological origin of gold of the
Ural Mountains, 14; his allusion
to the possible existence of gold
in the Great Eastern Chain of
Australia the primary cause of
its discovery there, 32, 48 ; on
the annual value of the Eussian
gold-mines, 197
Ores, methods of preparing for the
metallurgist, 99; washing, 99-
101; trituration, 101-103; sepa-
ration, 103-105 (see Washing,
Trituration, Separation) ; aver-
age produce from stamped, in
Schemnitz, 118, Siglisberg, ib.,
Siberia, ib.
Owen, Professor, remarks by, on
the bones found in the drifts of
Australia, 47, 48
Palaeozoic rocks, to what the term
is applied, 5, 44; the shells and
corals to be found in the upper,
55-57; in the lower, 57, 59
Parliamentary reports concerning
the discovery of gold, 36, 60
“ Parting ” processes of, 153-156
Parting-glass flask, 154, 164
Percy, John, M.D., Lecture on the
Metallurgical Treatment and As-
saying of Gold Ores, 123
Pericles, on the amount of gold
possessed by the Athenians, 177,
178
Peru, amount of gold procured
from, 191
Phillip, Port, description of its
approach, 25 ; geological features
of, 25, 26
Platinum, its chemical and physical
properties, 78, 79; its specific
gravity, 78; the solvents of gold
equally act upon it, 79; from its
less glittering appearance than
gold may escape the notice of
observers, ib.; tests or reagents
for, and their results, 84, 85;
how to discover it in doubtful
cases, 85, 86
Playfair, Dr. Lyon, Lecture on the
Chemical Properties of Gold, and
on the Mode of distinguishing it
from other substances resembling
it, 71
Pliny, diatribe by, against gold,
178, 179; on the manufacture of
gold by the Eomans, 179
Potosi, discovery of the mines of,
191
Precious metals, rate of increase
in Europe in 1850-52, 198, in
Mexico, 199, in Spain, ib., in
South America, ib.; annual con-
sumption of, in the arts, 205,206
Primary rocks, structure of, 4
Pytheus, amount of his wealth, 177
Quartz, structure of, 7; when
called “ rock-crystal,” ib.; spe-
cific gravity of, 10; gold gene-
rally found in, 34; crystals of,
mistaken for diamonds, 63
Quicksilver or mercury, specific
gravity of, 73; its affinity for
gold, 77, 98, 111 ; how employed
in amalgamation processes, 117
Eeverberatory-furnace, description
of a, 137, 160
Eing-money, specimens of, in the
Museum of Practical Geology, 173
Eittinger, Mr., of Schemnitz, his
conical sorting-drum for gold-
washing, 101
Eivers, their effect on auriferous
rocks, 10-12, 33, 98, 101; may
be considered natural “ cradles,"
12 ; what parts of, to be examined
for gold, ib.
“ Eocks,” meaning attached by
geologists to the term, 4,9, note,
45; various kinds of, 4-6,44,45
Eomans, their wealth, 178, in the
time of Augustus, ib., of Ti-
berius, ib., of Vespasian, ib.;
extravagance of their emperors


and consuls, 179; sources whence
they obtained their gold and sil-
ver, 180, 186, 187
Eussia, annual value of the gold-
mines of, 197, 198
Eussian gold-washings, inclined
cylindrical sieve employed in,
100; the annular sieve, ih.
Sand, formation of, 9
Scorification, process of, for assay-
ing ores of the precious metals,
149-151
Scorifiers, 164
Scythians, mines of, account of by
Herodotus and Pliny, 183; de-
scription of remains of, by Gme-
liu, 183-185
Secondary, or mesozoic, rocks, struc-
ture of, 4, 44 ; the existence of
in Australia doubtful, 45
Sefstrbm’s furnace, description of,
162
Selwyn, Mr. A. E. C., appointed geo-
logist to the survey of the pro-
vince of Victoria, 36, note
Semiramis and Ninus, amount of
gold possessed by them, 175
Separation of ores, contrivances for,
103-105 ; the jigging - machine,
104; the dolly-tub, or keeve, ib.;
plan employed in Hungary for
the, ib.; by the “ buddies ” and
“ tyes,” 105 ; by the gold-washer’s
bowl, or vanning-dish, 106; by
the “ cradle,” 110, 111
Siberia, machines used for gold-
washing in, 111-115
Silurian, or lower palaeozoic rocks,
organic remains in, 57-59
Silver generally found in rocks as-
sociated with gold, 8, 77,118,140,
151; specific gravity of, 73, 78 ;
its chemical and physical proper-
ties, 77, 78; by what acids dis-
solved, 78 ; tests or reagents for,
and their results, 83, 84 ; how to
detect it where its presence is
doubtful, 85, 86 ; what proportion
it bears to gold in variotis auri-
ferous districts, 118; mass of, pre-
pared for the Exhibition, by Mr.
Pattinson, 144; “ parting ’’ from
gold, 153 ; annual production of,
205
“ Slag,” produced from a combina-
tion of quartz and carbonate of
soda, in smelting gold ore, 130
“ Slocking-stones ” of the Cornish
miner, 127
Smelting gold ore, experience re-
quired in, 132, 133; Anossow’s
process, 134; Longmaid’s, / 135,
136
Smith, Mr., the first to discover gold
in Australia, 82; his proposal to
the Colonial Government not ac-
ceded to, ib.
Smyth, Warington, W. M.A., Lec-
ture on the Dressing, or Mecha-
nical Preparation of Gold Ores, 93
Solomon, amount of gold possessed
by him, 174, 175
Sovereign, English, a medium of
exchange over the greater por-
tion of the globe, 203
Sowerby, Mr. G. 8., description by,
of Australian fossils, 66
Stratified or aqueous rocks, nature
of, 4; their geological sequence,
4, 5 ; are fossiliferous, 5
“ Streaming” in Cornwall and De-
von, 95
Stream-tin, apparatus for the ex-
traction of, 107, 108
Strzelecki, Count, his description of
Van Dieman’s Land, 17 ; lost in
the “ bush,” 19; his sections of
the Blue Mountains, 24; his de-
scription of Australian fossils, 43,
44; his map of New South Wales
and Van Dieman’s Land, 59, 60,
66
Sturt, Captain, description by, of
the desert interior of Australia, 2;
on the shells found in South Aus-
tralia, 50
Stutchbury, Mr., the Government
geologist, his reports on the dis-
covery of gold, 33, 00
Superficial drifts, 46-48; bones of
animals found in, 47
Summer Hill Creek and Lewis


Ponds Eiver, the first spots in
Australia where gold was dis-
covered, 25, 32
Sydney, its harbour, 22 ; city of, ib.;
the surrounding country, ih.
Sydney sandstone undistinguished
by organic remains, 52; strata
of, ib.
Tennant, Mr., on the treatment of
diamonds, 63, 64
Tertiary rocks, structure of, 4, 44
“ Test,” description of the, 141, 142
Theophilus, on the process of gold-
beating among the Romans, 179,
180
Trituration of ores, 101-103 ; by the
“ bucker,” 101; by the crusher,
or grinder, 101, 102; by the
“ stamps,” 102; by the edge-
rolls, the Mexican “ arrastras,”
and in mortars, 103
“ Tye,” description of a, 107
Unstratified or igneous rocks, na-
ture of, 5 ; their internal struc-
ture, 5,6; varieties of, 6; no
fossils found in, 59
London: —Printed by G. Baeclay, Castle St. Leicester Sq.
Uralian washing and amalgamation
works, produce of in 1851,198
Yan Dieman’s Land, geological fea-
tures of, 17; extinct land-shells
found in, 48 ; silicified trees of,
49; fossil plants of, ih.
Yanning-dish, orgold-washer’s howl,
description of the, 106
“ Yeins,” formation of, 7; minerals
and metals found in, 8
Wales, gold-mine in, worked by
the Romans, 188
Walsh, Dr., on the discovery of gold
in Brazil, 192
Washing of ores, processes for, 99-
101 ; by a succession of sieves,
100 ; the inclined cylindrical
sieve, ib. ; the annular sieve,
ib.; the conical sorting drum,
101; considerations in the choice
of apparatus for, 115
“ Wet ” way and the “ dry,” for
testing precious metals, 71, 86
Wicklow, Ireland, discovery of gold
in, 189


Complete in Two Volumes, price 7s. 6d. each, cloth,
LECTURES
ON THE
Scientific Results of the Great Exhibition,
AS APPLIED TO THE ARTS AND MANUFACTURES,
DELIVERED BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF ARTS.
CONTENTS
1. Rev. Dr. Whewell,
13. John Wilson, F.R.S.E.
Agricultural Products and Imple-
ments.
The General Bearing of the Exhi-
bition on Science, &c.
2. Sir H. De la Beche.
14. James Macadam, jun. Esq.
The Flax Plant and its Manu-
facture.
15. Professor James Tennant.
Mining, Quarrying, and Metal-
lurgy Processes.
3. Professor Owen.
Animal Products used in Manu-
factures.
Gems and Precious Stones.
16. Thomas Bazley, Esq.
Cotton as an Element of Industry.
4. Jacob Bell, Esq. M.P.
Chemical Processes and Products.
17. S. H. Blackwell, Esq. F.G.S.
The Iron-making Resources of
Britain.
5. Dr. Lyon Playfair, C.B.
On the Necessity of an Industrial
Education.
18. Professor George Shaw.
The Glass Manufacture,
6. Professor Bindley.
Substances used as Food.
19. M. Digby Wyatt, Esq.
Principles of Form in the Deco-
rative Arts.
7. Professor Solly.
Vegetable Substances used in the
Arts, &c.
20. Owen Jones, Esq.
Principles of Colour in the Deco-
rative Arts.
8. Professor Willis.
Machines and Tools for working
in Metal, &c.
21. Henry Forbes, Esq.
The Worsted, Alpaca, and Mohair
Manufactures of England.
9. James Glaisher, Esq.
Philosophical Instruments and
Processes.
22. Professor D. T. Ansted.
Non - metallic Mineral Manufac-
10. Henry Hensman, Esq.
Civil Engineering and Machinery.
tures,
23, L. Arnoux, Esq.
Ceramic Manufacture; China, Por-
celain, Earthenware, &c.
11. Professor Royle.
The Manufactures of India.
12. Captain Washington, R.N.
Shipping, particularly Life Boats.
24. H. Cole, Esq.
International Results of the Ex-
hibition of 185
§i| j
D. Bogue, Fleet Street; aaud all other Booksellers.
