

PROTECTION.
POLITICAL ECONOMY
PROPER FOR
NEW SOUTH WALES.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
i *iA




£kJF
t*
LECTURE ON PROTECTION.
POLITICAL ECONOMY PROPER FOR NEW
SOUTH WALES.
On Tuesday evening, the 3rd instant, a lecture upon
what the lecturer described as “Political Economy
proper for New South Wales,” was delivered in the Hail
of the School of Arts, by Mr. W. B. Allen. The manu-
script having been handed to us, we publish it below,
and we certainly must give the lecturer credit for con-
siderable care and industry in the compilation of his
discourse. Mr. Allen spoke as follows:— Empire,
November 11.
I do not intend entering on the subject of political
economy to any greater extent, than to call attention to
some matters, that deeply concern us at present in New
South W ales. The science of political economy, bears a
near relationship to that of domestic economy. I don't
know whether some may not be a little doubtful of the
propriety of dignifying domestic economy with the
title of science ; yet the proper regulation of the family
of its income and expenditure, is just of as much im-
portance to its members, as on a larger
scale political economy is to a nation. A
family that cannot in some way provide an income
sufficient for its desires, but which, in order to keep up
a show, by dress and extensive living, gets into debt,
must sooner or later go to the wall; so must a nation;
that which is proper for one family is proper for nil
others under similar circumstances, and what is proper
for all must be proper for a nation, so that after all the
volumes that have been written on political economy,
from the days in which Adam Smith wrote his “ Wealth
of Nations,” down to the present time, the best system
and the most easily understood, is that, the principles of
which are daily illustrated around the domestic hearth
of a properly regulated family. There cannot be any
definite rule laid down, which will in detail meet the
condition of all families, neither can there be any which
will be universally applicable to the wants of all
nations, so long as the conditions of the nations them-


selves are so varied ; yet there are certain principles,
which are universally applicable to the domestic economy
of all families, as well as to the political economy of all
nations; but in their application, circumstances and ulti-
mate results to be obtained, must form the
only standard by which to judge the pro-
per manner of working them out in detail.
Ido not think any one will deny that it is the duty, as
well as the interest, of all families and all nations to
provide themselves with the greatest amount of the
necessaries and comforts of life with the least amount of
labour and toil, with the view of making themselves as
independent as possible of other families or nations.
This is or should be the proper desire of ail, and to
attain this by the easiest and shortest mode is the object
of all economy, whether domestic or political.
There is another principle which at first sight is often
regarded of general application, yet it is not so—that is,
the distribution of wealth as generally as may be
amongst the different members of society, so that each
may have that portion to which his industry or abonr
entitles him, having regard always to the ultimate
stability and independence of the whole. This, how-
ever, contemjdates conditions of political equality
very different from those which exist in
the nations of the present day. Laws
based on this principle would be incompatible
with the present circumstances of Russia, because they
would in a very short ime emancipate the serfs, by
placing them on an equality with their masters; the
policy of that empire is not to raise the low, but to keep
them down; Russia believes that to elevate the high
and to sink the low is the surest guarantee for the sta-
bility of the empire, she must therefore have a political
economy that w ill favour that view, her condition will
permit no other. The United States of America, on the
other hand, would he as surely ruined by adopting any
oti er political economy than that which distributes
wealth generally amongst all grades and classes of
the American citizens, and with it intelligence and
newer, as Russia would be if she adopted similar mea-
sures. Russia looks to keep the great masses of her
people ignorant and poor, so that her nobles may the
more easily rule them, whilst the nobles themselves are
ruled by the emperor; America looks to make every
citizen an educated and independent man, teaches him
his duty to himself and the state, and by giving him a
stake in the country he feels that anything it jurious to
America must be injurious to himself as an American.
America must therefore have a code of political ec nomy
worked out in detail, that will favour these views.
Although the same general principles may in some eases
he applicable to both countries, yet the manner of


working them must be as different as the < ir-
cumstances of the countries, and the ends to be
accomplished, therefore, 1 look upon it as extremely
doubtful, whether any system of political economy can
be laid down that will in detail meet the circumstances
of all. as long as the nations themselves are so dissimilar.
Is it then to bo wondered at that a young empire like
the Australias, should adopt some code also thought
best suited to its future rise and ultimate stability?
The economy of all nations, whether in a written code
or merely traditional, must be varied according to cir-
cumstances, capacity, and ultimate aim or object. That
which has latterly classified itself under' the heads of
Free Trade and Protection, aims at two different and
distinct results, the former applicable to the condition
of a people merely buying and selling, and only pro-
ducing those raw pr ducts of the soil for which it may
have a greater capacit} than most other nations, the
latter applicable in addition to this, for establishing and
carrying on the manufacture of such articles as may be
congenial to its climate and condition, and for which it
may be able to procure the raw material and labour.
If New South Walt s is to remain a pastoral country
only, exchanging her wool, tallow, hides, &c., for bread,
clothes, and such luxuries as their profits may furnish
her the means of procuring; or, if her destiny is to be, in
addition to this, a large store or depot for the sale of
the productions of all the world, without producing any
other things herself, free trade is her natural policy ; it
is best ealculated to place and hold her in that position.
If, on the contrary, her destiny is to be the centre of a
group of united colonies, all producing and manufac-
turing up to their own wants and for export, she must
adopt a modified protective policy, and follow in the
wake of all successful countries. I know and feel that
the sympathies of our people are in favour of the free
trade policy. This may be accounted for in having been
reared during the struggle for the repeal of the Corn
Laws, up to 1846 and 1849. These sympathies have
been confirmed into prejudices, when reflecting on the
sudden prosperity that followed the adoption of what
has been called free trade in England. This prosperity,
Powever, is not all to be set down to the credit of that
part of the free trade measure which lowered the pro-
tection on the manufactured article. Free trade in
England was only another name for cheap bread ; and
for a few years after the final abolition of the Corn
Laws, the people had cheap bread, yet not so much
cheaper as has generally been supposed. From 1841 to
1847. the average price of wheat was 7s. 1 Jd. per bushe l
of oats 2s. 9£d., of barley 4s. l^d.; From 1849 to 1855
both inclusive, the average price of wheat was 6s. 6d.
per bushel, of oats 2s. 7|d., of barley 3s. Bjd., be ng
a 2


average lowering in the latter 7 years compared with the
former, of 7Jd. in wheat, l£d. in oats, and sd. per bushel
in barley. Now this could not have had any very great
eff ct on the bulk of the people of Britain ,either for great
good or evil; certainly, whatever was in it, was in favonr
of free trade and the people. But there was something
else in the free trade policy that the people did not see,
and for which they did not clamour, which exerted a
much more powerful influence on their circumstances
tnan the repeal of the corn laws. That was the aboli-
tion of all duty on the raw material of manufactures,
while the manufacturers themselves still enjoyed protec-
tion to an extent sufficient to prevent foreign importa-
tions. These new regulations placed the whole amount
of duty formerly collected off the importation of raw
material in the pockets of the manufacturers, which,
enabled them at the same time to lower their prices and
to work into stock, and thu-; give constant employment.
When the free trade policy had been properly inaugu-
rated, the Anti-Corn Law League offered a prize of .4*250
for the best essay on free trade. This prize war awarded
to the Eev. Henry Dunekley, M.A., Salford, minister
of the Baptist congregation, Great George-street.
This essay was published in 1854, and may be
regarded as explanatory of the views and
principles of the free traders of England, It is
known as the “ charter of the nations.” I will have
occasion to quote from it to bear out the views of the
protectionists of Sydney. At page 52, speaking of the
report of the committee of the House of Commons, 1840,
on import duties, Mr. Dunekley says:—“ It was proved
before the committee that 94J per cent, of the custom-
house revenue was raised on seventeen articles only,
while more than eleven hundred articles were subjected
to imposts for the sake of raising the remaining 5£ per
cent. But this was not the only startling fact that came
to light. Of 4-22,000,000, the average amount of our
custom-house revenue in recent years, it appeared that
4*20,000,000 was raised on raw material and food. Thus
our legislation had been a two-edged sword in the vitals
of industry, on the one hand forbidding the free use of
the articles required in our manufactures, and on the
other enhancing the cost of labour by raising the price
of subsistence.” Thus 420,000,000 was directly distri-
buted amongst the manufacturing interest annually, of
which both masters and me' bad their fair share. Of
the remaining 4*2,000,000, or 6J per cent, raised by the
custom-house off manufactured article, the author does
not speak. It is to be inferred from his silence, there-
fore, that he did not believe that any benefit could
accrue to the country or the manufacturing interest
by an abandonment of these duties. However, they
were not at all abandoned, neither at that time nor


since. England retained protection to those manufac-
tures in which she dreaded competition, and per-
mitted the free importation of others in which she
excelled. The great idea in the free trade policy of
England was to stifle manufacturing abroad. Even in
her own colonies England never could bear the idea of
anything like rivalry. Lord Chatham said in Parlia-
ment, “He would not have the Americans make a
hobnail;” another noble lord, “Nor a razor to shave
their beards.” Mr. Brougham said in the House of
Commons in 1816, “It was well worth while (by
excessive exports to America) to stifle in the cradle
those rising manufactories in the United States which
the war had forced into existence.” Mr. Robertson,
another member, speaking of British policy, confessed
that it “ was nothing more nor less than for us to get
a monopoly of all markets for our manufactures, and to
prevent other nations, one and all, from engaging in
them.” The London Spectator, in 1843, says, “ More
general considerations tend to show that trade between
the two countries (United States) most beneficial to
both, must be what is ca led a colonial trade—the new
settled country importing the manufactures of the old,
in exchange for its own raw produce, and the “ Charter
of the Nations,” in 1854, says as follows;—“ The long
continuance of hostilities had depressed every foreign
manufacturing interest which might have entered into
successful competition with our own, and constituted the
British isles the workshop of the world. In order to
maintain this proud position, it was above ail things
requisite that we should enterinto friendly relations, and
equitable intercourse with other nations, and fully admit
in exchange for our own produce whatever they had to
offer. Such a policy would no doubt have been attended
with the happiest results. It would have confined the
capital of our neighbours to the production of raw
material, or to those kinds of handicraft in which peculiar
advantages permitted them to excel ; it would have
prevented the rise of that commercial jealousy which has
thwarted our best laid plans, and exposed our trade to
such extreme dangers.” . . . Here follows the
climax of all the evils accumulated to Great Britain by
her imposts on raw material. Not, however, let it be
remarked, of those laid for the protection of manufac-
tures. Mr. Dunckley proceeds For fifteen years we
had been besought to adopt a more liberal course;
Russia, Holland, Germany, and the United States had
been anxious to obtain such a relaxation of our tariff as
would have enabled them to exchange their raw pro-
ducts for our manufactures, but failed in their efforts;
they had begun to manfacture for themselves. In
Saxony, Bavaria, Wurtemberg, the Rhenish provinces of
Prussia, as well as Russia and Switzerland, factories had


been erected, filled with British machinery, and often
placed under the oversight of an experienced workman
from this country, end every exertion made under the
shelter of protective imposts to drive us from the
markets of the continent. Our skilled artisans were to
be found in the United States, in Brazil, in the neigh-
bourhood of Constantinople, and at St, Petersburg,
everywhere teaching the foreigner to render himself in-
dependent of selfish Britain.” I hardly think stronger
arguments could be used in favour of protection to the
home industry of New South Wales, than are to be
found in ihe above quotations. From whatsoever cause
these continental states desired to become the seat of
manufacturing industry is immaterial to us. They found
that they must adopt pr dection to their manufactures
at home, that by doing so they became possessed of
British machinery and experienced workmen, teaching
their own population how to become independent of
Britain. In all these states labour is known to be but
very poorly rewarded, and if they found protection
necessary in these circumstances, with the English tariff
in their favour, how much more so must it be under ours,
in which labour could not even exist on that wage
which in them would be regarded as a comfortable inde-
pendence. There is generally a vast difference in the
circumstances of young and old countries, old countries
that by protection have established manufactories, an
trained themselves to that species of industry necessary
to carry them on, may find it advantageous to adopt
a particular line of conduct regarding them
which, if followed by a young country, would
debar her for ever from having them at all.
The discovery of gold in California in 1848, exerted a
powerful influence on the prosperity of the manufac-
turing industry of England at this time, then our gold
discovery in 1851 created another new demand for
manufactures, all these happening coincident with the
adoption of what is called free trade measures, ushered
in the new policy under a favourable prestige, to which
(at least that portion of free trade which 1 wered the
duties of protection on the manufactured article) had
not the slightest cla m. The free trade of England is a
very different thing from the free trade of Sydney, every
thing is admitted free here with the exception of a few
articles, on which taxes are laid for the sake of revenue,
with a due regard, however, not to give the slightest
encouragement to colonial industry. Tobacco is ad-
mitted at a uniform duty, either in leaf or manufactured.
In England tobacco in leaf is admitted at a duty of 3s.
per lb., if manufactured it pays 95., this is a duty of 6s.
for protection. Linen, duty free. If cambric handker-
chiefs are only hemstitched 2s. 6d, is charged, leather
free, while shoes pay from 7s. to 14s. per dozen pair.
6


Silk, at 15 per cent. ; a silk dress made up pays -30 s.
Hat, 75.; cap or turban, 3s. 6d. Hops grown in ng-
land are subject to an excise duty of 2d. per lb., while
imported hops pay sd. These are all duties for protec-
tion, and strictly speaking, protective duties. The cot-
ton manufacture never was protected, but then no
machinery was permitted to leave England until lately.
This then is the nature of the free trade of England.
Now with regard to America. After the war
of Independence, but previous to the formation
of the United States, each state found it impossible on
the footing of free-trade to establish any description of
manufacturing industry. They found that, although
they had fought for liberty, and won the battle, they were
independent only in name; foreign importations swamped
their own manufactures. They could not compete in
this state of affairs their cash capital was fast finding its
way out of the country, that instead of getting richer
they were becoming poorer; they formed non-importing
associations, associations for consuming American
manufactures only. The separate states formed tariffs
of their own, these clashing with each other failed to
effect their object. They then hit on the idea of form-
ing a grand uuiou of all the Slates for the purpose of
making such general laws, in matters in which the whole
were interested, as would be for the general benefit of
all. For this purpose each state merged its sovereignty
into one general union of sovereign power for the
guidance of the whole, while each retained the power of
making laws for its internal government in such matte s
as only effected itself. This union was known at that
time, and has been so ever since as the United “ States
of America.” One of the leading duties of this union
was to make laws for the regulation ot
trade and commerce, indeed this was
the first principle of their bond of union.
Speaking of this regulation of trade, Daniel Webster
says, at Albany, August 27th, 1844, “ The term was well
understood in our colonial history, and if we go back to
the history of the constitution, and of the convention
which adopted it, we shall find that everywhere when
masses of men were assembled and the wants of the
people were brought forth into prominence, the idea was
held up that domestic industry could not prosper,
manufactures and the mechanic arts could not advance,
the condition of the common country could not be car-
ried up to any considerable elevation, unless there
should be one Government, to lay one rate of duly upon
imports throughout the Union, from New Hampshire to
Georgia,—regard to be had in laying this duty to the
protection of American labour and industry. I defy the
man in any way conversant with history—in any degree
conversant with the annals of this country from 1787 to


the adoption of the constitution in 1789—t0 say that
this was not a leading—l may almost say the leading—
feature South as well as North, tor the formation of the
new government. Without that provision in the consti-
tution it never could have been adopted. * » * Let me
add, that at this time it was no local question. The North
was not one way and the South another. Mr. Moore,
of South Carolina, said, that if American planters could
be protected, he did not know but they might one day
raise cotton in South Carolina, provided they could get
good seed. This was so recently as 1789, before
which time scarcely any cotton was exported.”
The first Congress of the United States met on the first
of April, 1789, of that Congress Washington was Presi-
dent, and the first exercise of its power (after that
relating to oaths) was to pass such duties for the pro-
tection of the then American manufactures as would
secure them the home market. They took up article by
article, and laid such duties on each as they thought
would accomplish that object. The protective policy in
the States is as old as the Union, and so worked into all
their Je islation, that without destroying that constitu-
tion itself, it cannot be abandoned. It forms as leading
a feature, and as sound a principle in the very elements
of their constitution, as the Charter of Rights does in
the constitution of England, neither of which can be
abandoned in either country without the destruction of
the constitution itself. Some of our public writers, who
consider themselves competent to chalk out a course
of political economy, on the principles of free trade for
the United States, consider that the protection afforded
to the iron trade of Pensylvania, has cost the States an
immense amount of money, because they say the Ame-
ricans could have had their iron so much cheaper from
England. I would just ask them who got all the money
that the States have lost ? Certainly if they have parted
with it, some one else must have got it. “ Oh,” they
say, “ not at all; but the people employed at raising
iron could have grown cotton, tobacco, rice,and wheat.”
The three first are the produce of slave labour, in which
free soiiers cannot compete; even if Pensylvania were a
slave state, the soil may not be suitable; but had they
all turned farmers, the farming states would have lost a
market equal to that of England, and brought
an immense population into farming that
would have increased the supply so much that the value
of the whole would have been so lowered, that farming
would have been no longer remunerative and must have
ceased to extend—they would have lost more than the
apparent gain. Besides, I deny that they could have
purchased cheaper than they raised it, since no money
left the country for the iron produced, and they always
exported farm produce. Our attempt at forcing all men


to become shepherds has not been so very prosperous as
to permit an argument to be founded upon it. I think
we may leave the Americans to take care of themselves.
So far as I can judge of their character, they seem much
more competent to do so than we are to advise them.
One thing the States cannot abandon—their protection ;
no doubt, they may alter and adjust their tariff to cir-
cumstances. Under protection, they have raised them-
selves from a population of less than 4,000,000 to nearly
30,000,000, in less than 68 years; whilst the free trade
Canadas, with a population of over 3,000,000 at that
time, remain at about the same standard still. When
the American union was first formed, they were over-
whelmed with a heavy war debt and sunk in poverty, so
poor were they that they could not pay their senators
nor public servants : now their great difficulty is, how to
send their surplus revenue into circulation; this, too,
after spending more money in internal improvement
than an nation of the present, day, not even excepting
England, How long will it be before free trade
overflows our exchequer ? Yet, notwithstanding
this abject poverty, the con ederated States considered
that they possessed that within themselves, which if
properly managed, would raise them to the dignity of
empire. They set their eyes on empire and nationality
and they have attained them, by a concentration of will
and power and a strict jealous and ever watchful protec-
tion of American industry, on the same principle as that
adopted by England, i think there will be found but
few cognizant of these events, and our circumstances
that will not discern a glorious future opening to these
Australias. Within themselves, they possess the
elements of empire and nationality, to a degree that few
will be found to dispute, and, however incapacity and
false legislation may retard their progress for a period,
that period will be but short, circumstances will bring
men forward of sufficient capacity to take part in public
affairs, who will make their way to power, they will be
found able and willing to grasp with a steady hand the
helm, and steer these young colonies into their destiny
“ Empire and Nationality.” I will regard New South
Wales as destined to become a great agricultural, manu-
facturing, and commercial nation, after the models of
England and United States of America. I will no say
anything further on personal wealth or floating capital,
than it is that property which a man possesses, that
he can remove entirely awny from the country.
I have now to consider national wealth, or fixed capital;
a nation’s wealth may be said to consist in improve-
ments of the soil, in buildings and manufactories that
cannot be moved, or of which portions cannot be re-
moved without injury to the rest. All uncultivated
land, its timber, grasses, and indeed almost all its
a 3
9


productions while in the wild state, may be justly con-
sidered latent wealth; hut that wealt can only be
developed by human labour expended on it, or some-
where near it. Land is not developed national wealth
until tilled, and productive; on it the labour of the
farmer may be regarded as a quickening power; that, of
itself, and in its very nature, must produce wealth. A
farm when brought into a state of production from one
of wildness, is just as va'uable in a national point of
view, at a time when it would cost £5OO, as it is at ano-
ther, when it would cost £1000; the cost of clearing
and tillage forms no element in its increased or lessened
value to the nation! It will produce the same amount
of crops whether it cost the lesser or the larger
sum, and is therefore equally valuable to
the nation. Put to the farmer to bring land
into cultivation at the one expense or the
other—or indeed, to bring it into cultivation at
all, or not, must be a matter of profit and loss specula-
tion to himself. The difference in the relative value of
money and his possession of it—whether it will sell for,
or purchase more labour, horses, hatchets, harness,
ploughs, provisions, and such other articles
as are used in the clearing and planting a
new fa m—at one tme than at another
is a subject of individual calculation, with which the na-
tion has nothing to do. A cleared and cultivated farm,
tweed or other factory, flour mill, brewery, an improved
harbour or wharf, canal, railroad, or anything of this
sort, machinery at work in a mill or factory, tools in a
workshop, or anything that cannot be disposed of with-
out destroying the works, are national fixed capital and
national wealth at the same time. The farmer may sell
his farm and take the price of it clear away out of the
country, but the farm remains, he cannot remove that;
it may change owners, hut it is still as much a valuable
part of the country in the possession of ne as in that of
another owner, and is capable of producing as much. A
mill may he sold in the same way, but it cannot be re-
moved, it must remain in the country, and is as capable
of performing all the operations of a mill with one owner
as with another. The machinery may be sold or re-
moved, but then you destroy the mill, which must re-
main thus destroyed until you furnish it with fresh
machinery. You may let the farm be idle until it is
overgrown with weeds and ceases to be productive ; you
cannot regard it then as national, it lapses into latent
wealth, in which state it remains until human labour
makes it productive as at the first. I am aware that
national cannot always be regarded as fixed capital ; a
ship, for instance, is fixed capital to her owner, hut
floating or circulating capital to the nation, becmse her
owner can sail her away at pleasure ; she can therefore
10


only be regarded as national or fixed capital so long as
he resides in the country and she earns money for him.
But if the owner leave the country, although the ship may
remain, she ceases to be part of the national wealth,
because her earnings must be returned to her owners
when they become part of the capital of the country in
which he resides. Capital never can become fixed or
national without three concurring conditions. First—
Labour sufficient to fix it, by building mills, forming
canals, making railroads, clearing and cultivating farms,
&e,, &c., and sufficient labour to work all these when
ready. Secondly—Sufficient personal or floating capital
to sustain the labour afterwards, when employed in
production. And thirdly—A sufficient market for the
production of all when brought into operation. Now
having explained personal and national, or floating and
fixed capital, to make them productive of an increase of
either personal or national wealth we must bring t em
into contact with human labour and skill so as to result
in cheapness of production—labour and national cheap-
ness, For whatever value may be attached to capital, or
by whatever name different descriptions of it may be
known, it is of little account without labour. Labour is
employed in fixing the capital of either a new or an
old country in working its fixed and circulating capital,
and is the best creator of a market for Us own produc-
tions. Labour is then very properly styled the fountain of
wealth, but to make that fountain flow labour must have
employment; it must be active in prod ming, and have
something congenial to its tastes whereon to act, else no
wealth is created. There is no more wealth in tdie
labour than there is heat in either wood or coal without
combustion. It is during the process of combustion only
that the latent heat is set free. S« it is with labour—
it is by its proper employment on proper objects that
its latent wealth is realized. After the discovery of the
gold in New South Wales, the value of money fell in
many instances fully 500 per eenr., while labour was
still measured by the value of money in countries in
which it remained without much change; that is, a
house previous to the.gold discovery, which would have
been considered dear at 10s. per week, afterwards let for
505.; in this instance 4s. previous to that time paid as
much house rent as 20s. did afterwards. Flour on an
average in the former period was about L 8 per ton; in
the latter it has been ful y H 25. Then Bd. measured
with flour in the former period would purchase as much
as 2s. Id. in the latter, and was therefore of equal value.
Butchers’ meat, 1. to 2d. in the former, and 4£d. to 6d.
in the latter; in the former fid. was of as much value
as Is. 6d. in the latter time. Now how does the case
stand with those countries from which New South
Wales purchased her supplies? In England a man
11


could get as good a house for ss. per week as he could
here for 255. The English workman could therefore sell
his article, so far as house rent went in the cost of pro*
duction, cheaper by sto 1, In Germany the value of a
house would be 9d. to Is. per week, and every-
thing else proportionately low; he (the
could, therefore, sell cheaper in the propor-
tion of 25 to 1. In the United States the
value of flour may be set down at 1113 per ton, and all
other living in the same ratio. America could, there-
fore, furnish two articles for our one. Now, notwith-
standing all these disadvantages, you say to the colonial
workman—lf you cannot produce for as little money as
others you shall not be employed ; you turn him out
of his workshop to starve, whilst you continue to send
the circulating capital out of the country to pay for the
article that he could furnish, until you yourselves be-
come as pojr, as poverty stricken as those are from
whom you purchase. How can you imagine for one mo-
ment that a country can become richer from parting
with its wealth, or that the personal circumstances of
all can be improved by the poverty of the whole. The
policy proper for New South Wales, under these cir-
cumstances, would certainly have been to lay duties for
protection equal to the difference in the value of money.
She would then have preserved her industry and
retained her capital at the same time. Yet our free-
traders don’t think so; they declare that must be cheapest
in a national point of view which can be pur-
chased for the least money by the individual.
They say if the home shoemaker cannot furnish boots
and shoes for as little money as we can import them, it
is a clear proof that the callings ot all those employed in
making boots and shoes, in preparing the hide into
leather, are not congenial to the circumstances of New
South Wales. These trades, therefore, should be
abandoned. If the tailor cannot furnish clothes as
cheap as they can be procured from abroad, it is a clear
proof that the trades of tailors, and of all employed in
producing the coat from the wool, are not congenial to
New South Wales, and ought to be abandoned. If the
cooper cannot supply buckets, tubs. churns,
casks, &c., &c., as cheap as we can procure
them from the penitentiaries of America, it
is a clear proof that the trade of the cooper
is not congenial to New South Wales. If the foundry
men and mechanics cannot supply stoves, pots, and
other castings, steam engines, boilers, and fittings as
cheap as England or America, it is a clear proof that
these trades are not congenial to New South Wales. If
the carpenters and sawyers cannot supply doors and
sashes, tongued and grooved boards, and other building
materials as cheap as they are sometimes furnished by


America, it is a clear proof that these trades are not
congenial to New South Wales. If the wood-cutters in
the bush cannot sell timber in the log as cheap as
we can import it, it is a clear proof that
the timber of New South Wales is value-
less, and that woodmen are not wanted.
If the brickmakers cannot supply bricks as cheap as we
can import them from Hamburg, it is a clear proof that
brickmaking is not congenial to New South Wales, and
that brickmakers are not wanted. If the farmers can-
not supply breadstuffs as cheap as they c m be imported,
it is a clear proof of the sterility of the soil, and that
farmers are not wanted. Eree-traders in this way
declare employment after employment inapplicable to
the circumstances of the country, and force us to abandon
them, not because we are incapable of following them,
but because of the relative value of money being lower here
than in other countries, which enables them to produce
for a smaller amount than we can. But withdraw
all the people who make a living by these employments
and what is the country ? Little more than a wilder-
ness. Or what will you do with their families. Oh, let
them go to the country and become shepherds, there is
room enough ; or to the diggings, there’s gold at Ophii
and at the Rocky; some people at the mines have made
fortunes. Neither of these pursuits is applicable to the
circumstances or congenial to the tastes of our people.
Even if they were, they must from their very nature
result in national imbecility and degradation. Cheapness.
Labour and time is the only true measure of national
cheapness or dearness. If a man can make a pair of
shoes in as short a time, with as little toil, here as he
can in another country, then New South Wales
can produce them as cheap. If her tailors, weavers,
coopers, carpenters, foundry men, mechanics, brick-
makers, and others can produce as much, with similar
mecuanical appliances, in the same time as can be done
elsewhere, then South Wales can produce these
articles as cheap as others. Between the national and
personal money cheapness of an article there is a great
difference. The cost of an article to the nation is the
money or value the nation parts with to procure it. The
cost to an individual in the same way, the money or
value he parts with to purchase it. I will endeavour to
illustrate my meaning. Suppose I want a pair of shoes,
and that the colonial make will cost me 155., and that I
can purchase a pair of English make of equal quality
for 13s. 6d., it is not likely that I will pay 15s. for that
which I can purchase for 12s. 6d. I take the English,
and save the half-crown. The importer sends away 10s.
for the imported shoes, leaving 2s. 6d. for the profits of
the different dealers who have passed the shoes from his
hand to mine. Now, the exportable value of the raw


hide of which the colonial shoes are made may be set
down at Is.; the difference between that and 155., the
price asked for the shoes, is made up in wages to the
different trades employed in the conversion of the raw
hide into them. Part has gone for bark to the country-
man, part to the tanner, part to the shoemaker, part to
the landlord for rent; bakers, butchers, grocers, tailors,
all other tradesmen get a moiety of it
in its second exchange. The whole amount goes into
circulation some way and remains in the country, and
is as much a part of its capital after the manufacture and
purchase of the shoes as it was before, while the whole
of the 10s. is gone for ever. The difference, then, in
favour of the national cheapness of making the shoes is
the difference between Is., the export value of the hide,
and 10s., the import cost of the shoes. The saving to
the nation is just 9s. on the transaction, and the
national cost of the home shoes Is. This, however,
supposes that the tradesmen would not have been other-
wise employed. Had they had employment at which
they could have raised beyond the value of «9s. in the
time occupied in making the shoes, then it would be
cheaper to purchase than to make them. Now, notwith-
standing the difference in the money price, the English
shoemaker may be belter paid .t 10s, than the colonial one
at 155.; because 10s. may purchase more in his countiy
than 15s. would here. In order to equalize the money
value of labour in both countries, and thereby allow our
leather workers as good a living for their labour as
similar can obtain abroad, a duty for protection of 3
per pair should be laid. I could then purchase the
home made 6d. per pair cheaper than the imported, at
the same time show that shoemaking could be carried on
in the colony at a saving of 9s. per
pair to the common wealth of the whole.
Individual or personal cheapness. At the first blush
it appears that I propose to tax myself 2s. 6d. per pair
for the benefit of the shoemaker ; would it not answer
equally well were I to decide to pay 2s. 6d. per pair
extra for the home made ? I answer, No. With the
duty I am in the same position with every other person
as now—we must all purchase on equal
terms. Suppose I am a o.rpenter, sawyer, cooper,
mechanic, other tradesman, or farmer, we all suffer
equally with the shoemaker by the free importation of
goods from countries in which 10s. goes as far as 15s.
does here ; then I tax myself for shoemakers and other
tradesmen, and farmers, and they in return tax them-
selves for me. If I pay the shoemaker and all others
extra for their articles, I get it back from the shoemaker
and all others who pay me extra for mine. Thus in the
end I am nothing out of pocket, whilst we all get constant
employment at a fair remuneration, and are richer as a


nation by the difference between the export value of the
raw material on which we labour, and the price we must
pay did we purchase the foreign manufacture. The
increased power to purchase that increased employment
confers, forms the measure of personal cheapness ; a loaf
is cheaper to me at 6d. with Is. in my pocket to pay for
it than it is at 4d. with only 3d. There is no doubt but
that some of our manufacturing friends abroad would
grumble sadly at New South Wales resorting to pro-
tection ; I would just say that it is for their especial,
interest as much as ours. If they desire to supply us
with their articles, they are perfectly welcome
to come and manufacture them on the
spot ; there is room enough. They can
thus save the duty, and participate in the protection.
The doctrine of free-trade seems to the superficial
thinker of very easy comprehension, and every one
seems to understand it so thoroughly, that it requires
constant repetition to get people to look below the
surface. Besides, no o\e will acknowledge
himself a superficial thinker. Its advocates
say it may be d. fined, buy in the
cheapest and sell in the dearest market. Let things
alone, they will come right in the end. Trade, like
water, finds its level. All these assertions look very
well on paper, but the consequences that follow should
occupy some place in the mind before the judgment
allows itself to be led ca tive in assenting to a hasty
conclusion of their unvarying truth and applicability to
all circumstances. The truth is, free trade aims at
baying and selling only. It never aims at increasing the
quantity of articles that either a nation or the world
possesses. Its tend ncy is rather to retard than
increase production, by reducing all producers to one
uniform money cheapness, in which the lowest forms
the standard of perfection. It is a mercantile theory
only, in which you will travel from A to Z for the saving
of a farthing; a theory put forward avowedly
for the purpose of preventing nations from
manufacturing for themselves, and forcing them
to purchase from those already in existence.
But the difficulties that New South "Wales has to
encounter on the footing of free-trade in becom-
ing an agricultural and manufactu.ing nation are even
greater in her ever becoming a commercial one. Not-
withstanding our geographical position and beautiful
and commodious harbour, our mercha As never could
compete, unassisted, with the Blackwall, Aberdeen, and
American clippers. Neither America nor England could
rear their mercamile marine on the footing of free-trade:
both tried and both failed. It was the navigation laws
made both England and America what they are in com-
merce ; and State assistance in some way must be ex-


tended to our commerce, else we will never have any.
New South Wales being a colony of England cannot
pass navigation laws, but she can grant bounties which
will ensure the same purpose. Suppose that a bounty
of twenty per cent, were given for the building of first-
class ships in the colony, and that twenty-five per cent,
of bonus were given on the earnings of such ship : if
owned by a colonial merchant, sailed by a resident cap-
tain, and the place of discharge some port in New South
Wales, we would soon have a mercantile marine equal
to all the wants ef tha country. The bounty paid
on ship-building would induce our colonial
capitalists to invest largely in that trade,
and be a source of great wealth to the colony. It would
be laid out in labour; giving employment, and be ex-
pended by the workpeople amongst the shopkeepers.
When the ship would be completed, then labour had
created wealth in the ship equal to the whole amount
of money expended. The money paid in wages, and
for such articles as the colony could furnish, would still
be in the colony, and form part of its aggregate wealth
as much whilst circulating amongst the people as it did
in the pockets of the merchant, while the merchant
would get the ship, and the whole community would
possess both the ship and the money. Then, in order
to make the ship as cheap to the merchant as if he had
purchased her abroad, he gets back, from the public
purse, 20 per cent, or one-fifth of the w'hole. This
money he invests again in that which seems the most
profitable trade, and sends it back again into circulation
to sustain production, while the public purse is re-
plenished off such dutiable articles as the workmen
themselves requite. Bounties on ships’ earnings.
Suppose an English ship, on a voyage to London and
back, to earn £BOO each way, or £I6OO in all; every
penny of this is paid by the colony, none of it ever
returns again, it is gone forever. Now, suppose t! is
were a colonial ship entitled to bounty, and her earnings
each way to be £7OO, or £I4OO in all, she must carry
for less than the English shin, else she won’t get
the trade. The bounty on this would be £350, £IOO of
which would go into the settlers’ pocket in lower
freights from this side, £IOO into the pockets of the
whole people in lower freights on their mer-
chandise from the other side, £l5O into
that of the colonial merchant to equalise
the difference in the wages between oar own and
foreign seamen, and the whole of the £I4OO
of the ship’s earnings is distributed amongst
us in wages, for supplies, for provisions, and
profits of trade, &c., &c. Thus, by displacing—
remember, only displacing—£3so of the public money,
we make an actual profit on the trip of one ship of


£I6OO ; that is, the colony has saved and added £I6OO
to its capital that it otherwise would have paid away.
It may be thought that this would be too favourable
a position for the merchant; don’t fear that, it will
bring plenty of competition. It is only under free
trade that the monopoly of capital can exist; protection
invariably destroys monopoly. If by some means New
South Wales could create a mercantile marine, and
sustain it during its infancy, what a future would be
opened to the youth of the colony ! What a goal for
their ambition; to work up from the middy to com-
mand a colonial clipper. And, as he paces the deck in
foreign ports, to see the beautiful banner of his southern
home mingling overhead with the descriptive flags of
commercial nations, asserting its right to be present in
the race of commerce. He would then feel that he too
had a home upon the waters, and a national character to
sustain in commercial enterprise. Population. —ln a
new country population must form the groundwork of
all improvement. As it settles more or less quickly it
may be regarded as the index of progress. A country
that cannot be made to yield support for man never can
have a dense one. The Ailsa Craig, nor our own
Pinchgut, never could be made to sustain
a dense population, even had we the power to extend
each of them to the size of a continent. They are
barren in their very nature. But the Continent of New
Holland is a very different place. Here almost every
part teems with vegetation and life. Here we have
almost perpetual spring and daily harvest. There is
only a partial cessation of vegetation between the
seasons. Here the lily of the Nile blooms in the open
garden during the winter, and the walks are trellised
with the grape, vine in summer; where the low lands are
shaded with bananas and the fields shed pine apples.
A country in which the European fruits, cereals, and
esculents flourish to perfection. Pastures sustaining
myriads of cattle and sheep, and forests teeming with
honey. And, to crown all, a climate proverbial for
salubrity. Surely when nature was sowing her gifts
broadcast over creation, New Holland got the first
scatter. To assert that this fine country is incapable of
sustaining a large population, is not only simply but
absurdly absurd. It is presumed by some that New
South Wales is capable of supporting a population equal
to that of three-fourths of Europe. Some of our agricul-
tural upland districts are said to be equal in extent to the
whole arable surface of England; yet the whole population
(by the last census) is under 270,000. Is it not very
strange that this fine country does not yield
sufficient food for this very limited poupulation ?
Would any stranger believe that for several years past we
have been spending upwards of three-quarters


of a million annually for foreign provisions.
That whilst we are boiling down flocks of sheep
and herds of cattle for their hides and
tallow, we are importing beef, pork, hams, butter, and
every description of farm and dairy pro;! uce from Europe
and America ? How can this be? Yet it is true.
And that flour, wheat, potatoes, &?., &0., are daily
arriving from abroad, nearly all of which has to be paid
for in specie, or in foreign manufactures, for which we
should either pay specie or wool, which is equally
valuable; whilst our own farms lie idle and our
finest agricultural lands remain wild. One
would imagine the country to be prosperous
and full of money, industry everywhere busy,
fully and profitably employed to sustain an expenditure
of three-quarters of a million annually for bread to feed
80,000 adults fit to labour ! Yet this is not the case.
The public debt of the country is now £3,444,000, which,
distributed rateably over our adult population of 80,000
brings each man into arrears on the public account
£35 10s., and a very large additional sum must be raised
to carry on the expenses of the Government during the
current year. If our population had been profitably
employed, the people attracted hither by the gold dis-
covery would have remained and settled down to those
remunerative employments; whereas they made their
way off as fast as they could to Melbourne and else-
where. Nor would our imports have ex-
ceeded our exports to such an extent as they have
done. Our imports last year amounted to £5,460,971 ;
whilst our exports amounted to £3,430,880, leaving a
deficiency of £2,030,091. In 1855, the imports were
£4,668,519, exports £3,884,130 ; leaving a deficiency of
£1,784,389. In the two years of 1855 and 1856, the total
deficiency is £3,814,480, or an average of £47125.6d. that
each adult man and his family has received more than
the country has paid for. These balances must be met
some way. The most practical illustration of the eir-
curnstances of the colony is to be found in the unsale-
able debentures that have been lately returned from
England. Had the colony been prosperous, and hoard-
ing its means economically, English capitalists would
have accepted our securities as willingly as they do
those of the petty European States. There is another
thing, not very well liked perhaps our small repu listing
manufactory, established by Judge Burton a few years
a go, at the head of King-street. These English gentle-
men know that toe money they lend us must go into
circulation, and leave us for the purchase of manu-
factures and when it is all gene, and our imports still
increasing beyond our exports, that our importers,
and dealers can have a clean bill of health from our
Insolvent Court. This repudiates in a most gentlemanly


manner any liabilities they may have contracted nnd
very properly too. The tradesman cannot pay the small
shopkeeper, who cannot in turn pay the large one, who
in his turn must repudiate the debt to the merchant,
who must repudiate his to the foreign consignor ; that is
when things come to the very worst which, is
such a state as they are fast approaching. While
the laws of the country aim at countenaning
and supporting this system, abstracting the fund that
should go to sustain labour at home and pay our debts
for the purchase of cheap grog, cheap clothes, cheap
soap, cheap pickles, cheap bacon, butter, bread, and
luxuries. When gentlemen say that the prosperity of
New South Wales is indexed by her xcess of imports
over her exports, it brings to my mind the case of the
prodigal son; his extravagance reduced him to feed
swine and eat husks. Somewhat similar may be the
case with us, if we don’t return to the policy of our
father’s house, and protect the labour of the country and
retain our capital for our support. The first step to be
taken in order to obtain population is, to satisfy people
that they will better their condition by coming. Satisfy
a man that he has a prospect of bettering his condition
by coming to New South Wales, and whatever may be
the distance between him and us, i will sink into
nothing directly. He will reason in this way : It will
take me a month—two, or three months—to reach it;
once there, I’m settled for life; here I cannot get on—
I’m not getting any better off; there, every year will add
to my means of independence. Hold out this view to
him, and New South Wales has little to fear on the
score of population. It was this brought all of us here,
and it, only it, will bring others. But, to settle popula-
tion when it comes, you must make it a reality (that
men can better themselves by coming) ; you must not
disappoint them; you must not send them to this or
that employment on pain of starvation ; you must have
employment of the sort expected, to which the people
were accustomed in the country they left. It
will never do to say to the mechanics—you
must leave your wife in Sydney, send your daughters to
servic , and go yourself and herd sheep at £3O to £3O a
year and rations; or you must go to the mines and
hump clay all day long, for which you may get some-
thing, but more probably nothing; or if you are really
starving and in desperate want, we will provide you
work at stonebreaking, at which you may earn as much
as will provide you with one meal in the day and a bed
in a stable. It is not very likely that a large number of
tradesmen will come to New South Wales with a pros-
pect like this before them, in preference to going to the
United States ; and those who are so unto tunate as to
come, will take very good care to advise their friends to


remain away. Yet it is the constant influx of popula-
tion that makes the prosperity of the towns. The newly
arrived immigrant has always something to layout on
his arrival ; as fast as it leaves his hand it becomes the
capital and profit of the old community; once set a-going
at his trade he very soon creates wealth by his labour
to the whole value of his wages, a portion of which
always remaining with himself soon repays him more
than he at first expended, while the community at large
is wealthier to the whole amount of hia earnings; thus
by creating wealth for the whole he gets rich himself,
without impoverishing those from whom he receives his
riches. But can ever New South Wales hold out the
prospect of riches to a large population on the principles
of free-trade ? Can any one expect to better his
condition by coming here, so long as we import
the article free of duty, the making of
which forms the only means by which he
can earn a living ? Never! never! The thing is
against all reason. If we import the article ready made,
we don’t want the man to make it. If we get the man,
we don’t want the article; he can make it here, and is
only useful for the purpose of making it. Certainly, we
cannot require both, and just as certainly we cannot
obtain both. Which is the better, the man or the
article ? If we say the man, then we must protect his
labour, that he may be permitted to make the article; if
we say the article, then we cannot want population to
produce it. But population constantly increasing is the
very vitality of the country, but we cannot support it
without employment—we cannot give employment with-
out protection, therefore we must grant protection to
home industry in order to get population. The United
States have been peculiarly alive to the necessity of
attracting and settling population in their dominions,
and have been very successful in doing it. How? By
protection to American labour! Nothing else. And
although Daniel Webster was opposed to any extension
of protection in 1834, he very soon after saw the absolute
necessity of it. In his speech on the tariff in the Senate,
27th July, 1846, in reply to those who had twitted him
with a change of opinion mi the protective policy, he
says, “ Mr. President, if it be an inconsistency to hold
an opinion upon a subject at one time and in one state
of circumstances, and to hold a different
opinion at another time and in a
different state of circumstances, I admit the charge.
Nay, I will go further, and in regard to questions which
from their nature do not depend upon circumstances for
their true and just solution—l mean constitutional
questions—if it be an inconsistency to hold an opinion
to-day, even upon such a question, and on that same
question to hold a different opinion a quarter of a


century afterwards, upon a more comprehensive view of
the whole subject, with a more thorough investigation
into the original purposes and objects of that constitu-
tion, I should not shrink even from that imputation. I
hope I know more of the constitution of my country
than I did when I was twenty years old. I hope I have
contemplated its great objects more broadly, I hope I have
read with deeper interest the sentiments of the great
men who framed it. * » But there is one sort of inconsis-
tency which is culpable—it is the inconsistency between
a man’s conviction and his vote, between his conscience
and his conduct. No man shall ever charge me with an
inconsistancy like that.” I have given the above extract
in consequence of Mr. Pennington quoting Daniel Web-
ster’s speech in 1824 as a free-trade speech. Mr.
Webster, from 1833, always regarded the protective
policy, as constitutionally embodied in the bond uniting
the States, a departure from which would be unconsti-
tutional. I will now give a quotation or two from
the works of the same statesman, in reference to popu-
lation, in which it will be clearly seen that it is to the
salutary effects of protection to American labour that
America owes her great influx of population and pros-
perity. At the Whig Convention at Andover, 9th
November, 1843, he says : “It is our good fortune,
gentlemen, to live in a country distinguished by a high
rate of wages, * * * We find that female operatives
receive two dollars per week after paying their board.
The male operatives, after paying their board, clear
twelve dollars a month. We cannot see this in any
other country. Our labour reaches beyond mere sub-
sistence. In Europe the case is different. We know
that with us labour earns for itself and creates capital.
Gentlemen, the labour of the United States is respect-
able. We are emphatically a country of labour. We
see labour and capital mixed together in a degree un-
equa led in the world. What is the value of a hundred
acres of land at the foot of the Rocky Mountains, or in
the remote regions of Spanish South America ? Nothing
at all! There is no value to land until man has mixed
his labour with it. But the moment an American drives
bis plough into it, or fells a tree, that
moment he creates capital which every step he
takes, and every stroke he gives, constantly augments.”
At Pittsburg, July Btb, 1833, speaking of protection
and New England, he says: “She has now become
virtually interested, in the preservation of the system,
her prosperity is identified, not perhaps with any parti-
cular degree of protection, but with the preservation of
the principle, and she is not likely to consent to yield
the principle under any circumstances whatever. And
who would dare to yield it ?” At the same time, speaking
of population, he continues : “ 1 see around me many


whom I know to be immigrants from foreign countries.
Why are they here ? Why is the native of Ireland
among us? Why has he abandoned scenes as dear to
him as these hills and these rivers are to you ? Is there
any other cause than this, that the burden of taxation
on the one hand, and the low reward of labour on the
other, ieft him without the means of a comfortable sub-
sistence or the power of providing for those who
were dependent upon him. * » » And do not
those remarks apply with more or less accu-
racy to every other part of Europe.”
Again, at Buffalo, May 21, 1851, eighteen years after-
wards, he remaiks as follows:—" Who are your inhabi-
tants ? A great many of them are ray countrymen from
the East, and I see them with pleasure; but these are
not all, there are also Irhh and Gh rmans. * * ♦ The
emigration to this country is enormous ; it comes from
Ireland, Germany, Switzerland, and almost every
other part of continental Europe. I remember
it used to be said, when anything
of a sudden or energetic nature took place, that it broke
out like an liish rebellion, forty thousand strong when
nobody expected it. Forty thousand strong does not
begin to compare with emigration to the United States;
emigration comes here with a perfect rush from every
part of Ireland, Into this country they come, and will
continue to come; it is in the order of things, and there
is no possibility of preventing it. * * * But they
don’t come with the idea of carrying back money or
fame, or a name, they mean to remain here, they mean
to abide here, and to be of us and to take their chances
among us. Let them come. Your city, lam told, has
a large number of thrifty industrious Germans; let them
also come. We see there is a rush of people from
Europe to America that exceeds in a single month at
the single port of New York, the population of many
single cities on the Atlantic coast. This is the case, and
it is to be met and to be considered. It would be
foolish to attempt to obstruct, it, if obstruction were
possible. The thing cannot be done,” Again, at
Albany, 28th May, 1851, speaking on the same subject
“ The Irish, the Welsh, the German, gentlemen, come!
and the fact is, ‘ the cry is still they come.’ There are
people enough imported into New York twice a year to
make a city as large as old Salem ; every ship brings
them to our shores, and off they start for
Wisconsin. Well, they come, every steamboat
brings them, every packet, and when you
think they are all here—' the cry is, still they come ’’
Well, we must meet this as well as we can. Very many
of them are excellent persons, and become excellent
citizens of the United Stales.” If, by adopting a similar
policy to that of America, we could transplant only a


tenth part of that surplus population that leaves Eng-
land for the United States every year, to this country,
we would very soon form an empire that would add
greatly to the stability of the mother-country. It must
weaken England greatly to part with so many of her
inhabitants, while it strengthens the United States in
the same proportion. Not to speak of the lasting bene-
fit it would be to the Australias, the commerce that this
population would sustain, and the greatly extended
market it would open up for English merchandize
beyond what it does in America, would be a lasting
advantage to Britain, Because America is a very ex-
tensive man itacturing country already, and is yearly
increasing, so that before very long if may be expected
that she will be in a position to supply nearly all her
wants without being indebted to England for scarcely
a single article. Whereas New South Wales, for many
years, could not anything like supply the wants
of her present population; and if such an influx
was to make its way here, until we could have
houses, manufactories, farms, &c., &c., in a
forward state of production, the chief part
of our supplies must come from England. No amount
of protection could prevent this, whilst without it we
could not find employment for any increase of numbers.
In eed, at the present time, every new arrival hastens
on the crisis to which free trade is urging us; it costs
us so much mere to support him, whilst there is nothing
at which to employ him that will bring anything in.
Regarding an increase of population, things must remain
as they are until New South Wales gets convinced of the
fact that there is one thing, and one thing only, that
will attract and settle population, either here or any-
where else, and that is compensating rewards to labour.
Labour, like every other commodity, will find out the
highest market. But, unlike every other thing, the supply
onlyincreases the demand. As the supply enters at the
door the cry for more, more, issues forth from the win-
dows. But then it must have free scope of action.
The articles which labour furnishes must not be im-
ported free along with it. Free trade and productive
labour cannot exist in the presence of each other. Their
natures are too antagonistic, both must perish. Free
trade cooped up in the same country with productive
labour resembles a nest of ferrets in a rabbit warren :
the ferrets live and grow sleek by sucking the life-blood
from the rabbits, and when it is all gone, die themselves,
arid mingle with that putrid mass they have created.
So with the free-traders, they are sucking the very
vitality of the country from it; they are abstracting the
whole of its circulating capital to pay for foreign com-
modities; they, too, may fatten and grow sleek;
but when the money is all gone, they must sink down


themselves, and swell that national poverty they have
created. ’ If New South Wales were to import her wool,
she would not want shepherds, and need not trouble
herself about squatting regulations ; if farm produce,
she does not want farms nor land, and need not fret
herself to death about land systems ; if clothes and other
articles, she does not want tradesmen te make them,
and may very well dispense with Immigration Boards ;
if she imports everything she cannot want population,
and every person here should leave as fast as possible.
This is the consummation of the doctrines of free-trade,
although nobody will acknowledge it, yet I don’t see
any other conclusion that can be arrived at.
One thing is surely certain, that free-trade always dis-
places labour somewhere, destroys its living, and seldom
finds employment or a living anywhere else. Another
thing is equally certain, that protection always aims at
diversifying employment—at sustaining and rewarding
labour. That crushes it out of existence for the sake of
cheapness; this fosters, nourishes, and supports it on
equitable rewards. That deters and scatters population
to the winds ; this attracts and establishes it in self-sup-
porting independence. Protection to all, then, is the
political economy proper for New South Wales, on which
to build her greatness as an agricultural, manufacturing,
and commercial nation, after the models of England and
the United States of America.
The Empire General Steam Printing Office, Hunter Street,
Sydney.




55 ;■ $
