

LECTURE
NEW GUINEA,
A. KEITH COLLINS,
AT THE
APRIL 13th, 1867.
BY
*%■
MASONIC HALL, SYDNEY,
SYDNEY;
CAXTON STEAM MACHINE PRINTING OFFICE, 156, PITT-ST.




LECTURE
NEW GUINEA,
A. KEITH COLLINS,
AT THE
MASONIC HALL, SYDNEY,
APRIL 13th, 1867-
3-e— -
SYDNEY:
CANTON STEAM MACHINE PRINTING OFFICE, 156, PITT-ST.
1867,




p 9 3 i 5S If SU 6T
’77
NEW GUINEA.
Foe a long time I have entertained the desire to excite among the
citizens of Sydney, an interest in the matter of the colonization and
exploration of the Island of New Guinea. I have been long im-
pressed with the importance of our taking steps to carry out this object;
but I have hitherto waited, feeling assured, that our commercial men
would not allow so vast and prolific a field for enterprise and trade, to
remain as at present, unknown and unsettled. Finding, however,
that I was mistaken, and that but small chance existed of the matter
being seriously considered, I addressed a letter to the Herald a few
weeks back, which, I am glad to say, has caused some little atten-
tion to be turned in this direction, and I now venture further
to solicit your interest in the subject. Those who know me, will
readily admit that I should not thus intrude myself upon your
notice, and challenge your criticism, did I not feel a deep and
absorbing conviction of the value of the project I shall presently
have the honour to submit to you, lamby no means at ease
in addressing a public audience, and dislike the task; but, in a matter
of the success of which I feel so earnest a conviction, I may, with
grace, lay aside my bashfulness, and overcome my reluctance to thus
obtruding myself.
Previous to laying before you an outline of the scheme by which 1 hope
this great island shall be ma de a new and exhaustless field for com-
mercial enterprise, I will, as briefly as may be consistent with the
value of the information, proceed to quote from the various authorities
upon the subject, such matter as may bear upon the desirability
or non-desirability of the enterprise. These authorities are few,
and chiefly consist of those gentlemen who have been commissioned
to survey the islands of Torres Straits. The information we derive
from them is necessarily limited to that touching upon the existence
of harbours, rivers, and anchorage grounds; the character of the
natives; and, lastly, the all-important item of trade. As to the


interior of New Guinea, I have been unable to find any reliable
account. I have heard that white men have penetrated into the
country ; but I can find no record of their adventures, and I cannot,
therefore, much to my regret, offer any more solid information than
we may conjure up by reasonable conjecture. I say reasonable con-
jecture advisedly; for were we to give rein to our fancy, we should
find in what little we know of the wealth and magnificent natural re-
sources of New Guinea, scope enough to lead us to dream of an Eden
or a fairy land.
New Guinea is an island situated to the north and north-east of
this continent, from which it is divided by those straits which are
known by the name of Torres Straits, after Luis Yaerde Torres, a
Spanish navigator of 1606. Its nearest point to Australia lies oppo-
site Cape York, the distance between the two lands being probably
some 90 miles, a journey which is frequently made by the Papuans,
as Mr. Jardine, the recent resident at Somerset, announces in his dis-
patches. The length of the island is about 1,000 miles, the breadth
varying from 150 to 300 miles. It is thickly wooded in some parts,
contains extensive prairies in others, vast mountains and magnifi-
cent rivers. It is largely populated, the coast by the Papuans—a
race warlike and energetic, traders and navigators : the interior by
the Haraforas—-probably the original or at least first inhabitants,
who are skilled in husbandry, and producing chiefly those articles
which, passing from them into the hands of the Papuans, are
raded to the Maccassar, Bughis, Ceramese, and Chinese merchants,
who periodically visit the island. These articles consist of spices of
all kinds, sago, arrowroot, yams, birds of paradise, ambergris, massay
bark, rosamala (an odoriferous wood), kayu-buku (a wood much
prized by cabinet makers), the edible birds nests, fungus and gold. The
Papuans themselves procure tortoise shell pearls, mother of pearl,
beche de mer or trepang, and such products as may be obtained in
the waters that wash their shores. Buffaloes, introduced by the island
traders, wild hogs, and I believe also deer, are the more important
nimals existing on the island, although in this respect it is hard to a
speak with any degree of confidence. Numerous tribes of strange
and unknown birds are said to be native to New Guinea, while the
coast and rivers teem with fish.
As far back as 1511 this vast island was visited by Antonio Ambren
and Francis Serrano, two Portuguese navigators, who appear to have
. narrowly surveyed the coast between Schouten Island and the
•r" y


Solomons. To them wo owe the names of the various bays, capes,
and headlands of this portion of New Guinea. Alvaro de Savedra
was the next who appears upon record as having surveyed the coast,
and from him, probably, we owe the name New Guinea, which he
chose as appropriate, either from the fact of the island being opposite
on the globe to Guinea, or from the similarity of feature and other
physical attributes of the inhabitants. This navigator’s visit was
made in the year 1527, and in the following year Antonio Urdanetta,
a Genoese, likewise came into these seas. In 1543, Ruy Lopez de
Lobos was sent by Ortos de Notha, the Governor of the Portuguese
territories in Hindostan, and surveyed some portion of the coast. He was
followed by Lopaz Yas, in 1567, who called the island Guadalcanal. He
landed, stormed a town, and found considerable quantities of gold.—
And here it may be noted as a curious circumstance, that accident alone
prevented this adventurer from taking possession of New Guinea, in the
name of his Government. The celebrated Captain Drake happened to
visit this portion of the world at the time of Lopaz Yas’ enterprise, and
orders were at once issued to forbear from settling on the island, lest
the great English Captain should thus be in a better position to secure
supplies. Yas, who was a Spaniard, misplaced the position of New
Guinea on his charts with the view of preventing other nations from
visiting it, and securing the gold. We learn much of this from a volume
published by Nicholas Struyck, in 1753, in Amsterdam, in which, con-
siderable information is given, more especially as relating to places ou
the Northern Coast, to which portion navigators had hitherto confined
their explorations. Two explorers, named respectively, Schouten and
Le Maire, arrived on the coast of New Guinea in January, 1616. They
landed, and were attacked by the natives, who displayed much dex-
terity in the use of slings, by which they hurled stones with astonish-
ing aim and force. Not content with driving the white men from
their shores, the natives attacked the ship, but were beaten off with
loss, leaving a number of prisoners in the hands of the ship’s company.
They afterwards became friendly, and ransomed the prisoners, with
the exception of some few who appeared to be slaves, and whose loss
seemed to be regarded as of little consequence. These, however, were
set at liberty.
Captain Cook does not seem to have paid much attention to the
exploration of New Guinea, or rather to gaining any knowledge of it
or its inhabitants, beyond the mere survey of its waters. He did
certainly make an attempt to land, but, being repulsed, contented


himself with shooting some natives, and set sail from the place. This
was on the southern or south-west coast, somewhere near the mouth
of a large stream known as Bartholomew Eiver. I think it is Cook
who mentions the custom of hurling ashes and dust into the air
through bamboo tubes, and which first led the seamen to suppose
that the savages possessed firearms. This is the mode they adopt
for signalling to distant friends, and signifying their need of
assistance, The natives who were seen by Lieutenant Kolff, of the
Dutch brig-of-war Doruga, which visited this portion of the coast in
1825-6, are described as very savage and bold, approaching within
gunshot of the ship; and when hailed, gnashing their teeth like
angry dogs, beating their breasts, and shewing every symptom of
ungovernable rage. Higher up the coast, however, the natives were
friendly, and readily traded, until a watering party provoked their
anger by cutting down some cocoa nuts, which are highly valued by
the Papuans. A melee ensued, in which the Dutchmen showed the
white feather, and were beaten off 1 . Kolff describes the people as of
large stature, well made, with a Jewish cast of face, and curly hair.
Some of them were fairer than others. They appeared very intelli-
gent, brave, and altogether a fine race of men.
A Captain Forrest, towards the close of the last century, visited
New Guinea for the purpose of procuring a supply of nutmeg trees
for the English settlements. He states that he was hospita-
bly received, and found the natives anything but the fierce
and ferocious race they are commonly described. Although he saw
no gold, he was told of its existence in large quantities in the interior.
But it is to more modern visitors we are com pelled to turn for in-
formation, which may prove of service to the project, and these are
Messrs. Earl, Jukes, Stokes, King, Belcher, Keppel, Yule, and
Stanley—gentlemen employed on surveying service upon the coast.
From them we glean all the recent intelligence respecting the country,
its people, its productions, and the trade carried on by its inhabitants.
All agree in praise of the country, and speak with enthusiasm of its
beautiful scenery, its noble woods, its broad rivers, its stupendous moun-
tains, its amazing fertility ; of the natives they are no less unanimous
in pronouncing them a fine race of men, warlike certainly, and jealous
of the presence of strangers, but by no means deserving the evil repu-
tation they bear. They trade, we are told, chiefly with the Ceramese,
the Bughis, and the M icassar people, giving tortoise shell, pearls,
cinnamon, cloves, and large quantities of gold, together with other


articles I have mentioned, in return for iron, common gaudy cottons,
knives (staified blue), axes, muskets, and ammunition. The Dutch
who have a fortified settlement on the north coast, also trade exten-
sively with the natives, mostly for gold, of which they obtain large
supplies in return for their goods. Vessels principally owned by foreign
merchants at Singapore and Batavia, annually visit New Guinea, and
trade for the most part for gold and copper. Messrs. Alimeida and
Sons, a well know Portuguese house, have long kept up commercial
intercourse with the New Guinea people. The further extension of
trade is perhaps somewhat checked by the indifference of the natives
to acquisition, beyond the supply of their immediate wants, and per-
haps even more to their determination to restrict their intercouse with
foreigners to that merely necessary for the obtaining of articles they
require for the time being. But it is the Macassar prahus that chiefly
supply them, and obtain the lion's share of trade. The Bughis like-
wise, a peopl e probably originally expelled from Macassar, and who
now live entirely in their prahus among the various islands of the
Celebes group, trade largely with New Guinea. Dobbo, the capital
town or village of the Arm Islands, is the grand depot for the British
calico, iron, hardware, muskets, gunpowder, &c., imported by the
Bughis, Macassars, and Ceramese from Singapore, for barter to
the New Guinea natives, as well as those of surrounding islands.
The Papuans repair hither, bringing their produce, which
they exchange for the articles they require, and the traders
make large profits from their transactions. Captain Stokes estimates
that each Bughis prahu imports into Dobbo, goods varying in amount
from 10,000 to 30,000 dollars, at least one half of her cargo being
British manufactures. Taking a yearly average of 30 prahus, and the
lowest amount of estimated value, viz., 10,000 dollars, and we have a
result of 150,000 dollars or £32,000 as the value of British goods
annually imported into Dobbo. The Chinese traders hold more direct
communication with the New Guinea people, and chiefly trade for
trepang or beche de mer, birds’ nests, sandal wood, copper, pearls,
and gold, large quantities of which latter production they are said to
obtain. Captain Stokes values the returns of a trading trip of one of
the Maccassar praus to be something near 200 per cent, on the outlay.
This ought to tempt our speculators.
The Dutch, whose post is situatad at Triton Bay, on the
west coast of the island, chiefly trade tor gold, as I have already said.
Their communications with the natives are limited to barter. They


are jealously watched, and rarely leave their Fort. This, however,
does not surprise me. The Dutch have never been popular with the
natives of any country in which they may have settled; their greed and
avarice overcoming every prudent consideration, and leading them, as
opportunity occurs, to acts of the grossest tyranny. Doubtless, too,
the Ceramese, Bughis, and other traders, have prejudiced the New
Guinea people against the Hollanders. These native traders are very
jealous of interference with their trade, and leave no stone unturned
tc check any intercourse with a people from whom they derive such
enormous profits. And I look to this policy on their part, as causing
in some measure the hostility of the Papuans to all white traders.
But even this hostility, I imagine, is greatly exaggerated. It is a
curious and significant fact that the tales we are told of the ferocity of
the New Guinea people, come second-hand to us, and have been
related to the relators by persons whose interest, it is natural to sup-
pose, interferes with their veracity. For example, the Macassar,
Chinese, and Ceramese traders are loudest in their denunciations of
the Papuans as savage cannibals, incapable of being conciliated.
The Dutch, too, follow suit, and cry down the New Guinea people.
Yet Earl, Belcher, King, Jukes, Stanley, Keppel, and Yule, agree in
pronouncing the Papuans by no means the ferocious people they had
been led to believe them. These gentlemen landed amongst them,
were received with kindness, and found little difficulty in communi-
cating with them. Keppel is especially emphatic in putting forth his
belief that the Papuans have been greatly maligned. I dare say wo
shall arrive at the truth of the matter by believing a proportion of
each side of the story. I can 'never be convinced by mere asser-
tions, and am of opinion that, as no systematic attempt to
conciliate and open up regular intercourse with these natives, has yet
been made, the observations of casual visitors on the one hand, and
interested traders offithe other, can scarcely be deemed as of very
great importance.
The Coast tribes, or Papuans, seem to be on ill-terms with the inland
tribes, or Haraforas. Forrest is somewhat contradictory in remarking
this; for, in one breath, he states that the Haraforas are held in tri-
bute by the Papuans, and again, that the latter are in constant dread
of the attacks of the former. And indeed, much of the information
at our command is contradictory. I think this latter puzzle may bo
explained, in the consideration, that the Island being large and densely
populated, the habits, laws, nature, and peaceable disposition, or the


reverse; of those settled at its various points, are distinct, and operated
upon as much by circumstances, as is the case in any other extensive
and thickly populated country. Thus, while one visitor may have
found a hospitable reception at one portion of the Island, another may
have been attacked at some other point. We find a parallel to my theory
in New Zealand, the South Sea Islands, and even in Australia. If it
be true that the Coast tribes of the Southern part of New Guinea, do
not speak the same language as those of the Northern, it may be
reasonable to conjecture that their respective natures and habits, modes
of Government, and general characterteristics, are as diverse. At any
rate, iu confirmation of this view, we are told of the ferocity of the Pap-
uans at that place, and their mildness and amiability at this. In short,
on the important point of the character of the natives, no decided asser-
tion can be made, beyond this, that, while willing to trade, they are
decidedly averse to the settlement of white people amongst them. I
have touched upon two or three probable causes for this, and it here
occurs to me, that it is possible another originates in the knowledge
they have of the vast importance of the riches of their island. These
savages, doubtless, reason that, if traders display so great an eager-
ness to obtain gold from them, once settled amidst their auriferous
country, they could never be driven forth, and would speedily over-
come them. To this reflection may be ascribed the determined
opposition to any attempt to explore their country, which they in-
variably display. And this very speculation further gives strength to
the reports which come to us from different sources of the incalculable
natural wealth of the country. These reports are many and vary in
theff probabilities. From one person, I learn, that, when
attached to a whaling ship, his captain procured two pickle bottles
full of gold dust., in exchange for iron hoops, old knives, beads and
looking-glasses. By another, I am informed, that atr American
captain obtained in trade 30,000 dollars’ worth of the precious metal.
Again, Keppel states that the pottery obtained by him from the
Papuans, discovered numerous laminar particles of gold, indicating
that the clay from which the ware was manufactured, was richly im-
pregnated. I have already said that gold constitutes the chief item
of trade with the Chinese, Dutch, Macassar, and Geramese merchants,
and I may here appropriately introduce a letter which I received
from Mr. Tarrant a few days back confirmatory of this state-
ment :


“ Mb. Collins,
Sib, —
Having seen your letter in”the Herald on the 26th instant, on
New Guinea, and read it with much interest, I think I can supply you
with a little further information on the subject.
I knew an old officer in England, (in fact, a relative) who, in his
younger days, about the commencement of the present century, was
sailing in an East Indian privateer, and whose cruises frequently took
them to the North coast of New Guinea and the adjacent islands. I
have heard him frequently wonder at the British Government never
having taken steps to colonise that country, as he was convinced it was
one of the richest on earth; he stated they often fell in with
Chinese and Japanese junks and Malay vessels which had traded there,
and which almost invariably brought away gold in return for their mer-
chandise. He believed it was wonderfully rich, not only in that metal,
but other valuable products. As to the stories about the fierceness of
the people, he always put that down as the tales of the Dutch and
Malay traders, and thought it was done only to scare others away.
Perhaps the time for opening up that country had not arrived, which
it now seems to have.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours, &c.,
G. P. Tab,bant
The natives, too, exhibit ornaments made of gold, and upon the
adjacent islands, and even upon the coast of Australia, if you shew
gold to the natives, they will point towards New Guinea, and tell you
that it is found there in abundance. A correspondent of the Sydney
Morning Herald recently stated that he had been informed by a man
who, being shipwrecked on the coast of New Guinea, and being hos-
pitably treated by the natives, had travelled in the interior, that he
had seen nuggets strewed about like potatoes on the banks of a
stream. I should like very much to come across this person. But,
as I have said, there can be no doubt that the auriferous deposits of
New Guinea exceed the wildest speculation. We need no further
proof of this than is at our command. The only question is, by what
means are we to satisfy our curiosity, and turn the riches of New
Guinea to profitable account.
But putting aside the question of the auriferous character of the
country, and even supposing that the stories of the gold deposits are
the mere phantasies of disordered or interested minds, we are yet


justified in the belief that New Guinea offers in its other resources,
an immense field for industry and enterprise. I would allude
to the diversity of climate which the formation of the island affords.
In the higb lands we have presented a similar temperature to tbat of
the hill country of Bengal and Madras; in the plains we meet with
the temperature of the tropics. Possessed of a soil singular in its
general fertility, there is no production, whether of temperate or
torrid latitudes, that may not be brought forth in New Guinea.
Thus, then, the country, apart from other temptations, offers induce-
ments to enterprise in its adaptability for the growth of cotton, sugar,
spices, indigo, and such other commodities as I have already
enumerated, together with those of more temperate climes. I would
especially draw attention to this fact, because I am anxious that we
should not alone rely upon the finding of gold and other valuable
metals; but that we should keep in mind that New Guinea offers
wealth of a far more enduring and valuable kind in its happy geo-
graphical position, fertility of soil, and varied and genial climate. I
look forward to the day when it shall become one vast plantation,
unequalled by any other country of the world, subjected to the skill
and knowledge of Europeans, and cultivated by its present inhabi-
tants —willing laborers in the cause of peaceful prosperity. Here
would be our true Protection. Cultivating the raw material at our
very doors, we could afford to compete in manufactures with the Old
World, and in the advantages of an illimitable production, overcome
that which Europe possesses in the matter of cheap labor. Giving
to our surplus and half-employed population a field for the profitable
exertion of their intelligence and strength, we should set at rest the
murmurs which are hourly becoming louder, and which arise from
circumstances which could not have been foreseen by the wisest, and
for which the wisest is at a loss to find the remedy. And at no other
period of our history has our position demanded more consideration
on the part of our governors, in regal’d to the well-being of
our population. I point to New Guinea as a resource for the
discontented, the energetic, the brave yet unsuccessful, of these
colonies. Let us explore this vast island, make it our own, subdue
by prudence and kindness its present inhabitants, and do at once a
good to ourselves, our nation, and civilization.
Before explaining the plan which, after much consideration, I have
deemed would be the most successful towards peaceably attaining our
object, let me say that we should not overlook the fact that in pro-


moting intercourse with these people, we forward the great cause of
religion and enlightenment. lam not one of those who believe that
it is right to leave the misguided and untaught savage in his primitive
ignorance and darkness. While Ido not shut my eyes to the
lamentable effects of intercourse with Europeans, which have almost
invariably attended their settlement among a savage race. I can
trace the origin and course of those disasters as being by no means
necessary to such settlement. It is no criterion of the evil as insep-
arable to colonization, or rather admixture with primitive tribes, to
point to the degraded Indians of America, or the fast fading abor-
iginals of Australia. From effects we learn to trace causes, and best
ascertain the remedy. The enlightened disposition of the present
age does not tolerate the bucaneering excesses with which coloniza-
tion w r as attended some centuries back ; and it should be the object
of all liberal and right thinking men, to avert misfortunes which have
had their origin in brutality and ignorance. I say, then, that an ex-
pedition to New Guinea would bear fruits of more value than all its
gold and riches. These savages, intelligent, brave, energetic, are
surely capable of something better than their present existence pic-
tures to us. I would point out to those courageous and good men,
whose self-sacrifice and piety have borne such glorious results to our
religion in various parts of the world—the missionaries that
New Guinea is a field which has been untouched by the Christian
husbandman, and demands tillage. And I am the more encouraged
in ray appeal to the mercantile community here, to form and ecpiip
an expedition, that its results will not merely give us a fresh scope
for trade and enterprise, but will aid in opening up a country to the
benefits of civilization, and confer upon its people the glorious
boon of Christianity. lam convinced that these people, their doubts
and apprehensions but set at rest by the adoption of a firm and truth-
ful policy in our intercourse with them, would speedily become our
fast friends and allies, assist us in the development of their country,
and speedily become alive to the advantages which peace, industry,
and obedience to the law confer. And while Ido not conceal from
myself that the task of gaining their confidence and co-operation is
likely to be one of great difficulty, (having traditions, prejudices, and
hatred to overcome,) I do not for a moment consider it impossible.
Surely it wmuld be a sad disgrace to our civilization and intellectual
superiority, if we allow a population of savages to become irreconcil-
able enemies, rather than our very good friends. It needs but prn-


donee, firmness, a just and straightforward dealing, speedily to
disarm their jealousy and suspicions. This done, all would go well.
I propose then, that the merchants of this city take up the matter.
From four to fire thousand pounds would fit out a vessel sufficiently
large for the purpose, and equip a force of one hundred men. This
sum could bo raised by shares. The vessel should be placed in com-
mand of some person well acquainted with navigation of the straits;
the exploration party should be directed by some one conversant with
the habits and nature of savage tribes. Old iron, knives, hatchets,
prints, and such like should be taken for bartering purposes, and
taken in abundance. Half a dozen horses, some hounds, and a couple
of American Express wagons, would be desirable. The frame of a
wooden house, which could be erected in a few hours, should also be
taken, together with tents, &c. The party should bo well supplied
with arms and ammunition, to be used in the last extremity. A Na-
turalist and Surgeon ought to accompany the expedition, and as far as
possible, the men comprising the party, should respectively possess
the knowledge of some useful trade, such as blacksmithing, carpenter-
ing, boat-building, and so forth. There should also be a good pro-
portion of experienced bushmen, and gold diggers among them, and
every man should bear a good character, and be bound over to implicit
obedience to the leader. The pay might be made contingent upon
the profits of the expedition, and as these, under the worst aspect,
would l)e very considerable, there is but little doubt that a number of
men of the right stamp, could be readily procured. Provisions for
one year should be sent.
Upon arriving at New Guinea, the first object would be to open np
communication with the natives. I think that in furtherance of this
course, it would be desirable to visit one of the loss frequented por-
tions of the island, where the natives, uncontaminated by intercourse
with Malay and Chinese traders, would probably display but little
hostility. Trade could be forthwith commenced, and by judicious
management, the confidence of the savages gained. Negotiations
could bo then made towards founding a settlement, and if these were
successful, a fortified factory built on the principle of the New Zea-
lander’s Pah, could be erected. Meanwhile barter could be carried on,
and continued intercourse could but lead to further good-will; for a
mutual interest, whether in regard to civilised or savage life, is a sure
promoter of friendship. Upon the completion of the fort, and the
establishment of the settlement, the vessel could return to Sydney


with the produce obtained, which would most probably consist of ebony,
sandal-wood, copper, gold, tortoise-shell, rattan, ambirgris, trepang,
and such other articles as would bo likely to find a profitable market
at this port. A fresh cargo of supplies and articles for barter, could
be despatched from Sydney, and thus a constant trade kept up. Mean-
while, the party settled, could, with caution, extend their observations,
and probably by degrees, obtain a knowledge of the interior. A
branch fort could be established inland, and a post thus formed for
communication with the Haraforas, who, I fancy, are a superior race
to the Papuans. ¥e should thus approach those huge mountain
ranges at the base of which, doubtless, are those streams whose banks
yield the precious metal. We should feast our eyes upon the vast and
luxuriant plains which we are led to believe spread far into the in-
terior, and behold the magnificence of the extensive forests. We
should become informed upon the productions of the country, and
inspect the native cultivations. Our naturalist would walk in a world
of wonders—birds, insects, flowers, shrubs—every experiment, so to
speak, of nature in her wildest and most beautiful forms, would lie at
his feet. What a tale should we send back to you here, and what a
country we should discover—an outlet for the laborious, a resource
for the adventurous, a field for the enterprising. As time progressed
and settlement extended, the climates and soils of this grand island
would yield to us all the productions of the tropical, together with
those of a milder temperature. Here could the cotton, indigo, and
sugar planter repair with a certainty of success ; here the lumberer
would find timber equal to that of Canada ; here the miner could
explore in the depths of the earth treasures of gold and copper which,
in moments of the wildest enthusiasm, he had not conceived possible :
here the trader would flourish, the farmer prosper. Let your
thoughts glance but for a moment upon the meanest picture you
can conceive of our success, and then idealise the results.
Would not those results bring to this colony —to all the
colonies —an incalculable measure of wealth. If a country at our very
doors, which can produce tea, coffee, indigo, rice, spices, sugar; which
is rich in gold and copper ; which is rich in timber ; from whose
shores we gather tortoiseshell and mother of pearl, trepang and
ambergris ; if such a country is not settled by us, w r e are unworthy
of our history, unworthy of our nation, unworthy of our
and wantonly cast a gift aside, which it would almost seem Providence
has reserved for us.


If the reports of the exploration party were favorable—and how
could they be otherwise—of course they would lead to the equipment
of other expeditions. And here would arise a difficulty, which it
would need the Government’s interference to overcome. Mere adven-
turers, so that they satisfy their greed of gold or gain, have little
scruple as to the means by which they do so. Thus, those following
upon us, unrestrained by discipline, unchecked by law, would in all
probability speedily upset the friendly relations which we might have
established with the natives. Then would follow the inevitable
result of a system of force and violence. Bloodshed, disorder,
and brutality would rule triumphant; and we should find ourselves
exposed on all sides to the hatred and treachery of the natives.
Thereafter the colonization of New Guinea would be that of the rifle
and the sword. Here would be the risk, then. The danger lies not
in the first settlement, but in the accession to settlement which would
be induced by the confirmation of the existence of gold in large quan-
tities. And I confess that I see no remedy which could be applied,
unless the Government took the matter in hand, and saw that justice
and order were preserved. To do this in the name of our nation, it
would have a right. New Guinea was proclaimed a British depen-
dency by Lieutenant Yule in 1846, and we should thus be legally
justified, in establishing a system of government which should have
for its purpose, the protection of the aboriginals, rather than the
European settlers.
But sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. Let me not count
upon difficulties which it will be time enough to prepare for, when
events shall have brought them closer to hand. The material object
which should occupy our attention at present, is the immediate organ-
ization of an expedition, on the basis 1 have faintly described. Every
consideration favors the project. Nothing short of shipwreck could
cause pecuniary loss to its promoters. Even though it failed in
securing a footing upon the island, there could be obtained in ex-
change with the natives of New Guinea and the contiguous islands,
goods in sufficient quantity to cover the expense incurred, while ser-
vice of no mean value would be rendered to the cause of science, in
the investigation of the geology and natural history of those countries.
But the object attained, a settlement effected, a permanent post estab-
lished, and the company to whose enterprise and money we owed such
an achievement, would reap a reward scarcely to be estimated. In
the negotiations with the natives, which would form the more


important course to be adopted towards effecting a footing among
them, care would be taken to obtain laud from them on equitable
terms ; and I believe, whatever the future government of the country
might be, such transactions would be revested and recognised. And
as the great East India Company grew, from a few quiet old gentle-
men in London, into a power second only to the Crown itself, so might
an association, formed as I propose, accomplish results as magnificent,
at any rate as regards profit. For New Guinea offers that which Hin-
dostan, rich though it was and is, never presented. It is close to us,
its products are, of all products, the most valuable ; we have no long
voyage to make, no tyrannical rajahs to pay tribute to, no exacting
Government of our own to petition, no organized and powerful armies
to encounter. We have but to conquer by prudence, firmness, and
courage, to obtain the riches of a country, I verily believe to be the
most wonderful in the world.
As I would not willingly lose sight of any argument in favour of
the scheme I suggest, I will refer to a letter which was recently pub-
lished in the Empire, and which was written by Sir Charles Nicholson
to a friend of his. Sir Charles, whose sympathies, as wo may
suppose, arc chiefly directed towards the interests of science, points
out in a very terse and sensible letter, the extraordinary anomaly
which is presented in our almost utter ignorance of this island, in re-
gard to its geography, its resources, its inhabitants, its geology, and
its natural history. Is there any other portion of the world, any other
island at any rate, of which we possess so little knowledge ? And yet
on the one hand, it is bounded by countries long populated by Euro-
peans, on the other, by colonies even more thickly peopled by an
energetic, restless, and enterprising race. At the very threshold of
commerce, as it were, it lies unnoticed, as a purse on our doorstep
might remain untouched and unheeded. Independently of other con-
siderations, reflect upon the wonderful and unknown volume of nature
which New Guinea promises to the perusal of science. In the mys-
teries of its natural gifts, what temptation is held forth to the student
of creation. Birds of unknown kinds, pigeons the size of turkeys,
parrots of extraordinary plumage, bustards of enormous size, a mul-
titude of finches and song birds, the beauteous bird of Paradise, —are
a few of the many feathered tribes inhabiting New Guinea. The lux-
uriant forests are prolific in their display of magnificent trees, curious
shrubs, lovely flowers, and a variety of creeping plants, while on the
plains, the herbage is luxuriant beyond conception. The insect tribes


of New Guinea are, I believe, very numerous and very curious. Lastly,
in the study of the inhabitants, their different physical types, their
languages, customs, manners, and laws, a field for philosophical in-
vestigation of a rare and tempting kind is opened to the ethnologist.
The advanced state of the people in many of the arts and manufactures
of domestic life, as well as those of commerce, argues that such investi-
gations would be of more than ordinary interest, and probably lead to
discoveries, or at least, traces of origin, vastly important to the cause
of scientific enlightenment. And all those benefits, I contend, would
be placed at our command by the carrying out of the enterprise I
suggest, for the settlement and exploration of New Guinea. The
letter I just now referred to, runs thus :
“ 26, Devonshire-place, Portland-place, W.,
December 26th, 1866.
Dear Sir, —I have to thank you for your obliging communication of
the 23rd October last, respecting New Guinea. I assure you that for
many years I have felt an equal interest with yourself with respect to
that most important region, and were I a younger man, and free to
follow my own impnlses, I would not hesitate to engage personally in
an exploratory expedition to that country, where there must be so
much to reward the traveller. Ever since I have been in England, I
have urged upon the Council of the Royal Geographical Society (of
which lam a member) the claims of New Guinea, as a field for geo-
graphical research, but with little success. A project for reaching
the North Pole, or for missionary enterprises to the central parts of
of Africa (where no European can live) will meet with infinitely
greater encouragement here than any proposition, however well-
matured, for acquiring a knowledge of New Guinea. In the address
which I delivered lately at Nottingham (as president of section of
Geography and Ethnology) I took the opportunity of dwelling on the
opprobrium it is to geographical science, that so little had been done,
and so little interest taken in a portion of the earth’s surface—the
almost only remaining portion that is habitable, and that is still un-
known. I regret that I have not a copy of the address here referred
to, to send to you, as illustrating my policy on the subject of research
in New Guinea. The chief hope I have of something effective being
done, is founded on the circumstance of Cape York being now occu-
pied by us. The period is not, I trust, far distant when some of the
enterprising young men of the colony of Queensland, or of New
South "Wales, may be tempted to seek their way to a region so invit-


ing, and so near at hand. In the meantime I shall take an early
opportunity of again bringing the question of discovery in New
Guinea before the council of the Geographical Society, and in doing
so shall make use of your letter. I shall be much gratified if at any
time you will communicate with me on any points on a subject in
which we both alike sympathise.
Hoping that the apathy now existing may, ere long, give place to
active effort, and that some young Australian Cortes may come for-
ward ready to seize the fruits of discovery that await him,
I am, my dear sir, very faithfully yours.
Charles Nicholson.”
I now turn to the end of my somewhat discursive discourse. Yet,
before completing my remarks, let me for a moment dwell upon
another obstacle which is put forth as inseparable to the exploration
of New Guinea, viz., the insalubrity of the climate. In answer to
this, I would ask what know we of the unhealthiness of this island.
Mr. Lance, in his admirable letter, takes it for granted that, as all
tropical climates are unhealthy to Europeans, (and here he is wrong),
New Guinea can form no exception. But I would point out that very many
tropical climates are the reverse of unhealth}'. The settlement at Cape
York has not been visited by any more serious illness than fever and
ague ; and the position of that settlement is far more liable to the
effects of malaria and fever than the elevated coasts of New Guinea.
But Mr. Lance immediately points out that even were the coast and
low lands, insalubrious to Europeans, a sanatorium could be formed on
the elevated plateaux of the mountainous portions of the country. As
in Mexico, New Guinea presents climates suitable to all physical dis-
positions, and the more I consider the matter, the more I am con-
vinced that the expedition would meet with but little sickness incident
to the climate. If it did, the remedy would be close at hand.
I have said all that I would say. I have been by no means indus-
trious in research, and have taken haphazard the accounts which
have come to my hand in support of my cause. I leave that cause to
the test of your reason and common sense. It is impossible—utterly
impossible—that the information at my command is based upon mere
conjecture. It is as certain that this information, however, discovers
only the mere hints which a cautious people have imparted to occa-
sional visitors. Yet what a stupendous -world do these bare items
suggest to us. Consider, that in New Guinea we alone possess the
terra incognita, which, in the days of chivalry and romance, prompted


great deeds, and brought about, albeit by measures to be regretted,
glorious resuli s. I ask the adventurous, the courageous, the ambi-
tious, to think but a moment, and while checking the promptings of
enthusiasm within due limits, yet to give rein to justifiable conjecture.
I ask the practical, and man of business, to consider alone the actual
facts at our command ; I ask, finally, the disciple of Christ, the self-
denying, fearless pioneer of Christianity : I ask these, if the cause I
advocate does not bear with it the support of generous courage, com-
mon sense, and, above all, the justification of a good purpose. And
in this spirit I confidently appeal to all classes to support my
suggestion.
Let me now use my final argument. If we delay in carrying out
my proposition—and I care not how it is carried out, so that it be by
generous and sensible meai s, —we leave the field open to other and
less scrupulous people. Last year an expedition started from Cali-
fornia, with the view of settling and exploring New Guinea, but
returned. The French recently have shown a great desire to acquire
possessions in this part of the world. The Dutch are as ambitious. I
ask you to reflect upon the disastrous influences which would result
from the possession of New Guinea by any one of these nations.
Putting aside every philanthropic view—and in doing so we dispose of
a very powerful argument—l revert to the political injury to ours elves
which would accrue from the settlement by a foreign government at
our very doors. I have no hesitation in saying that we not alone do
ourselves a wrong, but wilfully weaken the future power of the
coming great confederacy of Australia, if wo allow this prize to be
snatched from us, Can you not conceive this ? Can you not imagine
the future complications, the check to trade, the monopoly of valuable
products, the power in terrorem which may be held over us, by the
possession of New Guinea by the Americans, the Dutch, or the
French. On behalf of future generations, on behalf of science, on
behalf of our national honour, on behalf of commerce and prosperity,
on behalf of justice, finally on behalf of civilization and Christianity:
I advocate the measure I propose.
I leave, then, the matter in your hands. I have done my best,
though hurriedly, to place before you my arguments in favor of the
immediate settlement of this undoubtedly rich and valuable island,
lam aware that, had I taken more time, consulted more authorities,
have made more enquiries, I could have strengthened my advocacy
considerably. But it appears to me, that in leaving the consideration


of the subject to yourselves, I best promote my desire. All I wish is,
to turn your attention to the matter, to enlist your interest, to excite
your consideration. This done, I have little fear but that, as with
myself, the mysterious yet all promising glory which is pictured by
the enterprise I advocate, will become as palpable and attractive to
you as to me.
Ere I conclude my address, it is just to acknowledge the kindness
of very many people in this city, who possessing information of some
kind, have come forward to my assistance. To Captain Watson lam
especially indebted, more so indeed, than, considering the value of the
knowledge which has been imparted to me by him respecting the sur-
rounding islands, but which I have not used in my hurriedly written
lecture, —I can well explain. To Mr. Hawley likewise, the director
of the Australian Library, I return my most earnest thanks, for the
kind manner in which he has assisted my researches. Indeed, on all
sides, I have met with consideration and assistance, and I am con-
vinced that this courtesy is but a guarantee of a very general and deep
feeling of interest in the matter.
I have but now to thank you for your attendance, and to impress
upon you that the scheme and purpose is not born of a sudden thought,
a fleeting enthusiasm, a moment’s impulse. For years I have been
looking forward to this hour, for years I have waited patiently, believ-
ing that the matter would be taken up by the influential and the
wealthy. If I come forward now, believe me, it is no mean spirit of am-
bition, no unworthy lust for gold, no unscrupulous desire of adventure
that prompt me. I would not deny that I look forward to personal
benefit, I would not conceal that I hope to profit by the adventure.
But lam also actuated by a purer and nobler feeling. I desire to be
the originator of a movement which, in the future history of this por-
tion of the world, shall rank as one of the most important, as influ-
encing the prosperity, the political honour, the extension of civilization
of a great nation. I have waited, as I have said, in the belief that
others more worthy, perhaps, than myself, would originate my scheme.
I have waited in vain, and I now, therefore, reluctantly albeit, de-
mand your attention, ask for your criticism, and appeal to your judg-
ment. By your verdict lam willing that my project shall be put in
force, or fall to the ground. I thank you for your attention.




