

LECTURE
ON
NATIONAL EDUCATION:
DELIVERED AT THE SCHOOL OF ARTS, BRISBANE, ON
THURSDAY, THE 20TH JUNE, 1850,
BY W. A. DUNCAN, ESQ.
"To write now the reforming of education is one of the greatest and noblest
designs that can be thought on, and for the want whereof this nation
perishes."-Milton.
“ Rien n ’est plus négligé que Fenelon.
BRISBANE :
PRINTED AND PUBLISHÉD BY JAMES SWAN, ALBERT-STREET.
MDCCCL.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


PREFACE.
The following Lecture was not originally designed for
publication. It was hurriedly compiled, and its object
was answered when it was read to the members and
visiters of the useful Institution over which the Author
has the happiness to preside. The subject had, indeed,
received his maturest consideration; he was fully
satisfied with his conclusions, but doubtful as to his
style and manner of handling them. It was, therefore,
with some diffidence, if not reluctance, that he acceded
to a request that the Lecture might be published in
the Moreton Bay Courier,
In that form it obtained the notice of two or three
gentlemen, whose acknowledged literary attainments,
as well as their high social rank in the country, make
their opinions valuable; and an opinion expressed by
them, that its circulation in the less fugitive form of a
pamphlet might be useful in explaining the National
System of Education, and removing the effects of
misrepresentation, in a wider field, has led to the
present publication. The Author will be deeply gratified
if its result correspond with the anticipations of his
friends, by promoting, in any degree, the improvement
and extension of our Public Schools.


LECTURE
ON
NATIONAL EDUCATION.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, —
The indulgent reception given to the lecture delivered by me
at the opening of this Institution, on the connection between Science
and Commerce (notwithstanding its avowed imperfections), and the
solicitation of my colleagues of the National Board of Education in
this town, have induced me to appear again before you this evening,
and to claim your attention for one hour to a subject of the utmost
moment to this infant community.
The subject of Public Education is one, the importance of
which has been felt and admitted by the wise and good of all ages
and nations. The great legislators and philosophers of antiquity—
Moses, Lycurgus, Solon, Plato, Aristotle—all saw and felt this
importance, and all devoted their best energies, according to the
degree of light bestowed upon each, to the moral, physical, and
intellectual culture of youth. The chiefs of the Roman Empire
from the time of Augustus pursued the same path, and there exist
in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin writings that have come down to
us magnificent proofs of the success which, so far as their efforts
reached , attended them.
When, after the fall of the Empire, its restoration in the West
was attempted by Charlemagne, that great man surrounded himself
with learned men from all nations, and established schools throughout
the wide extent of his dominions. Our own Alfred imitated his
noble example. These benefits were unhappily neutralised or
destroyed by the civil wars and barbarism that ensued, and it was
not till the fifteenth century that the modern era of letters began—
when the treasures of literature that had survived the neglect and
and destruction of mediaeval barbarity began to be collected—when
the art of typography began to multiply copies of existing books—
when schools and universities began to spring up throughout
Christendom. Since that time the progress of education has never
been wholly interrupted in Europe, although the religious wars of


the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and the hitter antipathies
engendered thereby, have, up to the present time, prevented that
universal diffusion of knowledge which, we trust, it will be the
glory of our own age to accomplish, wherever Christianity and
civilization have assumed their beneficent sway.
It can hardly he necessary in the present day, and certainly
not before the audience that I have the honor to address, to offer
any proofs of the beneficial effects ofeducation. There are, no
doubt, still individuals to be found, and some of them in high
stations, too, who hold that the tree of knowledge is forbidden fruit
to the poor;—that education, if universally extended, would uproot
society, unfit men for manual labour, and destroy all order and
subordination among mankind. It is a sufficient answer to such
objectors to point to the indisputable fact, that precisely in those
Countries where education is most generally diffused, are men most
industrious, as well as most orderly in their manners. But it is not
from this class of opponents that the advocates of education in this
country have anything to fear. The difficulty of establishing a
general and enlightened system of education among us—a system
deserving of the name, and w r orthy of our age and race—arises from
the difference of opinion that exists among the friends of education
as to what public education ought to be, and who they are that
ought to confer it.
It is a fact worthy of notice, on the very threshold of this inquiry,
that neither among the Greeks nor the Romans—neither among the
Jews nor the early Christians—was education placed in the hands
of the priesthood. It is remarkable even that nearly all the more
learned and distinguished Fathers of the early Church were educated
in the schools of the Pagan philosophers; nor can the modern
opponents of secular education show that any one of them wavered
in his faith, in after life, in consequence. On the other hand, the
most remarkable layman of antiquity that received his education
from the clergy was the Emperor Julian, and you all know by what
surname he is called in history. I attach no importance, however,
to this last fact; but I assert that, in the earlier and better period
of the Church, no claim whatever was made by the clergy to the
direction of general education.
At the time of the revival of letters, however, to which I have
just alluded, the clergy were the only men of literary education
who existed in Europe. The physical education of the nobility and
gentry was, indeed, perfect. They were admirably taught how to
parry a foeman’s steel, and how to cut to pieces a less potent or
less disciplined antagonist; but very few of them knew how to
write and read; and, beyond the ability to say the Lord’s Prayer,
and a few simple rules of right and wrong, no education whatever
was conferred upon the great majority of the humbler classes.
r l he clergy, then, being the only possessors of literature, were,
as a matter of course, its only dispensers when the laity began to
avail themselves of its advantages; and it. is but fair to say that the
world will always owe them a deep debt of gratitude for their


labours at that period in extending knowledge, as well as for their
preservation of letters during the long and dreary period that
preceded it.
Afterwards, when laymen became teachers in schools and
universities, they naturally enough placed themselves, or were placed
by the State, under the superintendence of those ecclesiastical bodies
from whom they first received their own instruction. Thus were
the clergy for centuries the sole directors of literary and scientific,
as well as of religious, education.
By-and-by, however, came the religious revolution of the
sixteenth century, when one-half of the nations of Europe discarded
each more or less of the religious doctrines they had previously
received, and each transferred its educational establishments to a
clergy of its own choice. But in each of these States there was a
powerful minority, who either held by the old system, or attempted
to improve upon the new. The consequence was, that everywhere
•education became a monopoly in the hands of a party, —one or
more sections of each population being wholly debarred from its
benefits, as a public right; and, in some cases, prohibited even from
supplying the deficiency from their own resources.
This state of things prevailed, more or less, in every State of
Europe down to the end of the last century. In our mother-country
it exists in some measure to the present hour. The consequence is,
-that, from the dignified repose of its clerical guardians, on the one
hand, and the unwillingness of large bodies of the people to avail
dieraselves of an education wHich their consciences did not approve
of, on the other, public education languished, and had in many
places become—and nowhere more than in England and her colonies
—an object of contempt. There was no class of men more exposed
to ridicule than the schoolmasters —a class which ought to have been
the most honoured of all. But the contempt was just. There were
a thousand 80-the-boys Halls elsewhere than in Yorkshire, and in
Neiv South Wales, a few years ago, almost every school in the
country was one of them.
An additional cause, indeed, existed for the miserable state of
education here. Instead of having in this country one Established
Church, as most other countries have, we have four Churches
supported by the State, and, consequently, at least four kinds of
public schools, in which different doctrines are taught at the public
expense. It follows from this unprofitable waste of labour that the
large sum annually voted for education, when divided among a very
scattered population, and again subdivided among four different
Churches in each locality, afforded so paltry a .remuneration to the
teachers, that none but persons in the lowest ranks of society, and
these, again, individuals who were disqualified physically or other-
wise for pastoral or agricultural labour, would accept the office ; or,
if any person of education was inconsiderately led to embark in
the undertaking, the degraded position in which he soon found
himself placed caused him to relinquish it jn disgust at the very
earliest opportunity.


The evil became so conspicuous at length, that various attempts
were made by the Government to introduce a better system.
The first of these was made by Governor Sir Richard Bourke,
in 1836, who endeavoured to introduce into the Colony the system
which Lord Stanley had, some time previously, established in
Ireland. The measure passed the Legislature, but was rendered
nugatory at the time by the persevering opposition of the clergy.
A similar attempt was made by Sir George Gipps, in 1839, to
introduce the British and Foreign system ; but, from the same cause,
with no better result.
Still the evil increased—a large expenditure, with no corre-
sponding result; when, in 1844, a Committee of the Legislative
Council ivas appointed to collect evidence, and report upon the
state of Education in this Colony, and to devise the means of placing
the Education of Youth upon a basis suited to the wants and wishes
of the community.” Fourteen witnesses were examined by this
Committee, of whom I myself happened to be one. Among the
other witnesses were the Catholic and Protestant Bishops,—Presby-
terian, Wesleyan, and Baptist clergymen, —several schoolmasters and
laymen, of various denominations. Among these a great variety of
opinion w r as expressed. The majority were, however, in favour of
some system which should give an united education to all classes
of Christians, without prejudice to parental authority or the rights
of conscience.
It was discovered by the Committee that, out of 25,676 children,
between the ages of four and fourteen, only 7,642 received education
in public schools, and 4,865 in private schools, — leaving about
13,000 (or upwards of one-half of the whole youth of the Colony)
totally .destitute of all education whatever, notwithstanding a cost
to the country for Education of £1 per head; and even in the case
of those children who were reported as attending school, it appeared
that, from the want of good schoolmasters and school-books, the
education conferred was not deserving of the name.
The Committee, in reporting upon this lamentable state of
things, attributed the evil chiefly to the strictly Denominational
character of the schools. It must be obvious that the number of
schools in a given locality ought to depend on the number of
children requiring instruction in such locality. For example: a
population like that of Brisbane undoubtedly requires one, and not
more than one, good public school, —conducted by a well-educated
man, receiving a salary adequate to the high office of a Public
Instructor, But, if there is to be any education at all, it is equally
clear that, under the Denominational system, at least four public
schools must exist in each town, how small soever the population.
Supposing, then, the four to be adequately endowed, it follows that
the Denominational system would entail four times the expense upon
the country which is demanded by the population. Under that
system, wherever a school of one denomination is established, three
others instantly spring up ; not because the first is too well attended,
ot too well paid, but because it is feared—and justly feared—that


proselytes would be made. Neither do the three new schools spring
up because there is no other ground to occupy, for there are hundreds
of places where there is no school at all, nor any hope of one,' —
until haply some zealous fisher of men thinks of spreading his net
in the neglected stream ; when, lo ! again, not one school appears,
but four apologies for a school, as before.
This state of things, which would be an evil in any country,
is multiplied tenfold in this thinly-inhabited Colony. In hundreds
of places there is no school at all. In scores of places there are
four times the number that ought to be.
For these and similar reasons, the Committee of 1844 recom-
mended the adoption of a system by which the children of all
denominations should be educated together, —receiving a good moral
and intellectual education, together with as much instruction in our
common Christianity as should not interfere with the controverted
tenets of each denomination.
They, accordingly, recommended the adoption of the Irish
National system, —sometimes called Lord Stanley’s,—as being the
best adapted for this comprehensive purpose. The Council adopted
their report, and subsequently voted £B,OOO per annum for its
establishment throughout the Colony: £2,000 for the settled
districts, £1,500 for Port Phillip, and £1,500 for the squatting
districts.
This is the system which it is now intended to establish in
Brisbane, and which I appear before you this night to advocate and
explain.
The distinguishing characteristic of this system then is, that,
whilst it affords a superior elementary education to every class of
the people, it offers an inducement to all to receive its benefits, by
keeping clear of all interference with the particular tenets of any.
In other words, it explicitly avows, as its leading principle, that
“no attempt shall he made to influence or disturb the peculiar
religions tenets of any sect of Christians."
The first question that naturally arises is— 11 Can such a system
be devised and brought into practical operation? " That question
lam fully prepared to answer in the affirmative. Such a scheme
has long been in successful operation in the most enlightened nations
of Europe—in Austria, Bavaria, Prussia, Wirtemberg, Hesse, Baden,
Holland, Belgium, and, for the last sixteen years, in Ireland. In
all the countries I have named, Catholics and Protestants of every
denomination study together all the branches of a secular education,
while their religious education is attended to by their respective
pastors.
And surely there is sufficient ground common to Christians of
all denominations in this country, whereon to fix the basis of a good
education. We all speak the same English language —with some
variety of accent, it is true ; but even this itself is a reason why we
should study in common, in order that provincial errors may be the
more effectually checked, and the most correct usage established.
Again, we all adhere—professedly, at least —to the same principles


of Christian morality. We all receive the holy Scriptures S
divine revelation. We are all perfectly agreed in the principle*
both of ethics and physics. The rules of arithmetic and geometry
are the same to all of us. If we have some prejudices on certain
subjects of history, these are —thanks to the researches of recent
writers—every day becoming gradually fewer, and the whole field
of antiquity is open ground to all. The same melodies charm all
our ears: there is nothing heterodox in harmony, save a false
progression or an unresolved discord. A child may learn drawing,
{or sculpture even), without “peril of idolatry ” j and no one in
the present day pretends that there is any heresy either in geography
or astronomy. If tender consciences are still somewhat startled at
the new sciences of geology and phrenology, it is because these
sciences, like astronomy in the time of Galileo, are yet imperfect.
Thefe is, at any rate, nothing to fear trom a well-regulated course
of gymnastic exercises or of scientific agriculture.
Herb, I repeat, is a vast field of common ground, on which all
our children may tread with the most perfect security,—on which
may be laid the foundation of an excellent education.
1 But here we are met by the advocates of the Denominational
system with a series of objections ;• —
I. They say we either exclude religion from our system
altogether, or w r e exhibit an indifference to the truth of those
important points which are controverted among the different sects.
2dly. They ask us what guarantee we offer that, under the
cloak of liberality, proselytism may not be practised by the teachers.
3dly. Some object to the system because the Scriptures are not
admitted as one of the ordinary school-books.
4thly. It is said by some that the system has a tendency to
Infidelity.
1, In reply to the first objection, we admit that no education
can be perfect which is not entirely based upon Christianity. No
wise Legislature would for one moment think of separating Chris-
tianity from moral education. The advocates of Educational Reform
look for the best rules upon every science ; they have looked also
fbr the best rule of morality, and they have found it in religion.
“ Religion,” says Burke, “ is the only sure foundation of morality.”
The holy Scriptures, then, contain our moral code ; and, accordingly,
the history and morality of the Bible are completely interwoven
with the National system. Open the books published by the National
Board now on your library shelves. In them you will find an
epitome of sacred history :—“ They dwell on the original sin of our
First Parents, and on the promise then made—that in time One
would come by whom sin w r ould be overcome:—they show 7 how that
promise was renewed, particularly in the covenant w T ith Abraham ;
and they point to the fulfilment of it in the coming and suffering
of our Lord, They dw r ell also cm the giving of the Law of Moses *.
they state that it is commonly divided into three parts —the moral,
the civil, and the ceremonial; and that the moral is of perpetual
obligation, because the duties which the creatures of God owe to


Him 3 and to one another, can never have an end. The duty of
Christian charity is set forth and enjoined by the precepts and
example of our Lord himself; and a lesson by which it is thus
inculcated is hung up in every National School. All this is taught
as revealed truth.” — [Ninth Report of Commissioners, p. 25.]
The lesson of Christian charity to which I have referred is as
follows: —
“ Christians should endeavour, as the Apostle Paul commands them, to live
peaceably with all men.”— Rom xii., 18.
“ Our Saviour Christ commanded his disciples to love one another. Ho
taught them to love even their enemies, to bless those that cursed them, and to
pray for those that persecuted them. He himself prayed for his murderers.”
“ Many men hold erroneous doctrines, but we ought not to hate or persecute
them. We ought to seek for the truth, and to hold fast what we are convinced
is the truth : but not to treat harshly those who are in error. Our Saviour did
not intend his religion to be forced on men by violent means. He woqld not
allow his disciples to fight for him.”
“ If any persons treat us unkindly, we must not do the same to them, for
Christ and his Apostles have taught us not to return evil for evil. If we would
obey Christ, we must do to others not as they would do to us, but as we should
wish them to do to us.”
“ Quarrelling with our neighbours and abusing them is not the way to
convince them that we are in the right and they in the wrong: it is more likely
to convince them that we have not a Christian spirit.”
“ We ought to show ourselves followers of Christ, who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again.”—l Pet., ii., 23.
Is not this religion
I will now read to you an extract from a volume of Sacred
Poetry used in the National Schools :
THE EXAMPLE OF CHRIST.
Jesus Christ, my Lord and Saviour,
Once became a child like me;
Oh that in my whole behaviour
He my pattern still might be !
All my nature is unholy t
Pride and passion dwell within ;
But the Lord was meek and lowly,
And was never known to sin.
While I’m often vainly trying
Some new pleasure to possess,
He was always self-denying,
Patient in his worst distress.
Let me never be forgetful
Of his precepts any more ;
Idle, passionate, and fretful,
As I’ve often been before.
Lord, though now thou art in glory,
We have thine example still;
I can read thy sacred story,
And obey thy holy will.
Help me by that rule to measure
Every word and every thought,
Thinking it my greatest pleasure
There to learn what thou hast taught.


Ladies and Gentlemen, is not this religion ? Is it not pure
and undefiled religion ?
I admit, however, that there are religious doctrines of great
importance that are not taught in the school-books published by the
Board. lam not an Indifferentist on this subject ; my creed is
longer, I believe, than the creeds of most of you ; and, if I thought
that the teaching were to end here, I, for one, would not be here
this evening to recommend the system to your notice. Y* hat, then,
is the fact? The Commissioners of National Education, while they
will not allow any religious instruction to be forced on the children
contrary to the will of their parents —while they, as you have seen,
provide all the religious instruction that can be imparted consistently
with this principle, they also place it completely within the power
of the parents and pastors of every child to supply such peculiar
doctrinal instructions as they deem necessary. For this purpose
they have established the following rules, among others to the same
effect:—
“2. One day in each week, or part of a day, (independently of Sunday), is
to be set apart for the religious instruction of the children ; on which day such
pastors, or other persons, as are approved of by the parents or guardians of the
children, shall have access to them for that purpose, whether those pastors have
signed the original applications or not.
“ 3. The Local Patrons, Masters, and Mistresses of Schools are also required
to afford convenient opportunity and facility for the same purpose on other days
of the week ; but where any course of religious instruction is pursued in a school
during school hours, to which the parents of any of the children attending it
object, the Local Patrons are to make arrangement for having such instruction
given to those who are to receive it at a stated time or times, in a separate place
from the class-room, so that no children whose parents or guardians object to
their being so, shall be present at it.
“4. Any arrangement of this description that may be made is to be publicly
notified in the schools, in order that those children, and those only, may be
present whose parents or guardians approve of their being so.
5. The reading of the Scriptures, either in the Protestant authorised or
Bo nay versions, comes within the above rules as to religious instruction.”
Here, then, is ample opportunity for dogmatical instruction ;
and, if the clergy will not avail themselves of such opportunity, the
fault is not in the system,-—the fault lies not with us its advocates.
I say it with all due reverence and respect, the evil must be looked
foi elsewhere. Religious truth is as much a part of education,
undoubtedly, as grammar or geography. But it does not follow
that they aie both to be taught at the same hour, or by the same
person. In our colleges we have a different instructor for every
different branch of education. We have Professors of Humanity,
Professors of Natural Philosophy, Professors of Moral Philosophy,
Professors of Theology, and so forth—all giving separate instruction
in their separate branches.
Again, in our boarding-schools, I appeal to the ladies present
w rethei they ever saw or heard of needle-work and dancing, drawing
and music, being taught by the same master or mistress. Yet all
these are necessary branches of female education. The ladies must


be taught to knit, and they must be taught to sing and play ; but it
does not follow that the art of crochet and the science of crotchets
are to be taught by the same individual, or at the same hour.
Why, then, should we not introduce into primary schools a
portion of that division of labour which has long existed with
advantage in our universities and schools for the higher classes'?—
particularly when it is rendered essentially necessary, if we would
raise public education from its degraded state, and place it on that
respectable footing which the wants, and requirements, and spirit of
the age demand.
2. In reply to the question, —-What guarantee we offer that
proselytisra may not be practised by the teachers ?—I beg to observe
that the Commissioners, under whose control the whole scheme is
conducted, are gentlemen of different denominations, of the highest
character in their respective churches, as well as of the most
respectable literary attainments. As it is quite certain, therefore,
that any attempt at proselytism would be immediately detected either
by the parents or Local Patrons of the school, and reported to the
Commissioners, so it would follow, as a matter of course, that any
teacher offending in the slightest degree in this way would subject
himself to instant dismissal. Here, then, is a most effectual check
upon proselytisra. Let me ask you, have you any such check upon
the Denominational system ? In any locality where there was but
one Denominational School, must not many children either run wild,
or learn in that school a catechism which their parents disapprove
of ? This objection is a sword which our opponents hold by the
blade, and kindly present to us the handle.
3. Then, as to the objection that w T e do not use the whole
Scriptures in the schools, as an ordinary school-book. To this there
are several cogent answers. 1. It has long been the opinion of
many enlightened men that the Scriptures were given for a high
and spiritual purpose, and were never intended to be tossed about
with that levity and irreverence to which a task-book is naturally
and necessarily subjected. 2. Many also hold that there are certain
passages and portions of Scripture,—in the Book of Leviticus, for
example,—which, though excellent for their proper place and pur-
pose, are unfit to be read by youth of either sex. They could not,
in fact, be read aloud in this assembly. 3. Again, different bodies
are not quite agreed as to what constitutes the entire sacred volume,
nor as to the correct translation of certain passages of it. 4. But
even if these objections were got over, I would maintain, for my
own part, that, on literary grounds alone, the sacred volume is not
adapted for a class-book. The extent is too great; the style, though
noble in many passages, is antiquated, and often obscure, —two
characteristics that ought especially to be avoided in the choice of
lesson-books. It contains not that variety of subjects which a
complete modern education demands, —that alternation of grave and
gay, sacred and secular, prose and verse, which distinguish all well-
compiled modern school-books.
Hence it is not read in the National Schools as an ordinary


school-book ; but the Board have published ample selections from it
in the four volumes which I hold in my hand. Tw r o volumes are
from the Old, and two from the New, Testament. The selections
from the Old Testament contain the greater part of the Scripture
history, interspersed with psalms and other moral passages; and the
selections from the New Testament contain the Gospel of St. Luke,
and the Acts of the Apostles, together with some of the most admired
passages of St. Paul’s Epistles, These ample extracts have received
the express approbation of the Catholic and Protestant Archbishops
and one of the most respectable Presbyterian clergymen of Dublin,
as well as of the distinguished lay members of the Board, of
different denominations.
In addition to this, the whole Scriptures may be used in the
schools during those hours that are set apart for religious instruction*:
the only restriction being, that no child shall be present at such
instruction unless with the approbation of its parents or pastor.
The same rule applies with regard to prayer-books and
catechisms. These may be used during the days and hours set
apart for separate religious instruction, and not otherwise.
4. Notwithstanding all these precautions on the part of the
Commissioners, to secure religious as well as secular instruction to
the children attending the National Schools, it has been said that
there is a tendency to Infidelity in the system. How this opinion
has originated I know r not, unless it be, perhaps, that Infidelity—
avowed Infidelity —is knowm to have found its w r ay into some of
the public schools of France. This is, unfortunately, true ; but I
submit that there is no parallel between the cases. In France, you
are all aware that the majority of the present generation
received no religious instruction themselves, in consequence of the
abolition of religious worship by the Legislature during the first
French Revolution. If you read Alison's History of Europe during
that period, you will see this fact, and its probable consequences,
fully discussed, and a most alarming result to unborn Frenchmen
predicted by the historian. But this is not all. Not only are the
majority of the French adult race uninstructed in Christianity, but
a large proportion of them are, —in consequence of the dreadful
mass of Infidel and Socialist wailings,, licentious novels, and the
like, which disgrace French literature of the lighter sort, —deeply
prejudiced against Christianity, The teachers in public schools and
colleges in France are, consequently, in some instances, unbelievers
in Christianity —avowed Infidels.
But w ? hat parallel is there between them and us ? Not only is
our population, in general, free from this taint, but every possible
precaution is taken by the National Board of Education to prevent
any contamination of the kind.
I have already stated, and an examination of the books will
abundantly convince you, that Christianity is entirely interwoven
with the system. You have seen, also, that the most effectual means
me taken to prevent proselytism in every shape. I will now read
to you an extract from the Rules adopted by the Board for the


admission of Teachers, which will show their solicitude that only
religious and moral persons be appointed to their schools ;
“ 1. The appointment of the teachers of schools rests solely with the Board
of Commissioners, who are to be satisfied with the fitness of each, both as to
character and general qualification.
“ 2. But while the Board thus reserves to itself the right of nomination, it
will in all cases pay special regard to the recommendation by the Local Patrons
of candidates for the office of teacher. A teacher should be a"person of Christian
sentiment, of calm temper, and discretion:—should be imbued with a spirit of
peace, of obedience to the law, and loyalty to the sovereign ; and should not only
possess the art of communicating knowledge, but be capable of moulding the
mind of youth, and^ of giving the power which education confers a useful direction.
These are the qualities for which Patrons ot schools, on their recommendation of
teacners, should anxiously look, they are those which the Commissioners are
anxious to find, to encourage, and to reward.
“ 3 - The Commissioners will provide a Normal Establishment in Sydney, for
training teachers, and educating persons destined to undertake the charge of
schools; and they will not sanction the appointment of a teacher
to any school unless he or she shall have received a certificate from them, or from
such person as they may authorize to examine him or her on the spot, to ascertain
due qualification for the office.
4. lei sons presented for admission to the Normal Establishment must
produce a certificate ot good character from an ofhciatin o, clergyman of the
communion to which they belong.
* * * * «< * *
“ G. Should the Commissioners consider any teacher employed in a school
towards which they have contributed unfit for" his or her office, or otherwise
objectionable, they shall have the power to dismiss summarily the said teacher,
and to provide another.”
From these rules you will see that it is utterly impossible that
either Infidelity or Immorality can be taught or promulgated in a
National School. But the Board have gone still further. They
have published among their ordinary school-books a complete treatise
in pioof of the truth of Christianity. Here is the book; it is not
voluminous ; it is plain and simple,—adapted to the youthful
capacity ; but it is cogent in argument, and well adapted to satisfy
the inquiring mind. If, after all these exertions on the part of the
Boaid, there be any deficiency in the religious instruction of the
children, it must be the fault of the parents, and of that portion of
the clergy who keep aloof from it. There are £30,000 of the public
money devoted to the support of the clergy,—a large sum for so
small a population,—perhaps as much as our finances will allow.
They also receive contributions from their respective flocks. Let
them, then, fulfil the condition under which this money is appro-
priated, namely, to impart religious instruction. Let them co-operate
with the laity in conferring on the children of this generation a
good religious as well as a good moral and intellectual education.
W e recognise them as our religious instructors. Let them recognise
us as qualified to judge of the amount of science and literature
which the progress of the age requires that our children should
possess.
But it would be unfair to take it for granted that all the clergy
o any church are opposed to a comprehensive system of education.
«.mong the clergy of the Church of England there is not a more


learned or distinguished prelate than Dr. Whately, the Archbishop
of Dublin, and he, you are aware, is at the head of the National
Board in Dublin. A more distinguished churchman and educator
of youth than the late Rev. Dr. Arnold, of Rugby, did not exist m
England ; and he, it is well known, assisted materially in the com-
pilation of the admirable books published by the National Board.
In the Presbyterian Church, again, there are few brighter names
than those of the Rev. Dr. Henry and the Rev. Mr. Carlyle, and
they too have been most indefatigable advocates of the system.
' But'you may ask me, how am Ito deal with my own Church
in this matter?—Am I not afraid of the thunders of the Vatican
against this so-termed Infidel system ? I have no such fear, Ladies
and Gentlemen. There are, undoubtedly, Roman Catholic bishops
and clergymen who are strongly opposed to the system, from the
same mistaken motives as others; but I shall show you that we
have some of the best of them also with us. In the first place,
there is the learned and amiable Dr. Murray, Archbishop of Dublin,
who is a leading member of the Board ; and this itself should be
some guarantee that there is nothing very iniquitous in the National
System. . .. A . . , ,
Again, there did not exist, in his day, a more oistmguis ied
prelate in Ireland, nor in Europe, than the Right Rev. Di. Doyle,
and this prelate, in 1825, in his examination before a Committee of
the House of Lords, said, —“/ see no objection whatever that they
(Roman Catholics and Protestants) should he educated together,
on the contrary, if, by being educated together, the harmony oj the
different sects in Ireland could be promoted, I think it would be a
matter to be desired
Again, the most learned and distinguished Roman Catholic
prelate in England at the present hour is Dr. Wiseman, who, in his
evidence on Education before a Committee of the House ot Commons,
said, —I think that in this country (England) and in Ireland, such
arrangements might be made that both Protestants and Catholics
could attend anything in the form of an university or public school
without any harm ensuing; on the contrary, good, perhaps, might
be done. I think also that, in the lower branches ol education, it
might be easily managed to give them a common education, reserving
the religious education of their respective classes to their own
pastors.”
I might quote similar avowals from clergymen of different
denominations in Germany, Holland, and Belgium, where a similar
comprehensive system of education has prevailed for years, with the
hest results ; but I trust I have said enough to remove any impression
that may have existed in your minds as to any alleged tendency to
irreligion in the National System.
What real grounds, then, have our opponents to fear for the
stability of Religion under the National System ? Have they no
faith in the prevailing power of truth ? Is Christianity so unamiable
a thing that they must imprison it in order that it may not escape ?
Must it be sealed, like a bottle of champagne, lest its vital power


should evaporate? Will they trust nothing to its native beauty and
holiness ?—Nothing to its admirable adaptation to man’s spiritual
necessities? Have they no confidence in its Founder’s assurance of
its permanent stability ? Will they trust nothing to the grace of
God?
For ray own part, I believe that the interests of religion as
well as of literature, —the interests of truth as well as of science,
will be greatly enhanced by the system of united education which we
propose.
It will surely be admitted that young men who have been
accustomed to read these admirable lessons in class together,—who,
notwithstanding some differences of faith, are yet united in youthful
friendship,—it will surely be admitted that such persons are in a
better disposition of mind for investigating truth than those who,
educated in different schools* have been accustomed, —as some older
children I w T ot of are accustomed—to argue with a heat that may
consume rather than enlighten, and w r hose chief arguments are the
abominable nicknames of Papist or Heretic, Puseyite or Puritan.
A late clergyman of the Church of England, the Rev. Mr.
Warner, states, in his “ Literary Recollections,” that, in his early
days, he had written a very bitter pamphlet against the then
agitated measure of Catholic Emancipation. A more mature judg-
ment induced him to become a supporter of that measure 5 and, in
apologising for his previous act, he attributes it to the fact that near
the school in which he was educated there was a Catholic school,—
that the boys of the two schools were continually fighting,—that,
on one occasion, while manfully supporting the “ Protestant interest,”
he got beaten by a boy from the Babylonian side, and not only was
his nose’s blood shed in the good cause, but his Protestant master
gave him a sound thrashing into the bargain. Such was the cause
of this gentleman’s early hostility to the rights of his fellow-subjects.
And I am convinced that one-half of the unchristian rancour which
often exists between persons of different creeds arises from the
prejudices of the nursery, and the other half from the prejudices of
the Denominational School. And no wonder, seeing: that in this
Denominational teaching—
“ A hideous figure of their foes they draw,
Nor lines, nor shades, nor looks, nor colours true ;
And this grotesque design expose to view .-
And yet the daubing pleases.”
On the contrary,—reverting to our anecdote, —had the boys of
the two schools alluded to by Mr. Warner been educated together,
there would have been no civil w ? ar between them, —no bloody
noses ; and Mr. Warner wmuld not, on leaving school, have published
a pamphlet, which, “ dying, he wished to blot.”
And again I repeat, would not the minds of these two sets of
boys have been much better fitted for the calm investigation of the
grounds of their religious differences, if no such hostility had
existed ?
Will any man tell me that a mind full of rancour and prejudice


against ail sects save the one in which he has been educated;, is the
fittest mind for the calm and deliberate investigation ot religious
truth ? No doubt, it would be better if we were all of one mind
in this great matter, just as it would have been better if Adam had
never sinned. But we must lake the world as it is. Men will difler,
and seeing that differences will exist, —seeing that We must associate
in the world with men of different opinions, whether we will or
no t j s it not better, far better, that we should begin life by
cultivating kind feelings towards each other; and, as we cannot
unite all minds together, that we should do our best to unite all
This, I am convinced, is the true spirit of Christianity, and I
am equally convinced that the spirit in which sectarian differences-
are often inculcated, is the spirit which would have called down fire
upon the Samaritans, and which the Author of Christianity con -
demned. It is not the proper frame of mind for investigating truth.
I think I have a right to assume, from what has been said, that
complete religious instruction may be obtained under the National
System. On the other hand, Ido not believe that a good literary f
scientific, and intellectual education ever has been, or ever would
have been, conferred on the youth of this Colony by the Denomi-
national System. . . , .
During the first two or three years of my sojourn in this
Colony I was in the habit of seeing a good deal of the working of
the Denominational System. If you walked into a school, you
would see on the forms or desks (where there were any forms or
desks) a few torn catechisms ; one boy would be sitting with a
Vyse’s Spelling-book, another with an Universal Spelling-book, a
third would have Mavor’s, and a fourth Dilworth’s; perhaps, also,
you would see a tattered Testament or two lying on the floor ; but,
at any rate, one thing you never failed to see, and that was the
striking fact, that not one child in six, perhaps, had any book of
any kind whatever. The same contemptible Vyse or Dilworth was
often made to serve a whole class. The teacher himself seldom
knew anything more than barely to read and write *. the mysteries
of geography, grammar, physics, or mathematics were a sealed book
to him. He had been but the other day an ordinary hired servant,
and, when wages became once more high, he relinquished his school,
and accepted the higher emolument of a shepherd, a hutkeeper, or a
constable.
This was the state of things eleven years ago. I admit that
some improvement has taken place in the Denominational Schools
since that time. The very rivalry caused by the introduction of the
National System has effected this. There is now a Denominational
Board also, and they, 100, have their Local Patrons. These offices
are, however, perfect sinecures. Their Board have hardly any
control over schools, teachers, or books ; —the Patrons, none. All is
done by the Bishops and clergy. I have seen a few of their books i
some of them are good, and all are better than the Vyse’s and
Dilworth’s and Universal trash of former days ; but I must say


that, compared with the books of the National Board, they are,—
taken as instruments for the communication of general knowledge,—•
almost contemptible. Ido not pretend to have examined them all,
but the Denominational reading-books that I have examined are
filled exclusively with religious instruction, — often couched in
indifferent English ; and of lessons in Natural History, Descriptive
Outlines, Stories and Fables, History, Vegetable or Animal Physi-
ology, Natural Philosophy, or miscellaneous literature in prose or
verse, —not one word !
Is this, then, a system of education adapted to the wants and
wishes of a rising community in the nineteenth century ? I
apprehend not. “ One thing is needful,” I admit, to fit men for the
other world ; but many things are needful to make men enlightened
and useful citizens here below.
I will now state to you briefly what I conceive to be a system
of secular education adapted to the wants of this community, and
the age we live in ; —inquiring, as I proceed, how far the desideratum
is supplied by the system under discussion, and how far that system
itself, as now in operation, appears capable of amendment.
A celebrated foreign writer, (with a translation of one of whose
admirable little tales all of you are well acquainted),— Bernardin
de Saint Pierre , —says : “ Before establishing a school of citizens,
we ought to establish a school for schoolmasters. lam astonished
beyond measure,” he adds, “ that, of all the arts taught among us,
every one has to be learnt, except the most difficult of all, —the art
of educating men.”
This, then, is one of the most important measures to be adopted
in reforming our educational system, —to establish a Normal School
for the instruction of schoolmasters, and to establish an educational
test or criterion, by which the fitness of candidates for that most
responsible office may be ascertained. Such schools, accordingly,
have been established in all the countries in which this system has
been introduced. Such a school, upon a large scale, is now in
progress of formation in Sydney. I regret to say, however, that,
although £3OO per annum have been set aside for the salary of a
Normal teacher, —such is the dearth of properly qualified persons in
the colony,—one sufficiently eligible to fill the appointment has not
yet been found; and it has been found necessary to send to the
mother-country for a fit and proper person to conduct that important
establishment. This, of course, is only a temporary delay.
The Normal School is the life and soul of this system ; —but, as
sortie of you may not have a very clear notion of what a Normal
School is, I will give a brief description of it :
A Normal School is a seminary for ordinary pupils, who, so
far as they are concerned, receive the tuition of the Normal master,
as if that were the sole object. But this being merely subservient
to the great object of the institution, there are admitted to the school
candidates for the situation of schoolmaster. —(Seminants they are
called in Germany, where this system was first adopted.) These
seminants are present at all the lessons given by the master to the


young pupils, and, by turns, are employed in teaching them under
his direction.
These serninants are usually admitted at the age of eighteen 5
they should have previously received a good education, and they
should remain in the seminary about six years, or until they are
twenty-four.
Besides their practical exercises in the school, the serninants
attend separate prelections delivered by the Normal master, on the
principles of education, the art of teaching, and the whole economy
of a school. They are further required to read privately the best
works on the subject, and to undergo periodical examinations on all
the subjects of the lectures ; —those who acquit themselves wfith
more credit being placed higher on the list for vacant masterships.
Care also is taken that, while their professional education is
duly attended to, the general improvement of their mind is not
neglected. In Germany there is usually attached to the Normal
School an academy, or gymnasium, which also serves as a college
for the higher classes of society ; and this college the serninants
have the privilege of attending, to perfect their general education.
You will observe that a schoolmaster, thus schooled, is in reality
a highly educated professional man, in no way inferior to a clergy-
man, a barrister, or a doctor of physic. Accordingly, in Prussia*
and other parts of Germany, the schoolmaster is not, (as we sometimes
see him in this country), parish cieik, sexton, parson's man-servant,
undertaker, and gravedigger; and out of ali these pluralities can
hardly scrape a subsistence. In those countries he is recognized as
a member of the learned professions, ranks with the professions I
have mentioned, and associates on terms of perfect equality with the
other high officers of Government.
It would be of no use, however, to educate men for this most
important of all public offices, unless we gave them the means of
comfortable existence when installed in their appointment. When
the pay of a shepherd is equal to that of a schoolmaster, there is
is little probability that a highly-educated man will long continue
to prosecute the “ delightful task.” Accordingly, we propose, under
the National System, to give the teachers salaries, —in addition to a
good house and garden, and to the fees paid by the parents of the
children, —in no case less than £4O, and it is hoped, in most cases,
far above that sum. In my evidence before the Legislative Council,
I proposed that the minimum salary should not be fixed under £lOO,
but rather above it. I regret to say that this suggestion was not
adopted. But some of you will remember that the year 1844 was a
year of great retrenchment, and it may be that a minimum of £lOO
was considered then as too great a jump from the halfpenny a-head
salaries that had been previously awarded. I was glad hear,
however, from the Attorney - General, the other day, that one
deserving teacher under the Board was in receipt of £l5O a-year,—
fees included ; and that ought to be, and I hope will in due time
be, the salary of one schoolmaster here, if we should be fortunate
enough to get a properly qualified gentleman to fill the appointment.


Besides the Normal School to which I have alluded, the National
System recognizes two other classes of schools, namely, Elementary
Schools and Schools of Industry.
In order to obtain aid from the Commissioners for the establish-
ment of a school, it must be shown that one is really wanted in the
locality. The test for this is, that one-third of the expense shall
he guaranteed by the applicants, through local guardians appointed
by them. In towns, half-an-acre of laud will be granted for each
school ; one acre beyond the boundaries of towns ; and nine acres
for Industrial Schools.
The school must be built upon a regular plan furnished by the
Board, in order that the system of teaching may be properly carried
out ; and the property is vested in the Board as a corporate body.
The school-books are furnished by the Board at a price greatly
below their original cost; and, as I have said something in depre-
ciation of the books used in other schools, I would wish to say
something of the admirable books compiled for the National System.
To read long extracts from them would, doubtless, tire your patience.
I shall therefore content myself with a very brief description.
The First Book of Lessons is, of course, small, and confined
to words of one syllable ; but it is compiled by a master-hand, and
will be found, on comparison, better fitted for its object than most
other primers are found to be.
The Second Book and its Sequel contain easy lessons on a
great variety of subjects,—Natural History, Voyages, Moral Tales,
Poems, and Hymns.
The Third Book of Lessons is a degree more difficult; and here
we have an Abridgment of Scripture History, —the best abridgment
of sacred history which I have ever read • then Natural History,
Lessons on Money Matters, Geographical Outlines, Outlines of
Grammar, Lessons on Farming, Stories and Fables, and Miscellaneous
Lessons in Prose and Verse.
We have next the Fourth Book of Lessons and its Sequel, and
these contain matter which all of us may read with profit, the style
being more advanced, and the subjects delightfully varied. Here we
have descriptions of the Mineral Kingdom, the Vegetable Kingdom,
and the Animal Kingdom ; —Descriptive Geography, a Continuation
of the Sacred History, Political Economy, History of Inventions,
Moral Tales, and Poetical Pieces ; and a great variety of miscella-
neous reading, selected from the best modern writers.
The Fifth Book of Lessons rises higher still, embracing matter
which a philosopher might, for the refreshment of his memory,
dwell on with profit and delight, and from w'hich most other men
may learn something new,
“ Indocti discard, et ament meminisse periti.”
Here we have Geology, Mineralogy, Organic Remains, History and
Chronology, Ancient and Modern History, Physiology —Vegetable
and Animal, Natural Philosophy in all its branches, Astronomy,
Hydrostatics, Pneumatics, Optics, Electricity, and Chemistry.


Besides these general reading-books, we have a reading-book
especially calculated for Female schools, which contains many
valuable lessons on household economy and other branches of female
education. Then, again, we have separate treatises on Grammar,
Etymology, a most excellent English Dictionary, Geography—.
Elementary and General, Arithmetic, Bookkeeping, Geometry, and
Mensuration; besides the four volumes'of Scripture Extracts, a
Treatise on the Truth of Christianity, and a book of Sacred Poetry.
The prices of these excellent books, as I have already stated to
you, are astonishingly low, so that the poorest may possess the whole
of them.
Here, then, are the materials of a sound English education, and
to my reverend and esteemed Friend who is to occupy my place next
lecture evening, and who impugns the system, I would only say, in
the words of an ancient divine, “ tali Let
the Denominationalists show us anything to match these, if they
can.
With respect to the government of the schools, it is entirely in
the hands of the Commissioners, who act through the Local Patrons.
A certain number of hours is devoted to the ordinary business of
teaching. One day in each week, besides Sunday, is set apart for
religious instruction, under the direction of the parents and pastors
of the children. A register is kept of the daily, weekly, and
quarterly attendance of each scholar.
The teachers are appointed solely by the Board, but the recom-
mendations of Local Patrons w r ill always be entertained with respect.
When the Normal School is in full operation, the teachers will, of
course, be appointed from thence.
Clergymen of all denominations, whether friendly or not to
the system, have free admission to the schools, but only as visiters —-
except when they attend to instruct the children of their own flocks.
The teachers are required to receive all clergymen with respect, and
to afford them every means of inspecting the method of teaching;
but, of course, no such visiter is permitted to interrupt the business
of the school, but is to be referred to the Local Patrons for a reply
to any questions he may desire to put.
A book is, however, kept on the teacher's desk, in which
visiters, if they choose, may write any remarks respecting the stale
of the school; w r hich remarks the teacher, how unfavourable soever
they may be, has no power to alter or erase.
All other visits to the schools are subject to the regulations of
the Local Patrons ; but no person whatever is to interfere with the
religious teaching, except the clergyman or lay person authorised by
the parents of the children respectively.
As soon as the system can be brought into full operation, a
Superintendent will be appointed for each district of the colony,
whose business it will be to visit the several l schools, receive reports
from the teachers, and make general reports to the Commissioners.
No political meetings are permitted to be held in the school-
ouses, nor are they to be converted into places of worship, nor used


for any purpose whatever which can lead to contention. Any
infringement of this rule will lead to the dismissal of the master
or mistress so offending. The same punishment will be awarded in
the case of any teacher who attends political meetings, or takes any
part in contested elections.
In addition to the teacher’s salary, school fees are paid to him,
on a scale varying from one penny to one shilling per week, as
regulated by the Commissioners.
The system of teaching is a combination of what are called the
Monitorial and Intellectual Systems. I presume most of you are
aware that the Monitorial System consists in an ingenious multipli-
cation of the lessons, by employing a portion of the more advanced
pupils as assistant teachers. The Intellectual System is an additional
improvement, by means of which, instead of burthening the memory
with a host of words, which are in most cases perfectly meaningless
to the pupil, everything he reads is fully explained to him, and a
proof is exacted from him at the end of each lesson that he under-
stands it, by obliging him to give the substance of it, not in the
exact language of the book, but in his own. By this means, also,
the teacher is enabled to correct whatever erroneous impression the
pupil may have formed of that which he has been reading.
Instead of obliging children to commit to memory long alpha-
betical lists of words, and meanings often meaningless,—forgetting
the words in A long before they have reached those in Z, —the
children are taught orthography from the ordinary reading lessons,
and the accuracy of their progress is tested by the master dictating
sentences, which the pupils write down, and exhibit for correction.
With respect to the Industrial Schools under the system, these
are in every other respect like those I have described, with this
addition, —that to the Industrial School is attached a garden or
small farm, by which the boys are instructed in the theory and
practice of agriculture and horticulture. In both descriptions of
schools arrangements are made for a portion of the children being
accommodated as boarders, with the utmost regard to economy, for
the convenience of families residing in distant parts of the interior.
I trust I have now succeeded in imparting to you some know-
ledge of the system of Education which it is the wish of the
Government and the Legislature should prevail in this country. I
hope, too, that most of you are impressed with its superior merits,
and desirous to see it established in this district. Ido not pretend
that the National System is perfect ; —nothing human is perfect. I
do not even say that we are yet prepared to do justice to its merits,
on account of the impossibility of procuring thoroughly qualified
teachers, —the Normal School not being yet in perfect operation.
But this is a drawback that will be gradually got rid of, and the
sooner we make a beginning the earlier will our end be accomplished.
You have seen stated in your newspaper the other day the
alarming proportion of children in this town who are growing up
destitute of all education whatever. If you look into your streets,
you will see numbers of fine children growing up as wild and


untutored as the Aborigines themselves. It is admitted on all hands
that Ignorance is the mother of Vice. The records of our criminal
justice inform us that about seventy per cent.— if I remember
rightly—of the tenants of our gaols can neither read nor write.
Here, then, are powerful motives for exertion to remove the curse of
ignorance from our town and neighbourhood.
You must have lately read in the newspapers of a mob of youths
in Sydney, who designate themselves the Cabbage-tree Mob, and
who have repeatedly destroyed property, broken open prisons, and
maltreated individuals, with impunity. They exercised this argu~
mentum ad hominem in favour of Education on two highly respectable
clergymen, in the open street, only a few days ago. These, again,
are the effects of ignorance ; for a body of educated youths would
never give themselves up to a profitless violence of this description.
Let us have no Cabbage-tree Mob in Brisbane, but rather let us
establish an Industrial School, and turn their youthful energies into
a better channel.
Another powerful motive suggests itself. In this country there-
is no privileged aristocracy. The son of the humblest artizan may
as readily become a legislator as the son of the scion of a titled
house. Here, then, is a motive for establishing a system of Education
which may bring out the latent sparks of genius,fire manly ambition,
and arouse dormant patriotism. But, admitting that all cannot be
legislators and statesmen, there is no man, however slowly his
intellectual pulse may beat, but may obtain a voice in his country’s
affairs through the exercise of the elective franchise. The majority
of the electors necessarily rule the country. But what wise or
enlightened measures are we to expect from the sway of the majority,
unless that majority is enlightened by a proper course of moral and
intellectual Education ? The spirit of the age is to cry down abso-
lutism in monarchical governments, and it is a right spirit ; but,
with all our love of liberty, which of us would not rather enjoy life
and property under a paternal despotism in Austria or Prussia, than
buy and sell slaves in a republic, in which the citizen auctioneer
advertises the description of a lovely female as you would describe
the points of a race-horse ?
In former ages the cause of freedom suffered from the tyranny
of princes ; in the present age it has nothing to fear from that cause,
but it has something to fear from the unenlightened exercise of the
popular will, unless, along with political franchises, we extend
popular Education by every means within our power.
_lf, then, you agree with me that Colonial Education is at present
in a very low and unsatisfactory state; —if you are convinced, as I
am, that the Denominational Schools are wrongly constituted, and
for the most part deficient in their working, an opportunity is now
offered you of forwarding the establishment of a superior system.
Ihis is no very burthensome task; the greater part of the work is
already done.—The Board is in operation,—the walls of the Normal
School are raised, —the books are stereotyped,—Local Patrons have
been appointed. The Legislature offers full two-thirds of the


necessary funds. It is true they require you, in the first instance,
to subscribe the remaining third ; but surely this is a light burthen
compared with the great boon offered to you and to your children.
Besides, when you consider that, for one hundred pounds which
you may subscribe, three hundred will be spent and circulated in
your town, the very money contributed by you returns threefold
into your own pockets.
This, however, ought to be the least consideration. The great
object is to educate the rising generation, and to enable them and
their posterity to assume their position among the enlightened
nations of the earth. All the civilized nations of the earth are
engaged at the present day in a glorious rivalry of intellect. Are
we alone to remain spectators of the combat'? Or rather are we,
with fifty per cent, of our youthful population growing up like
savages, to go on from year to year deteriorating from our original
stock ?
This is the real question \ and it is for you to answer it, as far
as regards this town and district. To those of you who have sons
to inherit your names and properties, it is a question of much
consequence. To a sonless sojourner, like myself, it may not be
thought of such deep concernment \ but it is one in which I have
long felt the deepest interest,—it is one in the study and discussion
of which I have read much, and thought morft Accordingly, when
the National System was at length adopted by the Legislature, I
looked upon it as a personal as well as a national triumph ; and, if
the exposition of the system which I have attempted this evening
shall tend in any degree to promote the glorious cause of human
enlightenment, by determining you to avail yourselves of the boon
now offered, I shall be proud to think that, humble as my efforts
are, they have not been altogether useless.


£AMES SWAN, PRINTER* u COURIEROFFICE, ALBERT-STREET, BRISBANE.
