

JjUiiswt Jfomtiiwt «f
DELIVERED BEFORE THE MEMBERS OF THIS SOCIETY AND
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AGRICULTURAL SOCIETIES OF
VICTORIA, ON TUESDAY, JUNE 3rd, 1884.
LECTURE
By J. L. DOW, Esq., M.L.A.,
Dr. Plummer preaided, and said that he had received a telegram from
Mr. Connor, M.L. A., regretting his inability to be present at the meeting,
and stating that the subject of federation had his warmest sympathy.
Mr. Dow said the idea of reading this paper had been suggested to him
by Dr. Plummer, as the result of a conversation upon the federal system
adopted by the agricultural societies of the United States. In that
country there was first the ordinary agricultural societies throughout
the States, next the federation of these societies into central boards,
which boards in their turn were knit together with the great central head,
the agricultural department at Washington. As we in Australia were
not yet, however, federated into a union of colonies, as were the United
States, it would only be necessary in the paper to deal with the system of
federation as existing within the bounds of a single State, and to that end
a description might be given of how the agricultural societies worked within
California, the State that, in its general conditions, most nearly resembled
the colony of Victoria. From such a description he regarded it as possible
that suggestions might be gleaned by the representative meeting he had
the honour of addressing which might lead to the adoption of some similar
system here, in order to bring about a better combination of agricultural
effort among the societies of Victoria than at present existed. The
working of the federal principle among American agricultural societies
was first brought under his notice last summer in Sacramento, the capital
city of California. One of the interesting features of Sacramento is its
State Agricultural Society. Here we have an association of representa-
tive men working according to a plan by which they combine the offices
held in Victoria by the Government Department of Agriculture on the
one hand and the National Agricultural Society of Victoria on the
other.
What is called the State Agricultural Society of California may be
described as a board of twelve members elected from, and representative
of, all parts of California, whose proceedings are invested with the State
authority by an act passed specially to that end. The act may be thus
summarized :—The association is declared a State institution. Twelve
resident citizens representing different portions of the State are appointed
as a board of agriculture. The appointments aie by the votes of the
agricultural societies. The board classifies itself, by lot or otherwise,


into fou: xpire at
the end ■ __ nembers
are charged with full control of all the property of the institution and
with the direction of all its proceedings, together with the appointment
from their number of a president (holding office for one year), a secretary
and a treasurer. They meet once a quarter, or oftener if required. The
board uses all suitable means to collect and disseminate all kinds of
information calculated to educate and benefit the industrial classes,
develop the resources and advance the material interests of the State,
and make such suggestions and recommendations as experience may sug-
gest for the improvement and advancement of agricultural and kindred
industries, reporting to the Governor of the State annually a full account
of their transactions, statistics, information gained, together with a balance
sheet for the year. The act has further provided for the division of the
whole of California into twelve districts, each district including such a
number of counties as lie most conveniently into each other, and whose
interests are most in common. These district boards are composed of one
member sent from each agricultural society within the district, and the
members elected as presidents of these district boards are the district
representatives who are sent to the central board of agriculture. The classi-
fication of the district members into lots, and subsequent re-election, are
conducted in the same manner as the State board. Each district board is
also required to send annually to the secretary of the State board a report of
the transactions of their society, a balance sheet for the year, and all facts
and statistics showing the development and improvement of agriculture
in their districts, to facilitate which the State association furnishes neces-
sary schedules and blank forms for filling up. All these returns are
arranged to come in by a certain time of each year, when the State board
publishes a volume of its transactions and those of the district boards for
the year. This volume includes excellent practical papers delivered
during the year by members of the State and district societies, and alto-
gether forms a most instructive annual record of progress during each
year.
As an example of the kind of practical work performed in the agri-
cultural interest by means of this organization, it should be noted that
in the United States there is no official agency employed for the collection
of the agricultural statistics other than such as is here described. Mr.
Edwin F. Smith, the secretary of the State board at Sacramento, issues
yearly, before harvest, blank harvest schedules to competent men
connected with the various district societies throughout the State, to be
filled up, and xxpon receiving them he subjects the returns to a careful
analysis from the standpoint of an expert well acquainted with the
country, and thus arrives at a summary which is accepted by the agri-
cultural statistician at Washington as his official return, when making up
the total crop yield of the United States. The subsidy or agricultural
vote passed by the State legislature varies in amount according to
requirements ; and, in addition, the central board has a stipulation with
the State printer to have 4,000 copies of the annual volume, printed and
bound in cloth, free, together with the printing of all such job work as
is necessary for carrying out the provisions of the act. When it is
remembered that the twelve district societies cover the whole of California,


which is twice as large as the colony of Victoria, and comprises altogether
fifty-two counties, it will be seen that the system of having a central
State board, with its subsidiary district institutions, is one that aims at
considerable compactness of action. The annual fairs of the societies
are not so numerous as are the agricultural shows of the colonies, but it
has to be admitted that they thereby gain very considerably in quality.
Superior as the district fairs are, however, they are only regarded as
preparatory competitions for the great event of the year—the State
Exhibition at Sacramento. This exhibition takes place during the early
part of September (the second month of the Californian autumn), and
lasts during the whole week. Nor is the fair confined to agricultural
exhibits only, for every conceivable product or manufacture is welcomed,
and prizes awarded according to merit. An immense pavilion presents
during fair time something the appearance of the Melbourne or Sydney
Exhibitions, space in which is paid for by exhibitors of all sorts of com-
modities, who find in the State Fair one of their biggest markets, for
“ everybody goes to the State Fair.” An adjoining park is enclosed for
the live stock exhibits. Sacramento is a city of parks, and one of the
finest has been enclosed and set apart for the State Fair and races—for it
must not be forgotten that races, both trotting and “running,” which is
the Americanism for racing, are special features of Californian agricul-
tural fairs. From all points of the State the people flock to this big
annual event, Sacramento being situated as nearly as possible in the
centre of the State, and at a point where the railway system converges
from all directions, renders the capital city peculiarly well suited for a
large annual gathering, and that it is a large one the railway authorities
ensure by the practice of a broad, business-like policy. Owing to the
broad and intelligent principles on which the railways are run under
private enterprise, all exhibits are forwarded to the fair and back (unless
sold) to their destination free, while for the visitors a specially low
excursion rate obtains during the fair time. For 1882 the central board
subsidy amounted to 7,500 dollars, and the district agricultural societies
in proportionate amounts.
This State society disburses a sum that has been going up yearly
until 1882, when the amount reached over 40,000 dollars, or £B,OOO in
our currency. An annual payment of 5 dollars, or £l, qualifies for
membership, which includes free admission to the fair, and non-members
pay 25 cents for each day’s entry. Some idea of how the public patronize
the exhibition is obtained from the fact that the last State Fair, previous
to my visit, viz., that of September, 1882, the receipts for admission
amounted to 22,000 dollars. A total of 20,000 dollars was paid away in
prizes, one half of which sum went to the trotting matches and races ; but
this amount was nearly made up to the society from the entry money of
horse owners who put in their trotters and “runners” for the various
events. This trotting and running is a very strong feature of the State
Fair, the management not leaving, as Australian agricultural associations
do, all the trotting and racing sport to the clubs. As the annual fair is
looked \ipon by the general public as a holiday week, the board has
arranged so that all are satisfied. Up to about two o’clock is devoted by
the public to an examination of the agricultural, mineralogical, industrial,
and mercantile exhibition within the pavilion, and to a stroll through the


live stock being shown in pens and on parade in the park. The afternoon
is devoted to first-class sport, which the visitors can witness from an
immense grand-stand. Here the lover of racing can enjoy all the delights
of that fascinating recreation, and the stock-raiser or stock-buyer, who
probably seeks information of a more practical turn, can judge for him-
self, by the exhibition of their prowess, how the animals shown for prizes
in the forenoon come out afterwards in their competitive display of speed,
combined with endurance and weight-carrying capacity. The head-
quarters of this Central Agricultural Board of California presents features
that I submit might be copied with advantage in Victoria, where we
have a Minister of Agriculture, a Secretary of Agriculture, and a
Department of Agriculture, yet there is no tangible place to be found
representing what all these high-sounding names would suggest to a
stranger coming into the colony for the purpose of settling. Now, here
in Sacramento you can walk straight up to the office of the State Agricul-
tural Society, and find a bright, intelligent, and courteous secretary,
who will tell you to “ walk right in here, sir, and take a seat,” when he
will then proceed to supply you with any information connected with the
resources of the State that you choose to ask him for. The secretary s
office, adjoining the pavilion, is a large roomy building, which combines
the working head-quarters of the association with a complete bureau of
agriculture, including a library comprising all volumes and pamphlets
that have been published, bearing not only upon the agriculture of the
State, but upon every other matter which is in any way connected with
that industry. Among the numerous permanent exhibits the system of
registering and tabulating the various seeds grown struck me as valuable.
Take wheat, for example : here you have samples of the grain carefully
put away in small wide-mouthed bottles, on which is labelled the name of
the variety, the yield, the district where grown, the season of sowing,
and other particulars obtained from the practical farmer, and so on with
all other products. The State society has grown so rapidly that its
present pavilion and secretary’s office had become too small, and a new
pavilion was approaching completion at the time of my visit—July, 1883.
The business people of Sacramento contributed 40,000 dollars, to which
the State added a similar amount, and for the total 80,000 dollars a
handsome structure, giving 110,000 superficial feet of additional space, was
being obtained in the shape of a dome-surmounted hall 400 feet square,
from which four 100-feet wings extend in the form of a cross. The
roof is 96 feet from the ground, thus providing room for a spacious
gallery, which sweeps clear round the building. In this building was
to be established a permanent exhibition of Californian products,
including agricultural, mining, industrial, geological, and mercantile
departments, together with a division for curiosities and antiquities ; the
whole to be open to the public free during the period between the State
fairs.
The foregoing illustrates in a general way the appointment and working
of the central board, and now a representative district may be taken to
show how the district boards operate. As has been already mentioned,
the twelve districts into which California is divided are so mapped out as
to provide as nearly as possible for identity of interest in each. Thus the
coast districts of the State are chiefly devoted to vine and fruit growing,


and San Francisco is the head-quarters of a district board dealing chiefly
with these interests, just as in other parts wheat-growing, stock-breeding,
and other industries are more special to those districts. In the same
way that we have seen the central or State Board exercising executive
functions in connection with such matters as the collection of agricultural
statistics, so also are the district boards empowered to take such action
as may be necessary to conserve or promote their special interests.
Taking the district under notice as an example, it is found that the
vineyard and orchard interests are the more important ones within its
radius, and to these the most attention is devoted ; just as in a wheat-
growing or irrigation district the cultivation of cereals and the conserva-
tion and distribution of water respectively receive the larger degree of
attention. Phylloxera among Californian vines is prevalent, and, with
the exception of San Bernardino, every fruit-growing county in the State
has its orchards afflicted by some destructive pest, such as red spider,
codlin moth, mealy bug, root louse, saw fly, scale insect, and the many
varieties of the borers ; yet Californian wine and raisin production is
largely increasing, and Californian canned fruits are placed on Australian
markets. Our system is to apply for the appointment of a Government
official to deal with the suppression of vine or'fruit diseases, who may be
an expert, or simply a political friend of the Minister ; but the Cali-
fornian system places the nomination in the hands of the people most
interested—viz., those of the district.
Upon inquiring in San Francisco for the best man to apply to for being
put in the way of finding out where the leading orchards and vineyards
of California were situated, I was at once referred to Mr. John H. Wheeler,
the secretary of that district board, whose offices are at 111 Leidesdorrf-
street, and which I found to be the thoroughly organized head-quarters
of these interests. The secretary is a salaried official, and not a member.
The board requires to meet not seldomer than every three months, to
consult upon such measures as may be best calculated to promote the vine
and fruit-growing interests of the State, when travelling expenses to the
members are allowed. Amongst the duties of the board under the act,
are the appointment of a qualified person to deliver at least one lecture
annually, at central points of the district, for the purpose of impart-
ing instruction in methods of culture, pruning, fertilizing, fermenting,
distilling, rectifying, fruit and raisin drying, treatment of diseases,
or prevention and destruction of insects, as the requirements of each
place may show to be most important, and to disseminate useful
knowledge by printed documents, and correspondence upon everything
bearing upon the viticultural and horticultural interest. Amongst the
duties of the secretary, it is specified that he shall collect statistics and
other information showing the condition and progress of the industries
in question up to latest dates throughout his district, together with the
collection of information concerning land suitable for fruits and vines, and
to impart to all inquirers instructions concerning the localities of such
lands, prices, cost of cultivation, means of transportation, and similar
information, without charge to such inquirers, and to correspond with all
persons, societies, colleges, and schools of agriculture, and to prepare a
report for submission to the board at each of its half-yearly meetings for
publication. It is further specified that the Californian University shall


direct its professor of agriculture to provide for all necessary scientific
examinations connected with analysis of soils, determination of alcoholic
strength of wines, reports on woods best suited for wine casks, entomo-
logical researches upon orchard and vineyard pests, scientific discoveries
bearing upon vine and fruit diseases, and such other information of a like
kind as may be of advantage to the board. Towards these objects the
State legislature annually grants such a sum as may be deemed warrant-
able upon the board showing a yearly statement, verified by the president,
specifying in detail the manner in which the moneys have been expended,
together with an estimate of expenses for the coming year. For the year
1882 the sum of 17,000 dollars (£3,400) was granted. In addition to Mr-
Wheeler, the secretary, the board have authority to appoint two other
important salaried officers, named chief viticultural and chief horticultural
inspectors respectively, who are charged with the responsibility of
preventing the spread of vine and fruit diseases, and insect pests, enforc-
ing quarantine regulations, and governing the distribution and disposal
of anything calculated to spread horticultural or viticultural disease.
Amongst the duties of this district board, also, is the furnishing of a yearly
report from the district they represent for publication in the annual
report. The State board annual report, therefore, is a most instructive
volume, containing a paper by some local authority upon everything
connected with the fruit and vine growing industry, and of these reports,
Mr. Wheeler informs me, a copy is sent first to each vigneron and
orchardist in the State ; second, to every newspaper, muncipal body, and
agricultural society in America; and, third, to all leading associations
connected with viticulture and horticulture outside of America. This
latter distribution, Mr. Weeeler further tells me, he has endeavoured to
make as widespread as possible, and the reports, he finds, have been the
means of bringing many persons to California for the express purpose of
engaging in fruit growing, grape growing, raisin drying, and wine
making. Upon arrival in San Francisco, they proceed straight to the
head-quarters of the board, where they find a complete viticultural
and horticultural bureau and museum, with an officer in charge, whose
business, both verbally and by the supply of printed statistics and
directions, is to start the inquirers into grape and fruit production under
the most favourable auspices.
The establishment of at least one agricultural college in each State of
America is provided for by an act of Congress, and in connection with
these valuable educational institutions the central or State boards are
found of great value. On the one hand, the central board receives
suggestions through the district representative calculated to be of
benefit to the general agricultural interest, and combined with the
influence brought to bear through the central boards the legislature
is enabled to have necessary action taken ; and, on the other hand,
after certain steps have been taken, such as for example the estab-
lishment of an agricultural college, then it also comes in as a
valuable auxiliary in the way of supervision. At the time of my
visit to California, the Agricultural College of that State was not in
session, but during my tour through America I .had the opportunity of
visiting those of other States, and the one in Massachusetts might be
taken as a fairly representative example. The terms of this college are


arranged so as to alternate eight months’ work with an aggregate of four
months’ vacation. Professor Clark, practical instructor of agriculture
and superintendent of the nurseries, who showed me round, informed
me that the faculty comprised Professors P. A. Chadbourne, president ;
H. H. Goodell, modern languages ; 0. A. Goessman, chemistry ; S. T.
Maynard, botany; A. B. Bassett, physics and civil engineering ; Manly
Miles, agriculture ; Lieutenant Bridgeman, military science ; T. F.
Winchester, veterinary science and practice ; R. W. Lyman, rural law ;
and E. Hitchcock, elocution. The foundation of the college, Mr. Clark
stated, was an endowment by grant of land made under a law passed by
Congress in 1802, which provided, as the clause sets forth, “ for the
endowment, support, and maintenance of at least one college in each
State, where the leading object will be, without excluding scientific
and classical studies, and including military drill, to teach such
branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the mechanical
arts in such manner as the legislatures of the respective States may
prescribe, in order to promote the liberal and practical education
of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions of
life.” In addition to the permanent land endowment granted by
the Congress, the local parliament at various times, as necessity
arose for extensions and improvements, had made liberal grants
from the State funds, and fees were charged the students of £2,
£2 10s., and £1 per term for tuition, laboratory expenses, and
room rent respectively, together with 10s. per week for board. The total
expenses for each student, including books and all requirements, Mr.
Clark estimated to average about £6O per annum. The number of stu-
dents on the register at the date of his visit was 110, which, pending
further extension, about taxed the full capacity of the college. The
property of the college was vested in a board of trustees, of which the
Governor of the State was president, and the general supervision of the
working of the college was committed to the Central Board of Agri-
culture. In answer to a question as to what was about the annual sum
required to run a college of this kind, Mr. Clark furnished the balance
sheet for 1882, which showed that the year’s expenses amounted to £4,800,
of which £2,000 was the proportion paid for salaries ; and the year’s
income had amounted to £5,000, of which £2,200 had been received from
endowment fund account, and the balance from the sales of farm and
nursery produce, students’ fees, and four annuities which had been left
to the college. In addition to these annuities one had been left
for the payment of one free scholarship, and eleven other free scholar-
ships were provided by the trustees. Candidates for admission require
to be fifteen years of age, must be furnished with certificate as to cha-
racter, and must pass an examination in English grammar, geography,
arithmetic, algebra through the simple equations, and the history of the
United States. The regular course of study occupies four years, the first,
second, third, and fourth of which are described as the freshman,
sophomore, junior, and senior years respectively, and the subjects include
practical farming and stock breeding, botany, chemistry, mathematics,
physics, and languages. The various subjects are made to alternate with
practical work on the farm, and special days are set apart for each in duo
order. Students who finish the whole course receive the degree of


*7O /
a. n, tr\
Btcuo i s
Bachelor of Science, and also become qualified to receive the diploma of
the Boston University, thereby becoming entitled to all the privileges of
its alumni. Graduates of the Massachusetts Agricultural College are
kj sjC j found occupying responsible positions not only in their own State, but
all over America, and some of the more recently established institutions
in the Central and Western States refer with pride to the fact that this
and that professor of their faculty was “ an Amherst boy.”
During the reading of his paper Mr. Dow was frequently applauded.
Mr. J. Hurst, the representative of the West Bourke Society, said he
wsis very glad Mr. Dow had brought this question of federation forward.
He had shown with great ability that federation of the societies was
practicable, because if it could be done in the United States it could be
done here. He suggested that, as the matter was one of great importance,
the discussion should be postponed.
The Chairman said the slight hint about federation which he threw out
three or four months ago had been misunderstood by some of the country
societies. It had been said that the National Agricultural Society was
about to advocate centralization. This was a great mistake, for what they
wanted was not centralization but federation. (Hear, hear.) He then
read the following letter from Mr. R. Harper, the secretary of the Kyneton
Agricultural Association, dated 23rd May ;
“ Sir,—l have the honour by direction to forward you copy of the following
resolution, passed at a meeting of the committee of this society, held on the 15th
inst., on the subject of the federation of the agricultural societies of the colony,
and to ask for the co-operation of your society thereon : —‘ That in the opinion
of this committee it is necessary, in the interests of agriculture, the colony should
be mapped out in agricultural districts, and that the Government should divide
the colony into suitable districts, and that the society in each district should be
federated ; that a conference should be held in Melbourne on the subject on a
day to be named hereafter, at which societies having an income of £3OO and
under should be represented by one delegate, those from £3OO to £5OO two
delegates, and over £5OO three delegates.’ An early consideration of the above,
with a reply stating your society’s views thereon, will be esteemed a favour.”
He (the Chairman) felt confident that if a money basis was to be the basis
of representation, the matter would utterly fail. (Hear, hear.) The
principle he advocated was that they should have representation of men
instead of money. Every society receiving Government aid should have
representation, even if it had not more than five members. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Craikb, of Geelong, said that great benefit would be derived by
all interested in agricultural pursuits from reading the lecture just
delivered ; and The Leader newspaper deserved to be highly compli-
mented on having sent such a capable man as Mr. Dow to America,
to collect agricultural information for the public good. He thought
the discussion should be adjourned.
After some further remarks from Mr. J. Fergusson, Mr. Yeo, M.L.A.,
and other gentlemen, it was moved by Mr, Hurst, seconded by
Mr. Craike, and carried unanimously :
“ That this meeting, at its rising, adjourn to Wednesday, 2nd July, at 2 p.m.,
for the further discussion and consideration of Mr. Dow’s paper, and the
necessary action to be taken thereon, and that all the societies in the colony be
written to and requested to send delegates.”
On the motion of Mr. J. Fergusson, seconded by Mr. H. M. Marks,
a hearty vote of thanks was accorded to Mr. Dow, and the meeting
adjourned.
Walker, May & Co., Printers.
