

THIRD LECTURE
LECTURES ON THE JESUITS
Delivered in St. Peter's Schoolroom, Sydney, May 5th, 1879,
[Price, Threepence .]
By Bev. Canon Moreton.
THE TESTIMONY OF HISTOEY TO THE DEEDS AND
PLOTS OF THE JESUITS.
jiffijT is not pleasant to search, out and expose the evil deeds of
one’s fellow men, though such a process may not be without
its benefit on society. In times of danger we should be on our
guard. A hostile army once approached the gates of Imperial
Eome; the guard was asleep ; the people were asleep; a few
geese cackled and Eome was saved. In giving this short course
of lectures on the Jesuits, my object is to do my humble part
towards awaking this city and country, not to the approach, but
to the entrance in among us, of a more dangerous foe than that
which threatened “the walls of lofty Eome.” To employ a
simile of a very humble nature, I can regard a Jesuit school in
this city in none other light than that as a sort of human trap-
cage. Parents, guardians of youth, be on your guard in this
particular. There is danger. It was while men slept that the
enemy came and sowed tares. The evil will not end with time if
the Jesuit becomes the tutor of your child. It will be an eternal
loss. You very naturally may expect a reason from me for
giving utterance to such a statement as this. My reason shall
be in the facts I am now about to place before you.
One principal aim of the Jesuits from the time of their foun-
dation has been the education of boys, and one boast of their
admirers has been of their success in this department. Has
that success been of such a nature as we should like to see
repeated on these shores ? Let a few lines from Bentkowski’s
History of Polish Literature, for which I am indebted to
Dawson’s History of the Jesuits, be the answer to this question :
—“Experience has fully justified the accusation of Broscius.
By the end of Sigismund 111., by which time the Jesuits had
become almost the exclusive masters of public education, national
literature had declined, even as rapidly as it had advanced during
the preceding century. It is remarkable, indeed, that Poland,
which, from the middle of the 16th century to the end of the


reim of Sigismund ILL, 1632, many splendid works
on many branches of human knowledge in the national as well
as in the Latin language, can scarcely boast of any work c
merit from that epoch to the second part of the 18th century, the
period of the unlimited sway of the Jesuits over the national
education.” Pages might be given to the same effect. But a
word, "to th. 6 wiß6 should ho enough. _ . n
“ Secreta monita.” What are these! Look at the two words
in their plain English dress, “ Secret Instructions. The Duke
of Brunswick took Paterborn, in Westphalia, in the 16th
he seized upon the College of the Jesuits, dispersed its members,
ah handed over its manuscripts to the Capuchms Among
these manuscripts were the “ Secret Instructions of the Order,
with “ solemn injunctions that they are to be carefully g uar ded,
communicated but to few, and those only the well tried members
nt the Society.” Other copies were met with by the uninitiated in
different parts of Europe during the same century Of course
the Jesuits denied, and, no doubt, do now all knowledge of them
Learned men, however, not interested, formed the opinion that
in comparing the “ Secret Instructions” with the deeds and plots
of the Jesuits, there seemed to be about the same connection
between the former and the latter as there is between cause and
effect. See the Jesuit as he goes forth with this panoply. He
enters on a new mission. Ask him his object,—' ! ‘ The sole ob]| ect
is the salvation of souls.” This is good, if true. He goes to the
poor the sick, prisoners, hospitals,—he has nothing with which
to relieve —but “he will go far and near for the smallest atoms
—he will be observed, contrasted with the Dominicans and the
Franciscans, and gain “ the respect and reverence of the best
LTZst eminent g in the neighbourhood.” He must conduct
himself very deferentially towards the parochial clergy, an
never perform any clerical duty until he has piously and
submissively asked the bishop’s leave. If he gets any land let
the purchase be made under the name of another. Whisper
sweetly into the people’s ears that they come to catechise [teach]
the children gratis.” Kings must be flattered and deceived. If
a monarch is bent on some enterprise—war,—the issue of which
is doubtful, the advice of the Jesuit must be so shaped that if
the enterprise succeed the Society must have all the praise, if it
fails the blame must rest with the king To unmarried princes
it will be a rare stroke of policy to provide them with a wife who
must be of the Order.—“We must endeavour to breed dissensions
among great men, and raise seditions, or anything a prince won d
have us do to please him.” “ Eich widows ” must be gradually
lured into nunneries and their property made over to the Society
“The father who will have the charge of this delicate business
must be possessed of suitable gifts. He must not, m point o
years, exceed middle age; he must have a fresh complexion and
a gracious smile !”* Trade has been another means resorted to
by some of the brethren to enrich their Order.
Protestantism YolTlL, Chap. yi. tu. Dawson Hist. Jesuits
Chap. xii.


‘'Having secured the territory, of Paraguay, the Jesuits there
founded a kingdom and became its sovereigns. They treated
the natives well at the first, and taught them several useful arts,
but by-and-by they changed their policy, and, reducing them to
slavery, compelled them to labour for their benefit. * *
The fathers kept carefully concealed from the knowledge of
Europe this seemingly exhaustless source of wealth that no one
else might share its sweets. They continued to draw from it
those vast sums wherewith they carried on their machinations in
the Old World.”* Father Lavaletta, the Visitor-General and
Apostolic Prefect in the West Indies, organised offices in St.
Domingo, Granada, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, and other islands.
He drew bills of exchange on Paris, London, Bordeaux, &c.
The ships of the Jesuits sailed under whatever flag it suited
their purpose to place them, and answered the purposes of
merchandise, slavery, or pirateering. At last a trouble came
upon the trade of the Society. The Brothers Lioncy & Gouffre,
of Marseilles, had accepted their bills for a million and a half of
livres, to cover which two vessels had been dispatched for
Martinique with merchandise to the value of two millions.
Unfortunately, for the fathers, the ships were captured at sea by
the English. The merchants appealed to the Superior of the
Order of the J esuits for four thousand livres as part payment of
the debt to save them from bankruptcy. The fathers replied
that the Society was not answerable for the debt, but it would
help them with prayers and masses! The merchants appealed to
Parliament when the fathers declined to pay, giving as the
reason, that they were protected by their Constitutions. The
Parliament asked for these to be produced in evidence. These
disclosed the secrets of the Order, showing it to be an organization
“ based on the most iniquitous maxims.” The fathers lost their
case, and the trial was the chief cause which led to the extinction
of the Order in France in 1726.
I now turn to a darker subject, namely, that of the Inquisition.
The “ Holy ” Office of the Inquisition ! Eead the awful facts of
the sufferings it has caused to the witnesses of Jesus, and then
ask whether the record of tortures inflicted in the heathen world
has ever been greater. Its use was revived by Paul 111.,
in the 16th century, to stop the spread of the Protestant religion.
"The Jesuits account it among the glories of their Order, that
their founder, Loyola, supported this proposition [of the pope]
by a special memorial. The bull was published on the 21st of
July, 1542.” f "The Holy Inquisition immediately began to
show the world how dreadful is the vengeance of a Jesuit.
Mudarra, being accused of heresy, was thrown into prison,
where he suffered ; and a Jesuit stood by him when in the article
of death, to perform a ceremonial reconciliation with the Church.
Agostino himself left the Church of Eome and went to Geneva,
but was overtaken by Jesuit and Inquisitional vengeance, and
burnt alive. All this did not take place immediately, but the
* Whylie Hist. Prot. Yol. 11., Chap. ix.
f Ranke Yol. 1., p. 157.


action of the Inquisition began forthwith, a
His visit was paid m September, l»a My space will allow
and greeting the sight as one “'™- “ “
masks. These represent creatures monstrous olj P
* * Yourself accursed, with accursed oemgs j
r.Q-fnv+Vi to dwell —such, was the silent language
S"a°ge d s” ’*. * IK
instruments for compressing tlm hll to bo
rs : n nd
were tightened upon the limb ph . There were
his reader ancient^door-ways^^lox^
SEZSTSX a"‘d tm whence no sound codd reanh an
ear save that of the merciless mqmsitor. tortee and “an iron
? Ut6 Je d om e e of touching a spring the
- to enter
the°eyes of whom enfolded m
the ears, the brain, &c. lte Semer was placed in
torture had no the L flow
wide open, the
those iron arms, and a e e Q-od had borne home
touched,-in the meantime.the “gds °£ God h“d
SS3S=^^
along a canal to tne rivex & ’ j d f or w hom that
ocean, to await the ™ ™ .ive up its dead,
martyr gave up his life, sh S V ( (leef i s an( i
It is time that I bWd who personally
plots ”of the Jesuits in England. Cardinal r , i
"* w7H7Rule Celebrated Jesuits, Vol. I„ p- 159*


knew Ignatius Loyola, would not suffer him to send any Jesuit
to England during the reign of Queen Mary. He evidently
neither believed in Loyola or his Order. At the moment that
Mary died, almost at the same moment died the Cardinal
Archbishop of Canterbury. Elizabeth filled the Throne, and Dr.
Parker the Primatical Chair, and the Jesuits lost no time in
trying to fill the kingdom with their plots. The policy of the
Queen was to effect a reconciliation between the Catholic and
Reforming parties in the Church. And if the nation had been
left to herself this happy result would have been accomplished.
But no, this could not he. The Pope wanted England, the King
of Spain wanted her, France wanted to rule her, by placing
Mary Queen of Scots on the throne. Hence there was no end of
plot and intrigue. These powers would oppose each other, hut
more especially Elizabeth, who meant to retain the throne, and
have her nation independent of a foreign Power. The most
unscrupulous of all the enemies of England were the Jesuits.
In disguise they had entered the country, in darkness they
carried on their works. No labour, no pains, no money, no
lying, no sacrifice of principle or of life need be spared, if only
England could he brought to bow to a foreign ruler, managed by
their own Order. Elizabeth was no perfect character, hut
Protestants should remember that she was no foe to the rights
and liberties of her native land; and Roman Catholics should
remember that she did not, so far as I know, cause any law to he
passed against them, or interfere with them for the first twenty
years of her reign. All the Roman Catholics suffered in the
latter part of that reign they had to thank the Jesuits for.
Rapin says, in his history, “The Catholics accused the Jesuits of
being the sole cause of the severe laws made against them, from
having themselves engaged in every conspiracy, and even
suborned assassins to kill the Queen.” The Queen knew of
many of their plots. To Henry 111. of France she wrote, “ The
hypocritical and diabolical Jesuits were the source of various
treasons, their maxim being, that it is meritorious to kill a king
whom the Pope had cursed.” Upon their guilty souls rests the
responsibility of all those lives lost in the Spanish Armada, and
the misery which the Roman Catholic subjects of Elizabeth
endured in the latter part of her reign. Elizabeth lived to a
good old age notwithstanding all the attempts to assassinate her.
As her end was known to be near the intriguers turned upon the
subject of her successor. Of course he must be one of whom the Order
approved. Loyola, of yesterday, must appoint a king to sit on
the ancient throne of England, a king who will do his bidding.
James 1., though not a model king, did not meet with the
approval of Loyola’s disciples. Read the consequence,—“The
Jesuits, although in concealment, excited five different conspiracies
against James I. before he had reigned a year.”* The Armada,
their great plot by sea, had failed in the reign of Elizabeth, now
they will make an Armada by land. This shall be to blow up
the King, his family, the Lords and the Commons. A writer
* Lucius Hist, Jesuitica, lib. 4, c. iv. (quoted.)


says that De Thou in Ms IK***; ftoe ™7n S
account o£ it-the Gun the Superior of the
conspirators began by | ® b do f their union ; that
Jesuits, whose decision confessed them,
in order to cement it the more, th to .
gave them the Sacramen , £ * j esu it Tesmond to
Ly were to Vacl ■ that during the
direct them, a nd prevent the g with b is colleague
progress of the plot, Gain n n tries in order that as soon
Baudouin. who was rn 0^„ C “my m\gM land in England,
as the plot should take effe , Tesmond escaped,
The conspiracy being disc° hanged, after
but Garnett and his c^ a | egi ; it^lonou ;ed them with the title
aStogh' executed for a crime, the bare recrtal of
have s fgim ofweSying
the following years, but thejJesu thrQat J t he nation, and
l th Sfirf-una er had her of national and
the block at Whitehall, deat w restless and timorous
of dignity, which he acquir load to retire from it,
under,—his son Eicha „ 7 Qto his account, and his
—“ the merry monarch l as . Tames 11. sits on the throne
brother, the dull, the narrow-mi bis right hand to
of England, And thetoands the 8 Jesuits ,at
deceive him. Ibe , .7 f the Order, who had, during
Whitehall was an English brothe regarded
some time, acted as Vice-Provmmal, who.badbeen^
by James with peculiar favou , d d p etre , was descended
Clerk of the Closet This man manners were courtly: his
from an honourable faml y • _ bt p e was weak and vain,
speech was flowing and plausibl counciUors wbo had
covetous and ambitious. -oerhaps the largest part in the
access to the> royal ear hej am L ’ was not a young man.
ruin of the House of Stuarts. h 0 had two daughters
His end would come at no dista I d A a mem ber
-Mary, the wife of the such Sfe ’Jesuits not give
of the Church of Eng an • sit on the throne. Could they
their permission that she s change her religion ? The
tamper with her and induce he S t redem ption, being
attempt was made, and faded. M.B y P fathers could not
the wife of the Prince of (Irange ’ already
allow that such heretics should t wiU turn to Macaulay for
cost them so many dark P lot> • to be hoped, they said,
the solution of the dvfflculty the true faith without
that the King might be able he leave
tJwis [Louis XIV., King of France],
♦ Macaulay’s Hist. England, Yol. 11., P* 315 »


It was better for Englishmen to be the vassals of France than
the slaves of the devil. This extraordinary document was
handed about from Jesuit to Jesuit, and from courtier to courtier,
till some eminent Homan Catholics, in whom bigotry had not
extinguished patriotism, furnished the Dutch Ambassador with a
copy.”* The discovery of this document took place in the year
1687. One year after, a small squadron of ships passed down
the channel, turned into Tor Bay. The “Brill,” and the other
ships, came to an anchor at the little fishing town of Brixham.
William, Prince of Orange, stepped into his barge, and as easily
sat down on the Throne of England. Whether the good people
of Brixham are poets or mere utilitarians I am not prepared to
venture an opinion. Still the fact remains that when I visited
their town eight years ago, I saw the identical stone upon which
the inscription says the Prince of Orange first stepped on in
landing; this stone forms the basis of a lamp-post—a lamp—a
fight to explore the dark plottings of the Jesuits !
es • an d that light is as much needed in the reign of Queen
Victoria as it was in that of James 11. Of this I am afraid we
are not sufficiently aware. We may talk of this “Protestant
notion, but while we are talking others are working. I hope
the “ lamp ” of Protestant truth is not growing dim in England
or m her colonies. You may depend upon it that the Jesuits
ar< u.n 0116 ess zea l° us > Jhe less dangerous, the less
subtle,—no nor the less determined on the humiliation, the
downfall of England than they ever have been; and rely upon
it, what they were in the days of Pascal, of the Armada, of the
U-un 1 owder Plot, they are the same now. They know it. I
would that our nation knew it also. Wealth, luxury, the use of
indolence, have done much to close the eyes of the Empire
against its real enemy, the Ultramontane Jesuit. I ask you not
to take it upon my authority that the Jesuit is unchanged. I
vuli give you other and better authorities. I have a valuable
work lying by my side “ Ultramontaxeism, or England’s
Sympathy with Germany,” 1874. I will give you a few
quotations from this book. “It is the duty of English people to
watch with a jealous eye the action of the public Press The
secret influences in favour of Jesuit and Ultramontane policy
fiave long been at work in this direction, and no money or efforts
have been spared to control the Press of England. ‘ Wherever
the Jesuits are admitted they will be masters, cost what it may.’”f
Ihe Jesuits or Ultramontanes are an active and living power
within the nation. They are regardless of means, provided they
can secure their ends. Their chief exponent in England
[Cardinal Manning] has assured us that they mean to subjuqate
and subdue, to bend and to break the will of our imperial race. No
effort is spared. No political party is respected. Each in turn
is supported or opposed. Discontented agitations are encouraged
in order to harrass and divide the legislative councils. The very
foundations of the Throne are now keenly assailed, and views
presented to the people which would destroy the legal authority
of our Gracious Queen to rule, or the duty of her subjects to
* Macaulay’s Hist. Engl., Yol. 111,, p. 42.
t Napoleon I.


give a loyal and undivided allegiance. The whole machinery of
Ultramontane policy is worked by the Jesuits,”—“ A body of men
who are detached from every social tie—emancipated from every
obligation of ordinary morality—reckoning as nothing, whatever
is not the Order in which they are blended like metals in the
melting-pot; the corporation in which they are absorbed as rivers
in the sea, the supreme end to which they remorselessly sacrifice
everything, having begun by sacrificing to it each his life, his
soul, his free-will, his whole personality.” Mr. Newdegate,
M.P., says, “ I would warn the nation that it has been proclaimed
by Dr. Manning [now Cardinal] that the Oovernments of the
World are to be considered as rebels against the Pope. *
He looks to a general European war, and he lives in hope of
seeing the nations of Europe destroying each other with an
internecine war ; because he hopes by that means to see effected
the restoration of the Pope to temporal power. This is the
doctrine of Dr. Manning. If we may judge by the Franco-
German War —if we may judge by the convulsed state of Spain,
which has been brought about by the intrigues of the Jesuit
body, which has been expelled from almost every country in the
world, but, mind you, has found a harbour here in England.
And here is it that they govern the monastic and conventual
establishments - more than three hundred of them in England.
These men are among you. I say to you, honest Englishmen,
be prepared to assert for your own country the same principles
that you are going to sanction by the resoluion for Germany. I
call upon you to affirm it and to enforce your will, that these
more than three hundred establishments shall be brought within
the province and control of the law.”
May God give England, at this time, many faithful outspoken
sons like Mr. Newdegate! Men who can see the dangers, and
who are not afraid to become “narrow” or unpopular, by
warning this generation of them.
I now wish to ask you four questions, to which I will suggest
answers ; and upon these I beg you will pondei.
(1 ) If the Jesuits should succeed in gaining a paramount
influence in all our schools, will the people of this colony become
better educated, more intelligent, more self-reliant ? I send you
to Poland for the answer. There the Jesuit held the sway in
the schools for a hundred years, and at the end of that time the
nation lay bleeding at every pore. Her national energy was gone.
(2.) Would Jesuit principles make us more honest in our
dealings with each other? Consult, for an answer, all that long
dark roll of intrigue ydiich, like an evil spirit, follows the J esuit
wherever he goes. Every link in that chain of crime shows that
honesty has forsaken him.
(3.) Would Jesuit principles make us love this young country
more as our native or adopted home? Ask the Jesuits of the
time of James 11. They who were plotting to sell England to
Louis XIV. of France.
(4 ) Would Jesuit principles increase our sympathy—our love
for each other? Suffer the mangled body from the “iron
virgin,” and the deep shaft beneath her to give you the answer.


