

LECTURE
ON
OUR. SOUTH AFRICAN COLONIES:
HOW THE RECENT WARS WITH THE GAIKAS, GALEKAS
AND ZULUS AROSE AND ENDED.
BY
SIB EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S.,
Commissary-General of Her Majesty’s Forces.
Lately Com. Genl. in South Africa.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., 146 PITT STREET.
1882.
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.




LECTURE
ON
OUR SOUTH AFRICAN COLONIES:
HOW THE RECENT WARS WITH THE GAIKAS, GALEKAS
AND ZULUS AROSE AND ENDED.
BY
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S.,
Commissary-General of Her Majesty's Forces.
Lately Com. Genl. in South Africa.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO , 1 46 PITT STREET.
1882.
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.




OUR SOUTH AFRICAN COLONIES.
BY SIR E. STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S.
The title of my lecture, our South African Colonies,
how the recent wars with the Gaikas, the Galekas, the
Zulus arose and ended, will serve to show how very wide
a field is about to be opened to you for comment and
enquiry ; a field far too wide to be travelled over within
the limits of a lecture, with the care and precision it
merits. I have, however, spared no pains to condense
the lecture as far as possible to me, and whilst leaving no
important subject untouched upon, my effort has been to
dwell or dilate upon those subjects which I considered
would be most interesting to an Australian audience.
There are not a few points of common interest between
the colonists of South Africa and those of Australia, as I
shall point out to you hereafter—at present I think it
highly advisable that I should briefly sketch out for the
information of my audience, the subject upon which I am
about to address you. To a lecturer this is always a use-
ful, if not a necessary duty.
To begin then, I propose to find the Cape of Good
Hope for you —then to explain how and with what object
it became colonized, first by the Dutch, then by the
English. Rapidly passing over the period of Dutch rule,
I will introduce the Kaffir to you, the great Amaxosa,
and tell you whence he came and when and how we
first came in contact with him, how we have since
fought him, and at length conquered him after many
bloody wars, and utilized him in our ranks when we
invaded and conquered Zululand. The climate, the
geography of the country (26 to 36 Lat. South, 16
to 32 Long. East), its fauna and flora, its products, its
mineral wealth, its form of government, its progress, its
resources, its commerce, its importance to the mother


country ; all these subjects shall find a niche in the story
which I am about to relate of British South Africa.
The Cape of Good Hope was first discovered by
Bartholomew Diaz, in the year 1486. He appears to
have passed the Cape proper, and to have sailed Eastward
along the Coast, the reigning King of Portugal gave it
the name it now bears, when it was found out later on to
be on the high road to the Indies, then believed to be
countries of fabulous richness, teeming with diamonds
and gold and all that human imagination could conceive,
most wealthy and gorgeous. It was Vasco de Gama
who was the real discoverer of the road to the East Indies
via the Cape of Good Hope, who first discovered and
landed in the Cape Colony on the Western side. He
then rounded the Cape and sailed as far as Natal, to
which country he gave the name it now bears, having
sighted it on the day of the N ativity of our Lord. Vasco
de Gama reached India in due course, thus establishing
for. himself an imperishable reputation as one of the
greatest navigators on record. In proportion as the
commerce and riches of the East increased and became
known to the Western nations, so did the value of the
Cape of Good Hope as a halting station on the long
voyage to the Indies increase, yet strange to say, no
nation attempted to colonize it until 1652, being about a
century and a quarter before Governor Philip sailed up
Sydney Harbour. Now Australia has left the South
African Colonies well nigh a century behind in the race
for wealth, political importance and civilization.
The Dutch were apparently induced to colonize the
Cape with a view to facilitate their trade not only with
the Indies, but also with the Eastern Colonies which
they contemplated forming about this period. They
had already formed an East India Company in 1600,
and the Directors of this Company endeavoured to
monopolize all the commerce of the East, the power of
life and death was delegated by them from Amsterdam,
where the Governing Council of the Company sat in
conclave to the Governor of the Cape Colony. The
Bushmen and Hottentots were the only inhabitants found


by the Dutch settlers, they gave much trouble at first,
as did also our aboriginal blacks to Governor Phillip
125 years afterwards.
The governor ruled with an iron severity, which he
appears to have dealt out with uncompromising energy —
to-day it was expended to settle a dispute about land
between a white burgher and a Hottentot, to-morrow it
was to punish some breach of military discipline, some-
times the lash sufficed to punish the crime, at other times
the rope and the hangman or the bullet were considered
barely sufficient. Doubtless all this was necessary, at
the period we are writing of, and it would be most unfair
to look now upon episodes of the life of a great nation
which occurred over two hundred years ago through
spectacles made by Solomon in the nineteenth century.
This Dutch Cape settlement, consisting of about
360 souls, and garrisoned by less than 150 Europeans,
continued to eke out a strange existence on very hard
fare, penguins at times instead of pork, and their eggs
for a relish, for about twenty years. Steam was un-
known, so also was the electric telegraph, and again still
more unknown was the telephone in the dark ages of
which I speak, and the actors in those times were as
ignorant of the scientific wonders now so widely diffused
in our midst, as we are of our future. .Really, the only
wonders left inexplicable to us now-a-days, after all these
recent marvellous discoveries in science have been made
are, how are we to fly through the air like birds, or swim
under the water like fish, or live without air or food like
a hibernating bear or a toad disgorged from a primitive
rock where he must have lived for hundreds of years all
alone.
And here I must detain you for a moment to tell you
of the Hottentots and the Bushmen ; their names, their
acts will not unlikely be placed somewhat frequently
before you in the course of this lecture, and it is right that
you should learn as much at least regarding them, as will
enable you justly to judge of, and to appreciate whatever
I may tell you of them.
The Hottentot is generally looked upon as an


aboriginal native of the Cape country. He is immeasur-
ably superior to the Bushman in every respect and always
something superior to the black race. The “ Tottie ” as
he is familiarly called, is usually very muscular and of low
stature with a sort of yellow copper coloured skin. We
have utilized him immensely domestically, also as a soldier,
as a waggon driver and as a labourer. He has succeeded
in all, and has accepted civilization with singular ease.
He is usually very faithful, although as soldiers they at
one time proved disloyal to their masters. The Bushman
is more of an animal than of a human being. He is of
very low stature, of hideous appearance both men and
women, and incapable of erecting or inhabiting a house,
they live as wild animals sheltering themselves only
where they can find a cave, a hollow tree, a rocky
niche, or more natural shelter. Every sense they
possess is more animal than human; with the sight
of an eagle they combine feline treachery and ferocity
with Simian agility and low cunning. But they have
a higher a more human intelligence than low cunning—
especially in making a bargain they are sharp enough,
and show much ingenuity in the manufacture of
their implements for war and the chase. I took a
hard journey to see these curious bipeds, and when
I first saw them as they crawled out from holes and
crannies in rocks in the side of a hill, I began to believe in
Darwin, and refused to be satisfied until I had seen a
man perfectly naked—a very small piece of silver solved
the difficulty—there was no caudal appendage, and I
retired from the scene wondering why man was created
in so debased a form. The Bushman lives, believing that
every man’s hand is against him, he fights fiercely,
usually with poisoned arrows. But he has now become
a rare animal, to the great benefit of the colony, he is all
but exterminated. He is as untamable as a death adder,
and as irreligious as a monkey, and now these are the
men against whom the Dutch were brought face to face
when first they sought to colonize South Africa, in 1652.
As usual, the Europeans and the aborigines harmonized
together but very little, there were constant feuds


between them of more or less intensity. The question
of land at length intervened and helped to bring all
abuses to a crisis. The European diving into the interior
selected the best lands for himself—the Hottentot, quite
alive to the value of his land and the good judgment
which prompted the selection, demurred to being dis-
possessed. Civilization was daily over-reaching barbarism,
as it has but too often done in the marvellous history of
our colonization. The barbarian was brought to bay and
a compromise was effected. In the year 1672, twenty
years after the first arrival of the Dutch as colonists in
South Africa, a deed was signed by two Hottentot chiefs
and two Dutch officials, by which a large district of land
was ceded by the former to the latter for a stipulated
sum. I have been told on reliable authority that records
of this deed are still existent in the archives of the
Cape, and thus did the two antagonistic races live on
until the year 1687. What has now become an old story
was here enacted under the garb of Christianity. Civili-
zation robbed barbarism of land required by the former,
useless to the latter. I dare not here enter upon any
discussion of this knotty question, time will not permit.
In 1687 and 1688 many Frenchmen, sufferers from
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, emigrated to the
Cape; these Huguenots are still spoken of with great
respect, and their names figure prominently amongst the
foremost men in the colony in all that promotes its
welfare. The iron Dutch rule was very vigorously
applied to these poor emigrants ; within one generation,
say 30 years, their language was obliterated within the
colony, and even the ideas of freedom they had brought
with them from oppressed despotic France, were
forbidden, and they were compelled to live and die under
Dutch rule, and to set aside for ever, and most
absolutely, everything that was French or of a French
tendency.
It was thus the Dutch preserved their half-way house
between India and Europe, and it was by a most selfish
policy that they endeavoured to exclude therefrom all
other nations. Nothing could be more narrow-minded,


even suicidal, than the system of Home Government
adopted in the settlement (for it had not yet grown to be
a colony), by order from the Council of 17 who ruled at
Amsterdam, and whose sole idea in life was to enrich
themselves by Eastern trade, and to exclude therefrom all
strangers.
During all the eighteenth century, we find this settle-
ment existing without expansion and fettered by the most
oppressive laws, which made progress impossible. It was
the intolerable cruelty of these laws that made many of
the Boer settlers, who had originally emigrated from
Holland, leave the settlement and trek northward and
eastward there to seek a freedom and independence which
was denied to them by their own countrymen. Thus was
first established the habit of trekking, and the impatience
of authority which still characterizes the Boer population
of South Africa; of this I shall relate more to you durirg
the lecture, for these Boer trekkers have been in South
Africa glorious pioneers ; coarse and uncouth in their
manners, the Bible is ever prominent in the house of a
respectable Boer, we must hope that its teachings are
followed more strictly than is sometimes asserted.
In 1795 the settlement was possessed by the English
in trust for the Prince of Orange, the last stadtholder of
the Dutch Republic. We found all in great disorder, and
peace and good order were not re-established without
some fighting. We held it until 1802, when at the Peace
of Amiens it was decided that it should be restored to
Holland.
It had now in 1803, grown into a colony, and contained
22,000 Europeans and about 15,000 Totties, with 25,000
slaves chiefly imported from Western Africa or Dutch
Eastern settlements. The Peace of Amiens proved
abortive, and then it became imperatively necessary for
the English once more to take possession of the Dutch
Colony at the Cape, lest it should fall into the hands of
the French. In 1806 Sir David Baird expelled the
Dutch, and from that year dates its existence as an
English colony. A Governor, with an ample salary, was


appointed, English capital flowed into the colony. What-
ever was good of the Dutch law, and applicable to the
occasion was retained, and in the exercise of it, leniency
took the place of severity, taxation was taken off the
produce of the land and placed upon the land itself, the
shelter of the harbour was opened to all nations, commerce
revived, capital reached the colony, and a prosperous era
seemed to have dawned upon it. Alas, this proved a
delusion in many respects, for in 1811 the Kaffir who had
ceased to be troublesome for over a century and to dread
the white man who carried firearms, attacked the Boers
who had trekked to Graff Beynet, a distance of about
300 miles from Cape Town. In 1811, the Kaffirs invaded
a neutral territory known as the Zuurveld, which by treaty
had been established as a neutual territory between the
Boer pioneers and the Kaffir race, now rapidly increas-
ing in boldness and aggression, inspired apparently
by long close contact with the white man. The Kaffir
was quick to learn, keen to resent, and powerful and
brave as a warrior. The first Kaffir war was entered
upon in 1811, and it was carried on with great cruelty
on all sides. No prisoners were taken and the sur-
viving Kaffirs were driven across the great Fish Biver.
Before proceeding further I will again ask you to bear
with me whilst I give you a light sketch of the Kaffir
race in South Africa, who has already played such an
important part in our history there, and who is destined
not improbably yet to exercise a still greater influence
over our destinies in that Continent. The Kaffir of
whom I am about to speak must not be confounded with
the Natal Kaffir, of whom I shall speak hereafter.
Comparatively but little is known of the origin of the
Kaffir, there can be no doubt however that he first
reached the countries now known as our South African
Colonies about the time that the Dutch attempted
to settle there in the early part of the seventeenth
century They came from regions then unknown
to us in the interior of the great African continent;
about this period there appears to have been a general
migration of African tribes southward, and it was not


altogether warlike in its nature, for the Kaffir was then
only armed with his assegai, and he found no one capable
of resisting him until he reached the small knot of white
men settled in what is now the Cape Colony proper.
The word Kaffir is of Arabic origin, meaning infidel,
it was first applied by the Portuguese to the black man
at the Cape, and was adopted by the Dutch and retained
by us.
They were made to dread our fire-arms, and for
over a century they hung along the frontier of the
lands occupied by the Dutch who were ever trekking
deeper and deeper into the bowels of the great
continent, then a terra incognita to us. They were
in no way useful but they dared not be aggressive,
and were strictly kept within well defined limits.
The word Kaffir is very generic and is applied to
all the black races who continually flowed into the
southern countries from the north up to the middle of the
eighteenth century —savage in war and very cruel, they
are to this day most indolent in peace, and difficult
to civilize. The great Amaxosa race took possession of
all the country south of St. John’s Piver as they moved
southward, and the white men (the Boers) trekked north-
ward, the two people soon came into collision, but for
over one hundred years the gun asserted its supremacy
over the assagai—as already related, it was not until 1811
that the first Kaffir war occurred. The Amaxosa race was
subdivided into the following tribes. The Galekas, recently
inhabiting the country from the Kei, to the Bashee,
under the supreme chief of the Amaxosas, now repre-
sented by Kreli. The Gaikas under Sandilli occupy a
large tract of country south of the Kei Biver. North of
the Galeka country the Tembus are now settled down, and
again near them the Tambookies, the Pondos, the
Griquas Pondomisi, a reference to the small maps dis-
tributed will serve to explain much, and cannot fail to
prove useful to those of my audience who take an interest
in the subject under notice
Between the great Fish Piver and the great Kei
our Eastern frontier limit up to the war of 1877-78


(marked on the map as British Kaffraria), and throughout
the Galeka or Transkeian country, marked on map as
Kaffraria, Fingoes live in large numbers, scattered about
in locations assigned to them—their history is a curious
one —about half a century ago when Chaka the great
Zulu king was desolating with cruel war Natal and all
the countries to the west and north west, a vast number
of Kaffirs fled for safety into the country now recognized
as the Transkei country, inhabited as I have already told
you by the great Amaxosa race, many were Zulus flying
in terror from their King Chaka. The Amaxosas refused
to receive them except as slaves, and as slaves the Fingoes,
or dogs, as they came to be called by the Amaxosa,
settled down in the Transkeian country. These Fingoes,
numbering now over 60,000, have always fought on our
side, and have developed good fighting qualities. After
the first Kaffir war we released them from their bondage,
and they now live in the Transkeian and Ciskeian country
peaceful in time of peace, but always ready to join us in
war, for which they are well paid. As Kaffirs they are
industrious, and have become so rich in cattle as to excite
intensely the jealousy of the Amaxosas, their former
masters.
You will see marked in the map to the south of Natal
and to the north-west of Kaffraria proper and the Transkei
country, “ Basuto land.” These Basutos have long been
settled in independence in their country. They suffered
severely from the Zulu invasion under Chaka; in 1852
we fought them, but never conquered them. Again in
1869, the Free State carried on a fierce war against them
but failed to subdue them ; they sought for British pro •
tection and it was conceded to them. The population of
Basuto land is set down at 150,000. They are by origin
Bechuanas, a large and powerful tribe lying westward of
the Transvaal and extending to the Kalahara desert. I
could never learn how they came originally to settle
where we now find them, but they have always occupied
a conspicuous place in South African History, especially
during the last thirty years, under their great chief
Mosesh, whom many even now assert to have been


a Christian. Certainly he was a great warrior, a skilful
diplomatist, and had a knowledge of Scripture history.
He has been succeeded by his son of the same name,
who has recently been driven into a war with the Cape
Colony by acts of folly and oppression on the part of the
constitutional authorities. Your late most able and
popular Governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, still, not
unnaturally, regretted amongst you, made an award
between the two contending parties. The Basutos
accepted it, but they have not kept their promises. The
war party is too strong in their midst, and the terms
were, in my opinion, hard upon an unconquered people.
Basuto-land is said to be most fertile land in South
Africa, and the Basutos, although up to the present day,
so persecuted by war, have learnt to plough and till their
land, and they have also learnt much handicraft and some
trades. They have become a producing people, and con-
tribute not insignificantly to the revenue of the State.
The Catholic Bishop of Natal, Hr. Jolife, has interested
himself much in their regard, and to him is due much of
the civilization, rapidly being adopted by the Basutos,
even to the wearing of clothes. At present all is peace
with them, but the question of the award has yet to be
finally settled. Meanwhile, Bishop Jolife’s schools,
convents, and educational establishment have been sadly
disrupted by the late war.
Doubtless it will appear to you strange, even para-
doxical, that amongst this brave intelligent tribe, who
are, as it were, imbibing Christianity and civilization
more rapidly than any other black race in all Africa, there
still exist amongst them cannibals. This is well known
on the best possible evidence, in proof. I will quote an
extract from Trollope’s “ South Africa.” In November
1869, there appeared a paper under the heading of
“Ethnological Curiosities from South Africa” in Once
a Week Mr. Bowker, the real author of the paper,
“ goes on to describe how he and a party with him, were
“ taken by guides up the side of a mountain and by a
“ difficult pathway into a cave. The visit occurred in
“ 1868. The cavern is there described as being black


“ with the smoke of fires, and the floor as being
“ strewn with the bones of human beings, chiefly those
“of women and children. The marrow bones were split
“into small pieces, the rounded joints alone being left
“ unbroken ; only a few of these bones were charred
“by fire, showing the prevailing taste had been for
“ boiled rather than for roast meat.” Again he says,
<< X saw, while at the cavern, unmistakeable evidence
“ that the custom had not been altogether abandoned, for
“ among the numerous bones were a few that appeared
“ very recent. They were apparently those of a tall
“ bony individual with a skull hard as bronze in the
“joints of these bones the marrow and fatty substances
“ were still evident, showing but too plainly that many
“ months had not elapsed since he met his fate this was
“ as late as 1868.
“ Again there are still a good many old cannibals in
“ existence. On the day that we visited the cavern I
“ was introduced to one of them who is now living not
“ very far from his former dwelling place. He is a man
“ of about sixty and not to speak from prejudice one of
“ the most God-lost looking ruffians that I ever beheld
“in my life. In former days when he was a young man
“ dwelling in the cavern, he captured during one of his
“ hunting expeditions three young women. From these
“he selected the best looking as a partner for life,
“ the other two went to stock his larder.
No man in South Africa is more worthy of credence
on such a subject than Mr. Bowker. He is an old public
servant of high position and held in great respect. His
idea is that the Basutos were driven to adopt their
terrible practices by famine inseperable from their frequent
and very cruel wars. That it will become extinct with
the existing generation there can be but little doubt, as it
has already died out in New Zealand, and in Fjii Islands.
And now we must revert to Kreli and Sandilli and
dispose of them and then resume the general history of
the great Kaffir race apparently destined never to die,
but to live on increasing and multiplying as it does at
present under civilized rule where no despotic power can


destroy them, no tribal wars diminish their numbers, no
famine reach them.
Kreli and Sandilli have always been amongst our
most formidable opponents, now they are crushed and
thoroughly subdued. I was present at the death of
Sandilli, but no one has yet seen Kreli, either killed or a
prisoner. This once great Chief, the direct descendant
of the great leader and king of the once powerful
Amaxosa race, is now a wanderer on the banks of the
Bashee, living on the charity of the Pondos. He is said
to have a few followers with him, but he is now not
worth the trouble of looking after.. Within the
boundaries of the old colony, say westward of Algoa
Bay, there are very few Kaffirs, such as there are, live as
agriculturists or labourers, isolated for the most part,
n pf congregated in kraals—they are harmless, demi-
civilized, but indolent. Throughout the Eastern
Provinces of the Cape Colony the Kaffirs live congre-
gated in kraals or locations. They are ciosely supervised
by magistrates, and missionaries of various denomina-
tions are dispersed amongst them, but as yet these good
men do not appear to have struck upon any efficacious
mode of making a Kaffir either civilized or religious.
The nearest approach to success is the mission established
in the Eastern Provinces by Roman Catholic Bishop
Picards, aided by a party of Trappist Monks. The
scheme of this great and holy missionary is based upon
his belief (one in which I heartily coincide) that the only
true way to tame a savage is to make him useful—teach
him a trade, and he is at once erected by his own people
into a superior being, and others try to follow his example
and to become useful also. So far the scheme has been
decidedly successful. The Kaffirs are under the care of
Trappist Monks, being instructed in religion and educated
up to trade and handicraft. At Lovedale, near Queens-
town, in the Eastern Provinces, there is an institution
based upon somewhat similar principles, in so far that all
the inmates are compelled to work, and those who can
afford it, are made to pay about £5 annually towards
the Institute. Here they are taught trades, and the


education is far too practical to permit of the old amount
of Psalm-singing to which so much valuable time has
been sacrificed in educating blacks races all over the
world. Carpentering and cart and waggon building, type
setting, telegraphy, and even music, are all acquired by
the Kaffir youth in this admirable Institution, whilst
their dormitories and refectories would bear comparison
with those of ordinary public schools. All this notwith-
standing, we have the broad fact undeniably placed before
us, that the settlers do not care to employ the educated
Kaffir girl; and a large number of the educated men take
to drinking and European vices, and replase into
savagedom and indolence, existing on the labour of their
wife or wives and the milk of a few cows. We must
hope that better results will follow the teaching of the
Trappist masters. The question of educating the black
race in South Africa, presents many difficulties, perhaps
the greatest are the great disinclination of the Kaffir to be
educated, and their vast increasing numbers.
Within the Cape Colony which contains 220,000
square miles we have but 235,000 whites, and 450,000
blacks, and of the white population only 85,000 are of
English descent; the disparity is very striking, but it is still
greater in the colony of Natal, as I shall hereafter relate
to you when I speak of the black race in Natal, Zulu
refugees, and now in conclusion of my explanation to you
of the Kaffir, which I have made much longer than I had
intended, but still not more so than was necessary to the
importance of the subject, it will perhaps be well that I
told more of his character in a savage state in his normal
condition.
The red or really wild Kaffir, who lives in a greased
blanket, made red with ochre, has no religious belief, nor
does he practice any worship of any sort. His idea of a
supreme being is very vague, and is seldom alluded to.
Vvhen he dies he believes that he goes to live in another
world—in ghosts and evil spirits he believes, and the
latter are often credited with persecuting a bad
man by milking his cows, damaging his crops, and
preventing his pigs breeding, or his fowls laying


eggs. In witchcraft the Kaffir is a very firm
believer, and this is exercised by chiefs of all the black
tribes in South Africa, including the Zulus, as a great
engine of power and means of punishment. There are
witch doctors in every tribe. If the king be ill, or any
of his tribe, or if any sort of misfortune befall the tribe,
a witch doctor is immediately consulted, and he is sup-
posed to be able to fix upon the man who has occasioned
the suffering. In the Cape Colonies he is simply driven
from the tribe, and cast out a wanderer upon the face of
the earth, no other tribe will receive him except as a slave.
Amongst the Zulus a process known as ‘‘smelling out”
is gone through. Invariably the victim is a man rich in
the tribe and possessing many cattle. If “ smelt ” out by
the witch doctor he is stripped of all he possesses, includ-
ing his wives, and is usually put to death. These witch
doctors exercise great power and influence amongst the
red Kaffirs, a more striking proof can hardly be afforded
than the extraordinary occurrence of 1857.
In 1850, the fifth Kaffir war broke out, and it lasted
well-nigh three years. It was a costly war to us, both in
money and life, but the Kaffir was thoroughly beaten. In
1857, a witch doctor assumed the office of prophet, and the
Kaffirs implicitly believed in him. He predicted a great
victory to his countrymen if they would only follow his
advice, also the expulsion of the whole white race from
Africa, and the return amongst them of all their great
warriors and great men dead and gone from this world.
The witch doctor advised and insisted on his advice being
followed by all who had faith in him, that they should all
kill their cattle, destroy their grain, and cease to cultivate
the soil. The poor victims of witchcraft were made to
believe that when wanted, other cattle, fat and excellent
for food, would come to them from the mountains, that
grain would spring up for food without being sowed, and
that food in abundance would reach them from unknown
sources, of a delicious nature unknown to them. In-
credible to relate, so great was the power of witchcraft
over the Kaffir mind that they pinned their faith in the
witch doctor, they followed his advice, and within a very


brief space of time, the whole land was laid desolate, and
the whole Kaffir race was starving within a very wide
circle in British Kaffraria and Kaffiraria proper. Fifty
thousand perished of starvation, and vast tracts of country
became depopulated. Every possible aid was given to
the poor deluded people by the white population within
reach of them. The Government came forward well and
commenced large public works, and employed the starving
Kaffirs upon them. The lands thus depopulated were
immediately occupied by the German legion, and b} 7- a
body of 2,000 emigrants from Northern Germany, all
valuable acquisitions to the Colony.
It cannot but serve to convey to you what I am
anxious you should acquire that is, a correct
knowledge of the Kaffir, that I should tell you something
of his peculiarities, of his manners and customs, (religion
he has none) of his weaknesses and his propensities, of
his likes and his dislikes.
A Kaffir will never eat fish, fowl, or eggs, they adopt
many Jewish customs, amongst others circumcision and an
entire abstinence from pork.
The Kaffirs have amongst themselves many curious
laws and customs, these have been collected and published
by Colonel Maclean, once the governor of British Kaffraria.
Their laws include Codes for the protection of property
generally, also against adultery, which is punishable by
death— regarding marriage and the acquisition of the
second and third wife the law is clearly defined. Their
modes of torture are as ingenious as they are cruel—a
man is tied by thongs to four posts in the ground, his
arms and legs extended to the utmost, a fire is then placed
tinder him, and applied to his eyes and nose —not un-
frequently women are punished really for imaginary causes
(of which she is accused by the witch doctor) by being
beaten almost to death, then blistered all over by fire, then
left alone in a hut to die or recover as the case may turn
°tit. They usually die.
Those accused of witchcraft are usually killed by being
besmeared with honey, then placed on an ants’ nest until
their bodies are devoured; another mode is to tie a reim


or thong tight round the neck, then stretch it and strike
it with sticks until the vibration dislocates the neck. A
Kaffir will eat enormous quantities of meat raw, and he
has many tit-bits, the gall bladder especially—and he
specially rejoices also in the inside of a snake, which he
extracts with much skill entire; he gloats over this.
Many a time have I seen them pounce down upon a
trek bullock hardly dead, skin it and devour it in an
incredible short time, including parts disgusting to us,
reminding me of so many wild animals ; two Kaffirs
will easily consume a whole sheep in twenty-four hours.
They are passionately fond of their children and cruel to
animals. The women carry heavy loads, always on their
heads, and it is a very common thing to see them thus
laden, giving suck to their child tied to their back, by
throwing their long pendant breast over their shoulder.
Every Kaffir walks about with a bundle of assegais, and
these are used for a variety of purposes, as an implement
of war, as one for cooking or to eat with, even as a
surgical instrument for bleeding man or beast, or skinning
the latter. They have no burying places, for the most part
they are buried where they die, and if any man is foolish
enough to live too long, he is taken to the bush, where a
grave is dug, he is placed therein in a sitting posture and
is then buried alive. In the summer—or rainy season,
there is a great deal of lightning, and it is very destructive
of life and property. A red flamingo feather is considered
to act as a charm against lightning, and it is stuck on
kraals or worn on the person as a safe-guard. I have
often seen an equally ridiculous preservative adopted by
Greeks in the Greek islands. They place glass bottles
topsy turvy on the roof of their house, they seem to
have some vague idea that glass has something to do
with electricity.
Closing here my notice of the Kaffir I must now
resume my history of the colony where I left it off, i.e .,
the war of 1811, which I described to you as a very cruel
war, where no quarter was given on either side, no
prisoners taken. My effort now shall be to follow out
the six Cape wars which have occurred, and leave each


one to serve as a beacon or land mark to aid me in the
long journey I have to take ere I complete my assigned
task, and to aid my audience in understanding and in
remembering what I relate. I intend that the history of
the wars and the history of the colonies of South Africa
generally shall march together pari passu in my lecture.
It would be impossible for me to enter on a history of
the several tribes composing the widely scattered race
included within the term Kaffir, exclusive of the Natal
Zulu refugee. It is for this reason that I have but very
lightly touched upon, or merely named certain tribes, and
have only discussed the history of these two tribes or
peoples with whom we have most been brought in
contact, and have had most intercourse. I mean the
Amaxosa, or Cape Kaffirs and their dependent tribes and
the Basutos, hereafter I shall have much to say about
the Zulu and the Kaffirs of Natal.
A second trouble occurred in 1811. The Dutch
resisted British authority on the frontier ; they took up
arms and invited the Kaffirs to join them. The Kaffirs
refused—a battle was fought, the Dutch were repressed,
the rebellion was crushed out with an iron heel. Six
ringleaders were condemned to be hanged—five were
executed and a terrible scene it was, even to this day
the execution at “ Slagter’s Nek ” is spoken of by the
Dutch Boers with a shudder. A scaffold was erected,
the beam to which the victims were attached broke, and
they all fell together into a pit already dug for their
graves. Writhing in agony half killed, with ropes still
round their necks, they tried to struggle from the pit and
get back to life. Cries for mercy arose around, force even
was attempted, but the law had its course and those who
had violated it paid the penalty of their crime. The
surviors of this rebellion trekked immediately out of the
country and fought their way through many bloody
nghts until they once more got beyond the reach of
British law.
Until 1819, when the second war occurred, the Colony
inade good progress under wise Governors, but constant
disturbances occurred with the Kaffirs and other natives,


whilst the white population was ever restless and desirous
to get beyond civilization where they could treat both the
natives and their own slaves as they thought proper,
without any fear of consequences.
The war of 1819 arose from our intermeddling very
unnecessarily with tribal quarrels. The end of it was
that the Kaffir was driven back behind the Keiskama
Kiver, which you will see marked on the map. The
country thus left unoccupied known as the Zuurveldt was
rich and fertile, efforts were made to retain it as a neutral
territory, but this scheme proved abortive, it was distaste-
ful both to the Kaffirs and white men. The Governor,
Lord Charles Somerset, strongly impressed with the
fitness of the Zuurveldt for colonization, wrote home ad-
vising that emigrants be sent out. The necessary money
was at once voted by the Imperial Parliament, and 5,000
emigrants were sent out. They were landed at Algoa
Bay, where now stands the town of Port Elizabeth, the
Liverpool of the Cape Colony. It turned out a very
prosperous settlement, but the settlers went through great
hardships from the day when they first set the plough
into the virgin soil over 40 years ago up to the present
day. Scenes of flood and drought, and blighted harvests,
and bloody wars with the Kaffirs, all had to be endured
in their turn, until they achieved the great success which
they are so justly proud of. Port Elizabeth is now a very
handsome and a very thriving city, possessing far more
commercial wealth than Cape Town itself. Up to the
year 1820 the Colony was ruled with absolute despotism
under its English governors, even the liberty of the Press
was roughly violated, but the cruel severities practised
by the Dutch in former times had entirely ceased, it took
however a long time to eradicate the evils resulting from
their cruelties, and to emancipate the Colonists from the
unconstitutional rule under which they had been made
to exist. Gradually the Colonists have acquired for
themselves, as I will show later on, the amplest rights
and privileges enjoyed by any people in the world. Many
of the actors in the Constitutional struggles by which this
happy consummation was brought about, are still alive
and glory in their good work.


The existence of the Cape of Good Hope as a fiee
colony may fairly date from the year 1820. The school
master was then sent abroad in their midst, a perfectly
free Press was established. The judicial systems were
revised and extended, trial by jnry was instituted, postal
communication was placed upon a proper footing suited
to the times, churches and schools were established where
necessary, and every possible measures were anxiously
adopted to improve the condition of the people, politically
and socially—and thus matters progressed until the war
of 1834-35 broke out. This is always spoken of as the
most severe war in which we were ever engaged against
the Kaffirs. Important changes took place in the
Governmental systems of the country during the decade
from 1820 to 1830, notably as follows. A council of se\en
was appointed to act with the Governor, this was the in-
sertion of the thin end of the wedge to obtain Pailia-
mentary institutions, and they were obtained later on.
The remnants of Dutch Courts, known as the Land-
drost and Numraden, were abolished and resident magis-
trates substituted. All proceedings in Law Courts weie
carried on in English and all public despatches, were
written in English. The Hottentots were raised in the
social scale and were placed on the same footing as
Europeans. This was done on an express order received
from the Colonial Office, and it was worded in language
very positive and unequivocal. This measure gave gieat
umbrage to the whole European population. In 1834
slavery itself was abolished. This excited excessive
anger and ill-will towards the English in every Dutch-
man’s home, and coming as it did, so soon after the very
unpopular act regarding the Hottentots, loud muimurs
were to be heard everywhere against English rule. .It
was thus that the seeds were sown of that Dutch exodus
which was begun a few years afterwards, and which, so
far as we are concerned, ended at Laing s Nek, and the
Majuba Hill. This great exodus which has served to
exercise so important an influence on all .British inteiests
in South Africa, and to fix indelibly in. the heart of
many a Dutchman a hatred for all that is English; all


this was brought about by our own stupid administra-
tion. Many Dutchmen still look upon the whole
transaction of the manumission of their slaves as a great
swindle, for up to the present day, some have never
received a shilling of the compensation money, and there
can be no doubt that a good deal of this money found its
way into the pockets of dishonest agents.
Exasperated by so much injustice, and persecuted in
their homes by the incessant maraudings of Kaffirs on
their lands, which semeed irrepressible, the Dutch
farmers resolved in 1836 once more to trek away
far out of reach of so much mis-government, and to
other countries where they could govern themselves in
peace. The} T sold their farms and effects for little or
nothing, they bought waggons and organised their trek
with much care and judgment, and determined with their
wives and children to face all dangers—the treacherous
savage, the wild beast, the lion, the hyena, the flood that
everwhelms, the lightning that blasts, the Murrain that
kills their cattle, all these and even greater dangers they
were ready to brave, because, as they said, there was
at least freedom to be gained by the sacrifice. Wife,
sons, children, said the brave pioneer, take a last look at
your old home and we shall start, we know not whither,
but we doubt not the Lord will provide for us. I have
extracted this account from several stories of this eventful
exodus which I wrote down as I learnt or read them. We
must now leave the Boer farmers on their journey and
revert to the War of 1834-1835. In due course we will
follow the farmers to the end of their perilous journey,
pregnant as it was with interest to the future
of the Dutch race in Africa and of the black race
especially. The War of 1835, the third Kaffir war,
proved to be as bloody as it was costly. For some years
previous to its outbreak, Kaffir thefts of cattle on the
frontier had been increasing in numbers and importance.
Suddenly towards the end of 1834 the whole colony was
taken by surprise on learning that some ten or twelve
thousand Kaffirs had invaded the colony, massacred the
farmers and had carried away as booty, pretty nearly as


follows 12,000 head of cattle, 157,000 sheep and goats,
5,500 horses and 58 waggons —a pretty good days work,
especially if you add to it the burning and utter destruction
of over 450 farm-houses and the pillaging of some 300
houses more. The estimated money loss of this Kaffir
stampede into the colony amounted to £300,000 in round
numbers. But the butcher’s bill was hideous, for it is said
that under circumstances of great atrocity many hundred
Europeans were massacred by the Kaffirs. I have passed
many an hour over a camp fire in Africa, conversing with
the sufferers themselves or with their children, on what
they had personally witnessed of these atrocities, or what
they had learnt of them as handed down by tradition in
their families.
Sir Benjamin D’Urban was at this time Governor of
the colony. He was a grand old soldier and a good
Christian. He boldly faced his difficulty. He raised,
as it were, from the bowels of the earth, a force composed
of white men, of Hottentots, and of Fingoes, sufficient,
when added to the Imperial force present in the colony,
to cope with the difficulty and to prevent the spread of
the rebellion. The war lasted for over two years ; at
length Hintsa, the great Kaffir Chief, was killed, hot
handed in the act of committing a gross deed of
treachery. This was a death-blow to the whole rebellion.
The Kaffirs sued for peace. In the hour of victory the
Governor behaved with tact and good judgment. He
drove the Kaffir across the Kei and annexed his territory
southward, as far as Keiskama Biver, to the British
Crown. Thus a very perfect geographical frontier, or to
use a modern phrase, “ scientific frontier,” was estab-
lished, for the Kei is a grand and a very turbulent river,
apparently meant by nature to take some active part in
marking out the limits of human greed for land. Those
at Downing-street would not have it. Lord Glenelg
reigned supreme in Downing-street in 1836. He utterly
repudiated the gallant general’s acts. He tried to justify
Kaffir aggression before the war and ordered all land
taken from the Kaffir to be restored to him. Sir
Benjamin D’Urban was re-called. He indignantly


resisted the injustice of Lord Glenelg’s verdict ; but
Lord Glenelg was firm and assumed all the responsibility
of his acts. His orders were complied with, the land
was restored, the Governor went home, but the cattle
and stock taken from the colony were never restored, nor
was any compensation given for them, or for the burnt
houses of the frontier settler. This brought ruin upon
many, but it brought the war to a termination and peace
to the colony. This weak and vacilating policy, prompted
in the opinions of the Kaffirs by weakness and fear, not
by generosity or a desire to promote their interests, pro-
duced the worst possible effects. War was declared again
in 1846 ; it had become impossible to the settlers to
live on the frontier —their cattle were systematically
plundered, their herds murdered, and their lives
threatened. Thus the fourth Kaffir war begun, and
was only ended after two years of hard fighting
and a large expenditure of blood and treasure. This
was called the war of the axe. The small incident
of stealing an axe, and the rescue of the prisoners
by the Kaffirs was the immediate cause of the
war. The Kaffirs entered upon this war with great
spirit and were certain that the time had come when they
were to expel every white man from the country. The
idea is even still existent in the minds of many Kaffirs
that such a day will come. No one doubted the error of
Lord Glenelg’s policy, for practically great difficulty
w r as experienced in undeceiving the Kaffirs and once more
bringing them back under subjection. In this war the
Fingoes fought bravely with us and rendered excellent
service for which they were rewarded by accession of
land. Sir Harry Smith was appointed governor and he
immediately extended the frontier of the colony to the
Kei river once more, and he made the country south as
far as the Keiskama Kiver, a home, for Kaffirs where
they might live under British protection. It was called
British Kaffraria. In 1850, as soon as the really
unfortunate frontier settlers had resumed possession
of their farms and had commenced to repair the damages
done to them, the Kaffirs assembled together in large


numbers—and beating off Her Majesty’s troops who had
been sent out to protect the settlers, they deliberately
massacred several of the military settlers and laid waste
the Chumie valley. In this, the fifth Kaffir war, there
was an immense waste of life and property. It was
carried on after a desultory guerilla fashion, which proved
most harassing to the British. And on this occasion the
rebellious Kaffirs were aided by many Hottentots and by
all the discontented spirits on the Eastern frontier. Ihe
war was brought to a close by sheer force, of arms,
the rebels were beaten into submission by Sir .George
Cathcart in 1853, and they remained quiet until 1877.
Thus ended the fifth Kaffir war. #
With your permission we will make this a halting
point in our history of this very interesting colony and
we will follow out the trek of the Boer farmers, the
Dutch exodus, and relate to you whither they trekked
and how adventurous was their journey. This will
take us back to the year 1836. They trekked m one
body across the Orange river, there they sepaiated,
one party crossed the Drakensberg led by the gallant
Piet Retief and from the summit of these high ranges
they beheld the beautiful plains of Natal with feelings
much akin to those belonging to the followers of Pizano
as they sighted the blue Pacific from the heights ol
Dariens mountains. These smiling plains had not long
been laid waste by Chaka as an amusement, not because
he wanted the country, he only kept his hands oft the
Amaxosas, to the southward, because he believed they
were under British protection. Chaka s brother Dmgaan
if possible more cruel and bloodthirsty than his biother
whom he had murdered, ruled the country now spread
at the feet of the wanderers. Retief was kindly received
by Dingaan at first, but was afterwards most treacherously
murdered, together with the flower, of his followers. It
was a foul and horrible deed committed under the cloak
of friendly fraternisation, and it was immediately followed
up by an effort to murder the whole party. Six hundred
are said to have been killed by Dingaan. The Dutch
fought bravely within their laarger but only a few escaped
death to tell the tale and to avenge the cruel murder ol


their countrymen and women and children. The scene
of this episode is to this day called Weenen or weeping
country. A second party settled within what is now
known as the Orange Free State, whilst a third, under the
gallant and brave General Pretorius crossed the Vaal river
and established there the Transvaal Republic. Pretorius
afterwards marched from the Transvaal with a considerable
force and rallying around him the remnant of Piet Retief’s
forces and all the other Dutch who had followed in his
tracks over the Drakensberg, he built a stout laager and
therein stood many assaults of the Zulus. He finally
defeated Dingaan on the 16th December, 1838, still called
“ Dingaan’s day.” The battle was fought on the “ Bloed ”
river, Dingaan fled and afterwards quarrelled with his
brother Panda, at whose instigation he is supposed to
have been treacherously murdered.
From “ Dingaan’s day ” Natal may be said to have
become an English Colony, the Zulus were beaten out of
it, and already some English and some Boers had
settled down in it in 1839-40 —of these first Boer settlers
40 years ago, some are still living on the lands they
fought for so bravely, and acquired with such indomitable
courage, the majority of them trekked—Natal struggled
away into life under great difficulties—a small British
force was sent to hold the country as a British possession
colonised by Dutch from the English Cape Colony. This
force was soon withdrawn, and the whole territory was
left to the Dutch, indeed it was handed over to them, one
might say, with a congratulatory letter from Sir George
Napier, then Governor of the Cape Colony; we disclaimed
any intention of exercising authority over the territory—
and so matters remained until 1841. Meanwhile the
English and Dutch living together at Durban, already
made it the commercial Port of Natal, they had repelled
many attacks of the native tribes, but there was no reli-
able government formed, and the English made known
their intention of establishing a republic, if not at once
recognized as British subjects in a British Colony. Sir
George Napier now reconsidered his original decision, and
resolved to again occupy the country with a military force.


Artillery and Infantry were at once despatched from the
Eastern Frontier overland to Durban under Major Smith,
afterwards Sir Harry. This force was met by a large
Dutch force, commanded by field Cornet Joubert, by whom
they were beaten and were driven within their laager
which they at once fortified, and there waited to be
starved or relieved. To make matters worse the Dutch
seized our store ships sent round from Cape Town with
food and ammunition. As a last resource Dick King volun-
teered to convey to Grahamstown, over 500 miles distant,
news of the disaster. He was a brave. old settler, he
swam across the harbour, and it took him six days and
nights to complete his task to reach King Williams Town.
This brave performance is still spoken of in the Colony as
“ Dick King’s ride.” The result of it was the dispatch
of a large force to Durban, it landed without much diffi-
culty, fought the Boers, beat them, and .relieved, the
remnants of the beleaguered garrison. This expedition
was commanded by Colonel Cloete, now General Sir
Josias Cloete, one of a good old Cape family who had
received a commission in the British Army, where, he
served gallantly and honourably, gaining much distinction.
This first victory, far from ending the objects of his expe-
dition, served only to increase his difficulties he had.no
food, no transport, no commissariat, no means of moving
his force. Colonel Cloete, concealing the difficulty of his
position, accepted an invitation to proceed to Pietermaritz-
burg, a distance of 40 miles, and there confer with the
Dutch authorities. Much to his astonishment he there
met Piet Uys, the same who recently has been so. highly
praised by Sir Evelyn Wood for the good services
rendered the British in our war against the Zulus. Piet Uys
and Colonel Cloete had been comrades together in their
youth, and the astonishment of both at this extraordinary
meeting may well be imagined. The story goes that Piet
Uys at once asked the Colonel, “My God Josie, was it you
“ riding at the head of the troops when they landed why
“ I had taken deliberate aim at you, and was in a rage
“ because my gun would not go off.’ A compromise was
agreed upon, although some of the Dutch were opposed


to it—on the sth July, 1842, the Dutch signed a sub-
mission at Pietermaritzburg, but it was not until August
of the following year that the self constituted Yolksraad
declared Her Majesty’s Government supreme throughout
the Colony. Thus out of evil came great good, the Dutch
Exodus from our misgoverned Cape Colonies eventuated
in the acquisition by us of a grand and most important
Colony, Natal. We acquired possession of the Transvaal
also, which Pretorius erected into a Pepublic, but we let
the acquisition drop very soon, something in the hot
potato fashion. We also annexed many years previous
the countries settled by the emigrant Boers in the Orange
Free State, but these we honestly restored, and the Dutch
Pepublic there is now most peaceable and flourishing
—of this country I must hereafter explain something.
Before dismissing the subject of Natal here it is right
that I should make it clear to you that of those Dutch
who originally came to Natal and there bravely fought
and bled to acquire the country, but few submitted to
British authority—the majority deserted their farms and
trekked further and further, and crossed the Yaal river
and there joined their countrymen who had already
established themselves in the Transvaal country. The
black question hastened the departure of many from
under British rule. The Dutch could see nothing but
the gravest folly in our encouraging the Zulus to settle
in Natal and there assigning lands to them. This is a
large, a very large question, I dare not enter upon it
here, still I cannot set it aside altogether, without afew
figures, sufficient to illustrate the relative positions of the
black and white races in Natal country, revolutionized as
it has been by the hand of Cod by unexpected events by
philanthropic intervention. To elucidate our real
position as white conquerers from our tight little island,
over a vast black population, covering more square miles
than all Europe, culminating in our conquest of Natal,
I must remind you that up to the moment when British
bayonets intervened between the black man and the white
man in the Natal country, between the years, from 1 840
to 1843, the Boer had ever exercised a terrible authority


over the black, He looked upon them as so many wild
beasts, as vile incumbrances on the earth to be got rid of.
These blacks, of whom I speak, had been in constant
strife with the Dutch since, descending the slopes of the
Drakensberg he reached the plains of Natal, and these
blacks were either Zulu refugees or only the remnants of
the tribes which inhabited these most fertile and
delicious regions, desolated by the infernal wars of
Chaka and the fiendish cruelty of Dingaan, but a few
years ago. These blacks were elated beyond all descrip-
tion when they first heard, then learnt, and at last
realised the terms of freedom, the glorious Paradise
which was opened out to them by modern British legisla-
tion in their regard. It exceeded all their dreams, all
their wildest conceptions ; it exceeded the possible to them.
Yet they accepted it all as possible, and as the Dutch
trekked out of the country they entered it in considerable
numbers under British protection, under which they felt
they could be safe. And they induced other Zulus from
over the Tugela to come and enjoy the Paradise with
them. In vain the Dutch and English protested. The
gates into Natal were opened ; the memory of Chaka
and Dingaan still survived, and Cetwayo was ruling in
their stead with great cruelty. British philanthrophy
had held out the hand of friendship to the black race of
South Africa. Let us see from figures how the offer has
been availed of. Hereafter we shall learn what influence
the British policy has exercised over the black race in
Natal, or how far it is likely to hasten his civdization and
Christianity. In 1843 there were barely 3000 blacks in
Natal, within three years there were 80,000, and now
there are 320,000 as compared to 18,000 white men. All
live in peace together.
These figures serve at once to prove the vast numbers
of the black people who congregate under our flag, and
amongst us they live quietly and peaceably. It is indeed
a strange phenomenon to find blacks of the same nation,
of the same tribes, of the very same families, living on
opposite sides of Tugela. Those in Zululand subject to a
cruel despotism, those in Natal governed by civilised


laws—they become landed proprietors and farmers—they
possess waggons and teams and herds of cattle, they pay
taxes, the franchise even is open to them under certain
prudent restrictions. The Kaffir in Natal marries when
he likes, and is subject to no arbitrary authority. Does
not this point to the possibility of bridging over the vast
gulf which now exists between civilization and black
barbarism. The Boer exodus brought about this great
work, thus out of evil has come a great good. Our mis-
government drove the Boer from us, we are in Natal
settling blacks on the very farms deserted by the Boers.
As yet I have only brought the history of the Colony
itself up to 1838, when slavery was abolished ; despite these
great changes and desolating wars, the Colony prospered
materially; merino sheep were imported in great num-
bers, still more to improve the breed of sheep, and a great
impetus was given to the growing of wool. The quality,
however, to this day hardly reaches that grown in Aus-
tralia or New Zealand. Beyond those territorial changes,
immediately brought about by the several wars, which
occurred during the period from 1838 to 1877, all of which
I have brought to your notice, but few events happened
worthy of special notice in a lecture, where one is so bound
to time, and compelled to condense information within so
small and circumscribed a space. For many years the
Colony jogged along very quietly under governors of
varied calibre, under whose rule, by the in-
fluence of war, or the vacillating policy of a Home Secre-
tary at times extended the Eastern Frontier, and again
at other times retrenched it. No special industry belonged
to the Colony, yet its revenues increased, and each war
brought into the Colony large sums of British gold.
Five millions were raised to spend within the Colony in
reproductive works, and the Kaffir famine of 1857, of
which I have spoken, necessitated a large expenditure.
Ten years later the toy of a child exercised as great an
influence over the future of the Colony as did even the
Dutch Exodus. In 1867 the first diamond known to
exist in the Cape Colony was found in the hands of a
child, on the north side of the Orange River—of course


there were various stories about this diamond, but after
passing through various hands, Sir Phillip Woodhouse,
the Governor, bought it for £SOO. The diamond had been
found at the junction of the Vaal with the Orange Eiver,
and that is where the diamond fields are now situated.
The diamond fields are always spoken of in South Africa
as the eighth wonder of the world, and truly the verdict
regarding them is singularly unanimous. I need not
explain to an Australian audience how the profits of these
mines do fluctuate. How in the great rush which occurred
on their first discovery many left the diamond fields,
ruined and broken hearted, whilst others more fortunate
in their find of precious stones, became at once rich men,
nor need I explain how it came to pass equally in gold as
in diamond rushes, that a floating population, one meant
but to serve a temporary purpose, becomes imperceptibly
permanent, and so it will be until the end of the chapter,
for thus are our gold towns brought into life, thus has our
emigration been absorbed. The Orange Free State
claimed the land on which the diamond diggings were
established; after much delay and diplomacy, the whole
country was ceded to us, and we agreed to pay over
£90,000 to the Free State in discharge of all claims.
This rich acquisition gave a great impetus to trade
and commerce in the Colony, something akin to that
which arose in this Colony when the gold discoverer,
Hargraves, made you abandon your sheep boiling and
substitute for it digging and prosperity. The income
derived by the Colon}- from the diamond fields varies
much, it reaches an average of over a million a year.
Between the years 1871 and 1874, over £4,000,000 worth
of diamonds were exported over and above those included
in the Customs returns for that period. The “ Star of the
South ” valued at £30,000, now in possession of Lady
Dudley, was picked up by a native shepherd. In 1872
responsible Government was established at Cape Town —
pause and reflect for one moment on the contrast between
such a form of Government, and the arbitrary cruel
severity of the Government prevailing under the Dutch
rule, and even during the first years of English rule, and


then decide within yourself what meed of praise is due to
that Nation which can work out such a grand emanci-
pation of fellow creatures, white and black, within less
than half a century.
In 1825 the Governor ruled as a despot. In 1834 a
Legislative Council was established, all elected by the
Governor, 12 in number, of them 6 acted as executive
ministers.
In July, 1854, after long delay and very much discussion,
two houses of Parliament, both elective were established.
A franchise was also established in this year on the basis
still existent. Every voter for a member of either House
must occupy a land or building worth £25 or he must earn
£SO per annum. Many Kaffirs are in a position to avail
themselves of this franchise, and some few do, the multi-
tude are at present prevented by prudent legislation.
After 1872 a modification was made in the Constitution,
and Parliamentary Constitution was conceded to the Cape
Colony, exactly the same as that now enjoyed by the
Canadas and Australia. The ministers are now res-
ponsible to Parliament, not to the Governor, and they can
only hold office whilst they can command a majority, and
majorities can only be created and maintained by the will
of the people. Thus the Cape Colony is governed by
Kings, Lords, and Commons, our much revered Con-
stitutional principles have taken deep root amongst the
people, and so far Parliamentary Government has decidedly
succeeded in the Cape Colony. There are good debaters
within the House, and all important measures are discussed
with admirable freedom and ability. All the principal
towns within the colony are already connected by the
telegraph wire, and a large amount of capital is now being
expended in the construction of railroads. I regret to say
that I am unable to give you figures on these two heads.
The system of education in force throughout the
colony is decidedly good, if we may be permitted to judge
by the establishments and the admirable education
available to the youth of the colony, not excluding the
Kaffir. The hospital at the Cape is so far recognised
as a school of medicine by the Royal College of Medicine


at home, that students in qualifying for their degrees
are allowed to spend two years of their time in the Cape
Hospital.
There are some glorious public Institutions in the
Cape Colony—a Royal Observatory of widely extended
fame—a Public Library containing 40,000 volumes, some
very valuable works and manuscripts and records of the
colony. Sir George Grey contributed largely to this
library. The Museum and Botanical Gardens at Cape
Town are singularly rich in the fauna and flora of the
colony, and they are maintained with great care and skill
and some liberality, but these are equalled in importance
and in the richness of their collections by similar
Institutions established at Albany and Graham’s Town.
Under many great difficulties, hospitals are w T ell main-
tained throughout the colony, and an active and effective
supervision is exercised over them.
State-Aid is still given under restrictions to the
several creeds recognised by the State. The Reformed
Dutch is the more numerous, but it may be said that
every creed and form of religion known at home is to be
found within the limits of the Cape Colony, including the
Moravians, who, since 1732, have laboured hard for the
conversion of the native races. The Roman Catholics
occupy a conspicuous position in the colony, and have
most deservedly gained high and great respect by their
very excellent educational establishments.
The Roman Dutch law, received in Holland before
the introduction of the Code Napoleon, was in force in
the Cape Colony when we took possession of it. This
law is still authoritative, although it has been much
modified, the spirit of the law is becoming more modern,
more English every day, and it is now in contemplation to
pass consolidated Acts with a view to simplify legal
procedure. Before I enter upon the very important task
of giving you some information regarding the financial
condition of the colony, to make the subject intelligible, I
must first acquaint you with its population, its industries,
its resources. Now I shall rapidly glance at the whole
country of which I have been speaking and collect it


together, as it were, for I have been compelled con-
siderably to scatter it and disjoint it during the lecture,
wherein I have had to treat of so many subjects, and of
such varied peoples and tribes with a view to place our
South African colonies before you as clearly as was in my
power.
The countries which do now actually constitute our
South African possessions or which are inhabited by whites
and blacks together are as follows. I include the Orange
Free state and the Transvaal although not British territory
in order to embrace all the populations of South Africa
proper as I have described.
Ist. The Cape Colony proper —Area, 220,000 square
miles. Population, 235,000 whites, 485,000 blacks.
2nd. Kaffraria. The Cis Kei and the Transkei both
now are under British protection. Area, 10,000 square
miles. Population, 501,000 blacks; the white population
is so very small as not to be worthy of notice.
3rd. Basuto-land contains a population of 150,000.
Their country was desolated by Chaka. They fought
Sir George Cathcart at the Berea and were not conquered
although peace was made. They lived for many years in
chionic state of warfare with the Free State, until both
parties were well nigh exhausted. In 1869 they craved
protection at our hands, we granted it, and marked out the
frontier still adhered to, and recognised by the two
contending parties.
4th. Natal is a separate colony by itself. Area,
18,700 square miles. Population 20,000 white, 320,000
black.
This will be dealt with as the lecture progresses. In
speaking of the black races and of our history in South
Africa I have been unable to separate it from the Cape
Colony proper, it was peopled from there and was at one
time a dependency of the Cape Colony.
sth. The diamond fields or Griqua-land West. Area
15,500 square miles.
Population permanent—
Whites 1,200
Blacks 4,500


The floating population of the diggers may be set
down at nearly 15,000 white, 30,000 black. To com-
plete the map in your hands I must explain that this
land was originally occupied by Griquas and a race of
bastard Hottentots under Waterboer, and the two
brothers, Cornelius and Adam Kok. The two brothers
Kok quarrelled, and one trekked to a country north of
Kaffraria, which had remained unsettled since it had been
devastated by Chaka. It was called “No Man’s Land,”
but is now called Griqua-land East. We had much
trouble in acquiring the diamond fields, and eventually
were obliged, as I have already stated, to pay in compen-
sation £90,000 to the Free State. This was a very
prudent arrangement, for assuredly the English, who so
quickly populated the diamond fields, would never have
permitted a foreign rule over them, emanating from a
petty State.
The States or tribes bordering upon the British
possessions are—
.lst. Orange Free State. The Boers, who first left
British territory in 1836, were the first whites to settle
m this State—thence some crossed the Drakensberg, and
as already related, settled in Natal, whilst others
trekked on across the Yaal river. These early settlers
bjed in a constant state of warfare with the bastard
Hottentots and Griquas, whom they found there. In
1845 Sir Peregrine Maitland found himself obliged to
interfere and to try to establish peace in a country so
important and so close to the Cape Colony. He estab-
lished a Besident there, and in 1848 Sir Harry Smith
mirly took possession of the country as British. Old
Pretorius assembled a Commando and drove our Besi-
dent out of the country. Sir Harry Smith came down
to his relief, the battle of Boem Platts ensued. Pretorius
was beaten, and was obliged to fly. He crossed the Vaal
tiver and eventually founded Pretoria and the Transvaal
Bepublic.
In 1851, the Sovereignty, as it came to be called,
Was formally erected into a separate colony, under a
Lieutenant-Governor. It was a costly acquisition, and


compelled us to live in a constant state of war, therefore
in 1854 we handed it over to its inhabitants. A
Republic was erected, and under the Presidency of Mr.
Brand, it is a flourishing State, free of debt, and at peace
with all round it. We are much indebted to President
Brand for the valuable aid he gave to us recently when
finally settling our quarrel with the Boers of the
Transvaal. He proved himself an able statesman, and
essentially a lover of law, and order, and peace Of the
Transvaal it is needless to say anything here; its history
is but too painfully and indelibly imprinted in our
memories. Its population is stated below, and this
brings us to Zulu-land, where we must halt for the
present.
An analysis of the figures on population is remark-
able, for it will show how vastly superior in numbers the
coloured population is to the white.
White. Coloured.
Cape Colony 235,000 485,000
The Kaflrarian Trans | KAI AAA
and Cis Kei j 501 ’ 000
Basutos 150,000
Natal 20,000 320,000
Diamond Fields 15,000 30,000
Native protected districts | 185 000
bordering on our colonies ) ’
Orange Free State 30,000 15,000
Transvaal 40,000 250,000
340,000 1,934,000
This gives an average of nearly six coloured to one
white man throughout South Africa inhabited by whites'.
In the Orange Free State the proportion is very
different, the Dutch hate the blacks, treat them like
animals, and drive them from amongst them ; from these
figures you may form a just estimate of the magnitude of
the task which England has to accomplish in Africa.
In fulfilment of her mission, England is bound to teach


civilization and Christianity to all this vast multitude of
black barbarism which has taken up its dwelling in South-
ern Africa, and neither dies out nor becomes useless,
but increases and multiplies, and (wdth profit to the State)
accumulates wealth in cattle and farm produce, becomes
reconciled to civilization, pays taxes, and farms sufficient
for home consumption, even for sale. During the last Zulu
war, as fighting men, the blacks of Natal were brave and
loyal, although as carriers in war time, they were a failure.
As servants they are good and faithful, and the whole
white population is dependent on the black for all
household, for all agricultural, for all farming purposes,
and for shepherding. Many are being daily employed
in skilled labour, chiefly as blacksmiths, but in
Natal, instances are becoming more and more frequent
where the black man builds his own waggon,
rears his own oxen, drives his own team—of
course these men having their wife or wives at home to
care for their property, can work more cheaply as
transport men than any white men. During the last
Zulu war I utilized these men as far as possible, my diffi-
culty regarding them was that they were too careful of
their cattle and of themselves. Serving the white man
as the blacks do in Natal, it is most unfair to propagate
the accusation against the latter which is too commonly
done. Under the beneficent rule of Sir Henry Bulwer in
Natal, the Zulu refugees are well cared for, and are wisely
treated, for they are made to believe that civilization is
more profitable to them than barbarism, and brings with
it to them comfort and security which had been inconceiv-
able to them. This encourages them to be industrious,
ana with time, habits of industry must bring about civili-
zation and Christianity.
Keverting now to the Cape Colony, the first census of it
'Was taken in 1865, the second in 1875, which gave the
population 720,000, the increase of it during this decade,
has been 24 per cent. The present population is
nearly the same as that of New South Wales,
the component parts are however very different. The com-
mercial and industrial progress of the Colony has been


very great, but nothing comparable to what is now oc-
curring in New South Wales, wdiich is unprecedented.
Nevertheless, the natural resources of the Cape Colony-
will bear fair comparison with those of our most favoured
Colony, its mineral wealth is unbounded, and its climate
so varied that almost anything will grow in it. The
physical features of the Cape Colony are very striking—
the whole country appears to be built up as it were in
terraces, and there are many high dividing ranges from
6,000 to 10,000 feet high. The character of the country
is very rough and rugged, with deep kloofs or gorges,
through which the periodical torrents of rain escape to
the sea. Throughout the whole country flat-topped
mountains, such as one sees at Cape Town called table
mountain, everywhere abound, every mountain and hill
appears to have had the top cut off. Nearly two-thirds of
the Cape Colony consists of large plains covered with rich
soil. In the rainy season they are covered with rich
grass, but during one half the year the grass, very much
as in this country, is quite burnt up.
I can only so far touch on the very interesting
subject of geology as to tell you that in Namaqua land
a thousand tons of copper are exported every month,
by a company from Port Noloth ; the supply appears
inexhaustible. Copper is also found on the Orange
Piver, but it does not appear at present to be in paying
quantities. Coal in great abundance and of excellent
quality, is found and w T orked at Natal, of the diamond
fields I have already said as much as time will
permit.
All the rivers along the coast are protected by bars
which ruin them for navigation. There is not a single
good harbour along the coast from Cape Town to
Delagoa Bay. Trade and commerce are carried on under
great difficulties, but large sums of money are being
spent, and great efforts made, not without success, to
remedy these evils. Going round westward to the
Atlantic we find Saldanha Bay, which is a safe and
excellent harbour under all circumstances. Many
maintain that the capital of the colony should have been


erected there. At Cape Town, admirable docks have
been constructed, capable of receiving the largest
mercantile ships, thus science has conquered a great deal
of the natural insecurity of Table Bay as a place of
anchorage and refuge.
The climate of the Cape Colony is a counterpart of
our own climate here, lying as it does in the same degrees
of latitude.
The forests of the Cape yield many beautiful hard
woods well adapted for furniture and for waggon or
carriage building.
In no country do we find such exquisite bulbs and heaths
as in South Africa. They are to be found in endless
varieties, and in great quantities, carpeting the scenery
with the brightest the most brilliant colouring that we can
well imagine. The fruits of Europe have been introduced
with perfect success, and undeniable grapes, peaches,
apricots, pears, apples, plums, &c. &c. are to be bought in
due season in the markets at moderate rates. Wines are
made in large quantities from the grape plants originally
brought from France by the Huguenot emigrants, cuttings
of which were sent to Australia and were the first grapes
introduced. Constantia has a world wide fame, it is a
rich and luscious wine ; of the other wines, Pontac, Sherry,
Stein, &c. &c. I cannot speak favourably. The fact is that
although the production of wine is an important industry
m the colony, it is made as a rule with great carelessness,
and this is one reason why it is not acceptable in our
markets I fear we are following somewhat in the wake
of the Cape wine producers. Quantity not quality is be-
coming a great desideratum, and the grapes are not always
culled with sufficient care before being pressed. Barley,
°ats, maize, millet, all grow in abundance in Africa,
tobacco also is prolific, and cotton has been sucessfully
grown as an experiment. All the larger and grander
mumals now known to us are inhabitants of the Cape
Colony, but alas they recede further and further every
7 e ar as the settler approaches their feeding grounds,
-fhe lion, the tiger (not the Indian royal tiger)
fFe camelleopard, the hyena, the zebra, the quagga, the


stately elephant, all these and many more grand animals
are still to be found at the Cape, including antelopes
weighing dead 400 to 500 lbs. to the wee blue bok
weighing only sor 7 lbs. But the numbers of antelopes
have diminished excessively of late years. They are no
longer to be seen in vast herds darkening an extensive
plain, or passing before the hunter in closely pressed
masses, very many deep, for ‘hours together. The meat
of the antelope is always good, and the annual value of
their skins exported is very considerable. The larger
antelopes, when killed, are often found to have five or six
bullets in them, and they will run for many miles after
being wounded. The elephant is extinct in the Cape
Colony, except in the Knysna forest or in the thickets
of the Great Fish River. So also is the buffalo. Ostriches
once very plentiful in the Cape, are now most rare, but
this has been made up for by the ostrich farming, which
at one time, and until quite recently, had become a most
lucrative industry, by which large fortunes have been
amassed ; all is now at an end, as you will understand
from the following extract clipped from a newspaper :
Ostrich Farming in South Africa.— A letter from Port
Elizabeth, of November 30, 1881, says :—“ For the last few months up-
country settlers and agriculturists have been complaining of the injury
done to the country by ostrich farming, and many experienced and
influential men declared it would be the ruin of the country. However,
they will have nothing to fear now, as ostrich farming will soon be a
thing of the past. The banks have called in all the ‘ scrip,’ and several
private companies are in liquidation. The liabilities of one extensive
fai'mer amount to upwards of £300,000, and failures of small farmers
are of everyday occurrence. At one time, when everybody was going
in for ostrich farming and shares, a pair of old birds used to fetch £250,
and chicks from £6 to £9 each. A pair of birds can now be bought
from £ll to £l4, and chicks three weeks old from 3s 6d to 5s each.
It is difficult to ride down a wild ostrich—his power of
endurance is so great, his feathers are superior to those
of tame birds, its flesh is not palatable. The birds of
prey are numerous, some very grand as regards size,
especially eagles, vultures, larger even than condors ;
of hawks and falcons some very pretty specimens are to
be found; there are numerous cranes, including the


Years.
Population.
Increase.
Per centage of
increase.
1874
584,278
186,246
31-8
1880
770,524
Years.
White.
Coloured.
Total.
Per centage
of increase.
1874
340,000
1,930,000
2,270,000
1880
No figures are
available for 1880.
flamingo. Game birds are plentiful, and in excellent
quality ; first in merit I would place the pow, or bustard,
which is the best wild bird I know of; it weighs
from 30 to 40 lbs. Then the wild ducks and wild geese,
the guinea bird and the partridge all are excellent food.
Fish are very numerous, and many of good quality
along the coast. The snook is caught in large quantities,
it is dried and exported ; whales too are often killed along
the South African coast. Of reptiles there are many,
and for the most part they are venomous; there are the
cobra, the puff-adder, black and green mamba, scorpions,
tarantulas, hornets, stinging ants. Cattle, horses, and
sheep thrive well, dogs do not; sheep are generally of
good quality and care is taken to preserve the several
good breeds. I annex comparative tables showing the
live stock of the Cape Colony and of New South Wales
as far as possible, marked A.
COMPARATIVE STATISTICS.
NEW SOUTH WALES AND CAPE COLONY.
No figures are available to me which I can rely upon
for Statistics or Finance as regards the Cape. Colony
after the year 1874. lam therefore obliged to limit mv
enquiry into these matters to that year and to form my
comparative tables upon that basis.
POPULATION.
New South Wales.
South Africa and Cape Colony.


Years.
Amount.
Totals.
Increase
1871 to 1874.
1871
Imports
Exports
9,609,508
11,215,002
20,824,510
23,639,342
1874
>>
Imports
Exports
11,293,739
12,345,603
2,814,832
Years.
Amount,
Totals.
Increase.
1871
Imports
3,107,838
5J
Exports
4,374,024
7,481,862
1874
Imports
3,585,976
*5
Exports
5,725,412
9,311,398
1,829,536
Years.
Amount.
Increase.
Per centage in
3 years.
1871
2,908,153
1874
4,666,568
1,758,415
41’4
Years.
Amount.
Increase.
Per centage.
1871
3,006,876
1874
4,426,040
1,419,164
38-9
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS—IB7I & 1874.
New South Wales.
Cape Colony.
N.B.—lt must however be borne in mind that the
figures of the exports from South Africa do not include
the value of diamonds exported, while on the contrary the
imports are inclusive of large quantities of Military,
Naval, and Shipping stores, and munitions of war.
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE.
New South Wales.—Revenue.
Expenditure.


Years.
Amount.
Increase.
Per centage in
3 years.
1871
831,211
1874
1,907,951
76,740
9'3
Years.
Amount.
Increase.
Per centage.
1871
795,695
1874
1,199,970
404,275
52-5
Excess of Revenue over
Expenditure.
Revenue
4,666,568
Expenditure
4,426,040
£240,528
Excess of Revenue over
Expenditure.
Revenue
1,907,951
Expenditure
1,199,970
£707,981
Cape Colony.—Revenue.
Expenditure.
FINANCIAL COMPARISON.—IB74.
New South Wales.
Cape Colony.
The oxen are of an enormous size, and by far the
larger portion of the transport of the country is per-
formed by oxen in teams usually of 16 or 18, but over a
bad hilly country I have often seen 40 oxen inspanned,
and it is a marvellous sight to see how skilfully they are
driven by the little Totties with their large long whips,
better far than by the huge hulking Boer, who is himself
as strong as an ox.


Mules are bred to a great extent, and he is decidedly
the most hardy and enduring transport animal I have
ever met with, and I have had considerable experience of
them in all parts of the world, including Northern Africa,
Asia Minor, and America Strange to say, despite the fact
that ca ttle are so largely bred within the colony, it is most
difficult to get fresh milk, and except in the few large
towns of the colony, fresh butter is almost unknown.
The reason is simply that the calves are allowed to suck
their dams, and preserved milk is so cheaply and easily
obtained, that it has become an institution in South
Africa. Cattle were found in the colony when the Dutch
first colonized it. The horses cannot be passed over
without a few remarks from one who has severely tested
the merits of the Cape horse, as well as horses in other
countries, and has himself bought many thousand horses
for cavalry and for transport service.
Not very many years ago, horse breeding was in the
Cape a profitable and favourite pursuit, but the fatal
horse sickness which prevailed in 1853 54, and the
extraordinary demand for horses which arose when the
diamond fields were first discovered and the usual rush
took place to “ the diggings,” have together contributed
very considerably to exhaust the supply of horses in the
Cape Colony. Some of the best studs were abandoned,
the owners being ruined, foreign purchasers ceased to seek
horses where the quality had deteriorated, and the price
had risen, consequent on the scarcity of supply.
Breeders became careless in procuring good sires or dams,
and in recent years the Cape horse has lost much of the
high character which he had at one time most justly
gained.
The origin of the horse at the Cape is precisely the
same as in this country. He is descended from South
American importations of the hardy but ugly Pampa
horse. This was afterwards crossed with Arabs from
India which vastly improved the quality and the symme-
try of the horse. Size was still wanting, and even
symmetry required improvement to expunge entirely the
large head and drooping rump brought with the South


American mares. Lord Charles Somerset when Governor,,
first introduced English thoroughbred horses and mares.
He gave a great and most useful spurt to horse breeding
and horse racing, it was mainly through his efforts and
good judgment in the matter that the Cape norse was
first made to acquire a high reputation, and was first em-
ployed in the Indian Army, where they were fully appre-
ciated, both as Cavalry remounts and for the Artillery.
Indirectly, I learn that horse breeding has again been
undertaken in Natal by several of the English farmers,
but by none on a large scale. I do not anticipate much
success, for although a very considereble number of first
rate mares have been purchased from the Cavalry Eegi-
ments which came out mounted, and left the Colony dis-
mounted, either for India or elsewhere, really good sires
are much wanting, and no one in the Colony seems to have
the enterprise to make good the deficiency.. Although
the origin of the breed of horses in Australia is as I have
already stated, precisely the same as that of the Cape
horse, we have here in Australia far and away outstripped
the Cape in the production of horses generally, especially
of the thoroughbred horse. I have often said through life
in good sporting circles that the finest horses in the world
were to be found in this Colony, and I have assigned as
a cause not only the lavish expenditure of the New South
Wales breeders and racing men in procuring imported
sires, but also the good judgment which they have usually
shown in selecting them, also the care given to the cross-
ing of the various strains imported, and to the rearing and
wintering of the young stock. In New South Whies
everv needful care is given to the horse to make him
flourish and reach perfection, and in this warm climate,
which by nature belongs to a horse, for his cradle is in the
sandy desert of Arabia, he certainly does develop very
grandly, leaving nothing to be desired. Even in the very
cab horse in your streets you see blood and high breeding,
too much of it I fear for roadsters and hacks. I should
like to see more signs of Arab blood, for I have great
faith in it, and I have myself lived amongst the Arabs,
and have there ridden horses that no money could buy if
destined to leave the desert. I have personally put the


horses of the two countries, the Cape and Australia, to
fair and severe tests in New Zealand and in the Cape
Colonies.
There can be no sort of doubt as the superiority of the
Australian horse both for stoutness and for endurance.
The horses that best withstood the cold and starvation of
the Crimea, were those that came from India with the
cavalry and amongst them there were many “Whalers.”
The Cape men are striving to regain their prestige and to
re-establish their trade for Indian remounts. You must
look to your laurels. India must require from abroad a
vast number of horses. I know of no market comparable
to Australia. Now-a-days the losses at sea are reduced
to a minimum, and the horse can be produced here at a
very low figure. Australia has always this great ad-
vantage over the Cape, there is no horse sickness here. It
is a standing plague in the Cape Colonies and occasions
very heavy losses to the breeders. Nevertheless Cape
horse breeders calculate that they can ship four year old
horses at a cost to them of £4 each. I believe the
calculation to be correct for they are very wont to starve
their young stock as a measure of economy.
Sheep are an important item in pastoral productions
at the Cape; the original sheep of the country was a
largish fat tailed sheep, covered with hair rather than
wool, for the kitchen he w 7 as admirable. The Dutch
easily tanned the skins with the varieties of tanning
materials available to them, and they clothed themselves
very much with those tanned skins. The fat of the heavy
tail was much prized, and to this day nothing excels it in
the hunting field for preserving metals from rust, and for
guns and hunting gear. In 1790, a Colonel Gordon in
the Dutch service, first imported thoroughbred Spanish
rams, he soon found the value of their wool, and the days
of the fat tailed sheep were numbered. It was from the
flocks of this Colonel Gordon that merino sheep were first
brought to Australia, about the year 1825, by Mr.
McArthur, and here we have the origin of what is now
one chief source of the wealth of this grand Colony. The
advantages of pure blood are now fully realized, and great
care is taken to keep up the breed. The export of Cape


wool is considerable, (vide table annexed B), but still
only one-half that of New South Wales.
B
The Cape— lB74.
Wool £2,948,571...42,620,4811b5.
Wine 17,000
Diamonds ... 1,000,000
Feathers 205,640
Copper 321,434
Hair Angora 107,139
Hides, ox&cow 49,425
Ivory 26,677
Skins, goat ... 194,328
Ditto, sheep... 144,538
Australia — 1874.
£5,651,643...87,534,2801b5.
The South African climate is singularly fatal to dogs,
here they seem to thrive but too well, even at Cape
Town it required unremitting care to keep the hounds
fit, and the difficulty of rearing young hounds was exces-
sive. The further north or east we went these difficulties
increased, despite of all, we had an excellent subscription
pack and very good hunting. There used to be good
hunting here, and now there is none, it fairly grieves me
to see fine fox hounds now and then chained to a hut door.
Are we degenerating, are we losing our national love for
field sports ? The contrast shown in the table annexed (A)
A
COMPARATIVE TABLE OF STOCK.
Cape 1875. Australia 1875.
1 Horses 207,318 .. t 357,696
2. Mules and Asses... 29,517
3. Draught Oxen ... 398,825 ) qi qa
4. Other Cattle ... 698,681 f " 3 ’ 134 > 086
6. WooHed Sheep ... 10,064,289 I _24 382,536
6. Other bheep ... 944,050 j
7. Angora Goats ... 972,733
8. Common Goats ... 2,122,808
9. Pigs 110,489 ... 199,950
10. Ostriches... ... 22,257
N. B.—l need not state here that in 1882 the number of sheep is
largely increased in both Colonies, especially in Australia.
No. 7. The wool of the Angora goat is much prized, and the skin is
exported to make kid gloves.
No. 8. So also is the skin of the common goat somewhat eagerly
demanded on account of its excellence for gloves.
No. 10. Ostriches are now rapidly decreasing, the trade in feathers
has been overdone.


of stock cannot fail to excite attention, my object in prepar-
ing it has been to afford some indication of the relative
wealth of the two countries in stock, and the result has
far exceeded my expectations as regards sheep especially.
But you must always bear charitably in mind what a
perpetual struggle for life the Cape Colony has been
forced to endure. Nothing is more destructive to progress
in a new community than war, especially to agriculture
and the breeding of stock, and as I have related to you,
the Cape has been in perpetual war from the time we first
took it as a Colony from the Dutch in 1803 up to 1877.
I have given you the history of the five first wars, viz :—•
1811, 1820-21, 1834-35, 1846-47, 1849-50. A sixth war
broke out in 1877-78. Having given you some account
of it, I shall then conclude my lecture as regards the Cape.
The history of Natal must be completed, 1 have already
been obliged to enter upon it somewhat in relating how
first we came into possession of that rich and beautiful
Colony through the gallant Boer pioneers, who were
driven from our Cape Colony by misgovernment, near
akin to persecution, also in giving the necessary explana-
tions regarding the black races with whom we have come
in contact with in South Africa. The Zulu war will then
alone remain to complete my programme. Despite all
the great hindrances and disadvantages which have fallen
to the lot of the Cape Colonists, they have made great
progress, and if nothing unforeseen occurs, the Colony
cannot fail rapidly to rise into a position of first-rate
portance and of great wealth. The Cape Colonists
have nobly fulfilled their mission, they have proved
themselves to be worthy children of the great Anglo-
Saxon race from which they have sprung. Here-
after when history records our existence, our decay,
our final destruction as a nation, and this assuredly
must come in its proper time (for death claims nations
as its own with the same certainty that it does indi-
viduals), then will our story as a nation read like a
romance, then will it be acknowledged how we have,
actuated by the same spirit which brought our ancestors


from the North, gone afield to colonize the forests, the
plains of Australia, the backwoods of Canada, the fertile
soil of New Zealand, the productive lands of the Cape,
then will it be conceded to us that we have acted as the
pioneers for the rest of the world through savage, even
Arctic regions, for the spreading of civilization, and the
diffusion of Christian knowledge, then will the Anglo-
Saxon race he looked up to with admiring wonderment, as
the race which, under the aegis of an Almighty Providence,
has ever commanded the advance guard of humanity.
And our mission is not yet accomplished far from it. I
firmly believe that we shall be spared by the same Provi-
dence which has heretofore so signally protected us, to
accomplish it, and that even now, under our eyes there are
being prepared the instruments by which this great end
is to be attained, I allude especially to the rapid expan-
sion and adoption of our language throughout the whole
world in every country and climate. Everywhere now-
adays do we find our English speaking people, also
I allude to the marvellous conversions which are daily
taking place in all nations and in all classes to the faith to
which lam proud to belong. These I believe will serve,
and are serving now, as potent instruments, to prepare the
world for a universal faith or creed, for universal civiliza-
tion. Nay, more, I believe that if it pleases the Almighty
to extinguish England as a nation, we shall leave behind
us in America and Australia, children of our own bringing
up, English speaking, now either mighty and powerful, or
in a fair way of being so, and quite as much bound up, and
interested as we are now, in the completion of the great
task of which I have spoken. This idea puts the words into
my mouth unintentionally as it were, advance Australia.
We must not be led away from the Cape Colonists. lam
very anxious to give them a full meed of praise, they will
deserve it for the indomitable perseverance which they
have shown under almost crushing difficulties, and the
great success which they have attained. Never shall I
forget the heart-rending, pitiable scenes of which I have
been an eye witness on the wild frontier of the Eastern


settlement of the Cape. I have seen the horizon
lit with the lurid flames of the burning homesteads,
haggards and crops of the frontier settlers, I have seen
their cattle and horses scattered wildly and dispersed, I
have seen the mother and the children, wild with fright and
despair, flying for their lives to the nearest laager for pro-
tection. I have helped them in their flight, and I have
listened to their tale of terrible woe, how at one fell swoop
the labour of a life time had been rendered useless, how
all their property had been burned or destroyed, and how
they themselves had mercifully been able to escape with
their lives, how they were, as they spoke, thrown penni-
less on the world to begin life again, burdened with a
family to rear, how the husband was compelled to part
with his family in the hour of danger, and seek to collect
his scattered cattle, and place them in some safe hiding
nook or corner, whilst his children hurried to the laager
close at hand, and how possible it was that he might
never again rejoin them, for he was on a dangerous errand.
It was not easy to give any consolation where such deep
sorrow prevailed, indeed we saw so much of what I have
described, that even the most tender hearted amongst us
learned to get accustomed to it, and to look upon
all this human suffering as “ the inevitable,” and
such it really was —yet as a matter of fact, not
even all this desolation, this destruction of his hearth
and home, these sufferings of those most near and
dear to him, not even these complications of disasters,
sufficed to scare the brave settler from the land which
had become his property, which was the only spot in this
earth he could call his own. No sooner had the tocsin of
war ceased to sound along the frontier, than he boldly
faced the danger of a repetition of what had just occured.
With true bulldog tenacity he held on to his land, he re-
turned to the ashes of his once happy home from which
he refused to be permanently driven by the wild savage,
and he at once vigorously set to work once more to con-
struct a home, a covering for his wife and children, once
more to plant his fields, once more to gather round him
and to tend his flocks and his herds.


Let me beg of you to realize how terrible how over-
whelming are the misfortunes which I have related and
which I have only been able to picture to you in but very
light colours. In all fairness to the brave and indomitable
men of whom I am speaking, the eastern frontier settlers
of the Cape Colony, I pray you to brighten up these
colours to their brightest, call upon your imagination to
paint for you, human wretchedness and despair at its
worst, and you will then have no exaggerated picture of
what I have myself been an eye witness, of wdiat is a
reality, and you will then only be able justly to judge of,
and sufficiently to appreciate the vast meed of praise
which has been fairly earned by those men, whose inborn
courage has won and has retained the Cape frontier to the
Colony, and to the mother country, and wrenched it,
despite of all opposition, from the grasp of the savage
and held it for the Christian. A laager you must
know is a fortified camp always constructed in time of war
in the most accessible and defencible positions. It is
meant as a “ rendezvous ” for the families of settlers
when in danger and obliged to desert their homes. It is
a primitive but fairly secure defence, as a rule well
garrisoned, and within these laagers some of the most
heroic feats of arms conceivable have occurred. Each
family has its own space within assigned to it, and the
men take it in turns to defend it. The walls are for the
most part constructed of waggons, and it is a sight to be
seen to be understood, where a score or more of families
with children of all ages are huddled up together, some-
times for consecutive weeks even months, with only the
most makeshift, airy contrivances for cookery, or for
protection from the rain or heat of the day or the cold at
night. And all these days and weeks and months are
spent by the inmates of the laager, in constant fear and
apprehension of being attacked. Such has been the life
of the eastern frontier settler and his family, such are the
difficulties which he has bravely conquered, how possibly
can we praise him sufficiently ? All honor and glory to
him he has proved himself worthy of his race—let us
concede to him all possible praise. Conspicious amongst


these frontier settlers I must tell you there was an Irish-
man (many of them were Irish) Paddy Porke by name.
This brave man established a home for himself on the
Buffalo river within the Colony of Natal, not on the
eastern frontier of the Cape Colony, but at a drift or ford
on the Buffalo river now of world wide fame, known as
“ Borkes Drift ” recently defended so stubbornly and so
gloriously as to be imperishably handed down to posterity
on canvas by one of the great painters of the day. Paddy
Porke, for such was his real name, settled down on the
banks of the Buffalo many years ago far away from
civilization and close bordering on Zulu land. He built
a comfortable house for himself, which is the burning
hospital represented on de Neuville’s picture, and he built
a substantial store and comfortably established himself
with his family as a border trader, and as such he prospered
and accumulated wealth. To be brief, these border traders
were the very men through whom the savages chiefly
secured fire-arms and ammunition, and rum or Cape smoke,
would often suffice to buy cattle or hides, which once
across the border were of considerable value. I give
it on very good authority that Paddy was lord and master
of all he surveyed. He kept the savages on both sides of
his river under thorough subjection, and thought nothing
of sending for a chief and giving him a sound good beating
for some crime committed by himself or by one of his tribe.
He only died a few years before the Zulu war, and it was
from his sons that I originally took possession of Paddy’s
premises to form a military post.


Before entering upon the subject of the Cape wars of
1877 against the Gaikas and Galekas, it is necessary that
I should give some explanations of the different circum-
stances under which we entered upon these wars, as
compared to other previous wars with the Cape Kaffirs.
In 1877, they had with care secured a good supply of
firearms; over 400,000 stand of arms, many of excellent
quality, some breech-loading rifles, had within the last
few years, got into the hands of the Kaffirs of Cape
Colony ; of these the Galekas and Gaikas got a fair
share. These arms were chiefly obtained as the price of
labour at the diamond fields, or on the railroads or great
public works of the colony. The Cape Kaffirs believed
and openly boasted in 1877, that the time had come at
last, when they were to drive the white man into the sea.
This was the revival of an old idea constantly in their
brains. Individually, many of the Kaffirs become
attached to their masters and mistresses, but as a rule,
all Kaffirs hate us, and pass their life in a dream that the
day will come assuredly, when the white man is to be
destroyed, and they are to enter upon his possessions.
The sixth Kaffir war began in September, 1877. For
a long time there had existed a vast difference of opinion
between the western and eastern Cape Colonists. The
former living in security beyond the reach of Kaffir
danger, ridiculed the firmly expressed opinions of the
eastern frontier man to the effect that the Kaffir
population was uneasy and was bent on mischief. The
ministry of the day scouted the idea of war, and every-
where declared that there could never be another Kaffir
war; the eastern men were called alarmists and were
credited with getting up a frontier scare. The ministers
proved to be wrong, for war broke out suddenly on a very
small pretext, at a beer party across the Kei in the
Galeka country. These Galekas, under their chief Kreli,


a clever, astute, and brave man, well accustomed to war,
for he had fought against us many a time, perpetually
smarted at seeing the Fingoes, once their slaves, their
dogs, living free and independent of them, on lands
which were once their property, and there growing rich
by their thrift and industry. The Galekas were
determined to have their revenge and to exterminate the
Fingoes. The fight which took place between the
Galekas and the Fingoes, originating in a beer party, was
a serious affair, and appears to have opened out the flood-
gates of revenge against the Fingoes and hatred of the
white, all long pent up. The fight of Guadana made war
a fact, the war-cry of the Galekas was raised, and passed
from mountain-top to mountain-top throughout the length
and breadth of the crafty Kreli’s country. Despite of
the clearest possible proof that war had actually come
upon them, the ministry at Cape Town refused to
recognise the reality of their position, which was that
they stood face to face with such a war as the Cape had
never before seen, for we had never yet fought the Kaffir
armed and educated as he was in 1877. The Kaffirs
entered upon this war with a firm belief that their day
of triumph had arrived. They proved, however, to be
but an ill-disciplined mob in the field, and they had no
leader ; although they fought bravely, and by their very
numbers gave us a great deal of trouble. The English force
opposed to them was well disciplined, and it was led by
an experienced, able and cautious general, Sir Arthur
Cunynghame, G.C.8., and I feel convinced that the
speedy termination of this war was much due to the
cautious and very determined way in which the war
was entered upon by General Cunynghame, and pros-
ecuted and terminated by Lord Chelmsford. No resting
time was given to the Kaffirs, they were pursued to
their strongholds, they were surrounded in deep kloofs,
they were attacked and defeated there and in other
inaccessible positions by very clever tactics and
strategy, and they were driven even from their almost
impregnable positions in the Amatola Kanges, where they
had fought us so often in other wars.


The Galeka Army at Guadana numbered about 5,000.
the force they attacked consisted of 80 police, and about
1,800 Fingoes and one gun. The attack was so far
successful that the police force retreated to a more defen-
sible position at Ibeka and took the gun with them, un-
fortunately it had become disabled early in the action,
the carriage was rotten, then the Fingoes lost heart and
fled.
The condition of this gun carriage was typical of the
condition of the force available to the Colonial authorities
to defend their frontier and repress the war —rebellion it
cannot be called, for Kreli w T as not our subject, he was
merely under our protection, not so Sandelli we had
annexed his territory Blinded by Heaven knows what
stupidity, ministers had refused all advice, proffered to
them by experienced military authorities, and wrapped
up in the imaginary security of no Kaffir war being
possible, they had utterly neglected any preparation what-
ever for such a contingency. Even to this extent was
their culpable folly carried, that when the hour of danger
arrived with the news of the engagement at Guadana,
and at Cape Town, ministers were called upon to summon
to the front all the frontier police force, well nigh one
half of it was found to exist only on paper, many were
without uniforms, and others knew not even how to use
their rifles, whilst a large number were without horses,
which they were bound to provide for themselves under
the agreement which they had entered into on enlistment.
As regards officers, the few who existed were unable
to secure obedience, there was nothing like discipline in
the whole force. When I now write of those scenes with
which I was familiar at the time, I am at a loss to explain
the dangerous infatuation which had seized upon those
responsible to the Parliament, and the people of the
country for its safety. The ministers thwarted and im-
peded the General commanding in the most senseless,
wildest way. The acting minister for war imagined him-
self competent, not only to administer to the wants of an
army, and supply it with transport, but also to organize a
military force and command it. All those duties he


attempted in turn, and he told the general commanding
that rather than submit to the Colonial troops being
supplied by Imperial officers he would pay double for all
be required. Such conduct usually brings its own retri-
bution, and this instance, as we shall see later on, proved
no exception. General Cunynghame would not submit to
a divided command, after much delay and corres-
pondence, the command of the Colonial forces was con-
eeded to him. He at once pushed troops on to the
extreme frontier lining the Kei river. With the few
disciplined troops available, and the extraordinary spirit
displayed by the colonial authorities he deemed it
prudent to hold the frontier secure with troops he could
depend upon, and there to keep them ready to assist in
any extraordinary emergency which might arise across the
Kei. Meanwhile the Burgher force of the colony were
called into action and volunteers were raised in great
numbers of all colours. Competent officers were not
wanting, and as many of the volunteers were old soldiers,
somewhat of a cohesive and not very unreliable force
was soon made ready to take the field. This, together
with the best of the police force and some Fingoes formed
altogether a formidable and useful force. It was placed
under the command of Commandant Griffith, a competent
and experienced officer well fitted for the task set him,
which was to attack Kreli at once, and reduce him to
submission. Griffith took up a position at Ibeka wheie
he was soon attacked in force by the Galekas who had
received orders from Kreli “ to destroy those Fingoe dogs
and sweep the white tents away, they annoyed him.” The
attack was gallantly repulsed and the enemy well beaten,
but Griffith was unable to follow up his victory for want
of supplies and ammunition. These the colonial authorities
had omitted to forward, and they still held intdheir own
hands the reins of administration, whilst they had conceded
the executive command of colonial troops to the Imperial
General. The delay was turned to some account in
improving the organisation of his force and fortifying his
position. As soon as he was able, Griffith marched against
Kreli’s “ Great Place ” as it is called, literally translating


the Kaffir words ; he destroyed it completely, and was
then compelled to return to Ibeka ; supplies were again
deficient. The Kaffir chiefs both in the Transkei and
Cis Kei were uneasy, and this spirit was spreading
throughout the G-aikas under Sandilli now a besotted
drunkard, but once he had been a grand and clever chief,
and to us a most dangerous enemy. All this tended to
hurry Griffith’s plans, our frontier posts served to check
any assistance being given by the Gaikas to the Galekas
across the Kei, and entirely prevented at this time any
amalgamation of the armies of the two chiefs Kreli and
Sandilli. Fearing lest such should occur Griffith again
attacked the Galekas and drove them with their chief and
women and children and cattle across the Bashee. His
force consisted of 500 frontier police.
1000 Burghers
3000 Fingoes
3000 Tenbus
a tribe which had thrown in its lot with us. This grand
success staggered the whole Kaffir race, and deter-
mined many petty tribes heretofore wavering in their
opinions as regarded the white man. Two important
chiefs consulted a witch doctor, and guided by him, they
killed two oxen ; one white for peace, one black signify-
ing war. Both were skinned alive—the decision of the
chiefs was to depend upon which animal lived longest
after the operation. The white ox is said to have won
by many hours, the chiefs decided to sit down and be
peaceful. These witch doctors are very active in war
time divining, prognosticating, drawing omens, &c., &c.
Griffith pursued his enemy beyond the Bashee and over
the Umtata rivers. Kreli was utterly defeated, but the
General had no men with whom to guard the Bashee river,
and the Volunteers could not be induced to undertake
the task. There were no cattle to be looted on the
service, and many determined to return home.
Bay by day matters grew worse on the borders, the
Gaikas evidently meant mischief, and other tribes were
ominously unsettled. The Kaffirs on the Cis Kei com-
menced to commit lawless depredations, and precisely


those events were occurring daily, which the Eastern
frontier settlers had foreshadowed, and of which they
had forewarned the Ministers. For all of this they were
accused of raising a silly scare, even of cowardice ; but
now the fatal consequence of Ministerial folly and
neglect was forced upon their notice. Lawless marauders
were over-running the country; there were no troops or
police to prevent them ; the whole country was defence-
less. A very short time served to fan into a blaze
throughout the Gaikas or Cis Kei country this spirit of
disorder now indulged in with impunity—unmistakable
signs of a general revolt of the Gaikas were visible every-
where.
Meanwhile, Galeka land was deserted and had been
already disposed of on paper by grasping colonists greed-
ing after land; traders even already deserted the country,
but strangely enough, Mapassa and other Galeka chiefs
had come over to us. Whilst planning the repression of
rebellion in Gaika-land we w r ere suddenly aroused to hear
that Kreli, having left his cattle, and women, and children
of his tribe in safety beyond the Bashee had re-entered
his country, at the head of a large force. He had been
attacked at Holland’s landing by Captain Bayly and
defeated, but those who escaped were many of them
wandering through their country now rendered a
wilderness.
Even the colonial ministers now forced to admit
the peril of their position. War all round them, the
frontier but ill defended, and threatening Galekas on one
side, and rebellious Gaikas on the other, the whole country
in a blaze, and settlers’ property burnt or destroyed, while
the stock were driven away every day and every night.
Everyone grew anxious, travelling became very
dangerous, and many lives were lost from time to time,
when forced to travel through the country ; our posts
were stopped, and even the telegraph wires were cut.
The governor was no novice to war and troublesome
times, the general, a veteran warrior, was quite the man
for the occasion, both these high officers worked
harmoniously together, and they resolved at once to


despatch a force of our troops across the Kei, there to
deal with the Galekas, while other troops were pushed on
to occupy the line of the Kei, and to protect the colony
generally, King William’s Town. especially. A corps of
local cavalry was immediately raised, and two of infantry.
These were placed under Imperial officers of experience
and ability, a naval brigade also was landed; this as
usual did excellent service. The general himself assumed
the command of this Transkeian Force, half of it he
posted at Komgha and in some neighbouring forts. He
established his own head-quarters at Ibeka, and there the
field force eat its Christmas dinner in 1877 ; on 29th
December, the Caikas had openly broken out, and had
fought a police force under Major Moore, who was
severely wounded. On the next day they assembled in
great force, and again attacked Major Moore in command
of a party of the 88th, and some police at Draaibosch.
The attack was repulsed; the troops behaved with great
gallantry. The Caikas also committed some cold-blooded
murders of white men. The mask was now thrown off
entirely, and the whole tribe had to be dealt with.
Sandilli, after some efforts, rendered fruitless by the very
prudent and skilful arrangements of the general, at last
succeeded in joining Kreli in Galeka-land.
On 26th December, three columns were set in motion,
each under an Imperial officer, to drive the Galekas once
more out of their country. They occasionally met the
enemy in small force, but encountered no real difficulty m
accomplishing their mission. A considerable numbei of
Galekas, however, doubled back and reached the Kei,
where they met their chief Kreli, now joined by Sandilli.
A force under Colonel Glynn was immediately ordered
to join that assembled at Quintana. Scarcely had he
arrived on the ground on the 13th January, when
intelligence reached the general, that at Nyumaxa, large
bodies of the enemy were assembling. Colonel Glynn
hastened to the spot, and having a tolerably good force
in hand, he succeeded in thoroughly defeating the enemy
with very considerable loss. But even this defeat did
not suffice to crush the formidable rebellion now alive


before us, It was one of the first trials of our new rifle,
the Martini-Henry, which did marvellous execution at
long range, on one occasion a man was killed at a distance
of over a mile by the Musketry Instructor of the 90th
Light Infantry.
Kreli and Sandilli were still at the head of a large
force ; our own troops, of all arms and of all colours,
were inevitably dispersed; and the Gaikas. within the
colony, were daily becoming more irrepressible. Our
position was critical, if not dangerous, and the difficulties
of the General were considerably added to, because the
acting War Minister would insist upon moving colonial
troops and maintaining them where he thought fit. He
kept the General entirely ignorant of his actions, thus
the General could never rely upon the positions of the
colonial forces or the number of days supply available to
any force, or ol its strength. The colonial forces were
thus rendered all but useless, and were never to be relied
upon for a combined movement. Despite of all these
obstructive difficulties, the General managed to preserve
all his detachments unhurt, to render the Amatolaa Moun-
tains inaccessible, and to keep the enemy well in check
whilst he had a force handy and ready for any
emergency. Colonel Lambert scoured the Chicaba valley
on the 14th January, and drove large numbers of the
enemy therefrom, also enormous numbers of cattle and
sheep.
Commandant I rost made a sucessful raid through the
Kambusi country in January, by order of Colonial Minister.
And Commandant Brabant also hung about the lower
Kei under similar orders, doing good service. About this
time the whole country began to suffer from a severe
drought. The very rivers were dormant in their beds, and
springs ceased to exist. Very calamitous results threatened
our force, not a blade of grass was to be seen in the country,
nothing green that was available for food for man or beast,
it became necessary to issue forage even to the transport
animals, and worse than all, the Gaikas, deserting their
locations, and joining their chief in arms, had left their
wives and children behind, literally to starve—of course


this was not allowed to occur, and they were fed by the
colonial local authorities, and became a very troublesome
burden. An episode in the history of the Cape Colony
occured about this time which must not be omitted, I
shall briefly relate it. I already remarked upon the
obstructive conduct of the acting "War Minister, Mr.
Merriman, but I have not related one tithe of his acts or
of their evil influence on the conduct of the war. He
was supported by Mr. Moltens, the premier, who at
this period, January 1878, came to King Williams
town, where the Governor was residing. He treated the
Governor, it is said, with grave discourtesy, and his
authority with contempt, displaying at the same time, a
lamentable ignorance of a Constitutional Government.
The Governor requested him to resign, he refused, the
Governor dismissed him. It must be remembered that the
conduct of these men in power, complicated matteis
seriously, and very materially increased the cost of a war
which they expected was to be paid for by the Biitish tax-
payer. It was an immense relief to feel, that we were
rid of such men, and that whilst there was no ability lost
by the change, Mr. Sprigg, the successor of Mr. Moltens,
showed an anxiety to co-operate with the General, and he
rapidly grasped the position into which he had so unexpec-
tedly been forced. On the 7th February, Kreli and
Sandilli joined together their forces, and passing our head
quarters at Ibeka, attacked very vigoursly our post at
Quintana near Ibeka. We had ample notice of the in-
tended attack, and made such preparations as secured to
us a victory so complete, that it for ever destroyed the
tribal power of the two chiefs, Kreli and Sandilh, and dis-
persed their followers beyond all power of reuniting in
formidable numbers.
About this time, General Sir Arthur Cunynghame
was recalled, and very much he was regretted throughout
the whole force. The act was one of cruel injustice to a
really high-minded, able, and most conscientious soldier
brought about by misrepresentations.
To the army of South Africa it was a great relief and
consolation, that he was succeeded by such a soldier as


Lord Chelmsford. I never shall forget the kindness
I received from both generals, or the unqualified confidence
they both so generously reposed in me.
There still remained a great deal to be done on the
arrival of Lord Chelmsford before peace, law and order were
re-established throughout the countries we are speaking
of. Kreli ever after the battle of Quintana became an
outcast and a wanderer, he remains so still, impotent to
do any harm, and living on charity—several times he has
all but surrendered to us, wm do not seek him, and he
does not like to fall into our hands.
But Sandilli assembled around him a goodly following.
To subdue and to capture him was one objective point of
our compaign after Lord Chelmsford assumed command.
The task was not an easy one, but it was entered upon by
the general with much vigour and was brought to a
successful termination as I shall now relate. Unlike his
predecessor, Lord Chelmsford received all possible aid from
the Ministry in power, and he worked in harmony with
every one, thus the weight of his burden was essentially
lightened. It must be remembered that about the time
of Lord Chelmsford’s arrival in March, matters had
reached their worst between the Imperial and colonial
authorities. Mr. Merriman had got things into a great
confusion before his dismissal from office. On January
16th, he sent some 800 men into the Waterkloof country,
and there stirred up a war with Tini Macomo, and else-
where with Gongebella. All this force he was by way
of fighting and feeding himself, quite independent of the
general, to whom he communicated nothing regarding it.
This force was really composed of Burghers, and the
best fighting men of the colony ; but they were called
“ special constables” by the colonial authorities. In
January, this force amounted to some thousands,
including coloured allies, and bitter complaints reached
head-quarters, of the injustice and illegality of its
proceedings. Other forces were kept afield by Mr.
Merriman at the junction of the Kambourie and
Kei rivers, as I have told you, under Frost and
Babant, two admirable and brave leaders. They did


good work, each in his own sphere, hut they denied
co-operation with the Imperial troops, and thus important
operations of the Imperial general were frustrated, and a
most unmilitary spectacle was presented to the whole
colony. Two military forces quite independent of each
other, were operating in close proximity, and actually
quarrelling over the spoil of stock captured from the
enemy. These colonial forces ran short of supplies m the
field, and came to our depots literally starving for forage
and bread. Their immediate wants were supplied, hut a
strict order was at once published, that no colonial forces
similarly circumstanced, were ever to be fed
Imperial depots. The force of te special constables, had
established its head-quarters at Queenstown, and it had
roused up the Tambookies and other small tribes along
north-eastern frontier, who had hitherto been quiet and
shown no disposition to rise. Again, a considerable
number of those colonists who had been in the field for a
long time, had left for their families and homes, and the
horses of the police were for the most part overworked,
and not fit to take the field. The corps recently raised
by General Cunynghame, were too raw for immediate
active service, and an unpleasant feeling had been
engendered between the colonial and Imperial troops.
Not a bed of roses for a general to find prepared for him,
apart from the heavy responsibility of conducting a wild
war at a most critical period. But there was another
side to the picture. His predecessor had comported
himself with such firmness, dignity, and tact, that he had
risen high in public estimation, and his office had become
better understood by the colonists. The new ministry
appreciated the benefit to themselves and the colony, of
co-operation with the Imperial troops, and of doing away
with a divided command or administrative authority.
And reinforcements had arrived from England; two
battalions of infantry and * a battery of artillery, and
some special service officers, who did excellent work, and
have since made for themselves a high military
reputation. General Lord Chelmsford grasped firmly at
once the reins of power placed in his hands, and soon


completed the work of organisation his predecessor had
been compelled to leave but half finished.
Troops were soon afield everywhere needful to cir-
cumvent and capture Sandilli. Tini Macomo was beaten
in the Water Kloof by Colonel Palmer. Quiet and security
to life and property were once more re-established, when
they had been most unnecessarily disturbed in the north-
eastern provinces. The Tambookies were subdued and
the area of hostilities was very much circumscribed. Still
much remained to be done. Every one set to work
with a will, determined to accomplish the task, but it
turned out to be more difficult than was ever anticipated.
Beaten everywhere by the colonial and Imperial troops,
it was naturally supposed that the Kaffirs would have
become dispirited and have wished for peace, especially as
their losses had been so heavy and food was so scarce
amongst them, and so many hundreds of their wives and
children had sought refuge with us, in towns, settlements,
and camps, and were living on our charity. All these
circumstances combined, appeared to have no sort of effect
upon the Kaffirs, they all vowed their detirmination to
have a fight and they intimated that they had got rid of
their wives and children to facilitate their fighting, and in a
certainty that they would be fed and respected by us,
whilst they must have starved in their locations, had they
remained there. So far was this strange infatuation
carried amongst the Kaffirs, that the best educated
amongst them, who had been reared from childhood in
civilization, and had become Christians, and could read and
write well, and held appointments as clerks or interpreters
in government offices, even these men deserted from us,
and joined their chief to fight against us. Nothing similar
occured in any other war as this strange excitable passion
for fighting, or apparently heartless surrender to us of
their wives and children. About the 9th March Com-
mandant Griffith now serving under Lord Chelmsford, and
operating on the Thomas river, had very nearly succeeded
in surrounding and capturing Sandilli. Despite the most
careful precautions he succeeded however in escaping to
his favourite haunt in the Amatola ranges—his followers


dispersed and rejoined him there. The General pursued
him at once and with vigour. No breathing time was
given to our enemy, a considerable force was got together,
and continuous fighting took place for several consecutive
days. The forests and Kloofs were scoured by our soldiers
as well as by the Fingoes, they penetrated everywhere,
whilst the artillery shelled the forests and bush and Kloofs
from outside. But the enemy were comparatively secure
in their forest fastnesses. Although we killed but few
we made their favourite positions untenable to them after
much fighting of a very severe and arduous nature. In
April an important chief, Seyolo, joined Sandilli, with a
considerable reinforcement. At the same time we were
compelled to reduce our force, for many volunteers
■claimed dismissal, as they had served the term for which
they had enlisted. Offensive operations, however, were
never stayed, other volunteers were brought to the front,
and the Kaffirs were hunted down with great energy
during all May and June. At last they were besieged in
their own mountains, and were soon short of food and
ammunition. The weather too became cold, and made
their sufferings much more severe. They dare not light
a fire on the mountain-top for warmth or cooking, or
approach the plains; they were watched with such dili-
gence that they were confined to their very hiding places ;
to escape was impossible. This miserable state of affairs
was fortunately put an end to by the death of Sandilli.
He had been hard pressed for several days, and was shot
in an attempt to escape. His followers left his body
where it fell; they dared not attempt to carry it away,
and it was found by our troops fully a week after the
event, with one arm eaten away by Kaffir dogs. Thus
ended the life of one of the most subtle, brave, and war-
like Kaffirs who had ever opposed our arms in South
Africa. In his youth he had been all energy and activity,
despite a withered leg, which was ever an impediment to
him, except on horseback. Of late years he had given
way to drinking and other vices, and his treachery and
cruelty had made him almost intolerable even amongst
his own people. On the 29th June an amnesty was


proclaimed, and the sixth Kaffir war was closed, and here
closes also my explanation of how the Gaika and Galeika
wars arose and ended. We of course annexed the country
of the Galeikas, and we re-distributed the Gaika or
Sandilli’s country, taking care well to reward those who
had been loyal to us, and fought with us. The natives
talk of this sixth war as something beyond their compre-
hension ; never, they say, had they been so thoroughly
beaten before; never had they been so perseveringly
hunted down, without having ever an hour of rest or
breathing time given to them; never had they suffered
so much from cold and starvation, or in killed and
wounded.
Great numbers of Kaffirs were killed during this war,
and all the most important Chiefs of the Galekas were
either killed, made prisoners, or exiled. Kreli was driven
from his country an outcast, his great generals, Kiva and
Sigean, were killed, and several of his counsellors, also
two of his most famous witch doctors. Of the Gaikas,
Sandilli, the Chief, was killed ; also three of his sons,
and Dukwana, a semi-Christian, and Seyolo, and several
others ; whilst his chief son, Edmund, was made prisoner,
together with Gongbella and Tini Macomo, they were
tried and condemmed to death, but respited. Although
the defeat of the Kaffirs on our frontiers was apparently
very complete, still a war craze seemed to survive in their
midst, and some invisible agent seemed to keep them un-
settled. Beyond all doubt Cetwayo had a finger in the
pie, and his agents are stated to have penetrated even into
Galeka land and fired old Kreli’s war spirit. Cetwayo’s
name was perpetually in the mouth of every Kaffir, and
after the war was over, they constantly pointed to the
East, and told white men to leave them alone and to go
and war against Cetwayo. They looked upon him as
invincible, and it is certain that his influence extended
over a far wider area than the eastern frontier. The
victory of Seccocoemi over the Dutch in every attack
made upon him had raised the fighting spirit of the
Northern Kaffirs, and led them to place faith in their
own prowess and skill, and t<? consider themselves


our equals when armed equally well with us. They
openly argued, if Cetwayo’s dog, Seccocoemi, can beat the
white man, what cannot Cetwayo himself do to them ?
The Kaffir tribes were in constant communication
with each other ; they have never ceased to look upon us
as intruders, usurping their country ; they have never
pretended any affection for us. On the contrary, as I
have before told you, they have lived in constant hope
that a day would come when they would be our masters.
With such a feeling ever present to them, it is not to be
wondered at, that they anxiously looked out for news
unfavourable to the whites, and exaggerated every little
incident that came to their knowledge, and was pleasing
to them as being unfavourable to us. For these, amongst
other reasons, I am led to give credence to the many
stories we heard confirmatory of the rumours that
Cetwayo anxiously watched the progress of events
during the sixth Kaffir war, and took the trouble
to despatch his own Zulus to the scene of action,
in order to ensure correct information reaching him.
Be all this as it may, the fact remains that Cetw T ayo’s
name was peipetually in every Kaffir’s mouth during the
war, and after it, and many Kaffirs expected aid and
assistance from him. We shall have much to say to
Cetwayo later on, when we touch upon the Zulu war.
The question of Federation, which is an all-important
one in South Africa, now lies dormant; I shall not awake
it here, for it would require volumes to argue it out.. I
shall content myself with now recording my own opinion,
which is, that soon, very soon perhaps. Federation will
be forced upon the white population of our South
African colonies in self-defence. Two points are certain :
Ist. The black race of Africa does not die out before us,
as have other dark races in North America, in New
Zealand, in Australia. 2nd. The black race in-
creases and multiplies in South Africa, and, however
slowly, still it does improve in civilization, it
does adopt Christianity, it does materially advance
in intelligence. We cannot stay this progress, it
is our mission to encourage it. We must therefore look


forward with a certainty to the advent of the day, sooner
or later, when the black race will understand his real
social status, and the power he might wield in the state
by the exercise of the franchise already placed within his
reach. To be forewarned is to be forearmed ; now is the
time for the white population to provide against a possible
future which may bring them face to face with their dark
fellow-colonists, the odds being fully six to one against
them. If this difference cannot be made up by emigration
(and it cannot be) the white population must look forward
to living in a minority, to existing under black legislation,
or they must now, in time, strengthen themselves against
such an unhappy contingency by federating together.
Union must give them strength, and it should not be
forgotten that the black race is now already federated,
and any contention with the white race can only serve to
bind this federation tighter and more tightly together,
to enable them to hold their own, and to cause numbers
to outweigh the civilization, learning, and science of the
white man. And again, federation must help to secure a
lasting peace, because it will make war more perilous, and
it must facilitate the speedy acquisition and transmission
of information relating to any warlike movements of the
blacks, as well as the assembling together of a defence
force, or even its permanent maintenance. This last
is at the present time an imperative necessity in all the
colonies, but the burden of the expenditure is (I think
most unjustly) forced upon the Cape Colony. All the
colonies of South Africa are equally interested in the
maintenance of peace, therefore all should contribute a
quota to the military defensive force, so useful so
necessary to all. Peace means prosperity, progress in
commerce, industries, manufactures, science, learning, and
education.
This highly to-be-desired peace is, under present legis-
lation, rendered hazardous, because there is no common
native policy established. I am aware that many great
difficulties exist in the adoption of this policy, arising for
the most part from the great dissimilarity which exists in
the origin, the antecedents, the traditions, the character,
the idiosyncrasies of the several South African native


tribes. But these are not extreme or insuperable diffi-
culties. There are existent amongst them also quite a
sufficient number of similar habits, customs, interests,
superstitions, to make reconciliation possible, as also the
establishment of a standpoint from which should emanate
a native policy applicable to all tribes, and I would base
this policy upon the marvellous success which has attended
the enlightened and benevolent policy in force in Natal,
which is enforced by unwritten rather than by written
law, by charity rather than by force.
And now I must take leave of the Cape Colony,
where I spent many happy days, and received much
hospitality, for which I always have felt most grateful.
I have spoken in this lecture frankly—l hope not too
freely; my earnest desire has been to place all truthfully
before my audience. That the Cape Colony is a grand
and glorious colony, with a brilliant avenir before it,
there can be no manner of doubt. It has, I believe, ended
its phase of wars, and despite of them it has progressed.
Under more happy auspices I fully anticipate a glorious
development of its great wealth, and a period of great
prosperity.
I will now briefly tell you of the Zulu war, how it
arose, and how it ended. Already I have related to you
how the great Zulu chief, Chaka, formed a vast army,
which became invincible, and with which he swept
through vast tracts of country, carrying fire and sword
with him, and leaving desolation behind him. He was
arrested in his career of conquest by the great Amaxosa
race, whom he dared not attack, as he believed they were
all under our protection. He turned aside when he reached
them, and then laid waste the country to the north-west,
including the country now inhabited by the Basutos.
Chaka made a dessert of the lovely plains of Natal, and
one of his Lieutenants, Musele Katze, carried the war into
the Matabele country. Dingaan, his brother, excelled
him in cruelty, and introduced even more stringent
rules of discipline into the army than those established by
Chaka. Panda, the next in succession, was not a warrior ;
he maintaied in his army what he had found existent on


his accession to supreme power. Cetwayo, a son of
Panda, succeeded his father, and he devoted himself to
his army. He sought by every means in his power to
arm it with firearms. With this object in view, he allowed
his Zulu warriors to go and work at the diamond fields,
or on the railways, or other public works in Natal or
the Cape Colony, but every man was bound to bring
home one gun at least, and they literally complied with
the order. He habitually ordered his Chiefs, on pain of
death, to procure, within a given time, a certain number
of guns. They usually succeeded, through the traders or
others, called “ gun runners ”in the colony, —I mean the
Paddy Porkes, who sold guns for cattle. Was there ever
so gross an act of folly committed as the authorities of the
Cape Colony committed by allowing a whole nation to be
armed against them, exclusive of the 400,000 stand of
arms dispersed amongst the black population in the Cape
Colony, as I have already stated. Frequently I have
seen scores of Zulus returning home from working in our
colonies with even two or more guns each. A missionary
once began to dilate on the horrors of hell fire to Cetwayo.
The monarch turned round upon him and calmly said he
feared it not—that his men could extinquish it, and forth-
with he ordered out a regiment—say a thousand strong, at
once to proceed and eat up a distant fire which he pointed
out to them. They started immediately, and they accom-
plished their task. Many were injured, some were killed.
A few years ago the Zulu fought only with his shield
made of hide, and his assegai. Of these latter he carried a
large number usually with him ; to these a rifle is now
added. He paints his face, and decorates his limbs with
ox tails, and ornaments his head with feathers when he
goes to war; and each regiment is known by some dis-
tinctive mark ; some have white shields, with a black
spot—others a black shield, with a white or red spot; and
thus, by colours of their shields, they are known.
Usually they have, for warmth, the skin of some wild
animal, thrown over their shoulders. This, with his
ammunition and very little food, constitute the baggage
of a Zulu warrior. Their tactics in war are simple and


effective, and the warriors thoroughly well understand
them, for great pains are taken to teach them. A Zulu
army consists of two horns, projecting on either side ; a
chest connects them, and behind is a reserve. The
attack is usually made with the two horns, by
which it is endeavoured to outflank the enemy.
If, however, the General sees that they are well round
the enemy, he throws his chest upon him, and rapidly
advancing it, he wins the fight with a rush, and closes
in upon the enemy with his horns.
With so mobile, so well-drilled and disciplined an
army, it is not to be wondered at, that we experienced
great difficulty in effecting the conquest of the country.
An Impi or army of Zulus think nothing of covering 50
or even 60 miles a day without food, and they sleep
anywhere; usually many women, wives of the warriors,
accompany them to the field, and carry their mats, spare
assegais, and some food, but on forced marches, no wives
are allowed, and at the end of them, they are like so
many greyhounds, their stomachs drawn up and tightened
with a belt. To feed them, an ox or several oxen if
necessary, are pointed out to them, and they are told to
feed upon them. The Zulu makes short work of the ox,
and requires no fire to aid him in satiating his appetite.
Elated with success, and proud of the perfect state of dis-
cipline to which he had brought his army, and the facility
with which he had armed it, Cetwayo exercised it in
great hunts, and drilled it in the use of the newly-acquired
firearms. His army was usually from forty to fifty
thousand strong. The puzzle to colonists always was
for what purpose does he keep up such an army, and
spend his whole life in perfecting it according to his
lights ? He was known to be an ambitious man, and
very bloodthirsty, and with so formidable a fighting
machine in his power, colonists not unnaturally were
apprehensive always, lest he should use his mighty power
against them; and you will realise how natural was
this feeling when you remember what I have already
stated to you —that Cetwayo had a finger in our pies in
our recent wars on the Cape frontier. It is


well known now that he indirectly aided and
abetted and encouraged all who took up the
sw»ord (?) the assegai against us. Border settlers
naturally asked themselves for whom is this army
prepared, if it be not for us ? And their fears of this
army were increased from time to time by the dis-
covery of some fresh act of deceit, or of a series
of falsehoods, on the part of Cetwayo. It was
after the war of 1877 was concluded that the
hand of Cetwayo became visible beyond all pos-
sibility of mistake. His very messengers were detected
coram populo, carrying messages hostile to us, to those
tribes bordering on our Cape Colony; also into the
Transvaal, and to Secocoemi, to whom he sent a present
of oxen when actually in open arms against us. Were
further proof wanting of Cetwayo’s well-disguised hatred
of us, it is to be found in his reply to a remonstrance
made to him by Sir Henry Bulwer on the occasion of his
ordering a large number of young women to be murdered,
because they would not marry the men of a disbanded
regiment, as ordered by Cetwayo. This story is very
significant. It was the rule for Cetwayo to disband a
certain number of men every year, and to replace them
with others. Those disbanded were ordered to marry at
once, and wives were found for them. <>n this occasion
the girls refused to marry, on the plea that their husbands
were not warriors, their assegais had never been blooded;
and Zulu women only married real warriors. “Go and blood
your assegais,” they said, “ and you will be worthy of us.”
This at once proves the warlike spirit which Cetwayo
had infused into his nation, and this could have been with
but one object, i.e. —to attack the English, whilst he
simulated friendship and goodwill towards us. His
reply to Sir H. Bulwer was to the effect that be had
better mind his own business. He reminded Sir Henry that
he (Cetwayo) did not interfere with him as to the manner
in which he governed those entrusted to his charge; that he
Sir Henry did not know how to govern Zulus, and Zulus
did not heed him Cetwayo unless he killed the disobedient.
Cetwayo ended by impressing upon Sir Henry Bulwer that


he recognised him only as his equal, and that later on he
would learn that he (Cetwayo) had barely begun to kill.
Such a reply was as unexpected as it was uncourteous, and
it served to confirm many heretofore doubtful, as to the
real objects which Cetwayo had in view, that they could
be no other than aggressive and threatening ruin to all the
settlers bordering upon Zululand, and especially to Natal
itself. It should be remembered that only a few short
months before the despatch of the above message to Sir
Henry Bulwer, whilst the Zulu army was still undergoing
the process of reformation and preparation, Cetwayo
would never have dreamt of thus addressing the Governor
of Natal, but now that all his reforms were completed,
and his army was ready to take the field, armed as it
never had been before, Cetwayo felt strong enough to
beard the lion in his den, and was evidently bent upon
war. He and all his army were equally anxious and
equally determined to “ blood their assegais,” or in other
words, to fight. With whom else could they fight but
with those already indicated ? Clearly then, the colonists
were justified in representing to Sir Bartle Frere their
fears, their apprehensions, and many minor incidents
occurred from time to time, serving to prove how reason-
able was their fear, that Cetwayo could at his will, by
raising his hand, destroy them and all belonging to them.
I must be brief, and pass over the annexation about
this time of the Transvaal; also must I pass over the
final settlement of a long-standing dispute between
Cetwayo and the Transvaal Boers before we annexed
the country. With the country we assumed the burden
of the dispute. Great trouble was taken by us to settle
it fairly and honourably. But Cetwayo, as impatient for
war as was his army, invaded the disputed territory, _ and
drove the inhabitants out of it; and further, he permitted
—even encouraged Umbellini, a notorious robber free-
booter, to commit raids in the disputed territorv, and
scare the inhabitants, killing men, women, and children,
and seizing their flocks and herds. The Natal Govern-
ment offered to mediate, but Cetwayo received our
messages and messengers with cold insolence and defiance.


He was no doubt beginning to feel more and more confi-
dent in his power, as represented by 50,000 well-disciplined
men, trained warriors, like so many racehorses. At about
this period, early in 1878, the insolent overbearing of the
King Cetwayo was being adopted by his subjects all
along the Zulu border of Natal, and coming events were
casting their shadows before. Every possible forbearance
was shown by the Government of Natal, and every effort
made to pour oil on the troubled waters. It was in vain,
for on the one hand Cetwayo daily unmasked himself
more and more, whilst the white colonists and coloured
natives, nearly all Zulu refugees living within the colony,
began to feel the state of tension in which they were per-
mitted to exist more alarming, more intolerable. Every
intelligent man present on the scene saw that the end was
near, and that the end must be war with Cetwayo—an
event which had been looked upon, by the best-informed
colonists, for many years, as probable, if not certain to
arise. It was towards the end of July, whilst many
questions of importance w T ere still under discussion with
Cetwayo, and every effort was being made by the
Governor of Natal to avert war, an incident occurred
which complicated matters worse than ever.
Two women, wives of Sirayo, a powerful Zulu chief
living on the borders of Natal, fled to Natal for protection.
They were followed by Sirayo’s sons into Natal The
two women were then made prisoners, and were carried
back to their homes and there executed. According to
Zulu manners and customs, this was tantamount to a
declaration of war. ftedress for this violation of our
territory was repeatedly asked of Cetwayo by Sir Henry
Bulwer, and as often refused, or rather evaded by false
excuses. And thus time sped from July to November,
when Sir Bartle Frere arranged that the decision arrived
at regarding the disputed territory should be made known
to Cetwayo, through any envoys he might be pleased to
send to a post indicated on the Tugela river, where also
efforts would be made to settle up all pending differences
between the Zulus and the Natal Government. The
meeting took place on the 11th December, and from that


day forward a feeling of silent suspense seized upon the
whole white population, and they expressed the greatest
anxiety for the result of this all-important meeting. They
could no longer live with a naked sword at their throats,
wielded by a cruel and merciless savage, with a powerlul
army at his beck and call. Happen what may, this state
of things must end„ The Zulu refugees in Natal had great
confidence in us, but they said they had not yet seen us
fight. They had seen the Zulus fight, and they painted
their mode of warfare in terrible colours. Days passed
on; the decision on the boundary question did not give
satisfaction, but when an ultimatum was made known to
the envoys, by them to be communicated to Cetwayo, the
popular surprise knew no bounds, and the envoys stood
aghast, for they dare not convey the message to their
King. The terms of the ultimatum were briefly these in
substance :
Ist. Cetwayo was to adhere to the solemn promises
he had made when crowned by us and recognized by us
as King of the Zulus; he was to allow his young men
and women to marry when they chose; he was to cease
to kill his subjects without trial; he was to conform to
certain civilized principles, with a view to establish friendly
relations with his neighbours.
2nd. The sons of Sirayo were to be given up to us for
trial, and a fine of 500 head of cattle was to be paid.
3rd. Also a fine of 100 head of cattle for the seizure
and detention of two British subjects on the banks of the
Tugela by an armed party of Zulus.
4th. Umbelini was to be seized, and to be handed over
to the Transvaal authorities, to answer for the murders
he had committed and the plunder he had taken from
inhabitants of the Transvaal (their own country).
Twenty days were given to Cetwayo within which to
comply with these demands. Had he so wished, he might
have done it all in five days easily.
No Zulu dare communicate the contents of this
despatch to Cetwayo ; at length, John Dunn undertook
the task, and doubtless faithfully fulfilled it. He has
described the scene to me, and his conviction then was


that Cetwayo had quite expected something of the sort,
and was quite determined upon war. Time will not
permit me to enter into any detail, indeed, the history of
the war that ensued, would of itself afford complete
subject matter for a long and very interesting lecture.
It must be sufficient that I tell you that after the
11th December, matters were relegated by the civil to
the military authorities, by the High Commissioner, Sir
Bartle Frere, to the General commanding Her Majesty’s
forces, Lord Chelmsford. The plan of campaign was
decided upon after much deliberation and with great care.
The difficulty of obtaining that precise information so
necessary to a General to enable him to advance into an
enemy’s country with confidence, was excessive. It not
unfrequently occurred that two men who ought to know
the country equally well, would give information
diametrically opposite, one to the other, in matters very
simple of themselves, but of the first consequence to an
army ; e.g. a road, whether it was hilly or the reverse, in
good or bad condition, whether any streams crossed it,
what was the nature of the streams, was fuel procurable,
or water or grass for the cattle, were the rivers fordable,
and where, were there any natural obstructions to an
advance with artillery and baggage, either swamps or
boggy land ? On all these and similar subjects, it was
simply impossible to get reliable information.
The force available to Lord Chelmsford when he
entered upon the campaign, was
Cavalry aud mounted infantry ... 1,250
Infantry ... ... ... ... 1,200
Natives ... ... ... ... 8,000
Artillery .. ... ... ... 500
Guns ... ... ... ... 20
This force was divided into three columns of attack,
and a portion of it was detached to garrison certain posts
and to keep up the line of communication. The force was
supplemented later on by levies of natives locally, and by
the arrival of troops of all arms from England. In
January, 1879, the columns entered Zululand ; No. 1
under Colonel Pearson, aross the Tugela at a ford near


the sea, afterwards bridged over by the sailors and the
Royal Engineers. No. 2 under Colonel Clyn, entered at
Rorke’s Drift, and the general went with this column.
No. 3 column under Brigadier Sir Evelyn Wood, entered
from Kambula, at the far north-west, where his. head-
quarters had been for some time stationed, whilst he
carried on a harassing, desultory warfare against the
enemy, and signally defeated them several times,
especially when a large Impior army, numbering full
12,000, attacked him at Kambula, and were repulsed
with great loss.
Colonel Glynn’s column was disposed of at the un-
toward surprise at Insandhlwana. Colonel Pearson reached
Eckowe, about thirty miles from Tugela, and there he
shut himself up until relieved by Lord Chelmsford on 3rd
June, 1879, it is said that he built a wall nine feet thick
to resist an enemy armed only with rifles and assegais,
and otherwise kept his troops employed for the most part
peacefully—not as General Wood did, actively harassing
the enemy. It is reported that the king ridiculed the
force we were bringing against his legions ; he feared
Wood much, but he aiways described Pearson’s column
as rats in a great hole, to be killed at his pleasure,
nevertheless, he never dared to attack the garrison.
The advance into the Zulu country was made, as just
now stated, in January, 1879, and on the 22nd January
of that year the fatal massacre of Insandhlwana occurred.
So many descriptions of this catastrophe have been
written that I will not here detain you with my
version, except to say that having carefully studied
the whole affair on the very spot, and learnt from
the highest authorities their opinions, I cannot but
attribute the blame of it to those who, disobeying the
General’s order, did not “ defend the camp ” The waggons
were not even parked up, much less laaguered, the
camp was not circumscribed, the tents were not struck,
nothing was done to “ defend the camp.” The General
commanding was certainly justified in confiding the
safety of the camp to two experienced colonels, whilst
he himself went on in front to reconnoitre and to fix upon


the place where best he could give battle to the enemy,
of whose presence he was well aware in his vicinity,
although he had, up to the time when the fatal news re-
called him to the camp, been unable to ascertain the
exact positions occupied by the enemy. Everything was
new to the General—the country, the enemy he was
warring against, the wild untutored tribes, whom he had
been obliged to enlist in large numbers as allies, and
reliable information was not to be obtained. There may
be some truth in the assertion, that our successes over
Sirayo on first entering Zululand had led us to under-
rate our enemy, and to consider him too much as a
Galeka or a Gaiku.
After Insandhlwana, Rorke’s Drift was fought. There
a small handful of British soldiers (139 in all) beat off a
large force of Zulus, numbering at least 3,500. It was a
glorious fight, and will live irnperishably in the annals of
our army. Our loss in transport and supplies was pro-
digious ; everywhere at this period, and all along the
frontier line the principal forts were defended with ram-
parts made of Commissariat stores and transport wag-
gons. The difficulties which arose from these incidents
were excessive, but when to them was superadded the task
of forcing rapidly up the country several hundreds of miles,
by different routes, the reinforcements of artillery, cavalry,
and infantry as they reached Africa from England, then
supplying them as they marched through the country
day by day, and being prepared for them at each post
selected for the terminus of their march—when all this
work had to be completed whilst still occupied in making
good the losses of which I have spoken, the difficulties
became then appalling, and appeared impossible of ac-
complishment—yet if not accomplished the campaign
must have proved a failure. All difficulties were,
however, overcome, and whilst mobility was given to the
whole army, reinforcements and all, as they reached
their several destinations, a never-failing stream of sup-
plies was poured in upon them, whereever needed, until
Lord Chelmsford fought Ulundi, and virtually the Zulu
war then ended. Every man in the army of South Africa


was taxed to the utmost to place the fresh forces in the
field, and to repair damages and organise and drill
recruits. As usual, the British soldier rose to the
occasion after defeat. We were determined to avenge
Insandhlwana.
I mustnot pass over in silence an episode which occurred
during the war now rapidly sketched out to you. It was
an episode which grieved and pained every British soldier
in Natal, and which brought a terrible desolation on the
home of a widowed mother whose every hope on earth
was bound up in her only child. The Prince Imperial of
France met with a most untimely fate near the head-
quarter camp. He fell, pierced by several assegais, at
the hands of Zulus who lay in ambush in a mealie field.
He was a victim to his own self-will, and an unquenchable
love of danger or glory. He restlessly sought to be
employed upon every reconnaisance or any service that
offered danger, and even the authority of the General
commanding hardly sufficed to keep him within bounds.
The immediate cause of his death was the folly of choosing
for “ off-saddling ” a spot close to a mealie field in an
enemy’s country, which afforded the best possible cover
for an ambuscade. Such folly courted an attack from the
enemy, and the attack was made, and every one ran away,
when a stand made by even a very few brave men would
have ensured safety to all. But the great error committed
was the ever permitting the brave young prince to
join an army in Africa under any terms whatever,
especially when no executive position could be assigned to
him. Peace be with him ! He had ever shown himself
to those around him a kind-hearted gentleman, most
pleasantly affable and highly intellectual. Throughout
the British camp no one could help reflecting upon the
influence which at this present juncture he might have
exercised over his country, still ill at rest and unquiet.
The widowed mother remains alone on earth, to mourn
her irreparable loss, and to brood over what once were
possibilities, but (alas !) now have passed off for ever, and
are impossibilities. Sir Garnet Wolseley reached the
scene of action after all the work was done. The Zulu


army was dispersed and thoroughly beaten. _ Large
quantities of supplies were systematically placed in depots
throughout the country, along the lines of the two ad-
vancing columns, one under Lord Chelmsford, and a second
under General Crenlock, who was at last found by his
Lordship, when Ulundi had been fought, and the cam-
paign had virtually been completed. Port Durnford had
been opened as a landing-place, thereby economizing trans-
port immensely. Several cargoes had been landed there,
and others were ready for transmission when required.
All this had been the work of Lord Chelmsford. It was
left to his successor to capture Cetwayo, and the unfortu-
nate monarch was at length captured, after a spirited and
troublesome chase. He made desperate efforts to escape,
and for a long time succeeded in eluding his pursuers.
The capture was made by Colonel Marten, of the King s
Dragoon Guards ; Cetwayo had a few faithful adherents
with him to the last, and three wives. All were embarked
at Port Durnford, and were conveyed direct to Cape
Town, where the deposed monarch still is held in cap-
tivity. He is a magnificent man, every inch a king, and
from the moment of his capture up to the present day he
has comported himself with dignity and marvellous com-
posure and self-possession.
It is quite beyond my powers to give you a just idea
of the universal joy which the news of Lord Chelmsford s
victory spread throughout the colony. It was an
unheard of relief to the colony at large ; every town,
every settlement, even Pietermaritzberg itself had been
living in a state of siege, barricaded and protected by
fortifications for many months, all were torn down when
success had crowned our arms, and then we breathed
freely once more, and all subsided into a normal con-
dition of safety.
Sir Garnet Wolseley was by way of finally settling
the Zulu question, by adopting administrative measures
for the future government of the country. His plans
were ridiculed by many of the best informed on the spot,
and certainly so far, every thing tends to show that
these men were right; but before giving a positive


verdict it would be but fair to give the adopted system a
longer trial. Zulu-land is still wrestling in the throes of
its defeat, and many are crying out for the restoration of
their king. At present it is intended that he is to be
taken to England. He has ample ability to enable him
to learn a great deal and to draw just conclusions between
his own insignificance as a savage, and the great power
and magnificence of England as a civilised nation. On
his first arrival in Cape Town, I saw him land there;
everything civilized he saw filled him with wonder, yet
he spoke but little, and it was necessary to question him
in order to elicit his opinions. The large guns on the
ramparts of the Castle at Cape Town astonished him
immensely, and he spoke of them as the mothers of all
guns.


NATAL.
On the maps which have been distributed you will
find the Colony of Natal, situated north of the Cape
Colony. Natal is bounded on the north by the Tugela
river, which separates it from Zulu country. South and
south west the river Umzimkulu divides it from the
Transkei country, now under our protection, or annexed
since the defeat of Kreli. On the north and north west
the grand Drakenberg range wall it off from the Orange
River Free State and the Basuto country.
The climate is exactly the same as your own here, but
somewhat more blessed with rain, especially on the sea
board.
I have already said so much of Natal, especially of
its coloured population, which is a subject of great interest
as regards the Colony that I am compelled now to pass
over it but very cursorily. The Colony is lucky in having
restored to it the able and philanthropic governor, Sir
Henry Bulwer, who has already worked so much good
in the Colony. We must now in speaking of Natal cease
to call the black race Kaffirs, and give them their right
name Zulus, for such they really are, with very few excep-
tions, and the Zulu is a superior man to the Cape Kaffir in
every respect, physically, morally, and intellectually. You
will doubtless bear in mind how we came to take posses-
sion of the Colony of Natal, after having once given it up,
and declaring an intention of not further interfering with
it. Circumstances, however, compelled us to send Colonel
Cloete there to take possession of the Colony in Her
Majesty’s name in 1841. Until 1845 the Colony was
governed from the Cape as a dependency. In 1845
Mr. West was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of Natal.
Between 1845 and 1848 many Boers left Natal disgusted
and enraged at the encouragement we gave to the Zulus
to come and settle in the land. In 1849 a considerable
number of English emigrated to the country, and as
farmers have done well. It could only have been their


own fault if they had failed of success in such a fertile
and smiling land, possessing such abundant resources.
Mr. Pine succeeded Mr. West as Lieutenant-
Governor, in 1850, and in 1853, Dr. Colenso was
appointed Bishop of Natal, an appointment which he still
holds, despite of all opposition. But another bishop was
also appointed to Pietermaritzburg. The tenets of these
two bishops are not in accord, which has been unfortunate
for the colony. Bishop Jolivet, a Roman Catholic, came
to the colony a few years later, and he has done a
prodigious amount of good; so indeed has Bishop
Colenso, as regards the black race, whose champion he
has always been to an excessive degree, in my opinion.
In 1856, it was made into a separate colony, and a
charter of constitution was granted to it. This was
modified in 1875 and in 1879. The governor is now
assisted in his office, by an executive and legislative
council. The Executive Council is composed of the chief
officers of the colony, and two members nominated by the
governor from the elected Legislative Council. This
latter council is composed of 13 official members,
including some of the chief officers of whom I have
spoken above, and of 15 members elected by the counties
and boroughs. Towns with a population of over a
thousand, are admitted to municipal rights.
The revenue has increased considerably of late years.
In 1874 it amounted to £247,259 ; in 1879 it increased
to £473,478.
The expenditure in 1874 amounted to £254,402 ;
in 1879 amounted to £491,883.
The revenue is chiefly derived from the following
sources :
1. Customs dues.
2. Licenses to carry on certain trades, stamps, auc-
tion duties, spirit licenses.
3. Hut tax, 14s. per annum per hut.
4. Fees of courts, postage fines.
5. Quit rents in lands.


Large quantities of sugar are made on the coast, and
for twelve miles inlaud. The return is calculated at
tons per acre. Coffee has been largely planted, but has
not been a success. Arrowroot is largely grown, and
flowers and fruit and grain are produced in prolific
abundance.
Exports in 1874 to Great Britain £660,538
Ditto in 1879 ditto 608,516
Imports of British produce—
In 1874 £772,933
In 1879 1,449,741
Wool, hides, and raw sugar are the staple articles of
export.
The principal articles of British import are manufac-
tured goods and iron, wrought or unwrought.
This may be said to represent the commerce of the
colony at present.
The debt of the colony amounts to a little over a
million six hundred thousand. All has been laid out in
reproductive works—railways, harbours, &c.
The harbour of Durban has already cost the colony
large sums of money, but at present there is hope that
the plan proposed by Sir John Coode, when completed,
will at all events mitigate very materially the dangers of
the Durban bar and thereby facilitate trade, but many
anticipate such a success as will make the harbour of
Durban always accessible to ships drawing 25 feet. This
would be an incalculable boon to Durban, and make her
feel very independent of Delagoa Bay. In a contrary
case, Durban must look forward to being, sooner or later,
all but eclipsed by Delagoa Bay, which would be in a
high degree injurious to her increasing commerce, by
which a large majority of the black population far away in-
land, are now supplied with English manufactured goods.
I have informed you in the early part of my lecture
how vastly the Zulu preponderated over the European
in the population of Natal. I have told you also of the
happy success which had attended our efforts in govern-
ing them, and how singularly amenable we have found


them in all things and useful as labourers, and as servants
of all sorts, they are singularly faithful and trustworthy.
The Zulu of Natal is well aware of the benefits which
he reaps in escaping from the blood-thirsty tyranny
which Cetwayo had already shown himself perfectly
capable of exercising over his subjects, and he will tell
you how happy he feels to find his own laws administered
to him with even-handed justice. He can grow rich now he
will tell you, and he is permitted to enjoy his riches; there
is no fear of his being “ smelt out ” by a witch doctor
and plundered of his wealth and killed. It may surprise
you to learn that the Zulu in Natal is governed by his
own laws; nevertheless, it is quite true, and here lies
the secret of the reclamation of the Zulu from barbarism,
and of his steady approach to civilization and Christianity,
which is now being worked out in Natal, thus solving a
problem attempted by Bishop Selwyn in New Zealand,
without success, and has never since been attempted any-
where, except on a very small scale. The solution is, that
the Zulu is susceptible of Christian teaching and of civiliza-
tion, and at this early stage of the experiment it is quite
impossible to foretell what great changes may be worked
out in the future amongst the black race of Africa, based
upon the successful experiments of which I have been
speaking. In Natal the man for the occasion sprung up
at the time needed, in the person of Sir Theophilus
Shepstone. The son of an early missionary in the country,
and gifted with singular and most useful talents, he
acquired a perfect knowledge of the Zulu language, and
of their habits and customs. He was admit ably adapted
to govern the Zulu by his own savage laws when really
a British colonist, and, therefore, a subject of the Queen.
Sir Theophilus was called at first Diplomatic Agent,
and in 1848 Lord Grey legalised the system of govern-
ment he had introduced Obviously it would have been
impracticable, even dangerous, to attempt to rule raw
barbarians by civilized laws ; hence the adoption of native
laws, and these, by letters patent, were retained, except
in such cases as they transgressed the general principles
of humanity, or were otherwise objectionable. The


Governor of Natal is, as regards the Zulus, vested with
exceptional powers, and he is assisted in his administra-
tion by special magistrates. An appeal lies from them
to the Governor, but not to the Supreme Court. The
native law is applied to cases, both civil and criminal,
between natives, and also between the Government and
the natives. In cases of murder and other. heinous
crimes, the Supreme Court has co-ordinate jurisdiction.
The crime of cattle-stealing by natives, so likely to lead to
war and bloodshed if not checked, is placed under the
exclusive cognisance of native laws, which are far better
fitted to deal with the crime than more, civilized codes.
All such cases are tried before two magistrates and the
Chief of the tribe to which the accused belongs. This
system works admirably, and there is no portion of the
administrative machinery employed to govern the Zulu
in Natal which contributes more than this concession to
native prejudices to preserve peace in the colony, to
secure the loyalty of the natives, and to make him feel
secure, happy, and contented. The idea of the system is
to control natives by laws suited to their condition, to
modify these laws from time to time, as the natives
advance in civilization, and thus gradually but silently
to assimilate or identify them with the laws governing
more enlightened fellow-subjects. The process may be a
long one, but I feel sure that ultimately it will succeed,
and Heaven knows with what result.




