





LECTURE
ON
DEALINGS WITH LAND
BY
REGISTRATION OF TITLE,
AS PROPOSED TO BE APPLIED TO
IRELAND.
BY
ROBERT E. TOEEENS,
REGISTRAR GENERAL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
WITH THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE MEETING
HELD ON THE Ist FEBRUAEY IN DUBLIN.
PUBLISHED BY THE DIRECTION OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE
REGISTRATION OF TITLE ASSOCIATION.




REQUISITION
To ROBERT R, TORRENS, Esq., Registrar General of
South Australia.
"We, the undersigned, request that you "will be so good as to deliver a
lecture, in this City, explanatory of the method by which you propose to
apply to Ireland the system of conducting dealings with Land by Registra-
tion oi Title, which you have so successfully established in the Australian
Colonies:—
Peter Paul M'Swiney, Lord Mayor.
Howth, Lieutenant of County and City
of Dublin.
Leinster.
Edward Grogan, Bart., M.P., City of
Dublin.
John Vance, M.P., City of Dublin.
Drogheda, D.L.
David C. La Touche, D.L.
Charles Haliday, J.P.
Sligo, D.L.
James Power, Bart., D.L.
George Handcock, Honorable, J.P.
Meath, D.L.
James Jamieson.
Joseph Boyce, D.L.
Knight of Kerry, D.L.
Thomas Kelly.
Thomas Crosthwaite, J.P.
John Gray, Knight, J.P.
Val O’Brien O’Connor, D.L.
Robert Callwell.
Charles C. Domvile, Bart., D.L.
Alexander Parker, J.P.
Oranmore and Browne, D.L.
James R. Stewart, D.L.
James W. Murland.
Robert L. Blosse, Bart.
Robert Warren, junr., J.P.
Luke J. M‘Donnell.
Thomas Bewley.
Alexander J. Perrier.
William D. La Touche, D.L.
J. W. Fitzpatrick, Lieut., Queen’s Co.
Alexander Boyle.
Joseph Todhunter.
Jonathan Pim.
Annesley, D.L.
Francis Codd, J.P.
Alexander Findlater.
A. C. Lambert, D.L.
Frederick Stokes, J.P.
Henry Pim.
Robert Kane, Knight.
Cremorne, D.L.
Samuel Bewley, junr.
Henry Butler, D.L.
Andrew H. Bagot.
James Haughton, J.P.
E. M. Dunne, J.P.
Athlumney, D.L.
Thomas H. Todhunter
William Hogg.
Mervyn Pratt, D.L.
George H. Lindsay, D.L.
John Walsh.
T. Maxwell Hutton.
Samuel A. Dickson, Lieut.-Col., D.L.
M.P., County Limerick.
W. S. and E. Purdon.
H. H. Porter.
A. O’Flaherty, D.L.
John Sproule.
O. W. Jackson, D.L.
Gustavus Lambert, J.P.
Richard G. Mac Donnell, K.C.B.


Richard A. O’Donnell, Bart., D.L.
Edward Atkinson.
John Wynne, The Right Hon., J.P.
Joseph Hone, senr.
E. Borough, Bart. D.L.
Michael Staunton.
Francis P. Dunne, D.L., M.P. Queen’s
County.
Peter Aungier, J.P.
J. C. Colville.
John Watson.
St. George Cuffe, Lieutenant-Colonel.
John J. Robertson.
Christopher St. George, J.P.
Francis D. Reynolds.
Bowes Daly, D.L.
John F. Knox, Lieut.-Col., D.L.
George L’Estrange, Knight.
Thomas Yesey.
William Dargan, D.L.
Charlemont, Lieutenant, co. Armagh.
John Ennis, D.L., M.P., Athlone.
William Haughton.
B. L. Guinness, D.L.
Robert Doyne, D.L.
William Owen, J.P.
William Jackson, Archdeacon.
Richard Kirwan, J.P.
Ernest Knox, Major, J.P.
James Fowler, Clerk.
Henry Joynt.
Edmund Perry.
A. F. Knox Gore, Lieut., Co. Sligo.
Edward Atkinson, J.P.
W. J. O’Driscoll.
Robert Murray.
David Thompson, J.P.
Clanmorris, D.L.
John Trant, D.L.
John Bolton Massy,'J.P.
William Livingston, J.P.
R. H. Frith, C.E.
T. H. Thompson, J.P.
Robert Brampston Smith, Major.
Robert Rutledge, D.L., Lieut. Col.
Charles A. Cameron, M.D.
John Swain.
REPLY
Gentlemen, —I feel complimented by tbe Requisition which you have
addressed to me, and, in compliance with your request, will explain the
system of Conveyancing by Registration of Title, as applicable to the circum-
stances of Ireland, at the Commercial Buildings, Dame-street, on Monday,
the Ist prox.
Faithfully yours,
ROBERT TORRENS.
Morrisson’s Hotel, Dublin,
Jan. 28th, 1864.
RESOLUTIONS
Passed at the meeting held in compliance with the foregoing Requisition
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, in the chair:
Proposed by J. Bolton Massey, Esq.;
Seconded by Sir R. Mac Donnell, K.C.8.:
“ That the thanks of this meeting are due to Robert R. Torrens, Esq., for
his clear and able exposition of the method of conducting dealings with
Land by Registration of Title, which is now in operation in the Australian
colonies.”


Proposed by Colonel Knox Gore ;
Seconded by the Knight of Kerry :
“ That it is highly important to establish such a system of conveyancing
as will render all dealings with land easy, secure, and inexpensive.”
Proposed by Sir John Gray ;
Seconded by Jonathan Pim, Esq.:
“ That the delay and expense incident to the present system of conveyan-
cing are peculiarly oppressive, as regards the sale of small properties, and as
regards loans for short periods.”
Proposed by Alex. Boyle, Esq.;
Seconded by Charles Haliday, Esq.:
“ That the minute accuracy of the Ordnance Survey, and the indefeasible
Title given by the Landed Estates Court, appear to this meeting to afford
peculiar advantages to Ireland for the adoption of an improved system of
Conveyancing, and that this meeting commends Mr. Torrens’ system of
conducting dealings with Land by Registration of Title to the careful consi-
deration of the Government and the public generally.”
Proposed by Sir Robert Kane ;
Seconded by William F. Littledale, Esq.:
“ That the movers and seconders of the Resolutions now adopted be ap-
pointed a Committee, with power to add to their number, to carry out the
objects of this meeting.”
Proposed by Benjamin Lee Guinness, Esq.;
Seconded by Captain Lindsay :
“ That the thanks of this meeting are due, and are hereby given to the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, for his kindness in presiding on this
occasion.”




REGISTRATION OF TITLE TO LAND.
(Revised from the Report in the Freeman’s Journal.^
On Monday, February Ist, Mr. Robert R. Torrens, Registrar-General of
South Australia, delivered, at the Commercial Buildings, in pursuance of the
foregoing requisition, a lecture explanatory of the method by which he pro-
poses to apply to Ireland the system of conducting dealings with land by
Registration of Title, which he has so successfully established in the South
Australian Colonies.
The Duke of Leinster said he begged to move that the Right Hon. the
Lord Mayor do take the chair. In moving the resolution he would say a few
words, for he could not remain long, having a particular engagement else-
where. He was fully aware of the nature of the lecture that Mr. Torrens
was about to deliver. Although he might not go the full length of what
that gentleman proposed, he had no hesitation in saying, as the owner of a
large estate incumbered, that if he wanted to borrow money on his property
the heaps of deeds that should be resorted to was positively frightful. The
present system, in fact, prevented property from being of the value it would
be under a better system. At present land was incumbered by heaps of
useless documents. He would not detain them further, but begged to move
that the Right Hon. the Lord Mayor do take the chair.
Mr. Jonathan Pim seconded the motion.
The Loud Mayor took the chair, and returned thanks for being called on
to preside over so influential and numerous a meeting. The interest he felt
on the subject was shown by the fact that he left a chair which he was
already bound to continue in, almost under any circumstances, to fulfill his
engagement there. He wished to be understood that he came there to be in-
structed. He had not made up his mind one way or the other, nor did he consider
himself bound by anything that might arise. Mr. Torrens, whom he would
introduce to the meeting, was not unknown to Ireland (hear, hear). He was
a member of a family of which the late Judge Torrens, and Generals Sir
Henry and Sir Arthur Torrens were conspicuous members. His father,
Colonel Torrens, was well known in the literary world by his writings
on political economy and he was one of the original founders of the
colony of South Australia. Mr. Torrens himself was a graduate of Trinity
College. He had resided in South Australia for upwards of twenty-three
years, and had successively filled the offices of Collector of Customs and
Registrar of Deeds. When the colony obtained the right of self-government
Mr. Torrens became Colonial Treasurer, and subsequently Chief Secretary,
which office, in South Australia, was equivalent to the Office of Prime
Minister amongst us. The knowledge that Mr. Torrens acquired of the con-
veyance of property in ships, while he was Collector of Customs, led him to


devise the system of Registration of Title to land, which had rendered his
name so well known throughout Australia (hear, hear).
Mr. Henry Dix Hutton and Mr. Francis Good were requested to act as
secretaries to the meeting.
LECTURE.
Me. Robert R. Torrens then came forward to deliver his Lecture, and
was greeted with loud applause. He said—ln compliance with a requsition
signed by several noblemen and gentlemen connected with this country, I
am here to explain a system for conducting transfers and other dealings
with estates and interest in land, which has produced most advantageous
results in the Australian Colonies and in countries on the Continent of
Europe, where it has been in operation, and for the application of which the
most favourable conditions exist in Ireland. I should, under any circuit-
stances, deem it a compliment to have received a requisition bearing such,
names, but especially so when the subject on which I am invited to speak is
of such primary importance.
In England, where the general prosperity and the employment of the
people are dependent quite as much upon commerce and manufacturing
industry as upon agriculture, this question is deemed of the highest interest,
but in Ireland, where agriculture constitutes the one grand source of pros-
perity, the primary means of employing and maintaining the population, the
means whereby greater certainty may be given to title to land whereby
its transfer may be facilitated, and the investment of capital on its improve-
ment encouraged—constitute a vital question, involving the well-being not
merely of those directly interested in land and production, but affecting also
the rest of the community, whether professional men, traders, artificers, or
others, whose prosperity is contingent on that of the community at large.
I had imagined that it might have sufficed merely to state this proposition
to insure to it universal assent. But I have been surprised to find it
seriously argued recently that a measure which increases the value of land
by decreasing the cost of conveyancing would benefit the proprietary class
at the expense of the rest of the community, and that it would be for the
interest of the community that the value of land should be lowered rather
than increased, in order to bring the acquisition of a freehold within the
reach of men of small means.
Those who argue in this strain mystify themselves by confounding the idea
of cheapness with low price'—dearness with high price—but it is not neces-
sary to refer to such high authorities as Adam Smith or John Stewart Mill
to learn that it is quite possible to have land low priced, yet at the same time
dear —high priced, yet at the same time cheap. A farm may be for sale at
a low price, because the cost of conveyance of its produce is so great as to
render it dear and inaccessible to the man of small means. The construction


of a good road by reducing the cost of conveyance may cause a considerable
rise in the price, yet render the farm so cheap at that price as to bring it
within the reach of the man of small means. The substitution of a secure,
cheap, and expeditious system of conveyance of title for the present uncer-
tain, costly, and tedious procedure would have the same effect as the good
road in raising the price of the farm, yet leaving, it cheap at the money.
Again, it has been asked what advantage would it be to the community at
large to deprive solicitors of the tribute that for centuries they have been
receiving upon the transfer of land in order to add that amount to the
incomes of the landed proprietors ? To this I w'ould reply, that it is alto-
gether a mistake to suppose that all or even the larger proportion of the
amount by which the proposed reform would increase the value of land
would be made up by deductions from the present incomes of solicitors. Ihe
amount positively wasted and utterly lost to the community by our anti-
quated artificial system of conveyancing greatly exceeds the sum which that
system abstracts from the pockets of the landowner to be placed in that of
the attorney. No doubt a reduction in the cost of transfer, mortgage, or
lease, from pounds to shillings is a very serious consideration. But the
reduction in the time occupied in those transactions from months to hours
the entire removal of harassing and vexatious doubts and questions affecting
the validity or completeness of title—the facilities for raising money, and
the reduction in the rate of interest on mortgage, which has in every instance
attended the introduction of this system, are far more valuable consideiations,
and these do not accrue to the proprietary class out of the pockets of the
attorney.
This system of Registration of Title should not he considered merely
as a vendor’s question, for it is quite as much a mortgagee s question; for
although, as I have said, the invariable result in countries where it has
been any time in operation has been to reduce the rate of interest on mort-
gage, still the circumstance that charges under it attach to the land inde>
feasibly—that they are transferable by indorsement without cost or delay ■
and that the remedies in case of default in payment of interest or principal
are rapid and inexpensive—render these securities more valuable than
mortgages bearing a higher rate of interest under the antiquated artificial
method by transfer of the legal estate. It is likewise a manufacturer s
question—a merchant’s question —a banker’s question—because the cost of
conveyance, but especially the vexatious delays and uncertainties which
attend the acquisition of land for their business premises, and which fall
upon them under the existing law, constitute a serious burden, the extent of
which is not apparent at first sight, and is not generally understood. At
the risk of being tedious, I will proceed to illustrate it.
A manufacturer requires to expend £50,000 on his premises ; this sum is
thereby immediately removed from the law of moveable property , framed in
modern times to meet the requirements of a commercial age, and is placed
under the operation of the law of immoveable property, which took its origin


in remote ages out of ingenious devices resorted to for the purpose of
evading the tyrannical exactions of feudalism, and which is incompatible
with the requirements of modern civilisation, and thus to the extent of
the £50,000 expended on his building premises, and in the ordinary parlance
suggested by the condition “ locked up''' in real property, the manufacturer
is subjected to the same disadvantages which this antiquated system inflicts
upon the owners of broad acres.
Again, it is equally a tenant-farmer’s question, for it is evident that
the disadvantages to the proprietary class when dealing with the freehold,
fall upon the tenant in dealing with his leasehold interest—neither is the poor
tradesman, mechanic or laborer, who lays by his weekly half-crown to be in-
vested in a building or freehold land society, exempt from the evils which at-
tend on the law of real property; and as one fact is said to be worth a hundred
arguments, I will state what I have witnessed in other countries in this respect.
Usually in such societies a solicitor is engaged who transacts the conveyanc-
ing business at a moderate fixed charge. Many poor laborers and artizans are
led on by this bait to invest their savings in small freeholds, forgetful- that
whenever afterwards they require to deal with the property, the solicitor of
the mortgagee would not be satisfied with this conveyance, but would insist
upon a costly examination of the previous title, and that the expense of
mortgage and subsequent release would fall upon them, and speedily absorb
the greater part, if not the whole, of that which, with so much patient self-
denial, had been accumulated. Many a poor man has thus seen the freehold,
the darling object of his ambition, which he had attained at so much
self-sacrifice, melt away in law costs. Such institutions under the old law
were a curse rather than a blessing to the poor man, but upon the introduc-
tion of Registration of Title all this was changed. There being no longer
any historical manuscript of title to investigate the services of the solicitor
were dispensed with, the secretary to the society transacted the business,
and when the member who acquired a freehold subsequently needed to
borrow on the security, or to transfer the property, the expense was covered
by a few shillings.
Thus over every class in the community, from the peer, the proprietor
of broad domains, to the poor mechanic who lays by his half-crown to be
invested in a building or freehold land society, this antiquated system ope-
rates as an incubus, repressing the aspirations and the energies of the people,
discouraging the investment of capital on the land, and causing all classes
to move in the transactions of their affairs with the slow and painful motion
of the paralytic or manacled slave rather than with the freedom and rapidity
with which the same transactions are conducted in countries where convey-
ancing by Registration of Title prevails.
In the preceding remarks I have dwelt much upon the extent to which
the evils which afflict this country are attributable to the existing state
of the law of conveyancing. As I have been long absent from the country,
\nd am not bv profession a lawyer, my opinion upon such a question
may have little weight. I will, therefore, briefly quote the opinions of


Irish barristers and Irish land-owners; and I find Mr. R. Conway Dobbs,
barrister, in a paper read before the Dublin Statistical Society, just 11 years
ago, affirming every position which I have advanced, only in style so much
more forcible that it may warrant the repetition :—“ In dealing with land,
what is the language of the law to the landowner ? It is this. Before you
can dispose of your land, either by sale or mortgage, you must show that all
the incumbrances which have affected it during that period have been paid
off. You must verify all the facts connected with it, as births, deaths, &c.,
by legal evidence ; you must show that either you or those over whom yon
have control can convey to the purchaser or mortgagee every particle of
what are called the legal and equitable estates. Now, you must do this in
every case of sale, whether the land be incumbered or unincumbered ;
although, having 1,000 acres, you wish only to sell one acre. Again, the
same estate is brought into the market, and although the former purchaser
had ascertained its adventures for sixty years previous to his purchase, on
the re-sale the same tedious narrative of undisputed facts is subjected to the
critical acuteness of another counsel. But suppose even the second purchaser
satisfied, if afterwards he wishes to raise money by way of mortgage the
mortgagee goes into the same inquiries. Every fact, though undisputed,
must again be affirmatively proved, whether the money to be borrowed is
wanted for a short or longer period, whether the amount be £IOO or £IO,OOO.
And the mortgagor, though he may think he borrows the money for 4 or 5
per cent., if he will estimate the expenses of investigation of the title (which
are always paid by him) will find that he really pays 10 per cent, or more, for
the loan he obtains. Nor does it end here ; the mortgage money is called
in ; the same investigation of title again takes place by another person ; the
same, or nearly the same expense is incurred. It is easy to see how this
state of the law must affect the value of land, and more especially the smaller
proprietors of it. Practically speaking, small properties cannot be dealt with
except as articles of luxury. The large proprietor is debarred from selling,
and the poor man from buying, by the expense of the transfer. I may also
add that it is the same circumstance that in all cases of tenants dealing for
leases obliges them to rest content with the evidence of their landlords title
that is afforded by possession, and exposes them to that insecurity which all
agree has operated as a barrier to the expenditure of capital on land, and the
development of its capabilities.
Mr. Vincent Scully, in his place in the House of Commons, in 1853, when
introducing a bill for applying to Ireland the great principle of Regis-
tration of Title, illustrated the evils of the present system as follows :—“ The
real grievance of landowners is the enormous difficulty and cost of transfer-
ing their land. I have given two out of numerous instances of the immense
expense sometimes incurred. In one of those cases the purchase money was
£27,500, and the attempts to show a good title occupied from 1846 to 1853,
when the matter was very properly compromised, after a loss had been incurred
by the parties of not less than £IO,OOO. In the other instance which I gave


abortive attempts to deduce title to a charge of £l,lOB caused an expense of
nearly fifty per cent, upon that amount. But were Ito add to the thousands
thus lost or expended, the immense delays, with the consequent vexatious and
mental anxieties, it would be almost impossible to exaggerate the magnitude of
the evil. My own experience enables me to form some idea of the dreadful
afflictions which persons in such a position are often doomed to suffer, ending
frequently in the utter ruin of families, and sometimes in the premature
shortening of human life. During past ages all other experiments that
human art could devise, or inhuman cruelty accomplish, have been expended
in vain upon the reformation of Ireland. But never as yet was the experi-
ment tried of removing those legal obstacles which directly obstruct all dealing
in land, and thereby indirectly, but most effectually, depreciate the value to
the owner, and also prevent the occupier from acquiring by fair and volun-
tary purchase a permanent interest in his holding. The opportunity for
removing these obstacles, with the full concurrence of all owners and occu-
piers of land in Ireland has now arrived—it is fast passing away, and may,
perhaps, be gone before the lapse of another session of parliament.”
The Master of the Rolls thus decribes the existing law:—“ This system,
which has been suffered to grow up in this country, is one which might have
been devised expressly to render land as little an article of commerce, as
little vendible and purchasable as possible. If a man has a certain sum of
money which he wishes to exchange for shares or stock in a public company
or the funds, the law points out an ostensible owner with whom he may
deal; and though the stock or funds be affected with any amount of trusts,
the writing of a few words settles the transaction. But if a man wishes to
exchange his money against land, he is at once involved in a labryinth of
difficulty and expense. Voluminous abstracts, innumerable queries and
objections, interminable attorneys’ bills beset his path, and unless the
purchase be very large, bear a formidable ratio to the outlay.”
This opinion of one of the highest authorities—an opinion, be it remem-
bered, published in 1852—adhered to ever since, and given to the public in
the pamphlet on Law Reform published last year, may well be accepted as
conclusive. But it is needless to quote authorities upon this subject. There
is not one in this assembly who has not either in his own person or those of
his family or friends experienced the baneful effects of the law which I have
been denouncing. More usefully we may occupy the brief time that remains
in inquiring after the remedy for this state of things.
The Irish Estates Court Act has admirably served the purpose for which
it was designed, and affords a secure basis upon which to construct a thorough
reform. It has overcome all that was either difficult or hazardous in the
work of reform, and having accomplished this, it unaccountably stops short.
Having incurred all the toil, all the expense of clearing and preparing the
ground, it omits the now easy and inexpensive work of putting in the crop
that would yield the most valuable harvest, and leaves the fallow land which
it has created to he again over grown by the tangled thicket of noxious


weeds and thorns; and titles, left to be dealt with under the preposterous
system of conveyancing, which had produced such a harvest of evil, become
again in a few years whelmed under the same complexities and uncertainties
from which, at the expense of so much labour and time they had been
cleared.
Again I refer to the Master of the Rolls on this point, who says, “ The
estates sold under the Incumbered Estates, and by the Landed Estates Court
are becoming re-incumbered every day, and in the course of time difficulties
as to making out title will again arise if some such remedy as is suggested be
not applied. The time for it, if at all, is at present, as there would be but
little difficulty in registering the title of estates which have been sold by the
Incumbered Estates Court, or by the Landed Estates Court.” This measure,
admirable, so far as it goes, requires to be supplemented by some mechanism
which will obviate this result, else we shall see the labour of Sisyphus
perpetuated; the stone rolled up the hill only to recoil after the summit has
been attained.
Amendment of the system of Registration of Deeds can never effect this
reform. All that ever has been or ever can be effected by the best system
of registration of deeds is to give a complete list of such matters and acts as
have been effected by deeds. It does not exempt the solicitor of the
purchaser or mortgagee from the laborious operation of examining those
deeds; on the contrary, it saddles his client with legal notice of all they con-
tain. I could cite many cases to prove the mischievous results of this system,
which in closing the door against one class of frauds opens it to another ; but
it may suffice to refer to the case of Roehard v. Fulton, in which a
mortgagee was ousted of his security in consequence of his solicitor resting
content with the information given in the memorial of registration,
omitting to examine the deed, which disclosed that the property
was already saddled with an annuity of £4OO per annum. In short, regis-
tration of deeds can never afford the remedy we seek, because it does not cut
off the dependent retrospective character of title, which is the source of all
the evils of the present system. But there is abundant evidence to prove
that it has served another and quite different purpose, namely, to increase
the costs of conveyancing, and upon this, again, I will refer to the authority
of Irish barristers.
Sir Hugh Cairns, in the House of Commons, in 1859, when intro-
ducing a bill, which, like that previously proposed by Mr. Vincent Scully,
embodied the true remedy (Registration of Titles, which I shall presently
explain), said of the opposite system of registration of deeds—“ It only puts
on a formal record the whole of that multitude of deeds and conveyances, of
the extent and complexity of which we already have so much reason to
complain. You have to investigate and search just as before. In addition
to that you have to pay for searches in the register, and also to pay, in some
shape or other, the expense of placing deeds upon it.” Did time permit I
could quote the reports of parliamentary committees and royal commissions,


and adduce the testimony of Lord Brougham, Lord St. Leonards, and of the
most eminent conveyancers in England to the same effect, but it seems to me
unnecessary. Registration of Deeds has already been sufficiently tried in
this country in conjunction with the Landed Estates Court, and if the result
of that experience has not sufficed to satisfy those whom I address, that such
a system cannot afford the remedy with which we seek to supplement the
action of the Landed Estates Court, neither the report of parliamentary
commissions, nor the authority of eminent jurists, nor any arguments of
mine can suffice for that purpose. I must, however, refer to the report of
the Royal Commission of 1857, which included amongst its members the
present Lord Chancellor of England, an ex-Chancellor of Ireland, the Hon.
Joseph Napier, Mr. Vincent Scully, Mr. Robert Wilson, Mr. Strickland
Cookson, qnd other eminent lawyers, and which, after declaring the insuffi-
ciency of registration of deeds, recommended the principle of Registration of
Titles as the only effectual remedy for the evils attending the present law of
conveyancing. That Commission advised that Deeds could neither constitute
nor demonstrate a Title, but that, “at the best, they did but leave it to be
worked out as a probable inference.” Registration of deeds, therefore, is
merely a record of evidence more or less clear, but the title itself is under
that system something intangible, a mere semblance which could never be
surely grasped. Registration of Title, on the contrary, is not a registration
of evidence, but the title itself, a tangible entity, about which there could be
no question whatever—having local habitation in the Register which, so far
as concerned parties dealing, the one sole and only title to any estate or
interest whatsoever in any piece of land under the operation of that system.
I will now explain the manner in which I propose to apply this principle
to the condition and institutions of Ireland. I propose that in future convey-
ances and declarations of title from the Landed Estates Court shall he in
duplicate, and shall contain a map, delineating and describing the lands
referred to therein, according to the outlines and designations given in the
ordnance maps. The Record Book is the pivot upon which the whole
mechanism turns. It is compiled by binding together the duplicates of all
conveyances and declarations of title issued by the Landed Estates Court,
each of which should constitute a distinct folium, consisting of two or more
pages, set apart for recording together the memorials of all future dealings,
whether with the freehold or any lesser estate or interest in the land, repre-
sented by the conveyance or declaration of title, until a change of ownership
of the freehold is registered. When this occurs, the existing declaration of
title or conveyance is to be cancelled, the existing folium of the record
closed, a fresh declaration of title issued to the new proprietor, and a new
folium opened in the Record Book, upon which are carried forward the
memorials of all ‘jesser estates, interests, and charges affecting the land,
continuing current at the time of recording the change of ownership of the
freehold. Printed forms of contract, with full instructions for the guidance
of parties dealing, should be supplied at the Lands Titles Office, and at the


principal stationers’ shops. If the contracting proprietor does not attend
personally at the Office and execute the instrument in presence of the
Recorder, then the execution must be attested by a legal practitioner,
or else the contracting proprietor, or the person who attested his signature,
must acknowledge or prove the execution of the instrument before a notary
public, justice of the peace, or commissioner for taking affidavits, who will
notify such acknowledgment or proof by a certificate. These instruments
of contract do not pass the estate or interest, but merely constitute the
authority to the Recorder for entering the memorial of the transaction in
the record. That officer enters the recording memorial on the proper
folium of the record, and on the instrument evidencing the title of the
recorded proprietor ; he then endorses the instrument with a memorandum,
certifying the date of recording, and the volume and folium of the
record where the memorial has been recorded. Entry on the record is the
essential which gives validity to transactions. The memorandum certifying
recording, endorsed upon instruments under the hand and seal of the Recor-
der, renders them conclusive evidence of title in all courts of law and equity.
Recorded instruments are declared to be constructively embodied in the
record, and one original of each is filed in the Lands Titles Office, the other
being returned to the party entitled under it.
Under this method transfers, leases, mortgages and other charges, as pro-
visions for families, as also entails and settlements, are conducted with secu-
facility, and economy, without curtailment of the freedom "\\ hich landed
proprietors enjoy in the disposition of their estates under the present system.
The only difference is that we pursue a direct straight forward procedure to
the accomplishment of what is required, instead of a circuitous, intricate, and
artificial procedure. As, for example, when we desire to charge land as
security for a debt, we do that and that only by signing a printed form of
charge in half-a-dozen lines, which may be transferred or released by signature
of the mortgagee to a printed form endorsed on the instrument. We
repudiate the fiction of transferring the legal estate by deed to be re-trans-
ferred by another deed, which process encumbers the title thereafter with the
history of the transaction. Equitable mortgages are effected by deposit of
the declaration of title with a degree of security unattainable under the
existing law, because the possession of the title deed under that law by no
means proves the party named therein to be really the owner, as vendors
usually retain the deeds after they have sold the land in seperate parcels to
different parties, whereas under my system the existing declaration of title is
cancelled and withdrawn upon each transfer. Again, an equitable mortgagee
under the existing law may be deprived of his security by the registration of
a deed of transfer of the property to a purchaser not privy to fraud, and I
could refer to cases in which fraud of this description has been successful.
Under the proposed system this would be imposible, because no transfer or
other dealing could be recorded without the production of the declaration of
title.


But I prefer illustration by facts. In South Australia not long back,
two gentlemen, the one a landowner requiring to borrow £lO,OOO, the other
a banker desiring to lend that sum, entered my office at 10f a.m. They filled
in the printed forms, had them recorded, completed the transaction, and left
the' office within the half hour, the one having in his pocket the banker’s
cheque for £lO,OOO, the other an indefeasible mortgage transferrable by en-
dorsement ; the total expense being ten shillings.
Again, when we put property in settlement we repudiate the factitious en-
tanglements, involutions and fictions of “uses” and “trusts, andrecord exactly
what is intended, and nothing more, without lugging in the names of other
parties who have no interest in the transaction, but whose names must hence-
forth be used and their signatures obtained whenever the property is dealt
with. This is the system which Blackstone speaks of as “ serving no other
purpose than to show the vast powers of the human intellect, however vainly
or preposterously employed.” I must, however, demur to that conclusion. It
has served another purpose, namely, to increase the costs of conveyancing from
pence to pounds. Upon this important branch of the subject I will quote the
opinion of an English conveyancing barrister of some standing, and a pupil
of the celebrated Brodie. Mr. Henry Gawler, barrister, and Examiner of
Titles, writes to the South Australian Advertiser, of the 20th of October last,
as follows :—“ Settlements may be divided into two classes—First, those in
which the legal estate is vested in trustees the cestuique trusts, or persons
beneficially interested, taking only equitable interests. This is the most
common form of settlement at the present day. Second, those in which the
persons beneficially interested take the legal estate in the land in possession
or remainder, each one in his own right, without the intervention of trustees ;
and this is the form most commonly used when land is to be strictly entailed.
Settlements under the first class most usually contain provisions empowering
the trustees to sell or to make exchanges, and exempting purchasers from
such trustees from all liability to enquire into the honajides of any sale or
to see to the application of the purchase money; consequently, if the title of
the trustees be otherwise correct, a purchaser from them cannot be ejected by
the cestuique trusts on the ground of a breach of trust or improper sale by
trustees. Under the Torrens act such a settlement would be effected by the
settlor conveying to the trustees by memorandum of transfer, and the trusts
would be declared in the usual form, either in such memorandum of transfer
or in a separate deed, and the trustees would receive a “ declaration of title.”
Now in what respect would the cestuique trusts in this case be in a worse
position than they would have been under the old system ? In either case
they must depend principally upon the honour of the trustees, and would
only have a personal remedy in the event of a breach of trust. But cestuique
trusts under the Torrens Act, so far from being in a worse position than
they would have been under the old system, are actually in a better position,
because they, or any person on their behalf, may enter a caveat, and so
prevent any improper dealing by the trustees. This is the system adopted


at the Bank of England in the case of stock in the funds, and it has
been found by experience that property so circumstanced is practically safe.
Can it be believed that what is safe for beneficial interests in such property
will be otherwise than safe when applied to land? The second class of
settlements can be effected under the Torrens Act with the same facility as
under the old system. The Torrens Act in no way interferes with the prin-
ciples or rules of law, or with the powers of landowners or their rights or
liberties, but only with the machinery by which such rights or liberties may
be created or protected, consequently the second class of settlements is fully
and effectually provided for without the intervention of the Statute of Uses.
Instead of conveying to A. for the use of B. for life, with remainder to the
use of C. in fee, it conveys direct to B. for life, with remainder to C.
Upon the execution of such a settlement the Recorder of Titles would
issue a ‘ declaration of title’ to the first tenant for life or owner of the
first estate of freehold vested in possession. Such declaration would set forth
the nature of the estate, and all powers given to the tenant for life by the
settlement, such as powers of appointing the fee or of releasing. Each re-
mainderman as his estate became vested in possession, would receive a
declaration of title, and in the meantime he could deal with his interest,
though a purchaser would not receive a declaration of title until the
estate fell into possession. The only difference, in fact, between a
settlement of land under the Torrens system and of land under the old
system, is, that in the former case no estate would pass or become vested until
the settlement was registered; but, so soon as registered, the settlement,
would have exactly the same effect; estates and interests would vest or be
divested, exactly as under the old system.”
I must add to these remarks of Mr. Gawler, that the facility of charging
land with jointures, annuities, and sums of money, and of releasing land from
such charges, either upon payment of the money, or upon the death of the
parties entitled, are so great under the system which I have been advocating
that proprietors under it very rarely resort to settlement through the instru-
mentality of trustees, except where discretionary power is required to be
exercised in a fiduciary capacity. And I believe that all who have had to deal
with property through the instrumentality of trustees will agree that any
method which dispenses with that instrumentality, except in the cases
referred to, is an improvement, and it should be remembered that in those
cases the procedure under registration of title is far more secure because
it admits of protection by caveats and bar of supervisorship amongst
trustees not applicable under the existing law.
Such is the remedial measure by which I propose to supplement the ope-
rations of the Landed Estates Court. I have not the audacity to propose to
the landed proprietors of Ireland that they should risk their properties on any
scheme that has not been thoroughly tested by experience. It has been in
operation in the Hans Towns for six hundred years, in Bavaria, Prussia,
Belgium, and other countries in Europe, for various periods. It has been in


operation in Australia for nearly six years, and everywhere it has produced
the same result—adding to the value of land and of landed securities —enabling
the capitalist to acquire an estate by the purchase of adjacent small holdings
without incurring an extravagant outlay, and without acquiring a title
which accumulates upon one estate all the voluminous complexities which
previously hampered 40 or 50 separate titles—enabling the man of small
means also to gratify his ambition in the acquisition of a small freehold
without incurring ruinous extravagance. But, perhaps, the most beneficial
of those results appears in the perpetuation of that certainty and simplicity
of title given by the Estates Court—in the removal of most of the questions
which give rise to Chancery suits —in the reduction of the rate of interest
on mortgage —and in the facility and economy with which these charges are
created, transferred, and released. The progress made by this measure in
the Australian colonies indicates how much it is there appreciated ; in
South Australia, where it was first introduced, the applications for exchange
of titles from the old system to the new have reached the rate of 1,000
annually. In Queensland it has entirely superceded the old system of con-
veyancing. In Tasmania the progress is equally satisfactory, but in the elder
colony of New South Wales the rate of progress in the first year of the Act’s
operation has been greater than elsewhere, which I attribute to the circum-
stance that several of the leaders of the bar—rising superior to professional
prejudice—have given it their cordial support. lam happy to find many
leading members of the Irish bar exhibiting a similar spirit, whence we may
augur the most favourable issue to our efforts to apply this system to Ireland
—a step which has this additional recommendation that it would assimilate
the law of this country to that of England, where, under the judicious ma-
nagement of Mr. Spenser Follett, the Registration of Titles Act, introduced
by Lord Chancellor Westbury,is now .making progress.
For myself I would beg to remark that having succeeded in bringing about
such beneficial results in the country in which I have been sojourning so
many years, I am naturally ambitious to see the advantages of my system
extended to my native country. This ambition (not, I hope, an ignoble one)
has induced me to incur the labour of drafting, and the expense of printing a
bill, which I now lay on the table, for applying it to all titles which pass
through the Estates Court. My friend Mr. Dix Hutton, an Irish barrister,
whom I am happy to call my coadjutor in this cause, has prepared a model
Record of Titles, with forms of contract adapted to the requirements of this
country, and exhibiting the application of the system in contrast to the
existing practice in an actual case of a complicated character.* lam willing
to continue to devote my time and energies to this cause, but the efforts of an
* Here the lecturer exhibited the title referred to, consisting of 29 deeds, comprising over
70,000 words, which required to be perused and examined with an abstract, and searches
made every time any estate or interest in the land, or in any fractional part of it, was dealt
with; and, in contrast to this, he exhibited the same title deduced under this system, and
comprised within seven lines of a printed form, requiring neither abstract nor searches, but
“per se,” evidencing indefeasible title.


individual can avail but little to overcome the powerful interests that will be
opposed to its passing into law. I would, therefore, borrow the language
used by the member for East Surrey, Mr. H. Drummond, in 1850, when
advocating a similar measure :—“ What I want the country gentlemen of
Ireland to understand is that it is their own business to deliver themselves
out of the hands of the attornies. You are an attorney-ridden people. If
you want to succeed you must follow the course which has ensured success
elsewhere. You must combine ; you must form associations throughout the
country; you must agitate; you must petition.”
Mr. Bolton Massey begged to move the first resolution—“ That the
thanks of this meeting are due to Robert R. Torrens, Esq., for his clear and
able exposition of the method of conducting dealings with land by registra-
tion of title, which is now in operation in the Australian colonies. He was
sure the meeting would cordially assent to that resolution (hear, hear).
Sir Richard G. Mac Donnell, K.C.8., said he was there that day inpur-
suance of what he might term a friendly subpoena from Mr. Torrens, because
having had the honour to administer the government of South Australia for
nearly seven years, during a period when Mr. Torrens’ Bill was the subject
of much discussion and agitation, until at length, he was happy to say, it
became the law, Mr; Torrens, naturally turned to him as one who, having
had to exercise his best judgment on the subject, and frequently to report
specially to her Majesty’s government in reference to it, might now appro-
priately during his accidental presence in Dublin give evidence as to the
working of the system of Title by Registration in Australia, and thence argue
as to the probable benefits which would follow its introduction into this country.
The simple machinery devised by Mr. Torrens for transferring land
had met the universal approval of the proprietors of the land, and of those
who had to deal with land, but had excited the dissatisfaction of others who
fancied they had a sort of professional lien upon land, and were entitled to
levy an exorbitant contribution on every transfer of land. However, in
spite of a great deal of opposition from the bar, and even from higher
quarters, the Bill passed, public feeling became allayed, the successful results
of the movement were proved beyond all doubt, and there was now no danger
of retrograde steps being taken.
Ireland, owing to the operation of the Landed Estates Courts, offered pecu-
liar facilities for the introduction of the system of transfer by Registration of
Title. Moreover, they should put aside altogether the “ad captandum” assertion
that laws facilitating the transfer of land might operate advantageously in a
new, but were inapplicable to an old, country, as human dealings and wishes
as to property were alike in both. Mr. Torrens, however, had reminded them
that it was not a new measure they were considering. The system that Mr.
Torrens had introduced in Australia, and desired to introduce into Ireland
bad been for centuries applied in several parts of Europe. . It had effected a
complete and peaceful revolution in South Australia, where he would venture
to say that there were wanting some facilities for its introduction, which
actually existed at that moment in Ireland. He alluded specially to the
marvellously accurate surveys of the country, which they already possessed—
incomparably beyond, any which existed in Australia—whilst there was no
clearer ground—no simpler title there, than the ground cleared, and the
titles conferred by the gigantic operations of the Incumbered and Landed
Estates Courts. It was the peculiar union in Ireland of those two fortuitous,
but harmonising circumstances, which render the application of the proposed


new system so easy in Ireland. He did not think the public had yet realised
the immense extent whereby the operations of those Courts had placed Ire-
land and Australia on an equality in all that regarded a clear space for the
introduction of a simpler method of dealing with land. He would, there-
fore, remind them that about thirty-six millions sterling worth of land, and
nearly one-fifth of the whole surface of Ireland, had been disposed of by
these courts. Now he put it to them as men of common sense, as Irishmen
anxious for the well-being of their country, would it not be a great pity,
when so sharp a remedy as the Incumbered Estates Court became necessary,
that permanent fruits advantageous to the country should not be made to flow
from it (hear, hear). Why should they not, if possible, get rid of the entan-
glements, the difficulties, the embarrassments, the costs, and the delays of a
system that was not entailed by any necessity, or by the act of God, and
which it was not out of their power to resist (hear, hear). He would ask
again, therefore, whether, remembering the throes of agony of Ireland which
made the application of that very sharp remedy necessary, they would de-
sire to gain no lasting advantage from the past, and if they would permit
a perverted ingenuity again to entangle the title of so much property which
had been freed from complication by Act of Parliament (applause). The
lapse of time was now operating on the titles to one-fifth of all the lands of
Ireland in a manner the direct reverse of the healing influence formerly attri-
buted to Time by their illustrious countryman Lord Plunkett. He had repre-
sented Time as coming with his scythe in one hand to mow down the muni-
ments of our rights, but holding in his other hand an hour glass from which
he metes out incessantly those portions of duration which render needless
the evidence which he sweeps away. In the case, however, of titles cleared
by Act of Parliament, the only operation of Time consisted in piling over
that which had been rendered clear, brief, and conclusive, the obscurity of
continually increasing complications, which seriously diminished the value
of property (hear, hear).
He would now ask them to consider for a moment the great advantage
possessed by Ireland in the ordnance survey of the country. No system
of Registration of Titles could work, in his opinion, unless each certifi-
cate of title could refer, for the extent and position _of every parcel of
land named therein, to the conclusive evidence of some impartial and com-
plete public map. Now, in Australia there was occasionally great difficulty
in dealing with property on account of the absence of ancient land-marks,
and the original defects of the first surveys. The difficulty of fixing the
boundaries of lands, which was the weak point in Australia, was the strong
point in Ireland (hear, hear). The Ordnance Survey of Ireland, the six inch
map, was admittedly one of the finest of topographical surveys ; and when
the 25-inch survey was completed Ireland would have one of the most per-
fect references that ever existed in any part of the world (hear, hear). So
wonderful indeed were the mere mechanical means adopted for ensuring
accuracy, where actual measurement was employed, that when 500 feet of
one of the measured bases —viz., that near Lough Foyle, in the North of
Ireland—were remeasured in presence of Sir John Herschel and Mr. Bab-
bage, it was necessary to use a microscope to detect any difference between
the original and the new measurement, whilst the error, if any, was less
than the third of the finest dot which could be made with the point of
a needle! He might also remind them that when calculations were worked
out through all the intervening triangles between the measured base on
Lough Foyle and that in England on Salisbury Flain—a distance exceeding
400 miles, —the length of the latter base, as computed by those calculations,
scarcely differed four inches and a-half from its length, as found by actual
measurement on the ground (hear, hear). Thus, they possessed in a fifth of


Ireland an equally clear ground as in Australia, and a far more accurate
survey to work with. What reasonable ground, therefore, could exist for
opposing the application of the proposed simple and easy system of dealing
with land to those estates, at least, which had obtained Parliamentary titles.
It only remained for those who were interested in land here to do as persons
similarly circumstanced had done in Australia—viz., insist on the proposed
Reform being conceded, and it would be conceded. It was true that he had
met some owners of land, who appeared to think that if facilities were gi\ en
for the transfer of land, estates would be broken up and new principles in-
troduced. Now, that was a mistake and misapprehension that should bo
cleared aw r ay. tie wished it to be distinctly understood that under the sys-
tem of Mr. Torrens not a single principle, not a single dealing with land was
introduced which was not at present known to the English law (hear, hear).
It was simply proposed to do what now cost much time and much money in
less time and for less money (hear, hear); and if any country gentleman
desired to take six months to do what might be done in six hours, and
wished to spend twenty shillings when one shilling would answer, why
he (Sir Richard M‘Donnell) would so far respect his ancient prejudices
as to decline arguing the question further with him (laughter).
He was sure the meeting would think it desirable that practical steps should
be taken. Let a committee be formed, and the Government requested to move
in the matter. As a preliminary step let the judges of the Landed Estates
Court, who had such experience of the dealings in land, give their opinions.
He was sure those judges must have witnessed with much sorrow and
chagrin the present state of the law, which entangled and overclouded all
they laboured to disentangle and make clear. The simple question was,
whether the system of Registration of Title, which Mr. Torrens had made to
work so well in Australia, was altogether inapplicable to Ireland; or if it be
applicable in part, and inapplicable in part, what are the objections, and
how were they to be met. He was certain that the eminent judges of the
Landed Estates Court would devote their time and attention to the subject
if it was brought before them; and he believed that such a reference would
have the happiest results. He begged to say that he seconded the resolution
with great pleasure.
The Lord Mayor having put the resolution, it was carried by acclamation.
Colonel Knox Gore—My Lord Mayor, my Lords and Gentlemen—Onr
able and lucid lecturer, supplemented by the practical and convincing speech
of Sir Richard M‘Donnell, has left those who come after, like myself, to
propose resolutions, very little to say ; yet I deem no apology necessary for
occupying your time for a brief moment in advocacy of a medium I believe,
in my conscience, of vital importance to Ireland, and to all classes in it; I
know the fact, that I have never held back from supporting, to the utmost
of my ability, any matter promising good to my country, will plead my best
excuse for my shortcomings. I shall endeavour very shortly to give the
impression the lecture has made on my mind, which, given in a few simple
"Words, as I am neither lawyer nor orator, may perchance come home to the
minds of country gentlemen like myself, and if so, I shall not have stood up
in vain.
No one can deny that the present state of Ireland calls for the anxious
consideration of every class. The mighty power of steam, bridging
over seas, annihilating time and space, with the action of free trade, has
placed the granaries of Ireland in competition with those of the wide world.
Ireland is in a transition state ; she must look to cattle, to flax, and to its
manufacture to maintain her position, but as agriculture is her only manu-


facture now, we must try by every means to develope the resources and
increase the production of the land. Ido not despond. When I compare
our climate, and even our soil, with prosperous Scotland, I find the balance
in our favour. I have walked over undrained and unimproved pastures this
autumn in Ireland, where a cow in six months will produce from her milk
a value of from £l2 to £l4 on an acre and a-half. lam sure our noble and
able lecturer on Syria would say our Green Isle could bear comparison with
that land of promise. What, then, my Lord Mayor and gentlemen, do we
want to carry out what is required P We want capital, with skill to direct
it, and energy and perseverance to apply it. See what this would accom-
plish for all classes. It would ensure to the landed proprietors a regular
payment of a fair rent; to the farmer, by a proper application by his land-
lord of capital to drain the land and improve the farms, a superior export
and position; and to the labourer, higher and regular wages. And as the
prosperity of the trader and shopkeeper is bound up with that of the pro-
prietors and occupiers of the land, they would rise together. The vital ques-
tion then arises, how is capital to be got to apply to the land ? The answer
is, make dealings with land easy, secure, and inexpensive. This cannot be
while the present system exists. The present state of the law, as applied to
landed property, is so bad that, I may say, it is admitted it must be changed,
and various propositions, reports of Royal Commissions, &c., have been made,
and actual legislation has taken place lately in England called Lord West-
bury’s Act. Hence it is all important that when a move is made it is made
in a right direction, and not in a wrong or insufficient one. This led our
lecturer to contrast the Registration of Title with the registration of deeds,
and I shall repeal, for it cannot be done too often, their essential differences.
Registration of deeds can only furnish a list of all the instruments affecting
the property, but cannot exempt the solicitor of purchaser or mortgagee from
the responsibility of examining every one of them, and this tedious, unsatis-
factory, and expensive process must be repeated every time the property, or
any part of it, is dealt with. One of the most able conveyancers in England,
Mr. Strickland Cookson, said before a Parliamentary Committee —“By the
system of conveyancing by deed with registration, title may be wrought out
as an inference, more or kss probable ; but it can never be demonstrated as a
fact.” In short, it has no actual existence. But in Registration of Title we
do not register the evidences that enable title to be wrought out as a probable
inference ; we register the title itself, which alone, and per se, is not the evi-
dence of, but the title itself. Each freeholder, when he succeeds to a pro-
perty, can for £1 get a fresh title, entirely unaffected by the acts of his
predecessors, which has hence ceased to be in operation.
Under registration of deeds, each estate, or interest in each piece of land,
is evidenced by all the deeds that for sixty years have been executed affecting
the entire land, and all the births, marriages, and deaths, of all the parties
who have succeeded each other. Conveyancing with registration of deeds
is a yoking of the living with the dead, as all expired leases, discharged
mortgages, and other defunct transactions are bound up with the existing
title, like a bag of dead men’s bones, which the existing proprietor must drag
about upon bis back (cheers.) In a case in the North of Ireland, a gentleman
wanting to sell had to investigate 161 acts, not one of which affected the part he
was interested in ; but under this system you must clear the title of everyon®
else in the various other parts of the estate before you can make title to your
own part; whereas, in registration of title, each estate, or interest in each
piece of land, is represented by one instrument, and one instrument alone,
which is cancelled when that estate or interest is discharged or expires.
The system as proposed by our talented and practical lecturer is not
a new one ; it has existed for centuries on the Continent of Europe, and we


ave here a noble foundation in the Landed Estates Court and Ordnance
Survey on which to erect our edifice of Registration of Title We have I
am happy to remark incidentally, most enlightened J ud
are anxious to meet the public requirements, as exemplified the other day
in the ordinary deeds to be printed. See what an advantage is this. As a
practical instance, I give a case of my own I bought an estate erfffv<> town-
lands. I wished to facilitate separate dealings with each of them, to have
a senarate conveyance, and I got six printed copies, with each stamped con-
veySce stamped® deed l the safe, I give one copy to my land
agent, another to my law agent, and I keep one myself m case I find it
exuedient to deal in any way with the laud. Now, a printed copy brings
conviction to any common sense mind, which nothing but an attested copy
could do if written ; and I would hesitate long bet ol- ® 1 P aid , fc * *. 5,
tested copies of the townlands in this estate. Besides, printing is
fSlTble, more durable, and less liable to fraud. _ As to the Ordnance Survey
it is the best public work that has been done m Ireland for a century, and
should be made good evidence of meres and bounds, which is easily done by
challenging the world for the meres and bounds, when you challenge the
world as to vour title in the Landed Estates Court.
Hear what the Times says of Registration of Title even under Lord West-
bury’s defective law (for he had not a Landed Estates Couit) . It is the d
lay fund expense, and annoyance which the present state of the law occasions,
which it is the object of the new system entirely to destroy, and accordingly
shows once the ordeal has been gone through, and the title is shown to be good
and duly entered on the register, all this delay, expense, and annoyance are
at an end The registered owner carries m his hand, written on one small
sheet of parchment, the certificate of his title, having attached to it a cei ti-
tled mapof the property, prepared by Colonel Leach. If he wantsto seli or
mort°'a*e, there are no abstracts necessary, no title to be made on it, and no
delay S the completion of the transaction. He may complete the whole
affair in a few hours, and for as many shillings as the same transaction under
the old system would cost pounds The operation of estlteof'the value
shown by what has actually been done. For instance, an estate of the value
of £3O 000 was registered and then sold by the registered owner, lhe only
ttl7requLd wa S °the production of the certificate of title, the conveyancer
writes a few lines, which are carried to the office, and the
ter in a few minutes. The new purchaser mortgages the property, and the
same simple process effectuates the charge. According 1
in such a transaction as this the seller and buyer would each have to solici
tor and conveyancing counsel, long abstracts of tit e wow months of
pared and delivered, requisitions would have been made, O Sd h“ve been
delay and commensurate cost, this part of the affa ~
finished But then the mortgaging affair would begin, and again there would
be the solicitor and counsel, more abstracts, more requisitions, more delay,
and more expense. It is gratifying to find, by actual experience, that the
system that introduces such a beneficial change m one of g P
ments of law, is capable of practical operation. The objections made to it
r Men^of^thcThighest legal position in England, such as Mr. Daniels,
Q.C., Mr. Webster, Q.C., give Mr. Torrens system their unqualified sup-
port, and speak of the favourable position Ireland is in to receive it. Some
people object to this system from the facility of encumbrancmg ; but when
there is a J power to encumber, the reckless will do so just as much under the
old as the new system; but when a prudent era arrives to some of these gen-
tlemen, the facility of disencumbering is much greater in the new system
than the old, and is so far in favour of those parties retaining their estates.


In conclusion, I earnestly fyope this great and important measure will not
be allowed to slumber after the resolutions I and others may propose are
passed and carried. In Scotland, where any measure fraught with the public
good is discussed and approved, a committee is appointed, the matter is
placed before constituencies and public bodies, members of Parliament are
enlisted in the cause, and it is carried by the union of fifty-three members;
the number for Scotland in the Imperial Parliament. Let us, then,
at the eleventh hour, take a leaf from our neighbours ; let us inaugu-
rate a new era for Ireland; let us, laying aside our unfortunate dif-
ferences of party and sect, unite as one man for the good of our
common country. We have 105 members, and, surely, if united, honest, and
persevering, they must succeed as well as the Scotch. My Lord Mayor, and
my Lords and Gentlemen, I have for thirty years been hoping for Ireland,
and hoping in vain ; but if I could believe the course I have sketched out was
about being inaugurated, I should not despair ere I pass away, though clouds
now darken the horizon, to see it brightening with the light of prosperity
and happiness, that at meredian height would show Ireland to the world
as a truth and vei’ity, the glory of all lands. I thank you for your kind
attention, and beg leave to move the following resolution—“ That it is highly
important to establish such a system of conveyancing as will render all
dealings with land easy, secure, and inexpensive.”
The Knight of Kerry seconded the resolution, and observed that he might
claim a hereditary friendship with Mr. Torrens, for their fathers were friends.
He might also claim a hereditary connexion with the measure under con-
sideration, because his father, during his long public life, took up this very
question, and, the advantage of public lectures to spread information not
being then in operation, he wrote repeated letters to the government on the
subject. He (the Knight of Kerry) believed that this country could claim,
as well as England, the privilege of being solicitor ridden He had as great
respect for the law as any man, but he certainly felt that some effective
remedy was required for the present system of conveyancing and of dealing
with land.
Tbe resolution having been adopted,
Sir John Gray said he had been requested to move the next resolution.
Some of the preceding speakers had apologised for trespassing upon the
patience of the meeting, and in following their example he assured the meet-
ing that he would occupy their time for only a few moments. He was not a
lawyer, and therefore he could not enter into any discussion as to the
mysterious words and forms now in use, which too often were used ap-
parently more to create fictions and conceal facts than to advance the
professed object in view (hear, hear). He did not, however, agree with
some of the remarks that had been made with respect to the atttorney
profession, whose members were amongst the most able and trusted of their
fellow-citizens. He felt that the attorneys were not to blame for the system
(hear, hear). It was not their fault that the laws had not long since been
amended. The attorneys were not the framers of the law —they were
professional gentlemen appointed under the courts—they were the officers of
the courts for carrying out the laws as they existed (liear, hear). If those
laws were not long since amended, the attorneys—of whom very few had
the honour of seats in the House of Commons—were not to blame ;it was
the landed gentlemen themselves who were to blame (hear, hear) —for not
a PPtyi n gl themselves practically to the subject, for not learning and studying
their own affairs, and trying to conduct those affairs with that effectiveness


to which he was now glad to see so many of them were endeavouring to
attain (hear, hear).
Not being, as he had already said, a lawyer, he would not enter
into the legal view of the question, but dealing with it rather as a com-
mercial man he would express the view which pressed upon his own mind.
If he or any gentleman present, or any commercial man wished to invest
£20,000 in the funds he had only to go to his excellent friend Mr. Boyle,
opposite, who would take a little piece of paper six inches square, and,
returning before twenty minutes would have elapsed, hand that paper to the
party, giving him a perfectly secure title to £20,000 worth of the national
stock (hear, hear). There was no possibility of defeating the title of the
owner. He had only to go to the bank of Ireland and sign his name in a
book accepting that title, when it became as indefeasible and secure as if all
the deeds that all the legal gentlemen of Dublin could draw up were resorted
to for that purpose (hear, hear). If a man wanted to invest £20,000 in
railway stock his friend, Mr. Boyle, could do it by a process equally easy—
equally as short, and equally as rapid as- the process just mentioned (hear,
hear). But if a man wanted to invest £20,000 in land, why it would take a
month before he could get it done, and, when it was done, what was his
position P The man who had £20,000 invested in government stock had
only to go to the Bank of Ireland, to the National Bank, or any other bank,
and say that he had that amount of stock—that he did not wish to alienate
it—that it was an investment for his family, but that he wished to borrow
money upon it, and that in less than twenty minutes he could get the £6,000
■or £B,OOO he wanted to borrow; and if, in the course of six months or a
year or two years, as the case might be, he was prepared to repay the sum
borrowed, why he could, in twenty minutes more, recover back his in-
defeasible title to his £20,000 stock (hear, hear). The process of investing—
the process of borrowing—the process of repaying, and the process of
getting back title were each effected in a few minutes, and the same
might be done with railway and other classes of funds (hear, hear). But
if a man desired to borrow money upon land—if he wished to get an
advance of money for a temporary purpose on land which he did not
desire to alienate—or if he did desire to alienate and get rid of a part of the
land, having more than his capital enabled him to conduct with effectiveness,
he could not do it without heavy cost, and vexatious delay and difficulty.
The mysteries then came into play, the difficulties started up and stared him
in the face at every step. He had to resort to his lawyer, and the lawyer
had to go over all the voluminous deeds to which the Duke of Leinster had
referred, and make searches besides. His Grace had, in fact, put the whole
case in a nut shell (hear, hear). He did not hesitate to say before that large
meeting—“ lam the owner of extensive estates largely encumbered, and the
mass of deeds I have is appalling to look upon” (hear, hear).
Recently he happened to have occasion, in connection with the Land
Securities Company, to discuss this very question with some of the leading
mercantile men and some of the ablest legislators and ablest lawyers in Lon-
don, and the difficulties they were now considering forced themselves at once
upon their minds. There was abundance of money. Two millions sterling
were subscribed, and ten times that amount ready to be lent through the
instrumentality of that company. Yet, if the Duke of Leinster went the
following day and said to his (Sir John Gray’s) friend, Mr. Ennis—Give me
to morrow, upon the security of my broad acres, £5,000 of the two millions
which are subscribed for the purpose of being lent upon landed estates,” the
answer would be, “ what is your title, my Lord Duke” (hear, hear). And
the Duke had himself assured them that day that the mass of deeds was so
appalling that if he wanted to produce them at the Land Banks it would


take one of his own bullocks to bring his title deeds to the Land Securities
Company (hear, and laughter), and when the title deeds were brought, Mr.
Ennis would find it impossible to read them, and though, as you all know, a
very able man, he could not understand them if he did (hear, hear). The
result would be the duke should take them back again and hand them over
to his lawyer. The lawyer would spend at least a month before he would be
able to make out an “abstract” of title, and when his grace brought the
“abstract” to Mr. Ennis, that gentleman, for the protection of his share-
holders, would have to hand it over to Messrs. Cantwell and Julian to verify,
and another month would necessarily be spent before the matter could be
brought into a condition which would enable Mr. Ennis to issue his fiat that
the title was good, and that the £5,000 might be lent upon the land offered
as security (cries of hear, hear). Now was that the proper condition for the
landed property of the country to be in (hear, hear) ? Why should not
landed property —the most secure of all property—the most stable of all
property —the most fixed and firm of all property —why should it not con-
stitute a fund of credit for the owner, as facile, as accessible, as easy transf'er-
rable as a fund in government stock, in railway shares, and in other classes of
public securities ? They had the landed gentry themselves to blame for its not
being so. The landlords had invested the land with a sort of mysterious sacred-
ness ; and they were afraid to touch that sacredness until they came to feel
the embarrassments it produced to themselves, and learned that in investing
land with that sacredness they were not only doing themselves an injury,
but also doing an injury to the country at large (hear, hear).
He was sorry to see that some were disposed to blame the attorneys for
this. In point of fact it was the system that was to blame, and now that the
eyes of the landed gentry were opened to the effects of the system, he hoped
that they would all put their heads together, and put their hands together,
and unite for a work of true reform which would benefit themselves, advance
the value of their properties some ten or twelve per cent., and render those
properties at all times a fund of credit for their use, upon which they could
raise money for temporary or permanent purposes, freed from the incubus
that now pressed upon them (hear, hear).
Before he concluded, let him place one point of contrast before them, sug-
gested by the very remarkable, and conclusive statement of the Duke of
Leinster/ Suppose another man, who hadno ancestral estates as the Duke has,
came to the Land Securities Company to get an advance of money. Take,
for instance, the case of a tenant-farmer whose family for generations occupied
the same farm. If such a man came to the Land Securities Company, and
having obtained an interview with Mr. Ennis, as they assumed the Duke to
have done, he might address the member for Athlone and say, “ Mr. Ennis, I
understand you have opened a Land Bank. The estate of my landlord will
be sold in the Landed Estates Court to-morrow, it is divided into 20 lots, and
lot 5 includes my farm and nothing else. The marketable value of that
farm, estimated by Griffith’s valuation, is about £1,200, but I have only
£6OO towards the purchase. The new purchaser may have, no knowledge
of me or mine. He will have none of those kindly sympathies that the old
landlords had with their tenants. When he comes in he will remove me and
ny family from their home, which I will never see again. Can you do any-
thing for me ? The land is to be sold to-morrow.” Why, in five minutes a
bargain would be struck between the tenant farmer and Mr. Ennis, and
on the next day the Land Bank agent would buy the lot in trust for
the tenant. He would take £6OO from the tenant farmer and advance
the other £6OO, allowing the man ten or twelve years to pay it up, and
that man would return home the owner in fee of the farm. Secure
in its possession as his own landlord, he would expend his capital upon that


property to draw forth the utmost fruitfulness of the soil, thus benefiting
not only himself and his family, hut the whole country around him (hear,
hear) How would they account for the difference between the mode of
dealing with the noble owner of large ancestral estates, with huge masses of
deeds, from which it would be requisite to deduce a title at great labour, cost,
and delay, and the mode of dealing with the tenant farmer P The difference
resulted from the fact that the tenant farmer proposed as security a clear
title, verified by a judicial tribunal —a simple title, a title stated on a small
piece of paper, a title plain and clear, freed from all past incumbrance, and
beginning anew, like a newly-settled account (hear, hear)..
It might be said that this agitation for a Registration of Title was
a sort of project to give to landlords new titles, valid titles, property
that in point of fact might belong to others. It was no such thing (hear,
hear). could be more unfair than to attempt to give to a landlord
a title which now he had not (hear, hear). In that respect he (Sir John
Gray) dissented from some expressions used by some of the gentlemen who
preceded him, which seemed to convey the idea that a new title was to
be created. To give a new title and to declare anew the title were two
whollv different things (hear, hear). It was an effort to ascertain, define,
and fix the title which Existed, and which was now sought to be deduced
from heaps of cumbrous deeds (hear, hear). Why the Landed Estates Court
would not give a new title. If land was put into court for sale, and the
title was investigated, the moment it was found that the title was bad, that
the land did not belong to the party seeking a declaration of title, the court
would refuse to pass the title ; it would give no new title (hear, hear). But
having investigated and examined —-having in every possible form and shape
tried to ascertain who the true owner was, and what his stake in the land
was—then that ownership was recorded, and the party had the record of his
real title, and not the substitution of a fabricated title (hear, hear). That
title once ascertained and recorded could, by a proper system such as de-
scribed, be always defined with certainty by a sort of debtor and creditor
account always showing the exact condition of the property, and if a large
number of mortgage transactions, including loans and repayments, accumu-
lated at any time, it would be obviously an advantage not only to cancel the
record of the debts when paid, but when cancelled to have a judicial declara-
tion of title again and a new registration of title, just as they had a new
transfer of stock at the bank, without any reference to past transactions, to
which new registration all future transactions would have reference. _
He would not at that late hour trespass further upon their attention, but
begged to conclude by moving, “ That the delay and expense incident to the
present system are peculiarly oppressive, as regards the sale of small proper-
ties, and as regards loans for short periods” (hear, hear).
Mr. Jonathan Pim said he felt great pleasure in seconding the resolution.
Practically he believed the delay and expense of the present system ren-
dered small loans unknown, and the sale of small properties almost unat-
tainable (hear, hear). It appeared to him that the Registration proposed by
Mr. Torrens might he compared to a ledger well kept by a good book-keeper,
clearly and intelligibly written up to the day, and showing the exact state
of the account (hear, hear). The present system, on the other hand, was
like that of a tradesman, who, on being asked for his account, spent a long
time in looking over separate memoranda of accounts not written up, and
at length handed you the result, which you took with a feeling by no means
sure of its correctness (hear, hear). Now, some legal gentlemen in Dublin
had said that Mr. Torrens’ system would not work well. But Sir Hugh
Cairns, one of the most eminent lawyers in England, expressed the follow-


ing opinion of that system:—“ lam well acquainted with the great debt of
gratitude which the Australian Colonies owe to Mr. Torrens for his services-
in connection with the introduction into the Colonies of a safe, simple, and
expeditions mode of transferring real property, and I should have been glad
to have had an opportunity of testifying my admiration of the earnest,
practical, and persevering manner in which he conducted to a triumphant
conclusion, against obstacles of no ordinary character, his great legal re-
forms” (hear). Mr. Torrens had received the thanks of the local parliaments
of the three Colonies of Australia, and also an address of thanks signed by
10,000 landowners in South Australia (hear). No doubt there was some
difference in the circumstances of Ireland and Australia; hut, by exercising
due caution, and carefully considering every point of danger, the new system
could he adapted to Ireland (hear). If they set about doing that with the
desire to succeed, there was no doubt whatever but Mr. Torrens’ system
could be made to work successfully in Ireland, It was asserted that mistakes
would occur under Mr. Torrens’ system. The same objection was also urged
against the Incumbered Estates Court when it was projected. But what
was the fact? Twenty millions sterling worth of property had passed
through that court without a single mistake occurring worth mentioning
(hear). The expense of making search to the title of-a small property worth
say £3OO or £4OO, often involved searches into the title of property worth
£IOO,OOO. In many instances, to avoid the terrible expense, the seller stipu-
lated that the searches should only go back to his own acts —that it might
be presumed he took after due determination a clear title, and when the pur-
chaser took land under such circumstances, it was always attended, of
course, with a certain amount of doubt. There was great difficulty at pre-
sent in getting the loan of money on land. A man who had £IO,OOO in-
vested in the funds could get a loan of £5,000 from any bank without
difficulty, hut if he sought to borrow £IO,OOO upon a fee simple estate unin-
cumbered, and the title to which he believed had no flaw, the bank would,
regard that estate as a thing not to be touched. In fact, at present the
banks would sooner have the personal security of a man in trade whose credit
was good, than the landed security of the first nobleman in the country
(hear, hear). The question of the Registration of Title affected the
commercial as well as the agricultural community, for the interest of
the one was interwoven with the interest of the other. Besides, almost
every trader had some leasehold interest either in land or house, and
must at some time have experienced the inconveniences and expense
which Mr. Torrens’s plan was intended to obviate. One hundred years
ago Frederick of Prussia adopted a system of Registering Titles to land,
and it operated greatly to the public advantage. He (Mr. Pirn) would read
an extract from a letter which his friend Mr. Hutton had received on the
subject from Dr. Zimmerman, who was a judge in Prussia, He said : —“ As a
Prussian judge, I have worked the system (Registration of Title) in my
judicial capacity, and, as owner of some freehold property in Prussia, I have
personally enjoyed the benefit of it.” Mr. Zimmerman then describes the
mode of proceeding for a sale of land, and for a mortgage, which are both
very similar to those under the Australian plan, concluding with the words,
“ I think it must be manifest that under such a system the public credit must
be enhanced more than threefold, in consequence of the great facilities in
dealing with real property.” He adds, “ the system has also given rise in
Germany, as well as in France, to societies formed for the purpose of advanc-
ing money on real property at a moderate interest, say 4 to 5 per cent. In
combination with many facilities given to the lender or owner, the capitalist
gladly hands over his money to these judiciously managed societies, and
receives his interest with the utmost promptitude and facility, while the


owner of the estate dealing with a society with a good capital, does not incur
the risk of his money being called in, and of his being put to new trouble
and expense.” Now, that was most important testimony (hear, hear).
The Landed Security Company recently formed acted on the same prin-
ciples as those societies referred to by Dr. Zimmerman. That company
would lend money on landed property, receiving ample security for the pay-
ment of interest and principal. The project was a very important one, and
likely to prove very useful to Ireland (hear, hear); but unless it could quickly
and easily ascertain the title to property, and be able with rapidity and
facility to conduct the dealings with land in connexion with it, results which
Mr. Torrens’s system would attain, the company would not be capable of
fully developing its usefulness (hear, hear). The importance of the question
under consideration was his apology for trespassing at such length upon the
meeting, and he now begged to conclude by seconding the resolution.
The resolution having been adopted,
Mr. Alexander Boyle moved the next resolution as follows :—“ That
the minute accuracy of the Ordnance Survey, and the indefeasible title given
by the Landed Estates Court, appear to this meeting to afford peculiar ad-
vantages to Ireland for the adoption of an improved system of conveyancing,
and that this meeting commends Mr. Torrens’s system of conducting dealings,
with land by Registration of Title to the careful consideration of the
government, and of the public generally.” He believed the system proposed
by Mr. Torrens would greatly facilitate the sale and transfer of land—
matters now attended with immense trouble and expense—(hear, hear).
The ground work for the introduction of the system was laid, and they had
now simply to carry out the details which worked so successfully in South
Australia (hear, hear).
Mr. Charles Halliday, in seconding the resolution, observed that he
was sure if the matter was properly brought before the legislature it would
receive every attention.
The resolution was passed.
Sir Robert Kane said—l have been requested to propose the following
resolution, “ That the movers and seconders of the resolutions be now ap-
pointed a committee, with power to add to their number, to carry out the
objects of this meeting.” He would not, at that late hour, trespass upon the
attention of the meeting at any length, but would briefly refer to two points
which appeared to him worthy of remark. It had been stated that the system
of Registry of Titles, as proposed by Mr. Torrens, might be suited to and
practicable in a new and unsettled country such as the Australian colonies,
but that its introduction into an old country like ours, where a complex
system of interest in land had been created, would be extremely hazardous,
aud that the system could not work. Mr. Torrens and Mr. Pirn had, how-
ever, explained that in many parts of the Continent of Europe a similar
system was in actual operation, and it happened to himself to be able to
observe its operation in Prussia, a country of very old civilization, where the
®?st complete social relations as to property should naturally be found. A
friend of his who had acquired by marriage landed property in Westphalia,
but who resided elsewhere in Germany, had arranged to sell it, and he (Sir
R* Kane) had the opportunity of observing the mode of transfer. It was
done in an office like the Transfer Office of the Bank of Ireland, and the


matter was as simple as would be the transfer of government stock here.
Of course the price to be paid had been previously agreed on.
The other point on which he wished to observe was the importance of
rendering the maps of the Ordnance Survey legal proof of boundaries.
This would not only increase the accuracy and simplicity of such proof, but
would immensely diminish the expense of surveys. He knew'a case where
a small revisionary interest was sold under the Incumbered Estates Court.
It was chargeable on a property of large acreable extent, and before it could
be sold a map of the whole property had to be prepared, and for this purpose
three surveyors were employed for more than three weeks and produced a
map apparently identical with the six-inch ordnance survey map, but
certainly not entitled to the same confidence. Yet, he was informed that
this survey cost £156, and the reversionary interest sold only for £520, out
of which the cost of the survey and other charges had to be paid, making a
very large hole in it. Of course, the cost of such a survey would not affect
so heavily a property of larger value, but it still illustrates how much would
be gained in simplicity and economy if the maps of the Ordnance Survey
were received as the legal evidence of such bounds.
Mr. William F. Littledale, in seconding the resolution, said that he
believed that a reform of the present system was absolutely necessary, but
he was not prepared to go the whole length of Mr. Torrens’ proposed plan;
and he had heard with much pleasure Mr. Torrens’ statement in his lecture
that he sought to have the entire subject referred to a committee for investi-
gation. He had the honor to be a member of the body of whom some
complaints had been made—the solicitors. However, Sir John Gray had
defended the solicitors, and shown that they were not the makers of the laws,
but merely the administrators of the laws, and therefore not responsible for
the present system (hear, hear). Now he believed that the solicitors, as a
body, were of opinion that any reform that was for the good of the public
would be found to be for their benefit also, and several members of his pro-
fession, to whom he had spoken, objected quite as much as the country
gentlemen to the present mode of payment by the length of the documents
(hear, hear). They held it to be most unsatisfactory that they should be
remunerated by the number of the words, and not for their skill and know-
ledge (hear, hear). There was no doubt that the present mode of payment
was unsound and demoralizing. He hoped to see his brethren come forward
and point out the objections they had to the system proposed by Mr. Torrens.
It should be remembered that Mr. Torrens’ plan did not compel titles to be
registered. Therefore, for many years, much land in Ireland would be
left uncovered by the system; and it would be necessary to consider
whether, in order to facilitate dealings with this land, the present system of
registry of deeds,-which was admittedly very defective, ought not to be
made as perfect and as simple as possible. His Grace the Duke of Leinster
had truly said that the present delay and expense were frightful. It was
quite sufficient to deter any person from ever raising a second loan on his
property if he could by any means avoid doing so. With regard to the
lessening of this expense, he believed that the principle which had been
found so sound by the mercantile gentlemen near him, namely, that of
“ small profits and quick returns,” was equally applicable to the business of
solicitors (hear). In conclusion, he would say that the Committee would
have to consider not only the advantages of Mr. Torrens’ system, but also
how it would work with respect to land not brought under it.
Mr. Charles Halid ay, in seconding the resolution, said—That to the
very able statements which had been made, he would only add that he felt


confident, if the subject were properly placed before the Legislature, it would
lead to enactments advantageous alike to landowners and the public. It is
scarcely possible to conceive that there could be any hesitation in adopting
s ome plan by which the transfer of land would be facilitated, after a plan
been sanctioned by which Government funds can be transferred from
hand to hand, without any registration whatsoever, in the bank books or
elsewhere.
On the motion of Mr. Benjamin Lee Guinness, the Lord Mayor left the
chair, and the Knight of Kerry was called thereto.
Mr. Guinness then moved that the thanks of the meeting be accorded to
the Lord Mayor for his conduct in the chair, and for the becoming manner
in which he had discharged all his public duties since his accession to office.
Captain Lindsay seconded the resolution of thanks to the Lord Mayor, and
expressed the gratification which he experienced in seeing so important a
meeting presided over by the chief magistrate of the city.
The Lord Mayor, in returning thanks, observed that he had already said
he came there to be instructed, and he was happy to state he had not been
disappointed. The able, lucid, and convincing address which they had just
heard brought conviction to the minds of all present, and he (the Lord Mayor)
hoped that the truths uttered that day would be borne on the wings of the
press throughout the length and breadth of the land. All classes depended
upon the prosperity of the agricultural class in Ireland, to which 36 per
cent, of the population directly applied itself, whilst in England and Scot-
land but 25 per cent, devote themselves to the cultivation of the land ; thus
showing that two-thirds of the population of this country, and only one-
fourth of the neighbouring countries, are engaged in agriculture. After
thanking the meeting for the compliment paid him,
The resolution was passed by acclamation, and the proceedings then
terminated.




