

LECT
EDUCATIONAL, SOCIAL, AND MORAL SUBJE
DELIVERED TO THE INMATES AT THE
| SMITHFIELD REFORMATORY INSTITUTE,
DUBLIN.
I BY JAMES P. ORGAN.
DEDICATED, BY EXPRESS PEM»SSION,
i .*■ ISxcelUncg,
S GEORGE WILLIAM FREDERICK, EARL OF CARLISLE, K.G.,
Zo/’<i Lieutenant General , am? General Governor of Ireland,
(| 4’ e - $ c -
vp “ - \
“ Parmn est improbos coercere poena, nisi probos efficias discipline.”
, | DUBLIN:
W. B. KELLY, 8, GRAFTON STREET,
V AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1858.
A \:




a .




LECTURES
EDUCATIONAL, SOCIAL, AND MORAL SUBJECTS,
DELIVERED TO THE INMATES AT THE
SMITHFIELD REFORMATORY INSTITUTE,
DUBLIN,
JAMES P. ORGAN.
DEDICATED, BY EXPRESS PERMISSION,
f&te Excellency,
GEORGE WILLIAM FREDERICK, EARL OP CARLISLE, ICG.,
1 "V.
Lord Lieutenant General , and General Governor of Ireland ,
fyc. fyc.
iiEßtCiv
- 1 *- -;Lil ,
“ Parum est improbos coercere poena, nisi probos sfflcjas discipline,- o-,
_ V c
DUBLIN:
W. B. KELLY, 8, GRAFTON STREET,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1858.




gthkation.
TO HIB EXCELLENCY
GEORGE WILLIAM FREDERICK, EARL OF CARLISLE, K.G.,
Lord Lieutenant General and General Governor of Ireland, sc.
On the twentieth day of February, Eighteen hun-
dred and fifty-six, your Excellency first did me the
honor, out of your great Condescension and regard
for the cause in which I was engaged, to attend a
Lecture, delivered by me to the men who were at
that period inmates of Smithfield. From that day
until the present your Excellency has been a most
constant visitor to the Institution, cheering by your
presence, encouraging by your approbation, and
strengthening by your evident and undoubted inter-
est in our success. I do not mean in my success, or
in the success of any officer in the Institution, but in
the success of men and officers ; because, as your Ex-
cellency knows, in Smithfield there can be no success,
no fulfilment of hope, in which men and officers are
not equal participators and equal workers.
Emboldened by the words of kindness which your
Excellency sometimes addressed to me, I had the
temerity some months ago to beg that you would
permit me to dedicate some of my Lectures, which I


was about to print, to your Excellency, and I dis-
tinctly stated at the time, that I should print none,
save those at the delivery of which your Excellency
had been present. To my request you acceded in
terms of kindness and encouragement.
The Lectures are now before your Excellency ; I
shall say nothing in excuse or apology for them ; you
know the men to whom they were addressed ; you heard
the Lectures, and I shall only say to your Excellency,
in the words of Milward’s Dedication of Selden’s
“ Table Talk” to Mr. Justice Hales :
“ In reading be pleased to distinguish times, and in
your fancy carry along with you the when and the
why, many of these things were spoken ; this will
give them the more life, and the smarter relish/’
It is possible the entertainment you find in them
may render you the more inclinable to pardon the
presumption of
Your most obliged and
Most humble Servant,
JAMES P. ORGAN.
Smithjield Reformatory Institute ,
New Year’s Day , 1858,


PREFACE.
TO THE
FIRST OF THE ANNUAL SERIES OP LECTURES,
Delivered at the Smithfeld Government Reformatory
Institution, Dublin.
There is no fallacy more common than one which
leads the great mass of mankind to assume that
the vast majority of criminals are different from other
human beings. During the twelve years before the
date of my appointment as Lecturer at the Smithfield
Reformatory. I had been constantly engaged as a
teacher of adults, and during my experience of Smith-
field, I have not been able to discover that the ordi-
nary class of well-conducted convicts are in any
respect, in mind, morals, passions or feelings, inferior
to the generality of those of their class in life whom
it was my duty to instruct before I became connected
with the Convict Service.
He who would become a lecturer to convicts (or
indeed to persons of any class ) must bear two par.
ticulars in mind :—first, that being men, they
must not be talked down to, or treated as child-
ren ; second, that they must never for one moment
perceive, that when once received into the highest class
of good-conduct men, they are ever suspected of


falsehood or dishonesty. If, indeed, the person who
lectures, could adopt that plan which distinguished
Dr. Arnold’s management of Rugby School, and
induce the men to believe, as he induced his boys to
believe, that the possibility of their telling a falsehood
could never enter the mind of the lecturer, an amount
of good, impossible of conception to those unacquaint-
ed with the character of prisoners, would be the conse-
quence.
I would beg every person, teacher and lecturer,
to remember that he is not placed in his position for
the sole purpose of teaching men to spell, and cal-
culate, and write, and answer ;he has a higher duty
to perform, and which is, that whilst imparting School-
teaching to those under his charge, he should rnakehim-
self thoroughly and throughly acquainted with every
phase of their minds, and with every shade of their
dispositions. He should learn their past lives, their
hopes for the future, their joys and sorrows, their
desires and their aspirations, and aid them in carrying
out every reasonable hope of advancement and suc-
cess in that new life which shines before every prisoner
who longs hopefully and with a reformed mind, for
the throwing open of the prison portals.
If the prison lecturer or teacher, is unwilling to,
or incapable of, undertaking this task and facing these
toils, he is unworthy of his office, and may be a curse
where he should be a blessing
Prison teachers and lecturers may say that I ask
them to do that which is not their duty, and for


which they are not paid ; I have heard this cry over
and over again, and it always reminds me of a pas-
sage in Dean Swift’s Instructions to Servants. The
Dean is pointing out to the footman how not to do
his duty towards his employer, and he writes :—“ If
your master shall say to you, ‘ John, the stable door
is open, shut it/ you may say, ‘ Please your honor,
I don’t understand horses.’ ” Precisely in this J-don’t-
understand-horses-style of self-excuse from hard
work and from right work, do those prison teachers
and lecturers seek to exonerate themselves, who de-
clare that any work coming within their sphere is not
their work, because it may not be precisely within the
letter of those duties, for the discharge of which they
are paid. Putting of till to-morrow, what may be
done to-day—putting off till we are paid for the doing
of that which we see could be usefully done, will
always recoil injuriously upon the work of him who
acts thus, even though he should blind himself with
the poor, lazy plea, of good intentions.
Hell, we are told, is paved with good intentions ;
but there is a grand and a brave moral in the late
Archdeacon Hare’s gloss upon this saying, “ Pluck up
the stones, ye sluggards, and break the devil’s head
with them.”
If the lectures comprised in this volume shall be
found useful to men holding such an office as I hold,
my best wishes and hopes will be completely fulfilled
These Lectures will be found to exhibit neither learn-
ing nor eloquence, as my intention in preparing them


was to draw my hearers up to the level of the
ordinary comprehension of industrious mechanics,
and to afford them matter for thought. Their wonder
I easily excited, because, as Dr. Johnson tells us,
“ All wonder is the effect of novelty upon ignorance f
and having excited their wonder, I showed them how,
through books, they might gratify it, and having once
opened to them the gorgeous panorama which books
unfold, I found that they required no spiriting to
urge them onward in the pursuit of knowledge, com-
mensurate with their intellects, and compatible with
their tastes.
My great object was to talk to them, rather than
at them, as is the great error with those who lecture
to this class, and I have never found that when once
we had got to understand each other, my audience
and myself differed in our appreciation of the subject*
or in a community of interest and feeling on the topic
upon which we were engaged.
I do not offer these Lectures as models or as speci-
mens. I present them merely as records of subjects
which have instructed and interested Irish Convicts,
and may, perhaps, contain hints to men, holding a
position like mine, for topics which may instruct and
interest convicts, in other portions of Her Majesty’s
Dominions.
JAMES P. ORGAN.


AIR.
It is to be very much regretted that in this enlightened
age men should be found so ignorant of the nature of
many important things, with the names of which they
have been familiar from their very infancy, but into the
great utility of which they never thought of inquiring.
Who is there that has not heard of air ? yet how very few
know what it is, or how necessary it is to the existence of
every living thing, from man, the head of the creation,
down to those insects so small, that a drop of water to
them is a world as great as the globe we inhabit is to us.
And again, in the vegetable world, air is as necessary to
the tiniest blade of grass which grows, as it is to those majestic
trees that contribute so much to the beauty of nature, and
confer innumerable benefits and comforts on man.
We can live for a time without food ; for a longer time
perhaps without clothes ; but not for a single instant with-
out air.
Asleep or awake we equally require air to support our
lives, but, unlike all other things given unto us by a good
and bountiful God, we cannot take it in quantities such as
we wish or when we wish, it being given to us at all times
with a regularity and constancy that clearly bespeak the
great care of Providence for his creatures—and ungrateful
and unthankful creatures too.
Now as air is so necessary to your existence, I am sure
you would like to know something more about it than you
do just at present. Well, if you pay attention to me, I think
I shall be able to make you understand some of the principal
facts connected with this interesting subject, which it is desir-
able that every one should know, and while giving you useful
information, let me also hope I shall be able to show how
good God is, and how bountifully he deals out those bles-
sings so necessary to the comfort and happiness of man.
1


Respiration. —Air is constantly entering into and leaving
the lungs of animals, and this coming in; and going out,
of air, is termed Respiration, or, as you call it, “breathing.”
We take the air into our lungs by expansion, and we force
it out through our mouth and nose by means of the action
of the chest called compression ; you are all well acquaint-
ed with that common household article, a hand-bellows;
you must have observed how the air rushes in when the
boards forming the top and bottom are drawn apart, and
how it is forced out through the pipe when they are again
pressed together; well, the opening out and pressing in of
these parts of the bellows will furnish a good notion of
what is meant by expansion and compression, and the
operation of breathing or respiration is nothing more.
Now though the air taken into the lungs remains there but
a moment, yet it undergoes a very great change in that
short time, by which all the nourishment required for our
bodies is obtained : for it is to the effect produced in that
brief period that the blood, so necessary to the maintenance
of life, owes the entire of its sustaining qualities. But the
air, on leaving the lungs, differs very much from what it
was when entering them, so much so that, if we were to
inspire it, that is, to take it into our lungs many times, it
would deprive us of life; you can see from this how dan-
gerous it is to breathe the same air several times, how easily
it is corrupted, and the necessity there is for keeping up an
abundant supply of it in its purest and freshest form.
Air Material. —The air being very light, and in calm
weather offering so very little resistance as we move through
it, one is apt to think that it possesses no substance; that,
in fact, it has neither length, breadth, substance, or weight,
that it is nothing. Well, I should tell you that men
cleverer and more learned than any of us, thought
so too; but these persons lived some thousands of
years ago, long before the birth of our Lord, and are, on


that account, called ancients. The opinions of these men
have been proved by others living in modern times to be
very wrong, for the latter have clearlyshewn that air consists
of no less than four very curious substances blended toge-
ther, but in such a way that it is only the great Creator
himself could have contrived it.
Weight and Momentum. —l have not told you what these
substances are of which the air is composed, but I shall do
so by and by. Of course you will take for granted that what
I say at present is entirely true; namely, that air is a
compound substance, that is, made up of more things than
one. Now, anything so made up is said to be material,
that is containing matter of some sort, and you will re-
member that anything material must have weight. Well,
air being a material substance must have weight, and so
it has, and very great weight too, though it appears to you
and to me very light indeed.
Have you not heard of very huge trees and very large
houses being blown down ? You all say you have, and many
of you, I dare say, have seen them after having been blown
down. If you were asked what blew them down you
would at once say the wind, and you would be quite right
in saying so. But do you know that wind is nothing more
or less than the air, that seems to you so light, put in
motion. Must it not strike you that if air had no weight,
no matter how quick its motion, it could never have uproot-
ed trees, laid waste large districts of country, and brought
to the earth castles and dwellings of enormous size and
solidity ?
How Weighed . —l think you must find very little difficulty
from what is here stated in believing, and of course
understanding too, that air has weight: but you may very
naturally say to me, how can its weight be known ? This
is a question very easily answered, and if you pay
attention to me I think I shall explain it to your satisfaction.


Before I attempt to tell you how air is weighed, I must
first see if you know what is meant by solid or cubic mea-
sure.
[Here I proceed to examine, and at the same time
explain to those who know nothing of it, what is meant by
cubic measure. I find very little difficulty in making my
audience understand the three kinds of measures, viz.,
lineal, square, and cubic, being provided with a simple,
but effective apparatus, a box of solids, for the purpose to
which I take care to draw particular attention.]
Now that you understand what is meant by cubic mea-
sure, and that a cubic or solid foot of anything must measure
a foot in length, a foot in breadth, and a foot in depth or
thickness, I think you will understand what I am about to
tell you as to the way in which air is weighed. It has been
proved by men whose authority the world respects, that a
glass flask, or bottle containing a cubic foot of air, weighs
something more than an ounce heavier with the air in it
than with the air out of it.
This has been shown in so simple a manner that the dullest
can understand it—a bottle is provided with a cock of peculiar
construction called a stop-cock on the top of the neck, say,
and by means of a syringe the air in the bottle is pumped out,
(just as you would take water from a vessel with an ordinary
syringe.) When the air is removed the stop.cock is closed,
and the bottle or flask as I have told you is found to weigh
over an ounce less than what it weighed when the air was
in it. Is this not a very simple and practical proof that
air has weight ? Is there any man amongst you who can-
not understand it ? If there be, let him say so, and I
shall be happy to go over the explanation again and again ;
for, if every man does not understand what I say, he can
derive no benefit from this or any other lecture or discourse
delivered by me, and if this be the case, the men are deceiv-


ing themselves and me, by pretending that they understand
and value what I say.
Weight relative to that of water. —Well, I am inclined to
believe that you all comprehend me so far, so I shall proceed
with my subject. A cubic foot of air, I have just stated, weighs
more than one ounce, indeed I might say one ounce and a
quarter. Now a cubic foot of water weighs a little more than
997 ounces, so it would be found by calculation, if we had
time to make such, that water is nearly 773 times heavier than
air. It is stated that 36 cubic feet of water weigh a ton,
if so, 773 times 36 cubic feet of air will weigh a ton. which
would be about 27820 cubic feet of air, an important fact
which you will do well to remember.
The Atmosphere. —Having made these remarks upon
air, I shall proceed now to speak of the great atmosphere
itself, which is nothing more or less than the entire mass
of air that surrounds the world, to a height of nearly fifty
miles. If it were water that surrounded the globe, as air
does, would not the pressure of it on the earth be tremen-
dous ? for you know how much heavier water is than air.
The pressure of the atmosphere is very great, nevertheless
we are not injured by it, for reasons to be presently
stated.
One single fact will show you the great weight of the
atmosphere. Hold your hand out before you, mark
upon it what you think to be about a square inch. Now
the weight of the atmosphere even on so small a part of
the surface of your body is equal to 151b5., or 11b. more
than a stone weight, for that square inch supports a column
of air nearly fifty miles in height.
Pressure. —Before I can proceed further with this simple,
but important subject, I must tell you that air is a fluid,
but of such a nature that we cannot see it. It has no
colour, at least that can be seen with the naked eye ; and


of all known transparent bodies, that is those, which we can
see through, such as glass and water —it is the thinnest
and most transparent.
Now you must bear in mind that any pressure a fluid
puts forth or exercises on any thing coming in its way is
scattered oyer the whole object in every possible manner,
so that instead of its weight falling right down upon the
upper surface of anything under it or in it, as you might
suppose, it presses as much under the object as over it and
as much one side as on the other; in fact on every part of
the surface the object receives the same weight or pressure.
Perhaps you can understand me better by my telling how you
yourselves might prove the truth of what I say, Get any
number of empty bottles you wish and cork them well;
before corking them, put a sufficient weight in each so as
to make it sink in the water. Put them in the water, the
neck of one upwards, the neck of another downwards, the
neck of another horizontal, and so on in every direction you
can possibly think of, and after they have sunk to a certain
depth, you will find that the corks of all will be forced in,
and every bottle filled with water. And remember that the
cork of each bottle is forced in exactly at the same time,
and that the force that drove in any one cork in any one
bottle is in every case of equal power.
Thus it is seen that the pressure of water acts equally, and
at the same time in every direction. You can clearly per-
ceive from what I have said that a fish, or any other living
thing in the water, receives the pressure of that element as
much on the upper part of its body as on the lower, and as
much on the sides as on any other part of it.
It is to this grand property of fluids, this grand token of
the wisdom of Him who made all things, must be attributed
the fact, that animals can exist on this earth or in the waters of
the deep. What I have said of water applies to air and all sub-


stances in a fluid state. If the pressure of air did not exercise
an equal force in every possible direction on every part of the
surface of anything exposed to it, and at the same time,
who or what could live upon the earth ? What a great
load a ton weight is for some of the strongest animals to
draw ? What destruction it would cause, if at this moment
a ton weight of iron were to fall amongst us ? would it not
kill many of us ? nay, crush us to atoms ; aud yet by the
wise provision of God, the helpless new born babe supports
a far greater pressure at the first moment it sees the world.
It is on account of this property of the air that each and
every one of us is able at this moment to support a pressure of
nearly 14 tons without feeling the least inconvenience or
pain. Which of you here present does not wonder at this ?
Who is there that meditates on the power of God displayed
in his works, but must be terrified at bidding defiance to
his law ; —to laws made for the good, and for the benefit of
all mankind. Who, again, let me ask, can cast his eyes
towards Heaven, and behold the glorious sun by day, or the
million stars by night, without being moved to amazement,
if not to gratitude, at the works of Him who gave those
things for the use and benefit of ungrateful man ? Oh ! were
it not that his mercy is greater than his works, what would
become of us? But let us not dwell too much on this.
No, let us rather wonder how we could be permitted to
encroach so far on his patience, and while we thus wonder
at his mercy, let us remember with St. Augustine, that
“ God is patient because he is Eternal,” and let us endeavour
to reach those regions, where the beauties of the works, and
the splendour of the divine workman, will be unveiled to
our eyes.
Why bodies are not crushed by the air. —Now I know it
appears very strange that we are able to bear unhurt such
an immense weight as that I have just mentioned to you,
for such a pressure as lolbs on every square inch of sur.


face is greater perhaps than yon can just now imagine.
Let us see how it is that we are not crushed to atoms by
the immense weight of 14 tons, pressing on our bodies.
You remember my telling you that we take in air by means
of our lungs, and that air, like every other fluid, presses
on any object exposed to it as much one way as another.
Well, of course, you know that the blood in our veins is
a fluid, and you also know that the air taken into our bodies
enters into the lungs, and into every little opening or aper-
ture let it be ever so minute, for it fills all space.
When the blood comes in contact with the freshly in-
haled air, of course it is exposed to its pressure like every
thing else, and as the pressure must act from the inside, the
blood must be inclined to force its way outside, and so it
would were it not that the same force which tends to
drive the blood in an outward direction from within was
also pressing against it from without, namely, the air, for
you know I proved to you that all fluids press equally and
at the same time in every direction.
The blood which fills the veins in our bodies, is exposed
to the pressure of the air, just the same as the outward
surface of our bodies. Entering our bodies through our
lungs, as you are already aware, filling up every portion
inside, and causing the fluids in the interior of the
body to send the pressure all over it, communicating
to it, by this means a tendency to press outwards, and
this pressure is equal in every respect to that from the air
without. In fact, it is the same and caused by the same
agent, the air.
Cupping Glass. —If you listen attentively for a few
moments, I think I shall be able to show you more clearly
that it is in consequence of the inside and outside pressures
being identical that we do not feel any inconvenience from
the great pressure of the atmosphere. You have all heard of
people being cupped for different diseases. Now the opera-


tion of cupping is effected by applying the mouth of a cup
to the surface of the body, and withdrawing the air from
within the cup, thus removing all external pressure from
that part, taking care of course that all communication
with the air without is prevented. When this is done the
effects of the pressure from within will be clearly seen at
once, as it is not resisted by the pressure of the air outside.
The skin covered with the glass swells up, and in this state
the cupping instrument is applied to the skin, and causes
the blood to issue out at once, an effect which is of course
owing to the pressure of the fluid within.
Thus you see how wonderful and yet how simple are the
wise provisions of God for his creatures.
Compressibility of Air. —Air is capable of being pressed so
as to occupy smaller and smaller space just the same as if you
were to press bran or any such substance in a tub. Heat also
readily changes it from thick to thin.
Indeed it is to this property of air that the draft always
observed at a fire place is due ; for the air about the grate
is made thin and light by the heat of the fire, and con-
sequently must ascend, so it rushes up the chimney and
makes its way out every way it can, and then the cold and
heavier air rushes in to supply its place, which becoming
heated in its turn ascends also, and the constant rushing in
and out of the air causes the draft. Now you will be
surprised to hear that on the very same principle are the
winds of Heaven carried on ; but I shall explain this more
fully hereafter.
When I told you a while ago that there is a pressure
of 151bs of air on every square inch of surface, I should
have told you that this is only the case when we are so
near the earth as we are at present; for in this situation
we receive on every square inch of the surface of our
bodies the weight of a column of air having a square inch


for its base ; and that column is said to be from 40 miles
to 50 in height, this being the height of the whole atmosphere,
or the air which surrounds the globe. Now it is evi-
dent that as we ascend into the air this column of air
must get shorter; the same bulk becomes also proportion-
ately lighter and consequently its weight must grow less ;
so it does, and hence the pressure of air on the top of high
mountains is much less than at the base. Persons who
ascend a great distance into the air suffer from its great
lightness, and sometimes the same effects are produced on
them as those which result from the cupping glass which I
have already described. Noise is heard in the ear, small
air vessels burst, and frequently blood issues from the nose
and other portions of the body.
Composition. —At the commencement of the lecture you
may remember I told you that air was made up of several
ingredients, but I did not say then what these ingredients
were.
I must do so now, as I think I cannot well proceed
without making you acquainted with them.
It may seem strange to you that an invisible substance—
such as the air is, can be taken, examined and divided into
other substances, yet the operation is quite easy and simple,
and if we had here the proper means for making the experi-
ment, I could prove to your full satisfaction that it is not
more difficult to separate from each other the different airs
or gasses as they are called for the sake of distinction, of
which the “ air we breathe” is composed, than it is to
remove the dross from gold, or silver, or any other ore.
These airs or gasses are found to be principally two ;
oxygen which signifies acid-maker, and nitrogen, which
means nitre-maker, and because every 100 gallons of
common air contain about 20 gallons of the first and
about 80 of the last mentioned gas, it is sometimes re-


garded as consisting of these two alone, which is by no
means the case. The air contains several other substances,
though in very small quantities, two only of which we
shall now notice, as they perform most important parts in
the “ economy of nature,” that is the skilful management
which appears in all the works of the wise Creator, by which
every want of the creature is supplied, and every means
provided to maintain and continue it in
these two substances are carbonic acid and water in the
state of vapor. Now the four substances we have men-
tioned are found blended together in the air in all places.
For there is a law, as it were, by which gasses are
regulated, and which it will be well to recollect, and that
is, though they be of very different weight, the moment
two of them are brought together, far from the heavier one
falling to the bottom as water does when poured on oil, they
begin slowly to unite with each other till they become
completely and thoroughly mixed.
We shall now proceed to examine their qualities or
“ properties ”as they are called, and their uses. Recollect
now the names of these gasses—Oxygen, Nitrogen and
Carbonic Acid—l repeat them, the better to fix them on
your memory. Nitrogen is the first of these that demands
our attention, as there are four times as much of it in the
air as there is of Oxygen, though it is Oxygen that supports
animal and vegetable life, as well as combustion—
that is, it is the presence of this gas that causes substances
to burn and show light, such as fire, gas, candles, &c., &c.
Oxygen and Nitrogen gas have neither colour, taste nor
smell. The nature of these gasses widely differs; for
instance, if a candle or any blazing substance were placed
in Nitrogen gas, it would immediately go out, and if an
animal were introduced into this gas its life would in.
stantly pass away. Now with Oxygen the contrary is the


case, all substances that burn in the common air will burn
more brilliantly and more rapidly in Oxygen. The least
spark on a piece of wood or any other substance is imme-
diately turned into a flame, the moment it is put into a
vessel containing Oxygen gas. The absence of Oxygen for
a moment would cause instant death. It is heavier than
either Nitrogen gas, or the air around us, but indeed very
little, as you will learn from their respective weights which
are as follows :
100 Cubic inches of Oxygen weigh 34j grains
100 „ „ „ Nitrogen „ 30£ „
100 „ „ „ Common air 31 „
Carbonic Acid Gas. —lt may be more difficult perhaps to
remember the name of the other gas, that is the Carbonic Acid,
but I cannot help this. If I could give it a new name I
would, and a very simple one too : I should call it the
killing gass. This gas is what remains after the Oxygen
or life-surporting gas has united with a portion of the
substance burned in it. Listen to me now while I give
you an example of what I mean. Suppose I had a jar of
Oxygen gas before me at the present moment, and I threw
a piece of lighted charcoal into it (this is a piece of char-
coal which I hold in my hand) the charcoal will, as I
have told you just now, burn very rapidly and very
brightly, but, after a little, it will burn with less and less
brightness, until it at last goes out. Now instead of
Oxygen being in the jar when the charcoal goes out, or is
extinguished, we will find it to be Carbonic or life destroying
gas ; and if a lighted candle or any lighted substance be
placed in it, it would immediately go out. This gas is
heavier than Oxygen; it is most destructive to life, and
therefore unfit for respiration, and is produced by the
burning of fire, candles, lamps, and so on. That pro-
duced by the fire in our rooms does us no harm, as it


escapes up the chimney; but that produced by th churning
of lamps and candles finds its way up to the top of the room,
and there floats about the ceiling, and if provision is not
made for its escape, it will descend and mix again with
the air about us, poison it, and consequently render it
most destructive to health. You see therefore how neces-
sary it is to have some place towards the top of the room
through which this gas may escape —all public buildings
have, and you should see that something is done about it also
when you return once more to your own humble and I trust
happy homes. When you are providing for the let-
ting in of good and the letting out of bad air, you are
said to provide for the ventilation of the house or room as
the case may be; and to know how to do this effectually
at all times is a most necessary and important branch of
knowledge. There are very few substances which do not
contain Carbonic Acid gas. Soda water, ginger beer, and
even water itself, contain this gas. By boiling water we
drive away this gas, and it is the absence of this gas,
that gives boiled water its very insipid taste, while its
presence gives to many liquids a pleasing and sometimes a
pungent or acid taste.
This gas sometimes floats about the bottoms of old wells,
and again, the earth itself gives it forth in many places in
such abundant quantities as to produce most destructive
effects. Its fatal qualities are tested by showing that
small animals let down into the low situations where it
abounds instantly die. The following interesting account
of the Poison valley, in the island of Japan, by an eye-wit-
ness, will elucidate what I state :
We took with us two dogs and some fowls to try experiments in
this poisonous hollow. On arriving at the foot of the mountain, we
dismounted and scrambled up the side about a quarter of a mile,
holding on by the branches of trees. When within a few yards of the


valley we experienced a strong, naueous suffocating smell, but on com-
ing close to its edge, this disagreeable odour left us. The valley
appeared to be about half a mile in circumference, oval, and the depth
from thirty to thirty-five feet; the bottom quite flat: no vegetation;
strewed with some very large (apparently) river stones, and the
whole covered with the skeletons of human beings, tigers, pigs, deer,
and peacocks, and all sorts of birds. We could not perceive any
vapour or any opening in the ground, which last appeared to us to be
of a hard sandy substance. It was now proposed by one of the party
to enter the valley ; but at the spot where we were, this was difficult
at least for me, as one false step would have brought us to eternity,
seeing no assistance could be given. We lighted our cigars, and,
'with the assistance of a bamboo we went down within eighteen fee*
of the bottom. Here we did not experience any difficulty in breath"
ing, but an offensive nauseous smell annoyed us. We now fastened
a dog to the end of a bamboo eighteen feet long, and sent him in >
we had our watches in our hands, and in fourteen seconds he fell on
his back, did not move his limbs or look round, but continued to
breathe eighteen minutes. We then sent in another, or rather he got
loose, and walked into where the other dog was lying. He then
stood quite still, and in ten minutes fell on his face, and never after
moved his limbs ; he continued to breathe seven minutes. We now
tried a fowl, which died in a minute and a half. We threw in ano-
ther, which died before touching the ground. During these experi-
ments we experienced a heavy shower of rain ; but we were so
interested by the awful sight before us, that we did not care for get-
ting wet. On the opposite side, near a large stone, was the skeleton
of a human being, who must have perished on his back, with his right
hand under his head. From being exposed to the weather, the bones
were bleached as white as ivory, I was anxious to procure this
skeleton, but any attempt to get it would have been madness.
It may be well perhaps to tell you that this gas is some-
times met with at the bottom of wells, shafts of mines, and
like situations, where it receives the significant title of
choke-damp. This gas is, as I have already stated, much
heavier than air, and can be poured like water or other
fluids from one vessel into another; but when it comes in
contact with another gas it mingles with it, notwithstand-


ing its weight; for all gases, as I told you before, mingle
with each other no matter what may be their difference of
weight.
Though the quantity of Carbonic Acid in the “ air we
breathe is very small, say about two gallons in every
5000; there are times in the year in which it abounds
more than at others. In Autumn, if we take a walk
through groves or plantations, after the fall of the leaf,
we must inhale quantities of this gas ; because the decay-
ing of any animal or vegetable matter produces it abun-
dantly. And here I may observe that every time we
breathe, we give out large portions of this gas, thereby
corrupting the atmosphere around us; so you see how
prejudicial to health it must be to remain in a crowded room,
where proper precaution is not taken to permit it to escape;
in fact each individual has the same property of corrupting
the air, as a large candle, or lamp ; and the result is still
worse, if the room be lighted by artificial means ;
for then these lights and the persons in the room unite
in producing such quantities of this very noxious and
destructive gas as very soon to render the air of the
room quite unfit for respiration. There is a great mistake
very frequently committed by persons as regards the
manner in which they allow this gas to escape, and even by
persons from whom we would be inclined to expect
better.
Now I shall just explain to you what I mean in such a
way, and by such an example, that you must understand
it at once.
There are very few of you who have not been one time
or other at what is commonly termed a party. As the
night advanced, and dancing went on, you of course began
to feel the room 'eery close and breathing somewhat difficult;
these were the effects of the presence of Carbonic Acid


abundantly produced by the respiration of the persons
present, and the burning of the candles. This is even still
more insupportable if persons are collected in a wake-
room : for the corpse the moment decay sets in gives out
this gas in copious quantities. Some persons think, that by
raising or letting down the window, they will prevent any
evil consequences which might occur—but it is no such thing;
as the air let in is of course much colder than that already
in the room, and the result is, that persons by exposing
themselves to the sudden current thus produced, receive a
chill which drives back into the blood moisture that should
be allowed to escape, and thus subject themselves to many
diseases such as colds and fevers, which very often end in
death.
Thus you see how necessary it is to have a little know-
ledge of these things, as it may be of the greatest service
to us at some future time, and thus also you will understand
how important it is that we should see, wherever we are, be
it in the cell of the prison or our own humble home,
that it be properly ventilated.
Colour. —The air, though it appears to us colourless, is,
strictly speaking, of a bluish colour. To see this we must
look through a vast quantity of it which learned men call
a volume, and in the day time too, when it is lighted up as
it were by the rays of the sun. Mountains far off frequently
appear blue, but this is really the colour of the air between them
and the observer—for all practical purposes, we may say
that the air is colourless and transparent, that is, that we
can see through it.
But as Carbonic Acid gas possesses such very dangerous
qualities, it may be asked, would it not be a better arrange-
ment if the common air were entirely free of it? lat once
answer, no, and shall tell you why. You recollect what I
said about oxygen gas a few minutes ago, and amongst


other things that it afforded to man and the lower animals
the most necessary portion of their nutriment. Well then,
the vegetable was to be consulted for as well as the animal,
and mark now, the animal could no more exist without his
supply of Oxygen than the vegetable could without Car-
bonic Acid—it being the natural food of every plant that
springs, from the largest tree that waves in the forest to the
smallest blade of grass that trembles in the breeze. There
is not a single green leaf, or herb, or tree, or flower, that is
not continually sucking it in through invisible pores .
and thus, while securing food for itself, it is at the same time
purifying to a great extent the layer or stratum of air
through which we and other animals move about on the
surface of this earth.
We will now glance at the part which watery vapour has
to play in keeping the air in a healthy state. Every plant, I
must inform you, whether it be the sturdy oak or the
slender willow, solid as it may appear to the eye, is made
up of water to nearly the amount of the three-fourths of its
whole weight; and the leaves, which may well be called the
lungs of the plant, from the likeness of the duties performed
by them and these organs in animals, are constantly send-
ing forth quantities of water in the state of invisible vapour;
now, if the air were completely dry, or nearly so, it would
absorb or suck out all the moisture of the plant too rapidly,
in fact much faster than it could be supplied to it by the
soil, through means of the roots, and the consequence would
be that the plant would immediately dry and wither up,
and finally cease to exist; and man’s lungs would, without
sufficient degree of moisture in the air, meet a similar fate.
In the body of a man weighing over 1501b5., there are
38 lbs. of dry, solid matter;- all the rest being water, which
is continually passing out in vapour from his lungs and
through his skin. Were the air quite dry, man would, as
2


in the case of the plant, he in a short time parched np, and
nothing would remain but a dry shrivelled carcase. To the
watery vapour contained in the air we are also indebted for
the refreshing dews in summer, which by a law of nature
are made to fall in the greatest abundance where most
wanted, and which contribute so much to the health of the
vegetable world when rain is for any length of time denied.
Summary.—You are now, I hope, familiar with the
principal uses and properties of the substances which form
the air we breathe. Of its utility as a vehicle of sound, of
its agency in the diffusion or spreading about of light, and
so-forth, I shall take other and frequent opportunities of
speaking; but from what I have stated you cannot fail to be
struck with the extraordinary wisdom, skill, and care for the
comfort and preservation of his creatures manifested by our
all-powerful and all-seeing Creator in this portion of his works;
how well adapted each substance is for the part it is required
to perform, and how many and what great advantages arise
from anything that may seem to us injurious in its compo-
sition to make amends for the evil. Many of the pro-
perties of it which we are now convinced to be true, may
hereafter be found to be incorrect, for in this as in every one
of God’s works, there are a thousand things which we are
not able to explain; a thousand utilities we cannot discover,
but which may hereafter come to light, and excite the won-
der and admiration of future generations. Whenever, then,
we turn our thoughts to the works of God, in those portions of
nature that lie within our reach, let us proceed with reve-
rence and caution, well aware that our own understanding-
is limited, and cannot comprehend the intentions of an all-
powerful Creator; but when we do succeed in discovering
how bountiful he is in his care for his creatures, let us
earnestly pray to him to make us always grateful.


WATER.
Having spoken to you some few evenings ago on air, and
having good reason to believe that you valued the infor-
mation given you on that common but very important
thing, I have resolved to introduce another common thing
on this evening, with the name of which you are as familiar
as I am myself;—it is mater .
Utility and .—There is no substance in nature
more useful, if we except air, than water. It is to be met
with in three different forms; namely, as a solid, such as
ice —as a fluid, as you see it in this glass, and as vapour
or steam, as you see it issuing from the pipe of a boiling-
kettle. It is in the state of vapour that it floats around
our globe ; but we are better acquainted with it in the form
of a liquid, in which state, when pure, it may be said to be
colourless, and I might say tasteless. The purer the water
is the more transparent it is, and I may add the less its
weight. You may remember that, in my lecture on air,
when speaking of its weight, I also made some remarks
upon the weight of water. You may recollect that I told
you a solid or cubic foot of water weighed nearly 1000
ounces, I meant of course the water that comes under our
notice every day; for it is right I should tell you that
water has not the same weight in all countries or under all
circumstances. Water will be found to weigh less in very
warm countries than it weighs in countries with a tempera-
ture of climate such as ours, for hot water is lighter than
cold, and therefore it would require a greater weight of
cold than it would of warm water to fill a gallon.
The weight of an imperial gallon of cold water is lOlbs.,
but the weight of a gallon of boiling water will be found
to be considerably less, (by the term imperial measure you


are to understand a measure fixed by the laws of the
country—in other words, a legal measure).
Contraction and Expansion. —All fluids swell when
heated, and contract when cooled; so that if you fill a
gallon, or any other vessel, with boiling water, and allow it
to cool, you will find it will sink considerably, and that a
given quantity of that now in the vessel will weigh heavier
than an equal bulk of it in its boiling state, for as it cools
it contracts, and therefore occupies a less space. There is,
however a certain degree of coldness to which if water be
brought down, instead of contracting, it expands, or swells.
This is a peculiarity which I shall explain to you more
fully after having spoken a few words about an ins-
trument called a Thermometer which is used to find out
the temperature, or the different degrees of heat and cold of
all fluids, the atmosphere included, and on this account it
is sometimes called a weather-glass.
Thermometer. —The Thermometer is a very useful instru-
ment of the simplest construction. It consists of a long
tube of glass with a hollow ball or globe at the end partly
filled with mercury, or what you commonly call quick-silver.
In some Thermometers the tube is filled with spirits of
wine, coloured so as to be seen when it rises ; but this one
which I hold in my hand contains mercury, as you may
perceive. When the ball is filled with mercury or spirits
of wine, it is placed in boiling water which you know
must cause it to expand, or swell; and at the point where
the fluid reaches in the tube the latter is broken off, and
closed with a pair of pincers so as to prevent the least par-
ticle of air from getting out. Of course the glass tube is
softened by great heat or this could not be done. The ball
is then taken and plunged in what is termed a “freezing
mixtureand owing to the cold, the fluid contracts and
sinks down in the tube; and where it stops the number


82° is marked; the little circle placed beside the 2, is to tell
all persons looking at the number that it means 32 degrees ;
and the little line on the scale where it is thus marked is
called the freezing point, and the line placed at that part of
the tube where the fluid stopped when the ball was put in
boiling water is marked 212° to show that this is the boiling
point. A degree is commonly taken to mean 60 geogra-
phical miles, but the degree we now talk of means the
small distance between any two of the little lines you see
marked on the scale.
As I intend entering more fully into the nature of this
and other instruments on another occasion, I must defer
saying any more about it at present, and proceed with the
subject of our discourse.
From what I have said you will see that when water is
reduced to the temperature of 32° it becomes solid and this
change from a liqued to a solid state is called freezing,
and that is why the point marked 32° is called the freezing-
point, as was before observed.
Maximum Heat. —You may remember that I have just
now spoken about what is termed the boiling point of the
Thermometer, which is marked 212°. Now I should per-
haps tell you a little more about this boiling point. You
are aware that water in a kettle becomes hotter and hotter
as w’e apply heat to it; but you are not to think that you
can continue to render it hotter and hotter for ever. No
you cannot, for no matter how great the heat you apply
after the water has reached the boiling point, you cannot
make it exceed the degree of heat already attained. It is
well you should know this, for it may save you a deal of
time hereafter, and perhaps a deal of firing too. If you
want to know when you have made water or any fluid as
hot as you can, all you have to do is to place a Ther-
mometer in the water, and if the mercury rises to the
point marked 212° the water cannot be made hotter. In


this state the water boils; and until reaching* this state
was of course becoming hotter and hotter while the heat
was continued. I was near omitting to tell you that the
heat imparted by the fire to the water is absorbed or sucked
in by the steam or vapour into which the water is con-
verted, and if the heat be prolonged, all the water in the
vessel will escape in the form of vapour.
Evaporation. —lt must be also remembered that in
converting boiling water into vapour there is nearly six
times as much heat used as would convert ice into boiling
water. Water is converted into vapour at points much
below the boiling point, or 212°. It is well known that
vapour is produced even from ice ; so you see that water
may be converted into vapour at different temperatures or
degrees of heat. When water boils it is converted into
vapour at every point and at every depth, but at or near
the bottom of the vessel more than at ar nearer the
surface of the water. The less heated the water, the nearer
the surface will the evaporation take place, while the air
immediately over and in contact with it acts like a sponge
in absorbing or sucking in the vapour as it arises, and
when the air is so full of the vapour that it cannot hold
any more, it is said to be saturated , just as we say of a
sponge when it is so full of water that it cannot take in any
more.
It is clear from this that evaporation takes place, more
or less quickly and largely, as the air is more or less able
to receive or contain the vapour.
To illustrate what I say I have only to remind you of
a phrase or expression which all of you must have heard
used by some of the female members of your families.
The phrase is, “ there is no drying out to day,” that is, the
clothes cannot dry though exposed to the air. Now you
will ask me why. Well simply, because the air is full of
vapour, and like the clothes themselves it is moist. The


drier the air the more quickly will moist substances dry
when exposed in it; for the faster will the moisture escape
from the pores or little holes which are always to be found
even in the most solid substances. Windy days are very
good for drying; for the wind sweeps the moist air before
it, and then dry air rushes in to supply its place ; and the
current caused in this way goes on as long as the wind
continues.
Pure and impure Water. —Water, you may remember I
stated, when pure has no taste; but pure water is not
to be found on any part of the earth’s surface, so
to obtain pure water a regular process must be gone
through. All water therefore in what we call its
natural state contains particles of matter dissolved in
it, and the kind of matter, of course, depends upon
the sort of substances which the water flows against,
or, what we sometimes say, comes in contact with. (One
body is said to come in contact with another when the
two meet or knock against each other.) Now you may
ask me, why we do not see these things contained in the
water; but you might as well ask me why you do not see
sugar after you have put it into tea or coffee, and stirred
it up. Listen to me while I tell you the reason you cannot
see the sugar in the tea or coffee, or whatever other liquid
it may be, in which you put it. The sugar is melted and
the liquid sucks it in, and is therefore said to hold it in
solution; on the very same principle does the water of a
river hold various ingredients in solution, and on this same
principle do the waters of the great ocean hold common
salt in solution. You taste all these things when you
drink the water containing them, though you cannot see
them. You are not, however, to think that the different
things which water contains cannot be seen ; no, there
are learned men called chemists, who can take the ingre-


dients which are contained in any water out of it, and
lay them before your view as clear and as distinct as the
maps on the wall. And according to the nature of these
substances, the water will vary or differ in its taste.
Spring water, considered so good to drink, even in its
purest state contains lime and other substances. Some
spring water holds iron in solution, and many of you may
remember seeing stones, looking somewhat like iron, about
a well; this colour is given to them by the water of the
well. Spring water you know is called hard water, and
its hardness is owing to the things it holds in solution.
The waters of some springs are altogether unfit for com-
mon use, but are used for medicinal purposes.
Filtration. —Water, as I have just told you, contains in
solution many impurities which are removed by what is
termed filtration or clearing, and the vessels used for the
purpose are called filterers or cleavers.
There are many kinds of filterers, all of which are very
simple in their nature. Prepared paper, earthenware such
as you see in coarse unglazed crockery-ware, and a peculiar
kind of stone brought from a place called Teneriffe, an
island in the Atlantic Ocean between Africa and America.
The water in passing through these substances loses its
impurities, and is then said to be filtered water, and of
course much purer than it was in its original state.
Now though water, in its natural state, is not pure, we
are not to think that if it were, it would contribute more
to our benefit. No, for did the Creator give us pure water,
instead of the kind ordinarily met with in our springs,
lakes, and rivers, it would be of the greatest disadvantage
to us. Pure water would not serve so well for drinking,
or for cooking purposes, flow insipid and unpleasant is
rain water! yet, in its natural state, it is the purest water
we have; but to obtain it in this state it must be received


direct from the clouds, as by passing through spouts and
leaden pipes it takes up many impurities. River water
may be classed next to rain water in pureness.
You may remember I stated, in a former lecture, that
the ancients considered there were in nature but four
simple substances, and that from a union of these in dif-
ferent proportions every visible object was formed, whether
animal, vegetable, or mineral. Water they held to be one
of these substances, the others were fire, air, and earth.
Modern discoveries have shown, however, that this was a
very great error, for it is now well understood that there
are more, I believe, than sixty simple substances, and
perhaps some of those which we now rank as simple may
hereafter, as science advances, turn out to be compound
substances. I should have remarked, that when a sub-
stance cannot be analyzed, that is separated into two or
more distinct substances, each possessing peculiar qualities
it is then called a simple substance. Now when we put
water through a certain process or operation, (very easy to
be understood by anyone who may have an opportunity of
seeing it performed by the chemical professors who are almost
constantly explaining these subjects in the public lecture
rooms in this city) it is found to be former of two distinct
and widely different airy substances—namely, oxygen gas,
with the qualities of which you are already familiar, and
hydrogen gas, a term implying water-maker, of which I
shall endeavour to give you as clear an idea as I can.
Hydroge7i. —In the first place then I must tell you that,
like the generality of gases, it has no color, and is on that
account invisible, neither has it taste nor smell, but as it
easily mixes with any impurity that comes in its way, it
often acquires a most unpleasant odor, of which every one
is sensible who has ever stood for a moment near a leaking
gas-pipe, for hydrogen is a large ingredient in the ordinary


lighting-gas. In the next place it is the lightest body or
substance in nature, as any given complement of it will
weigh fourteen times less than the same complement of
common air.
On this account it is used to fill balloons, two thousand
cubic feet of it weighing only eleven pounds, while the
same complement of common air will weigh 160 lbs.
When confined then, and prevented from mixing with the
air around, it must, according to the natural law by which
fluids are regulated, rise till it comes to a region of the air
where the weight of equal bulks of both are the same, and
this is why a balloon can drag after it a considerable weight
to a distance of several thousand feet from the earth.
Lastly, it is one of the readiest bodies in nature to catch
fire and kindle into a blaze or flame; bodies possessing
this quality are said to be inflammable ; well, hydrogen is
highly so, and when set on fire burns with a weak blue
flame, but throws out an extraordinary heat.
Formation of Water. —Having now, I trust, given you
a plain description of the properties of this important sub-
stance, I shall proceed to show in what proportions it unites
with oxygen to form water.
This could be done by either of two means; we could
procure the two gases, a flask of oxygen, say, and another
of hydrogen, and by means of instruments which chemists
have invented for the purpose of making experiments, fill
a third with certain portions of both; then if an electric
spark be applied the gases will explode and form water,
and this process is termed, composition, which is the term
used, you must remember, to express the mixing together of
simple substances to form compound ones. The other
method is just the opposite of this, and very simple. By
the help or agency, as it is called, of electricity, a sub-
stance you all must have seen, at one time or other, under


/ ? 27
the form of lightning, whose flashes, wild and untamable
as they seem, man has now made obedient to his will, pure
water can in a few minutes be converted into the two gases
of which it is made up, and this operation is called decom-
position, which you now observe is the separation of a
compound substance into the different ingredients of which
it is composed, or formed. Whichever of the operations
—composition or decomposition—we use, it will go to
establish or prove the same fact, namely, that water is
made up of eight measures of hydrogen and one of oxygen
—that is, mother words, every mne gallons of it contains
eight gallons of the former and one of the latter; and that
a given bulk of oxygen weighs exactly sixteen times as
much as the same bulk of hydrogen. Now you, no doubt,
remember that any lighted material placed in pure oxygen
will burn with much more vigor and rapidity than in the
common air; and I have just informed you that hydrogen
is the most inflammable of all substances, can it then fail
to raise your wonder that water, so different, so very
opposite in its nature to fire, should be formed of two
substances, so closely connected with, and so favourable
to the production of the latter; yet this is simply the
result of chemical union, —by which term you must under-
stand such a union to take place that from two different
bodies a third will be formed having no properties belong-
ing to either, but on the contrary, new ones, quite peculiar
to itself. Such is the case with respect to water, in which
you see the gases are chemically united, whilst in the com-
position of air they are simply mixed.
Natural State. —In its natural state, water is never pure,
not even rain water, but if you listen to me attentively, I
shall tell you how pure water is obtained.
Water, you know, holds in solution, that is, in a dissolved
or melted form, various substances ; and, as the water goes


off in the state of vapour or steam, these substances remain
and collect together on the sides or bottom of the vessel
which contains it —you have only to look into an old kettle
to see this—for there you will find yellowish matter or
sediment, settled on its sides, which is nothing more or less
than the remains of the impurities of the water. Now the
water that escapes in the form of vapour is pure mater, and
as cold can convert this vapour into a liquid again, nothing
more is required than to place a glass or some cold vessel over
the steam to receive it as it escapes. In a few moments,
pure water will be obtained, and in this way water is distilled
and the process is called distillation. Of course, the receiver
of the steam is of a very particular construction ; but you
can well understand the principle. The quantity of vapour
necessary to form a gallon of water, is very great, being
about 1,800 gallons; so you see vapour must be greatly
reduced in bulk, before water can be produced. From this
it is evident, that one gallon of water will produce 1,800
gallons of vapour.
Poisonous Matter contained in Water. —Before con-
cluding my observations on this important subject, I shall
say a few words on the injurious or poisonous matter which
water is sometimes found to contain, and the use of which
for domestic purposes, the situations where such waters
are to be met with, and the remedies that are occasionally
employed to purify, or render them fit for the use of man
and the animals dependent on him.
In the first place, we should be cautious of using water
from springs or wells, found in the neighbourhood of farm-
yards or large towns. In such places you all know, filth of
every kind is allowed to collect in large heaps, containing
quantities of rotting remains of vegetables and animals.
Now, matter while rotting is undergoing Chemical De-
composition, a term I explained to you but a few moments
ago, in which state it forms or gives out new substances,


many of them fatal to animal existence. These substances
water has the power of dissolving, or melting with great
ease, so that when heavy or continuous rains fall upon these
collections of filth, the impurities to which I point are
melted and washed out, in a very short space of time. They
then spread themselves by degrees through the surrounding
soil, and, at last, find their way to the springs and wells of
the country, which, of course, they corrupt or poison ; and
such waters have very often been the means of causing
deadly diseases to break out amongst the population who
have no better to use.
Dangers to he guarded against. —From this you see how
dangerous it is to permit refuse consisting of animal and
vegetable matter to be heaped up near your wells, and how
necessary it is that the water for supplying the wants of the
inhabitants of large towns or cities should be conveyed from
some distance from the situations where collections of this
objectionable kind are permitted to be made. Wells
in the neighbourhood of Burial Grounds—Church Yards,
as they are often called in this country —are not less danger-
ous and destructive.
You must all, or at least most of you, have heard of a
liquid called, “ Aqua-fortis,” strong water is the meaning
of the term, and a very good reason there is for giving it
that name, for several hard, solid bodies, very difficult to be
melted, will be speedily dissolved on being placed in a vessel
of it. Now, human bodies, as well as those of the inferior
animals, when in the course of decay, give out this substance
in considerable quantities. It very soon unites with lime,
potash, and other substances, with which the earth is com-
monly mixed, and should the soil happen to partake of a
porous or spongy nature the new compounds soon creep
through every corner of it, mix with all the streams or
springs flowing by or lying within reach of their deadly in-


fluence, thereby rendering the use of the waters far more
to be dreaded than that of those already mentioned. I may
as well inform yon here that amongst men of learning or
science, which means the same thing, this powerful Auid,
Aqua-fortis , is known by the name of Nitric Acid; and
that, on that account, a mixture made up of it and any other
simple substance, is called a “ Nitrate ” of that substance,
for instance, if it be mixed with silver, the new substance
formed is called “ nitrate of silver;” if with lime, “ nitrate
of lime;” if with magnesia, “nitrate of magnesia,” and so on,
allbeingmore or less destructive. lam nowtobe understood
as speaking of springs and streams in the neighbourhood of
Burial Grounds, which have either entirely or partially
fallen into disuse; for much worse substances are to be
found in waters taken from wells or rivulets close by grave-
yards, where numbers of dead bodies are daily interred, the
Arst stage or commencement of decomposition being that
which is most favorable to the formation of those noxious
or hurtful compounds.
Unwholesome Water. —The wells or springs of vast dis-
tricts in many countries are all found to supply waters of
a very unwholesome kind. Where the surface of the earth
partakes very much of a sandy nature, but is still capable
of producing vegetation, I mean of nourishing plants,
they are most commonly to be met with. The following
is the manner in which persons having great experience or
knowledge of such matters, explain the process which makes
the waters became bad and poisonous in such situations.
They say that when the vegetable substances decay and rot
on the surface,'the matter they give forth sinks down to
some distance in the soil and forms with the sand a sort of
clayey layer. You see these slates piled over each other on
the table near me; when substances are arranged one above
the other in that form they are said to lie in layers. Now,


though the hardest marble we know of is full of small pores
or holes, this clayey layer we talk of has none, and will not,
therefore, permit water to pass through it. When rain falls
many quantities then in the localities under our consideration,
it sinks through the earth till it meets this layer on which it
must rest, not being able to force a passage through. After
some time little rills are formed which find their way under
the surface of the ground to those hollows in the inside of
the earth where the waters are collected from which springs
or wells issue. During the time, however, the water remains
on the aforesaid layer it is not idle. It is able by means of
its natural properties to dissolve some of the objectional
vegetable substances contained in the layer, which it, of
course, carries along with it in its underground passage, thus
spreading corruption and the seeds of infection over whole
districts.
Boiling a means of Purification. —Sometimes by simply
boiling the water, the corrupting substances can be got rid
of; for being somewhat of the nature of the white of eggs,
it is curdled by boiling, or by pouring in a juice found in
oak and other woods, which produces the same effect. In
whichever way this curdy matter is produced, by boiling or
by the infusion of the oak juice, it sinks to the bottom,
rolling down with it all other foreign substances, and
leaving the water pure and fit for use. Thus it is that the
waters of large districts in France are cleared or purified.
A peculiar description of nut reduced to powder will
make the waters of some districts in India drinkable, while
bitter almonds are known to have a like effect on the
muddy waters of the Nile. These facts cannot fail to
bring to our recollections a remarkable and at the same
time interesting passage in Scripture History relative to
the journey of the Israelites from Egypt, I refer to the
sweetening of the waters of Marah, as we read in Exodus ;


“ So Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea; and they
went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three
days in the wilderness, and found no water. And when
they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of
Marah, for they were bitter : therefore the name of it was
called Marah. And the people murmurred against Moses,
saying, what shall we drink? And he cried unto the
Lord, and the Lord shewed him a tree, which when he had
cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet.”
I have now, I hope, made you understand something of
the nature and composition of water, and the benefits and
blessings the Great Creator had in contemplation for his
creatures on the day when he gathered together the waters
and called them “ Seas.” Let us never fail to take occasion
to praise and thank Him in whatever shape His wisdom
or goodness is presented to us in this portion of His works—
whether in the fertilizing shower, the refreshing spring, the
cooling brook, the glassy lake faithfully reflecting the blue
heavens above it, or the tempest-maddened ocean, proclaiming
through the thunders of its billows, “ I am the Lord and
none else! ”


PLANTS.
It is my intention on this evening to speak a few words
to yon on that division of nature, termed the Vegetable
Kingdom. It may not be out of place here to tell you
what is understood by the term, nature—it signifies the
rcork of God, or as it has been beautifully expressed,
“ nature is but the name for an effect whose cause is God.”
<1 here explain the meaning of cause and effect and give
some familiar examples of their relation.)
In every law of nature and in every effect produced,
the hand of the Almighty worker is plainly visible, and
the better acquainted we become with his works, the
more we must admire the wisdom and power of their
Author.
We are told in the Bible that on the third day, God
said: “ let the earth bring forth the green herb, and such
as may seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind,
which may have seed in itself upon the earth.” God here
gave expression to His will, and by His creative word
only was all this accomplished.
It is now nearly six thousand years ago since the
Creator gave utterance to the words I have just repeated,
and during that time the earth has never ceased to yield
the herb, or the trees to bear their fruits for the support of
man and the animals over which he gave him supreme
power. And were the earth to last thousands of thousands
of years, the will of Him who said : “let light be,” and,
“let the earth bring forth its fruits,” shall be obeyed.
In six days God made this world and all things in it;
therefore we are to conclude that every living creature,
from the animalcule, or little animal, that sees a world in
the smallest drop of water, to man himself, and every
3


vegetable, from the tenderest blade of grass, or the most
delicate rose-leaf, to the stateliest oak in the forest, are all
the work of His hand.
Now this is true, and equally true is it that not a thing,
no matter how useless, how worthless, or even injurious it
may, at first sight, appear, but has been made by Provi-
dence to answer some useful purpose; and it is our igno-
rance of, and indifference to the works of God which pre-
vent us from knowing these uses, and appreciating the
wisdom and the benevolent intentions of the Divine Being,
who has stamped on each its proper quality.
Unfortunately the whole sum of our knowledge is very
limited, and we are always too ready to pass our judgment
on things at first sight and to pronounce them as useless
and injurious, though if we were less hasty we might see
abundance of reasons to form a very different opinion.
Let us then always bear in mind that though there are
things in nature in some respects injurious, they more
than compensate for this in the many ways in which they
render service to mankind.
Extent of the kingdom. —The first point to
which I will call your attention is the extent of the vege-
table kingdom, as this division of nature is commonly
called. About one-third of the surface of our earth is taken
up under dry land ; and it has been estimated that a little
more than the fourth of this space is inhabited by man.
This is not the case with vegetables. They occupy a much
greater portion of the earth’s surface, as they are to be
found in luxuriant growth on the mountain top, or beneath
the waters of the deep. Indeed the tribes of plants, which
we are in the habit of calling sea-weeds from their seeming
uselessness, but which should be properly termed “ marine
plants,” have, in several instances, so many curious and
beautiful characters that a very distinguished writer, Mary


Howit, strongly exclaims against the injustice of calling
them needs in the following exquisite lines :
Oh call us not weeds but flowers of the sea,
For lovely and bright and gay tinted are we ;
Our blush is as deep as the rose of the bowers,
Then call us not weeds, we are ocean’s gay flowers;
Not nursed like the plants of a summer parterre,
Whose gales are but sighs of an evening air;
Our exquisite, fragile, and beautiful forms,
Are nursed by the ocean, and rocked by the storms.
Forests of plants, some of from 300 to 400 feet in height
and of considerable thickness of stem, some so minute or
small that they cannot be seen by the naked eye, occupy
the bed of the ocean or world of waters throughout its whole
extent. These plants differ widely from those on land in
their nature and structure, but are supported and fed by
the same means. There are not so many varieties of them
as there are of land plants owing, perhaps, to the almost
uniform temperature of the ocean at low depths, and the
absence of the many causes, such as difference of soil, ele-
vation and the like, which exercise a great influence on the
growth and distribution of the latter.
Division of marine plants. —Marine plants indeed may
be divided into two great classes or groups, those having
joints, which are generally of a threadlike from; and
those without joints; the last mentioned group in-
cludes, however, a good many different species. Sea-weeds
fix their roots to rocks, stones, the stems of other weeds, in
fact to anything coming within their reach. They are easily
detached or loosened by the motion of the waters, and are
sometimes found in such masses, particularly in southern
latitudes, as to save ships from being wrecked by prevent-
ing them from being dashed against rocks, in the heavy
swells to which these seas are subject, thus showing that


the Creator has formed nothing without some wise object,
either on the land or beneath the waters.
Providence of God displayed in the distribution of
plants. —Such and so varied is the extent of the vegetable
kingdom ; but then we are not to suppose that the Creator
scattered plants about in all directions and on every side,
without any order or regularity of plan in reference to
clime or country—no, he assigned to each kind a particular
region or country best suited to rear and bring it to per-
fection, and where it would be of most service to the wants
of that portion of the human family dwelling there.
Structure of plants. —Let us now take a short view
of the structure of plants; we will select a tree for
our purpose. On looking at an oak or an elm, a person, who
has never made this subject his study, would be very apt to
think it a mere lifeless mass of irregularly shaped wood?
putting forth green leaves in the spring season, and casting
off in winter because it is its nature to do so, and nothing
more. This, however, is very far from being the case.
The tree is provided with means of taking in food, of di-
gesting it, and of turning it into the substance of which it
is itself formed in the same way as animals are. Fluids
circulate, that is flow with regularity, through its trunk
and branches just as the blood does through the veins of
animals. It has a power to decompose or separate the
compound substances it imbibes or sucks in—to form new
compounds—to collect certain substances called by the
learned “ secretions,” as animals have. In fact the only
reason why a tree or any other plant has not a stomach or
cavity to contain a supply of food, is that it has no neces-
sity to go in search of it like the animal, a regular supply
of the simple kind required for its support being always
prepared in the spot where it grows.
Now that portion of the frame or structure of an animal


by the aid of which it is enabled to perform any of the
actions necessary to continue and sustain its existence, is
called, in the language of naturalists, that is those who study
nature, the “ organ of that action for example, the lungs
are termed the organs of breathing or respiration—the
stomach, the organ of digestion—the ear, of hearing, the
eye, of sight or vision, and so on ; and whatever is seen in
nature to be possessed of a structure the different parts of
which have assigned to them the performance of different
actions on which its existence depends is said to have an
“ organic structure.”
Well it has been proved that plants do all these things I
have mentioned, we must therefore admit that they have
an organic structure, and a very delicate and interesting
one it turns out to be too. Indeed the result of the numer-
ous experiments by which this fact has been now firmly
established appears so convincing and so satisfactory, that
very many distinguished naturalists have gone so far as to
adopt the opinion that plants are gifted with feeling as well
as with life and an organic structure.
Effect of poisons on Plants. —Certain poisons which are
known to be fatal to animal life, will, when administered
to plants, effectually kill them. If a solution of any of
those poisons,—that is, if any of those poisons melted or
dissolved in water, be applied to the roots of a plant, it will,
as might be expected, be sucked up by them gradually, that
is, by little and little. Well what is the effect ? Why it
has no sooner spread itself through the body or stem of
the plant than its leaves begin to curl and crisp, then
grow limber and droop ; and finally the plant withers
and dies. This curling and crisping and drooping of the
leaves must be admitted to be very like the twistings and
convulsions we see take place in animals whose deaths are
caused by poison.


Feeling of Plants . —There are plants certain parts of
which being wounded by a needle or any other pointed
instrument, other portions near are seen to bend and fold
over the wound. Does not this look very like feeling ?
Close connection of Vegetable and Animal Life. —
There are plants again whose leaves are continually mov"
ing in different directions, up and down, and laterally, or
side-ways, and every way, though it is impossible to observe
the slightest agitation or stir in the air—this would lead us
to suppose that plants have feeling. There are others whose
leaves shrink from the slighest touch of the human finger.
In fact so closely do plants resemble animals in the per-
formance of many actions by which life is supported, that
naturalists have found it a hard task in some cases to say
whether a thing is a plant or an animal, or to mark the
boundary where animal life commences, and vegetable life ter-
minates. Plants live—they breathe—they perspire—blood,
or a fluid corresponding to it, circulates within them, and
their forms are covered with skin as our own are; for the
bark of trees is nothing more or less. Again plants, eat
and drink, and what will appear stranger still, some of
them to require animal food for their support, as you
will see by what I am abou t to say.
There is a plant called the pitcher plant; at the ends of
the tendrils* grow little vessels in the shape or form of a
pitcher with a lid at top. When the plant reaches a certain
size, this lid raises of its own accord, and, at the bottom of
the leafy vessel, a liquid substance is easily observed, which
serves as a trap for the insects necessary for the support of
the plant.
* I here tell the men that tendrils are those thread-like shoots by
which the sweet pea and other climbing plants are enabled to fasten
themselves to the supports up which they climb.


Another very curious instance of plants requiring
animal food is that presented to us by one known by the
name of Venus’s Fly Trap. At the ends of the leaves of
this plant are two little lobes or divisions bordered with
bristles ; from the ridge of each lobe rise three small bris-
tles forming a triangle (this figure is here explained).
Any insect passing over the leaf is sure to come in con-
tact with a bristle. The moment the bristle is touched by
the insect, a shock is felt by the whole plant, and the leaf
closes on its unwary victim and converts it to food.
These examples cannot fail to teach you some of the
wonders to be met with in the vegetable world, but had I
time to dwell upon the vitality, or the principle of life, of
plants, I could tell you many more things about them,
still more curious and interesting.
Sleep of Plants. —The life with which plants are endowed
seems to be mainly due to the light of the sun. In proof
of this it is stated that they flourish more vigorously in the
sunshine than in the shade, and at night actually seek
repose in sleep as animals do. The family of plants bear-
ing the closest resemblance to animals in this point is that
called the leguminous, of which the common pea or bean
maybe mentioned as examples.
As the close of day draws on, the leaves present a rather
fatigued and weary appearance. This is almost visible
indeed, and the more the light of day declines, the more
they bend and fold together, till at last they close entirely
up, and sleep, as it were, till the return of the morning sun
enables them to recover their vigour, spread out their leaves
and unfold their flowers or blossoms. Indeed almost all
plants sleep during the night, of which fact the leaves or
blossoms afford visible proofs. This I shall illustrate by
instances from plants and flowers with which you are all
familiar.


You know, I am sure, every one of you the wild flower
called Dandelion—this plant, let me tell you, opens its
leaves early in the morning at 5 o’clock or so, and is said to
close them at 9in the evening or thereabouts. The Mari-
gold is said to go to bed with the sun and rise with him in
the morning. The “ modest daisy” shuts its blossom in the
evening and opens it again to meet the morning beams :
and any of you who have seen a clover-field at dusk, must
have observed the sleepy appearance it presents, every
single leaf in it being closed up, lulled to rest as it were,
which opens only with the return of morning. I think
these instances are quite enough to show you that plants,,
like animals, are accustomed to seek repose in sleep.
Diseases of Plants —Vegetables not only present all
these marks of being endowed with life, but they are also
subject to diseases. One of these is called mildew. The
plant attacked with this disease is seen to be covered with a
white dust, which was formerly believed to be the work of
insects, but is now found to be caused by the stoppage of
the circulation of the juices. This stoppage of the juices
is followed by a slow decomposition or corruption of the
plant, in which state it attracts or draws to it millions of
insects which lay their eggs on every part of its surface,
forming the dusty crust called mildew. It is found that
the weakest plants and trees, and such as are placed in
unfavorable localities, are most liable to this distemper.
In some places a matter very much like dew, but sweet
and stickey, and which is now thought to fall, like dew,
from the air, frequently produces diseases in plants, of
which they generally die. In certain countries this matter
is seen after a night in small drops on the leaves of a whole
row of trees, and sometimes in such quantities that people
have imagined that showers of honey had actually fallen.
By some it is supposed to be a sweating or perspiration


caused by some distemper in the inside of the tree, by which
the juices are corrupted and the circulation stopped as in
the case of mildew. It has been observed that the leaves
on which this kind of dew falls soon become spotted and
blackish and finally decay, an effect which is thought to be
caused by something in its substance. As was stated res-
pecting mildew, myriads of insects collect round trees or
plants attacked in this manner, and give us another exam-
ple of the goodness and wisdom of Providence in making
them serviceable in removing, by turning into food, those
corrupted vegetables which are become useless to man, and
might be injurious to him also. Plants, like animals, have
their periods of infancy, maturity or full strength, and decay,
as well as their different terms of existence. Some tribes
perish as soon as they have sprung up, some live only till
they come to full growth, while others having obtained
situations favorable to their wants and habits exist for a
length of years almost beyond belief.
Longevity of Plants. —Travellers inform us that they
have met in the forests of Lebanon in Palestine
groups or clusters of cedars bearing marks of an age
perhaps as remote or far back as the time of our blessed
Lord’s suffering. In other parts of the east trees have
been found exhibiting proofs of having lived for
terms varying from 800 to 1000 years. One authority
assures us that he found in a country grave-yard a yew
tree measuring sixty feet in girth, and appearing from the
number of yearly growths or layers shown by its diameter—
this description of trees being increased by a new circular
layer of wood every year, which can be clearly and easily
distinguished—to be over 2800 years old.
A French Naturalist who has bestowed a great deal of
attention on the study of this subject, states that in the
course of his observations of trees remarkable for their


longevity, or great age, an orange tree had been found 600
years old, a lime 1100 years old, an oak 1500 years, a yew
2500, a kind of tree called baobab 5000 years, and one of
the cypress tribe called taxodium 6000 years old, which,
according to the account of the creation found in the Bible,
appears to be as old as the world itself. Indeed the same
writer remarks that it may be looked upon as a memorial to
mark the exact time when the Creator brought the world
out of a state of confusion or disorder into its present
form.
Haying said so much on the nature of vegetable life or
the vitality of plants, we will now turn our attention to the
matters which constitute their food.
Food of Plants. —lt is true that plants receive or draw
much of their support from the earth in which they are
rooted, but not so much as is supplied to them from the air
by which they are surrounded. You may remember my
description, in a former lecture, of a substance called Car-
bonic Acid gas. Well, this gas forms the chief or most
important part of the nourishment of plants. You may
also remember I told you that in the months of Autumn,
during the decay or decomposition of fallen leaves and
other vegetable matter, this gas is produced in great
abundance. I do not recollect having explained to you
what is meant by the process called decomposition;
however, lest I have not I shall do so now.
When we say a body, be it animal or vegetable, is in a
state of decomposition, we mean simply that it is rotting,
in which state it begins to disappear by degrees, the original
simple substances of which it was composed being resolved
or separated, and invisibly mingled with air around, form-
ing new compositions, and leaving nothing behind but dust
or ashes. But though the body may have wholly or
nearly disappeared from view, it has only undergone a


change of form, not a particle of matter however minute being
ever destroyed or reduced to nothing. Fallen leaves, and
indeed all vegetable matter when undergoing the process
of decomposition, give out large quantities of pure carbon,
a substance of the same nature as burned or charred wood,
which uniting with the oxygen of the “air forms what is
called Carbonic Acid gas, which, as I before stated, supplies
the vegetable world with the principal part of its nourish-
ment. It is this gas that renders soil fruitful, the richest
being that which contains most of it.
Soil. —Pure clay, you must know, is quite a different
thing from the soil we cultivate; pure clay in which
nothing will grow, and through which water cannot pass,
being one of the simple substances mentioned in a former
lecture, and soil being formed of decayed animal and
vegetable matter, particularly the latter, and on that account
is called vegetable mould. It is always of a dark color and
found in abundance in every country.
It is to assist or hasten the decomposition of vegetable
matter in the soil that digging and ploughing are employed;
for, by these means, the surface is loosened and broken, and
the more it is softened and crumbled, the farther and the
easier the air can pass through it, but, unless the air find
means of coming in contact or close union with the vege-
table matter rotting under the surface of the soil, the car-
bon given forth under these circumstances can meet with
no oxygen to mix with, and carbonic acid, that nourishment
so necessary to the plant, cannot be formed.
You may remember how frequently I take occasion to
impress upon you the fact that God has made nothing,
however worthless or mean it may appear, without intending
it for some useful purpose.
What I am about to tell you will afford a strong proof
of this. I have shown you how necessary it is to break


and powder, as it were, the surface of the earth in order to
provide the plant with a plentiful supply of food; well now
observe what share the common crawling earth worm, which
we are accustomed to despise so much, has in this operation.
I quote from high authority—“ In loosening and refining
the mould the common earth worm is the fellow labourer
of man; it eats earth, and after extracting the nutritious
part, ejects the refuse, which is the finest soil, and may be
seen lying in heaps at the mouth of its burrow. So in-
strumental is this creature in preparing the ground, that it
is said there is not a particle of the finer vegetable mould
that has not passed through the intestines of a worm; thus
the most feeble of living things is employed by Providence
to accomplish the most important ends.”
Is not this one fact enough of itself to call forth our
wonder at the simplicity of the means employed by the
Creator in rendering this world a habitation suited to such
a being as man ?
It is not my intention at present to enter deeply into
explanations of how the food or nourishment taken in by the
plant from the air or from the earth afterwards becomes
part and parcel of the plant, and how it is changed into
the matter of which the wood, the leaves, the fruits, and
the flowers so pleasing to the eye of man, are formed, as
this would require a great deal of knowledge very hard to
be acquired to enable you to fully understand, and would
after all prove of no great advantage. I shall speak a
few words, however, on this part on our subject.
While it is under the ground it draws its whole support
from the soil, but the moment it lifts its head above the
surface, the air is made to contribute its own share towards
its nourishment, and the more the plant increases in size the
greater the necessity for air becomes. Indeed the whole tree
tribe derive all their food from the air, from the time their fruits


ripen till they begin to shed their leaves. The class of plants
called annuals, from the circumstance of their seeds re-
quiring to be sowed or planted every year, are fed almost
solely by the air, deriving little or no nourishment from
the soil. There is a tribe or family of plants called air-
plants which flourish in situations where they can have no
communication whatever with the ground—several of them
can be seen any day in Glasnevin gardens, just at hand
here, these, of course, it must be admitted live on air only.
The roots of plants are furnished with little sponge-like
substances which enable them to soak and convey to the
organs of the trunk the water around them ; where it un-
dergoes a regular process of decomposition by which it is
resolved into the gases of which it is composed, namely,
hydrogen and oxygen; the former or first of these, mingles
in different quantities with the carbonic acid already in the
body of the tree, and forms wood, sugar, starch, gums, vege-
table oils, and acids, which are the secretions I-referred to
in a former part of the lecture ; whilst the latter, that is the
oxygen, enters into and becomes a part of the composi-
tion of the leaves, and also assists in the formation of
resins, oils and acids. That a plant, nay the same identical
plant, should contain all these different substances may
appear very strange, it is nevertheless true; they are not all
formed, however, at the same time, but at different stages of
the plant’s growth, the starch being converted into sugar
in proportion as the fruit ripens, the fruit also being
sweeter in proportion to the quantity of starch contained
in the plant. The ripening of the fruit it must be observed
depends a good deal on the clearness of the sky, and the
temperature of the air.
From what I have now told you, it can be easily seen
that the food of plants consists chiefly of the gases generated
or formed by the union of a few simple substances with the


matters composing* the common air, and of water; but it
cannot fail to call forth our astonishment and admiration
that objects like plants, apparently destitute of anything
approaching to an organic structure, should on close examina-
tion be found possessed of a machinary so wonderful and
so powerful as to be capable of turning into food materials
so simple, and forming from them so many varied and
valuable substances ! There are other things which contri-
bute to the food of plants, but to so slight an extent that to
mention them would only help to perplex your minds and
encumber my lecture.
The odour of plants. —The perfume,or sweet scent yielded
by the rose and other fragrant plants of the flowering tribe, is
owing to an oil which they secrete of a highly volatile nature.
The term volatile, signifies apt or eager to fly away, and a
volatile oil, is therefore, one which, of its own accord, flies
away in vapour through the air. This vapour is invisible,
and consists of drops of nature’s perfumed oil, so exceed-
ingly small, that a grain of the finest dust has magnitude
or size in comparison to one of them. Such small divisions
or portions of matter are called particles, and it is these par-
ticles striking in their flight against the organs of the nose—
the most delicate in the human structure —which produce the
sense or feeling of smell. The pleasure which man derives
both from the perfume and the beauty of flowers, the first
being so agreeable to his sense of smell, and the last to his
sense of sight or vision—is said to be the chief object of our
bountiful and benevolent Creator, in calling them into ex-
istence. This class of plants, is known by the name of
odoriferous, which means, perfume-bearing. These plants
give out more of their perfumes during the morning and
evening, than at other periods of the day, and spread or dif-
fuse it further in warm than in cold countries. Along some
portions of the coast of Arabia, a large district of the


division of the world called Asia, the perfume of the flowers
is said to be perceptible, that is, capable of being felt, for
miles out at sea.
Distribution of plants. —We now come to the distribution
of plants, that is, the placing of them in their proper places,
and their adaptation or fitness to the places in which we find
them placed, or, in other words, of which they are natives.
The number of species or kinds of plants has been set down
by Naturalists at something between 70,000 and 100,000.
This you will say is a surprising number, but it will appear
still more surprising when I tell you, that of this very
great collection, there is not a single kind or species which
has not its own particular country, and special position in
that country, where the soil and climate are best fitted to
its structure and wants, and the plant itself to the wants of
the inhabitants. Some are formed to flourish in those
burning tracts, which you see on the map of the world
before you here at each side of the equator; the line
or circle, which, as you have been often told, divides
the northern from the southern half of the world. These are
called tropical countries, and it is in these countries that
vegetables attain, or reach to, the greatest dimensions or
size. Some have a structure so hardy, that they are able
to grow beneath the never-thawing snows of the polar
regions—that is, Lapland, and those other countries which
we see on the map there situated round the north pole.
These regions are situated in what is called the Frigid
Zone, and it is here that vegetables dwindle down almost
to nothingness. Some love to spread their leaves over
mountain heights, where human foot-step has never yet
left a print; and some choose their home in the sheltered
valleys which the brightness and variety of their colors
help so much to beautify; but of all this, I may say,
boundless collection, there is not one species, I repeat, which
does not seek to occupy the particular spot allotted to it by


God at the commencement of the creation. It would be
quite as impossible to make some of these plants change
climates with others, without doing them injury (unless we
make a suitable change of temperature, or heat of atmosphere)
as to make fishes leave their natural element, water, and
soar, like birds, through the air.
What I have told you here about the number of species
or kinds of plants on the surface of the earth, of their fitness
for the countries in which they are found growing, and of
their organic structure and mode of taking in and digesting
food, is, no doubt, very wonderful, very curious, but not
more wonderful and curious than is the skill and wisdom
displayed in their nice distribution over the various climates
of the earth. The limits of this lecture will not permit me to
give you many instances of this adaptation or fitness; I shall,
therefore, only point out a few of those which cannot fail to
strike even a careless observer.
Thus in the tropical countries, the situation of which I
have a moment ago pointed out to you on the map, where
the heat of the sun is so great that the least degree of labor
is hardly bearable, we find a tree producing an article of
food in its fruit ready made and without requiring an hour of
man’s labor, and so nearly resembling, when roasted, our fresh
bread, in preparing which we spend so much time and
trouble, that it has been significanty called the bread-fruit
tree. The fruit is described as being about the size of the
head of a newly born infant, and so wholesome and nutri-
tious that Captain Cook states, if a man plant but two in
his whole life time, he will discharge his duty to society ?
as faithfully and as fully as the natives of other countries do
by a life of continuous or unceasing labor. In these
countries too, where coolness and shade appear to be among
the greatest of man’s natural wants, we find the banian-tree
with its many trunks, under whose broad spreading branches a
small army might repose without inconvenience; the fan


palm, and others with leaves so large, and of such a shape
as to resemble a good sized umbrella, and actually answer
all the purposes of that article. In our own regions, where
labor is useful to keep the human frame in a healthy state
or condition, we find the broad fields of wheat and other
grain which supply us with the chief part of the staff of life.
Advancing further into the cold northern climes, we will be
sure to miss fruitful crops, and plentiful herbage; but instead
we meet with the lichen, a kind of plant formed to thrive
under the snow, which there almost always covers the ground,
and is of greater value to the natives than any other plant
could be. It is this plant that supplies food to the rein-deer,
a creature which in those climates answers all the purposes
of the horse, and the other tame animals with us, and in fact
makes those dismal regions habitable, where :
“ Tardy suns to deserts drear,
Give days and nights flf half a year.”
I shall only add two more examples of the fitness of
plants for the countries they are placed in, too wonderful
to be omitted; and these are the pitcher plant of the
southern islands of Asia, and the cow tree of America :
“ The curious vessels found attached to the extremities
of the pitcher-plant form so many little urns, containing a
clear, wholesome, and well-tasted water. In the morning
the lid is closed, but it opens during the day, when a portion
of the water evaporates: this, however, is replenished in
the night; and each morning the vessel is full, and the
lid shut. As this plant grows in sultry climates, and is
found in the island of Java in the most stony and arid
(parched up with heat) situations, how welcome and ex-
hilarating must the sight of it often be to the weary
traveller; and from the marks of teeth upon the vessel, it
has been said ‘that, it is evident that beasts often supply
their wants at the same plenteous source.’ The milk-tree,
4


or cow tree, so called on account of the resemblance its sin-
gular juice bears to the milk of animals, in the place of which
M. Humboldt has seen it used for every domestic purpose, and
is thus described by that enterprising traveller “ I confess
that among the great number of curious phenomena which
I have observed in the course of my travels, there are few
which have made a stronger impression on my mind than
the cow-tree. On the barren declivities of a rock grows a
tree, whose leaves are dry and coriaceous (leather like); its
thick ligneous (woody) roots scarcely enter the rock; for
several months in the year, rain scarcely waters its fan-
shaped leaves ", the branches appear dry and dead, but,
when an incision (cut) is made in the trunk, a sweet and
nutritious milk flows from it. It is at the rising of the sun
that the vegetable liquid runs most abundantly; then the na-
tives and negroes are seen to come from all parts, provided
with vessels to receive the milk, which becomes yellow and
thickens at the surface. Some empty their vessels under
the same tree; others carry them home to their children.
It is like a shepherd distributing to his family the milk of
his flock. If those who possess these precious trees near
their habitation, drink with so much pleasure their beneficent
(kind and bountiful) juice, with what delight will the
traveller, who penetrates these mountains, appease with it
his hunger and thirst ?”
So much for the order and regularity in which we find
the several kinds of plants forming the “ vegetable king-
dom,” spread out on the face of the earth, and the fitness
of each for the spot allotted to it. We come now to their
uses of which we will only mention a few, as to do justice
to this part of our subject would require a whole lecture,
and the present has, I fear, already gone beyond the proper
limits.


To the plant in the first place, man is indebted for that
most necessary of all kinds of food—bread. To the tea
and coffee-plant he owes much of the most palatable of all
beverages or drinks. The number of delightful fruits
yielded by the fruit-bearing tribes, scattered over all parts
of the world is almost too great to be counted. From the
cotton-shrub comes a large share of his clothing. The
plant gives the spice that makes our food savory ; to the
Chinese it supplies candles, to the natives of Chili in South
America salt. In one part of the world it gives a medi-
cine to expel from the body the wasting fever, in anothe
a balsam to heal our wounds. There are many more im-
portant uses of the plant, upon which I cannot now dwell;
let it be enough to say that from the plant may be formed
the house that shelters man from the severity of the wea-
ther ; from the plant is formed most of the furniture on
which our ease and our comfort depend; and from the
plant is constructed the huge ship by which the most dis-
tant countries can be, as it were, brought together, their
natural productions exchanged, and the bounty of nature
spread equally amongst all God’s creatures.
I trust that you can now comprehend or understand some of
the wonders of the vegetable kingdom, and that I have not in
vain attempted to point out to you the great wisdom and
skill, the great love and affection for His creatures the Lord
has shown in this part of His works; but above all let me
hope, that His love and affection will fill your hearts with
gratitude and admiration, and His skill and His wisdom
give you a higher notion of His greatness, and his power ;
that you will think more frequently of Him, and that you
will earnestly pray for His grace to overcome your vicious
dispositions.
J. P. 0.


CANADA AND HER RESOURCES.
Canada was first discovered, in the year 1499, by
Sebastian Cabot, and after being frequently visited by the
French, was colonized by them in 1608. This lively and
intelligent nation saw in it the making of a great and pro-
ductive colony. They encouraged emigration to it, they
endowed its church, and according as civilization spread,
divided it into lordships, or baronies, as we call them. Some
of those lordships still exist, with their grand old French
names. The accomplished and brave French gentleman, in
after generations, intermarrying with the sensible, solid,
Saxon Englishwoman, and vice verm, the sturdy, honest
English yeoman uniting himself with the educated and
graceful French dame, have produced a race of people at
this moment inhabiting Canada, that for politeness, hospi-
tality, and good nature, in every sense of the word, is
scarcely to be excelled by any in existence. In 1759, it
fell into the occupation of the English, and has remained in
their possession up to this moment. It would be out of
place here to enter into a history of the events that led to
the rupture with France, and consequent war, in the course
of which this interesting country was wrested from the
crown of that country; so I shall content myself with re-
ferring merely to its last great battle—that of Quebec.
The battle of Quebec was fought, between the French and
English, in September, 1759, on the heights of Abraham,
which overhang the city. In this decisive and sanguinary
engagement both generals were killed—the heroic General
Wolfe, on our side, and the Marquess of Montcalm, on that
of the French. Our general, Wolfe, was much lamented
by the nation and the army, as he was a good man as well
as a brave general. It may be well to repeat the epitaph


inscribed on his monument by direction of the British
Parliament:—“The Parliament erected this Monument to
the Memory of Major-General James Wolfe, who, having
distinguished himself eminently in Europe and North
America, by a stretch of magnanimity, gained a master
victory at Quebec, September 13th, 1759, and fixed upon
the spot, in death, the fulness’ of his fame.” This is, in-
deed, a glorious tribute, and richly he deserved it. In 1791
Canada was divided into two provinces, the Upper and Lower ;
and every year since it has advanced with gigantic strides
in the path of prosperity and contentment. When the
English took possession of the province they respected the
ancient laws and rights of the colonists: private privileges
were secured, and the church of the people acknowledged
and protected. It is right to remind you, the old Canadi-
ans were of French origin, and, consequently, professors of
the national faith of the mother country, and had an
endowed church and hierarchy of their own, just as we have
here at home, which institutions were left in full and undis-
turbed integrity by their new masters.
At the present day it may be asserted, that amongst the
numerous and flourishing colonies of Great Britain there
is not to be found one more flourishing, and certainly more
content, than that of Canada. Its countless resources are
hourly developing themselves ; its population increasing in
wealth, civilization, and refinement. No man with health,
and willing to work, can be without a dollar in his pocket;
and if he be sober and industrious, ere long without dollars
in the bank too ; and, as a matter of course, farms, flocks,
herds, corn, and cattle follow. Plenty of work, and ample
reward for that work, awaits the Canadian immigrant: it
is there, indeed, “ reward sweetens labour,” and man can
find a true aim for his activity. The tall tree invites the axe
of the clearer; the limpid stream, wandering through sweet


and untrodden meadows, woos the eye to rest with pleasure
on it, and make thereon a happy home. 0, men, contem-
plate the happiness of those who are sufficiently fortunate
to secure a home in this favoured land. Past troubles only
enhance the pleasure of present joys. Brothers follow
them in the path of industry they have shown them ; sisters
seek shelter from the storms of a cold world with them ;
and blest, thrice blest is the man who can boast to himself
that he has created a warm chimney-nook for his aged
parents beyond the Atlantic wave. Acre after acre, is
added to the farm yearly; the axe sounds cheerily in the
light of the morning and evening sun; the tall tree falls
with a merry shout from the strong and well-fed woodman.
Well may he shout: the fall of that tree adds another rood
to his farm—estate I should say—as the price of one of
our pigs, our small pigs, would pay the rent of 100 acres.
The knowledge, partial as it is, which you receive here
of tailoring, shoemaking, &c., would make you invalu-
able assistants to some of those large Canadian farmers, as
when the day’s work would be done, you could, by the
bright wood fire, ply your trade, and thereby fill your
pocket. The proprietors invariably treat their servants—
assistants they consider them—with kindness; they remem-
ber that they took axe and spade in hand, some short time
before, themselves, and that the path is open to you to do
so likewise, and attain the same honourable independence.
Though my object is not so much to make you acquain-
ted with the natural geography of the country as to point
out to you the inducements it holds forth as a field for em-
ployment, yet I cannot allow to pass unnoticed the great
natural beauties and inexhaustible resources of native
wealth of this favoured country of lakes and rivers. I
must, therefore, ask your attention while I glance hurriedly
at these subjects as I go along.


Geographical Features. —Canada extends from Labrador,
on the East, to the Western extremity of Lake Superior,
on the West, a distance of nearly 1,600 miles, with an
average breadth of 220 miles. Its area is said to be
350,000 square miles, or three times greater than that of
Great Britain and Ireland.
By looking at the map you will see that the large Gulf
of St. Lawrence and Labrador, form its Eastern boundary;
other British possessions extending to the great Pacific Ocean,
its Western; the territories of the Hudson’s Bay Company,
its Northern; and the United States and New Brunswick,
its Southern.
The colony consists of two divisions, namely, Upper and
Lower Canada. The former is sometimes known as Wes-
tern Canada, and the latter as Eastern Canada.
Upper or Western Canada contains about 100,000 square
miles, and Lower or Eastern Canada about 206,000 square
miles, or more than double the area of the upper province.
I do not now include the vast space occupied by the chan-
nel of the great river St. Lawrence, and part of the gulf
of the same name, which by some is computed at a quarter
of a million square miles.
The contents or areas that I mention here you are not to
consider as precisely exact, for geographers very seldom
agree on these points. For instance, I find it stated on a
different authority that the area of the whole of Canada,
that is, the two divisions, upper and lower, taken together,
comprises 346,863 square miles. Be the area of the co-
lony what it may, it is sufficient for us to know that it is
nearly three times greater than that of Great Britain and
Ireland, as I have already mentioned.
Canada is one of the finest watered and best wooded
countries in the world; her timber forms one of the most
important items in her exports, several ships being annually
laden with it to these kingdoms.


I have just stated that Canada is finely watered. Her
rivers and her lakes are amongst the grandest in the world.
The St. Lawrence stands at the head of the rivers in
Canada. It takes its rise West of Lake Superior, under the
name of the St. Louis, and is known by various names as
it flows along. Thus, between Lakes Superior and Huron it
receives the name of the Narrows, or Falls of St. Marie; be-
tween Lakes Huron and St. Clair, the St. Clair; between Erie
and St. Clair, the Detroit; and between Ontario and Erie, the
Niagara. It is not known as the St. Lawrence till it reaches
Montreal,from whence it runs direct into the ocean, into which
it is said to discharge every year 4,300,000 tons of fresh wa-
ter. The estuary, or mouth of this river is 100 miles wide ; its
basin is said to embrace nearly 298,000 square miles, of
which 94,000 are covered with water. The length of this
noble river from its source to its mouth is about 3,000
miles, varying in breadth from one to ninety miles.
The scenery along the river St. Lawrence is beautifully
grand, and is thus described by one, long familiar with its
characteristic features :
“ The river St. Lawrence, and the whole country, unfold
scenery, the magnificence of which, in combination with
the most delightful physical beauty, is unequalled in
America and perhaps in the world. From both land and
water there are frequently prospects which open a viewof
from fifty to 100 miles of river, from ten to twenty miles
in breadth. The imposing features of these vast landscapes
consist of lofty mountains, wide valleys, bold headlands,
luxuriant forests, cultivated fields, pretty villages and
settlements, some of them stretching up along the moun-
tains ; fertile islands, with neat white cottages and rich
pastures, and well-tended flocks ; rocky islets and tributary
rivers, some rolling over precipices, and one of them, the
‘ Saguenay, ’ like an inland mountain lake, bursting
through a perpendicular chasm in the granite chain ; while


on the bosom of the St. Lawrence, majestic ships, large brigs
and schooners, with innumerable pilot boats and river craft
charm the mind of the immigrant or traveller.”
The scenery on approaching Quebec is truly magnificent.
“On the left, Point Levi, with its romantic church and
cottages; on the right, the western shore of the He
d Orleans, said to resemble so much the Devonshire coast;
beyond, the lofty mainland opens to view, and the specta-
tor’s attention is riveted by the magnificent Falls of Mont-
morency, a river as large as the Thames at Richmond,
and which precipitates its volume of waters over a perpen-
dicular precipice 220 feet in height. The eye then runs
along a richly cultivated country for miles, terminating in
a ridge of mountains, with the city and battlements of
Quebec rising amphitheatrically, creating, as it were, the
ridge of Cape Diamond, and majestically towering over
the surrounding country as if destined to be the capital
of an empire—the whole panorama being one of the most
striking views in the old or new world.”
Justly may the Canadian people be proud of their noble
river, and look upon it as the grand highway of their com-
merce. Though parts of this river are occasionally inter-
rupted by rapids, some of which are so great as to prevent
vessels ascending them, yet the enterprise and energy of
the Canadians have overcome the danger and difficulty
here presented by means of a chain of grand canals, which
renders the St. Lawrence navigable for vessels of great
burden for nearly its whole course.
The canals constituting this magnificent chain are the
Wellend, St. Lawrence, and Lachone canals, which are
only rivalled by that which travellers regard as the greatest
monument of Chinese industry*
* Canals. —Mr. Hogan, in his admirable essay, referring to these
canals, remarks that—» As early as 1841, when the population of


The principal rivers that flow into the St. Lawrence are
the Ottowa, St. Maurice, and Saguenay, on each of which
I shall make a few remarks in their turn.
The Ottowa river is next in size and importance to the
St. Lawrence. Its length is about 780 miles, and in its
course receives as tributaries many rivers which are equal
in size to the largest in England. The country drained by
this river abounds in natural wealth, perhaps more so than
any other part of the mighty continent of America.
The basin of the Ottowa extends over an area of 80,000
Upper Canada was but 465,337, and of United Canada only 1,114,837,
and when their entire annual revenue did not exceed £347,000, their
Legislature had the courage to make an appropriation of half a
million pounds for these works. As a consequence, locks among
the finest and largest in the world have been constructed, and
divide admiration with the splendid river they render more available
for the use of all America, The passenger, as he returns by the
canals, finds it indeed difficult to tell which to admire more, the
works which have been the offspring of enterprise and intellect, or
the St. Lawrence river. The chambers of these locks are two hun-
dred feet long by a width of forty-five feet, and they are so superbly
constructed that they will stand for ages as monuments to the spirit-
ed little Legislature which conceived and secured their completion.
The remaining link of canal—for I may as well speak of it in this
connexion—between the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the head of
Lake Superior, is the Wellend which unites Lakes Erie and Ontario,
and avoids the Falls of Niagara. Its locks are little less capacious
than those on the St. Lawrence canals, but are equally well built.
They have chambers a hundred and fifty feet long by twenty-six and
a-half feet wide, and the available depth of water in both is between
nine and ten feet.
“ The contemplation of these canals as works of enterprise and
skill, naturally leads to their contemplation as works of utility and
enlarged public value. If the people who now occupy the vast valley
of the St. Lawrence, and the plains and slopes which are less con-
veniently situated to other great channels of communication to the
ocean than to it, were to use it solely, would they be acting wisely
and well? Or if the tens of thousands from Europe who annually
seek this valley and these plains and slopes, with the view of occupy-
ing them, were to follow up this chain of navigation, would they be
doing the best they could for themselves ? These inquiries are of
singular interest, and I shall devote all the space to them that the
limits of this essay, and the other important matters treated of,
permit/’


square miles, which is said to be capable of supporting
8,000,000 of people.
The scenery along the Ottowa is so magnificent that no
words can adequately describe it.
The country is represented as offering the greatest
inducements to all classes of industrial and enterprising
immigrants—a truth of which fresh proofs are every day
afforded. Lord Elgin, alluding to the vast advantages of
this portion of the colony, in his despatch to the Govern-
ment, about four years ago, says “ that the farmer who
undertakes to cultivate unreclaimed land in new countries,
often finds that not only does every step of advance which he
makes in the wilderness, by removing him from the centres
of trade and civilization, enhance the cost of all he has to
purchase, but that, moreover, it diminishes the value of
what he has to sell. It is not so, however, with the
farmer who follows in the wake of the lumberman: he
finds, on the contrary, in the wants of the latter, a real
demand for all that he produces, at a price not only equal
to that procurable in the ordinary marts, but increased by
the cost of transport from them to the scene of the lumber-
ing operations.”
In closing my remarks on the Ottowa river, I should
perhaps tell you that the natural wealth of the country
through which it flows comprises an inexhaustible supply
of iron, vast quantities of timber, (in fact, the forests here
are, perhaps, the finest in the world), copper, lead, plum-
bago, marble, &c.
This district furnishes annually to the European markets
alone 25,000,000 cubic feet of timber, 850,000 deals and
planks, with a vast variety of other timber.
I now close my remarks on the Ottowa river with the
following extract from the Report of the Government
Agent to the Crown Lands Department relative to the
wealth of the district:—


“ On principles of calculation admitted by persons of ex-
perience to be correct, after making deduction for barren
ground and destruction by fire, it is estimated that there are
still standing on the Qttowa and its tributaries, about
45,811,200 tons of timber, of the kind and average dimension
now taken to market, and about 183,244,800 tons of a
smaller size, though still valuable.
The river St. Maurice drains a large and valuable tract
of country also, which within a few years has had its
sources of wealth developed by men of perseverance and
enterprise. Several companies have been formed and are
engaged in the timber trade, and Government has expended
large sums of money in the construction of rafts for con-
veying timber down the river.
Along the banks of this river are extensive fields of iron
ore, and many extensive iron works.
The Saguenay, 200 miles distant from the St. Maurice,
is a beautiful river, and of great depth. The scenery of
its banks is perhaps not exceeded in beauty and sublimity
in any part of America. Many of the rocks on its shores
attain the height of 3,000 feet.
Many large manufactures are to be found on this river,
and numerous ships laden with timber, destined for Great
Britain.
I have given you a brief account of the principal rivers
in Canada ; very brief indeed, but the time just now does
not permit me to dwell any longer upon this point of our
lecture. Of course you can understand that in such a
country as Canada very many rivers exist, which I have
not noticed now, but in a future lecture they shall engage
our attention.
The Lakes of Canada come next under our notice. They
are very many, but I shall only tell you about a few of the
principal ones, and these are lakes Superior, Huron, Erie,
and Ontario.


These lakes form a grand chain, and are all situated on
the river St. Laurence.
Lake Superior, as its name denotes, is superior to all
other fresh-water lakes in the world. Indeed it may justly
be termed an inland sea.
This queen of lakes covers an area of 32,000 square
miles. Its length is 430 miles, breadth 160 miles; depth
1,200 feet, and circumference 1,750 miles ; it is said to re-
ceive the waters of nearly 200 rivers. It contains a great
number of islands, and its shores are rocky, but for the
most part covered with timber.
Its waters are discharged into lake Huron by a part of
the St. Lawrence, known as the River St. Mary.
Lake Huron is another vast sheet of water, 250 miles
long, 220 miles broad, and about 900 feet deep. A line
drawn round the lake would measure 1,100 miles. This
lake receives the waters of many rivers, and contains good
harbours on its north coast. The River St. Clair connects
the lake with Lake Erie, which may be termed the third
great lake in Canada.
This lake runs from east to west, and is 280 miles long,
sixty-three broad, and covers an area of 11,000 square
miles.
It is bordered by a most fertile tract of country,
which renders it of much commercial importance. That
part of the St. Lawrence known as the River Niagara, con-
nects this lake with Lake Ontario. On this river are situ-
ated the Falls of Niagara, which I shall speak of by-and-
by.
Ontario is 180 miles long, eighty broad, and having a
circumference of miles. The scenery of this lake is truly
beautiful, and many harbours, deep and capacious, are to be
found round its coasts. Like the other lakes, it receives the
water of many rivers, amongst which is that of the St.


Lawrence, which flows from it in one uninterrupted course
of 700 miles to the great Atlantic Ocean.
All the lakes that I have mentioned are raised one above
the other, and many rapids and waterfalls ars thus caused
on those parts of the St. Lawrence which connect them.
The following will give you some idea of the position of
these lakes.
Lake Superior is raised 672 feet above the level of the
sea; Lake Huron is thirty feet lower than Lake Superior;
Lake Erie is thirty-two feet lower than the Huron; and
Lake Ontario is 331 feet lower than Lake Erie. These two
last-mentioned lakes I have already told you are united by
the River Niagara which is thirty-three miles long, and
slants or descends sixty-six feet in this short distance.
The Falls of Niagara, which I mentioned a while ago, are
situated between Lakes Erie and Ontario.
This cataract presents the most magnificent scene perhaps
in the world; the perpendicular height of the fall being
about 150 feet, with a breadth of 3,500 feet, or about three-
fourths of a mile. From the weight of this vast body of
water, and the quickness of its descent, the ground in the
neighbourhood is always trembling, whilst its roar is heard
on every side for a distance of fifteen or twenty miles.
I have now given you some information about some of
the chief of the grand lakes of Canada, or rather of America.
A description of all would be impossible to embrace in the
limits of a lecture; but I would wish you to remember this
remarkable fact, that the American lakes contain more than
half the quantity of fresh water in the world.
You must be satisfied with this brief sketch of the lakes
and rivers of Canada at present, and give me your attention
while I speak of other things which, if not so interesting,
are equally important to know. I shall begin with its
natural productions .


Natural Productions. —Timber.—The value of timber
exported from Canada in 1863, amounted to £2,365,255 ;
and the ships built in Quebec during that year may be
estimated at £620,18?. Of the timber exports the value
of the quantity, according to Mr. Hogan, sent to Great
Britain amounted to £1,682,125; to the British Colonies
£ll,OOO ; and to the United States of America £652,544.
The consumption of timber for home purposes during the
same year might be computed at least to £2,000,000. We
may, therefore, set down the proceeds of the forests for 1853
at £4,532,000.
Canada possesses all kinds of ornamental timber ; and one
kind called the black walnut is superior in durability and
grain to the mahogany and rosewood used in Europe.
Pot and Pearl Ashes. —The value of these articles expor-
ted in the same year amounted to £167,000.
Furs and Skins. —The value of furs and skins exported in
the same year is estimated at £32,000.
Fisheries. —The fisheries of Canada contribute very large-
ly to her wealth.
The produce of this trade in 1853 was about 110,000
barrels ; and the value of the fish exported £85,000, viz :
to the United States, £18,355; to British North American
Colonies, £16,072; to Great Britain, £8,801; to foreign
colonies, £42,770.
The following is an extract from a paper prepared by
Mr. Bouchette, and published bythe House of Assembly
in 1862:
“ Rushing periodically in certain seasons from the Atlan-
tic, whether by the passage of Canso or by the entrance to
the gulf, between Cape Ray and Cape Lawrence, the cod,
herring, haddock, mackarel, and the various gregarious
finny tribes, in immense shoals, spread along the vast extent
of coast that is presented by the gulf shores of Cape Breton,


Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Gaspe, the north coast of the
St. Lawrence, and Labrador, to the Straits of Belle Isle;
then along the western coast of Newfoundland to Cape Ray,
presenting upwards of 2,000 miles of in-shore fisheries, be-
sides the numerous rivers and streams which are ascended
for miles by salmon, as well as a quantity of fresh-water
fish, which forms a very productive branch of the fisheries
of these provinces.”
Mineral Wealth. —Canada abounds in mineral wealth;
gold, silver, iron, copper, have been found in various places
throughout the colony ; and the development of these sour-
ces of wealth only await the energy and enterprise of men
of capital to give employment to thousands, and thus show
to the world that nature has been bountiful in her gifts of
these metals, as well as in the other treasures of which I
have already spoken,
Agricultural Produce. —As an agricultural country Cana-
da offers inducements of the most favourable kind to the
farmer and agricultural labourer. In 1852 the exports of
agricultural produce amounted to £1,274,214 3s. KM,
while in the succeeding year it increased to nearly
£2,000,000.
Canada is a very extensive wheat-growing country. In
1851 the produce was considerably above 15,000,000
bushels, of which upwards of 4,230,000 bushels were ex-
ported.
Soil. —The soil of Canada is, generally speaking, extreme-
ly fertile, being improved and enriched in many places by
the ashes of fires which sometimes occur in the forest, and
thus acting as manure for the land for many years.
Mr. Morris, in his Prize Essay on Canada, tells us that
—“ The soil of Canada is adapted and the climate favour-
able for the growth of wheat, peas, rye, barley, oats, buck-
wheat, hay, hemp, and flax, grass seed, Indian corn, and


potatoes; and of all these large quantities are raised.
Upper Canada is best adapted for wheat, and produces it
most largely ; but Lower Canada grows no inconsiderable
quantity, and produces also large quantities of peas, oats,
and the coarser grains generally. Its soil is also well
adapted for the growth of root crops, which should be more
extensively grown, in view of the importance of fodder,
which is rendered more valuable in consequence of the
length of the winter. Flax and hemp might also be grown
with great advantage to the country. Lower Canada is
especially suited for their growth ; and these articles might
prove a great source of industrial wealth, and give employ-
ment to a thrifty population. Hemp and flax grow with
the greatest luxuriance.”
Climate. —The climate of Canada is healthy and salu-
brious, perhaps more so than that of any of the United
States. Much, no doubt, has been said of the severity of
its winters ; but facts and figures go clearly to prove that
the climate of Canada is every day becoming more and more
salubrious, and more favourable to health and long life.
In 1851 there were in Lower Canada over 100 years of
age, 38 persons ; between 90 and 100 years, 417 ; between
80 and 90, 3,030; between 70 and 80, 11,084; between
60 and 70, 24,095.
In Upper Canada, in the same year, there were over 100
years of age, 20 persons ; between 70 and 80, 7,156 ; be-
tween 60 and 70, 20,266; so that the balance is in favour
of the lower province, as regards the longevity of its in-
habitants, and, doubtless, to be referred to the greater com-
parative dryness of the atmosphere.
“ In Lower Canada, it may be further stated, that melons
ripen freely in the open air ; plums and pears grow abun-
dantly, and apples attain a peculiar degree of excellence,
the apples of the Island of Montreal being especially famed.
5


Peaches and grapes also ripen freely with the aid only of
Glass. On the whole, it may be safely asserted that while
the province presents great diversities of climate, yet the
general character of its climate is such as to conduce both
to the maintenance of the physical health of the inhabitants
of the province, and also to the promotion of the growth of
the cereal and other natural products of the fertile soil of
Canada.
“The of the province is sufficiently proved by
its cloudless skies, its elastic air, and almost entire absence
of fogs. The lightness of the atmosphere has a most in-
vigorating effect upon the spirits. The winter frosts are
severe and steady, and the summer suns are hot, and bring
on vegetation with wonderful rapidity. It is true that the
spring of Canada differs much from the spring of many part 8
of Europe ; but, after her long winter, the crops start up as
if by magic, and reconcile her inhabitants to the loss of that
which elsewhere is often the sweetest season of the year.
If, however, Canada has but a short spring, she can boast
of an autumn deliciously mild, and often lingering on with
its ‘ Indian summer’ and golden sunsets, until the month of
December.”
Manufactures. —As a manufacturing country, Canada may
be said to be only in its infancy. Many of her manufac-
tured articles, however, obtained prizes at the great Exhibi-
tion of London in the year 1851.
Ship-building, especially at Quebec, forms the most im-
portant of her trades. The vessels built there having ob-
tained a reputation for their speed, solidity, and beauty of
outline.
In the year 1853 forty-eight ships, with a tonnage of
49,000, were built at Quebec, valued at £500,000; being an
increase in one year of twenty-two ships, at a value of
£340,000.


The average annual value of vessels built at Quebec is
estimated at £500,000.
Iron .—Many mines of this valuable mineral are now being
worked; and, from the accounts received both of the quan-
tity and quality of this metal to be found in Canada, we
may safely conclude that in a few years it will form one of
the most important sources of wealth in the colony. The
bar iron manufactured in Canada is equal to the best Swedish
Iron, while some of the iron found in the vicinity of Lake
Superior has been pronounced superior to any in the world*
Woollen Goods and Furs. —Canada produces a large quan-
tity of woollen goods, and of a most superior quality, lor
which their manufacturers have received various prizes.
For her furs, Canada stands unrivalled in the world.
Canada has her tanneries, her founderies, her mills, her
breweries, and her innumerable factories of all descriptions,
which, added to her fertile velleys, her luxuriant forests,
and her unrivalled water-power, invite the labourer and the
capitalist to her shores, rich in beauty, abounding in natural
wealth, happy homes, and hospitable people.
Commerce. —The commerce of Canada has increased won-
derfully within the last few years. The increase in her
commerce from 1852 to 1853 alone was upwards ol
£5,000,000.
In the latter year the exports of the country amounted to
nearly £6,000,000.
The exports were as follows: —produce of the mines,
£27,339 3s. 2d.; produce of the sea, £85,000 13s. B d.;
produce of the forests, £2,335,255 2s. 2d.; animals and
their produce, £342,631 75.; vegetable food, £1,995,094
15s. 9d.; other agricultural products, £26,618 17s. lid.;
manufactures, £35,106 95.; other articles, £15,823 11s. 3d.
I have told you that the progress made by Canada in her
commerce was astonishing—so perfectly so, indeed, that wo


should be scarcely inclined to believe it had we not proofs
which bid defiance to doubt or contradiction.
The merchants of Canada are up and doing, as are all
her people; and, when we remember that at the close of the
last century, or thereabouts, what is now the fertile, wealthy,
and prosperous Canada, was one vast unsightly wilderness,
we must admit that the energy and enterprise displayed by
that people give them a claim to a superior rank on the
American continent.
I will now speak a few words on the chief towns of the
colony in which we are all so deeply interested; and in
doing so I shall now and then allude to their rapid rise and
almost incredible progress.
Principal Towns. —As I have, perhaps, spoken too long
already, I shall confine my observations to four of the
principal towns, —Toronto and Kingston in Upper
and Quebec and Montreal in Lower,
Toronto, the capital of Upper Canada, is a very hand-
some town, and beautifully situated on the northern border
of Lake Ontario. It was the seat of parliament of Upper
Canada until both Canadas were united by Act of Parlia-
ment in 1841.
Toronto, in 1826, had nst 2,000 inhabitants, while its
population at this moment is upwards of 30,000. It has
risen with great rapidity ; its progress, social and commer-
cial, show an enterprising and intellectual people. The
surrounding district is very fertile, and mansion-houses and
richly cultivated farms add to the beauty as well as indicate
the wealth and comfort of its inhabitants. In ten years
the population of this town increased upwards of 16,000.
Kingston is a considerable town, situated on Lake
Ontario, just at the efilux of the St. Lawrence, close to a
number of islands. The population of this town is upwards
of 10,000. Its inhabitants are most industrious and well


behaved, and the prosperity of the town is advancing every
day, as may be judged from the fact, that in ten years its
population has increased 5,000.
In 1793 it consisted of but one Indian’s hut, containing
twelve families.
Ottowa is another rising city, called after, and situated
on the beautiful river of that name.
As a proof of the progress of this city, it may be stated
that, in 1830, it consisted of 140 houses, some of which
were mere sheds. The population of the city at present is
upwards of 10,000; and, though the property on which the
city stands was purchased for £BO, I am sure that some of
it is worth at the present time £2O a-foot.
Quebec, the capital of Lower Canada, is situated on the
St. Lawrence, in a rich and fertile district; its population
is about 40,000, chiefly descendants from the French.
Its fortifications, its great port, and its very favourable
situation for commerce, render it one of the most imposing
and beautiful cities in any of the British colonies.
This city has nearly doubled its population within the
last thirty years.
Montreal was formerly the second city in Lower Canada,
but is now of greater importance than Quebec, it being the
seat of government. Its population is considerably above
40,000, consisting of English and French in nearly equal
numbers.
The Catholic cathedral in this city is, perhaps, the most
stately and magnificent building in the whole continent of
America.
Montreal has trebled its population in thirty-four years
and, if not the most substantial, is certainly the most
beautifully built city in America.
Banks. —Banks were established at a very early period in
Canada, and have extended their operations with the growth


of the country; and though the number of them has
greatly increased, still the business of banking has been so
honestly and so prudently managed that there never yet
has been known an instance of a Canadian bank stopping
payment. Does not this speak forcibly for the healthy
tone and state of society, and the unmistakable progress
of the colony ? Contrast this state of atfairs with the bank-
ing proceedings of the United States. Why, men, there is
scarcely a bank in the United States that has not broken
down. A man in the United States might go to.bed in the
possession of wealth, and rise a beggar in the morning—
his favourite bank had stopped payment, and its chief gone
“ over the border.” In Canada there is no boasting. In
this department all is certainty, solidity, and honesty.
As a whole, the banks of Canada have been judiciously
managed, and afford to the capitalist safe and favourable
investment.
The Press .—The Press of the colony is also in a most flour-
ishing and healthy state, decidedly moral, and for efficiency,
general information, and character, quite equal, and, in fact, in
many cases superior to the provincial press of our own country.
In every ordinary sized town, of Upper Canada, and in all
the cities of Lower Canada, there is a press and a news-
paper —perhaps two. The city sheets, that is, the returns
of the imports and exports shipping published in every sea-
port, &c., contain, in addition to commercial intelligence,
much interesting literature, and matter of importance and
utility.
Ability, energy, and liberality are the leading features of
the Canadian press, and its growth has been both steady
and rapid.
The first newspaper was established by Mr. Brown, of
Philadelphia, in 1763, “ The Quebec Gazette,” which still
exists.


Tlie number of French and English papers published in
Upper Canada in 1853 was forty-three, which afforded a
paper for every 20,000 inhabitants ; in Lower Canada, 114
papers in 1854, that is one for every 8,000. The disparity
between the two provinces is gradually diminishing, and it
is to be hoped will soon altogether disappear, owing to the
general diffusion of education throughout the lower province.
None of the newspapers in either province is confined exclu-
sively to political topics; most of them contain useful
selections and general information in various branches of
literature and science ; and it is pleasing to observe, that,
as far as is known, they all breathe a tone favourable to
public morality. Would to God we could say as much for
our own periodical press.
Educational Institutions. —On the whole, Canada has
every reason to be proud ofher educational institutions ; and
their bearing on her future is a very important consideration,
inasmuch,as, no doubt, they must greatly tend to her advance-
ment and progress in general enlightenment. Her system
is a noble one, inferior to none pursued in other countries ;
superior to that of many; scarcely yielding, in fact, to the
National education in Ireland.
The schools and educational institutions of Canada are
built on a most superior plan ; and I may assert, without
exaggeration, that the system of education now established
in that country far exceeds in comprehensive details any-
thing of the kind in Great Britain. The school-houses are
generally supplied with maps, standard school books, and
other necessary educational requirements. In these schools —
rarely not more than a mile and a-half from the most re-
mote of the settlers in the district—the children receive a
sound and useful English education, quite adequate to all
the ordinary avocations of life. In some districts the schools
are free—that is, they arc open to all children between the


ages of five and sixteen without charge; but in the greater
proportion, a tuition fee of a quarter of a dollar, that is, a
shilling a month, is charged, and this is the highest amount
allowed by law to be levied. A large proportion of the
teachers of the common schools in Upper Canada are trained
at the normal schools at Toronto, in which city there is a
great university, or college, also, like our Trinity College.
Under existing laws, the child of the poorest labourer, who
distinguishes himself as a successful competitor for a free
scholarship in a common school, has the advantage of at-
tending one of the county grammar schools (that is, a school
of higher pretension than the schools I have been speaking
of). Mere, again, he has open to him another free scholar-
ship in the highest educational institutions in the country,
if his merits entitle him to that distinction. Thus an
educational ladder has been erected by the Government by
which the child of the humblest inhabitant may ascend to
the highest point of scholastic eminence, with the children
of the wealthiest and most respectable in his neighbourhood
as his competitors.
Thus you see, men, in this happy land, the industrious,
honest man may live to see his child an ornament to the
church, the law, or the medical profession, and thereby ele-
vate himself and his other children to a height in the social
scale he never could even dream of at home. It is with
heartfelt pleasure I mark in every one of you, without ex-
ception, a desire to learn and make amends by every means
in your power for the wofully misspent time of your early
years.
Now, need I ask you, would it be the fondest wish of
your hearts to see your children (if blessed with any)
receive a sound, religious education, and be saved by it
from the fatal errors into which you have unhappily fallen.
The government of this province, which is aptly called


“ the brightest jewel in the British crown,” is of the paternal
and liberal kind; in fact, there is no country on earth, even our
own, where the local legislature takes more care of the
people generally, and diffuses the greater good to a greater
number. The charitable institutions founded on true phil-
anthropy extend their blessings to all around. The hos-
pitals, well endowed, and presided over by able and well-
chosen officers, are a model for older states.
Postal System. —The postal system is as well organised as
our own. Public libraries adorn every township. Railways
intersect the country to a vast extent, and others are being
constructed. At the close of last year, 1856, Canada had
2,000 miles of fully-equipped railway, which cost her about
£18,000,000 sterling. What a powerful impetus this net-
work of railroads will give to the developement of the
boundless resources of this country. In this little lecture
I have endeavoured to advert to all matters most likely to
awaken your attention, to stimulate your energies, and
guide your thoughts towards this glorious and happy land.
It would be useless to encumber this lecture with minute
details, as it would distract your minds from the main point
of my discourse. I have attempted to describe the country,
its soil, its climate, and its resources; to trace its people’s
advancement, to show how they govern themselves, and
what are their institutions; to exhibit, in short, what may
guide industry in search of a place wherein to reap the
richest rewards, and capital in quest of a field for profitable
investment.
“To the poor who are struggling against becoming
poorer;” to those whose own circumstances place them be-
yond reach of want, but regard with anxiety the future
condition of their younger dependents; to the “hewers'of
wood and drawers of water,” into whose dreams a hope of
domestic comfort or independence never dared to enter,


what a prospect does this noble country hold out! Here a
mi]lion and a-half of men as poor and as friendless as your-
selves, have been able to fling away the weight of poverty
from their limbs, and here is ample room for millions more
to emulate their example.
I have endeavoured to give some idea of the wealth of
this country, and though by no means capable in the limits
of a lecture to do the subject the justice it deserves, still I
flatter myself the picture must appear tempting. Let me
now ask, who were the men who created, who now enjoy
this vast property? Were they conquerors? Were they
capitalists? Were they supported by powerful princes?
No, on the contrary, they were the oppressed and hopeless
of the old continent of Europe, with no other wealth than
stalworth arms, no support but the confidence that ever
accompanies perseverance and industry. Let you who
listen but resolve to imitate the industry, enterprise, and
the laudable ambition which distinguish the present inhabi-
tants, and which contributed so signally to the success of
the early settlers of this country; and rest assured that,
if Canada has wealth, Canada will afford you every oppor"
tunity, every facility to honestly acquire your share of it.
Yes, seek this shore; be steady, be virtuous, be honest; and
I feel convinced that I by no means prophesy falsely if I
say, that a day may come when, your former errors no
longer remembered, you may stand erect before your fellow-
man, happy in your home in this world, and happy in the
hope of an eternal one in the world to come.


THE OCEAN.
The subject which I shall bring before your notice this
evening is— The Ocean. Beautifully has it been styled the
Symbol of Eternity— unbeginning, unfathomable, and
boundless—
Beautiful, sublime, and glorious,
Mild, majestic, foaming, free ;
Over time itself, victorious :
Image of eternity !
We find it written in the Bible that God said: “ Let the
waters that are under the heaven be gathered together into
one placeand this being done at his bidding, he called
the gathering of the waters seas.
Now these same seas have in them many mysteries ; the
very pebbles along their shores affording subjects for study
to the wisest and most learned of men.
Where is the man who, standing by the seaside, and
casting his eyes over the vast ocean before him, will not be
impressed with a sense of his own nothingness, and struck
with awe at the grandeur, the majesty, and the omnipotence
of the Creator.
Extent. —The Ocean is said to cover three-fourths of our
world. Its waters are unequally distributed over the earth,
as you may perceive by looking at the map of the world,
now before you. In the southern hemisphere the quantity
of water is much greater than that in the northern. So
much so indeed that it was long suspected that a continent
or large division of land lay about the south pole, in order
to regularly balance the globe—a supposition which late
discoveries have proved to be actually true. From 1838
up to 1841, discoveries of this continent continued to be
made by the Americans, the French, and the English.


The Americans have, it appears, made a survey of the coast
for a distance of 1,700 miles. It is stated to lie about
2,000 miles south of Australia, and is described as being
cold and barren, covered with everlasting ice, and without
inhabitants. The most southern point yet reached is a
volcano, or burning mountain, over 12,000 feet high, to
which Captain Ross has given the name of Mount Erebus,
that being the title of one of the vessels under his command.
But supposing no such continent existed, and that it were
possible to remove the waters of the ocean from both the
hemispheres in question, and then weigh them, it is pro-
bable the difference in weight might not be so great as it is
now imagined. I am notnow speaking positively, remember,
but only stating what is very likely to be the real case.
To understand me you must not think, as some people do,
that the bed of the ocean is as level and as even as the
strand on which you have all, perhaps, from time to time
walked.
Bed of the Ocean. —The bed of the Ocean is nothing
more or less than land covered with water, in which we find
as many inequalities, hills and hollows, mountains and
valleys, as we see on the surface of the land on which we
move. If the water were drawn away and the bottom of
the great deep uncovered to our view, we would then see at
once the great resemblance between it and the dry land.
In fact the bed of the ocean, that is the land under the
waters, has the same, or very nearly the same, features of
surface and soil as the land above it. There you find the
swamp, the barren waste, the broad plain, and fruitful val-
ley, swarming with animal and vegetable life.
Climate. —“ The sea has its climates as well as the land.
They both change with the latitude, but one varies with the
elevation above, the other with the depression below the
sea level. The climates in each are regulated by circula-


tion, but the regulators are, on the one hand, winds, on
the other, currents.”
“ The inhabitants of the ocean are as much the creatures
of climate as are those of the dry land, for the same
Almighty hand which decked the lily and cares for the
sparrow, fashioned also the pearl, and feeds the great
whale, and adapted each to the physical conditions by
which His Providence has surrounded it. Whether of the
land or the sea, the inhabitants are all His creatures,
subjects of His laws, and agents in His economy. The sea,
therefore, we may safely infer, has its offices and duties to
perform ; so may we infer, have its currents, and so too its
inhabitants; consequently, he who undertakes to study its
phenomena must cease to regard it as a waste of waters.
He must look upon it as a part of that exquisite machinery
by which the harmonies of nature are preserved—and then
he will begin to perceive the developments of order, and
the evidences of design ; these make it a most beautiful and
interesting subject for contemplation.”
As I shall come to speak of all these things in due course
I shall for the present confine my remarks to the area or
space taken up by the several great bodies of water into
which the whole ocean is naturally divided. They are the
Pacific—the Atlantic—the Indian—the Northerner Arctic—
and the Southern or Antarctic Oceans.
The Pacific Ocean. —The Pacific, or, as it is sometimes
called, the Great Ocean, covers a space of nearly fifty mil-
lions of square miles, which, according to the best authorities,
that is, persons well acquainted with the subject, is an extent
of surface greater than all the dry land on the face of the
globe taken together. This great body of water lies between
the continents of Asia and America, and has, in some places,
a breadth of between fifteen and sixteen thousand miles.
r i his ocean is studded or spotted with more islands than any


of the others, some formed by the labours of the little crea-
tures known as coral-worms, and some by earthquakes, and
the matter thrown out from the bosoms of volcanos, or
burning mountains; for these dreadful occurrences, you
must know, are not confined to land, their effects visibly
disturb the waters of the oceans and seas far and wide.
The depth of parts of the Pacific is indeed unknown, all
attempts to ascertain it having failed, though trials have
been made with sounding lines of five miles in length.
But we are not to think that, on this account, the ocean is
bottomless, for the greatest depth of it yet arrived at, is as
nothing compared with the distance of the centre of the
earth from it? surface.
The Atlantic. —The Atlantic is about half the size of
the Pacific, its area being about 26 millions of square
miles ] and, if we include the Glulf of Mexico, it will
measure in breadth something about 5000 miles, which is
nearly one-third the breadth of the latter- The bed of
the Atlantic is supposed to be a long deep valley, lying
between the Old and New Worlds; and, if we may judge
from the almost total absence of islands, we may conclude,
but very few mountains rise from its bed —islands being
nothing more than the tops of mountains appearing above
the surface of the ocean. The depth of this ocean also is,
in many parts, very great, it being not less than six miles
north of the Bermudas, while, some hundreds of miles
west of the island of St. Helena, a line 27,600 feet in
length did not reach the bottom—and this, you remember,
is the measure of the highest mountain in the world.
The Indian Ocean. —The body of water which laves or
washes the southern coasts of Asia, is called the Indian
Ocean, and covers a space or surface of about 20,000 square
miles.
Arctic and Antarctic. —The Arc tic Ocean is that which lies


around the northern pole or extremity of the earth, and the
Antarctic that which lies around the southern pole or extrem-
ity,which you see to be directly opposite points.
Depth of the Ocean. —From what I have stated regard-
ing the depth of the ocean, you are not to suppose it to be
so very great in all parts. If it were, you would be quite
right in thinking its bed to be one great unbroken level, but
you know this would be contrary to what I have already
told you, regarding it. You yourselves have seen the
bottom of the sea through a few inches of water, and
are aware that it becomes deeper and deeper for awhile,
and then again shallower and shallower, as you approach
or come near some high or lofty spot in its bed,—an island
for instance. In the tract of water lying, as you may see
between Great Britain and Norway, known as the North
Sea, or German Ocean, the depth throughout the greater
portion of it does not exceed 93 feet. The only other re-
mark I shall make on this point is, that where you see the
coast bold and high, the sea at its bottom will be generally
deep, but where the coast slants, the bottom of the sea will
slant also.
In the ocean I have just mentioned, we have a strong
proof of this, for along the coast of Norway where it is bold
and steep, that is perpendicular, or nearly so, the depth is
upwards of 1000 feet.
Pressure. —ln my lecture on water, you may remember
I told you something about its pressure, and the way in
which it is proved to press equally in all directions. I shall
not, therefore, allude to it here further than to say that the
waters of the ocean, where, lightest, are found to press with
a weight of 2809 lbs. on every square inch of surface at a
depth of 1| miles.
The depth of water through which we can see depends
entirely on its transparency, or clearness. The clearer it is,
the greater the distance to which the rays or beams of the


sun can pierce. In the Arctic Ocean and amongst many of
the West Indian Islands the water is very clear, so much
so that the bottom of the sea can be distinctly seen at a
depth of 80 fathoms.
Color oj the Ocean . —The next thing we shall consider
regarding the ocean is its color, which is not, by any means,
uniform, or the same throughout, presentiug different hues
in different places, though at the same time, the waters of
the clearest stream are not more transparent than those of
the ocean. You know transparent means letting light pass
through. Every gleam of sunshine, every passing cloud,
causes more or less change on its surface; but its general,
and perhaps true, color when not altered by circumstances,
is bluish, which becomes clearer and clearer as it comes
near the coasts. The variety of hues or colors which the
ocean is seen to take arises from many causes. One of
the supposed causes is the vast multitudes of animalcules or
infusoria (animals or insects so small as to be invisible to
the naked eye) with which the sea swarms, and which have
the power of tinting or coloring its waters. Sea-vegetables
may be looked on as another cause, as also the mineral
matter which is dissolved or melted in many places by the
action of the waves. In the Gulf of Guinea the color of
fhe ocean is white; round the Maidive Islands, west of
Ceylon, it is black ; off the coast of California, west of North
America, and at the mouth of the La Plata, a large river of
South America, it appears of a vermillion or bright reddish
tint, whilst in the Persian Gulf, between Persia and Arabia,
it is green. The waters of the Arctic Ocean change their
colour very rapidly, being seen to be sometimes clear, some-
times dark, and sometimes an olive green. This last change
is thought to arise from the multitudes of infusoria, before
spoken of, that abound there, which by the way, are said
to devour, or eat up each other, and then become food in


tlieir turn for other animals. The color of the clear, shallow
water is principally caused by that of the bed beneath. If
that should consist of chalk or white sand, the water will
seem of an apple green—if of yellow sand, it will appear
dark green ; if the bottom be dark, the water will be of a
brown or blackish tint, while over mud it will appear grey.
I have now told you something about the size, depth, and
color of the Ocean ; I shall now direct your notice to another
of its qualities, namely, its saltness.
Saltness of the Ocean. —The saltness of the sea saves it
from corruption, or from becoming rotten, in the same
manner as the process of salting saves animal flesh; it also
makes it heavier, bulk for bulk, than fresh water, for the
more saline or salty matter it contains, the weightier it
becomes. You are not to suppose that the saltness of the
Ocean is uniform, that is, the same in all places, as there
are many causes of its being increased and lessened in
different places. The waters of the Atlantic are found to
contain more salt than those of the Pacific, and the waters
of the Northern less than those of the Southern latitudes-
neither is it unusual for the waters of the same Ocean to
differ in respect to this quality. The Northern or Frozen
Ocean is less salt than any sea or other ocean of the world,
owing to the vast quantities of ice melted in these regions,
and to the fact that lighter substances always float on the
surface ; fresh water, you know, is much lighter than
salt, and, therefore, must necessarily float above it.
You may easily see from this that the saltness of these
seas varies or alters with the seasons; you can also under-
stand that the surface will be less salt than the parts near
the bottom in those seas or latitudes where heavy and con-
tinuous falls of rain occur. At the mouths or estuaries of
large rivers, that is where they meet or end in the sea, or
Ocean, there is less salt present than elsewhere, owing to
vast quantities of fresh water flowing in at these points*
6


"W here the Amazon discharges or empties itself into the
Atlantic, the waters of that Ocean are found to be brackish,
that is, half fresh, half salt, some hundreds of miles dis-
tant from the mouth or estuary of that mighty river. It
may be easily seen now why the waters of deep seas are
found to be impregnated, thoroughly mixed, I mean, with
more salt than those of shallow seas, and the waters of
seas which receive many rivers, with less than the waters
of those which receive none.
Evaporation . —ln the seas of warm latitudes a great
evaporation is constantly going on, as is seen in the case of
the Mediterranean, which, though receiving a vast quantity
of fresh water from many considerable rivers, still preserves
its saltness unaltered. This will also account for the quick
disappearance of the fresh water from the surface, where it
would otherwise be found floating on account of its greater
lightness; for you will remember that I stated, the deeper
we go, the saltier, and for that reason the heavier, will we
find the water, in proof of which I need only say that, at
the Straits of Gibraltar, a measure filled with water at
depth of 4,000 feet, was found to be four times the weight
of the same measure filled at the surface. The waters of
rivers are frozen or turned into ice much sooner than those
of the sea —a property or quality due also to its saltness.
Causes oj saltness. —l shall now tell you the different
reasons which have been brought forward to account for
this saltness. It is thought by some writers on the subject
that large beds or mines of salt lie at the bottom of th e
ocean, which give it the taste or quality we speak of; others
say that the ocean has received all its salt from the rivers
which flow into it; these latter dissolving and carrying
along with them all the salty particles they meet with in
their course to the sea, where, being finally deposited, they
remain, as salt cannot be evaporated; whilst others, with


perhaps the greatest approach to probability, say that the
Creator himself stamped this quality on the rolling wave
the day he parted it from the dry land, and the earth ceased
to be any longer “ without form and void. ’
Be the cause or causes what they may, the saltness of
the sea affords another striking proof of the goodness of God
in the wonderful provisions he has everywhere made for
the preservation of his creatures ; for had he not endowed
or gifted the deep with this useful quality, and caused its
waters to mingle throughout its various depths by tides and
currents, it would in a very short time yield to rottenness
and corruption, and render our beautiful world one huge
sepulchre or grave.
Tides » —The next thing relating to the Ocean to which I shall
direct your attention, is that regular swell of its waters
which takes place every twelve hours. This rising up or
swelling of the paters is called the tide, and is caused by
the united action of the sun and moon, but that of the moon
is the principal cause, it being within 240,000 miles of the
earth, while the sun is removed to a distance of 95,000,000.
Causes of Tides —To explain the causes of the tides to men
like you, whose understandings have not been strengthened
and cleared by the benefit of early education, may prove a
difficult task, though the subject seems now to be pretty
well understood; however, I shall endeavour to be as
intelligible and as plain as I possibly can. I trust you will
try to follow me as I proceed, or go on, and if anything I
say should not appear sufficiently clear to any of you, I re-
quest you will not allow it to pass without asking me for an
explanation, which I will give you with the utmost cheer-
fulness, well aware that the more you know of the simpli-
city and grandeur of the works of your Creator, the more
you will hesitate to offend Him. But to proceed. You all
know from what you learned from my lecture on the earth,


that this globe we live on is continually spinning round, or
turning on a line called its axis, (or axletree, if you will,)
and that it makes one complete revolution in every twenty-
four hours—that is, if any spot on its surface, (we will
suppose London,) be now opposite a certain fixed star, or
point in the heavens, it will take twenty-four hours, all but
a few minutes, for London to come opposite the same point
again. The motion I give the little globe I hold in my
hand, will give you a notion of what I mean—it is now
said to revolve.
For the present let the larger of these two globes repre-
sent the earth, and the smaller the moon; we place a bit
of white paper then on the larger, and say that point so
marked is Dublin Bay for instance; this, if you pay
attention, will be a great help to your understanding.
Let one of you take the smaller globe in your hand, and
hold it stationary, and observe, as I make the larger one
revolve on its axis, how often in each complete revolution
the bit of white paper comes opposite the smaller one, or
what is the same, how often in twenty-four hours Dublin
Bay comes opposite the moon, and you will find it does so
only once.
You will be surprised to hear that the moon has the
power of drawing towards it not only the water on the face
of the earth, but even the great bulk of the earth itself.
Now when Dublin Bay comes directly opposite the moon,
the waters in it are drawn or attracted, as is more frequently
said, towards the moon ; in other words, they swell out, and
this is the tide. But there is another tide at the very
same moment at the point exactly opposite Dublin Bay on
the other side of the globe, marked with a bit of
red paper, which you see is entirely turned away
from the moon, and on which the latter can therefore
use no power of attraction. This appears to puzzle
you, but if you attend closely to what I am about


to say, the puzzle will vanish. I told you the moon had
the power of attracting substances towards it, a power
possessed by all bodies of matter in proportion to their bulk.
The effect of this attraction is felt most by air-like sub-
stances, next by fluids, and least by solid bodies ; that is, the
particles composing solid bodies are harder to be separated
and made to increase the bulk of an object than any other.
Now when the white bit of paper comes opposite the globe
representing the moon at that point, as before stated, the waters
are drawn a little in the direction of it, while the waters at the
spot marked by the red paper are not acted upon at all, but
remain as if held or pinned tight by some strong power; but
the moon pulls not alone the waters on the side of the globe
turned towards itself; it pulls even the great mass of the
earth in the same direction, by which the depth of waters
at the spot marked with the red are made to increase, just
as an Indian rubber string, with one end fastened to the
desk, would stretch when the other would be pulled. Thus
you see how two tides are caused at opposite sides of our
earth at the same moment. I have accounted for one of the
tides that takes place daily in Dublin Bay ; I shall now ex-
plain the cause of the other. I showed that the earth makes one
revolution in twenty-four hours, it must therefore make
half one in twelve, that is the white bit of paper being now
exactly opposite the moon, will in the space of twelve
hours come round as you may observe, to the spot where
you see the red paper, in which position I need scarely say
it must have another tide, and now I hope I have satisfac-
torily accounted to you for the flow and the ebb of the tide
twice in the twenty-four hours.
I stated the sun had some share in the cause of this
motion of the ocean, it is indeed but little, and only ob-
servable at certain times, namely, when all three, the sun,
moon and earth are in the same straight line, which is


always the case at new and full moon, for then the two
first act together and cause spring or high tides; at the
other changes of the moon, that is, the quarters, they act
separately, when we have what are called the neap or lowest
tides.
Tides, as I have just said, commonly happen twice every
twenty-four hours, but I should not omit telling you that
the circumstance of a place, such as its position with respect
to other places, its shape and the like, have a great share in
preventing, altering and producing tides. In some parts of
the world there is but one tide, while in others there are as
many as four in the twenty-four hours. Tides in various places
differ very much in height too, for the reason just given ;
they rise to a very great height, 40 or 50 feet I should say,
on the eastern coast of North America; on the coast of Eng-
land they are much higher than out in the ocean, while
the general height of the tides in the Atlantic
Ocean between them does not exceed 12 feet. In wide
open and deep seas the height is still less; in fact in places
where the sun and moon only act upon the waters, the
tides are never so high as those where local circumstances
contribute to elevate the waters of the deep. At the island
of St Helena the tides seldom exceed three feet, and among
many of the islands in the Pacific Ocean the tides are scarce-
ly perceptible.
From what I have stated respecting tides, their nature
and their causes are somewhat better understood by you
now than when I commenced my lecture.
Many of you perhaps never before knew anything about
them more than they came and went. You know now
that twice in the day the big ocean ebbs and flows. The
sea swells as it were gradually, until it has attained its
greatest height—it then begins to decrease, which lasts


about six hours—this is called the ebbing of the tide. At
the end of six hours it again begins to flow, and so on, al-
ternately ebbing and flowing. I should here observe that
when the waters of the sea have reahed their greatest height
on any shore they rest themselves, as it were, for about
twelve minutes before they retire—at this time it is said to
be High Water. When the waters retire from our coast,
and finding they can go no further, they again rest them-
selves for the same time, and this is called Low Water.
This motion of the sea is called its ebbing and flowing*
and sometimes its flux and reflux, and constitutes the tides'
It may be well that you should know, that owing to some
little change in the ebbing and flowing of the sea, the tide
of each succeeding day is later than that of the preceding
one; nor do they return at the same time to the same coast
for a period of Thirty days.
I have endeavoured to give you some idea cf the causes
of the tides, of course a very poor one, for their theory is
not very simple, and would require men of greater learning
than you are to understand its full explanation. You all
understand what is meant by “ low water,” but perhaps
you have never considered the beauties of the ocean, dis-
closed to us at the time of low water. Were the waters of
the sea to remain at all times heaped up, we never could
have known the beauties and wonders of the Ocean so much as
we do,, for its bed would be always covered and hidden from
our view. We should have never known that the deep has
its butterflies, or that its worms wear coronets of crimson,
“glittering in burnished brightness.” We should have
never been able to explore its gardens, or admire the gor-
geous colours of the flowers with which they abound—we
should have never been aware that on its bed vegetate “ an
herbage of red and purple hue, exhibiting strange yet exqui-
site forms, such as no terrestrial vegetation displays.


Roseate shrubs of jointed stone, and arborets of filmy
glass, and creatures full of active energetic life, whose forms
are stranger still, both in structure and in appearance:
mere worms whose colours are gorgeous as the tints of the
butterfly’s wing, or the peacock’s tail, or the humming
bird’s breast.”
Truly may it be said that the Ocean has its mysteries and
its beauties. If “ The Heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament showeth his handiwork,” does not the
Ocean display His admirable wisdom, for in it “He has esta-
blished monuments of His grandeur and the sceptre of His
Glory.” How beautiful the sentiment, and how simple, yet
sublime, the eloquence of the Royal Psalmist, King David—
“ They that go down to the sea in ships, and have their
business on the great waters, they see the works of the
Lord, and His wonders in the deep.”
The Ocean has its rocks and mountains, its earthquakes
and volcanoes, its wells and running streams, its forests and
flower gardens, its atmosphere and climates, its fertite val-
leys and barren wastes—in fine, the land we live on, and the
sea we gaze upon are mighty like each other in their peculiari-
ties. It is surprising that we should be so very indifferent to
the works of the Creator which come under our notice day
after day. There is not a pool of water along the sea coast in
which we may not behold ocean gardens and sea forests
on a small scale. Gardens where flowers are clothed in
the most beautiful hues vieing with the brilliant and many-
coloured Rainbow.
Earth has not a plain
So boundless or so beautiful as thine.
Advantages of the Tides. —The advantages arising from
the tides are many. The beds of rivers affected by them
become deeper, and the current down the river is checked;


these two things combined are of the greatest service to
large vessels having to convey their cargo to towns removed
from the sea. Were this not the case, large ships would
find much difficulty in sailing up rivers against their natural
course, and hence many large cities and towns situated on
the banks of rivers removed from the sea, would be deprived
of that abundance and variety of commodities which they
have now at so reasonable a cost. It is the poor that bene-
fit most by the tides in this respect, for the rich could pur-
chase everything they might require, having the means to
do so, while the poor would be debarred the little
luxuries of life which they now enjoy. If we couple this
with the great fact, that the tides by causing the ocean
continually to roll, and thus preventing it from stagnation,
we cannot close our eyes to the great advantages which we
derive from the tides. And here let me add, that from the
ebbing and flowing of the waters of the deep, any thoughtful
mind may learn a lesson of the uncertainty and ever-changing
nature of this world. Everything here below is always
fluctuating; never resting, always unsteady and uncertain
—no joy lasts long—no happiness remains, the gayest
moments soon depart, and when sorrow comes we feel the
miseries of existence and are sad.
“ Oh thou who driest the mourner’s tear.
How dark this world would be,
If when deceived and wounded here,
We could not turn to thee.”
I have now endeavored to explain to you the causes of
the tides, and to point out to you their great utility and the
many boons they confer upon mankind. Let me now
direct your attention to the waves and currents of the
ocean.
Besides the ebbing and flowing of the sea, caused by the


tides, its rise and fall are also shown by waves that give
to the sea a motion which appears never to come to a stand.
You are to bear in mind that this motion is rather in the
waves themselves, than in the sea over which they roll, for
the sea, though it rises and falls, is in itself stationary.
Force and Pressure of Waves. —The force of waves is
exceedingly great during heavy gales of wind. Their pres-
sure is very great also. On the west coast of Scotland
their pressure has been found to be 611 pounds on every
square foot of the surface during the summer months; and
in winter it has been estimated at three times that amount.
During storms the pressure of the waves is still greater, it
having been known to reach upwards of 6,000 lbs. on every
square foot. That this enormous pressure is owing to the
velocity or speed of the waves, there can be no doubt; since
a wave not in ]notion only presses with a weight equal to
half a ton on the same extent of surface. As an instaftce
of the great power exerted by waves, I may mention that
blocks, varying from ten to fifty tons, have been moved to
a considerable distance by it in several parts of the ocean.
Notwithstanding the great force of waves, or the heavy
gales that ruffle the deep so much in storms and tempests, their
influence extends to a very inconsiderable distance beneath
the surface of the ocean. Amidst the greatest fury of the
tempest, the agitation of the waves is, we might say, con-
fined to its surface. All is quiet beneath, at the depth of
200 or 300 feet at the farthest. Here again we see another
wise provision of the great Author of Nature, for if the fury
of the tempest was felt equally all through, the waters beneath
would become thick and muddy, and the shell-fish, which con-
tribute so much to our store of food, would be destroyed. The
functions or offices the waves have to fill are effected, and that
is all required of them ; but did their influence reach to the
bed of the ocean, instead of being of service in mixing its


waters and contributing their aid to prevent them from be-
coming corrupt as they do now, they would prove very
injurious for they would deprive us of many of the treasures
of the ocean, which some of the poorest of us at present
enjoy. The waters of the ocean are also disturbed by
currents which depend upon many causes. Some of these
currents are lasting, and some are periodical, or take place
at certain periods. Currents are sometimes confined to the
surface of the sea, and at other times they take place beneath
it. With the exception of the tides, and those currents pro-
duced by the wind, all currents may be said to be caused
by the difference between the weight of the ocean at different
parts of it. That the water of the ocean varies in weight
there cannot be the least doubt, and this difference is pro-
duced either by a difference in the warmth of the waters, or
in their saltness. The heavier or more salt water, going
towards the lighter or less salt, and the lighter water going
to fill up the place of the heavier. In this way the waters
of the ocean are mixed together as in a bottle. In the ocean
there are always to be found currents running in opposite
directions, and whenever one current is found taking off
water, another current is found bringing an equal quantity
to supply its place. This giving and taking, so to
speak, is for ever going on ; for if it did not how could the
first current get its water, as after a short time the place
which supplied it would be dry ?
I cannot think to go into the details of, or to enumerate
all, the currents of the ocean, but there is one at least
which I shall notice here. It is the great equatorial
current, better known as the Gulf stream.
Gulf Stream. —The Gulf stream originates in the
Gulf of Mexico, which may be said to be its fountain, and
whence it has derived its name. The great equatorial cur-
rent is first felt in the Atlantic Ocean between the tropics,
near the coast of Africa, and as soon as it reaches the


eastern projection of South America, it divides itself into
two streams; one, flowing- along the coast of Brazil, passes
into the Pacific Ocean through the Straits of Magellan ;
the other flows to the north-west, and enters the Oarribean
Sea. It then passes into the Gulf of Mexico through the
strait formed by the western extremity of Cuba and the
peninsula of Yucatan ; here it follows the bending of the
coast from Yera Cruz to the mouth of the Rio-del-Norte ;
thence to the mouth of the Missisippi, and along the coast
of Florida. After flowing, as here described, this great
current rushes out through the Gulf or Strait of Florida
with greater rapidity than that of any known river, and
having a volume of waters thousands of times greater than
the great Amazon itself. This rapidity is owing, of course,
to the reaction produced by the water striking against the
coasts on the Gulf of Mexico, and the narrowness of the
Channel by which it escapes. The velocity or speed
of the Gulf stream (for it is by this name we must know
this great current now), in issuing from the Gulf of Mexico
is five miles an hour,, and the greatest velocity, seventy-
eight miles a day. After passing through the Bahama
channel, it turns north-east, and flows along the coast of the
United States, diminishing in spesd till it strikes against
the southern banks of Newfoundland. As it flows along the
coast of Carolina and Georgia at the rate of about three
miles an hour, its waters are of an indigo blue; indeed so
distinctly marked are the waters of the stream as they pass
the coast of Carolina (though a distance of seventy miles
from the coast), they may be seen by the naked eye ; and
it is stated that frequently one half of a vessel is seen
floating in the waters of this stream, while the other half
is in the common water of the sea. So you see there is,
as it were, an unwillingness on the part of the waters of
the Gulf stream to mingle with the common water of
the sea.


The eminent American writer, Dr. Murray, compares
this great current to a stream of oil in the ocean, preserving
a distinctive character for more than 3000 miles. Why the
waters of the Gulf Stream assume the blue color which I
have just mentioned may be gathered from the following
well-known fact. The salter the sea water becomes, the
deeper is the color of its blue, To salt manufacturers this
fact is well known ; for they judge of the quantity of salt
held in solution in sea water by its color. The bluer the
water the more it abounds in saline matter ; while the
greener the color, the fresher the water. And hence we
find in Polar seas the water presents a green appearance,
owing to the largo quantities of ice melted in it. Now the
waters of the Gulf stream being saltier than the sea water
through which they flow easily accounts for the beautiful
blue color of the stream, or I should rather say, the majestic
marine river, for such the Gulf stream is. When the
stream reaches the southern coast of Newfoundland, it
changes its course to the east-south-east about as far as the
Azores, where turning almost directly to the south, it flows
along the coasts of Kurope and Africa in the direction of
the Canaries, till on reaching the parallel of Cape Blanco,
it completes its grand tour in the Atlantic. Here it meets
the great current from which it sprung, and mingling its
waters with it sets out again on its journey after making a
circuit of 3,800 miles. Such is the Gulf Stream in the
Atlantic.
In the Pacific Ocean the current moves with great regu-
larity from the western coast of America to the eastern coast
of Asia and Australia ; and though it is of great advantage
to navigators in many parts of the Pacific, it renders navi-
gation difficult and dangerous among the many islands
lying between New Holland and Asia. It moves round


the southern coast of New Holland, between that island and
Van Diemen's Land, and causes the great current to be met
with in the strait lying between the two islands, and known
by the name of Bass Strait.
Haying now told yon about the Gulf Stream, and what
it does, let me say a few words about its causes.
Causes.— Many causes have been mentioned, but I should
tell you, that great men, or, as the world calls them, phil-
osophers, have been puzzled to account for the Gulf stream.
Some writers have said that the Mississippi River was the
father of this stream. Its floods they said produced it, and
what led them perhaps to this conclusion was, that the speed
with which the waters of this river flow, is equal to that of
the Gulf Stream. But this was proved to be wrong by a
very clever writer, Captain Livingston, who proved that the
volume of water the Mississippi empties into the Gulf of
Mexico is not the one 3-1000th part of the quantity which
escapes from it through the Gulf Stream. And again, the
waters of the Gulf Stream are salt, while those of the
Mississippi are fresh.
Again, if the Gulf of Mexico did not receive as much
salt water from the Ocean as leaves it through the Stream,
it is evident that ere this, its waters would be fresh unless
it was fed by salt springs below, or had a bed of salt beneath
its water, neither of which appears to be at all probable.
Dr. Franklin accounting for this great marine river, or
current, says “ it is caused by the escaping of the waters that
have been forced into the Carribean Sea by the trade winds,
(which I shall explain in a future lecture,) and that it is the
pressure of those winds upon the water, which forces it up
into that sea, a-head as it were for this Stream.”
Drift of Bottles. —Indeed, I should have observed that
the waters of the Atlantic from every direction have a ten-
dency towards this stream, and its fountain, the Gulf of


Mexico. This is clearly proved by the drift of bottles cast
into the sea, a practice in frequentuse amongst sea-faring men.
They put a paper in the bottle stating the time and place at
which it is thrown into the sea. Comparing the position of
the places where they are found, with that from which they
were thrown, navigators have concluded that many of them
must have performed the tour of not only the Gulf, but the
Gulf Stream also.
Sea of Sargossa —By some writers it has been stated
that the level of the Gulf Stream is elevated in some places
more than in others. How far this assertion is correct, will
be seen from what I am about to tell you.
In the Atlantic Ocean, between Africa and North America,
are situated three groups of islands, viz.:—the Azores, the
Canaries, and Cape Verde. These groups form a triangular
space in the Atlantic, which is known as the Sargossa Sea. It
is of great extent, and the speed of vessels sailing through it
is much retarded, owing to the sea weed which covers its
surface. Its appearance frightened Columbus and his
comrades very much when they first saw it, as they believed
that their tour of discovery was at an end. This is not to
be wondered at, for at the present day when the eye first
falls upon it it appears to be quite solid, and one is apt to
think he could walk upon its surface with safety, and to
make it still more deceptive to the eye, patches of the weed
are visible along the outer edge of the Gulf Stream as it
flows along.
Now, many of you are aware that if you put bits of
paper or any light substance in a basin of water, and cause
the vessel to spin round, all the little substances floating
on the surface of the water will be found to approach the
centre. On the very same principle is the peculiar appear-
ance of the part of the Atlantic, known as the Sargossa Sea,
caused. The Atlantic is, so to speak, the basin to the Gulf
Stream, and this sea is the centre.


The discoverer of the New World found this sea in his
first voyage, and up to the present hour its main position
may be considered the same as when the eye of the Genoese
adventurer first rested upon it. There it is moving up and
down, changing its position by turns, but ever its
main position all the while.
Velocity. —The waters of the Gulf Stream have been
estimated to be carried around with the earth on its axis at
the rate of 157 miles an hour quicker when they enter the
Atlantic, than when they reach the banks of Newfoundland.
When they enter the Atlantic they are carried round with
the earth at the rate of 915 miles an hour, and this rate
diminishes to 758 miles an hour when they have arrived off
the banks of Newfoundland. Assuming that the waters
of this stream move at the rate of four miles an hour, you
may have an idea of its effect on the waters of the ocean,
when I tell you that it keeps in perpetual motion one-fourth
of the waters of the Atlantic.
The waters of this current are unequal in temperature ; the
hottest being found at or near the surface. Like all things
in this world, this Great Sea River has its offices and its uses ;
and one of these is the influence which it exercises on the
climates of those countries bordering on the theatre of its
action.
From its fountain, the Gulf of Mexico, it conveys heat
and warmth to western Europe, and renders the climates
within the sphere of its influence, salubrious, soft, and
mild.
There are many other currents of the sea worth our at-
tention did time permit me to notice them, but I fear I have
already dwelt too long on this part of my lecture. It will
answer my purpose just now to tell you, that the many
currents of the ocean have their parts to act in keeping its
waters in their present state of pureness and freshness, lo
account for some of these currents has puzzled great men,


therefore humble individuals like you and me need not
trouble ourselves farther about them. lam fully borne out
in this statement by Maury, who, in his admirable work—
“ Physical Geography of the Sea,” states, in alluding to the
currents in the Pacific, that—
“ There are also about the Equator in this ocean some curi-
ous currents which I do not understand, and as to which
observations are not sufficient yet to afford the proper ex-
planation or description. There are many of them, some
of which at times run with great force. On a voyage from
the Society to the Sandwich Islands I encountered one run-
ning at the rate of ninety-six miles a day.
“ And what else should we expect in this ocean but a system
of currents and counter-currents apparently the most un-
certain and complicated ? The Pacific Ocean and the Indian
Ocean may, in the view we are about to take, be considered
as one sheet of water. This sheet of water covers an area
quite equal in extent to half of that embraced by the whole
surface of the earth ; and, according to Professor Alexander
Keith Johnston, who so states it in the new edition of his splen-
did Physical Atlas, the total annual fall of rain on the earth’s
surface is one hundred and eighty-six thousand, two hundred
and forty cubic imperial miles. Not less than three-fourths
of the vapour which makes the rain comes from this waste
of waters; but supposing that only half of this quantity,
i. e,, ninety-three thousand, one hundred and twenty cubic
miles of rain fall upon the Sea, and that that much, at
least, is taken up from it again as vapour, this would give
two hundred and fifty-five cubic miles as the quantity
of water which is daily lifted and poured back again into
this expanse. It is taken up at one place and rained down
at another, and in this process, therefore, we have agencies
for multitudes of partial and conflicting currents, all, in
their set and strength, apparently as uncertain as the winds.”


Bo much for the currents of the ocean, all of which con_
tribute to the continual motion and preservation of its
waters. Nothing without its use whether in the firmament,
on the earth, or in the ocean. It is to be regretted, men,
that we do not know more of the works of the Almighty
One than we do, for the more acquainted we become with
them, the more do we know how dependent we are on his
will. Let us, at all events, imitate the waves and currents
of the deep in obeying his Mighty .Voice, especially when
we know that it is He who poureth balm into our wounds,
supports us in affliction, and wipes the tear from every
eye.
Ocean Birds—The Gull. —The birds of the ocean shall
now engage ourattention for a few moments.
They are too numerous of course for me to notice in the
limits of a lecture, however a few words on those which
commonly present themselves to our view may be accept-
able to you all.
I shall commence with the common Gull. This is a
very bold and knowing bird having a very peculiar cry,
half scream, half laugh ; when heard during the storms at
sea, it adds to the melancholy of the scene. The Gull is
not easily deceived; for instance, if a piece of bread be cast
on the surface of the sea, it will in a short time be picked
up by one of those birds, though not a bird was visible in
the heavens a moment before. But should a piece of paper
or any other like substance float on the water, the Gull
will not not even stoop to look upon it, no matter how
great its resemblance to bread may be. This shows at
once the cunning and the instinct of the Gull. I have
just told you that it is very bold, and in illustration
of its boldness, I have only to remark that it will follow a
vessel at sea for many miles, and keep so close to it, that


the sparkling of its eyes will be visible to those on board.
The Gull’s home is the sea, and when driven by storms to
take refuge on the land for a time, he feels sad, and awaits
with the greatest anxiety the welcome moment when he
can return to the tossing main. Sea-gulls are to be seen
in large numbers during fine weather, for on sunny days
the fishes on which they prey swim near the surface of the
water, and thus become easy victims to these birds, which
may be justly called, feathered fishers, I should here tell
you that during the storms at sea, these birds cannot seize
on the fishes, and therefore repair inland where the earth-
worm is to be found which serves as a substitute. I re-
member when a school-boy, I was very much taken with
a verse written by our much lamented countryman Gerald
Griffin, entitled “To a Sea-gull, ” which I shall repeat for
you for more reasons than one.
“ White bird of the tempest! O beautiful thing,
With the bosom of snow and the motionless wing,
Now sweeping the billow, now floating on high,
Now bathing thy plumes in the light of the sky ;
Now poising o’er ocean thy delicate form,
Now breasting the surge with thy bosom so warm.
Now darting aloft with a heavenly scorn,
Now shooting along like a ray of the morn ;
Now lost in the fields of a cloud-curtain’d dome,
Now floating abroad like a flake of the foam.
Now silently poised o’er the war of the main,
Like the spirit of charity brooding o’er pain.
Now gliding with pinion all silently furl’d.
Like an angel descending to comfort the world 1
Thou seem’st to my spirit, as upward I gaze
And see thee, now clothed in mellowest rays.
Now lost in the storm-driven vapors, that fly,
Like hosts that are routed across the broad sky*
Like a pure spirit, true to its virtue and faith.
’Mid the tempests of nature, of passion and death.


Rise ! beautiful emblem of purity, rise.
On the sweet winds of heav’n to thy own brilliant slcies.
Still higher ! still higher ! till lost to our sight,
Thou hidest thy wings in a mantle of light;
And I think how a pure spirit gazing on thee.
Must long for that moment—the joyous and free,
When the soul, disembodied from Nature, shall spring.
Unfetter’d at once, to her Maker and King ;
When the bright day of service and suffering past,
Shapes, fairer than thine, shall shine round her at last.
While, the standard of battle triumphantly furl’d,
She smiles like a victor, serene on the World!”
The simplicity and beauty of these lines are, I am sure,
fully appreciated by you all—no matter how uneducated
many of you may be—and may our death be so tranquil
and so prepared that we shall bid farewell to the things of
this life, and “ smile like a victor serene on the world.”
Tern , or Sea-Swallow. —There is another bird very
common in our seas, the Sea-swallow, or the common Tern.
It resembles the gull in many of its habits, but its flight is
much more rapid. It is called the Sea-swallow from its
resemblance to the swallow, so familiar to us all, and which
visits this country during the summer months. The Sea-
swallow is remarkable for its swift flight and the rapidity
and sureness with which it seizes its prey, as it skims
along on the waves of the ocean. The nest of this bird
consists-of a hole made in the sand along the coast above
high-water mark, in which it deposits its eggs, which rarely
exceed three in number. There are various species of the
Sea-swallow, or common Tern, as it is frequently called.
The Cormorant. —The next ocean bird which I shall
notice is the Cormorant, whose appearance is anything but
handsome. Its color is black, and its long and hooked bill
coupled with its yellow countenance and grey eyes, gives
it an appearance not very pleasing indeed. This bird is
most persevering in seeking its prey. While the heron


sits patiently on the water’s side awaiting the fish unfortun-
ate enough to seek the shallow waters, or the Gull flits across
the ocean’s breast, seeking its prey in the rolling waves, the
Cormorant penetrates the waters of the deep in search of its
prey, and defying the fishes in their native element, proves
itself a more expert swimmer than the finny inhabitants of
the deep, and a more skilful fisher than man himself.
Frequently during the winter season this bird takes
up its abode along the banks of inland lakes and rivers,
and commits serious ravages among our fresh-water fish.
The Cormorant is a very voracious bird, and devours its prey
with great greediness. Before swallowing its victim, the
Cormorant seizes it crosswise in its mouth, and throwing
it into the air, meets it as it descends with its head
downwards. There is great instinct displayed in this ;
were the Cormorant to swallow the fish with the
tail downwards, the fins, as the victim descended, would
probably stick in the throat of the bird and thus cause
death. Death has been known to be caused in this way
both to the bird and the fish.
The plumage of the Cormorant, though apparently
black, is really a very deep green. It builds its nest of
dried sea-weed, and is usually to be found on the tops of
high rocks ;it is sometimes found on lofty trees. The*egg
of this bird is coated with a kind of chalk, so thick that it
may be removed with a knife or sharp instrument. The
number of eggs found in the nest of the Cormorant ranges
from three to five.
Gannet, —The Gannet, or as it sometimes called, the
spectacled Goose (from the very peculiar aspect of its coun-
tenance) is another bird that visits our shores, but more
frequently those of Scotland. This bird is very easily
known, as it appears to wear spectacles; hence it is called the


spectacled Goose. Men endanger their lives in search of
the eggs and young of these birds in places frequented by them.
Guillemot. —The, Guillemot is rather a curiously formed
bird, and very remarkable in its nature. The female
generally sits over one egg when hatching, and then assumes
a most grave and solitary appearance. It will suffer itself
to be removed by the hand, sooner than forsake the object of
its care, and on this account it has been termed u foolish;”
but the writer of a very interesting little work on these birds
suggests, and very properly too, that the word “ faithful”
should be substituted for “ foolish.” The egg of this bird
is of a beautiful color, variegated with brown spots, and is
generally found on a narrow ledge of rock, which makes
us wonder how it escapes from falling, or how the young
bird when it first sees the light is saved from destruction
The Puffin.— The Puffin, or as it is sometimes called,
the Sea-Parrot, is remarkable for its large beak, which is
of the greatest service to this little bird. The beak is
unusually large, that is compared with the size of ths bird
itself; but God, you know, consults the wants of all his
creatures, and gives to them those things which they most
require. The beak of the Puffin fully illustrates this; for
had this bird the ordinary sized beak of other birds of its
own, size, it could not catch the fishes, which form its
food, nor dig those cavities or hollows in the sand, where
it deposits its eggs; nor would it be able to defend
itself against the ravens and other foes, which endeavour
to seize upon its eggs.
The birds of the ocean are too numerous to notice here*
you must therefore be content for the present with the few
here mentioned.
Ocean shells —Now give me your attention and I shall tell
you something about the shells found along our coast, and also
of their inhabitants. Where all the empty shells came from


which we see along the sea-coast, and what became of the
creatures that once made them their home, are questions that
any of us might very naturally ask ourselves. These shells
were placed there by the tides, and removed perhaps from some
of the caverns or gardens of the deep, while their tenants
have either died by natural causes, or have become the prey
of other inhabitants of the sea. The little round holes you
see in the strongest shells have been caused by creatures
which you could almost crush to death between your
fingers.
The cockle, the perriwinkle, the barnacle, the mussel, the
scallop, and the oyster, being the most familiar to us, best
admit of our attention.
Cockle. —The cockle shell is the most abundant of all
those found upon our coast; the home of the cockle is
beneath the sand, where it can remove itself with almost in-
credible rapidity. Those little jets of sandy water which
we see on the strand mark the home of this little creature.
The cockle has a natural spade by which he digs his hole,
and which enables him to get to the surface whenever he
desires.
Perriwinkle. —The perriwinkle is also well known is us ;
it is very hardjf, and will live a considerable time in con-
finement ; it is rather a pretty little creature when seen
crawling along in search of its food. The body of this
curious little animal is marked with narrow spots of a
darkish color, which give it a handsome appearance.
Razor-skell. —The razor-shell is also found along our
coast; but though very familiar to you all, perhaps you
know very little about its inhabitant. The following
description of it may prove interesting and instructive.
“ This creature burrows even deeper than the cockle,
being often found at the depth of two feet. It does not, how-
ever, seem fond of sinking thus low, but generally remains
sufficiently near the surface to permit the tube just to pro-
ject from the sand. The burrow in which the animal lives-


is nearly perpendicular, and in it the solen passes its
entire life, sometimes ascending to the surface, and some-
times descending to the bottom of the burrow, for it has
none of the locomotive faculties of its fellow-miner, the
cockle. But although its range of travel is circumscribed,
the narrowness of its habitation is compensated by the
activity of its movements therein. The fisherman who
wishes to capture this creature is aware of its agility, and
takes measures accordingly; as the tide retreats, he
watches for the jet of sand and water which the animal
throws into the air, when alarmed by its hunter’s footstep.
Into the hole from which the jet ascended, the fisherman
plunges a slender iron rod, which having a barbed, harpoon-
like head, pierces the animal and retains it while it is
dragged from its hole. If, however, the fisherman takes
a had aim, and misses his cast, he does not try a
second with the same creature, knowing that it will have
retreated to the termination of its burrow, whence it can_
not be extracted.”
Mussel. —The Mussel is also familiar to us, and is found
clinging to the sea-beaten rocks skirting our shores. It is
used as food, but to some constitutions it acts most injuri-
ously, and instances upon instances have been known where
the eating of this fish has proved fatal.
The Scallop. —The common scallop is found in great
abundance on our coasts ; its shell as you know is rather
handsome, but not so beautiful as the creature itself. It
changes its position at its will by the sudden, and indeed
I might say powerful, motion of the water which it then
contains.
The Oyster. —From very early ages the Oyster seems to
have been a favorite fish of the wealthy and the great.
Emperors honored them by their choice; and very wise
and able men were extremely partial to them. Indeed,
in times long gone by, if we can credit the historians
then, it was not unusual for men to eat several hundred


Oysters daily. Ladies also indulged to the greatest excess
in Oysters ; indeed so much so that in this civilized age it
would be considered gluttony.
The beautiful and spacious Port Jackson, on which Sydney
the capital of New South Wales is situated, abounds with
Oysters of an excellent flavor.
“ Every inch of rock, ’’writes Colonel Mundy, “ from Syd-
ney to the Heads is thickly colonized by these delicate shell-
fish ; that is, every inch would be so peopled, but for the
active extermination incessantly going on. On any fine
day, select parties of pleasure—and—Oyster seekers may be
seen proceeding by water or land, furnished with the neces-
sary instruments for an attack, or actively engaged in it.
A hammer and a chisel, an Oyster knife, a bottle of vine-
gar, and the pepper pot, with a vigorous appetite, sharpened
by the almost impregnable character of the foe—such are
the forces brought into the field, and the inducements to
destruction.”
In a recent number of the Irish Quarterly Review ap-
peared a very humorous and instructive article on Oysters
from which I take the following extracts.*
* Let me here pause and award to the editor of the Irish Quar-
terly Review, Mr. P. J. Murray, the testimony of gratitude to which
he is entitled. To him the success of criminal reformation in Ire-
land is indebted in no small measure. During the last six years he
has advocated the cause of criminal reformation, which is as yet but
in its childhood in England, little more than in embryo in Ireland,
and then and now urged upon the legislature and endeavored to im-
press upon the public mind the good that would be effected by the
humane treatment which all under the control of Directors of con-
vict prisons in Ireland receive. I believe, and lam sure none would
more readily admit than Mr. Murray, that much of his best efforts
have sprung from the close study of the writings of Mr. Recorder
Hill, Miss Mary Carpenter, Mr. Frederick Hill, the various letters
of Mr. T. B. LI. Baker, and the luminous addresses of the late la-
mented Mr. Robert Hall, the Recorder of Doncaster.


“ Oysters cast at the commencement of spring a spawn
of a greenish color which resembles a drop of fat, in
which may be observed through the aid of a microscope,
an infinite number of little oysters quite formed and fur-
nished with their valves, by which they attach themselves
to the rocks, and to stones and other solid bodies dispersed
in the sea. They attain quickly the power of reproducing
others, and from the fourth month after their birth they
can increase anew. At this period this species of mollusca
become weak, lean, and spent; nor do they regain their
size, quality, or flavour till towards the end of September.
**#»**
“ The Abbe Diquemare, who has closely observed the
habits of oysters, assures us, that when free, they have the
faculty of transporting themselves from one place to an-
other, of causing the sea-water to enter, and emerge
suddenly from between the valves ; that they can in effect
open and close them with such extreme quickness and force,
as to produce a remarkable sound. It is by these measures
they are enabled to defend themselves from other small
animals, especially crabs, which try to get into their valves
when half open.”
Oysters have been used as a medicine for the curing
of many diseases. Their effect in stopping Diarrhoea is
most sanitory and effectual ; and persons affected with
gout and scurvy have derived invaluable benefits from
using them as an article of food. Oysters crushed in
pieces with their liqour are used with much advan-
tage as a cure for ulcers; indeed, this application of
the oyster is of very old date, and is at the present day
fully appreciated.
It would be intruding too far upon your attention this
evening, were I to dwell further on the inhabitants of
ocean shells ; I purpose, however, in a future lecture to bring


under your notice those fishes of the sea with which you are
best acquainted, and explain to you, as simply as I can,
their wonderful structure and their peculiar nature, and
habits; in doing thi•, I shall also be able to show you
that the sea as well as the earth, is another great store-
house provided by God for his creatures. Yes. His anxiety
and his providence for man are -strikingly manifested in the
mysteries of the “ Dark Blue Ocean/’ and here as every-
where, we find his goodness and his care entitling Him to
our gratitude and our love. Have we not reason then, as
we gaze upon this “ Image of Eternity”—the ocean—to
stand still, and consider the wonderful works of God.
“ Such art thou—stupendous Ocean !
But, if overwhelmed by thee.
Can we think without emotion,
What must thy Creator be ?”


TEMPERANCE AND SELF-CONTROL.
The subjects on which I shall address you this evening
are of the greatest importance, not only to you, but to
mankind generally. The subjects are Self-control and Tem-
perance.
To the absence of self-control is to be attributed many of
the miseries and misfortunes of man. "Where it does not
flourish, temperance never thrives, but the passions and
desires assume an unbridled sway.
We must remember that there are many misfortunes in
this life which are heedlessly brought on ourselves by in-
dulging in certain vices, vices which are as repulsive to the
feelings of the Christian, as they are offensive to his God.
Man, unfortunately, is more prone to evil than to good,
and hence it is that the government of his evil propensities
should engage his greatest attention, from the cradle to the
grave. Bad example in youth has, no doubt, a great in-
fluence on the future man; and, perhaps, many of you
listening to me this evening can trace your present condition
to the examples set you in youth by drunken and profligate
parents; it is equally true that many of you have inflicted
wounds upon the hearts of good and loving parents, who
are now, perhaps, earnestly praying for the return of the
“ lost one,” as did the fatherof the Prodigal Son in the Scrip-
tures, parents who have gone down with their grey hairs in
sorrow to the grave ; and again, there are some amongst
you who have torn asunder the links which bound you to
your wives and children; and in those humble but, perhaps,
happy homes, left the brand of crime, with its blasting
trail of sorrow, and desolation.
But what may many of you thank for this ? Is it not
the absence of self-control, and the domination of the
foul fiend, Intemperance ? Is it not your being unable to
govern or hold in check the evil propensities of your nature,


you allowed yourselve to be led into the commission of crimes,
for which the laws of God and man call aloud for atone-
ment.
To avoid, in future, the mishaps of the past, you must
first be temperate, and ever hold in detestation the life and
career of the drunkard. That you may the better do so,
I shall here offer a few remarks on the drunkard’s
career —remarks you yourselves know to he borne ont by
facts that have even come under your own notice.
The drunkard contracts the habit of indulging in spiri-
tuous liquors, a habit that grows with him day by day, till
at last it plunges himself and his family into misery and
ruin. He does not contract this habit all at once. No, it
slowly creeps on; and at any stage, if the victim possessed
a spark of self-control, he might have cheeked his down-
ward career to the vile slough of confirmed intemperance,
and its pestilential train of demons—discord, sin, an un-
timely end, and an unwept death-bed. When we see a
man deprived of reason, of modesty, or shame, by drink,
we are too apt to pass by and look upon it merely as an
every-day occurrence. The blasphemy vomited forth by
him in this hideous state, his impure and unchaste expres-
sions, may pass unpunished by the laws of the land ; but
there are other laws, laws which the drunkard cannot
violate with the same impunity—the laws of God. The truth
of what I say may be gathered from the words of Holy
W 7 rit itself, which says that the drunkard shall never enter
into the kingdom of heaven. But even in this world the
drunkard is punished, and what is worse, he brings
punishment and misery on others.
Who can describe the drunkard’s career ?—who can tell
of the miseries and privations of his family ?—who can
describe the wretchedness of his home? —who can relate
the history of his children ?—and who, let me ask, can
reflect on his sad end without horror and dismay ?—hurried,


perhaps, into eternity without time being allowed him to
say, ‘'May the Lord have mercy upon my soul.”
I have stated that, even in this life, the drunkard is
punished. How often does it happen that he sees his wife
die of a broken heart, his sons the inmates of our peniten-
tiaries, or the living freight of our convict ships—while
his daughters live on the cursed pay of prostitution, and,
like the parent, meet an untimely and reprobate death-
Nay, in moments of remorse, the guardian angel long
since fled, scared away by untold crimes, those poor, aban-
doned daughters of infamy and bad example, seek death
by their own hand.
‘ One more unfortunate
Weary of breath.
Rashly importunate
Gone to her death.
Who was her father ?
Who was her mother ?
Had she a sister ?
Had she brother ?
Or was there a dearer one
Still, and a nearer one
Yet, than all other ?
Alas ! for the rarity
Of Christian charity
Under the sun!
Oh 1 it was pitiful
Near a whole city full.
Home she had none.
There are some amongst you who already are, and
almost all of you will, one day, be fathers. Now, let me
ask you, after all you wept, sinned, and suffered, would
you wish that those children, sent you by God, would be
placed in the position you now occupy, even favoured
(in comparison to others) as it at present is ? Let me ask
you would you wish your daughters to earn their bread by


infamy ? No, you would not. I will answer for you.
Well, men, remember when you go forth to the world the
example that is required of you, in order to guard against those
horrors I describe. Control your selfish propensities, govern
your evil nature, andresolve to begin as new and good men.
Once you pass the dangerous gate of Intemperance, you
lose all control of yourselves—like a stone, once put in
motion from the top of a high mountain, increases in
velocity at every bound as it descends, until it is
plunged into the abyss below; thus this scathing blight,
this curse of our beautiful land, Intemperance, has lost
many millions of souls to heaven.
In speaking to men of your fallen class (and let me
here impress on you, that when, in addressing you, I make
use of the word fallen , I only use it as a gentle reminder
of your state, and the expression is accompanied by a well-
founded hope springing up in my breast, that you are re-
pentantly working your way on the high road to the social
position which your Almighty Maker intended you should
fill,) it is necessary, I say, thatwhen I speak to men of your
fallen class of self-control and self-government, I should
advert, at the same time, to Intemperance.
The temptations are so numerous, and, when you can
purchase a momentary forgetfulness of your woes for a
few penny-worths of whiskey, you fly to it—unmindful of
the miseries and the horrors which follow. This is the time
for which the arch tempter is waiting —Satan,him self, marks
his opportunity —rushes in at the this fatal moment, and
seizes his prey.
At the awaking hour after a drunken debauch, many,
many made the first false step that eventually led to cells,
chains, lashes, and the felon’s death. Sweet are the bless-
ings of temperance ! Untroubled is the sleep, and bright
and hopeful is the morning of the temperate man.


Now, men, you may take my word for it, there is no certain
safety to you after haying entered the world without the
Temperance Pledge. Poor, weak mortality !—one glass is
two , two calls for three , and so on: so, I repeat again,
there is no certain safety for you but the Teetotal pledge .
I know it, I feel it thoroughly: my own thoughts, feel-
ings, and wishes are wound up in your fate.
The conduct of the men who pass under my notice in
this little hall is, at this period, of the utmost importance
to the sacred cause of philanthropy and mercy. The world
distrusts you—after you enter the world you will be on a
greater trial than when you stood before the judge in open
court. Many eyes will be on you, and the slightest slip
will not go unremarked—nay, will be exaggerated. So,
bear in mind what great mischief you will do to the un-
fortunates of, perhaps, another generation, if you miscon-
duct yourselves again.
At this moment your case, your present state and future
prosperity, engages the attention of both the Parliament
and press of these kingdoms. On you, then, on you, the
very men now listening to me, much, very much depends.
Oh, how necessary it is for you to be always on your
guard after you leave this.
Remember those you leave behind, and let not your
misconduct hereafter rivet their chains. Say to yourselves,
my conduct will speak for myself, reflect credit on me,
and help to unbar the prison doors of my poor companions
remaining in Smithfield. The Teetotal pledge will be the pass-
port of my safety. I will shun the dram-shop as a plague—
the proceeds of my honest earnings shall never enter the till
of the thankless publican. Say, when temptation comes,
I will have recourse to prayer, and humbly and earnestly
implore of God to strengthen me to resist the Evil One,
and allow the temptation to pass away,


Men, it is to you that religion opens widest her ever glorious
gates —it is in misfortune that its holy balm steals more
quietly and sweetly into the wounded heart, and raises the
poor spirit to hopefully contemplate a calm and sunny
future.
“ And sorrow touched by thee, grows bright
With more than mortal ray,
As darkness shows us worlds of light
We never saw by day.”
I have endeavoured to trace the miseries and misfortunes
of the drunkard to the absence of self-control; but the
want of this quality is equally to be deplored in another
point of view : I mean the giving way to anger, to hasty,
passionate expressions, wounding the feelings of all around—
nay, worse, striking those that are nearest and dearest to
us while the ungovernable fit lasts.
The passionate man, in his frenzy, sets all laws,
human and divine, at defiance; how many have,in this hour
of ungovernable fury, dealt a death-blow to a near relative,
or bosom friend. Days, years of sorrow and remorse, have
frequently followed a blow, hastily given to those bound to
us by ties of affection and love.
The world is crowded with what we term ill tempered
men. They are often called by the mild termof men o
hasty temper. We frequently hear it aaid of a man that “he
has a hasty temper: but it is all over in a moment; ” “heisa
very good-natured fellow, and cannot help his temper.” This
is pretty reasoning—nice excusing, after a man indulges in
all the viciousness of temper, leaving heartstings at every
word —flinging, perhaps your sister’s shame or brother’s
misfortune in your face. When they condescend to cool, you
must, I suppose, pocket all those insults, and say “you
were very hasty, but you are very good-natured.” Yes, and
A n another hour, perhaps, the hasty, passionate man repeats
8


his dose of insult and fury. Now, men, do yon understand
me, where was this man’s self-control all this time?
Is not his hasty temper the grossest self-indulgence.
Couple this species of temperament with intemperance.
Think what dens of sorrow the passionate drunkard creates
—what amount of misery does he not cause. When he
dies, think you wives can regret him ; why, in spite of
themselves, in spite of their duties, his death must be a
relief to them. As soon as children come even near ma-
turity, they instinctiveh fly from the stormy homestead.
Oh, that we could ever bear in mind that a soft answer
turneth away anger; or, remember the advice of St. Paul,
—“ Be angry, and sin not; let not the sun go down upon
your wrath.”
The decay of the intellectual powers make men
peevish, passionate, and unbearable. The long use of strong
liquors enervates the frame, weakens the power of the
stomach, and leads to countless ills—amongst others, the
habitual loss of temper. Thus you see, men, how wedded
together are those two evils, Intemperance and Bad
Temper. Long indulgence in both gives them an entire
mastery over us. Anger, like too much strong drink, hides
us from ourselves, but exposes us to others. If the man
who has for years been a confirmed drunkard can form and
religiously keep a resolution or pledge to refrain from the
fatal poison, the man who has often been intoxicated with
anger should go and do likewise. He can but try—the
effort may be crowned with success.
Those amongst you affected with the sad disease of Bad
Temper—those amongst you who are easily excited to anger,
and in this anger make use of expressions more becoming
demons than Christians, to you, I say, think of Him who
taught the devotion of perfect love, He who, in the agonies
of death, prayed for and forgave his enemies. Do this,
and your reward will be great and certain.


I shall conclude, for the present, with the words of the
Divine Author of our faith —“ Love your enemies :do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them that persecute
and calumniate you.”
UilOfl


AUSTRALIA.
The country which I shall introduce to your notice
this evening is one of much importance, hut perhaps to
none is its rise and progress more interesting and important
than to the present audience. Doubtless there are many,
amongst you whose honest and industrious relatives have
contributed their mite in raising Australia to its present
flourishing and prosperous condition.
Situated in the South Pacific Ocean is the continent of
Australia, consisting chiefly of the island of New Holland
(now generally known as Australia), Tasmania or Van
Diemen’s Land, and the island of New Zealand &c. In the
island continent or New Holland are comprised the princi-
pal British Colonies of Australia all of which it is my inten -
tion to notice in their proper course, but I cannot promise
to do so in the present lecture.
Up to the beginning of the sixteenth century this divi-
sion of the world was perhaps unknown to Europeans.
The Chinese navigators had some knowledge of the north-
ern coast of the continent at a very early period ; hut I am
not prepared just now to tell you the exact time.
In the early history of the discovery of this division of
the world, the Spaniards are entitled to the first place. The
discoveries made by them of this continent however neither
contributed to enlarge their foreign possessions, or to enrich
the parent country as they were merely accidental and led to
no permanent settlement.
From the beginning of the sixteenth to the early part of
the seventeenth century, nothing definite or satisfactory
was known about these southern lands.
The name Australia, by which the island of New Holland


is now generally known, was suggested by the enterprising
Flinders of whose history you will hear a little by and
by. The Dutch, (natives of Holland in Europe,) were at
this time a very adventurous and sea-faring people and
gave to the world the first accurate knowledge of the country
now under notice. They called it New Holland after ex-
ploring its northern coast, and continued for the first half
of the seventeenth century to be the principal discoverers.
Late in the eighteenth century (1770), Captain Cooke
explored the eastern coast, and gave it the name of New
South Wales from its resemblance to South Wales in the
mother country. The first landing place was Botany Bay,
a name by which the whole continent was up to a recent
period unfortunately known. The exact spot where
Captain Cooke first landed remains up to the present day a
swampy district in the neighbourhood of Sydney the Cap-
ital of New South Wales, and resorted to by idlers to drink
and smoke. Botany Bay is thus described by Colonel
Mundy in his very interesting work “ Our Antipodes.”
There are two good hotels on the north shore of this
basin called after Sir J. Banks and Captain Cook ; and the
point on which La Perouse’ monument stands may be nine
miles from Sydney. To the former there is a pretty good
turnpike road, besides innumerable tracks for equestrians
across the stunted scrub-land. To the latter there is noth-
ing that can be called a wheel road, but a sandy galloping
ground for horsemen, soft as the riding-school tan. It
must be the pure love of fresh air and exercise that tempts
the rider in this direction. Barren, hopeless, unblessed
tract; scrubby, rocky, sandy, and boggy by turns ; except
in the short season of the bush flowers, one would suppose
that it had been named “ Botany” in bitter irony, unlucky
name, retained to the discredit cf the whole colony, by
reason of its associations in the popular mind !


The sterile desert lying between the Bay and Sydney
contains the greatest treasure—the life blood, it may be
called of the metropolis. Without a fresh water river, built
on a rock unfavourable to well-digging, without tanks to
catch the unfrequent rain, Sydney would die of thirst, and
die unwashed if it were not for the Lachlan swamp.”
As it would be impossible in a lecture to enter into a
detailed account of the early discoveries and explorations
of this continent and its adjacent islands, I shall merely
give you a brief, and perhaps I may add au interesting
sketch of their early history, and likewise allude to the
great men to whose labours and enterprise England is en-
debted for this accession to her power.
The Spaniards, early in the sixteenth century, made some
incidental discoveries in the course of their voyages from
their possessions in South America. They were succeeded
by the Dutch, who continued their discoveries for many
years afterwards. The first accurate report of Australia was
furnished by Torres, a Spaniard, at the commencement of
the following century. In this, as in many other instances,
the English reaped the fruit of the toil and enterprize of
Dutch navigators ; for we find the illustrious Cooke hoist
the British flag on the eastern coast of this southern
world about one hundred years afterwards, and in the
following w T ords proclaim Australia a British Colony :
“ As I am now about to quit the eastern coast of New
Holland, which I have coasted from latitude 38° to this
place, (Possession Island, latitude 10° 30’ S), and which I
am confident no European has ever seen before, I once
more hoist English colours: and, though I have already
taken possession of several parts, I now take possession of
the whole of the eastern coast by the name of New South
Wales (from its great similarity to that part of the Princi-
pality), in the right of my Sovereign George the Third,
King of Great Britain.”


Three volleys of firearms, fired both by the men on shore
and on board, followed by three hearty cheers from his crew,
concluded the proceedings of the memorable 21st of August,
1770. The land he stood upon while repeating the above
words, he called Possession Island. This was Cooke’s
fifth landing on the eastern coast. It is mournful to con-
template that this able and enterprising man should in a
short time afterwards, while exploring other countries, fall
a victim to the treacherous savages of O-why-he, by whom
he was murdered on the morning of the 14th of October,
1779. If this cold-blooded murder call forth our indigna-
tion, which no doubt it should and does, how ought we feel
on hearing that the hands of men professing Christianity
are employed in shedding the innocent blood of their fellows ?
I have just observed that the illustrious but unfortunate
Cooke landed five times on the eastern coast of New Hol-
land, I shall repeat the names of the different landing
places, and tell you why our navigator gave them the
respective names which they bear to this day.
He first landed at a place now called Botany Bay (a
dangerous harbour) on the 28th of April, 1770. It received
this name on account of the great quantity of plants col-
lected there by some friends of Cooke. On the 22nd ot
the following month we find him at Bustard Bay, where
he shot a large bustard weighing 171bs, a circumstance to
which this point of the coast owes its name. On the 30th
of the same month he landed on another part of the coast,
which from the absence of water there at the time, he de-
nominated or named Thirsty Sound, He next landed at
Endeavour River on the 30th of June in the same year.
It is supposed that this river was called after the captain’s
own ship the Endeavour, in which he sailed from England
on his first voyage on the 30th of July, 1768, and in which
he arrived at Spithead in England on the 30th of July 1771,


after circumnavigating the globe. His fifth and last land-
ing place off the eastern coast was the spot called Possession
Island which I have already noticed.
I here conclude my remarks on the gallant but ill-fated
Captain Cooke, hut before closing my observations on the
early discoveries and explorations of the Australian Conti-
nent, I must mention the names of two other illustrious
British navigators, who are not so generally known, I allude
to the gallant Captain Flinders and his kind and able fellow-
laborer Surgeon George Bass.
Flinders was born in Lincolnshire in England; he accom-
panied Captain Hunter to New South Wales in 1795, who
was to supersede Governor Philips. From early boy-hood
Matthew Flinders displayed an adventurous spirit and a
most inquisitive mind. Surgeon George Bass accompanied
Flinders on his voyage in the same year on board the
Keliance. They arrived in the colony about seven years
after the first tree fell beneath the stroke of a British axe.
For the following nine years Flinders and Bass continued
to explore the coasts of New Holland, and it must be said,
the principal and most important discoveries on the coasts
are due to the enterprize of these men. Flinders first sug-
gested that the whole island continent of New Holland
should be called Australia. He circumnavigated Yan
Diemen’s land in 1799, which from its discovery by Tasman
in 1642 to that time was supposed to form part of the
southern coast of Australia. It was his colleague Surgeori
Bass who first asserted that a passage of water lay between
the Island of New Holland and Tasmania, or Van Diemen’s
land, an assertion proved to be correct by Flinders, who
called it Bass Sirait in compliment to his brother
officer. From the day these two men set out from Sydne yon
their first tour of discovery in their little boat “ Tom Thumb,’
with one boy for their crew, till their departure from the


Australian coast for their native land, they never ceased
their labors, the results of which have contributed more to
the accurate knowledge of the new country than all the
discoveries and explorations hitherto made. Yet, from
cause or causes which I cannot tell, the labors of these men
were unrequited, and their well-earned claims on a nation’s
reward and gratitude were permitted to pass unnoticed. In
1802 Bass left Sydney for England as mate of a trading ves-
sel and we hear no more of him. Had he not inscribed his
name on a small portion of the waters of the Pacific, it is
probable we should have never known that such a man
lived and perhaps would attribute his brilliant discoveries
in the Australian world to some more exalted but less
talented a man.
The following particulars relative to Surgeon George
Bass, may prove interesting to you just now; I shall there-
fore read them as quoted by Mr. Samuel Sidney in his
work “ The Three Colonies of Australia.”
“ The mother of Mr. George Bass lived with them (the
Calder Family) fourteen years, and died with them. Her
son and only child George Bass was born at Ash worthy,
near Sleaford, where his father had a farm, and died when
he was a boy. The widow and son afterwards went to
reside at Boston. From his boyhood he showed a strong
inclination for a seafaring life, to which his widowed mother
was much opposed. He was apprenticed to Mr. Francis, a
Surgeon at Boston; and at the end of his apprenticeship
walked the hospital and took his diploma with honor. But
his inclination for the sea being unsubdued, according to a
promise she made, she yielded to his wish and sank a con-
siderable sum in fitting him out and buying a share for him
in a ship which was totally lost. She was a fine, noble-
minded woman of no ordinary intellect. Her son wrote


her long letters containing full accounts of his discoveries.
These came into the possession of Miss Culder on the death
of Mrs. Bass. A short time ago she thought to take a peep
at the letters, went to the old box, but they were gone.
The last time his mother heard of Bass he was in the straits
of China. She expected him many years, thinking that he
might be taken prisoner; but at last gave up all hopes,
concluding that he had been wrecked and drowned. He
had only been married three months when he sailed never
to return. His widow is dead.”
Let us now see what became of Flinders. From early boy-
hood Flinders gave signs of future adventure and enterprize.
It is told of him that when first attired in buttoned clothes,
he was found in the middle of a sea marsh, with his pocket
filled with pebbles tracing the running streams and anxiously
inquiring where they came from.
Flinders continued his brilliant career of discovery on
the coasts of New Holland and some of the islands in that
locality till about the year 1804, when he set sail for Eng-
land with a view to lay before the Admiralty the result of
his labors. The same writer, from whom I have just
quoted, speaking of poor Flinders, thus writes
In the miserable Cumberland, Flinders, intent to lay the
results of his researches before the Admiralty, set out on
a voyage of sixteen thousand miles to England ; every man
of his crew except his clerk, volunteered to share the
danger and accompany him, but the leaky state of his
craft compelled him soon to seek shelter at the nearest port
and he put into Mauritius, relying on his passport: this
would have been a sufficient protection had the government
of the Island been in the hands of a gentleman and a man
of honor; but the governor was one De Caen, a low malig-
nant, envious, insolent wretch, who to the infinite disgust
of many of his countrymen and companions in arms,


availed himself of the misfortune which had thrown Flinders
into his power, to vent his spite on a nation and on a native
he detested.
De Caen seized the Cumberland, took possession of the
charts, journals, and log-books, and detained Captain
Flinders for six years, during which period, in spite of the
representations of the French Admiral Linois, and of many
of the most respectable colonists, he treated him with every
kind of cruelty and indignity ; and after evading repeated
orders for his release, dismissed him as unceremoniously
as he had seized him, detaining however, one log-book,
which Flinders was never able to recover. In the mean-
time appeared an account of Captain Baudin’s voyages—
the Captain Baudinwho had received at Port Jackson every
kind of attention and information. In this work, accom-
panied by an Atlas, the discoveries of Flinders and Bass
were appropriated wholesale and unnamed. Baudin had
made about fifty leagues of discovery and claimed nine
hundred leagues, part of which had been surveyed by the
Dutch a century before his time.
Flinders reached England in 1810, broken in health,
but his spirit of duty unimpaired. Under the regulations
of the service, the time he had passed in unjust imprison-
ment could not count in his professional employment. At
length he petitioned the Prince Regent for promotion, as
an act of grace; but his prayer was refused, and neither
his widow nor his daughter was able to obtain the pension
to which his eminent services formed so strong a claim.
Flinders devoted the last days of his broken health and
spirits, to preparing his books and maps for the press—an
admirable work, which has been the foundation of every
subsequent exploration and colonization in Australia, and
died on the 14th of July, on the very day his account of a
voyage to Terra Australia was published.”


I have now given you a brief sketch of the history of
Matthew Flinders, who by his unremitting labor and enter-
prizing genius has contributed most materially to extend
the sway of British power, who has given in fact a southern
world to those who wield that power ; surely such a man is
well deserving our sympathies.
While suffering the pangs of disappointed hope and a
broken heart, which he did before his death, poor Flinders
might well say.—
“ My days are in the sere and yellow leaf;
The flowers and fruits of life are gone ;
The worm, the canker and the grief
Are mine alone.”
Thy steal Features. —So much for the early discoveries of
the Australian Continent ; the next thing we shall consider
is its physical features, the first of which I intend bringing-
under your notice is its surface.
Surjace. —Though not warranted by explorations yet
made of the interior of New Holland to arrive at any con-
clusion regarding the elevation of the land or the nature
of soil which composes it, nevertheless, from the absence of
large and navigable rivers throughout the island continent
we may infer at least that the interior is not mountainous.
The celebrated Mrs. Somerville is of opinion that, “ how-
ever unpropitious the centre of the continent may be—and
the shores generally have the same barren character —there
is abundance of fine country inland. In the north all
tropical productions might be raised, and in so large a con-
tinent there must be extensive tracts of arable land, though
its peculiar character is pastoral.”
Position. —Looking at the map of Australia now before
you, it is evident from its position on the surface of the
earth that it must have two climates. The Tropic of Capri-


com dividing it unequally causes the northern portion of
the Continent to enjoy a tropical climate; while the por-
tion south of the Tropic lies in the South Temperate Zone,
and therefore its climate must be temperate, that is, neither
too hot nor too cold.
The island to the north is New Guinea, which is separated
from Australia by a passage of water, known as Torres
strait; called from Torres, a Spanish navigator who passed
through it in 1606, and to whom we are indebted for the
first accurate report of continental Australia.
Torres Straits. —At the eastern extremity of Torres
Straits, extending from New Guinea to New Holland, there
is an immense number of Coral Beefs, running close to
each other from east to west ; of which reefs the eastern
ends or extremities, terminating abreast of each other and
forming a long line north and south, nearly on a level with
the surface of the water, present to a ship approaching them
the appearance, of a low wall, which is called the Barrier,
but some of the channels between these reefs are found
passable for ships of any burthen/ 1
This object (the Barrier) to a person on board a ship ap-
proaching it, and impelled by a strong breeze, when the
sea is breaking over it in all directions, certainly exhibits
a most sublime and somewhat terrific appearance.
The island to the south of New Holland is Van Diemen’s
land, discovered by Tasman in 1633, and visited by Captain
Cooke in 1777. It was considered part of New Holland up
to 1779. A British settlement was established on this island
in 1804, at the mouth of the Derwent, and under the name of
Hobart Town. It is still a convict colony of Great Britain,but
with God’s help the day may yet come when the arrival of
an Irish convict on its shore will be a matter of surprize
and astonishment to its rulers, and as far as Ireland is con-
cerned, they may await in vain the arrival of the convict
fchip.


Men, you will then prove that the treatment which
you here receive at the hands of the British Government,
acting, as they do, mercifully and indulgently towards
you, is fully appreciated.
The area of Van Diemen’s land is about 27,000 square
miles, and its harbours are not surpassed for depth and
safety by those of any other country in the world. The
following extract is taken from a letter from the Governor
of the colony dated 3rd November, 1850.
“ Upon Hobart Town the amount of rain falling annually
varies from 15 to 25 inches. January, February, and March,
the summer months, are generally dry, but of course the
climate varies very much according to position. The cen-
tral part of the island is about 3000 feet above the level
of the sea, and this portion may he said to form a plateau
covered with lakes, from which nearly all the rivers in the
island flow in different directions. In many parts of the
country, vegetation suffers from summer frosts; the low
damp valleys appear to he most subject to this infliction,
from which the sides of the hills appear to be exempt in a
great measure. The winter is never severe, snow seldom
lies anywhere, except on the elevated plateaux, and on the
mountain ridges for more than a day, and the climate is
singularly healthy/’
Harbours, and Bays. —l have mentioned to you that Van
Diemen’s Land is highly favoured by nature as regards her
spacious and commodious bays and harbours. Such in-
dents are not alone confined to this island, but exist on a
very large scale around the island continent of Australia
itself. Many of the bays indenting the coast are capable
of affording safe anchorage for all the navies of Europe.
Among the principal Bays along the Australian coast may
he mentioned, Port Jackson, Port Hunter, Port Macquarie,
Port Stephens, Botany Bay, Trial Bay and Broken Bay.
Headlands . —The principal Capes and Headlands are,


Smoky Cape, Sugar-loaf Point, Green Cape, and Cape
Howe.
Islands . —Norfolk Island, the Solitary Isles, and the
five Islands of Illawara are amongst the chief islands of
Australia. Norfolk island is under the government of Van
Diemen’s Land and is about 1000 miles east of New South
Wales.
Rivers. —There are many tolerably good rivers in the con-
tinent, but few are navigable for any great distance ; or
can be said to contain large volumes of water. On the
whole the rivers of Australia are more insignificant in depth
and volume than those in any other division of the globe.
The following may be considered the principal rivers of
Australia : —The Darling, which is said to flow 660 miles
without receiving a tributary ; the Murray, which forms
the boundary between Victoria and New South Wales,
takes its rise close to Mount Koscuisko, and after flowing
upwards of 1200 miles empties itself into the Ocean at
Encounter Bay. The breadth of this river is 350 feet, and
its depth 20 feet. The Murrumbidgee, which we may
consider a tributary of the Murray, joins the latter river
after a course of 900 miles. The Hunter is another fine
river navigable for ships of large burden, for a distance of
400 miles from its mouth. Skirting the banks of this river
are some of the finest farms in the world. The Swan
River is the only one of note on the western side of the
continent.
Lakes. —There are many extensive lakes in New Holland,
the most important of which are, Lakes George, Illawara,
Wallis, and Macquarie.
Mountains. —Almost parallel to the eastern coast of
Australia, removed from it at a distance ranging from 40
to 150 miles, runs a long chain of mountains, the length of
which is estimated at 1.500 miles, and rises from 2,400 to


4,700 feet above the level of the sea. The highest point
is Mount Koscuisko, which though elevated but 6,500 feet
above the level of the sea, yet its position is such that from
its rugged and snow-capped top the eye can range over an
area of 7000 square miles.
These mountains, are of a very craggy and rugged cha-
racter, much more so, than one would expect from their
height. In some places the tops are covered with forests
but the greater part of them are crowned with needle-like
rocks, which give them a most terrific and savage appear-
ance. These mountains, as you may see, divide New
South Wales into two districts, eastern and western ; and
form, indeed, a complete barrier between the country along
the coast, and that lying west of the range. I need not
tell you that this is a great draw-back to the interior country.
To the eastward of these mountains, are what may be
termed the agricultural peopled districts of the colony of
New South Wales. Westward lie the wide pasture lands,
which are amongst the finest in the world. These lands
form a low, flat and unbroken chain, while on the east side
of the range exists a most beautiful country, consisting of
rich and verdant hills here and there grouped together.
The country itself is richly wooded and undulating, having
a soil rich and fertile, with a climate salutary and
healthy, of which I shall speak more fully hereafter.
Description. —By many travellers the aborigines of New
Holland are considered much below all other savage tribes
in the scale of humanity. According to the European idea
of beauty they are extremely ugly, but their countenances
are not at all times unpleasing The colour of the skin is
sable or dark brown, the lips thick, nose broad and flat,
mouth wide and the hair long and fine but not woolly like
other savage tribes. The beards of the males are dark thick


and bushy, which added to their large white teeth and
erect but slender figure, give them a noble and war-
like appearance. The hair is much neglected by them, but
when cared, as in the case of domesticated natives, it is a
great ornament to the wearer appearing “ parted naturally
at the top of the head and hanging on the neck in shining
curls.”
Gait. —The gait of the Australian savage is strikingly
manly, his movements graceful, his air and general
carriage imposing; and as far as the figure and physical
attainments of the man go, the native of New Holland
is justly entitled to a place among the lords of creation,
for he is “in native honor clad.” The young men
of these savages are considered by some travellers frank
and well looking. The absence of one of the front teeth in
the males of some tribes give them anything but a pleasing
appearance. The extraction of this tooth is performed with
great ceremony -when they arrive at a certain age. The
following description is given of the natives of this continent
in the fourth book of lessons, page 154.
“The natives of Australia are either black or copper-colour-
ed, very thin, with long straight hair, and extremely ugly
features. They are among the lowest and most ignorant
savages in the world. They wear no clothes, except a cloak
of the skin of the opossum, which they throw over their
shoulders in cold or wet weather, and tie round the neck.
They bore a hole through the nose, in which they stick a piece
of bone, and often paint themselves with lines of white clay.
They sleep in rude huts formed of the bark of trees, never
remaining long in one place, but wandering about together
in companies, resting wherever they can find food. They
have no idea of tilling the ground, or of keeping any sort
of tame animal; but they live on such wild beasts or birds
as they can catch, or on the few roots the country produces,


These last are dug out of the ground by the women, with
a sharp stick.”
Both males and females tattoo themselves. This is done
“by a series of cuts on the flesh of the breast
and shoulder, which by some special treatment, are made
to heal in high ridges, having precisely the appearance of a
weal from the severe stroke of a whip.”
Character. —The character of the New Hollander is
naturally fierce, treacherous, crafty and blood-thirsty. All
efforts to spread the Gospel amongst them have been less
successful perhaps than with any other savage tribes.
Though they build no houses owing to the wandering life
they lead, yet wherever adequate supplies of subsistence are
at hand they have comfortable homes and to their own
minds contented. They have been employed with advan-
tage as shepherds and police, but their lovejfor a migratory
life they seldom conceal.
Colonel Mundy, in his excellent work “ Our Antipodes,”
gives the following interesting account of the native police
force raised in New South Wales.
Native Australian Police.—" The experiment of enrolling
as a border force a native mounted police, with British
officers, has perfectly succeeded. In 1850, the division sta-
tioned on the Macintyre river consisted of forty-four men
with a commandant, two subalterns and a sergeant-major.
The pay of the privates is 3d a-day ; their uniform a light
dragoon dress. They are all quite young men, averaging
five feet nine inches in height, light, butstiong, and very
quick at drill, the use of arms and horsemanship. In the
Port Philip district a similar force has been raised. There
is no want of recruits, nor need of “ bounty,” the only
difficulty is to choose among the herd of long-legged shock-
headed, grinning fellows offering themselves “ the plenty
fight” for 3d. per diem. They have no qualms about acting


with the utmost rigour against their brother black-fellows ;
and such is the terror of their name, that wheresoever a sec-
tion of the force shows itself the evil-minded tribes instantly
disappear. Nor are the rangers of the bush, fairer in skin
but equally dark in deeds, less afraid of these active, vigi-
lent, and dashing black Hulans. Shepherds and stockmen
no longer fear to quit their huts, and gentlemen graziers
may now ride from station to station without arming them-
selves like an ambulent arsenal. For bush duties, especi-
ally against their own countrymen, the native police are
infinitely more effective than the English police.
Food. —The food of the Aborigine consists principally of
the Kangaroo, the Emu, the Opossum, a variety of wild
fowl, fruits, grubs and fish. He catches the wild fowl and
fish by means of nets which are made by the women for
this purpose. The New Hollander is also fond of honey,
“ and the black deserves to enjoy this luxury for the dex-
terity with which he sometimes discovers its whereabout.
Catching a stray bee, he sticks upon its little busy body,
with gum, an atom of white down from the owl or swan,
and releasing the scared insect, follows it by the eye and
foot to the hole in the hollow tree where the comb is con-
cealed, and whence it is quickly cut out after the hive has
been well smoked.” Some of their repasts are considered
delicious.
There are many articles of food which the women are not
allowed to use, some that the young men are prohibited
from using, and others the old men only are allowed to eat.
The latter are held in great reverence and respect by all
tribes. There can be no doubt that they also consider hu-
man flesh a desirable article of food. By some travellers
the New Holland savage is considered an “ atrocious canni-
bal.” It is true they account the fat of parts of the
human body a luxury, and instances are recorded when


the mother has murdered and eaten her own child, and
joined in the repast by her brethren. According to Mr.
Shaw, cases of infanticide were unknown among the natives
until the arrival of the white man, who has stolen their
lands, and killed and driven away the animals upon which
they subsisted.
Women. —The women are treated by these savages most
cruelly, as it is said, “by dint of blows, they
are governed ever after by club law.” They are not suffered
to sit with the males while eating, and their food is thrown
to them in a most degrading and dog-like manner. Wo-
man is the beast of burden among the savage tribes of Austra-
lia, and is treated by them in a most brutal and wanton
manner.
ihe smallest offence is punished by spearing the thigh,
or being knocked senseless with a blow of their waddle or
club, let, suicides are not common amongst them. Thetribes
are subdivided into families. The female members of a
famny are betrothed in childhood, and the wife and property
oi tiie man are invariably, on his decease, claimed by his
eldest brother.
“Their treatment of the dead,'observes Mr. Shaw,“differs
in different tribes: some simply inter the body, others burn
it, while in the North they carry it in an envelope of the
paper-like bark of the tea tree, and deposit it in a hollow
tree until the skeleton only remains, which they afterwards
convey to the burial place of the tribe; the bones of the
dugong are often mixed with human bones in their funeral
piles. The graves in Western Australia are always placed
east and west. When first the Europeans came amongst
them, the aborigines imagined they were the embodied
souls of their ancestors and deceased friends.”
Language. —lhe language of the Australians is described
as soft, and of considerable beauty and regularity. It is


spoken by women, perhaps with greater ease and volubility
than by the men. The language differs in various tribes,
so much so, that the language spoken by some tribes cannot
be understood by others. Alterations are constantly being
made in their “unwritten tongue the following circum-
stance is the cause. “ Whenever a native dies his name
ceases to be mentioned in any way in the tribe; if, there-
fore, it should be the appellation of some common object,
a new word is created by which that object is in future
known.”
Weapons. —The principal native weapons are the spear,
the waddy, the stone toma-hawk, and the boomerang; of
the latter there are two descriptions. The boomerang is the
most curious of all their weapons, and perhaps the most
original.
The spear is between nine and ten feet long, about the
thickness of the middle finger, and pointed at the end. The
waddy, or club, is a heavy stick about two feet in length.
It brains the enemy in the battle, or strikes senseless the
poor “gen,” (native woman,) in cases of disobedience and
neglect. The stone tomahawk is employed by the black in
searching for opossums in hollow trees, or in making notches
in the bark of trees to enable him to ascend the top.
I have just stated that there are two kinds of the boom-
erang, one of which on being thrown straight a-head, re-
turns to the thrower, while the other possesses no such
peculiarity.
“ 1 saw a native of slight frame, ” writes an author,
already quoted, “ throw one of the former two hundred
and ten yards, and much further when a ricochet was
permitted. With the latter he made several casts
truly surprising to witness. The weapon after skim-
ming breast high nearly out of sight, suddenly rose high
into the air, and returning with amazing velocity towards


its owner, buried itself six inches deep in the turf, within a
few yards of his feet. It is a dangerous game for an in-
attentive spectator. An enemy, or a quarry, ensconced
behind a tree or bank, safe from spear or even bullet, may
be taken in the rear and severely hurt or killed by the re-
coil of the boomerang. The Emu and Kangaroo are stunned
and disabled, not knowing how to avoid its eccentric gyra-
tions. Amongst a flight of wild ducks just rising from
the water, or a flock of pigeons on the ground, this weapon
commits great havoc. At close quarters in fight the boom-
erang, being made of very hard wood with a sharp edge,
becomes no bad substitute for a cutlass.’'
Dance. —The corobbery or native dance cheers the long
evenings of the native savages. After hunting they some-
times indulge in this amusement, but never till after dark.
The women are the musicians on these occasions, and per-
form on a skin tightly stretched across their knees accom-
panied by their own voices. The men dance and utter
wild howls; which added to the screams of the women,
make the scene not one very entertaining, except in point
of novelty. However, by them this amusement is con-
sidered healthy and pleasing. A gentleman who- wit-
nessed one of these dances, thus describes it, “ The most amus-
ing part of the ceremony was imitations of the Dingo, Kan-
garoo and Emu. W hen all were springing together in
emulation of a scared troop of their own marsupial brutes,
nothing could be more laughable, nor a more ingenious piece
of mimicry.
* * * * *
“ The men were tall and straight as their own spears, many
of them nearly as thin, but all surprisingly active. Like
most blacks they were well chested and shouldered, but
disproportionately slight below the knee.
“The brandishing of clubs, spears, and other instruments


of war, ever accompanies the corobbery, which I need not
mention adds still to its savage character.
Extermination. —I have already observed that the savage
of New Holland is treacherous not only towards the white
settler but equally so towards his own race, “ his eye and
hand are always ready for a victim.” His reason, such as
it is, serves the purpose of the Tiger’s instinct, and has
scarcely a higher office to fulfil.”
These tribes are in most instances very hostile to each
other and their wars are frequent and bloody. In some
cases it is to be feared their hostile disposition and envy tow-
ards each other, are encouraged by the white savage, who on
more than one occasion have been known to adopt the most
fiendish and murderous means to exterminate the natives.
I am fully borne out in what I say by the following anec-
dote told by a gentleman whose authority is beyond doubt
and contradiction.
“ About nine years ago a party of Stockmen on Liverpool
plains, having had their herds much molested by the natives
determined on signal vengeance, and resolved to wreak it
on the first blacks they met. Having fallen in with the
remnant of a tribe, which having been partially domesti-
cated with Europeans made no attempt to escape, they
captured the whole of them, with the exception of a child
or two ; and having bound together with thongs, fired into
the mass until the entire tribe, twenty-seven in number,
were killed or mortally wounded. The white savages then
chopped in pieces their victims and threw them, some yet
living, on a large fire; a detachment of the stockmen re-
maining for several days on the spot to complete the de-
struction of the bodies. In this case the law sternly
vindicated ; for the murderers having been arrested and
brought to trial, seven of them in one day expiated their
offences on the scaffold.”


In a few years hence the savage tribes of Australia will
have passed away. Their vices, diseases, and frequent
conflicts, both with themselves and the white invaders of
their territories, contribute to their utter extermination.
“ Another circumstance which tends to shorten the duration
of this race in the civilized districts, is that so few children
are born among them; for among twenty-one tribes of 450
Aborigines, in the western part of Port Philip, there were
but ten surviving children born in three years. It must be
also noticed that wars have been more frequent of late
owing to the trespass of one tribe upon the hunting ground
of another, as the white man advances into the country.”
There exists but little hope for the advancement in civil-
ization of these poor creatures, though to use the words of
a distinguished traveller, “ They are as apt and as intelligent
as any other race lam acquainted with; they are subject
to the same affections, appetites and passions as other men.
Efforts have been made and in some measure successful,in the
training of the savage children, who are described as laugh-
ing, happy little creatures, but how long the good effect will
continue is yet to be known. The wild coo-ee of the savage
chieftain and his tribe will for along long time be responded
to, despite the arduous and God-like labours of those good men
engaged in the spread of the Gospel amongst them.
“ Just when these zealous pastors had begun to con-
gratulate themselves that they had subdued to the fold
a remnant of these black lost sheep, a body of wild natives
would arrive and camp beside the walls, and next day
both the newly arrived and a batch of half-converts had dis-
appeared together. I can picture to myself the mortifica-
tion of the good teachers, as the wild coo-ee of the savages
reclaiming their kindred, rang through the forest, and obe-
dient to the call, the half tamed pupils, with flashing eyes
and answering cry, tore off their garments - symbols of in-


cipient civilization —and once more naked rushed into their
native wilds.
‘ Give me again my hollow tree.
My Kangaroo and liberty !*
was their exclamation as these children of the bush,
tired of boiled mutton, turnips, potatoes, and tea, and the
twaddle (as they thought it) of the teachers relapsed into
their natural savagehood/’*
In concluding my observations on the Aborigines of New
Holland, let me hope that as the whiteman has derived, and
deprived them of their hunting grounds, their fields, and
their forests, he will give them in return not arsenic and
strychnine, but his sympathy and pity, and remember
“ There is in every human heart.
Some not completely barren part.
Where seeds of love and truth might glow.
And flowers of generous virtue blow ;
To plant, to watch, to water there
This be our duty—be our care.
Minerals. —Amongst the minerals found in Australia,
may be mentioned coal, iron, and copper, which are found
in great abundance. To these may now be added gold,
which in this part of the globe, has been discovered in
greater quantities than in any other country heretofore
known.
Gold Digging . —The first discovery of gold in Australia,
was made by Mr. Edward Hargreaves, who, having a farm
near Bathurst, went to California in search of gold, and was
struck with the similarity between the rocks and strata of
California, and those of his own district of Conobolas, some
thirty miles west of Bathurst. On his return home, he
accordingly examined the soil, and after one or two months
digging, found a quantity of gold, April, 12th, 1851. He
* Our Antipodes, Page 115.


at once applied to the colonial government for a reward,
which he readily obtained, with the appointment of com-
missioner of crown lands. The excitement becoming in-
tense throughout the colony of New South Wales, rapidly
spread to that of Victoria, and other places; and in the first
week of July, 1851, an aboriginal inhabitant, formerly at-
tached to the Wellington mission, and then in the service of
Dr. Kerr, of Wallawa, discovered while tending his sheep, a
mass of gold among a heap of quartz. Three blocks of
quartz, from two to three hundred -weight, contained 1121bs.
of pure gold, valued at £4,000. These blocks were found
on the Munou Creek, 50 miles to the north of Bathurst.
The gold fever now became general, and the gold since
found in numerous other places, and often in large blocks,
has been of enormous amount; vast quantities, (many tons
weight at a time,) being shipped to England, and the Con-
tinent of Europe, and to America. From the gold fields of
Mount Alexander, and Ballarat, in the district of Victoria,
up to October, 1852, there were found 2,532,422 ounces,
or 105 tons, 10 cwt. of gold; and the gold exported up to
the same date represented £8,863,477, sterling.
In all probability, neither all the gold mines, nor the
richest land which Australia contains, have yet been disco-
vered, and the results of further search, when aided by
science and skill, and by concerted and systematic action,
are likely to astonish the world.
Animals. —The principal animals found in Australia, are the
dingo, or native dog, the kangaroo, which is the venison of the
native, the emu, which is his pheasant, the wombat, the
opossum, crane and black swan, and a variety of other animals
and birds. At pagels2 in the Fourth Book of Lessons, it is sta-
ted that “ the animals, as well as the trees of New Holland
differ remarkably from those of the other divisions of the
globe. Some of their quadrupeds go on two feet; and


others have the bill of a bird. In this country black swans
are not rare ; and stranger still, their dogs do not bark ;
and their bees are without stings. But the animal which
strikes the new settler as the most remarkable is the kanga-
roo, which usually stands erect on its hind legs ; and when
it wants to move with s-peed it neither walks nor runs, but
hops or jumps along, with great agility. Of this animal
there are thirty or foujy species; some of which are large
and strong, and others not much bigger than rats. They
are hunted down by the settlers for the sake of their flesh
and skin. These animals are called marsupial or pouched,
because the female has a kind of pouch, or bag, underneath
her stomach, into which her young always creep when they
are tired or alarmed.”
The following interesting and amusing account of a kanga-
roo hunt is from an eye-witness.
“This day was devoted by some of the resident gentlemen
of the vicinity, to an attempt to show the governor the
sport, par excellence , of the country, Kangaroo hunting.
Under their guidance accordingly, well mounted and ac-
companied by three or four greyhounds of a powerful
breed, we traversed a wide extent of forest land, where in
ordinary seasons the animal was known to abound. In a
long day’s ride, however, we only found one Kangaroo,
fortunately a good specimen of that kind known as a Red-
flyer, a strong and fleet animal not less than five feet high.
The bush was tolerably open, hampered only by fallen
timber and occasionally rocky or craggy soil. The Kangaroo,
which w T as feeding in a patch of long grass, jumped up
under our horses’ feet, and at first starting looked very much
like a red-deer hind; its action was less smooth though
equally swift ; but no one could have guessed that it con-
sisted only of a series of jumps, the fore-feet never touch-
ing the ground. A shrill tally ho from one of the finest


riders I ever saw made all the dogs spring into the air;
two of which got away in pretty good turns with our
quarry, and while facing the hill at a pace considerably
greater than an ordinary hunting gallop, I thought we
should have had ‘ Whoo-Whoop’ in less than five minutes.
After crossing a ridge and commencing the descent on the
opposite side, however, the red-flyer showed us quite ' an-
other pair of shoes,’ and a pretty .fast pair too. I never
saw a stag in view go at all like our two-legged friend ;
and, in short, after a sharp burst of twelve or fourteen
minutes, both dogs and men were fairly distanced. In
about half that time I lost my place by riding at full speed
into the fork of a fallen tree concealed in long grass, a pre-
dicament out of which there is only one means of extrica-
tion, namely, retreat; for cavalry has no chance against a
good abattis.
“On the whole, taking into consideration the hardness of
the ground, the stump-holes, sun-cracks, and deep fissures
caused by water, the stiffness of the underwood and the
frequency of the trees, living, dying, and dead, burnt and
burning, the riding in a Kangaroo hunt may be considered
tolerably dangerous.” The same writer observes that “at
bay the Kangaroo is dangerous to young dogs from the
strength with which he uses the long sharp claw of his
hind foot ; a -weapon nearly as formidable as the wild
Boar’s tusk. The animal when hard pressed, not unfre-
quently takes to a water-hole where from his stature he
has a great advantage over the dogs, ducking thorn under
water and sometimes drowning them as they swum to the
attack. The tail of the Kangaroo makes excellent soup;
the haunch is tolerable venison, but like most really wild
venison it is too lean.” The weight of the tail alone of
the Kangaroo is sometimes over twenty pounds; at full


speed this animal's strides are said to equal those of the
swiftest horses.
Many strange things might be told of the animals of
this part of the globe, from the Kangaroo, which is said to
leap upwards of 20 feet at a bound, to the harmless bee
without a sting, and which produces the most delicious
honey. The most curious of all the animals peculiar to
New Holland, is that which is described as half bird, half
bear, or possessing the bill and feet of the duck, and the
body of a mole or rat. There is a great variety of birds in
the continent, whose plumage is very beautiful. Parrots,
parroquets, and cockatoos, with their splendid and varied
colors of red, white, green, and purple, and the beautiful
doves, equally splendid, give to the Australian woods a
cheerful and pleasing scene.
The trees of New Holland are also worthy our notice.
The majority of them come under the family of Evergreen,
but there are trees in New Holland, which furnish fine and
lasting timber.
That of the tall black and upright Ironßark, is very strong
and durable, perhaps it equals oak itself in these properties.
The Stringy Bark and White Gum are also among the
leading trees peculiar to Australia. I may also mention
the Bottle Brush, the Exocarfus, or native cherry, and the
Ana Wattle, or Accacia, which perfumes the surrounding
air.
“ Most of the trees which are natives of Australia are
evergreens. Their leaves generally grow edge-ways on
the stalk, and have neither upper side nor under. One
kind of tree, which our settlers call the grass-tree, has
leaves like grass growing upon it. Another has a fruit
which looks very like a pear, but if the traveller attempts
to taste it, he will soon find his mistake, for it is as hard
as wood. There is also a fruit like a cherry, which grows
with the stone outside ; this is eatable, and tastes like an


indifferent damson. But very few of the fruits, herbs, or
roots of Australia are fit to eat ; the principal ones are a
sort of ground-nut, the root of the fern, and the stalk of the
New Holland lily, a plant which bears a beautiful crimson
flower. The soil, however, is extremely fertile, and suits
all kinds of European fruits and vegetables, which are
grown in great quantities by the colonists.”
By this time, I hope, you know something more than
you did about the great division of the earth, which has
been under our attention for some time this evening. On
to-morrow evening 1 shall tell you something about the
parent British Colony of Australia, New South Wales—
“ The land of the South that lies under our feet.
Deficient in mouths, overburthened with meat.”
In concluding my lecture to-night I should not omit to
state, that there are many little draw-backs to the White
Settlers in this part of the World. For instance, in the
uncultivated and uncleared districts of the country mosqui-
toes prevail, but, perhaps, not to such extent as in other
parts of the globe similarly circumstanced. In many parts
of America these stinging flies are far more numerous and
annoying. They are peculiar to warm climates, and pre-
vail most in marshy districts, where they are easily har-
boured. There are also snakes in Australia, some of which
are poisonous. But the numerous and inexhaustible
sources of wealth of the country (of course I speak of the
settled and cultivated districts) far and away compensate
for any disadvantages of this nature. To the honest,
sober, industrious, persevering, enterprising, and self-
reliant emigrant, Australia will indeed be found a land
flowing with milk and honey.
I promised on last evening to tell you something about
the British colony of New South Wales, occupying the


eastern side of the island continent of Australia, which
promise I am now about to fulfil.
Colonization. —On the recommendation of Captain
Cook, New South Wales was formed into a Penal Settle-
ment on the 20th January, 1788, when the first Governor
landed with 800 convicts at Botany Bay; but finding that
place unsuitable in many ways for the site of a colony,
without landing his charge he set out on an exploring
expedition, and eventually selected the banks of an inlet
in Port Jackson, on which now stands the rising and
flourishing city of Sydney, the capital of the colony. The
following account of the expedition is quoted from high
authority: —
“The day was mild and serene. The expedition sailed
along the coast near enough to see and hear the wild cries
of the astonished natives, who followed them as far as the
rugged nature of the land would permit. As they
approached Port Jackson the coast wore such an appearance
that Captain Philips fully expected to find Captain Cook’s
unfavorable impressions realized; but he was destined to
be most agreeably disappointed.
“The first tack carried the expedition outof thelong, heavy
swell of the Pacific Ocean into the smooth water of a canal
protected by two projecting * heads/ and soon they came
in sight of a vast land-locked lake, stretching as far as the
eye could reach, dotted with small islands, whose shores
sloped, forest covered, down to the water’s edge. Black
swans and other rare water birds fluttered up as the white
strangers sailed on, charmed with a scene in which every
feature was beautiful, yet strange. They had discovered
one of the finest harbours in the world. Coasting round the
shores of this great natural basin, Governor Philips deter-
mined to plant his colony on a promontory where a small


dear stream trickled into the salt water. After three days
spent in exploration, he returned to Botany Bay.”
Six days after the arrival of Governor Philips at Botany
Bay, the Colony of New South Wales may be said to have
been founded, and a party of about one thousand souls
landed where one of the principal streets of the city of
Sydney now stands.
“In March, 1787, accordingly, the ‘Fort Fleet,’ eleven
vessels under command of Captain Philips, R. N. of H. M.
ship Sinus, with 565 males, 192 females, and a guard of
marines—in all 1030 souls on board, sailed from England.
After eight months passage, they reached in safety Botany
Bay. This spot was found sandy, swampy, and ill watered;
the harbour shallow and exposed; the natives hostile.
Philip searching further northwards, entered an inlet about
ten miles from Botany Bay laid down in the chart of Cook’s
expedition as a ‘ boat harbour,’ under the name of Port
Jackson from the sailor who discovered its entrance. As-
tonished and overjoyed at the view of the magnificent haven,
which had been veiled from the sea by the outer headlands,
Philip hastened to remove the fleet from Botany Bay; and
on the 26th January, 1788, it was anchored in Sydney Cove.
On that day the epoch of transportation to New South
Wales commenced ; it terminated on the 28rd August, 1840.”
I do not profess to give you a detailed account of the
early history of New South Wales, nor do I see the neces-
sity at present for doing so. -
“ Amazement and horror overcome us when we look back
on the early days of New South Wales. The settlers were
crowded together on a narrow space—a promontory cleared
of a dense forest. The soil was a barren sand ; every yard
required for cultivation had to be gained by removing en-
ormous trees of a hardness thrt tried the temper of the best
axes, wielded in skilled hands. On one side was an unknown


shore and a shipless sea ; on the other an apparently limit-
less country, inhabited by savages, in which not a step
could be taken without danger of being totally lost; a
country which produced no wild fruit or root fit for the
sustenance of man, and with the exception of a wandering
Kangaroo or a sly, swift emur, no game of any size fit for
food.”
During the twelve succeeding years the colony seems to
have made very little progress, as may be inferred from the
following extract taken from Governor Maquarie’s first des-
patch :—“ I found the colony barely emerging from infan-
tine imbecility, suffering from various privations and dis-
abilities ; the country impenetrable beyond fifty miles from
Sydney ; agriculture in a yet languishing state, commerce
in its early dawn, revenue unknown, threatened with fa-
mine, distracted by faction, the public buildings in a state
of dilapidation, the few roads and bridges almost impassa-
ble ; the population in general distressed by poverty ; no
credit, public or private; the morals of the great mass of
the population in the lowest state of debasement, and reli-
gious worship almost totally neglected.”
Such was the state of New South Wales at the commence-
ment of the present century. Let us now examine it as
the home of the friendless and the poor.
Climate. —The first and most important thing to be con-
sidered by any man about making a new country his home,
is the climate of that country. If not satisfied that it is
favorable to his constitution, nothing should induce him to
go there. The climate of New South Wales is at some
periods of the year unpleasant, but at no time is it unwhole-
some. In this assertion lam fully borne out by the follow-
ing statement of a gentleman, Dr. Lang, who is thoroughly
acquainted with the country :
“ For eight months during the year—namely from the


Ist March to the Ist November, the climate of New
South Wales —which throughout the whole year, indeed, is
at least equal, if not superior to that of any other country
on the face of the globe—is peculiarly delightful. The sky
is seldom clouded; and day after day, for whole weeks to-
gether, the sun looks down in unveiled beauty from the
northern heavens. In ordinary seasons refreshing showers
are not unfrequent; but although there are no periodical rains
jn the colony as in the Torrid Zone, it sometimes rains as
heavily as it does within the tropics. It seldom freezes in
Sydney and never snows; but fires are requisite during the
day in the winter months, and for a considerable time longer
in the mornings and evenings.”
Again, Colonel Mundy speaking of the climate of this
colony says —“ it is a glorious climate—glorious in its virile
beauty—glorious in its freedom from lethal disorder —price-
less with respect to this latter feature in the eye of those who
have known what it is to serve in countries where death
multiform rides on the wings of the wind, lurks in the
forest and swamps, and rests in the crowded emporium.”
With these statements before us, coming from such sources,
we can have no hesitation in arriving at the conclusion, that
the climate of New South Wales is not an unfavourable one
at all events.
Soil. —The soil of New South Wales, and indeed of the
whole continent, is of a very varied character. On the
whole, New South Wales is not an agricultural country, but
asapastoral country, it stands pre-eminent beyond all others in
the world. Skirting some of the rivers, and in various dis-
tricts throughout the colony, farms abound, which in point
of fertility, are not surpassed even in the best agricuitural
districts of the Old World. I have mentioned that, as a
pastoral country, New South Wales is not surpassed by any
other on the face of the globe.
“A strange result of the abundance of sheep, is the su-


perfluity of animal food. There is so much mutton that it
is worthless in the pasturing districts. Sheep are valuable
only for their wool and fat. The plan pursued with these
animals is to drive them in flocks to the sea-ports, then
slaughter them, and boil down their carcases for tallow.”
Such advertisements as the following are not unfrequent—
“S. —C., wholesale and retail butcher, will supply beef
and mutton of good quality, at Id. per pound.”
Productions. —ln fine, the soil of New South Wales
is capable of producing not only the necessaries, but
even the luxuries of life, and these in no niggard way; on
the contrary, in such abundance, as to support millions more
than the present population.
Exports. —The principal exports of the colony are grain,
copper, wool, tallow, wine and gold. The wine and wool of
Australia are held in great repute, and command attention in
the English market. The wool, in particular, is every day
becoming more prized and admired. At the present moment
Australian wool enjoys the highest reputation in England
and America, andholdsthe highest place in the market, and so
readily and so profitably is it disposed of, that the cost of
transport of 16,000 miles, goes almost for nothing in the
calculation of profits. In 1852, a whole fleet of ships were
required to convey the wool of Australia to the manu-
facturers of Yorkshire.
The Colonial Government of New South Wales is subject
of course to that of the mother country. The governor and
the chief members of his official staff is appointed by the
home government. The salary paid to the governor of
New South Wales is £7,000 per year.
What I shall now read for you, appeared in the leading
newspaper of Sydney some few years ago, and clearly points
out to the most ignorant here this evening, the state of the
Colony at that time, nor have we any reason to believe that


this flourishing* country has declined since the statement
was made. On the contrary there are just grounds for the
belief that it has steadily progressed.
Our flocks and herds are increasing while the labour
market is exhausted. Wages have constantly advanced at
rates averaging on the whole somewhere about thirty per
cent. We have ample employment for many thousands of
British emigrants provided they be men who can give a
good days work for a good days wages. We do not want
loungers ; neither do we want any more of that swarming
class of young gentlemen who can do nothing but sit on a
stool and handle the quill. Of these we have always more
than enough. But persons accustomed to hard work,
whether mechanical or rural, and persons having money to
invest, whether of large amount or small, will find in New
South Wales a finer opening than any other part of the
world presents, and than ever before was presented by any
colony under the British Crown.
“ Let them remember that for mildness and salubrity our
climate cannot be surpassed ; that our soil is capable of pro-
ducing all that man requires for sustenance, and most of the
luxuries that he prizes; and that at the one gold-fields were
discovered the colony, with a population of less than
200,000 souls, possessed about 100,000 horses, 1,500,000
horned cattle, 8,000,000 sheep ; yielded an annual revenue
£600,000; and expended of our own produce or manu-
factures to the extent of £1,100,000 per annum altogether,
irrespective of her gold. Coupling these facts with the
‘ great fact’ mentioned above, that in ten months we had
shipped a million worth of our new found produce, the
fruit of peaceful industry, and the earnest of a still brighter
future—our friends in England must admit that our shores
have strong attractions for all who think it better to emi-
grate than to stay at home.”


This statement of facts calls forth no comment from me,
you yourselves can form as good an idea of the prosperous
state of the colony as I can myself.
“ A country which produces grapes, peaches, and
oranges, on a large scale, in the open air, along with maize,
wheat, potatoes, andother ordinary products, besides afford-
ing boundless pasturage for sheep and cattle, may be said
to enjoy the greatest bounties of nature, and to be capable
of yielding substance to millions of human beings.” If Ave
add to this its immense gold mines, we must conclude that
New South Wales is a country favored indeed by nature.
The following is taken from a recent copy of the North
British Mail.
“ Immense Nugget. —We have had the satisfaction of in-
specting an immense nugget, from the Australian mines
in the shop of Mr. Muirhead, goldsmith, Buchanan-street.
This nugget weighs 400 ounces, is of pure gold, without
any apparent admixture of quartz, and is in the condition
in which the lucky digger discovered it. It is valued at
about £1,600, is the largest but one ever brought to this
country, and is certainly a curiosity worthy of the inspec-
tion of the citizens. We believe it will remain on view in
Mr. Muirhead’s for a few days.” —North British Mail.
Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, was founded
by Governor Philips, in the year 1788, and received its name
in compliment to Lord Sydney, one of the Lords of the
British Admiralty at that time. For many years it con-
tinued to be a British Penal Settlement; it is not so now,
nor is any part of the Australian continent, the English
government having determined to send no more convicts to
Australia. This was announced in the House of Commons
by Lord John Russell, on the 10th of February, 1853.
Where situate. —Sydney is situated on “ Sydney Cove,”
in one of the finest harbours in the world, Port Jackson,


to which I have already alluded. The founder of Sydney,
Captain Philips, was induced to select the present site of the
capital, inconsequence of discovering a small river running
between the two promontories forming Sydney Cove, but
there were other inducements besides this, namely, a fine
harbour and abundance of wood and water. Sydney is
removed five miles from the entrance of the harbour, which
is marked by two very high projecting capes or promon-
tories, called “ The Heads.” Port Jackson is fourteen miles
in length, and lies thirteen miles north of Botany Bay.
Sailing vessels, bound for Sydney, generally pass through
Bass’s Straits, and the scenery along the coast is thus des-
cribed by Mr, Cunningham :
“ The shore is bold and picturesque, and the country
behind gradually rising higher and higher, into swelling
hills of moderate elevations, to the utmost distance the eye
ran reach, is covered with wide-branching, evergreen forest
trees, and close brushwood; exhibiting a prospect of never-
failing foliage, although sadly monotonous and dull in tone
compared with the luxuriant summer foliage of Europe*
Grey rocks at intervals project among these endless forests,
while here and there some gigantic tree, scorched dead by
the summer fires, uplifts its blasted branches above the
green saplings around.”
“ The mouth of the harbour is about three-quarters of
a mile, and is protected by the heads from the streams
of the Pacific. This beautiful land-locked lake is capable
perhaps of affording safe anchorage to all the navies of
Europe. Numerous coves, creeks, and inlets indent its
shores, which, in years gone by, were covered to the water's
edge with the finest timber.
“Prior to my landing at Sidney, ’’writes Mr. Shaw, “I
bad frequently heard of its harbour; but I did not antici-
pate seeing one of the finest things I ever beheld. I have
visited the great Lakes of North America, the Lake of


Geneva, the Fords of Norway, and the various indentations
of the Coasts of Ireland and Scotland; but none produced
an impression surpassing that which I felt when I first be-
held the magnificent and peculiarly beautiful scene of Syd-
ney Harbour. The land which surround* the harbour is
hilly not timbered, but scrubby, and the soil like that of
the coast, poor, with large stones protruding through it,
looking at a distance like boulders. These rocks contrast
singularly with the uniformly stunted scrub. The hills,
covered with their peculiar vegetation, form as wild a scene
as any to be found in the interior of the great Australian
continent, although within a few miles of the metropolis of
New South Wales; and the many and beautiful little bays,
with a number of islands, and splendid stone mansions here
and there scattered over the hills around the harbour, taken
altogether, form probably one of the most striking and
truly picturesque scenes in the world.”
Population, —The population of Sydney is about 50,000.
The inhabitants are active and enterprising; religious feuds
seldom take place amongst them, the industrious and per-
severing have no time to spare to indulge in these party
feelings which have ever proved the bane of our
country. Hence it is that the rapid rise of not only the
metropolis, but the whole colony, is unequalled in the annals
of colonial history.
The people are described as being well dressed and well
behaved, and the poor immigrant after a short time is
wonderfully altered for the better. It is perfectly surpri-
sing how quickly the immigrants after their landing assume
not only a better style of dress, but also a better style o*
manners, and this applies more or less to all the colonies.
To the moral tone of society in Sydney, Colonel Mundy
bears testimony in the following words;—
“I have heard the society of Sydney accused—l have


heard them accuse themselves of an addiction to scandal,
and tittle tattle, and I dare say many people who know the
city quite as well as myself, will disagree with me when I
exonerate the good people in general from those vices, or at
least from possessing them in an inordinate degree.”
People. The people of New South Wales are indeed a
working people. There is no aristocracy there, the gover-
nor himself must be a working man. All are up and doing,
there is little time for gossiping, slandering, and back-biting.
Self-reliance meets its reward, and want of it its punishment.
No nobler quality can a man possess at home or abroad,
than honest self-reliance.
Postal Arrangement. —There are upwards of a hundred
post offices throughout the colony, and though the number
of letters received from all parts of the world yearly is
exceedingly great, yet the postal arrangement is neither
perfect nor even satisfactory.
Religion. —There are many beautiful religious edifices or
churches in the metropolis and other towns in New South
Wales, and to every religious sect all toleration is shown
and abundant church room afforded.
Amusements. —There are many places of amusement in
Sydney, the theatres are well attended, and the games of
boyhood are nearly the same as with us, and frequently is
the adventurous, and perhaps friendless immigrant, reminded
of his by-gone days, and thinks he hears “the sound of
time long past,” or the voices “of those who long within
their graves have slept.” Of course when I speak of the
amusements of Sydney, I do not by any means advise you
to seek them, nor do I wish to be understood as oneot those
persons who are opposed to amusement, provided the
amusement be harmless, and does not interfere with business.
I remember reading a very pithy and true saying of a
wise man, which is well worthy a place not only in your


memories, but in the memory of every one. It is this
“Take pleasure in your business, and it will become your
recreation. Hope for the best, think for the worst, and bear
whatever happens.”
Letting of Land . —ln New South Wales, as in all new
colonies, land is to be had at a very low rate, of course I
mean in the early stages of colonization. The price of
land in Sydney and its immediate vicinity, differs very much
now, from the time when Governor Philips first landed. By
an order made in council in 1847, relative to the letting of
what are termed the unsettled districts of the country, the
Governor is empowered to grant leases for any term of
years not exceeding fourteen. The clause referring to these
lands runs thus:—
“The Governor is empowered to grant leases of runs for
any term or terms of years, not exceeding fourteen years
in duration, for pastoral purposes; with permission, never-
theless, for the lessee to cultivate so much of the lands res-
pectively comprised in the said runs as may be necessary
to provide such grain, hay, vegetables, or fruit, for the use
and supply of the family and establishment of such lessee,
but not for the purpose of sale or barter \ and so, neverthe-
less, that such leases shall in no case prejudice, interrupt,
or interfere with the right of the Governor or other officer
for the time being, administering the government of the said
colony, to enter upon any of the lands comprised in the
said leases for any purpose of public defence, safety, im-
provement, convenience, utility, or enjoyment. The rent
to be paid for each run to be proportioned to the number of
sheep, or equivalent number of cattle, which the run shall
be estimated or capable of carrying, according to a scale
to be established for the purpose, by authority of the Gover-
nor. Each run shall be capable of carrying at least 4,000
sheep, or equivalent number of cattle, according to the scale


aforesaid, and not in any case be let at a lower rent than
£lO per annum, to which £2 10s. per annum shall be added
for every additional 1,000 sheep, or equivalent number of
cattle, which the run shall be estimated as capable of car-
rying* The rent to be paid yearly in advance.”
This is very cheering and very encouraging to the enter-
prising poor man. We need not wmnder at the thousands
who seek the shores of this land of promise every year.
And I sincerely hope the day may yet come when many of
you will add to the number. Perhaps it will not be out
of place here, to give you an advice as regards emigration,
I offer it to you,as you are all well aware, for your own good.
There are few amongst you who may not attribute your
present unhappy position to one or other of the three misfor-
tunes—Poverty, Ignorance and Drunkenness. Well, we may
look upon Idleness as being the parent of these misfortunes.
Beware then of the latter, and always bear in mind, that there
is no greater obstacle in the way of success in life than trust-
ing to something to turn up, instead of going to work and
turning up something.
When you land in a strange country accept the first offer
of employment which presents itself, no matter how humble
the employment may be, provided it is not criminal. Do
not remain with your arms folded waiting for something to
turn up, which you think will suit you. No greater mistake,
and for which many a foolish emigrant paid sorely when
he found his pockets empty, “distressed on every side with
no hand to helpsuch has been the sad fate of many
emigrants, but I hope you will be wise enough to avoid it.
“ Idleness travels very slowly, and Poverty soon overtakes
her.” The road to independence is not a very smooth one,
especially in a new country ; there are a great many big
stones in the way which can only be removed by patience,
perseverance and energy. The results of honest labor more


than compensate for its anxiety and difficulty. Exertion is
the parent of Independence, and without the latter we are
Seldom happy.
Wages, —There is every encouragement given to the
sober and industrious in New South Wales. The following
is a list of the'yearly wages, exclusive of board and lodging
given to the working people.
Shepherds .. . * £3O
Ploughmen .. .. 35
Blacksmiths .. .. 50 to 60
Coachmen .. .. 40
Grooms .. .. 30
Cooks >
Housemaids > .. 20
Laundresses &c. )
Education. —The next and last thing connected with the
colony which I shall notice is the state of education there.
Education is the poor man’s best friend, and therefore any
government having at heart the welfare of a people should
provide ample means for their education. “ I have no
sympathy,” writes a great and wise man, “whatever with
those who would grudge our workmen and other common
people the very highest acquisitions which their taste or
their time, or their inclinations would lead them to realize ;
for, next to the salvation of their own souls, I certainly
say that the object of my fondest aspirations is the moral
and intellectual, and as a sure consequence of this, the
economical, advancement of the working classes.”
I need scarcely tell you, men, that these are my sentiments
also.
Education —The national system of education in New
South Wales may be said to have been introduced in 1836,
by Sir Richard Bourke,governor of the colony at that time.
He was not as successful as might be desired, yet his efforts
to raise the moral tone of society in the colony have secured
for him the affection of every good and well Mentioned man.


Speaking of the importance of education to the people of
New South Wales he said, “/ may without fear of contra-
diction assert, that in no part of the world is the general
education of the people a more sacred or necessary duty of
the government than in New South Wales. It is worthy
of notice that the Irish system of National Education should
be selected as a model for the education of the poor in this,
and I might say all other British Colonies ; and well deser-
ving of the honor that system is. National Education in
Ireland has diffused its blessings far and wide over the
country and sown the seeds of knowledge and enlighten-
ment.*
This is not the place, however, to give expression to my
feelings,or advance any opinion upon asystem thathas placed
many a poor and friendless Irish lad beyond the reach of
poverty and want, and led to the development of that genius
and talent inherent in the Irish youth.
For myself I must say that were it not for that system,
it is more than probable I should never have been able to
fill an office amongst you of which I am proud.
My poor and humble education I received in a great Uni-
versity, and many a now learned men, drank from
the same fountain of knowledge. My books of early
study were the same as those from which I teach you night
after night, and'how I teach you, I was taught my-
self. The University to which I now allude, is one open
to the child of every poor man—it is the Model National
School in Marlborough-street.
Long may that school continue to shed the blessings of
education amongst the children of the Irish metropolis.
* The Educational Works of Dr. Sullivan, written for the use of the
Irish National Schools, are of more than European reputation, they hold
the very highest place as class-books in America and in the British
colonies.


And here let me accord to the good gentleman presiding
over the administration of the system itself, the Eight Hon.
Alexander Macdonnell, the gratitude of one who admires his
actions, respects his policy, and loves the man.
He has been to me, and to thousands like me, a wise
adviser, and a kind friend. He is truly great, for he is
truly good.
1 have wandered too far, I fear, from the subject before us,
but gratitude, “ the memory of the heart,” must plead my
excuse.
The state of Education in New South Wales must indeed
have been very low previous to 1836, when we find that in
1851, out of a population of nearly 188,000, not half that
number could read and write, though there were in the
colony the same year forty-three National Schools in opera-
tion, and fifty-three more in progress, exclusive of many
other of a denominational class.
There is a beautiful statue of the great advocate of
National Education, Sir Richard Bourke, erected in Sydney
by the people of New South Wales, ‘Ho record his honest,
able, and benevolent administration, from 1831 to 1837.”
Part of the inscription is as follows :
“He established religious equality upon a just and firm
basis, and sought to provide for all, without distinction of
sect, a sound and adequate education.”
He was a good man, and a wise governor, and under his
administration New South Wales is said to have attained
the highest state of prosperity. Port Jackson was crowded
with shipping, bringing free laborers and capitalists, the
banks overflowing with money, and the whole population
full of the happiest excitement.”
Besides Sydney there are many other important towns in
the colony, of which Paramatta, Campbell Town, Liverpool,
Windsor, and Wellington, form the principal.


I now conclude my observations for the present upon
New South Wales, hoping that the information you have
received, may prove interesting and instructive to you all.
And should the day arrive, when by honest industry, and
manly perseverance, you will have acquired the means of
reaching its shores, remember what has been effected by those
who have gone before you
—“ Without a friend,
Pressed by a thousand foes.”
Yet they acquired independence, station and position, by
honest labour, sobriety, and frugality; to you I say,
“ Go Forth and Do Likewise.”


LIFE:
ITS BATTLE, AND HOW TO FIGHT IT.
It is my intention on this evening to offer a few ob-
servations on the various stages of Life, its Battle and how
to Fight It. The subject is one of interest to us all, and
requires one more competent than I to treat it with
that power which its importance demands.
Infancy. —The innocent and helpless stage of infancy is
the earliest era in the life of man. Here for the first time,
the affection and anxiety of a mother for her child, show
themselves, whether that mother be Christian, slave, or
savage.
In every clime the love of a mother shows itself, and it
is beyond the powers of a child ever to fully compensate a
mother’s love, a mother’s care, or a mother’s anxiety.
“When it wakes from its sleep there is one watchful form
ever bent over its cradle. If startled by some unhappy
dream, a guardian angel seems ever ready to soothe its
fears. If cold, that ministering angel brings it warmth;
if hungry, she feeds it, if happy, she caresses it. In joy
or sorrow, in weal or woe, she is the first object of its
thoughts. Her presence is Heaven. The mother is the
deity of infancy.”
Much indeed is due to a mother, and when we find her
“ tottering on the grave’s cold brink” we should then think
of all she has done for us, and endeavour to smooth her
path to eternity by affection and obedience.
I have never yet known a good man who was not a
good and affectionate son.
But many of you have had mothers whom you could


not consider good, and who perhaps by their bad example
and evil instruction, are more or less accountable for your
present position. If there be such amongst you,and your mo"
thers still live, act you the part of good sons, and on your re-
turn to your homes impress upon, their minds the words of our
dear Lord and Master regarding bad example —“ Better
that a mill-stone should be tied round their necks, and cast
into the sea, than scandalize one of these little ones.” But
take heed that you
“ Speak gently to the aged one.
Grieve not the care-worn heart;
The Sands of Life are nearly run—
Let such in peace depart.”
Boyhood . —After infancy, the next stage of life is boy*
hood, and generally speaking, as our infancy, so will be our
boyhood.
To some of you the recollections of boyhood, its scenes
and innocent amusements, must make you gloomy and
sad.
Manhood is the next step from boyhood. The structure
of man is perhaps the grandest miracle in nature. Placed
as the head of creation, endowed with the greatest beauty
and nobility of form, gifted with faculties which, if pro-
perly .exercised and applied, enable him to claim relation-
ship with angels, he is designed by God to rule over crea-
tion itself. Made to reflect God’s own image; with form erect
and countenances directed heavenwards, as if to remind
him of the destiny awaiting him if his actions during his
sojourn in this life entitle him to a place in his Maker’s
mansion.
The dignity and high position for which man was in-
tended by the Almighty show themselves clearly and dis-
tinctly in the following passage :
“And God said, let us make man to our image and
likeness, and let him have dominion over the fishes of the


sea and the fowls of the air, and the beasts, and the
whole earth, and every creeping creature that moveth upon
the face of the earth. ”
What power is thus vested in man by his Creator. But
God has done more for man. He has promised him a
happier home beyond the grave than that which all earthly
power, splendour and greatness, can obtain for us here a
home “ where everlasting suns shed everlasting brightness.”
But how different are the lives of men, how dreadful is
the wickedness of some, how great the virtues of others.
The wicked and vicious man. is never happy, no matter
what may be his riches or power in this world. “ The
wicked man,” says Job, “travaileth with pain all his days.
A dreadful sound is in his ears ; in prosperity the destroyer
shall come upon him.” The same inspired writer also says,
that “ his rememberance shall perish from the earth,
and he shall have no name in the streets.”
Men forget their dignity and the grand object of their exist*
ence when they indulge in those vices which make them
more brutal than the very beasts of the field. It is ridiculous
to hear the miscreant and the drunken sot speak of what free-
dom and liberty should be, while he himself is engulfed in
slavery, and slavery too of the darkest dye—the slavery
of his own vicious habits whose chains are forged by him-
self. Little does he know that
“ The bravest trophy ever man obtained
Is that which o’er himself, himself hath gained.”
Let me now tell you in the words of a wise and good man,
what constitutes the true freedom of a man.
“ The free man is he who is loyal to the laws of the uni-
verse ; who in his heart sees and knows, across all contra-
dictions, that injustice cannot befal him here ; that except
by sloth and cowardly falsity, evil is not possible here.
The first symptom of such a man is not that he resists and


rebels, but that be obeys. Gladly be that will go gladly
to his labour and his suffering, it is to him alone that the
upper powers are favorable and field of time will yield fruit.
The essence of all ‘ religion ’ that was and that will be,
is to make men free. Who is he that, in this life-pilgrim-
age, will consecrate himself, at all hazards, to obey God
and God's servants, and to disobey the devil and his ?
With pious valour, this freeman walks through the roaring
tumults, invincibly, the way whither he is bound.”
Such a man indeed well deserves the name of freeman.
It is not very easy, 1 know, for men such as you are to
govern evil inclinations. Perhaps had you met some kind
friend to advise and exhort you in earlier years your lot
would be happier. But do not despond; there may yet re-
main the embers of goodly youth which require only to be
kindled by the fire of repentance to shed brilliant rays of
morality and religion,rays which will dispel the dark and heavy
clouds of crime and despair, that for years have shrouded
the nobler and more manly characteristics of your nature.
Arise then I say and burst those chains of slavery which
you yourselves have forged. Let your reason predominate
and ever keep subject those evil inclinations and vicious
habits, the indulgence in which has made the dark frowning
walls of a prison the barriers to your liberty, and its cells
your cheerless homes for many a long and dreary year.
Eeflect—look back on the past, profit by its bitter experi-
ence, and manifest to those who with arms folded look
doubtfully and suspiciously upon your reformation. Prove
to them that within the bosom of an unfortunate and erring
one there beats a grateful and a noble heart. Remember,
men, that you are the living images of Him who, desirous to
show his mercy and forgiveness for man, exclaimed to the
penitent thief on Calvary’s height, “ This day shalt thou
be with me in Paradise.”


1 shall now ask you to follow me while I offer a few re-
marks upon man’s maturity, and his decline, two very im-
portant stages in human life. At the age of thirty, man
may be considered in his prime and maturity, his physical
powers being then at their maximum or greatest point—while
at the age of fifty, he may be looked upon as entering upon
life’s decline.
Though not a very shrewd observer of mankind, yet it
has frequently occurred to me, that it is in the power of
every well disposed young man to better his condition in
life before the era of maturity has arrived. Of course I do
not presume to say that all young men can rise above the
depressing circumstances of a poor or low birth, and soar
to a high and dazzling position in the world, but I hold
that it in their power more or less to become useful and
respectable members of society. And further, I hold that
those young men who have received an early education,
have very little to plead in self excuse, if in later years the
effects of their early training are not visible to their advan-
tage, and this is best seen by their character and reputation,
no matter how humble their social rank. Well has it been
said by a great poet, that “ the child is the father of the man.”
It is sad to see men preserve the evil passions of their
nature for mature age, and then like some wild beast es-
caping from its den, prey upon society till overtaken by the
strong hand of justice and committed to the prison cell,
there to pass the prime of their existence shrouded in the
degrading costume of a convict. By this time you must
have felt the wearisomeness of such a life and learn that
“ A prison is a house of care,
A place where none can thrive,
A touchstone true to try a friend.
A grave for one alive.”
When each evening I glance around and see so many fine
looking men in the full flush of existence, my bosom is filled


with emotions of pity and regret. To account why such
men should sacrifice their liberty and their homes, and for-
get themselves to so deplorable an extent, as to become the
outcasts of society, bearing, as many of you do, the impress
of many crimes, is, I assure you, to me a task of difficulty
and of sorrow: man “was not born to shame,” it is man
who brings shame and misery upon himself. Many of you
may say that your sad position is attributable to various
causes ; doubtless it is, but the true and only cause is your
own vicious conduct. Some will tell me they had bad and
profligate example set them in youth had its
effect even in manhood. Now I must confess that lam not
altogether a believer in this doctrine, for I am and ever have
been of opinion, that no matter how bad or how demoralized
a parent may be, it is in the power of a child when it arrives
at mature age, to eradicate from its own heart, the evils which
bad example and bad precept have sown there, and prepare
the mind for the seeds of moral and religious instruction.
My experience of mankind in every phase of life, confirms
this opinion more and more, and in support of my views,
1 have the authority of the able man who wrote that “every
man has two educations—that which is given to him, and
the other that which he gives himself. Of the two kinds,
the latter is by far the most valuable. Indeed all that is most
worthy in a man he must work and conquer for himself.
It is this that constitutes our real and best nourishment.
What we are merely taught seldom nourishes the mind
like that which we teach ourselves.”
It was the education in vice which you gave
that brought you to what you are; but even now you can
unlearn your follies, it is not yet too late. Let not past
misiortunes subdue your courage, or stay your efforts to re-
regain the position which you have lost. It was the want
of moral courage that caused your fall. Many of you, I


know, committed crimes for the purpose of being considered
daring and courageous, though you well knew in your hearts
you were doing wrong. But my advice to you is, for the
future, to avoid what is wrong, and to do what is right, re-
gardless of the opinions, frowns, or smiles of any, whether
friend or foe. Do this and you will never bring yourselves
into danger, and thus you will save your hearts from many
a pang, and remorse of conscience can never disturb your
slumbers.
If you are disposed to profit by the advice I now give
you, it is not too late. Every hour that passes over you
may be turned to good account in uprooting those habits for
which you have suffered. And here let me impress upon
your minds that the longer you defer entering upon an
honest and industrious career, the more hopeless will be your
reformation. Commence then at once, and ever look upon
the phrase too late , as the curse of life.
I am now about to address the old men amongst you.
A few short years hence and these languid eyes will be closed
in death, and your fast failing frames will moulder into earth
once more. You now stand in the shadow of death,—you
are now in the winter of mortality—hopes and fears, sighs
and farewells, joys and sorrows, will soon no longer affect
you. It is time then to awake and look forward to your
future state. God is merciful. He is just. The past can
never return; therefore it behoves you to “ wisely improve
the present —it is thine, go forth to meet the shadowy future
without fear, and with a manly heart.” Here let me remark
to both old and young, that to defer preparation for the
death-bed but too often proves too late —it is a very poor
support, I fear, for the parting spirit to depend upon.
“Fool! fool! fool!” were the last words of one, on his
dying bed, who, it is to be feared, had procrastinated his
repentance too long, and too fearfully; while the humble


Christian, sensible of a thousand failings and imperfections,,
still looks with the eye of faith on his Redeemer; and his
soul, like the flight of an eagle, towards the heavens, soars
to the regions of everlasting happiness.
May ours be the death of the humble Christian.
I now conclude my remarks upon the various stages of
life. Life is a divine gift, and it is in the power of every
man to make that gift conducive to honour or to shame.
How it can be spent to make shame its inevitable conse-
quence you all know; how it can be spent to render a man
honourable and independent in this world, we shall now see.
It has been said that “ if you begin life with disappoint-
ment, it is apt to end in despair.” Now I would say, when
disappointment presents itself, step over it. Disappointments
should rather tend to stimulate your exertions than unfix
your determinations. And these obstacles which disappoint-
ments place in our path, try us as to our energy, ability, and
steadfastness, and if we surmount these, we prove what is
called the “use of difficulty.”
There are many qualifications which a man determined
to succeed in this world must possess. Amongst them I
shall first notice industry, as it is the prime source whence
spring fortune and independence.
Industry is, and ever has been, the great means by which
we open a way to wealth and honorable independence, whilst
religion and honesty furnish the only safe lights to guide
us on the journey. Before starting upon the journey of
life, then, you must first resolve to be industrious, and make
up your minds to overcome by patience, perseverance and
zeal, the difficulties to be encountered. No half measures
will do—if you be idle to-day and industrious to-morrow,
you can never expect to reap the golden harvest of honest
labor. Obstacles and disappointments you must be prepared
to meet, the path you are proceeding on is beset with them.


but when they do occur, be neither disheartened nor discou-
raged ; let them rather stimulate you to more vigorous ex-
ertions, for to the man who is determined to accomplish the
object he has in view, particularly when that object is a laud-
able one, there is no difficulty insurmountable. You are
sure to pass by in your progress, thousands in poverty and
want—stragglers by the way side—who may sneer at your
labors, and set you down as a fool for your pains; but to
those you must say—we will argue this point with you,
on our return, when the pilgrimage of our life is ended;
for the present we can only spare time to bid you farewell.
Life’s Battle must be fought by every man, rich and poor.
Some fight it and are defeated, others fight it and are suc-
cessful. Amongst the former we find the idle and irresolute,
among the latter the industrious and persevering. Industry
turns all it touches into gold—it is the great fortress that
resists the besieger, Want. It is the bark which rides out
triumphant above the raging winds of poverty, and pre-
serves the owner safe and secure, while his enemies pay ho-
mage to him, as they look upon and admire or envy, what
they call his good luck, but what I believe to be the reward of
honesty, self denial and ever wakeful energy.
The law of Industry is a law nearly as old as the world
itself, established by the Creator when he said to Adam, “ out
of the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread”—a law wisely
and mercifully established for the good of all mankind.
I never approve the sentiments of those who say, .when
speaking o f one who has succeeded better in life than them-
selves, “he was a lucky fellow, but what would he be
had he not had friends to take him by the hand.” “I re-
member him,” another will say, “ when he was so and so.”
A third will say, “ there was a time when I would not con-
descend to know the fellow,” and thus they continue. Now,
my friends, the industrious and persevering man, heeds not


such remarks as these, for ne knows they all proceed from
jealousy, and I regret to say envy in many instances is at
the bottom of them. An anecdote which happened to come
under my notice at one time, is very applicable here, as it
shows the cause of the industrious man s success. Richard
Burke, being found in a reverie shortly after an extraordin-
ary display of powers in Parliament, by his brother
Edmund Burke, (Edmund Burke I should tell you was
a great Irishman, a great orator, a great writer, one,
perhaps, of the greatest men that ever sat in the House
of Commons), was questioned by a friend as to the cause,
and replied, “I have been wondering how Ned has con-
trived to monopolize all the talents of the family; but
then again, I remember when we were at play,he was at work.’
Thus it is that the industrious man by perseverance rises
to independence and fame. His business is his recreation,
its study his pleasure. It has been very wisely observed,
that “ a man who gives his children habits of industry,
provides for them better than by giving them a fortune.”
Equally true the saying, “At the working man’s house
hunger looks in, but dares not enter ; nor will the bailiff
or the constable enter ; for industry pays debts, but despair
increaseth them.”
Treasure these sayings, let them ever live in your me-
mories so that you may remember them when fighting
Life’s Battle.
Your position now, my friends, is sad and gloomy, but
it will not long continue so please God. Liberty you soon
shall haye, and no doubt you will value it, and the best
way you can prove that you do value it, is to enjoy it,
Aou all know by this time that
“ When liberty is gone.
Life grows insipid and has lost its relish.”
With the prospect of liberty before you, you should not


despond nor allow your present state to enfeeble your de-
terminations, or prevent you from making every eftort to
regain the happier one from which you fell. This can only
be done by honest and. persevering industry. God has
wisely designed that all men should labour, and if any
man work not, neither should he eat.
But some of us are apt to imagine that unless a man is
stripped in his shirt sleeves, and hard and heavy at work,
he is not labouring , and hence it is many of you -suppose
that men who wear fine clothes, have grand houses, splendid
carriages and many servants, do not labor at all. Such an
opinion is very erroneous indeed. Labor is of two kinds,
that of the hands or manual labour, and that of the mind
or mental labor; the latter is by far the more oppressive, the
more wearing, and the more laborious. Riches do not always
bring contentment and happiness with them, nor do great
and high situations in this would confer upon those who
fill them that amount of pleasure and delight which such
men as you are inclined to suppose.
You cannot, I fear, form an adequate notion of the mental
labor, mental pain, and mental anxiety of some great men.
They feel the heavy responsibility of their office —their ac-
tions are watched, nay the very words they speak are noted
down, and they are always on their trial before the bar of
public opinion. Should the plans devised by them for the
public good or for the advantage of the kingdom fail, the
world condemns them, no matter how well meaning or how
good their intentions. Thus it is that great men seldom ex-
perience that repose and content of mind which the honest
poor enjoy. But it is right I should tell you who in my
estimation is entitled to the name great man. He who
devotes his life, his talents and his genius in ameliorating
or bettering the condition of his fellow-man. Ido not es-
teem that man great, whose yearly income may be counted


by thousands and hundreds of thousands, and who spends
it in indulging in pleasure and in folly, regardless of the
wants, the penury and the privations of his fellows. No,
nor would I envy such a man’s, pomp, riches or wealth.
“ Nothing can make a man truly great but being truly good,
and partaking of God’s holiness.” When it is your happy
fortune to meet a great man, that is a man raised above
you by station, birth, education and fortune, and who forget-
ful of all these advantages over you, stoops to heal your
wounds and wipe away your tears, respect him and feel
grateful. Gratitude is the only tribute we can pay to such
men; they deserve it at our hands; the grateful memory of
such men is a pleasure to those who can feel that, “It is
a species of agreeable servitude to be under an obligation
to those we esteem.”
I would also have you to be very cautious in condemning
the acts of great men; you can only see the surface of
affairs, while they have penetrated the depths.
I cannot give you a better idea of what a truly great man
is than is given by a great man himself. “A great man is
affable in his converse, generous in his temper, and im-
movable in what he has maturely resolved upon; and as
prosperity does not make him haughty and imperious, so
neither does adversity sink him into meanness and dejection,
for if ever he shows more spirit than ordinary, it is when
he is ill-used and the world frowns upon him; in that he is
equally removed from the extremes of servility and pride,
and scorns either to trample upon a worm, or sneak to an
emperor.”
There are few who would not respect and esteem a man
so gifted, but unfortunately you have never been taught to
do thus. Great men have ever been looked upon by many
of you as so many foes, and the government of which they
may form a part you were but too easily led to disrespect.


Industry, whether bodily or mental, can only make us
great provided it is industry based upon morality and reli-
gion, having for its object the elevation of the mind as well
as the comfort of the body. And, thank God, great men are
not confined to the ranks of the noble and the wealthy, hut
as the pearl is found in the oyster shell and admired for
its unsullied whiteness, so from amongst the friendless,
the poor and the lowly have great men sprung, whose names
shall be honored and their memories reverenced.
The humblest being born is great.
If true to his degree.
His virtue illustrates his fate
Whatever that may be—
Thus let us daily learn to love
Simplicity and worth ;
For not the eagle but the dove
Brought peace unto the earth !
So much for industry and what it may effect. The law
of labor is divine, a legacy left us by old father Adam—a
law which has ever since been obeyed by every good man.
Labor is food and physic for the body; then let us face it
with earnestness of heart and gladness of will, never despair,
and as we face the struggles of life remember the advice of
the poet —
Work, work, my boy, be not afraid.
Look labor boldly in the face ;
Take up the hammer, or the spade,
And blush not for your humble place.
There’s glory in the shuttle’s song.
There’s triumph in the anvil’s stroke.
There’s merit in the brave and strong.
Who dig the mine or fell the oak.
But industry alone does not do. Temperance and fru-
gality are indispensable to success and independence in this
world. We all know how true and expressive the adage—


“ there is little good in the cow that yields a pail of milk,
and then spills it. Equally absurd is the conduct of the
man, who in the evening squanders in low debauchery in
some filthy tavern, the good wages he obtains by the labours
of the day. You are all aware of the number of
excellent tradesmen who pursue this course; you are also
aware of the consequences that result from it—themselves,
and their families are always wretched and miserable, —-
their clothes shabby, patched and ragged, their meals scanty
and uncomfortable, and their dwellings, which are to be
found in foulest and unhealthiest localities, cheerless and
disgustingly dirty.
Thus you see that without these invaluable accompani-
ments, Temperance and Frugality, Industry may become
more productive of evil than good, for wherever intem-
perance and the vices of which it is the fruitful parent
prevail, domestic comforts must be always strangers.
Temperance preserves health and keeps man’s reasoning
powers clear. Besides this there is a blessing attending
the sober temperate man. As I have already spoken to
you on this subject, I shall only say to you, cultivate
temperance for the future, and blessings and virtues will
more than compensate you for your trouble. Further, I
wish to impress upon you the great necessity that men
like you should be frugal—men w r ho I may say are friendless
—men most likely to meet with coldness and indifference
in the world—to such men I say, a shilling or sixpence, nay
even a farthing, is valuable indeed. No matter how great
the [’pleasures the good things of this world afford, they
bring with them poison and remorse, when we feel that in
procuring them, we are exceeding our earnings, or de-
priving ourselves of necessaries, whilst indulging in su-
perfluous luxuries. Think of this then, and do not squander
your little earnings even in this Institution. Do not permit


over sanguine expectation of success when discharged from
Smithfield, lead you to think lightly of what you are now
earning. Hope is a pleasant acquaintance, but an unsafe
friend. Be frugal therefore and save while you can, and
believe me when you again find yourself in Life’s Battle
Field, you will find that your most powerful friend and
ally is Prudence. “ Frugality,” says Doctor Johnson,
“ may be termed the daughter of prudence, the sister of tem-
perance and the parent of liberty. He that is extravagant
will quickly become poor, and poverty will enforce depen-
dance, and invite corruption.”
I have already told you that you would be exposed to the
ridicule and jeerings of idlers in your onward progress,
and much it is to be regretted that contempt and ridicule
should furnish such effective means for shaming the weak
and wavering from the path which is certain to conduct them
to happiness; and rogues and fools should exercise so fatal
an influencein trying the courage and resolution of the honest
and the well-disposed. To sustain with firmness and com-
posure the jeers and taunts of those who would revile
virtuous undertakings, shows a man to be possessed of a
noble nature and decision of character, which latter quality
endows ah individual with a moral power that is generally
regarded as the first element of greatness. Now listen,
while I endeavour to impress on your minds the means by
which you may be able successfully to combat the wicked
efforts of the scoffers, who would fain turn you away from
your honest purpose, and make you victims of the ruin,
that is certain to overtake themselves.
You must first remember that it is ordained by a wise
Providence that you should be constantly exposed to temp-
tations and irials ;it is quite natural then to expect that
you should encounter them more frequently in your reso-
lutions to proceed on a career of virtue and goodness. But


then, if that great and good Being who has ordered all
things for the best, has thought fit to expose you to temp-
tations, he has also mercifully provided the means by which
you can effectually resist them, for he never denies his all-
sustaining grace to those who sincerely implore it, and if
you but keep constantly in memory the sufferings and sorrows
of him wdiom he sent down from Heaven for your sake,
you will be enabled to bear patiently and firmly any annoy-
ance or persecution you may meet with at the hands of
the ill-disposed. Remember “ ’tis one thing to be tempted,
another thing to fall.”
Armed thus you may boldly encounter Life’s struggles,
and heroically fight its Battle. The derisive smile or scorn-
ful laugh of the idlers will have no sting for you, you can
well afford to leave them to the enjoyment of their mirth;
they may pronounce you a fool, but time and the substan-
tial rewards which are sure to crown your efforts, will per-
haps cause them to alter their opinion, or at least turn the
laugh in your favor. There is an old and a true proverb
which says that “ Those who Win may Laugh.” In a short
time these petty annoyances are certain to cease, for the
tormentor soon grows tired of his employment when he
perceives that his ridicule is received with its merited con-
tempt. But this complete indifference to the ridicule, com-
bined occasionally with the solicitations of men whose acts
you once approved, in whose guilt you were perhaps fre-
quent participators—this steadiness of purpose now so es-
sential to you, and without which the pure and the innocent
are not secure from the wiles of the tempter, you cannot, I
fear, hope to acquire without decision of character ; this, I
repeat, is the quality that most contributes to independence
here, and by the support it lends to religion, may be said
also to lead to eternal happiness hereafter. View it in any
point, temporal or eternal, moral or physical, decision of


character appears quite indispensable; where this grand
attribute prevails, threats and solicitations fail alike to divert
a man from what he considers the line of duty. Did the
terrors of the lion’s den affect the decided character of
Daniel, or the flames of the furnace that of his intrepid
companions ? What, in short, bids the martyr brave the
block —the patriot the dungeon, or the soldier the cannon’s
mouth, but decision of character—decision of character, I
repeat, with the value of which you can never be too deeply
impressed.
In conclusion, I would earnestly advise you to place no
trust in those who affect an extraordinary friendship for
you, who desire to persuade you that they are your bosom
friends, and that they feel a stronger interest in your wel-
fare than their own; however plausible and sincere they
appear, suspect them I say, question their motives— examine
them narrowly—and you will be sure to discover that they
but want to render you the instrument of some evil design
—to use you for their own advantage, and when they have
effected their purpose to abandon you to the consequences.
Recollect that it is want of decision of character that has led
to the commission of the misdeeds the penalty of which
you are now suffering in this prison—a penalty which, I
am sure, must be increased sevenfold by the knowledge
which in your hours of reflection, must force itself upon
you, of the shame and the sorrow that some of you have
brought to the doors of honest and affectionate parents
who carefnlly watched over the years of your infancy, of
the tears that others of you by your crimes may have wrung
from the eyes of your devoted brothers and sisters, and the
misery and distress which must now be the portion of the
wives and offspring of such of you as contracted those ties,
unmindful of the duties you thereby imposed upon your-
selves. Let the experience of the past teach you to be


wiser for the future; use every precaution to baffle the
tempter, close every avenue againthis approach—drive him
from you at once, for his presence, if but for ever so short
a time, may blight all your fine resolutions and poison
your happiness for ever. Do not for a moment hesitate as
to how you are to rid yourself of him —there is danger in
hesitation—there must be no false modesty—no fear of the
severity of his retorts, there must be determination in your
tone and in your look. As an illustration of my meaning
I will quote four simple lines which you will do well to
remember.
“ Greatly stroke an angry nettle,
And it stings you for your pains ;
Grasp it, like a man of mettle,
Soft as silk it then remains.”
Profit, I say, by your past experience. Carefully avoid
the places, the society, the pastimes that led to your first
fall into guilt. Enter hand and heart on the road to Indus-
try, which is only another name for the road to Wealth; no
proverb contains more truth than that which says that
‘‘time is money, and industry a treasure.” Forget for ever
your former vicious habits, for so sure as you yield to the
indulgence of the least objectionable of them, so surely will
you again fall into crime, to be followed by that punishment
of which you have already experience, and to be followed
hereafter by a punishment as terrible, as it will be eternal.
And this you will find it easy to do. if you are only at-
tentive to the precepts of religion ; neglect of these precepts
leads to ruin, while the man who is eager to acquire a
knowledge of them, will not only learn to repent of former
transgressions, but thoroughly fortify himself against future
temptations.
Thus, men, may you hope to fight Life’s Battle bravely
and manfully, and at its close you may look with a Chris-
tian’s hope to Heaven, and there expect to enjoy “perfect


purity, everlasting freedom,” and perfect rest. It was
beautifully said by the author of a great good book,
“The Following of Christ,” when writing of a virtuous man,
“some there are who keep themselves in peace, and have
peace also with others, and there are some who neither have
peace themselves, nor leave others in peace; they are trouble-
some to others, and still more troublesome to themselves.
“And there are those who keep themselves in peace, and
study to restore peace to others.
“Nevertheless all our peace in this miserable life must be
placed rather in humble endurance, than not in experiencing
opposition.
“He who but knows how to endure, will possess the
greater peace.
“Such a man is conqueror of himself, and lord of
THE WORLD, A FRIEND OF CHRIST, AND AN HEIR OF
HEAVEN.”
Note on this Lecture.
To some reading this lecture, it may appear tb* be a; lay sermon
rather than such a lecture as properly belongs to my course. I give
it, however, as a specimen of some lectures addressedjby me to the
men at Smithfield, at the special request of the men themselves. I
have always thought it right to address them upon any subject in which
they appeared specially interested, (excluding always, of course, re-
ligious subjects within the scope of the chaplain’s duty.)
When the men desire to be spoken to upon moral or social subjects,
it is a good sign that the heart is awakening. It is true, doubtless,
that they have all been vicious, but there is a grand moral in the Re-
deemer s rebuke to those who would haye stoned the woman taken in
adultery; and besides, though we know that those men have been
guilty of crimes, though all can tell their sins committed, which of us
can tell the temptations surmounted? For my part, I have always
looked and shall always look for what I believe the perfection of
reformation in a convict, a desire to talk upon his moral future,
12


INDEX.
WATER
PLANTS
CANADA AND HER RESOURCES
THE OCEAN
TEMPERANCE AND SELF-CONTROL
AUSTRALIA ...
LIFE; ITS BATTLE AND HOW TO FIGHT IT




