

SECOND LECTURE
LECTURES ON THE JESUITS
Delivered in St. Peter's Schoolroom, Sydney, April 21 st, 1879,
[Price, Threepence .]
By Bev. Canon Moreton.
The MOEAL TEACHING- and CASUISTY of the JESUITS.
Subject of my present Lecture is “ The moral
teaching, and casuistry of the Jesuits.”
It is well that we should start with a clear understanding 1 o£
the meaning of the two principal words in this title,—“moral”
and casuistry.” “ Moral ” teaching is teaching in our duty to
God and man The “Moral” Law of God is contained in the
ien Commandments, as in these we are taught our duty to both
uod and man. “ Casuistry,” relates to cases of conscience, the
lawfulness, or unlawfulness of what one may do, or not do. The
subject of my lecture may, then, be roughly put as follows : —The
conduct of the Jesuits in their teaching or dealing with the
consciences of people with regard to their duty to both God and
man. lam to speak of the Jesuits as teachers; and here, at the
outset, I have no wish to lose sight of the fact that among the
Jesuits have been, and no doubt still are, very able men. Men
v. ell able to teach your child Latin, Greek, French, and Science.
One of my critics, in print, has asked me if I can deny this ? My '
answer is, No, I cannot. He then assumes that this is enough.
How simple ! Do the Jesuits think this is enough ? They know
perfectly well that such subjects are only a means to an end. The
fisherman uses a bait. But is this enough ? ask him. It will be
enough y hen he has caught that fish; and the Jesuits will use
Latin, «fcc., as a bait to catch the body, soul, and money of all who
come within their reach. They know this is their object; and
Bus is our charge against them; so in this the Jesuits and I agree
Ihey want all the human being—all that he has—all that he can
do during the whole of his life. Ho must give up himself to
them to lord it over him, and make him the instrument by any


means of catching others. “The end justifies the means” is
their maxim. They teach it in their writings, they practice it in
their lives. My charge against the Jesuits is this, —They hold
views which are dangerous to the mind, in which they can
instil them, dangerous to the family, disastrous to the State,
ruinous to the soul, and dishonoring to God. This is a severe
charge, and, if I cannot prove it, from their own standard writers
I do them a grievous injury, I sin against you, and against God.
Jesuit authors have set aside the plain teaching of our Lord m
the fundamental principle of all true religion, namely, man s
duty to love God. “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, &c.,
St. Matt., xxii. “ This is the first and great commandment,” says
the same Divine teacher. Let us see how this teaching of our
Saviour is treated by the Jesuit fathers. Escobar is said by his
brother Jesuits to have been “a good man, and a laborious
student.” He compiled awork in six volumes, entitled “ Exposition
of Unconverted Opinions in Moral Theology .” “ Its characteristic
absurdity is that its questions uniformly exhibit two faces,—an
affirmative and a negative —so that escobardene became a synonym
in France for duplicity .” See how the teaching of our Lord with
regard to man’s duty to love God is treated by this “ good man
and laborious student.” Hear his question, and see the answers
from him and other Jesuits“ When is a man obliged to have
actually an affection for God ? The following are some of these :
Suarez says, “It is sufficient a man love God before he dies, not
assigning any particular time.” Yasquez, “ That it is sufficient
even at the point of death ” ; others, when a man receives his
baptism ; others, when he is obliged to be contrite ; others,_ upon
holidays. But our Father Castro-Falao, disputes all these opinions
and that justly. Hurtado de Mendoza, pretends that a man is
obliged to do it once every year. Our Father Coninck believes a
man to be obliged once in every three years. Henriquez, once in
five years. But Filiutius affirms it to be probable that in rigour
a man is not obliged every five years. When then ? He leaves
the point to the wise.” “We are not,” says Sirmond,
“ so much commanded to love him as not to hate him.’
Send your child to them to teach him when to love you and
relv upon it, they will be as unfaithful to you and your child as
they are to that Jesus whose name they have dared to appropriate.
Take another instance of the tampering of the Jesuit fathers
with the words of our Lord. “ Give alms of such things as ye
have.” St. Luke, xi., 41. “ Give alms of your superfluity is
the translation of the Latin vulgate. Here the command is to
give alms of such things as we have, or of our superfluity. Ihe
Jesuit will teach his client in the confessional that he need not
take hoed of this command of Jesus, inasmuch as he can have no
superfluity. . ,
Hear Vasques in his treatise on Alms, c. 4., “What men of the
world lay up to improve their circumstances, or those of their
relatives, cannot bo termed superfluity; and, accordingly, such a
thing as superfluity is seldom to be found among men of the world
* Why lie’s Hist. Prot., vol. ii. bk. xv., ch. iv.


not even excepting kings * * * that as to the question
whether the rich are bound to give alms of their superfluity, even
though the affirmative were true, it will seldom or never happen
to be obligatory in practice.” The rich fool (St. Luke, xii.) had
much goods laid up for many years, and seems to have fallen
under the condemnation of Jesus. But I dare say if he could
only have got into the Confessional of a Jesuit he would have
obtained absolution. It does, nevertheless, strike an honest
mind that men who can so rashly deal with Cod’s word will not
have much respect for their own word.
They, of course, profess profound veneration for the person,
office, and decision of the Popes, and they carry it all into action
so far as it suits their convenience, and no farther, as the follow-
ing will show. Gregory XIY. decided that assassins are not
worthy to enjoy the benefit of sanctuary in Churches, and ought
to be dragged out of them. But who are assassins? The Jesuit
fathers will tell you. “By the word assassins we understand
those that have received money to murder one ; and, accordingly,
such as kill without taking any reward for the deed, but merely
to oblige their friends, do not come under the category of
assassins !” “ The Popes have denounced excommunication on
monks who lay aside their canonicals.” One would think this is
plain. But no ; the Jesuit fathers will help the monks. They
ask—“ On what occasion may a monk lay aside his religious
habit without incurring excommunication?” They mention a
number of cases in which they may, and amongst others the
following: “To pick pockets and to go into houses of ill-fame ”
(si hahitum dimittat ut furetur occulte, vel fornicetur) . Are these
the morals which St. Kilda House and the North Shore are to
teach the youth of New South Wales ?
Who has not heard or read of the Jesuit doctrines of
Probabilism? But who can sound its depths of subtilty, or
declare all the dark deeds done in its name ? It is suggested to
you to do some act —say, to steal a watch. It is probably wrong
to rob your neighbour, but it is probably right as you
want a watch, and you are indisposed or unable to buy one.
Here is probability on either side, and, according to Jesuit teach-
ing, you may do either, and yet, in the confessional of a Jesuit,
obtain absolution. However much the law of God and the law
of man may condemn an act, if only some Jesuit has spoken in
its favour as being probable, you may commit that deed, so far as
God’s law is concerned, administered by the Jesuit, with impunity.
It may have been a sin formerly, but since it has entered into
the crucible of a Jesuit father, it is sin no longer. “ Jam non
peceant, licet ante peccaverint .”
Now I will turn your attention to the application of “pro-
babilism ”as applied to some of the daily wants of life. In the
seventeenth century the sale of benefices was carried on somewhat
briskly, and I am sorry to be obliged to say that England is not
free from it even now. In aggravated forms this, in the Church
of Rome, was regarded as simony, from Simon Magus, who
wanted to purchase the gift of God with money (Acts, viii.) The
traffic had been condemned by certain eminent authorities in the


Church of Eome, and this presented a problem for the Jesuits to
solve, namely, how the traffic could be continued and yet the
decision of those authorities respected. In such hands as that of
the casuists nothing-could be more easy. “If a person gives a
temporal in exchange for a spiritual good—that is, if he gives
money for a benefice, and gives the money as the price of the
benefice —it is manifestly simony. But if he gives it merely as
the motive which inclines the will of the patron to confer on him
the living, it is not simony, even though the person who confers
it considers and expects the money as the principal object.” Suffer
this system of giving money, ivith a consideration, to be applied to
our elections, and where would the corruption end ?
- A servant has aided his master to rob someone. The man’s
conscience pricks him ; he goes to the confessional and makes it
known there. Is the priest in doubt? If a Jesuit, possibly not,
as he has been well taught his duties in such matters. But if he
be “Father Bauny,” will tell him, “Let confessors observe
that they cannot absolve valets who perform base errands, if they
consent to the sins of their masters ; but the reverse holds true, if
they have done the thing merely from a regard to their temporal
emolument.” That is, stealing for stealing sake is wrong ; but,
if done for your “temporal good,” it is right! May a servant
rob his own master ? Certainly! But under what conditions ?*
‘ ‘ They may, in certain circumstances ; as when they are so poor
that, in looking for a situation, they have been obliged to accept
the offer made to them, and when other servants of the same
class are gaining more than they elsewhere.” Pascal (Prov.
Letters, p. 164) mentions the case of a servant who had been
employed in a Jesuit College, where he both learned and
practiced these teachings. He stole some pewter plates and
absconded. Of course the Jesuit fathers prosecuted him, The
man, in defence, pleaded the principles he had been taught;
whereupon the judge, M. De Montrouge, remarked “that he did
not see how, on the ground of the writings of these fathers —
writings containing a doctrine so illegal, pernicious, and contrary
to all laws, divine and human, and calculated to ruin all families,
and sanction all sorts of household robbery—they could discharge
the accused. But his opinion was, this too faithful disciple
should be whipped before the college gate by the common hang-
man, who should, at the same time, burn the writings of these
fathers which treated of larceny, with certification that they were
prohibited from teaching such doctrines in future on pain of
death.” These, however, are but mere trifles compared with the
teachings on the subject of taking life. “It is perfectly right,”
says Henriquez, “to kill a person who has given us a box in the
ear. * * * The man who has received a buffet on the ear is
held to be under disgrace until he has wiped oft the insult with
the blood of his enemy.” Nay, it is allowable to prevent the buffet
by killing him that meant to give it, if there be no other way to
escape the insult. * * * “It is lawful for a man of honour
to kill another who threatens to give him a slap on the face, or
to strike him with a stick. * * * By the universal consent of
the casuist (the Jesuit writers), it is lawful to kill the calumniator


if there he no other way of averting the affront (Ex sententia
omnium , licet contumehosum occidere, si aliter ea injuria arceri nequit ).
Much more to the same effect may he seen in Pascal’s “ Provin-
cial Letters.” Pascal, it must he remembered, lived and died a Roman
Catholic. According to these Jesuit fathers, a person may equivo-
cate, may tell direct lies, may steal, may take life, if only “the
attention is directed ” to the good to he obtained hy the act, and
yet in their confessionals have absolution !
Why, it may he asked, have the Jesuits so perverted the truth,
and framed these wicked laws ? It cannot have been for the
mere sake of doing evil. The reason seems to have been this:
The age was one when th e standard of morals was low, and the
Jesuits lowered their teaching to suit it, in order to draw men to
the confessional, that they might retain their hold on them. Eead
what Pauko says ;
“Nor, indeed, was it now their purpose to subjugate the
world, or to imbue it with the spirit of religion; their own spirit
had, on the contrary, succumbed before the influence of the
world. The Jesuits now laboured only to render themselves
indispensable to their fellow-men by whatever means this might
be effected. And to secure this purpose, not only the rules of
their institution, but even the doctrines of religion and the pre-
cepts of morality, were modified and perverted. The office of
confession, by means of which they maintained so immediate an
influence over the most secret recesses of social and domestic life,
received a direction from these fathers which will be memorable
to all times. On this subject we have unquestionable proof from
authentic documents. The Jesuits have themselves expounded,
in many elaborate works, the principles by which they were
guided in confession and absolution, and what they recommended
to others. These are, in general, essentially the same with those
they have so frequently been accused of prescribing.”*
To the same effect is the following testimony of Nicolini: —
“ However, the great contest with the Protestants had left
among the Eoman Catholics a tendency, a wish, we do not say to
become better Christians, but to make a greater display of their
religion. All the external practices of devotion which, in their
eyes, constituted the true believer, were more eagerly resorted to;
and, above all, the confessional was frequented with unprecedented
assiduity. To have a confessor exclusively for one’s self was the
surest sign of orthodoxy, and became as fashionable as it is now
to have a box at the opera. Sovereigns, ministers, courtiers,
noblemen—every one, in short, who had a position in society—
had his own acknowledged confessor. Even the mistresses of
princes pretended to the privilege—and Madame de Pompadour
will prove to her spiritual guide that it is dangerous to oppose the
caprices of a favourite. The Jesuits saw at once the immense
advantage they would derive if they could enlarge the number
of their clients, especially among the higher classes. They were
already, in this particular, far advanced in the public favour ;
they were known to be very indulgent; had long since obtained
# Rauke’s Lives of the Popes, vol. ii.. p, 393


the privilege of absolving from those sins which only the Pope
himself could pardon; and Suarez, their great theologian, had
even attempted to introduce confession by letter, as a more easy
and expeditious way of reaching all penitents.”! _ .
Our Lord came into the world to save people from their sins ;
the Jesuits pander to them in their sin, and allow them to live and
die in delusion of the most awful nature. _ You may reply that
these were the views of some of the Jesuits in former years, but
that it is surely unreasonable to charge the entire Order with
them. Suffer one of the brotherhood to speak on this subject:
“ The members of the Society are dispersed through every
corner of the world, distinguished by as many nations and king-
doms as the earth has intersections; but this is a division arising
from diversity of place, not of opinion; a difference of language,
not of affection; a dissimilarity of countenance, not of morals. In
this Association, the Latin thinks with the Greek, the Portuguese
with the Brazilian, the Irishman with the Sarmatian, the Eng-
lishman with the Belgian ; and among so many different disposi-
tions there is no strife, no contention, nothing which affords
opportunity of discovering that they are more than one. The place of
their nativity affords tnem no personal advantage. * * * The
same design , the same manner of life, the same uniting vow combines them
& % ■>:- The pleasure of a single individual can cause the whole
Society to turn and return, and determine the revolution of this
numerous body, which is easily moved, but with difficulty shaken.
Have the charges which Pascal brought against the Jesuits
ever been satisfactorily answered? He wrote and published
these charges in the “Provincial Letters” (a book which ought to
be in the hands of every one, Roman Catholic and Protestant).
“ Then followed a long, a strange, and glorious conflict of genius
against power. The Jesuit called cabinets, tribunals, univer-
sities to his aid; and they responded to the call. Port Royal
appealed, not in vain, to the hearts and to the understandings of
the millions. The dictators of Christendom (the Jesuits) found
themselves, on a sudden, in the position of culprits. They were
arraigned on the charge of having systematically debased the
standard of evangelical morality, for the purpose of increasing
their own influence; and the charge was enforced in a manner
which at once arrested the attention of the whole world; for the
chief accuser was Blaise Pascal. * * * All Europe read and
admired, laughed and wept. The Jesuits attempted a reply, but
their feeble answers were received by the public with shouts of
mockery.”*'
The writings of Escobar and his brother J esuits have come
down as an evil legacy to the J esuits of the present day, and they
must either receive it or reject it. If they receive it, then they
admit, before all men, that their principles are lying, perjury,
theft, and murder ! If they reject it they confess that the Jesuits
f Nicolini’s Hist. Jesuits, p. 235.
I Dalton’s Hist. Jesuits, p. 32.
* Macaulay’s Hist, of England, vol ii„ p. 314.


of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were in error, that they
have seceded from them, and, virtually, formed a new Order.
This, they know, and we know, they have not done, cannot do,
and have no wish to do. They, therefore, hold the views, and
we hold them responsible for the deeds of their fathers. As they
are making an effort to establish themselves in this British
community will they explain how they can reconcile their views
with our Laws ? Will the Archbishop, under whose authority
we suppose their General in Rome has placed them, —will His
Grace be good enough to state how he can reconcile with British
law the establishment of schools in our midst whose teachers are
pledged to views at which human nature shudders ?
Some will advance the plea of charity, that we are living in
more enlightened days than those of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, and that though the Jesuits now have not formally
renounced the principles and deeds of their fathers, we must not
suppose they believe the one or would do the other. Have Jesuits,
at the head of affairs, ever made in the nineteenth century such
an admission ? Have they not made one of an opposite nature ?
The “Syllabus,” formulated for the Vatican Council, was prepared
by the Vienna Jesuit Schrader. Clause 24 of this condemns that
‘ ‘ the Church has not the power of availing herself of force or
any direct or indirect temporal power.” \_Ecclesia vis inferendae
potestatem non hahet, neque potestatem u/lam temporalem directam vel
indirectam.~\ According to this leading Jesuit father the Church
ought to have temporal power ; and he remarks, “It is not only
minds that are under the power of the Church.” This implies
that he would have bodies also, with the power of inflicting
punishment and death on them.
Schneeman, another Jesuit of the present day, says, “ As the
Church has an external jurisdiction, she can impose temporal
punishments * * * We see that the state does not
always fulfil its duties towards the Church according to the
divine idea, and, let us add, cannot always fulfil them, through
the wickedness of men. And thus the Church’s rights in
inflicting temporal punishment and the use of physical force are
reduced to a minimum.” It follows that the Jesuits claim for
the Church of Rome in the present day, the power to imprison
hang, and burn.* Mark you, these are not the words of a
Protestant writer; no, they are the demands of the leading
members of the Order. They claim this power over the bodies
and souls of all men whether in Rome, or in Sydney. I have befor
said that each Jesuit must carry out the instructions of his General
in Rome, so far as he is able whatever those instructions may
be. You see the power he demands for the Church of Rome,
may 1 not say for his own Order, as being the ruling power of
that Church in the present day ? Let Hesanctis speak, himself
having been a Roman priest for over twenty years, and an
attached friend of the leading Jesuits in Rome. “As far as I
have been able to learn it—[The Order of the Jesuits.] —directs
the world as follows: Every Jesuit is sworn to blind obedience to
* See Janus, Jfope and Council, Ch. i., p.p, B—l 3.8 —13.


his superior, so that, as the rule expresses it, a Jesuit, m regard
to hi? superior, must resemble a corpse under the_ surgeon
dissecting knife. The Jesuit must have no conscience.; his
conscience is in his superior’s keeping, m such sort that, as the
rule says, ‘ He is bound to obey his superior where his orders
are clearly sineul,’ though, according to Jesuit morality
one can tell whether calumny, theft, or homicide, [killing]
styettl * * * All means are held to be
indifferent to compass the desired end ; this is their favourite
maxim. Hence, in order to subjugate men s intellect, they
enfeble them, and, under the pretext of instruction, _ hi! young
minds with prejudices which serve to shut them up in a species
of ignorance which assumes the appearance of Science. Inoide
to render themselves dominant over religion, they have reduced
it to superstition and materialism. They call themselves the
followers of Jesus ; not to conform themselves to his example
but rather to model it on theirs ; so that whatever book you open
on the list of those designed by the Jesuits to nourish, as they
call it the religion of their followers, you will find, instead o±
the Jesus of the Gospel, one whom they assimilate to their own
notions. From the same motive they have invented a whole host
of modern superstitions, and degraded religion into a false
material worship, entirely abolishing the worship in spirit and m
truth required by the Gospel.” * . .
I have now shown you, from authorities which no one can
deny that the Jesuits hold that a man may lie, may steal, may
conunit murder for a mere trifle, and yet he can obtain absolution
so far as the confessional goes, for these crimes. I have shown
you also thatthe Jesuits, in the present day, wantpower over men s
bodies as well as their souls, and that their system of Christianity
is an admixture of superstition and materialism, at least so Dr.
Desanctis says, and he lived among them.
With facts such as these before you—and I challenge any one
to meet me and question my statements —will you, with such tacts
as these, send your children to the schools of the Jesuits, or will
you place yourself under their religious teaching? The Jesuit
fathers may use blandishments—they may utter soft words ; put
we do not forget who it is that attempts, when occasion requires
it, to transform himself into an angel of light, and no marvel it
his ministers do the same !
If these statements are wrong, let the Jesuits o± fet.
House come forward and refute them. Let them show that
Escobar, and others quoted by Pascal, never wrote the immorality,
the criminality, attributed to them. Let the Jesuits deny the
demands of their modern brethren, Schroder and Schneemann, and
let them refute the statements of their ex-brother Desanctis. i
ask them to undertake this task, and to let us know when they
have accomplished it. Then, perhaps, and not till then, we may
consider them qualified to teach the children of this British
Community. _
F, White, Printer, 166, Pitt Street, Sydney.
* Popery and Jesuitism at Rome, !802.


