

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
LECTURE TO MEN
ON A
VITALLY IMPORTANT SUBJECT,
CONTAINING INVALUABLE INFORMATION FOR YOUNG
MEN, AND THOSE WHO ARE MARRIED.
BY
HENRY VARLEY.
This Lecture has been delivered to 300,000 Men in various
parts of the World.
PRICE FOURPENCE.
Published by
VARLEY BROS., 180-182 William Street, Melbourne.
1894.




ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
LECTURE TO MEN
ON A
VITALLY IMPORTANT SUBJECT,
CONTAINING INVALUABLE INFORMATION FOR YOUNG
MEN, AND THOSE WHO ARE MARRIED.
BY
HENRY VARLEY.
This Lecture has been delivered to 300,000 Men in various
parts of the World.
Published by
VARLEY BROS., 180-182 William Street, Melbourne.
18U4.


LECTURE TO MEN.
BY HENRY VARLEY.
Gentlemen,
In a very important sense the seed is the life. With-
out doubt it is one of the most vital forces of man’s physical
constitution. Its retention, therefore, is a necessity of the
highest moment to youth and manhood. The vigour of the
nervous system is mainly dependent upon the seed, which may
be fitly described as the sap of the whole man. Bound up
with the presence and healthy quality of this generating force
is the strength of the brain, the richness of the blood, the
brilliance of the eye, the vigour of the mind, the hardness of
the muscle, and the firmness of the flesh.
It is a melancholy fact, in human experience, that the
noblest gifts which men possess are constantly prostituted to
other purposes than those for which they were designed. The
most valuable and useful organs of the body are those which
are capable of the greatest dishonour, abuse, and corruption.
What a snare the wonderful organism of the eye may become
when used to read corrupt books or to look upon licentious
scenes at the theatre, or when used to meet the fascinating
gaze of the harlot! What an instrument for depraving the
whole man may be found in the matchless powers of the brain,
the hand, the mouth, or the tongue! What potent instru-
ments may these become in accomplishing the ruin of the
whole being for time and eternity !
In like manner the organ concerning the uses of which I
am to speak has been, and continues to be, made one of the
chief instruments of man’s immorality, shame, disease, and
death. How important to know what the legitimate uses of
this member of the body are, and how great the dignity con-
ferred upon us in the possession of this gift. On the human


side this gift may be truly said to bring men nearer to the high
and solemn relationship of the Creator than any other which
they possess.
Were this fact reverently recognised by husbands and wives,
how certainly it would separate their action, in this respect,
from that of mere sensual gratification, which object we fear is
the uppermost intention with the great majority. The sanctity
of this relationship is one of the chief requirements of our
time. The recognition of God’s will and blessing in connec-
tion with an act designed to be coincident with the highest
personal affection should not fail to produce results of the
most important character in the children which are given
therewith. Without this recognition, acting simply in accord-
ance with animal passion and amative desire, who need affect
surprise when the tendency to self-will, disobedience, and
licentiousness is seen in the youthtide of those who were
begotten in the heat of sexual desire, without prayer, and
without any reference to the will of God ? It is written,
‘•Children are the heritage of the Lord.” We ask, To what
extent are they regarded as His gifts, and sought from Him
to become the joy, the strength, the perpetuation, and the glory
of home ? In how many cases, we fear, it might be said that
children are looked upon as the unwelcome outcome of
unbridled sexual desire—lives which, had they never existed,
would have suggested to those concerned a welcome escape
from what they feared would be the penalty of sensual gratifi-
cation !
The energy identified with the presence and possession of
the seed is manifested in very early life. This statement need
not occasion surprise, for this function of man’s being may be
regarded as the engine where power resides, in order to the
diffusion of energy throughout the whole machinery of the
house in which he lives. Nothing is more important than the
careful instruction of youths by their parents concerning the
things whereof 1 speak. It is a shame that boys should grow
up and be sent into the world in practical ignorance of the
uses and abuses of the powers which they possess. That the
proper use of this force, which is intended to conserve the
strength and wealth of the whole man, should be unknown,
because a false modesty keeps back instruction, is simply
deplorable. This knowledge is as necessary and essential as


cleanliness, exercise, restraint, training, or any other factor in
a sound education.
It is mere prudery to affect a delicacy for, and silence con-
cerning, that which is certainly producing more immodesty
and immorality than all other causes put together. It will
require moral courage on the part of the father. It will need
wisdom and the fear of God to bring clearly to the boy’s mind
information which may certainly become an important defence
for his wl\ole life. This result, however, is worth any measure
of painstaking care. All experience shows that the possession
of energy by a youth will declare itself, and be expended in
some way or other. Energy misapplied or abused through
ignorance and sin is sure to be injurious in a very high degree.
Such has been and continues to be the result of the sin of self-
pollution amongst the great majority of the boys of England.
One important object of this lecture is to arouse the attention
of parents to the existence of this degrading vice, a vice which
is sapping the vigour of our youthful and national life.
I deal first with the destructive sin of Masturbation, or self-
abuse. There can be no doubt that vast numbers of boys and
young men are guilty of this sin. In many cases the degrading
practice has been taught by others, — e.g., by elder boys at
school, where association largely results in mutual corruption.
With others, this means of sensual gratification is found out
by personal action ; in other cases fallen and depraved men
have not hesitated to debauch the minds of mere children by
teaching them this debasing practice. Large numbers of
young men have written saying that when they were very young
they were taught this action by their seniors.
Thousands of youths and young men have only to use the
looking-glass to see the portrait of one guilty of this loathsome
sin. The effects of this degrading vice are plainly discernible
in the boy’s appearance. The face and hands become pale and
bloodless. The eye destitute of its natural fire and lustre.
The flesh soft and flabby, the muscles limp and lacking healthy
firmness. In cases where the habit has become confirmed, and
where the system has been drained of this vital force, it is seen
in positive ugliness, in a pale and cadaverous appearance,
slovenly gait, slouching walk, and an impaired memory. Proof
often exists where the lessons of the schoolboy are hard to
learn and easily forgotten, in the weariness that sets itself


against early rising, vigorous exercise, and the cold bath. It
is seen also in the absence of that quick and healthy reaction
of the blood which is readily induced where the natural force of
youth and manhood has not been tampered with or spent.
These, though not infallible proofs in every case, are amongst
the ready signs which should arrest attention and awaken
parents to suspect the existence of the defiling practice of
Masturbation, or self-abuse.
It is obvious that if the most vital physical force of a boy’s
life is being spent through this degrading habit—a habit, be
it observed, of rapid growth, great strength, and very difficult
to break—he must develop badly. In thousands of cases the
result is seen in a low stature, contracted chest, weak lungs,
and liability to sore-throat. Tendency to cold, indigestion,
depression, drowsiness, and idleness are results distinctly
traceable to this deadly practice. Nervous exhaustion,
rheumatic affections, loss of memory, epilepsy, and insanity
find their principal predisposing cause in this same shameful
waste of life. The want of moral force, the simpering effemi-
nacy and lewd speech often observable in youths and young
men, is mainly induced by this destructive sin.
To these must be added the great number who pass from an
exhausted boyhood into the weakness and decline, the inter-
mittent fevers and consumption which are said to carry ofi so
many young men. If the deaths, thus happening, were to be
attributed primarily to loss of strength occasioned by self-
pollution and licentiousness, it would be much nearer the truth.
Without doubt the chief cause of disease, decay, and death
amongst youths and young men, is to be traced to this baneful
habit.
No matter who the man is, if he parts with his strength at
the bidding of a sensual appetite, he must become weakened,
and his manhood seriously impaired. In making this state-
ment, I would not for a moment reflect upon those who arc
naturally the subjects of physical weakness. My object is to
show that fornication and self-pollution are both moral and
physical evils. They are an offence against manhood, a crime
against womanhood, and a fearful sin against God.
For this reason, in the early stage of my lecture, I speak to
both single and married men. I can understand young men
present saying, “It is all very well for those who have wives to


speak to us concerning chastity. Their position involves no
self-denial : and if we were similarly situated the case would
be radically different.” Now, it is because of these thoughts,
which I know are common to young men, that I have adapted
my testimony so as to include those who are married also. I
take what some may regard as low ground in dealing clearly
and forcibly with the physical aspects of this question. Those
present who think this will bear with me until the close of my
address. In one sense I know no higher ground than the
physical. To use an expression which you will comprehend in
a moment, I believe that that which is physically wrong cannot
be morally right.
I admit that I am anxious to appeal to you upon the ground
of common-sense and self-interest, as well as in the behalf of
public morality. I speak as a man “of like passions with
yourselves,” and I stand before you to war a resolute warfare
on this whole question. You will know, gentlemen, what to
do with anything that I utter which is unreasonable. “ I
speak as to wise men ; judge ye what I say.” To your reason,
conscience, and judgment I make my appeal, and I await with
confidence your favourable verdict when I have fairly stated
the case. Mean while, I ask at your hands the forbearance and
sympathy which my position renders necessary. You will
agree with me that it requires a goad deal of moral courage to
deal honestly with this question. If, as I proceed, that sym-
pathy is accorded expression, it will be grateful. In any case,
I shall speak out plainly upon a subject which is of vital
interest to us as men, and of the highest moment to the moral
and physical welfare of the nation.
As an illustration of the value of the seed for purposes of
physical strength, I cite the following case :—A well-known
preacher of the Gospel informed me that eighteen years since,
and before his conversion, he underwent a course of training in
order to a prize-fight. He said, “ During the time, I was not
allowed to be alone, either night or day,” the reason assigned
by the trainer being that he should not have opportunity for
self-abuse, fornication, or even cohabitation with his wife.
The trainer knew right well that his man could not spend his
strength and possess it also, and moreover, he was aware that
if his strength was thus spent, the chances were ten to one that
he would be beaten by his opponent. Notice also that bound


up with the retention of the seed is the rich and equable con-
dition of the blood, whereby liability to take cold is reduced to
a minimum. The power to resist the exhaustion caused by
extremes, either of heat or cold, is found here also. The
endurance of fatigue occasioned by travel, climbing, or hard
work, is hereby rendered comparatively easy.
The power that we call energy, without which character
becomes gloomy and life mainly a failure, is almost wholly the
blessed and generous result of the diffusion of this vital force
throughout the whole man. The fruits of continence and
chastity are observable in the cheerful countenance, rounded
feature, and elastic step. No miserable chills are felt, or
appeals to stimulants needed. An even temper, pure affec-
tion, vigorous manhood, and energetic business ability are
amongst the noble and manly rewards of those who are clean
from these sins.
It is a well-known fact that any man who desires to excel
and retain his excellence as an accurate shot, an oarsman, a
pedestrian, a pugilist, a first-class cricketer, a successful
student, artist, or literary man, must abstain from self-pollu-
tion and fornication. If he be a married man he must restrain
himself from anything approaching sexual excess. The reason
why many married men so soon lose their prestige in the
positions named, is because they unwisely give their strength
to the wife.
There is no indulged action common to men which is so
exhausting or so shamefully absorbing as this, neither any
gratification so short-lived or costly, both to body and mind,
or, when committed outside the marriage relationship, so com-
pletely condemned by the conscience, the judgment, and the
Word of God. Self-pollution, e.g., is pre-eminently a secret
sin. With the youth, unless one or two companions are taken
into the unholy fellowship, it is never hinted at. What a
proof this guilty secrecy affords of the character of this sin as
being committed against light and conscience ! With the
young man fornication is never mentioned, until known com-
panionship with the harlot has seared the moral sense and
rendered him insensible to shame. It is only true to say that
thousands of young men in the early stages of a licentious
career would rather lose a right hand than their mothers or
sisters know what manner of men they are.


Let it be remembered that sexual desire is not in itself dis-
honourable or sinful, any more than hunger, thirst, or any
other lawful and natural desire is. It is the gratification by
unlawful means of this appetite which renders it so corrupting
and iniquitous. Young men, carefully master the positions
taken in this lecture, and instead of being ready, as many are,
either to gratify their lust or to curse themselves on account
of the existence of this desire, the presence of this vital energy
might cause in you thanksgiving to God. Remember, the
seed is the power of the man. God’s Word uses this expres-
sion, “the precious life ” (Prov. vi. 26) ; its presence and
force a pent-up energy, intended for diffusion throughout the
entire being. As well might the driver pitch the coal intended
for the engine-fire down the embankment and expect the speed
of the train to be maintained, as for youth or manhood to sin
away and waste this strength and then expect to succeed either
in character or life. As well might the men in yonder mill
consign the bales of cotton to the engine-fire and then expect
the fabric which they manufacture to appear, as for youths, or
men or women, to sin away their physical power and retain
their strength or fitness for the battle of life.
This force sanctified, acording to the Divine intention, says
to the warehouse hoy, “You may become the head of this
house one day to the student, “You may excel in know-
ledge, and, ere long, occupy the professor’s chair; ” to the
athlete, “ You may depend upon me for endurance and strength
of lung until the goal is reached to the apprentice, “You
may stand the strain of application both of brain and muscle
till success crowns your efforts ; ” to those exposed to extremes
of heat or cold, “You also may know experimentally how
effectually I conserve the strength of man’s physical powers.”
The highest qualities of real manhood are interwoven in
such a way with the seed that its absence practically destroys
the man. In proof of this statement I mention a fact which
is conclusive. In Turkey, where the degrading institution of
the harem exists, men are made eunuchs ; that is, they are
castrated and denuded of their manhood, in order that they
may exercise surveillance over the harems without temptation.
The result is that these miserable creatures sink into a condi-
tion of mental and physical lethargy. The energy and vivacity
of the natural character decline, and numbers of them present


the appearance of men intellectually comatose. There have
been exceptions, but, as a rule, they become heavy lumps of
half-animate animal matter, retaining the form, but utterly
destitute of the noblest attributes of man.
Whilst lecturing on this subject recently in Edinburgh, a
gentlemen who for twenty years has occupied the important
position of H.M. Inspector of Schools in Bombay, furnished
me with another important illustration which bears directly
upon this question. He said : “ The Hindoo and Parsee boys
are both sharp and intelligent, and until they reach the age of
sixteen few teachers could desire more energetic or painstaking
scholars and students. ' You are probably aware,” he added,
“that as a rule these boys are married when they reach the age
of fourteen or fifteen. The girls are married at twelve or
thirteen, and become, in most cases, mothers at fourteen. The
result of these early marriages and consequent cohabitation is
simply deplorable ; the great majority of the boys are ex-
hausted and spent by the time they reach seventeen. Their
former energy and youthful brightness are gone. Henceforth,
for purposes of close application on the part of the student,
they are an utter failure and disappointment.” The reason is
obvious : ensnared by this form of sensual pleasure, they
exhaust themselves, and are broken down at seventeen or
eighteen years of age. “Such,” he added, “is the testimony
of all the masters whose schools I inspect.” In emphatic
language my friend said, “ The Hindoos and Parsees
will never make a nation so long as these early marriages
continue.”
I cite at this point an equally conclusive and melancholy
individual case. A few weeks since I was speaking with a
young man not yet twenty-four years of age ; when a youth,
his mother, a lady possessed of considerable property, sent him
to one of the best schools in England, thence to the London
University, where he soon gave promise of success. At the
examination, which is a tolerably stiff one, he was ignomini-
ously plucked ; he tried again and failed once more, much to
the astonishment of his tutors and the surprise and dismay of
his mother. Rejected in London he went to Edinburgh,
where for a time he appeared to apply himself, but at the final
examination he was pronounced incapable, and returned home
not only disgraced, but a moral and physical wreck. Lieen


tiousness and drinking had done their deadly work, and were
the real causes of his failure and rejection. Looking into that
degraded face, as with paralysed side and diseased body he sat
smoking in a chair, evidently sinking into premature death,
we could but feel how terribly possible it is for the highest
abilities and advantages to be sacrificed to the degrading
slavery of lust.
Besides this, let it be borne in mind that the sins of self-
pollution and fornication are related to a whole set of kindred
corruptions ; e.g., the thoughts of these youths and young
men constantly revert to that which is impure. Leisure
means the opportunity to commit sin. Unclean .pictures are
sought after and feasted upon, paragraphs relating to cases of
divorce and seduction are eagerly read, papers and books of an
immoral character and tendency are greedily devoured, low and
disgusting conversation is indulged in and repeated. In the
emphatic language of Scripture it may be said, “It is a
shame even to speak of the things which are done of them in
secret.” Young men take a fiendish delight in seeking to
deceive, entangle, betray, and seduce the objects of their lust.
The fairer and more beautiful the object of their unholy desire,
the greater the intensity with which the fire of passion burns,
not seldom consuming both seducer and seduced. Be it re-
membered, also, that every time the sin of fornication is com-
mitted the fire of desire is intensified. In thousands of cases
moral power and self-control are weakened, the end being
suicide, death, or the madhouse.
How conclusively do these experiences give the lie to the
commonly expressed opinion, that it is a natural relief, and for
the health of a man to indulge the sin of fornication ! This
statement is not only utterly untrue, but it is a dastardly lie.
The practicable and manly counsel to every youth and young
man is, entire abstinence from indulgence of the sexual faculty
until such time as the marriage relationship is entered upon.
Neither is there, nor can there be, any exception to this rule.
We are aware that this counsel may appear hard, and is likely
to be rejected by licentious men, but it is safe, right, and com-
patible with perfect health. Restraint is the essential and
necessary rein in order to the legitimate use of power. The
first-rate horse without restraint from the driver is engaged in
a race to destruction. A train with an uncontrolled engine is


hurrying onward to catastrophe and death. A man without
restraint is on the highway to ruin.
Experience teaches that even constant gratification of cor-
rupt and unlawful passion yields no relief to any man, but
recoils upon him and makes still more galling his miserable
and shameful bondage. This may not appear at first sight,
but let anyone carefully think out the position stated, and he
must recognise its soundness. Ask the intemperate man
whether the gratification of his appetite for drink has brought
him relief, satisfaction, or liberty. He is proving that his
bondage is in proportion to the strength of his unrestrained
and corrupted appetite. Ask the gambler whether he has
found his thirst for gain at hazard, cards, or racing, yield him
liberty. Literally it may be said of the gambler, his bondage
is cruel and terrible. Go and ask the covetous man whether
his greed of gain has yielded him satisfaction or rest. Here,
again, must come the same reply : “ Feeding my sin, the fever
of desire hath enslaved me.” Go and ask the drivelling victim
of licentiousness whether the gratification of his lust has
yielded him relief, or whether its exercise has not increased its
strength, until his lust, as a burning fever, consumes him.
Thousands stricken with paralysis and insanity are simply
suffering from the effects of their own unrestrained appetites
and passions. God pity you, young men, should you, through
yielding to these sins, know the horrible condition described by
the Apostle Peter in these startling words, “ Having eyes full
of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin.” I know young
men not more than twenty-two or three who are now mentally
imbecile and physically broken up by the twin curses of self-
pollution and fornication.
SELF-DENIAL AND RESTRAINT TRUE LIBERTY.
Some present can testify with thankfulness that they never
knew the sins of gambling, drunkenness, fornication, or
adultery. In all these cases abstinence has been, and con-
tinues to be, liberty. Eestraint is the noblest freedom. No
man can affirm that self-denial ever injured him ; on the con-
trary, self-restraint has been liberty, strength, and blessing. I
solemnly ask young men to remember this when temptation
and passion strive as a flood-tide to move them from the


anchorage and peace of self-restraint. Beware, I beseech yon,
of the deceitful stream of temporary gratification, whose
eddying current drifts towards licence, shame, disease, and
death. Remember how quickly moral power declines, how
rapidly the edge of the fatal maelstrom is reached, how near
the vortex, how terrible the penalty, how fearful the sentence
of everlasting punishment!
Before I pass to other considerations, allow me to press
upon your attention one more terrible proof of the physical
weakness which is induced by the sin of fornication. Nearly
every immoral woman is intemperate—those who are on the
streets with scarcely an exception. This appeal to stimulants
is mainly caused by the tremendous exhaustion which their
degraded life induces. Drained of their strength in the
shambles of prostitution, fevered, thirsty, and weak in their
career of shame, they fly to brandy or some other powerful
stimulant, in the vain attempt to make up for the vital losses
which their horrible course entails, or in order—alas ! too
successfully—to paralyse and sear the voice of conscience and
of God. The use of ardent spirits would appear to be the devil’s
masterpiece in connection with the traffic of the women, concern-
ing whom God has spoken in these words : “ She hath cast down
many wounded ; yea, many strong men have been slain by
her. None that go unto her return again, neither take they
hold of the paths of life. For her house inclineth unto death,
and her paths unto the dead ” (Prov. ii. 18, 19). “For by
means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of
bread, and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life ” (Prov.
vi. 26). By the subtle action of intoxicating drinks the brain
becomes weakened, and the decline of moral power necessarily
follows. The conscience becomes blunted and seared ; yea,
and this result is produced even whilst a delusive cheerfulness,
and courage possess the victim of the unhallowed stimulus of
the intoxicating cup. Under such conditions of heated
excitement the arena of prostitution becomes ensnaring to the
last degree.
A TERRIBLE BUT TRUE PICTURE.
Young men, let me show you another side of this arena.
Think of these poor women, emphatically the sisterhood of shame


and death. Would to God that something might be done to
rescue them from their low estate. We speak of them as
“ fallen women.” Fallen indeed they are, but surely not more
deserving of the application of that term than the “fallen men ”
who are their partners and paramours. The Word of God says,
with incisive meaning, “ He that is joined to a harlot is one
flesh.” The term, therefore, applies with equal force to both.
Yes, sirs, it is easy to use the words, “a fallen woman,” but
Avho can apprehend all that is involved in the expression,
seeing that every purpose for which God created woman is
prostituted and destroyed ! She is now neither maiden, wife,
nor mother ; the sweet names of sister and betrothed can have
no legitimate application in her case. A helpmeet, a servant,
a nurse, a housekeeper, or employee in a house of business 7
No ; these are all positions for which the “ fallen woman ” is
utterly unfitted.
Can the harlot be welcomed where either children, brothers,
sisters, wife, or husband are found ? Surely no. Home is a
sphere alien to the harlot’s estate. See such a one wherever
you may, she is a fallen outcast from woman’s high estate.
Her existence—for she does not live—now culminates in one
dread issue, viz., prostitution. She sleeps, but awakes a harlot.
She rises in the late morning hours, but her object is prosti-
tution; she washes, dresses, and braids her hair, but it is with
one foul purpose before her. To this end she eats, drinks, and
is clothed. To this end her house is hidden and the blinds are
drawn. To this end she applies the unnatural cosmetic, and
covers herself with sweet perfumes, which vainly try to contra-
dict her shame. To this end she decks herself with dashing
finery and tawdry trappings, and with bold, unwomanly mien,
essays the streets of the great city. To this end she is loud,
and coarse, and impudent. To this end she is the prostituted
“lady,” with simpering words, and smiles, and glamour of
refined deceit. To this end, an angel face, a devil in
disguise. There is one foul and ghastly purpose to-
wards which all her energies now tend. So low has she
fallen, so lost to all the design of woman, that she exists
only to excite, stimulate, and gratify the lusts of degraded,
ungodly men. Verily, the word prostitute has an awful
meaning. What plummet can sound the depths of the
harlot’s fall 7


As a terrible corollary stands the dreadful fact that, except-
ing a few of the more grossly animalised amongst them,
scarcely any of these women live longer than five years after
taking to the streets. The great majority die within three
years. Intemperate, diseased, and shameless, they become
“ the pestilence that walketh in darkness, the destruction that
wasteth at noonday” (Ps. xci. 6).*
Staying at the house of my esteemed friend Dr. B ,
about three years since, in the city of H , I obtained
a terrible illustration of this. He had just returned from his
morning visit to his patients, and remarked, “ I have come
from a distressing and awful scene. About four years back
the eldest son of one of our leading families left this city on a
visit to M . During his holiday trip he evidently became
the companion of immoral women, with whom he contracted
the horrible disease of syphilis. After a few weeks’
absence he returned home, and three months later was
married to a beautiful girl, the daughter of another of our
principal families. They have two children, the fruit of the
union, and now the father and mother and the two little ones
are all dying from the hideous and shameful disease which the
father contracted four years before, and which disease he had
communicated to his wife and children. The scene,” said my
friend, “is enough to break your heart to look upon. lam
sick with the very thought of it. On account of the
respective families nothing can be said as to the facts of the
case. In a few months they will all die, and the medical cer-
tificate will hide the actual truth for the sake of the surviving
relatives.”
Another case which has recently come under my notice, is
that of a young clergyman who was engaged to be married to
a lady in one of our provincial cities. Five different
physicians saw him in reference to a certain form of disease
from which he appeared to be suffering. Two of the number
expressed to one of his friends their suspicion ; but the
devoted character and work of the clergyman seemed utterly
* Dr. Mireur, an eminent French physician, says, “ Death strikes
nearly all these women in the flower of their age. The hospital is
almost always their fatal goal. The debauch which made them live
yesterday makes them die to-day.”


to contradict their statements. At length a retired military
medical man, well known to me, was called in. At once his
suspicion as to the real cause of the sickness was aroused. He
remarked certain copper-coloured patches on the face, beneath
the surface of the skin, and then quietly but plainly asked the
question, “ Have you been guilty of fornication ? ” The
young minister, greatly startled, solemnly replied, “As God is
my witness I have not committed that sin for ten years ” ; but
he admitted that he then had intercourse with an immoral
woman once only. My friend the physician said, “ I have no
reason to doubt the truth of his statement ; but that one act
resulted in the contraction of a fearful form of venereal
disease, which has been secretly working in his system for ten
years, and which has utterly corrupted his physical frame.
Poor fellow,” said my friend, “ it is an awful penalty, but it is
the penalty to which every man exposes himself who becomes
the companion of the harlot.” “What became of him ?” I
asked. “ Why,” replied my friend, “he has gone no one
knows whither. At the time I saw him he was engaged to be
married ; indeed the union had been delayed by reason of his
illness, but, as I was compelled to tell him, marriage in his
case was cut of the question. It would simply mean loath-
some disease and early death to all concerned. The young
lady knew not the real cause, and was heartbroken, the friends
being dismayed and astonished at his sudden and unexpected
departure.” Such is a common result of this loathsome
sin.
It is a fact which should be known everywhere, that whilst
excessive intercourse between husband and wife will cause
weakness and general debility, the production in the marriage
relationship of these terrible diseases has never been known.
Of course I am supposing that both were mutually healthy
and free from disease at the time of marriage. Observe, how-
ever, directly the law of God is broken, and promiscuous inter-
course between the sexes takes place, gonorrhoea, syphilis, and
every other form of venereal disease is seen in hideous variety.
Thousands are slain annually by these horrible diseases.
Iniquity, shame, and incipient murder have taken the place of
life. Immoral men and women intending the prevention or
destruction of life are murderers before the fact. May we not
ask, What must be the moral enormity of a sin which


produces such frightful physical and moral carnage as that
which is here portrayed ?
Another awful case which came under my notice only two
months since is as follows. A soldier stationed at Gravesend
seduced a respectable servant-girl. The villain communicated
to her n loathsome form of venereal disease. Her child was
born in the infirmary, and when the medical man examined
her at the time of her confinement, he found her a mass of
disease. Four days after the birth of the child she died, and
the fifth day saw her child dead also, both of them slain by the
fearful disease communicated by this licentious soldier.
Talk about the Legislature legalising harlotry and calling
in the aid of medical science to minimise the penalties which
attach to vice ! Such an attitude on the part of the Legisla-
ture is scandalous and abominable. What is needed is, that
this session of Parliament should not close without a measure
being passed which should render every man and woman
proved guilty of immorality liable to fine and then to imprison-
ment, whilst to anyone guilty of the horrible crime of this
soldier, the law should be competent to pass exemplary sen-
tences of five years’ penal servitude. The low tone which
exists throughout English society on this whole subject is
largely a result of the practical lawlessness which has existed
in regard to these social curses in the past. Besides such a
measure as that which I have indicated we need the sturdy
outcasting from our churches, drawing-rooms, and social
circles of licentious men and women. Instead of speaking of
them as gentlemen and ladies, let them be regarded as the
sensual lepers of civilised society.
It is monstrous that men and women of known immoral
character should have access to the drawingrooms and social
circles of English society. Let English ladies and gentlemen
refuse to enter the .houses where these genteel harlots and
harlotmongers are received. A few examples made of certain
well-known first-class adulterers and courtesans would work
wonders in this much-needed moral reform. Never mind the
title, position, or wealth of these male and female prostitutes,
out upon them ! let the workers of iniquity find their places in
the darkness which is congenial to their character.
Yet another case, which still further shows the destructive
nature of this terrible sin. I was called one evening to visit


a young man reported to be dying. Entering a large room, I
found lying in partial undress upon a bed a fine muscular
fellow of about twenty-seven. The moment he saw me he
started up, saying, “ I don’t want to see you ; I know who
you are, and why you have come. My friends have told you
that I am dying, and that I shall be dead before the morning.
What nonsense ! ” he added ; “do I look like a dying man?”
And as though he would prove to me the utter unlikelihood of
such a result, he walked with quick and vigorous tread round
and round the room.
I was startled, and at first could not comprehend the
situation. A friend who was present then quietly took me
aside, and informed me that two physicians had been there
that afternoon, and given it as their opinion that he could not
live through the night. But why 7 Had he in fatal mistake
taken poison, or had he been guilty of murder, and been con-
demned, and was the hour of execution nigh at hand ? No,
neither of these ; but he had been the companion of harlots,
and some months before had contracted one of the most viru-
lent forms of venereal disease. This had now reached the
throat, and was working its deadly issue. The air-passages
were gradually swelling and filling up, and suffocation must
speedily result. In vain did I try to calm the agitated and
bewildered man ; in vain did I endeavour to gain his attention
to the blessed theme of the mercy of God, who “commended
His love towards us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us.” No, he would neither hear nor believe that he
must die. Nevertheless the solemn fact remains that, after
some hours spent in paroxysms of excitement, alarm,
rage, and struggle, in the midst of which he kept on
asserting that he would not die, suffocation did its brief,
subtle, and deadly work. At 2.30 a.m. of the follow-
ing morning there lay upon the same bed, in the same
room, the manly form of another victim to the awful number
of the slain by lust.
Terrible as the cases are which I have cited, they are not in
degree so frightful as the closing career of the harlots them-
selves. It is well-known that, unless a young girl has been
mentally debauched by licentious novels or lewd companion-
ships, or in some way roused to unholy passion, she naturally
possesses great modesty and power of self-restraint. God has


in mercy defended maiden character with a quick and strong
sense of right, as also of impropriety and shame. Modesty
and a chaste deportment are a young girl’s birthright and her
choicest adornment. Unless the true woman is gone, and the
degraded, though fair, animal has taken her place, the over-
tures to this sin come almost exclusively from the male side.
But when the beast and the harlot have taken the woman’s
place, there is no depth of shameful sensuality into which she
is not prepared to sink. “ Loud and stubborn, her feet abide
not in her house.” Impudent, deceitful, and full of lies, she
can toy her victims with the kiss or seeming words of love.
All the while she proves herself to be what God’s Word thus
describes : “ I find more bitter than death the woman whose
heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands ” (Eccles.
vii. 26).
Come with me, young men, to yonder hospital, where vast
numbers of these fallen women die. Enter that ward, narrowly
observe the bloated, pale, and blighted wrecks of humanity
which lie around. Keep the windows open, let in the pure air
liberally, or very soon the offensive odours of loathsome disease,
decay, and death will sicken you, and cause you to withdraw.
Observe that laboured and foetid breath ; mark those features,
once fair and beautiful, now halt fiend, half pain and misery,
racked with the last deep cough. The harlot approaches the
awful realities of the eternal world. There is little hope in her
death. Corrupted, hardened, and intemperate, the earthly has
already passed into the sensual, and the sensual is rapidly
giving place to the devilish. Her accumulated iniquities, like
a huge millstone, lie on the brink of the great gulf, ready for
the supreme moment when the unblessed spirit passes to the
Judgment, and leaves the shattered temple in which it dwelt
in dishonour, decay, and dissolution. Mark it well! The vital
spark has fled, and the diseased body stiffens into the ghastly
pallor and rigidness of death. No mother is present to shed
the warm tears of a tender affection ; no sorrowing sister
smooths the loose hair into final folds. ’Tis best it should be
so. Tell not her name, nor speak of relatives. Home, and
all these, have long since been dead to the fallen woman whose
corpse lies before us. See, the rough coffin is being borne
into the ward. Gently the sheet is lifted, and now the human
play has found its narrow bed.


Hurry it away, bury it deep, lest the corruption spreads.
Bring out the mattress and bedding, all, all that pertained to
the fallen woman’s latest days. Let the consuming fire
destroy it, lest contagion blast others also.
“ Eeady to go,” you say. Well, young men, go ; but ere
your mental eye is lost to that hospital ward, observe another,
and yet another, filling the same narrow bed where the harlot
lay whom we saw die. And now, I ask, how came these poor
women here ? How many of them were once bright and
modest servants, pure-minded maidens, and affectionate sisters ?
How many of them have been tempted, deceived, betrayed, and
seduced by brutal and licentious men ? Perhaps I am
addressing those who have done their utmost to compass the
ruin of some of these fallen ones. Nay, more, perhaps you
have succeeded, and the victim of your lust is even now
tracking the path of shame. And think you that you shall
escape the judgment of God ? Nay, sirs, the penalty shall yet
be paid. “ Thinkest thou this, O man, that thou shalt fail to
reap the harvest of thy sin ? ” Hearken ! God speaks to you,
“Woe unto you, unclean fornicator and adulterer.” Let His
words ring through your innermost conscience. “Itis a
righteous thing with God to recompense indignation, wrath,
tribulation, and anguish upon every soul of man that doeth
evil.” At this point let me add that I am not unmindful of
the mercy and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in regard to
these poor women, or that I fail to remember how deeply they
have been sinned against. My constant prayer is, that to many
of these lost ones His tender grace and pardoning voice may
come, saying, “ Thy sins be forgiven thee; go, and sin no
more.” And now, sirs, I ask, will you, dare you, henceforth
proffer to maidens and harlots the hire of your damnable lust,
and traffic in the wages of blood ? Shall the shades of evening
see you stalking forth as “ male street-walkers,” as harlot-
mongers, and partners in this licentious pandemonium, or will
you, through righteous conviction and the fear of God deter-
mine to live pure lives, so far as this scandalous iniquity is
concerned.
I can well understand that some of you will be ready to ask,
“ But, after all, what are we. to do when fierce and heated
passion assails, and when temptation bears in upon us like a
strong man armed ? ” Listen to me, and I will answer you.


Your question leads to that part of our subject which compre-
hends legitimate and practical counsel. Remember this, young
men. There is no physical necessity for immorality, either by
self-abuse or fornication. I have already shown you what an
important part the seed plays in all that means the strength,
both of body and mind. Its presence as a primal energetic
force, designed for diffusion throughout the whole being, is its
legitimate use, and any superabundance will either be absorbed
by the blood, or pass away with the urine.
Experience shows, in some cases, involuntary emissions at
night; but, as a rule, this is a result of past sin. It is
melancholy how many cases of this kind there are. Self-
pollution has so weakened and distorted the normal condition,
that many constantly lose their strength in this way. Impure
thoughts and actions induce abnormal secretions of semen,
and thus absorb vital force, which otherwise had been distri-
buted throughout the whole man. Where occasional (say
once a fortnight) involuntary emissions take place during the
night, I do not think the subject of them need have a bad
conscience concerning them, for where there is young and
strong life this may prove a natural method of relief ; but
such cases are not common.*
It is absolutely false to suppose that the retention of the
seed causes men to be unhealthy. I affirm, without fear of
contradiction, that those who retain this vital fluid, save for
such uses as the law of God permits, will live longer, and be
both healthier and happier.
• “ Masturbation is the common cause of emissions.”— Tanner.
“ It is commonly the consequence of that hideous sin, engendered
by vice and practised in solitude, masturbation.”— Ericlwen.
The great Neymeyer says : “ Fully two-thirds of the patients who
have consulted me for these pollutions (emissions) have at last
acknowledged that they still masturbated ; ” and he then speaks of
others who seek medical aid for these emissions who own that they
were guilty of self-pollution during youth, but have subsequently
ceased doing so. There is no greater authority than Neymeyer.
It would be easy to multiply by hundreds these medical testimonies.
I earnestly warn young men against the medical quacks who ad-
vertise in places of public resort, and whose bills are generally
headed, " Secret Disease,” etc. In nineteen cases out of twenty,
they are swindlers—a kind of pseudo-medical shark, who fattens
upon the victims of immorality.


Who that has felt the glow of delightful buoyancy, conse-
quent upon breathing the fresh morning air, as with elastic
step and cheerful spirit the park, or street, or mountain-side
has been tracked, but can bear witness to the enjoyment pro-
duced ? Such men return to breakfast or business with a
measure of physical energy that makes application to life’s
engagements a pleasure. And let us remember that this
robustness of physical manhood is dependent to a large extent
upon the retention of this vital force.
I subjoin a compact statement, written by a medical man
well qualified to speak on this subject. He says :
“ The semen may be called the essence of animal life—the
rectified spirit—the most subtle and spirituous of the fluids of
the animal frame, which largely contributes to the support of
the nerves ; the greatest part of this refined fluid, in a healthy
state and conduct of the human system, becomes intermingled
with the blood, of which it constitutes the most energetic and
volatile part. It imparts muscular strength to the body, and
general vigour to the whole animal machine ; it gives strength
to the beard and hair, depth of tone and masculine power to
the voice, manliness and dignity to the countenance and walk,
energy, ardour, noble daring, and enduring to the mind ; the
emission of semen enfeebles the body more than the loss of
twenty times the same quantity of blood.”
To the majority of young men, I doubt not, the counsel of
God’s Word applies ; “To avoid fornication, let every man
have his own wife.” Certainly it is “ better to marry than
burn.” Besides which, the institution of marriage is every
way blessed. That condition must be exalted indeed, con-
cerning which it is written, “ For this cause shall a man leave
his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and
they shall be one flesh.” True marriage is union by God
Himself : hence our Lord says, “ What God hath joined
together, let no man put asunder.” For a hundred obvious
reasons it is desirable that a young man should become united
to one who is designed of God to be helpmeet, wife, and
mother, yea also companion and friend.
I have no sympathy with that abnormal and mischievous
view which either makes or represents married life as an
expensive and luxurious state. If a young man knows and
loves a pure-minded maiden, and he has reason to believe that


liis affection is reciprocated, I think he is greatly to blame if
he does not squarely face the fancied difficulties of his financial
position in relation to a home, and overcome them. I say
fancied difficulties, for they are mainly so. The needs of two
young hearts and lives are not great, nor do they involve costly
outlay. As for a real wife being a burden, the very thought is a
scandalous reflection upon the helpmeet of man. Hundreds
and thousands of men could testify that their truest prosperity
and happiness dated pre-eminently from the day which
consummated the marriage tie.
Let me also add that one of the best safeguards for a young
man’s purity is the existence of a fellowship of love with one
to whom he is honourably engaged, even though some years
may pass before union take place. True love is so chaste and
noble, that to many young men I need not say one word ; but
for some who are thus engaged I will speak. Beware of
familiarities which excite the animal passions. It is written,
“ Love worketh no ill to his neighbour ” (Rom. xiii. 10). I
care not who the man is who tampers with a woman’s honour
under the pretext of love prior to marriage ; he is a lustful
and dishonourable scoundrel.
To effect a woman’s ruin in order to gratify lust is a crime
of the highest magnitude. Supposing a man intends to, and
afterwards marries the woman he has seduced, I ask, what
confidence can either of them have in the virtue of the other ?
It is a shameful blot upon their characters, and, as experience
in such cases proves, results in scandals and breaches which
otherwise had never existed. When the chastity of human
love gives place to the sensuality of animal passion it is a fall
indeed.
FASTENING STRONG CONVICTION.
Young men, it can never, under any circumstances be right
for you to do to a woman that which, if another man did to
your mother or sister, you could never forgive ! Why, sirs,
the very thought is revolting. Let us suppose a man gtiilty of
this shameful sin, and I apprehend that each of us would feel
ready to shoot the villain. lam not justifying the shooting,
but I am appealing to your instinctive sense of right, in order
to show the enormity of this fearful crime, and to fasten strong


conviction in your minds against this sin. What would you
think of a man, no matter his wealth, culture, or gentlemanly
bearing, who should lay himself out for the seduction and shame
of your beloved sister ? Her very name now reminds you of
the purest affection. Think of her, if you can bear it, ruined
in character, and soon to become an unhappy mother. To
whom can you introduce her ? What can you say concerning
her ? How can her own brothers and sisters associate with
her ? And, mark ! all this personal and relative misery
caused by this genteel villain’s degrading passion.
Another terrible result of this sin is the practical overthrow
of natural affection which it effects, A young man comes from
his father’s house to London. Either by his own lust or
through the corrupt companions which he finds in the house
of business where he resides, he becomes the companion of
lewd women. The immediate result is a bad conscience, a
sense of shame, and a breach in the affections of home. Let-
ters are less frequent, careless, and brief. He cannot manifest
home-love now. He begins to shrink from his sister and
mother, and well he may. He thinks to write as before, and
give expression to his former affection, but he finds it diminished
and dried. He has spent the strength of his affection and love
for home. In their stead the wretched harlot has filled him
with unholy lust. His brain and heart refuse to yield him the
love of the son and brother. His hand cannot write as afore-
time, or at best, his expressions become a hypocritical pretence.
Fallen into the degradation of the fornicator, he has changed
a mother’s love and a sister’s affection for the cursed fellowship
of the woman whose “ house is the way to hell, going down to
the chamber of death ” (Prov. vii. 27).
Here also is found one of the principal reasons why young
men keep away from religious services. For every man that
absents himself on the ground of indifference, intellectual
difficulty, or scepticism, twenty might be found who do so to
escape the accusations of conscience in regard to these sins—
accusations which must arise when the testimony of God’s
Word exposes and denounces this shameful iniquity.
Well does the Apostle say, “This is the will of God—your
sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication : that
every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honour ; not in the lust of concupiscence,


even as the Gentiles who know not God” (1 Thess. iv. 3—5).
In numbers of cases, especially where young men are weakly
or have consumptive tendencies or heart-disease, I believe the
best possible advice for the whole life is that furnished by the
Apostle Paul’s example and teaching : “It is a good thing for
a man not to touch a woman ”(1 Cor. vii. 1). Let it not be
supposed, however, that I either recommend or have sympathy
with celibacy. For the great majority, I believe with Martin
Tupper, that
“ It is the duty of most men to many.”
I proceed to reason with married men. My remarks, how-
ever, are of equal importance to those who intend to enter this
relationship. I desire to show, in the light of the relationship
which we who are married occupy, that in pleading for chastity
we also are not without constant restraint; that our wisdom,
strength, and manhood alike forbid that we should make the
best earthly gift which God can bestow a cause of injury in-
stead of a life-long blessing and help. Every husband should
know the things whereof I speak.
Doubtless one cause of the unhappiness which exists in
many homes arises from marital excesses. Certainly no act is
more capable of exaggeration and abuse. In proportion to its
frequency is the weakening of the energies of mind and body.
It is a fire which consumes, a fever-heat which parches the
whole being. The common expression in relation to this act,
‘‘ A man spends himself,” is emphatically true. It is a
scandalous proverb which is often used concerning married
people who die : it is said, “ She killed him,” or, “He killed
her.” The worst of it, in many cases, is that it is solemnly
true. These excesses slay numbers of men and women, and
that at the very time when they should be in the prime of their
life. The effects of excess in this act are more injurious to the
whole man than the sin of intemperance. The Word of God
thus speaks, “ Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy
ways unto that which destroyeth kings” (Prov. xxxi. 3).
Now, it is quite possible for a man to give his strength to
his wife and exhaust her strength by doing so. Young
married women who develop nervous prostration and debility
are often suffering from excesses for which the married
relationship affords opportunity, but for which it was never


designed. In many cases where weakness now exists, that
weakness will gradually disappear if great moderation in this
act be vigilantly maintained. Women of refined physical and
mental constitution cannot stand this exhaustion. Those of
us who have subdued this passion know right well how much
stronger we are, and how much purer the love becomes between
husband and wife.
Experience shows that even where the law of God has
instituted the legitimate use of these functions, e.g., in the
marriage state, both as the expression of affection, and in order
to the procreation of children, great care is needed lest an act
lawful and blessed in itself should become the cause of physical
weakness, injury, and sorrow. Many things in themselves
lawful are not expedient, and certainly, it can neither be ex-
pedient or lawful to impair the health and strength of either hus-
band or wife. This relationship is designed mainly for mutual
companionship, friendship, sympathy, affection, and home.
To every husband let me add, If you desire to retain robust-
ness of physical manhood, and to return home fresh and bright
after the work and business of the day, mind that you keep
this animal passion in subjection. If you wish to see your
wife retain to mature age the cheerful step and buoyant
animation which throws its welcome glow around the home,
take care that you do not exhaust her strength by the
wretched impulse of undisciplined animal desire. If the bloom
of maiden freshness is to be retained, and nervous force, with
its manifold worth and uses, hold sway, so that mother and
children be healthy, and practically independent of the medical
man, see to it that this true philosophy of strength be
courageously and faithfully maintained.
UNFAITHFULNESS STRONGLY DENOUNCED.
This leads me to denounce, in the strongest terms, the
profligacy of many married men. Not content with the
moderation permitted in the divinely appointed relationship of
marriage, they become adulterers, in order to gratify their
accursed lust. The man in them is trodden down by the
sensual beast which reigns supreme. These are the moral out-
laws that make light of this scandalous social iniquity, and by
their damnable example encourage young men to sin.


It is constantly affirmed by prostitutes, that amongst married
men are found their chief supporters. Evidence from such a
quarter must be received with considerable caution. Never-
theless, we believe that there is much truth in this statement.
Here, again, I lay the axe to the root of the tree ; the married
man who dares to affirm that there is a particle of physical
necessity for this sin is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
Whether these men be princes, peers, or legislators, pro-
fessional men, mechanics, or workmen, they are moral pests, a
scandal to the social state, and a curse to the nation.
Many married men exhaust themselves by these excesses ;
they become irritable, liable to cold, to rheumatic affections,
and nervous depression. They find themselves weary when
they rise in the morning. Unfitted for close application to
business, they become dilatory and careless, often lapsing into
entire lack of energy, and not seldom into the love of intoxi-
cating stimulants. Numbers of husbands and wives entering
upon these experiences lose the charm of health, the cheerful-
ness of life and converse. Home duties become irksome to the
wife ; the brightness, vivacity, and bloom natural to her earlier
years, decline ; she is spoken of as highly nervous, poorly, and
weak, when the whole truth is that she is suffering from phy-
sical exhaustion which she cannot bear. Her features become
angular, her hair prematurely grey, she rapidly settles down
into the nervous invalid, constantly needing medical aid, and
if possible, change of air.
Now, I know that these conditions are brought about in
many cases through what I am bound to call sins of ignorance
on the part of those who are married. I remember how mul-
titudes of men have neither read, heard, nor known the truth
of this question. I sympathize with my fellow-men in this,
that we have been left in practical ignorance concerning the
exceeding value and the legitimate uses of these functions of
our being. Some present are prepared to say that had they
known these things in the early days of their married life it
would have proved to them knowledge of exceeding value.
Certain am I that if this counsel is followed thousands of
homes will scarcely know the need of the physician’s presence.
I believe that large numbers of my fellow-countrymen are not
only surprised at the important information contained in this
lecture, but, as hundreds of letters and testimonies prove, they


are profoundly thankful for, and profited by, the light thrown
on this difficult and delicate subject.
A gentleman well known to me, who is now at the head of
an important association of Christian men, informed me that
for some years he was intimately associated with the well-
known Mr. Smedley. For more than twelve months he was
engaged in his consulting-room, and also in dealing with
hundreds of patients who came to the institution. My friend
affirms that Mr. Smedley repeatedly told him that the great
majority of men who came there were weak, exhausted, and
suffering from nervous debility, which, without doubt, had been
occasioned by marital excesses ; that the separation of men
from their wives, so far as cohabitation was concerned, was
constantly counselled, and in many cases for a time insisted
upon. Indeed, one object of these institutions is. through
residence in them for weeks or months, to secure this isola-
tion. Mr. Smedley affirmed that all the wives who came
there suffering from nervous affections, depression, and physi-
cal weakness were brought into those conditions by excesses
which are a wretched prostitution of the marriage relationship.
In this connection I call attention to what is now spoken of
as “the law of hereditary transmission.” Whilst lam not
prepared to accept all that has been stated on this subject, I
can clearly see that there is much force in some of the positions
taken. Common-sense leads me to recognise that children
who are begotten in the heat of animal passion are likely to be
licentious when they grow up. Many parents, through
excesses of eating and drinking, become inflamed with wine
and strong drink. They are sensualists, and, consequently,
morally diseased. Now, if in such conditions men beget their
children, who can affect surprise if they develop licentious
tendencies ? Are not such parents largely to blame ? Are
they not criminal in a high degree ? Have they not fouled
their own nest, and transmitted to their children predisposition
to moral evil ?
I am assured that many of our “ fast young men ” have
been thus corrupted, even as the children of the intemperate
are proved to have been. Certainly no one can deny that
many of our “ well-bred ” young men are little better than
“ high-class dogs,” so lawless are they and ready for the
arena of licentiousness.


Happily, as ten of thousands of husbands can testify, the
pure-minded wife and mother is not carried away, as men are
liable to be, with the force of animal passion. Were it not
so, the tendencies to licentiousness in many sons would be
stronger than they are. In the vast majority of cases
suggestion is never made except by the husband, and it is a
matter for deepest gratitude and consideration that the true
wife may become a real helpmeet in restraining this desire in
the husband.
We often hear it stated that a young wife has her children
quickly. This cannot happen to the majority of women
without injury to health and jeopardy to life. The law which
renders it imperative for the land to lie fallow in order to rest
and renewed strength is only another illustration of the unity
which pervades physical conditions everywhere. It should be
known that if a mother nurses her own babe, and the child is
not weaned until it is nine or ten months old, the mother,
except in rare cases, will not become enciente again, though
cohabitation with the husband takes place.
It is natural and rational that a mother should feed her
own children : in the selfish and unnatural conduct of many
mothers who, to avoid the self-denial and patience which are
required, hand the little one over to the wet-nurse or to be
brought up by hand, is found in many cases the cause and
reason of the unnatural haste of child-bearing. Mothers need
to be taught that the laws of nature cannot be broken without
penalty. For every woman whose health has been weakened
through suckling her child, a hundred have lost strength and
health through marital excesses. The haste of having children
is the costly penalty which women pay for shirking the
mother’s duty to the child.
So graciously has the law of God been arranged in regard
to the mother’s strength, that if it be obeyed, there will be,
as a rule, an interval of at least from eighteen months to two
years between the birth of one child and that of another.
Every married man should abstain during certain natural
seasons. In this periodical recurrence God has instituted to
every husband the law of restraint, and insisted upon self-
control.
To young people who are married—and my words come with
additional force to young Christians—l add, Be exceedingly


careful of licence and excess in your intercourse with one
another. Do not needlessly expose, by undress, the body.
Let not the purity of love degenerate into unholy lust. See
to it that you walk according to the Divine word, “ Dwelling
together as being heirs of the grace of life, that your prayers
be not hindered ” (1 Pet. iii. 7). What an infallible test!
There is no act which interferes so quickly with the spirit of
prayer or energy in the service of the Lord.
I call to mind some young married men that I have known.
It was not more than two or three years after their union
that a marked difference was observable in them. They had
lost much of their natural vivacity, energy, and strength of
voice. Their powers of application, as business men, students
and ministers, had declined, as also their enterprise, fervour,
and kindliness. They had become irritable, dull, pale, and
complaining. How often have I wished for liberty of speech
in order that I might intelligently show the cause !
Many cases of rheumatic fever have been induced through
impoverishment, caused by excesses on the part of young
married men.
After middle age the sap of a man’s life declines in quantity.
An eminent physician, upon whom I called in relation to this
subject, told me that a man who intends close application to
the ministry, to scientific or literary pursuits, where great
demands are made upon the brain, must restrain this passion.
He further stated that if the supplies for the brain and
nervous system are absorbed and the seed diverted through
sexual excesses in the marriage relationship, by fornication,
or by any other form of immorality, the man’s power must
decline : that to this very cause may be attributed the failure
and breakdown of so many men of middle age.
Of course I shall be met with the objection that there are
men of known immoral character who continue to be strong
even to old age. I admit that there are some, but these are
strong through feeding and developing the mere animal part
of their nature. They are strong as sensualists, and this
condition is indicated by their excessive eating and drinking.
The pleasures of the table, the love of wine, and the constant
appeal to stimulants are so many contributing items to a
debased animal existence. These lives are not the less
degrading because in many cases they are lived in the midst


of the refined splendour of licentious luxury. Such a life,
with its low appetites, is quite high enough for thousands of
those who are called “the upper classes.” To invert the order
of a well-known proverb, It is low life upstairs which is one of
England’s chief dangers at this time.
When the husband reaches forty he should aim at the
diminution of the use of this animal function. The divine in-
tention evidently is that when the wife’s ability to bear children
ceases, this passion should gradually decline and die out. At
fifty he should be free from its power. Why should a man
impair the strength of his mature manhood by sensual gratifi-
cation ? I speak plainly : look at the large number of old
rakes and roues that abound in this city. Are they not a pest
to society and a curse to the world ? And remember this
sensual corruption exists by men developing a passion which
Nature herself teaches them should die.
Some of us are men in the prime of manhood, and we
affirm that this desire is completely under control. Not only
so, but we are stronger and can do a greater amount of work
with less fatigue than in our younger manhood. Our testi-
mony is capable of proof in your own experience. lam as
certain that my statements cannot be gainsaid as I am anxious
that you should put them to the test. I will not hide from
you my earnest desire that, having made proof, you should
come and help us in the tremendous fight against licentious-
ness.
I speak in all delicacy. I hold that this act of the marriage
relationship is designed to be an expression of affection, an
act of enjoyment, as well as of the highest honour in procreat-
ing and perpetuating human life. Now every man listening
to my voice knows this, that any act which produces intense
enjoyment costs precisely its intensity ; liability to intemper-
ance increases with the liberal use of the generous wine; here
also the temptation to excess is found in the act itself.
There is something fitting in the fact that I should be able
to give you counsel on this subject from the writings of that
great reformer, Martin Luther, the man who dared to tear in
shreds, by his own example, the corrupt and ungodly teaching
which “forbids men to marry.” In his Letters to a Friend he
suggests to young married men a weekly limit for this act.
This testimony is not understated, if this passion is to be dis


ciplined, and the moral and physical strength of man and wife
maintained. Apart from any hard and fast lines, I strongly
counsel more lengthy intervals of abstinence. Fever, gentle-
men, is inflammation, and consumes the health. The rapid
pulse and hot blood of fever are neither physical health nor
normal condition. The heat of lust is a sensual fever, con-
suming and terrible ; this condition is abnormal also. The
feeding of a fire is not likely to produce its diminution.
Reticence, restraint, and self-control—these are the regal
qualities necessary to produce liberty here also.
I denounce in the strongest language the disgusting doc-
trines propounded in such books as The Fruits of Philosophy
and The Elements of Social Science. These vile productions
are intended covertly to encourage promiscuous intercourse
between the sexes, so as to avoid the natural results of child-
birth. Thousands of men and women in America and
England, both in the marriage relationship and out of it, have
become physical and moral wrecks through the pernicious
influence of these licentious publications. Ugly as the sin
they commit, pale, wizened, angular, and prematurely old
through sensual excess, these blighted wrecks pay the penalty
of their sins in weakness, disease, and death.
A case which has recently come under my notice shows the
cursed influence of these books. A young man in a good
position in a large Midland town became engaged to a young
lady. It was not deemed timely or advisable to marry. This
genteel villain therefore placed a copy of The Fruits of
Philosophy in the hands of this young lady. As the result of
its vile reasonings she submitted herself to the sensual desires
of this scoundrel. Very quickly this illicit intercourse drained
the physical and moral strength of the poor girl. Her con-
science loaded with guilt, in constant fear of being found out,
scarcely daring to look father or mother in the face, she, to
their astonishment, gradually sank into great weakness, which
culminated in rheumatic fever. The very time which, had slm
been married, should have seen her a happy mother,
saw her a wreck. There, lying on the brink of eternity,
she told amid intolerable agony how she had been
brought into this terrible condition by the influence of
this “ gentleman ” and the accursed teachings of this loath-
some publication.


Further, I speak strongly against the unpardonable reticence
of medical men. They know that these sins are the secret
and predisposing cause of the physical weakness, depression,
and nervous exhaustion which prevail. They are aware of the
immorality, shame, disease, and death caused by licentiousness.
Why do they not speak out ? Why permit this horrible
canker-worm to eat into the very heart of our social life, and
undermine the physical strength of the nation ? It is high
time that this shameless iniquity was denounced by them in
terms of burning indignation.
As a minister of Christ, a man, and an Englishman, I
denounce those medical men who do not hesitate to recommend
to young men the practice of fornication on the ground of
natural appetite and physical requirement. Such advice is
scandalous and abominable. If immorality in the opinion of
these men is necessary to health, I suggest that young men so
advised should require from these professional celebrities the
woman with whom they are to cohabit. And whether the
wife, sister, or daughter of the physician is eligible to represent
his prescription ? And if not, why not ? Somebody’s wife,
sister, or daughter must! Why not his ? I speak out
strongly, because certain medical men of high position have
been, and still are guilty of this dastardly and immoral
counsel.
A young man well known to me, the head of a large com-
mercial establishment, lost his wife by death. Shortly after-
wards he complained of pains in the head, and called upon the
family physician for advice. I know that this eminent medical
outlaw recommended my friend to come to London for pur-
poses of immorality. Happily he was possessed of the fear of
God, and thereby kept from the counsel of iniquity. Whilst
on a visit, my friend informed me of the advice received. I
strongly condemned this wickedness, and pointed out that the
oppression, sense of fulness, and headache, of which he com-
plained, indicated the fact that he made blood quickly—that he
needed to discontinue his use of wine, to become abstemious,
use plenty of cold water both as bath and beverage, and
relieve his vigorous physical system by constant exercise. This
simple counsel followed is sure to minimise sexual desire.
If I had my will I would publish the name of every medical
man who dared to counsel immorality, and hold him up to


public reprobation. Indeed, 1 am prepared to do this when I
get a clear case. lam aware that the great majority of the
medical profession utterly repudiate such counsel. I mention
this, not only because I should be extremely sorry to make a
statement which, without careful qualification, would reflect
seriously upon an honourable profession; but because I intend
my statement to attach as closely as I can make it, to certain
distinguished men, whose infidelity has prepared them to
minimise, if not to deny, the morality and righteousness of
this whole question.*
I quote three well-known authorities in reference to this
phase of the subject. Sir James Paget, in his Clinical
Lectures to Medical Students, says : “ Some of your patients
will probably expect you to advise fornication; I would as
soon advise stealing, or lying, or anything else which God has
forbidden.”
My friend, F. B. K , Esq., H. M. Inspector of Schools
in Bombay, to whom I have alluded, affirms, “ About twenty
years ago, before I left England, I was seriously informed
that, in consequence of the heat of the climate, Europeans
residing in India must commit fornication. Being a Christian,
I felt the strongest repugnance to such a position. I deter-
mined to consult Dr. Andrew Clark. I told him the facts,
and that 1 had come to consult him simply as a physicist.”
His answer is invaluable, not for India only, where thousands
of Englishmen have been slain by licentious excesses, but for
England and every other part of the world. “ Necessity for
fornication!” said that eminent physician, “ certainly not ; I
believe that if you keep from women you will live twenty years
longer.” My friend’s freshness and vigour after twenty years’
residence in India gives another proof that it is not the
climate which slays those who visit its shores, but the sins
which those commit who go there.
My task is drawing to its close. I therefore bring to your
minds some suggestions which are remedial, practicable, and
1
* Certain of these corrupt medical scientists are now actually ad-
vocating return to the old cupping and bleeding system. The reason
is not far to seek. It is that certain of their free-living and wine-
drinking patients may be relieved from the pains and penalties
which come from their own excesses.


within the range of ordinary application. By all means avoid
intoxicating drinks. Immorality and alcoholic stimulants, as
I have already shown, are intimately related to one another.
Wine and strong drink inflame the blood and heat the passions.
Attacking the brain, they warp the judgment and weaken
the power of restraint. Avoid what is called good living ; it
is madness to allow the pleasures of the table to corrupt and
corrode the human body. We are not designed for gourmands,
much less for educated pigs. Cold water bathing, water as a
beverage, simple and wholesome food, regularity of sleep,
plenty of exercise, games such as cricket, football, tennis,
boating, or bicycling are amongst the best possible prevent-
atives against lust and animal passion.
Eschew photographs, novels, papers, and conversation of
an immoral tendency and character. Never mind the ability
of speaker, artist, author, or authoress. If you desire to escape
pollution, do not suffer your eyes to be blinded by the fasci-
nation of wonderful novelists, who make lust to be love, and
set it in all the brilliance of artistic finish. A harlot is a harlot,
though bedizened with jewels. A clever novelist who sets vice
in the garb and trappings of virtue, who makes the courtesan
beautiful, fashionable, and a centre of attraction, who paints
the clever and licentious villain as “ a handsome and dashing
gentleman,” “ a little fast, perhaps.” Such a woman, though
a popular novelist, is a mental prostitute, a harlot in language,
an adulteress in thought; her glamour in writing is as shameless,
vile, and abominable as the silvern tongue and sealskin jacket
of the miserable procuresses who decoy young girls into their
infernal dens. Were I a despotic monarch for a month I
would sentence to two years’ imprisonment with hard labour
several novelists, both male and female, that I could name.
Am I asked for what ? I answer, for writing books, whose
tone, language, and spirit indicate that they were written in
order to pander to corrupt tastes, and to debauch the minds of
English men and women.
Avoid the theatre, for, whatever may be said about its uses
as a school of morals or a sphere of recreation, there can be
little doubt that, as a whole, the representations, dresses,
actions, and postures, of half-naked women, covered with
tight-fitting, flesh-coloured drawers, armlets, etc., are pur-
posely designed to stimulate the sensual nature and lustful


passions of the male spectators ; nay, is it not true to say that
some of these are only waiting for the close of the play to
become the paramours and partners of the hundreds of women
in these theatres who are regarded as “ respectable prostitutes” ?
Why, sirs, they find a principal promenade and camping-
ground in and around the purlieus of the metropolitan and
provincial theatres ! These creatures of “ easy vice ” are
certainly a leading article in the school of pleasure, and their
constant presence is a singular comment upon the oft-repeated
assertion that “ the theatre is a school of morals.”
Beware of idleness ; indolent leisure means an unoccupied
mind. When young men lounge along the streets in this
condition they become an easy prey to the sisterhood of shame
and death. Bear in mind that evil thoughts precede evil
actions. The hand of the worst thief in London will not steal
until the thief within operates upon the hand without. The
members of the body which are capable of becoming instru-
ments of sin are not involuntary actors. Lustful desires must
proceed from brain and heart ere the fire that consumes burns
in the member. No sentence ever penned contained greater
or more important truth than this —“ Keep thine heart with
all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life ” (Prov. iv. 23).
The member whereof I speak is actually destitute of the ability
to sin until prompted by the lust and fire of corrupt passion
within.
Further, set your face and ears resolutely against the
immoral men who are to be found in banks, shops, dining-
rooms, houses of business, commercial rooms, and other places
of public resort. Morally diseased in heart and brain, their
thoughts, when unoccupied, at once revert to the images of lust
which possess their minds. Out of the corrupt heart the
mouth speaks ; verily the tongue in such cases is “set on fire
of hell.” These moral lepers use poisonous words and lustful
similes, which suggest vile stories as corrupt as hell itself.
These moral pests are found in the garb and with the
mannerisms of gentlemen, and their victims are mainly youths
arid young men whom they spare no pains to debauch and
make as shameless as themselves.
My hearers will not fail to see that I have boldly challenged
and sternly wrestled with licentiousness, the hydra-headed
serpent whose fascination is as terrible as its sting is deadly.


Nevertheless, I know that this iniquity is but one of the mani-
fold forms of evil to which man, who is naturally corrupt,
yields himself. The statement is as true as the law of the
tides, that sin and moral iniquity, in some form or other, will
hold men in bondage until Christ Jesus the Lord is known,
believed on, and received. It is written, “It the Son, there-
fore, shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed ” (John viii.
36). For this cause the Mighty God, “having raised up His
Son Jesus, sent Him to bless you, in turning every one of you
from your iniquities ” (Acts iii. 26). There is abundance of
power resident in Him who “holds the stars in their courses.”
The knowledge of, and the application to ourselves, through
the ministry of the Holy Spirit, of this great strength is all-
sufficient for every case and for all our need.
A century has not yet elapsed since a discovery was made
which has practically revolutionised our methods of transit and
travel. The old ideas of speed and time necessary to reach
certain points are gone for ever. Be it remembered, however,
that steam is not an invention ; it is simply a discovery. Its
power was always there, though human knowledge had failed
to divine the methods of its application. In like manner, the
power of our Lord has ever been, and an illustrious line of men
have in the past borne witness to the fact. When their
knowledge and faith became the firm and fast connection, on
the human side, between Himself and themselves, then His
energy, as competent for restraint or propulsion as the engine
of yonder express train, possessed them. Christ in us is ade-
quate to all our need. What steam is, as practicable and available
force in the world of mechanics, Jesus Christ is in the seething
world of humanity. Masses of our fellow-men are little better
than mere spasmodic centres of human energy, as lawless and
destitute of discipline as the gyrations of “ wandering stars.”
The truth is, that every man, however well-bred, cultured, and
highly civilised, is of the earth, earthy, until vital union with
Christ takes place. Nothing save partnership in the divine
nature of Christ Jesus can produce in us real love of holiness
and real hatred of sin. As well yoke a team of horses to the
railway train, and expect it to attain a speed of forty or fifty
miles an hour, as to see men speeding along the lines of
righteousness and holiness of life apart from the real posses-
sion of the indwelling Christ.


Who among yon is not familiar with the interesting history
of the woman of Samaria—a Samaritan adulteress, choosing,
probably, to suffer the scorching heat of the midday snn rather
than meet at eventide the scornful looks of the hundreds who
then should come to draw water from the well. But mark.
The Christ of God sitteth there. The pent-up energy of grace
is in Him. The strength of holiness is in Him. The Fount
of eternal life is there. The Sin-bearer and He that hath
power on earth to forgive as well as to turn from sin is by her
side. He speaks in gracious words of "the living water” and
of “the gift of God.” She asks, receives, and lives. She
drinks of that living water, and forthwith the fever-fires of sin
die down. Young men, remember this. At noon an adul-
teress ; one hour later, and she has become a child of God, an
evangel. See, she hath left her waterpot as a pledge of her
return, and is gone into the city to tell the men (probably
some of her former companions in sin), “Come, see a man
that told me all things that ever I did.” Is not this the
Christ ? They came therefore and said : “ Now we believe,
not because of thy saying only, for we have heard Him our-
selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ” (John iv. 42).
SUBJECTION TO CHRIST TRUE LIBERTY.
He that discloses to us our sin is He also that hath power
on earth to forgive. More than this, He has power to make
every one of us free from its galling and hateful bondage.
Young men, I present Christ to you. Complete subjection to
Christ is the highest liberty and freedom.
The Universe as well as the Scriptures teach the necessity
for submission to one Supreme Lord. Two beings of equal
strength, crossed in purpose, will, and active energy, could only
mean universal confusion and catastrophe. This is a philo-
sophic measurement which sweeps the circle of the universe.
This necessity of “ the nature of things ” applies in the
government of man also. Let any young man allow the reins
to pass out of the hands of the judgment, the will, the reason,
and all that constitutes the like of God in man; let the
passions and corrupt affections, which are ever ready to de-
throne the Divine in man, burst the barriers of law, and con-
science, and will, and then let him observe how long ere


anarchy, riot, and ruin prove his overthrow also. The essential
truth is that “ the Lord our God is one Lord.” Paul, the
servant of Jesus Christ, lives to-day in a wider sphere and
grander range of influence than any other name which stands
upon the scroll of spiritual, manly, and Christian fame. The
Apostle hit the mark when he affirmed, not as theory only,
but as experience also, “ Not I, but Christ liveth in me.”
Finally, remember that whilst the real reception of Christ is
absolutely essential, the connection securing the union is
exceedingly simple. Faith in Him, and the surrender of your
whole being in loyal obedience and confiding love—that is all.
The power you need, for repression, propulsion, or restraint, is
from Himself. Think for one moment of the simple and
instant connection which is effected when the railway employe
drops the strong link of the short chain which attaches the
carriages to the engine, and makes fast the connection. Such
a connecting link is faith in Christ. It is the trust of the
mind and heart which attaches to and centres in Him, who is
the source of spiritual life, strength, and holiness. At this
point sin and iniquity in their varied forms of power are over-
come. It is a question mainly of our Lord’s superior strength,
a conflict of forces in which the strongest and the best shall win.
In simple and pertinent illustration, let us suppose that at
this moment a young man of eighteen could receive my life ;
that he should so receive me that my will predominates his,
my thoughts displace his, my strength being diffused through-
out his whole being. In a word, that my life, in its variety,
force, and energy, should permeate his. Is it not obvious,
assuming my strength and will-power to be superior to his,
and set on the lines of righteousness, that a radical change
will be seen in the life, character, and habits of that youth ?
Such is no unmeaning illustration of what Paul states in these
words ; “ Not I, but Christ liveth in me ” (Gal. ii. 20) ; or
again : “ Whereunto I also labour, striving according to His
working, which worketh in me mightily” (Col. i. 29). Such
was the Apostle’s daily experience, and the same energy which
made him what he was is available for us also.
Gentlemen, it is untrue, contemptible, and unmanly to
affirm that you must indulge your animal and sexual propen-
sities after what I have shown you. The law of the Author
of your being is against it. The judgment and righteous


sentiment of society are against it. Conscience, moral sense,
and the physical welfare of the body are opposed to it.
Woman’s honour and character are lost by it. Family life is
outraged by it. The strength of the nation is imperilled by it.
The universal testimony of an enlightened manhood proves
this sin of licentiousness to have been the prolific source of the
greatest scandals, crimes, and villainies which have sullied the
fair fame of England.
In conclusion, I may add that I have purposely dealt with
this subject in great plainness of speech. I have called a spade
a spade. I have not willingly said one word to gratify
prurient curiosity, neither have I the slightest fear of injury
being caused by the information given. In conclusion, may I
ask this at your hands ? Seeing how difficult it is wisely to
deal with this subject, that you will, if necessary, defend me
from the unjust criticism which my lecture, in some minds, is
sure to provoke. Adverse criticism, in nearly every case,
comes from those who have neither heard nor read my lectures.
I am prepared to my utmost strength to wage war against this
fearful social vice. If any apology is needed for the bold and
uncompromising stand which 1 have taken, that apology is
found in my high regard for my fellow-countrymen, and in my
deep sympathy with the 145,000 fallen women in England,
whose ruin and degradation have been caused by the unbridled
lusts of men ; last, not least, in the honour and welfare of
the British nation, to which it is my privilege to belong.
Yarley Bros., Printers, William Street, Melbourne.


BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
THE CURSE OF MANHOOD,
AN ENTIRELY NEW AND LATER WORK DEALING WITH THE SAME
SUBJECT AS THE LECTURE TO MEN.
First delivered to 3000 Men, ,in Exeter Hall, London, on
Tuesday, Bth March, 1887.
PRICE - - " - - FOURPENCE.
PRIVATE ADDRESS
TO
BOYS AND YOUTHS,
ON AN IMPORTANT SUBJECT.
Containing Invaluable Information for Boys, Youths, and Parents.
PRICE - - - TWOPENCE.
THESE LECTURES ntay be obtained from the Publishers,
VARLEY BROS., 180-182 William Street, Melbourne;
and may be ordered from any Bookseller.
Special Arrangements can be made for large quantities.
