

I ffato
LECTURE
ON THE
(ECUMENICAL COUNCIL OF 1870
BY THE EEY. J. KINROSS,
MINISTER OP THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OP KIAMA.
The degree of interest which men take in any
given subject is not always in proportion to its
importance. It often happens that a commu-
nity is intensely excited regarding a matter
that will have very little influence on their
happiness in this life or the next; whereas,
matters of grave import are but seldom dis-
cussed, and engage but a small share of atten-
tion. Much of this arises from the fact that
there is a great diversity of tastes among men.
Many confine their attention to a very limited
number of subjects, and anything beyond their
narrow sphere is not possessed of the slightest
interest. What is taking place in their own
little world —the births, deaths, and mar-
riages—common gossip—is all the mental food
they live upon ; and Church or State may go
to wreck or ruin for anything they care.
Some again widen this sphere a little, and scan
very minntely those dreary columns of the news-
paper which chronicle the sate of the money
market and the price of wool and butter.
Others take a keen interest in politics, or
science, or art ; but most of these classes are
apt to think with feelings bordering upon con-
tempt respecting church or religious questions.
If the importance of the subject is to be the
gauge by which we are to measure our interest
therein, then there is none that can be named
in the same breath with religion. Itistrue, that
of many of the fierce disputes that have arisen
respecting it, we may say that it matters very
little whether they are decided one way or
another. But this is nothing more than can
be said of any subject. At first sight it may
seem to be of no moment for the prosperity of
a country, what ministry is in office, who is to
be elected for this district and who for that —
how much this salary is to be increased and
how much that is to be reduced ; and because
it is so, we need take no interest in these mat-
ters. Well, if almost every body were to be of
the same view, and act in this way, the
2 e i ►
active minority would have a fine time of it,
at our expense. So, iu religion, thei’e are
many questions that seem to have very little
relation to human life and human happiness ;
but it betokens great want of discernment to
affirm, that, therefore, we are to take no in-
terest in them. Many speak slight-
ingly of religious disputations, simply because
they know nothing about them. Surely before
anyone pronounces a subject of inquiry utterly
useless, he ought to know' what it is. But
what has all this to do with the (Ecumenical
Council ? It is granted, perhaps, that every-
one should take some interest in the affairs of
his own church ; but what have we, Protes-
tants, to do with what is taking place in
Rome ? That Pius IX. should summon an as-
sembly of venerable bishops, archbishops, and
cardinals, for the purpose of delibe-
rating on his own infallibility, may seem
to be an event in which we have
little or no concern. But it ought to be borne
in mind that the decisions of this (Ecumenical
Council will have a powerful influence on a
very large number of human beings. The
Pope of Rome is the head of a church which
numbers 200 millions of adherents. These
may be said to belong to every nation and
tribe under heaven. Barbarian, as well as
civilised, own her sway. The great majority
of the nation to which, by universal consent, is
assigned the leadership of fashion, is still Ca-
tholic, and by her army helps to keep Pius in
his chair. The empire of Austria, notwith-
standing some signs of liberal tendencies, is
subject to the Roman See ; Italy and Spain,
although much changed from of old, are still
to be reckoned among Catholic countries. The
great majority of our fellow-subjects in Ire-
land, a rapidly increasing minority in Eng-
land, and nearly a third of our own fellow-
colonists, profess the same faith. They are,
doubtless, looking on with considerable inter-


esfc, and the result arrived at will not be with- of the great American Republic, were not yet
ont its influence on them. Again, this Council born; 1 ; but now, in 1870, 54 bishops have
is possessed of additional interest from the
fact, that such an assembly is a rare event in
the history of the world. It is an C Ecumenical
Council, i.e. not a diocesan, or provincial, or
national, but a general or universal one. The
word “ (Ecumenical” is, as most of you are
aware, of Greek oi’igin, and has much the
same meaning as “ Catholic” or “ Universal.”
It signifies literally “ inhabited,” and when
joined with the Greek word for earth, signifies
the “whole inhabited world.” If Archbishop
Folding held a synod of the clergy in his dio-
cese of Sydney, that would be a “Dio-
cesan Synod j” if he called an assembly of all
the bishops in New South Wales, Victoria,
New Zealand, &c., that might be called a
“Provincial Synod j” but when the Pope sum-
mons his bishops, not only of one province,
but of all provinces ; not of one nation only,
but of all nations in Europe, Asia, America,
Africa, and Australia, it is called “ General”
or “ (Ecumenical.” It must have been an
imposing sight to witness the procession of
bishops on their way to the Cathedral of
Rome; but how it must have thrilled the
heart of the aged Pontiff, now nearly four-
score years, when from under the lofty dome
of St. Peters, he saw before him about 800
bishops, archbishops, and other dignitaries,
most of them venerable from their years, some
distinguished for their abilities, and all claim-
ing to be the successors of the Apostles—the
representatives of his Church on earth —-and
he himself presiding over them all as the
Vicar of Christ. There have only been 18 or
20 (Ecumenical Councils since the death of the
Apostles ; and the last was that of Trent,
which was opened on the 13th of December,
1545—more than 300 years ago. Some may
think that our lot has fallen at a very happy
period—since neither our fathers nor great
grandfathers were honored to see the day of
the universal gathering of mitred heads at
Rome. Whether his Holiness is by this time
congratulating himself on his happy stars,
admits of serious doubt. This, we may assert,
however, that never before, in the history of
the Christian world, has there been such a
number of bishops and dignitaries, as-
sembled together. In the first Council —that
of Nice—which met in 325, and drew up the
Nioene Creed, there were only 318 bishops ;
at that of Constantinople, there were only
150 ; and at Trent the number was under 300 :
so that now at Rome there are nearly three
times as many as there were at Trent in 1545.
At Trent there were 187 Italian bishops—at Rome, 276
„ „ 26 from France ~ 84
„ „ 1 from England „ 35
~ ~ 31 from Spain „ 41
This is sufficient to show that there has been
no decline in the number of the hierarchy
since then, whatever changes in other res-
pects, may have come over the Papacy. Then
the new world was but being introduced to
the light. The Pilgrim Fathers, the founders
crossed the Atlantic to take their places side
by side with those of the kingdoms and em-
pires of the old world. Our peaceful times, and
our rapid and pleasant modes of conveyance,
doubtless have allowed many more to be pre-
sent than otherwise would have been. But
still the Pope needs something more to support
him than the presence of 800 venerable bi-
shops, however loving and peaceful they may
be. Former Popes have had armies at their
back, and the strong help of the civil power.
Philip 11., of Spain, who fitted up an immense
armada for the destruction of English heretics,
and sent his armies for the suppression of Pro-
testantism in the Netherlands, declared “he
would rather not reign at all than reign over
heretics.” I fear there will never be another
king of Spain who will perform similar ser-
vices for Pius IX. Henry 11., of France,
and his queen, Catherine de Medici, were
zealously devoted to the interests of the
church ; and so generally at that period were
the German emperors. In those days Protes-
tantism was comparatively feeble. The
princes, kings, and emperors expected to sup-
press it by stringent measures. I imagine
they have slender hopes of doing so now. As
regards wealth, power, influence, and pros-
perity, the two parties have changed sides
since then. Three hundred years work a
wonderful difference on the face of society and
in the government of nations. Another rea-
son why we ought not to allow this Assembly
to pass off without considering its claims,
arises from the fact that the Pope himself, in
the Bull he issued for the summoning of the
Council, addressed the Protestant Churches,
as well as the Greek, urging them no longer
to put their souls in jeopardy, by refusing to
submit to the head of the Holy Catholic
Church. If all the Protestant bodies went to
Rome, acknowledging their grievous errors,
and yielded meekly and submissively to his
paternal rule, then he would be most glad to
receive them. Dr. Gumming, you may re-
member, wrote to the Pontiff, as the latter
seemed to invite the Protestant on equal
terms, asking if he would be allowed the
right to speak, and intimating that if this favour
were granted, ho would certainly make
his appearance before his Holiness and the
venerable fathers. The Pope replied that if
he appeared at all, it must be to make acknow-
ledgement of his errors. Still, evidently
anxious for the return of Protestants to his
fold, he wrote Dr. Gumming a second time,
saying that, although he (the doctor) could not
speak in the Council, ho could come and se-
cure instruction from, and discuss matters
with, the learned divines in Rome. Of course,
Dr. Gumming declined to go to Rome to ob-
tain what he could easily get in London. Are
we then to yield to the demands of the Roman
Pontiff, to acknowledge that we Protestants
have been in fatal error, and to submit to him


as our supreme head ? That is the question supposing certain statements to be in a book,
■which we are now called upon, in the course because that is only a question of fact; but
of divine providence, duly and solemnly to pon-
der. To give a complete answer to it, would
involve a discussion of the chief points of
controversy between us and Rome, which
would be most absurd in me to attempt on the
present occasion ; but it so happens that the
main claim set up by that church comes out
prominently in the Council —and if she vindi-
cate this claim she will come off victorious;
but if she fail to substantiate it, then she
must surrender everything. I allude to the
doctrine of Infallibility. That, in one of its
aspects, is the great subject before the Council.
It is well for the interests of truth, that such a
fundamental doctrine and not one of subordinate
importance, is the question of the day. What
then is this Infallibility ? It is affirmed that
the church does not, and cannot err, in any
decision she pronounces, regarding faith and
morals. If she affirms that belief in certain
articles of religion is necessary to salvation,
then we may be as certain that this belief is
necessary as if Christ himself had told us. If
she tells us that a certain action is right, and
that another is wrong, we ought to feel the
same assurance in doing the one and refrain-
ing from the other, as if we heard a voice
from heaven commanding the former and for-
bidding the latter. If she condescends to ex-
plain the meaning of a text of Scripture, then,
whatever may be our opinion of it, we must
humbly accept hers, because she cannot err
in the interpretation of scripture. When she
affirms that after consecration, the bread and
wine are changed into the substance of our
Lord’s body and blood, we are bound, on pain
of damnation to believe her, even although
our sense of sight, touch, and taste proclaim
that the elements are the same as before. Our
senses may err, but the church cannot, in mat-
ters of faith. You must understand, however,
that the Church does not claim to be infallible
in everything. It is admitted that she may
err in matters of fact, on questions of history,
or of science. If the Pope or a general coun-
cil gave a decision on a Geological question,
Roman Catholics would not feel themselves
bound to believe it. The Church of Prance,
e.g., fully acknowledges, or did acknowledge,
the doctrinal decision of the Council of Con-
stance ; that same council, in violation of the
safe conduct of the Emperor, condemned
Huss, of Bohemia, to the flames. The French
Catholics would not hold themselves bound to
approve the latter, although they warmly ap-
plaud the former. The Bull of Innocent X.,
condemned as heretical, five propositions said
to be found in a book, written by the cele-
brated Jansenius. Many distinguished divines
and others denied that the condemned propo-
sitions were in the book at all. Supposing a
believer in the Pope’s infallibility were con-
strained to admit this, how would he defend
himself. ? Very ingeniously. The Pope, he
would say, might be mistaken, might err, in
if he pronounced the propositions themselves
heretical, he could not possibly err in that, be-
cause it is a matter of faith. How the
church, or the council, or the Pope could trip
in such a simple matter as declaring what is
or is not in a given book, and yet be infallible
in the all-important matters of faith, is a
very nice question for them to settle.
If we, on pain of everlasting condemnation,
must yield to this claim, it must be supported
by the strongest and clearest evidence possible.
That we should render the same unhesitating
assent to the decisions of the church as we are
bound to accord to the words and commands
of our Saviour himself, must be proved be-
yond a doubt before we dare do so This can
only be done from scripture or from reason.
The Church of Rome professes to establish it
from both. Let us consider her argument
from scripture. It is founded upon these four
texts, Luke xxii. 31 : “ And the Lord said,
Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired to have
you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not,
and when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren.” Then comes the celebrated text,
Matthew xvi. 18 : “ And I say also unto thee
that thou art Peter, and on this rock I will
build my Church ; and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and what-
ever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatever thou shalt loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven.” John xxi.
16 : “He said unto him, feed my sheep.”
Exodus xxviii. 30 : “And thou shalt put in
the breastplate of judgment the Urim and
Thummim.” I feel assured that everyone here,
as he listened to the reading of these texts now,
felt that whatever they mean, they don’t
teach the dogma of Infallibility. A doctrine
that can only be received on the strongest
evidence, cannot be established by such obscure
arguments. However, let us examine the
texts a little more minutely. The argument
from the Jewish high priest wearing the Urim
and Thummim is simply ridiculous. We find
Caiaphas, the Jewish high priest, presiding
over the tribunal which condemned our Sa-
viour to death. An argument based on the
state of the Old Testament priesthood would
be productive of the most dangerous consequen-
ces. For, assuredly, there was no infallibility
amongst them more than in the Church ofßorae.
If there was, they must have lost it when Caia-
phas condemned our Saviour, else (as some
Romanists, I am told, have affirmed) he
did right in passing that fearful sentence.
Another text, “ Feed my sheep,” is equally
weak as an argument, for these words may be
applied to any minister of the gospel. All are
commanded to feed the flock over which they
have been placed as overseers, but none would
claim for themselves infallibility on that ac-
count. And then as to Peter ; what did our


Lord say : “ I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not.” But has Christ not prayed for
thousands more besides Peter, and whose faith
did not fail more than his ? Every man
who dies in Christ, whether as a martyr for
the truth, or peacefully in his home, does all
this without his faith failing him. When Peter
was to be converted, that is, restored after his
disgraceful fall, he was to strengthen his
brethren. And this, surely, he could very
well do, without infallibility. He could use
his own case—his disgraceful denial of his
Lord, the pain of conscience he experienced
because of it, and the sharp and searching
reproof of his Lord, —as a solemn warning to
his fellow apostles, and to other Christian
brethren, that their faith and attachment to
Christ should be strengthened. But the main
text is that in which the foundation of the
church is referred to. “ The gates of hell shall
not prevail, against her.” This is assuredly
one of the most consoling promises addressed
to the church in the New Testament. Our
Lord thereby assures us that whatever changes
may come over the woi’ld; —although the
scourge of war may sweep over the fairest por-
tions of the earth, leaving nothing but de-
solation and distress behind ; —although na-
tions may be convulsed by internal dissen-
sion, and revolutions burst forth, hurling
monarchs from the throne and scattering to
the winds constitutions that have commanded
obedience for ages, yet amidst all this general
wreck, the Church of Christ will survive.
This is what Christ has promised ; this is
what has been fulfilled. The attempt has
been made to extinguish Christianity. The
Bible has been sought only to be burned, and
Christians only to be destroyed ; but the more
they were persecuted the more they increased.
But what has this to do with the question ?
What connection is there between permanence
and infallibility ? None whatever. Men may
be Christians without, being perfect, and the
church be still the body of Christ although falli-
ble. It might be urged with as great a degree of
plausibility, that the Pope or a General
Council could never sin, as that they could not
err in doctrine or morals. In many respects,
although not in all, sin in practice is more
dangerous, and more likely to lead the church
to ruin, than errors in doctrine. As to the
rock on which the church is built, some say
it is the confession of Peter, —“ Thou art
Christ,” and others, that it is Peter
himself. Not to dwell on this, let
us admit that the church was founded on
him. What follows ? That he occupied a
place in common with the other apostles of
our Lord in the church’s foundation, as Paul
says, Eph. ii. 19 : “ Now therefore ye are no
more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-
citizens with the saints, and of the household
of God ; and are built upon the foundation of
the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ him-
self being the chief corner-stone.” That is the
foundation, Peter is there ; so are the apostles
and prophets. But this is very unfortunate for
the successors of the apostles. As the
foundation of the church they have no suc-
cessors. How could a foundation have a suc-
cessor ? The apostles were the first stones
laid of this spiritual building, and there can
be no succession of first stones. The seventy
disciples come next; the three hundred on the
day of Pentecost come after ; and all believers
from that day to this have been the lively
stones that have been built into this spiritual
building. Let the meaning of the passages
be what it may, before his Holiness can call
upon us to surrender our Protestantism and
enter his fold, he must prove that all that was
given to Peter and the rest of the apostles,
has been given to him and his Council. Peter
and the rest may have been inspired, as we
believe they were, but how does that prove that
Pius IX. is so ? The apostles proved their inspi-
ration by their miracles, which are as fully at-
tested as those of our Lord himself. Let his
Holiness perform the same, and then we shall
acknowledge that he is a genuine successor of
these inspired men. We have seen that the
promise that Christ will be with the church
does not imply infallibility. We might as well
affirm that when our Lord says, “ where two
or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.” We are to con-
clude that any two or three persons thus assem-
bled are infallible. But the inspired penmen
of Holy Scripture have told us quite the con-
trary. Paul told the elders of the church that
grievous wolves would enter, not sparing the
flock ; and he tells us also that there will be
a great falling away. These words of in-
spired men teach us that dangerous errors will
spring up in the church. But does he tell us
that truth will always be in the majority ? The
apostle Paul found often that all men forsook
him. Then, is truth always in the oldest body P
If so, the Greek Church stands a far better
chance than the Roman. Our Roman Catholic
friends always like to put the question—where
was your church before Luther ? Whatever
may be the worth of it, they can’t say that to
the Greek Church, which is quite as old and
corrupt as their own. Thus, you perceive, that
instead of infallibility being founded on clear
texts, whose meaning is indubitable, it is
built on those that are more obscure ; and in-
stead of the Roman Catholic interpretation of
them being the most evident, it is the most
improbable. But what renders this claim the
more arrogant, and which ought to lead us to
scrutinise it the more narrowly, is the fact
that the Roman Church herself is not agreed
as to the seat of infallibility. Where does it
reside—in the Pope, in a General Council, or
in neither singly, but in both combined P
This has not been determined. Doc-
tors, eminent for their talents and learning, as
well as for their strong attachment to the
church, have enlisted on opposite sides in this
controversy. The French or Gallicau Church
has always taken the lead in opposing the in-


fallibility of the Pope, and in upholding that
of a General Council. Let us read an extract
from the four propositions of the convention
of the French Church, which met in 1682,
composed of eight archbishops, twenty-six
bishops, and thirty-eight other ministers : “ In
temporal things, kings and princes are sub-
ject to no ecclesiastical power of God’s ap-
pointment, neither can they directly or indi-
rectly be deposed by authority of the keys
of the church, nor can their subjects be ex-
empted from fidelity and obedience, nor be
absolved from their oath of allegiance.” “ In
questions of faith, likewise, the Supreme Pon-
tiff has a principal part, and his decrees have
reference to all and singular churches ; yet
his judgmentis not incapable of correction, un-
less it have the assent of the church.” We
should say that these are pretty sound decla-
rations as to the province of the Church and
the State ; and that the King of Italy had im-
bibed similar views, when he called for his
confessor to speak to him regarding spirituals,
but when the confessor spoke of matters of
State, the king very properly referred him to
his ministers. Still, the opinion of the Galli-
can Church is not quite satisfactory on this
subject either, for, strange to say, there is a
division in the Church of Rome as to the num-
ber of CEcumenical Councils, and as to which
of them are. to be held such. The French
maintain that the Councils of Pisa, Constance,
and Basle are general, whereas the Italians
deny it. The Italians affirm that those of
Lyons, Florence, and the fifth Lateran are
Oecumenical, and the French deny it. Here
we have one branch of the Roman Catholic
Church against another. Which are we to be-
lieve ? Talk of the differences among Protes-
tants, they are slight compared with this. All
Protestant Churches, established and volun-
tary, British, Continental, and American, are
at one as regards the rule of faith. With one
hearty, unanimous, harmonious voice, all
the churches of the Reformation affirm,
and steadfastly maintain, that the Bible,
and the Bible alone, is the religion
of Protestants. But as to the rule of
faith in the Papal Church, we have pope
against pope, council against council, doctor
against doctor. By the Council of Constance
it is affirmed—“ This assembly being legiti-
mately gathered together in the Holy Ghost,
constituting a general council, and represent-
ing the Catholic Church, has its power imme-
diately from Christ; and that every person, of
whatsoever dignity, even though it be the
Papal, is bound to obey the Council in those
things which pertain to faith, and to the ex-
tirpation of the said schism, and the reforma-
tion of the said church in its head and mem-
bers.” The fifth Lateran Council declared
quite in the teeth of that, that a pope is supe-
rior to a general council. Whether, then, are
we to believe the fathers who met at Constance
or those who met in the fifth Lateran p Verily,
we need an infallible guide to tell us which,
pope or council, is infallible. If the Fathers
now in conclave at Rome pronounce it to be a
doctrine of the Catholic Church, that
the Pope cannot err in matters of faith,
then they will flatly contradict the Council of
Constance. That Council declared that it
assembled legitimately in the Holy Ghost; the
present Council cannot claim anything higher.
I ask again, which are we to believe ? Sup-
pose it will be decided that the Pope is infalli-
ble, that General Councils are not —-what
follows ? The Pope of one generation contra-
dicts the Pope of another ; and, worse still,
what are we to do when there is more than
one ? At the beginning of the 15th cen-
tury there were two claiming to be the head of
the church. Boniface IX. at Rome, and Bene-
dict XIII. at Avignon. The former died, and
his party elected another. When Benedict
was besieged by the King of France, he fled
to Catalonia, and his cardinals joined those of
the opposite side. Both parties, desirous of
putting an end to the strife, summoned a
council at Pisa, in 1409. That council went to
work with hearty good-will. It declared both
of the popes to be heretical, perjured, obsti-
nate, and unworthy of any honours, and ex-
communicated them from the church, and
elected in their room Alexander Y. So, in-
stead of one pope, we have now three, each
hurling his anathemas at the head of his bro-
ther. This is a very troublesome affair to the
upholders of papal infallibility. Cardinal Bel-
larmine, one of the most acute, subtle, and
learned defenders Rome has ever possessed,
finds himself here in a fix. He had always
placed the pope above a council. Accordingly
he could not admit that of Pisa to be general,
because it condemned two popes ; but if he
denied it to be general, then the succession of
the popes is broken—a link in the chain is
snapped—because it elected Alexander Y. He
very prudently invents a new place for that of
Pisa. It seems to bo a general council neither
approved nor disapproved. Such are some of
the inezti'icable labyrinths in which believers
in infallibility find themselves involved. These
differences have always existed in the bosom
of that church, have distracted her councils,
and disturbed her peace. Now a conclave of
cardinals and bishops is met to promote peace
and unity. How long it will continue its
sittings, no man can tell. It bids fair to imi-
tate that of Trent, which sat some 15 or 16
years ; as it began in December last, and how-
ever many long Latin speeches have been
made, nothing has yet been decided. The
telegrams by this mail state, that many of the
holy fathers have left Rome, and that the
dogma of Infallibility is not to be pressed. I
suspect that if Pius had anticipated that he
should have encountered such firm opposition
on the part of many of the bishops, and been
compelled to endure such plain speaking, and
to listen to such a nhmber of unpleasant
truths as has not fallen to the lot of any pope
for the last three hundred years, he would


have thought twice before he summoned them
together. There is division in the Council.
Strong vigorous opposition has been given to
the court of Rome ; and we have the words
of the bishops themselves for it. We don’t
need to go to the reporters for that; as we
have their own published statements as evi-
dence for the trnth of our assertions. The
chief and leading opponents of the present po-
licy of the Roman See are the French and
German prelates. This is just what might
have been expected. The French are true to
the traditions of their own national Church.
Although there have been fiercer contests be-
tween Catholic and Protestant in France than
anywhere, and as barbarous cruelties inflicted
upon their opponents as by any other people,
especially in the early part of the contest, —
yet it cannot be denied, that since the
granting of the Gallican liberties, French
Catholics have been far more liberal than
others, and have produced a brighter galaxy
of distinguished names than any other country.
Some of the best men that ever breathed be-
longed to the Catholic church of France.
Pascal, one of the sublimest writers in any
language, and Fenelon, one of the most pious
of men and most persuasive of Christian
writers ; Bourdaloue, Bossuet, and Massillon,
three pulpit orators, who, if they have been
equalled, certainly have never been surpassed
by any orators in the world ; these and others
that might be named, all belonged to the
church of Prance. If Bossuet had been alive,
his burning eloquence would doubtless have
been directed against the present attempt of
the Papacy. That church is certainly ’ not
what she was then; she has become more
servile to Rome ; but still as of old, she has
some valiant sons who boldly confront the
head of the Catholic world, and contend for
their natural rights. Foremost among these
is to be reckoned Father Hyacinthe. He is
from all accounts, the first orator in Prance.
He drew crowds of admiring auditors, Sab-
bath after Sabbath, to the Cathedral of Notre
Dame, to listen to his heart-stirring addresses.
It should be to us, I think, a matter of thank-
fulness to Almighty God, that such a man,
notwithstanding his errors on some points,
should have the opportunity of preaching the
gospel of Jesus Christ in the cathedral of the
gay, fashionable, and voluptuous city of Paris.
He is in revolt from Rome. His warm and
generous heart rebels against the restraint
which his church imposed on him. He be-
holds in all Christian men true brothers in
Christ, and he has given and received the
right hand of fellowship from American
Christians of all denominations. Here then
we have not an ignorant, obscure, bigoted
monk rising up in rebellion against Rome ; but
one of the most distinguished men within her
pale on the soil of Prance. Another valiant
defender of the rights of his order, and a
vigorous opponent of the Pope’s Infallibility,
is Bishop Dupenloup of Orleans. He
seems to be the leader of the opposition, and
evidently manages the matter with great
ability and dexterity. He does not seem to
have his equal among all the bishops of
France. In a vigorous letter against passing
the dogma, he says— (S. M. Herald, May 31,
1870.) “ But let ns lay aside all that will be
said here, and which one day will be said.
Behold the 140 bishops who conjure, on this
question, the Holy Father and the Council to
stop, and you, as if that was not the case, cry
to the council—we are under the impulse of
necessity ! Let us march on ; let us march on.
But is it a mere bagatelle in your eyes, that
they will pass on over the bodies of so many
bishops, so many people, and so many great
churches ? You cannot speak of necessity, when
so many of your colleagues speak of unanimity,
nor invoke the general sentiments of the
Episcopacy, or of the faithful in Germany and
France, when the German Episcopate almost
entirely is against you.” Should the dogma
pass or not, these words of this able bishop
are not likely to be soon forgotten by the Pro-
testant world at least. Then the theological
faculty of the Sorbonne, the most distinguished
in that country, is on the same side. Two of
its members, the abe Maret, and the abe
Gatry, write vigorously on the subject. Hear
the latter—and remember they are the
words of a distinguished Roman Catho-
lic—“ We have had amongst ns for
many centuries, the school of dissimula-
tion and of lies. They have mutilated the
Breviary, which from the 7th to the 16th cen-
tury, spoke in indisputable terms of the con-
demnation of Honorius (a pope) as a heretic,
we have still amongst ns, at the present day,
the same school of error founded on passion,
blindness, and rashness—a school which de-
cides for itself without seeing or listening to
testimony, and which denies or affirms, ac-
cording as it wishes.” I think you will allow
that none of you ever heard me say a severer
thing of the church of Rome, than this abe,
one of her own sons, says of a party within
her. In Germany we find the same thing,
even more decidedly than in France. There,
although liberty of speech in affairs of State
has never flourished, there has generally been
unlimited freedom, if not boundless license,
in matters of religion. There learning, in all
its branches, has been more zealously culti-
vated then in any other country in Europe.
Education is not only generally diffused, but
in most States, is compulsory by the Govern-
ment. The Protestant and the Catholic study
side by side, in the same universities.
Where the country is divided, Catholic and
Protestant professors, are delivering lectures
on theology to their respective students, under
the same roof. Consequently there is not the
same violent antagonism between the mem-
bers of the two creeds, as in those countries,
where they are educated in separate denomi-
national schools and colleges. As an effect of
this Catholics are much more liberal, and


much more learned than in other countries, privileges on certain conditions. In no Catho-
Many of them are profoundly versed in the lie country in which a concordat has been con-
history of the church, and consequently in the
present crisis, the German bishops, almost to
a man, are on the liberal side. One of the
most distinguished divines of the Catholic
church now living, is unquestionably, Dr.
Bollinger of Munich. Some of his works
occupy a very high place in the theologi-
cal world, and are read with admira-
tion, both by Catholics and Protestants,
He also is strongly opposed to the new
dogma. He is the reputed author of a book
called “ Janus,” which most mercilessly ex-
poses, by arguments drawn from history and
reason, the present pretensions of the Roman
See. Such, in point of character and ability,
are some of the opponents of the policy which
the Court of Rome is now pursuing. Who are
its defenders P In point of numbers they
seem to form the majority in Council. Most of
thel Italians, I suppose, because they bask
under the rays of the great central sun of the
Catholic world, are devoted to the views of
Pius. The hierarchy of Spain, long the most
gloomy and bigoted country in Europe, are, as
might have been expected, on the same side.
But what shall I say of those in whom we,
perhaps, are most interested —the bishops of
our own country ? Without an exception, I
am sorry to say, they are the devoted ad-
herents of the party under the sway of the
Jesuits. Is it not melancholy to think that he
who, some fifteen years ago, was an archdea-
con in the Church of England, is now one of
the most prominent supporters of the retro-
gade policy, and most servile in his devotion
to the dogma of Infallibility—l mean Arch-
bishop Manning ? It is a fact, and a most me-
lancholy one, that none are prepared to go a
greater length in swallowing the most absurd
doctrines than those who have during the last
thirty years seceded to the Church of Rome
from the Church of England. I suppose it is
because they are now in the years of their first
love, and are so smitten with the charms
of the Holy Catholic Church, that they are
blind to the many ugly defects which she car-
ries about with her, and which older and more
experienced hands have long discovered, and
are now exposing. It is rather singular, too,
that almost all the bishops who live in Pro-
testant countries are much more servile in their
attachment to the Papacy, and much more
generally side with the Pope at the present crisis
than those of Catholic countries. The reason
of that is, I apprehend, that the former are
much more under the control of the Papal
Court than the latter. They are under the
“Propaganda” at Rome, where all the main
appointments are made, and the main move-
ments are originated and controlled. It is not
so in Catholic countries. The governments
take much to do with ecclesiastical appoint-
ments, and generally the Pope and the King,
or Emperor, conclude an agreement—called a
Concordat—in which the State grants certain
eluded, can the bishops or clergy read from
their pulpits a Bull of the Pope, without the
Government giving its sanction, e.g. The Em-
peror of the French prohibited all the Bishops
of France from reading the Syllabus from the
pulpits. In this, I believe, he was justified by
the concordat he concluded with Rome before.
But in the United States of America and in
Great Britain the bishops could read a Bull
from the Pope every Sunday and holiday if
they thought fit, and the Government would
never interfere. They get nothing, and, con-
sequently, we expect nothing. In a Catholic
country, if a bishop happen to quarrel with
the Pope on any matter, and chance to get the
protection of the civil power, he may set his
Holiness at defiance ; but if one in a Protes-
tant country does the same, he is left to his
fate will take him by the hand. This
accounts in some measure for the slavish obe-
dience which most of our British bishops ren-
der to the insolent dominion of the Papacy.
There are two honorable exceptions to this state
of things, if not among the bishops, at least
among the clergy of Britain, viz., Dr. New-
man and Mr. Ffoulkes, who were both brought
up in the Church of England. Dr. Newman,
since the death of Cardinal Wiseman, is un-
questionably the ablest defender of Romanism
in Britain. I have not read any of his works
since I left college, but then I was much
struck with his marvellous controversial skill.
Beyond anyone I almost ever read, he had the
power of making black look white. Some years
ago he said that since he entered the Church
of Rome, he felt he had reached a safe
and secure harbour; and lying quietly at
anchor, he looked out with pity and compas-
sion upon his Protestant brethren driven about
on a tempestuous sea without compass. I
wonder whether he thinks he has got into
troubled waters again. At all events, he is
said to have declared that the present dogma
is an attempt of an insolent faction.
Next to Dr. Newman, Mr. Ffoulkes is, per-
haps, the most distinguished of the English
perverts. He has published several works—
one on the “ Crown in Council” —in which ha
deals some heavy blows to the papal court.
He says to Archbishop Manning—“ Therefore,
my Lord, I find this conclusion inevitable,
that whether absolutely inerrant or not in
matters of faith, Rome has abundantly proved,
during the last 700 years, that she can be a
most, negligent, hesitating, fickle, self-seek-
ing, hypocritical guide to others, even
where the faith is concerned. Of all Councils
(Florence) that were ever held, I suppose
there never was one in which hypocrisy, du-
plicity, and wordly motives, played a more
conspicuous or disgraceful part.” Mr. Ffoulkes
was taken to task for his sayings; his case
brought before Rome’s Court ; that court
called upon him to retract, through Arch-
bishop Manning—to whom he replied ; “ You


must have felt in your own mind there was
not one in a thousand of your educated coun-
trymen ever likely to accede to a compromise
of this description. I pitied your Grace from
the heart in having to be the instrument of a
court officially styled holy, whose absorbing
idea seemed to be that of its own consequence,
and its least concern the interests of those in
whose behalf it professed to act.” Why did
Mr. Ffoulkes, you may well ask, join the Church
of Rome ? He now admits that he derived as
much good in the Church of England as ever
he did in Rome; and that Manning him-
self was as good a man when archdeacon of
that church as now when an archbishop of the
Catholic. Yea, he thinks he was rather better.
But what does he say of himself: “ But till I
had actually been received into communion
with Rome, it was my own impression, and I
was assured, by members of the Church of
Rome over and over again, that I could never
judge of her system fairly. This was one of
my chief reasons for embracing it when I did.”
Such was his reason. I think you will all
agree with me, that it was a very weak one.
He neglected the old adage, “ look before you
leap.” If an intelligent man, well versed in
history, could act thus, what must we think of
the hundreds of clergymen, of dukes and
duchesses, who have gone over to Rome
these few years back ? If they were
not obstinately blinded by prejudice, the
doings and discussions of this council would
be sufficient to open their eyes. How will the
council end P We need cave very little. Can
We believe that whatever its decision may be,
it will proceed from the Holy Ghost ? An as-
sembly, where proper freedom is denied
where no subject can be introduced without
consent of the Pope’s advisers, and where the
bishops are prevented from meeting privately
together for consultation on these matters ;
which is under the dictation of men who be-
tray such ignorance of the rules of free dis-
cussion ; or, if not ignorance, inveterate de-
Delivered in the Presbyterian Church, Kiama, on Friday, 10 th June, 1870.
termination to violate them at every step ;
can we believe it is acting under the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost P Let
him believe who can. It is often brought
as a reproach against Protestants, that
they are split up into innumerable sec-
tions ; and that division is the necessary effect
of the exercise of private judgment. There
are evils incident to our divisions, but not so
great as to the opposite side. Ten thousand
times rather the freedom and vitality of Pro-
testantism with all her divisions, than the
slavery and torpor of Catholicism, notwith-
standing her boasted uniformity. Yet there is
more real unity among Protestants, than in
the Roman Catholic Church. If this Council
does nothing else, it manifests this : we are
all heartily united as to the Bible being the
rule of faith ; but they are divided as to the
seat of infallibility. They tell us they are in-
fallible ; and if we ask, where is this infallibi-
lity seated—one says, in the Pope ; another,
in a General Council; and a third, in both
combined. Before the whole of Christendom
this Council proclaims, by its division, that
the boasted unity of Rome is an empty name,
with their leading, most} talented, and
most influential bishops and theologians of
Prance and Germany opposed to the policy of
the Pope, we may well say —“ First cast out
the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt
thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy
brother’s eye.” Let us hold fast our liberty,
and firmly defend the trnth committed to our
care. Instead of an infallible, visible head,
we have still the Holy Ghost, aiding all sincere
enquirers after truth. With full reliance upon
his promised aid, let us study our great chart;
and directing our course in accordance there-
with, we shall be infallibly guided to the gates
of heaven, and pass into that happy land,
where all the noise, and bustle, and debate of
the church below, have for ever died away,
and where celestial joy and peace reign for
ever and ever.
