

'' ■ ■
-
iECTURE
oar the
lAN MISSION,
RED AT SYDNEY,
jjy THE
STD BISHOP PATTESON*
!EB WITH THE
XUUJSTUJBA WITH THE
SPORT AND ACCOUNTS OP THE MISSION,


/ r* ' ’ $' u ** / s p?Xl 7'" V A&? ‘,\r '>, ‘
■"■■■■-■■-., ■ '- ’ • '■■■'■■ ■• ■ -■■■•■■
, *
" , ;■ ■.,■■■ -■■■; : -■• .;£>£; ~' -■.--■•■
-• ■■ . «•< :'■:>-, '♦ ,* ,V r v, 1
■
•


THE MELANESIAN MISSION.
The following address was delivered by Bishop Patteson, at
Sydney, at a meeting convened for the purpose of hearing
from him an account of the state and prospects of the
Melanesian Mission. The chair was taken by the Reverend
W. Stack, who, in introducing the Bishop, dwelt upon the
obligation that the church in Australia was under to support
the efforts that were being made to Christianise the adjacent
islands of the Pacific.
Bishop Patteson then said: I feel more obliged than I
can well express to Mr. Stack for the kind way in which he
has introduced this subject. He has put the matter on
precisely the ground that I should wish to see it put.
I never heard better reasons put before a Christian audience
to urge them to support missions to the heathen. I only
wash I could reproduce the precise words that Mr. Stack has
made use of; for he has said something to-night that I should
be glad to make use of when I have to address other people.
I can only say that I think he has put the matter on precisely
the right ground ; first of all, that no church can be in a
healthy state without making aggressions on the heathenism
existing around it ; and secondly, that God does teach us to
localise our efforts- We do not come here by accident. It
is God who is determining all these things; and any thoughtful
person who asks himself what he w r as placed here for, must
see that he was placed here to do some work. We are all
missionaries—a missionary is simply a person who is sent.
I should like to know who is not sent. A parent is sent to
train up his children in the fear of God—every child has its
duties to discharge towards its brothers and sisters. Every
single person in the community —every individual from the
Sovereign downwards, is sent to do a certain work. Well
we are sent here —we have a special work to perform. That
is exactly the ground upon which Mr. Stack has placed our
duty to support Christian missions. What are we placed
here for ? Well, let charity begin at home, but let it not end
there. It must go on in ever widening circles to the ends of
the earth. Even poor people that have not a shilling to give
and who cannot assist by their money can help by their
prayers, and in prayer and thought can reach the most distant
islands of the Pacific. Now, while every Church ought to
be a missionary Church, the Church in this land has a special


(Int t to discharge in reference to missions. You have your
own heathen aborigines whom it is your first duty to look
after; and God forbid that I should ask you to withhold one
sixpence or one thought from them. It has not been my
special providence to go to them, though I have often thought
of them and desired to see some good work commenced on
their behalf. But it is literally true that the inhabitants of
the Melanesian Islands (saving only the aboriginal inhabitants
ot this land), are, of all heathen races the nearest to you, and
that you have distinct duties towards them. I know that
you wish to be engaged in doing some good work. Thousands
of good people wish to be engaged in some good work, but
they do not see the particular way in which they should work.
“What is my distinct work ? ” is the question that thoughtful
people are often asking themselves. Now, I have a right to
say that it is your bounden duty to encourage any efforts
that are being made to help the original inhabitants of this
country, and then, by your prayers and alms, to aid those who
are engaged in the missions to the Melanesian Islands, lying
as they do very near to the eastern coast of this great continent.
The islands in the Eastern Pacific are better known to you
than those in the Western Pacific. Vessels are constantly
going from Sydney to the islands in the Eastern Pacific—to
the Samoan Group, Rarotonga, and the ’Fiji's. Now, with all
of those I have nothing to do to-night : they He in the east of
the Pacific or in the centre of it. We have some acquaintance
with the language of those places, and it forms an important
element in our work to know all that is going on among them.
But our more special vrork lies in the west of the Pacific.
If, then, you can at this moment carry your mind to a map of
the Pacific you will remember that there is a large belt of
islands, including, New Guinea and reaching eastward from
Australia to the Fijian Archipelago ; these are the islands
that are called by the name of Melanesia. These islands are
very little known. On one of the most southern of them
there have been missionaries belonging to the London
Missionary Society. These islands are perfectly healthy,
being merely coral reefs upheaved. Europeans may live
upon them with perfect safety, without any apprehension of
either fever or ague. At this moment only one of these islands
is occupied by missionaries at all; but the Nova Scotian and
Scotch Presbyterian mission is engaged in seeking to evangelise
the four or five islands lying to the north and west of
Anaitenm. To the north of that, this mission of the Church
of England is the only missionary agency at work over many
thousands of miles; in fact, there is nothing between it and
Borneo, where the Bishop of Labuan is engaged. I do not
say that in my lifetime I shall ever see the half of these islands ;
but still there is no other missionary agency that I know of ;
and they are in a state that calls for our sympathy and efforts
to the utmost in our power. But how are we to help them ?


In the Eastern Pacific the climate is not at all unhealthy.
I have known people living in the islands there many years
without any injury to their health, and the dialects spoken
in the Eastern Pacific are for the most part common dialects
of one language, very easily acquired by those who have lived
on any one of the islands ; so that a native of one cluster of
islands can, after a very short time, learn to communicate
with the inhabitants of adjacent islands. This is a fact that
is well known to persons who have travelled amongst those
islands. The other day, after I had addressed a meeting at
Adelaide, a gentleman present who had gone among those
islands, said he could testify to the truth of what I had stated,
as he had sailed with some Maori people and they were able
to communicate with the natives of those islands. I mention
all this to show that in the Eastern Pacific it was quite
possible for the missionaries to live permanently in one place,
and that they might hope, by God’s blessing, to introduce
Christianity therefas they could employ the agency of natives
who had received Christianity to propagate it among the
inhabitants of the adjacent clusters. Now we cannot adopt
this plan in the Western Pacific, because, with the exception
of three or four of the islands, where the vegetation is not so
rank, and where there is consequently not the same amount
of exposure to disease, we cannot live permanently on those
islands. I have tested that for a good many years ; I think
it would be very wrong for me to attempt to live there
myself, and I would not ask any one else to live where I
cannot live myself The utmost we can hope to do is to
spend on the islands four or five months of the winter—the
less unhealthy part of the year. But even suppose we could
live permanently on the islands, the utmost we could then
hope to do would be a much more restricted work than we
ought to aim at ; for in that case we should introduce
Christianity on that one island only, and then, humanly
speaking, our work would be likely to stop, because the
natives of that island could hardly go out beyond the
immediately adjacent islands to evangelise the whole of the
islands of Melanesia. For in every island a different language
is spoken, and in some islands a number of different languages
are spoken, all of which are mutually unintelligible to the
natives themselves. You can, therefore, easily understand
that the plan that has been adopted, with considerable success
in the Eastern Pacific is not capable of being transferred to
the Western Pacific. It was necessary that some other plan
should be adopted ; and I must say that we have not adopted
a plan that is unlike that adopted by other missionary bodies,
merely because we wish to differ from them. But that plan
has been arrived at by a sort of exhaustive process ; after
making several experiments, we have come to see that there
is no other practicable method by which we could hope to


carry on this work among islands so circumstanced as those
of the Western Pacific—in regard to their being unhealthy,
and their being inhabited by people who speak a multiplicity
of languages. It is some fourteen years ago that the Bishop
of New Zealand, who had received a charge from the Primate
of that day to endeavour, as soon as he could, to do something
towards introducing Christianity into these islands of the
Western Pacific, w r as enable to leave New Zealand in k little
schooner of twenty-two tons, and in which he sailed fourteen
hundred miles, navigating his vessel himself, into unknown
seas. (Cheers.) It is well that that statement should be
applauded —for it did require some faith and courage to enter
upon that expedition. The Bishop had been anxious for
many years to commence it; but he had at that time the
visitation of an enormous diocese, which involved I cannot
tell what amount of personal toil and hardship, and danger,
such as very few people in any other profession expose
themselves to; but he is not a man who will have his reward
in this life. But the moment he could leave New Zealand
he went off; and he was the very first Englishman who went
down amongst those islands, with the intention and the object
of introducing Christianity amongst them. There had been
traders to some of those islands before. They had gone to
the island of Anaiteum, where there is a good harbour, and
which is a regular sandalwood station ; and they had also gone
to Eromanga. I have been often at those places, and I know
something of the consequences that have attended the contact
between the white and the black man in those islands; but I
need not talk about that. Ido not wish to impute wrong
motives to either white or black people. Ido not wish to be
either the accuser of the white people or the apologist of the
blacks ; I wish to speak charitably of all alike. But I must
say this—that it was of no good consequence to the cause of
missions that the missionary was not the first white man that
landed on those shores. I have been in islands in which no
■white man has been before me, and I could go and lie down
there with as much confidence and sense of security as I
would in any house in this city. And whenever I have met
with any difficulties or have been at all exposed to personal
injury, I have always been able, when I came to know the
language and to converse with the people, to trace the fact
to the natural desire of retaliating upon one member of that
community that had already wrought so much wanton injury
upon them. The Bishop of New Zealand went down to
those islands; and he, a man whose energy and power, and
activity of mind and body are a proverb throughout
Christendom, —he was just the man in his humility of heart,
to say—as I have heard him say, when he came to some island
that witnessed sad traces of the intercourse already established
with those lawless wanderers of the ocean,—“Ah, here we


come lagging behind.” Well, he went down, and he brought
away some of the islanders with him, for that was the plan'on
which he went to work; seeing, as a man of real power and
originality -of thought must see, that that was the only
practical plan under the circumstances. He brought away
at once a number of scholars from these islands. “Now
what was the good of that ?” you may say. He felt that he
could not go and live on these islands ; he had to return to
New Zealand and do his work there. Even if these islands
had been the healthiest spots on the face of the earth, he
could not have left New Zealand to have lived in them.
His heart was set on trying to do them good; but he knew
that the islands were unhealthy, though he did not know it as
well as we know it now; and he devised a plan to meet the
circumstances with that intuitive instinct which must have
been given him from above. He soon learned that the
multiplicity of dialects spoken in these islands would prevent
the adoption of the plan that had succeeded in the Eastern
Pacific ; and so he brought away with him to New Zealand
a small number of scholars. This went on for a year or two,
and then he was obliged to go to England to arrange all those
matters for the reorganisation of the church in New Zealand
which he has been enable to carry out with such wonderful
results. We have Diocesan Synods and a Provincial Synod
in New Zealand, working admirably ; and there is also a
missionary offshoot from the church there. That was the
Bishop’s special work in New Zealand. When he returned
from England, now nine years ago, he brought me with him ;
therefore I can speak of what I have seen during the last
nine years. And I beg you to remember that, as I must
speak a little about myself, if I say anything which seems to
indicate any amount of prudence, or skill, or wisdom in
working out this plan—(for I am not speaking now as if I
wanted ungratefully to ignore any gifts or faculties which
God has been pleased to bestow upon me) —I wish always to
have it understood that the plan was that of the Bishop of
New Zealand wholly and entirely, and that, in working it out,
unless I had been trained by him, and in every detail told
what I ought to do, I am perfectly certain I never could have
originated one of the twenty or thirty different points in
which this mission work has been distinguished from almost
every other missionary work. I feel that I may with freedom
speak, and that my tongue is loosened when I tell you that
that is the fact. It is not given to many men to be allowed
the intimate friendship and constant society for several
months of perhaps one of the greatest men of his age; but it is
a great happiness and comfort to me to be permitted to bear
my testimony to what he really is. Therefore, in what I say
now about this mission work, if in any respect it commends
itself to you as a work that ought to be supported on the


ground of its being a feasible, wise, and reasonable plan of
operation, you will, if you please, attribute that, under God,
to him, and not to me. That is the real, simple truth of the
case. Well, this plan for bringing away scholars from the
islands was one that commended itself to the judgment of the
Bishop, and he had, from the first, no doubt whatever as to
its result. But the carrying out of the plan required great
confidence in the mental capacity of the natives themselves ;
because what should we bring away these people for, unless
we thought them capable of being educated ? And of being
educated for what? Not merely to receive a certain amount
of education themselves, but to be the future teachers and
missionaries to their countrymen. That required a great
amount of confidence in the intellectual power, and in the
moral earnestness of the people themselves ; in their capacity
to be the teachers and clergy of their people. And as we
knew that until this plan had been fairly tried it was hardly
fair perhaps to go to others and to ask them to believe in the
fact that we did all along believe in, because we had personal
knowledge of it, —we thought it better to go quietly on for a
certain number of years until we had fairly tested the method
of operation, and then to come to the people of these colonies
and tell them of what we had actually done. This is my
apology for not having before given information on the subject
of the Melanesian Mission. We almost purposely withheld
information respecting it, because we wanted to go on quietly,
trying a plan which we knew to be an unusual one, and at last,
when we had tested the plan fairly, to come to you and say—
Now , we are in a position to commend this plan to you as a
practicable and reasonable one, and one that is likely under
God’s blessing to be successful, because we have tested it and
found it to be sound. The plan is this: here are very many
islands, inhabited, you will remember, by people speaking
different languages. They are wild, barbarous people, living
the most savage lives that men can lead, and the practices
common among them are almost indescribable. I will not dwell
upon that state, because we are naturally too much disposed
to dwell on the dark side of the picture. It is not, therefore,
necessary that I should speak much about their depravity, as
there would not be much good in dwelling upon it; and we
are apt to forget that it is owing to God’s grace and mercy
that we are not similarly circumstanced; and perhaps,
notwithstanding our privileges and advantages, we are not so
very much better after all. When we look at the apathy,
the careless indifference in the discharge of duties, and the
want of anything like self-denial on the part of many people,
and then remember that we have received for several
centuries the heritage of Christianity, I do not think that
on the whole we have any right to talk of the Melanesian
savages as being such fearfully depraved specimens of the
human race. Ido not like to hear this language. Knowing,


as I do, those people so well, I sometimes feel it as a personal
insult. Amongst them, I have met some whom I might
fairly speak of as thorough gentlemen. I was greatly pleased
when I came across that passage in Captain Speke’s book
where, after his return from his remarkable tour in Africa, he
told the members of the Royal Society in England that some
of those people he had met with, and who were considered as
wild heathen savages, were as perfect gentlemen as any
people he had ever met in the whole of his life. I can bear
just the same testimony. Ido not deny that evil practices
are going on. I have read that Ist. chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans as well as other people, and I ought to know
what takes place in heathen countries. But the point to
which I wish to direct your attention is not so much the
moral depravity of all those races, as their capacity for being
taken out of that state of sinfulness, and brought from their
blindness and ignorance into a state of purity, and knowledge,
and holiness. What we want to testify to you is this—that
as God has made of one blood all the nations of the earth, it
stands to reason that there is no human being incapable of
receiving the blessings that God has bestowed upon us as
members of the common race of mankind collectively. If
any one denies that the Australian black or Melanesian savage
is a man at all, I meet him on the simple ground of physiology.
That will answer the question whether he is a man or not.
But if you allow him to be a human being at all, see the
inference that is to be drawn from that fact. If he is a
human being he is a partaker of that nature which our
Blessed Lord took upon Himself when He came down to
earth to suffer and die for us, because He took a nature
common to us all in His divine person. And now let any
Christian man tell me that a man who shares that common
nature which the Lord of Glory took in His Divine Person
is incapable of being taught what our Lord came down from
heaven to teach. I know that no Christian man will dare to
say that. Now, I hope that, once for all, every child will
have a proper answer to give to that uncharitable and
unchristian way of talking about the incapacity of any race
under heaven of being saved. Never listen to such talk
again; it is utterly untrue, and opposed to the whole spirit
of Christianity. Every single man, because he is a man, is
a partaker of that nature which is common to all, and that is
the nature which at the right hand of God, is united to the
Divine Nature in the Person of Christ. You will
understand that there is no answer to that argument. Well,
let us consider it to have been established that every human
being is capable of being taught that which is necessary for
his salvation. Ido not say that every man who is capable of
learning would be able to teach others. It is not every spark
that is capable of being fanned into a flame. But the
capacity for learning is there; that is the point I am


contending for: and it is because we know it to be there that
our plan of operations has been directed in the way I am now
attempting to describe to you. Ido earnestly trust that we
do not go to the heathen man in any spirit of pharisaical pity
or contempt for him; we do not denounce him for being a
wild heathen savage; we do not treat him with contemptuous
pity as if he stood outside the bounds of God’s universal love.
But we go to him, assuming that there is in him a capacity
for receiving that message that is sent to every creature
under heaven. We know it is there; the difficulty is in
calling out that latent faculty, and in that consists the skill
of the Christian teacher to try, as it were, and discover what
is latent in the heart of a man whom he is trying to teach
the doctrines of Christianity, what it is he can lay hold of,
and by which he may draw the man gradually into a region
of light and truth and knowledge which he seemed at one
time to be utterly incapable of entering into. That is the
point, then. We go in our mission schooner down to these
islands, and we see such a sight as this:—an island wooded
from the water’s side up to the top of the mountains, three or
four thousand feet in height, one dense mass of vegetation, an
undergrowth utterly impenetrable—the tops of the highest
trees covered and entwined with creepers and parasites.
There is a narrow strip of white coral strand —perhaps at low
water there may be a large portion of the coral uncovered—a
third or half of a mile in breadth. On that strip we see a
number of natives, say, from fifty to four or five hundred, all
full-grown men, 1 armed with bows and arrows, spears and
clubs. If we see women and children with them we may
conclude that they are friendly; but if they are only armed
men, we look at them a little while to try by the known
indications whether they are friendly and whether we ought
to o-o amongst them or not. Of late years since the Bishop
of New Zealand has not been able to go down with us, the
plan adopted has been usually as follows:—In the old days
we went on shore together, now Igo alone; I have no other
person to look after or to think about. We reach the shore
by any means in our power, wading or swimming as the case
may be. 1 beg you to observe that the fact of being
defenceless is the real defence; it is of no use going with
arms, because it is apt to engender suspicion by treating the
people suspiciously. Recollect that for them as for us Christ
died, that they have the same capacity for receiving His
message that we have. Wacannot speak to them in words, for
we cannot speak their language; but the first thing is to win
their confidence, to give them something like an idea that here
is one who will treat them with love and confidence. I know
they have been brought up in habits of suspicion; and how
can* you dispel that notion ? Not by acting suspiciously
towards them. You go to teach them something different
from what they have learned, and you must adopt a different


method. How can you do that? You cannot go and talk to
them ; you do not know their language. How do you act
towards a child that is shy and timid and that you wish to
make a friend of? Parents well know the little kindly
artifices that are used in such cases. You must treat these
people in the same way. Win their confidence somehow;
get them to regard you as a person that wishes them well:
and we all know that to trust ourselves among these people
is the only way by which we can in the beginning attempt to
inculcate this new lesson at all. If in going among them one
does feel a little uneasy it is better not to show it, because
they watch every change of the countenance, and the great
object you have to keep in mind is to try to make these people
understand you wish to confide in them. They would never
think of hurting a man going to them under those
circumstances. They have often told me afterwards that the
reason why they did not do me any harm was, that all their
suspicion was disarmed ; they could not “ hit a man when he
was down.” You go among them in this kind of way; and at
the very first visit you dispel some of their suspicious doubtful
thoughts as to the object of the stranger coming among them.
During one voyage 1 landed on seven islands that I had never
visited before, and carried away scholars from each of them.
That is a very remarkable thing. What power it was that
induced them to come away Ido not profess to explain. I
believe that there was some mysterious power working in the
hearts of those lads that induced them to trust themselves with
us. But in most cases a second or third visit is required, I
suppose that, seeing our vessel return after an interval of
some months, the people argue in this way. “ What is this
man coming here again for? He seemed very kind when he
was here before, giving us presents; here he is again, and
what does he want?” On my first visit to an island, I used
to write down a few of the names of the people, and this I
found a great introduction to them upon my second visit.
During one voyage I wrote down no less than thirteen hundred
names. At one time I see a few young lads standing together,
. _ 1 9 oo 7
and 1 try by signs and gestures, and in every way that I can
think of, to induce them to come to me. As a matter of fact
they do come—drawn by some strong strange influence; and
I am able to take away people from the islands that had never
before been visited by white people. Occasionally a trader
had visited the place, but that was of no great advantage to
us, for the natives would only trade with them at arm’s
length. Now, from no less than thirty of these islands two
hundred scholars have been tah:en to the school in New
Zealand. The year before last we obtained fifty-two natives
speaking twenty-two languages. We go about our work with
confidence, and they are after a while induced to let us bring
away some of their own people with us. Then you can easily
understand that half the difficulty is over. When the


scholars go back to their islands they become interpreters for
us in communicating with their countrymen. What they tell
them is probably something of this kind : —“ In the country
we have been living in we have seen no quarrelling—nobodv
is killed. We could walk half a dozen miles without being
molested. Wherever we went the white people were kind to
us—where we lived we could sleep all night; there was no
necessity to get up twenty times to see if there were any
enemies coming to hurt us; we have been living in
friendliness and peace all these months. ” Every notion which
the scholars thus received would be a religious notion ; and
although they were not yet connected with any particular
doctrines of Christianity, there is a beginning made —there
was confidence instead of hatred. That is a great thing to
begin with. I have had this happen to me at the Mission
College:—l have taken a walk for some miles with some of
these lads, and they have said to me, perhaps half a dozen
times, “ How nice it is being here ! What a nice walk we
have had.” At first I did not understand the meaning of the
observation, but I afterwards found that it simply meant
this:—•“ What a delightful thing it is that we can actually
walk two miles from home, without any one rushing out of
the bush to knock us down.” Well, of course they are
learning a good lesson. And to bring people from these
islands to a place where they can live in perfect harmony and
peace and contentment, —what good lesson is there that can
exceed that? In the meantime we are trying to teach them
to read and write; we are trying to draw out into distinct
statements the foundation that these lessons leave—lessons that
were actually taught in the life of our Lord. We are not
going to withhold doctrinal teaching when it can be imparted.
But what would be the use of teaching vague words and forms
to which the scholars would attach no meaning ? Long before
we can talk to them of the doctrines of Christianity, we can
communicate to them new thoughts and feelings; and that
must needs be the beginning of the work. It is true that
there are a few mischievous people amongst them, as indeed
there are in every community. Instead of saying that all the
Maoris are bad, and that all the Melanesians are wild
savages, 1 would say that some Maoris and some Melanesians
are very bad people; and that while some Englishmen are
very good, there are not a few that are very bad—a simple
way of stating it, and a very true one. Believing that these
people have a capacity for improvement, and believing that
they are willing to treat us with friendliness, we go among
them and do succeed in bringing away young people and
sometimes old ones. There the work of education begins.
On going back with the scholars, we then stand in a different
position. The people being friendly we can talk to them.
What we say to them is, “ We come here not to buy things
of you or to sell to you; but we want to teach you something


better than you now know; —we want to teach you not to
quarrel but to live in peace. Come away with ns. These
boys have been with us ; they know what it is. There is no
occasion to be at all afraid; we will give you good clothing
and good food.” And they do come away ; and that is how
we obtain our influence over the scholars. Some scholars we
retain in the school if we find them intelligent enough.
Suppose, for example, there are in the school fifty-two
scholars ; nearly the half of these we shall not wish to bring
back ; they have done us a very good turn, and we shall be
able to count on their assistance when we go to the island
again, as they will never forget the friendliness with which
they have been received; But the remaining five and twenty
we must try, if possible, to keep in the school, and to bring
them into the inner circle, so that they may become the
future teachers and missionaries. We think we shall be able
to keep some of these scholars in New Zealand during the
winter months in future, by supplying them with warm
clothing and warm rooms; then their teaching will go on
better still. But hitherto we have returned with our whole
party from New Zealand at the approach of winter. You
can understand that it is most desirable to keep up the
education of these people without any interruption at all.
For this purpose we ought to be able, when we take the
scholars back, to have a sufficient number of clergymen
connected with the mission to occupy some central spot in
each of the clusters of islands. If there were ten subdivisions
we want to have ten men, each one to occupy his own central
island in the particular cluster of islands, the natives of
which are entrusted to his especial charge. The scholars
would be in New Zealand altogether in the summer, and in
their own islands they would be under their special friend
and pastor during the winter months. That is the full plan
of our mission, but in order to start a new station on any one
of the islands it will be necessary—first, that we should have
taken away some of the natives for two or three years, so
that we may have acquired a considerable knowledge of the
language ; we must have some young men in whose character
we can place confidence; then we must have ascertained
pretty well the character of the island, with regard to the
supply of water and other things; then we may go down to
the island and live there for a few weeks, and if the place is
sufficiently healthy to allow of our staying there longer, and
if all should go on satisfactorily, it will be my duty to say to
the clergyman that I have a desire to leave there—“ You
have your own six or eight scholars; you can confide in them ;
they will give you information of everything about the island;
they w r ill help you in teaching the people.” And that
clergyman would have charge of a particular cluster of islands.
And if there were ten men thus located the work would go
on with tenfold usefulness. Ido not think we could ever


have the complete plan at work throughout, because the great
unhealthiness of the climate would always interrupt it. Ido
not think we could ever carry out the work through the
whole of these groups at once, as it is quite certain that
during the winter months some two or three of thd clergymen
would be so utterly broken down with fever and ague, that it
would be necessary to take them away. At present we have
only been able to try the experiment upon one particular
group of islands, because we have not had the men or the
means to proceed further with the work. We have been
obliged to concentrate our efforts on one particular group,
but that will he quite enough to furnish an illustration of the
working of the present mission; and I can honestly say that
in the work of that particular cluster of islands, we have met
with very great encouragement and comfort. Six years ago
we did not think it right to land on any of the islands of
Banks’ Archipelago, where we have now made our first
attempt in establishing a school. Until we visited the island
the people never went about freely; everybody venturing a
short distance from home, was armed with bow and poisoned
arrows. The first time I walked round the island, after I
had been a few days upon it, as I was coming back along a
narrow path to the spot where I had been obliged to put up
our little boat, I was met by three men with their bows all
drawn. I said, “ Shoot away, it is all right.” They said,
“We heard you had been killed at the other end of theisland,
and we were coming to bring you off.” This will give you
some idea of their shrewdness and cunning. I saw through
their object at once. They wanted to persuade me that the
people at the other side of the island were very unfriendly,
so that they might get for themselves the beads and hatchets
and other things I had brought with me. I, of course,
walked back. I said to them, “I do not come here to make
friends of any one person, but of all. What I want to buy
for food I mean to buy from them as well as from you. My
business is to put down all your quarrelling and fighting.”
Now was not this a very good lesson for them? Long before
I could begin to use anything like phrases which would have
been only vague and unmeaning to them, I gave them
practical lessons of leading a life that, is the same kind of life
that a Christian leads. It would be easy to say to them
afterwards, “Now you are leading a happy, comfortable,
pleasant life. In old times the inhabitants of the island I
came from were just as rude and savage as you were; and the
way in which they came to lead a more peaceful life was just
the same kind of process as I wish to put before you now.”
Then they see at once what my object is, and they are taught
to regard themselves as belonging to the great family of man.
They say, “Here are people who were once in just the same
state as we were ; but they have been taught to build great
ships, to make the nice clothes, and to build fine houses, and


all by the way that they want to teach us.” From being
ignorant, foolish, and quarrelsome, they come to take their
place in the general community, and they begin to entertain
some ideas of progress, they show a little more self respect;
and these notions underlie the regular education of the whole
people. I think you will understand that we thus come to
exercise a real influence for good over the people at large; all
of which, really and truly—as good can only come from the
Author of all good—is the work of God. And inasmuch as
we know that Christ alone is the Mediator between God and
man, it must be the work of Christ and His Spirit. I could
teach these people to utter the sacred name of Christ if I
wanted, but what would be the good of that if they did not
attach the notion to it which rises up in our minds? And
why does it rise up in our minds, but because we have heard
from our infancy the reasons why Christ died upon the cross ?
And if we did not know the object that brought Him from
Heaven, who He was, what He did, and why He died, there
would be no more use in our learning that name than in a
parrot learning it. You must teach the associations and the
thing, and then when your scholars understand the thing you
can take some word in their language and appropriate some
particular name to the expression of the particular associations
which really it is intended to convey to their minds. That
is in a few words our whole system ; and inasmuch as at first
we can only teach by our lives and examples, we need the
special prayers of all Christian men and women and children ;
because there is a special responsibility resting upon us who
are the sole witnesses of the truth amongst these people.
Why, any mistake on our part, any hasty expression of anger
may be injuring, for ever perhaps, some of those people who
are regarding us as the only witnesses to the truth of the new
religion that is being brought to them ; and if they cease to
have confidence in us in whom would they place confidence ?
and if we unnecessarily place obstacles in their minds to the
reception of Christianity, just conceive the fearful injury that
would be done to them. If we were to teach them a whole
host of vague unmeaning words, which after a little wdfile
they might see themselves to be very inadequate exponents of
the truths that underlie them, or find to be applied by us to
quite different ideas to those with which they had associated
them, I do not think that we should be fulfilling our duty to
God or them. Our duty is, as far as in us lies, to teach them
the practical lessons of Christianity—love to God and
to man—and to teach them that Christ alone
is the mediator between God and man—that every
blessing from God comes through Him, and that every prayer
and good thought naturally rises to Heaven through Him.
But the question is, how to teach it ? And it is not to be
taught by merely speaking about it, even did their language
contain the words that would readily express these ideas.


Our duty is first of all to show them what a Christian life is;
and then, by carefully examining the language, to search for
the most suitable words to express Christian ideas, and to
appropriate them to those ideas already imparted, to teach
them the meaning of repentance, the meaning of faith, and
the meaning of all those words so common with us, but not
on that account so well understood by us. For how often
amongst us is the unfortunate use of words to which we each
attach what we think the proper meaning a fruitful source of
controversy and dispute. I want each word that I use to
convey a certain idea to them, and no other ; and until I feel
perfectly certain that that word really does convey that idea
I had better not use it at all; otherwise, I might give a
wrong turn to their religious belief. Well, by taking away
scholars from the islands to be with us for six months in
New Zealand, and on taking them back to locate clergymen
in each group of islands, we hope to keep up the work mere
continuously. At present there is a school in only one of
the islands. I have given you some idea of what the state of
that island once was. People much older than [am would
say to me. “May I walk with you to-day?” They had
never before been two miles from their homes, and under the
protection of this white man they were able to see their own
island. Some time ago I was walking with a lad across his
island, and he took the wrong path ; it was only three-quarters
of a mile from his own village, and he confessed to me that
he had never been there before in his life. But now, thank
God, we have had for the last two years natives sent to our
central school from every island of that archipelago, and the
people are living peacefully and securely. At one time, it
was impossible for the people to feel at all secure, when they
went away from their own doors. I have seen in one island a
stream of water; and when a woman used to go down to it
with her calabash, a distance of only a hundred and fifty yards,
her husband used to watch her with his bow and poisoned
arrows lest some one should pounce upon her, and carry her
away. But when I walked through the island the other day,
I did not meet with a single person armed. The people had
not only learned to put an end to quarrelling when we were
there, but even when there was no member of the mission
party there, they have settled their quarrels without bloodshed.
There is another point that I wish to direct attention to. In
some of the islands we find—as it was in New Zealand in the
wildest times—certain people who seem to possess a kind of
right, like the heralds of old, by which they are able to go
about, and are treated with a certain amount of respect; and
they have consequently a great influence in banding together
the people of the different islands. Then, again, you find
these very people living on the southern coast of an island,
who, in consequence of some feuds that had been carried on
for years, could not move two miles upon their own island;


but they had made the acquaintance of people thirty or forty
miles off, because they could move about in their canoes.
That is an excellent thing for us, because these men speak
not only their own language but also that of the other coasts
that they are accustomed to visit. This greatly modifies the
suspicion and distrust which exist in a certain degree on the
whole of the islands. I must just go on to say that we
have some knowledge of some four or five and twenty dialects ;
that in thirty or forty of these islands we go about as 1 have
stated; that we have visited about seventy islands, and have
taken scholars from about forty of them. Therefore we have
all the machinery necessary for our operations ; and we are
looking out for some central spots that will be available for
carrying on our work in the winter. I must also give you a
few proofs of the intelligence and capacity of the islanders.
There are belonging to Banks’ Islands about eight or nine
people who have been baptised, and seven of them I was able
to confirm last year. Now, of course, you must in this matter
accept my statements without being able to test them, but I
do really think that these seven people who have been
baptised and confirmed, could write down in their own
language as satisfactory an account both of their Christian
faith and of the duties which a Christian ought to be daily
exercising, as a clergyman would be content to accept of
ordinary candidates for confirmation in England or in this
country. I think that some of them could do a great deal
more : they exhibit a capacity of thought and reflection which
is not always possessed even by educated people. As an
illustration of this, I may mention the case of a young man
named Edmund Baratu, who is, perhaps, the ablest of all my
scholars, with the exception, perhaps, of another lad named
Henry Tagalana. I remember some time ago I was going to
translate one of the parables, and I began, “The kingdom of
heaven is like—.” I stopped short there, because I thought
to myself how can the scholars know anything about the
kingdom of heaven ? It took me a fortnight, an hour-and-a-
half each day, to explain to them some portion of the
meaning of that phrase I gave them the notion of a king, a
person of great authority and power, which he exercised
towards those who were subject to him, and who were
obliged to obey him. Then, of course, speaking about God,
I said that He was a king from all eternity. When I went
away for a little while they had to write a short essay on
the subject. The essay of Baratu was, I thought, the best.
He gave an exceedingly good account of all the points that I
had touched upon, especially as to the contrast between an
earthly and a heavenly kingdom, as to the universality of the
kingdom of God. But the lad was puzzled with one thing ;
he said, “If I understand the idea of a king aright, it is that
of one exercising authority on those that are without him.
iNow, God is an everlasting King, but in the beginning, when


there were no angels, no created universe, how could He be a
King, as there was nothing on which He could exercise His
authority at all ? Why, to God all things are present; there
is no past or future with Him ; though as yet there were
neither angels nor men created, yet He in His Divine Mind
contemplated as it were the existence of these creatures.”
And then he brought in as an illustration that passage, “The
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world”. Ido not mean
to say that he supplied this answer from original thought; I
suppose I must at some time have said something of the kind ;
but it showed great power of thought in the lad to reproduce
it. And he proceeded to refer to the case of the architect in
whose mind the finished building exists, although the
o undations are not laid. That was very good reasoning for a
Melanesian lad fourteen years of age. When I tell you that that
is a fair specimen of the youths, 1 may fairly say that there is no
lack of capacity for being taught on the part of the
Melanesian people. I may truly say that I never give what
might be considered an elementary lesson, but the intercourse
with the native scholars leads me to understand what I teach
better than I understood it before. I consider, therefore,
that their intelligence and capacity may be taken for granted.
Now let me give an instance or two to show the moral
earnestness displayed by the students. A lad named William
Pasvarong came away with us to New Zealand ; he was not
very clever, but he was what you would call a good boy. He
was with us only one year, and we lost sight of him for
eighteen months. I was at that island again windbound, and
saw the little fellow coming towards me, he seemed very
happy, and we sat down and talked together, and he told me
he wanted to come with me again. Well, he went away
with me, and three years afterwards I visited the place again,
as it was awkward to get at. I then told the boy that, as I
could not come there twice, if he wanted to return with me I
would put him on shore that night, and he must return early
the next morning. V» e went on shore, and slept together in
the same little hut. The little fellow sat up all night,
talking to his own relations, telling them what had happened
since he had been away ; he was ready to start with us the
next morning at six o'clock, and he came away with us for
another year. The next time I visited the island he only
remained two days at home, and came off with us again.
I think that may be fairly quoted as a proof of a real
earnestness on the part of the lad. Whether he had the
power of writing down the ideas that passed through his
mind, I do not care to inquire. I said to him, “If your
friends say it is unkind in you to go away, you can say
it would be unkind in you to stop, for in three or four years
you can qualify yourself to teach them what you have learned.”
1 may mention another lad of the name of Tagalana. I told
him that I wmuld cali for him in a few w r eeks in the mission


vessel. So I did ; but I found that the little fellow had
already taken advantage of a calm and paddled across to the
adjacent island ; and when I went to the school, there I found
my little friend. If that does not show some desire of being
instructed and some sense of gratitude for having been
treated with kindness and love, I do not know where it
could be looked for. It certainly establishes the fact that,
not only is there intellectual capacity amongst these people,
but also that they have a sincere desire to learn, from the
consciousness of having received benefit from the teaching.
I never think of asking the scholars whether they mean to
stay at the school in the central island ; it is for them to take
advantage of the teaching they receive until such time as we
can say to them, “ Now you can go away and stay among
your own people, because you are able to do them good.”
These people are treated by us in the only way which can
give them any real chance of becoming useful among their
own people ; we are trying to give them the same advantages
that any English parent would give to his own child. There
is no line of demarcation drawn between the white and the
black; we never ask a Melanesian to do anything that we
would not do ourselves. Although it is not worth my while
to clean my own shoes every day, still I do it from time to
time, to show that there is nothing derogatory in it; and
although I do not cook every day, it is just as well for me to
go into the kitchen from time to time ; otherwise, the lads
might entertain the notion that we white men wanted to
make them our fags, which would be absolutely fatal to our
success. If I may be allowed to make this criticism, I would
say, that if you would look into the causes of most of the
failures that have occurred in the attempt to improve the
native races, it would be found that they had arisen from not
treating the black race precisely as the white race is treated.
Why should the son of a chief of a Melanesian island be told
that he is to be the fag of some English boy whose father
never had the rank enjoyed by the Melanesian chief?
There is one thing that above all others distinguishes the boys
in our school; it is an utter absence of sanctimoniousness.
A boy would not do behind my back what he would not do
in my presence ; he would never put on a solemn face because
he saw me coming round the corner. They have a thorough
confidence in their teachers; and they are genuine boys ;
there is nothing affected or constrained in their movements.
There is really a good moral tone in the school; there is a
feeling of principle among the boys. They remind me of the
boys at Eton who would put down anything mean or
cowardly. That is the kind of thing in our school.
I know of Melanesian lads who, without saying a word to me,
or to any other clergyman, would by their own sense of what
is right put down things that they know to be wrong. It is
right for me honestly to say that all this is not so much


owing to me as to the Rev. Mr. Pritt, a clergyman of my
own age, who has very carefully studied boys’ nature, and it
is to him that the present good organisation of the school is
entirely owing. I know what a blessing he is, and what good
he does, to the school. I have already told you that the
islanders come from places adjacent to your own coast. Ours
is the only Church of England mission work in the South
Seas, with the exception of the work at Honolulu, which is
twenty degrees north of the line. Moreover, it is the only
missionary work within many degrees of latitude, from the
north of Eromanga right down as far as Borneo itself.
X think that that fact constitutes a distinct claim on your
prayers and your alms. I hope I have been able to satisfy
you as to the intellectual capacity of these islanders, as to
their moral earnestness, and as to the good moral tone
existing in the school at present. Ido not ask you to place
confidence in me, but I do ask you to place confidence in
my good chief, the Bishop of New Zealand. If he is
not a man to be trusted, you will not find a man that is.
The plan that I have been explaining to you is his own plan.
Of course I have not been so foolish as to do anything
without consulting him. I have also consulted Sir William
Martin, whose wisdom, and knowledge- of these matters,
and long experience, give him a right to be listened
to. I do testify to you. that if you go the right way
to work in dealing with the native races, if you treat
them with entire confidence—assume the existence in
them of those instincts which belong to them as human
beings, and seek to elicit from them all their latent yearnings
and cravings after something better than what they at
present possess,—recognising in them a sense and a power of
appreciating truth, —not troubling yourself with arguments
about their superstitious practices, but stating the positive
truth, and trusting to that truth to win a power in their
hearts—being careful of everything you do in your intercourse
with them, —never taking any step beyond the correctly
ascertained knowledge of subjects you speak about, —and
being content to proceed cautiously rather than aiming to
produce speedy results—you may, under God’s blessing, lay
the sure foundations upon which native churches may be built
in Melanesia to last for ever.


REPORT
or TBI
MELANESIAN MISS I 0 N,
From 1 July, 1862, to 31 December, 18G2.
Since the last report was written, it hat pleased God
to visit us with great blessings and great sorrows also. It
has been indeed a very critical time, testing severely the
character not only of our Melanesian Scholars but of «ur
whole Mission party.
We returned towards the close of the year 1862 at the
commencement of the New Zealand summer, with the
largest party of scholars that we had ever gathered
together ; no less than 52 from 23 Islands, speaking more
than as many languages.
The summer was very dry ; the weather unusually
settled, and the health of the whole party exceedingly
good for several months. School-work went on vigorously;
old scholars made rapid progress; seven of them were
baptized on January 6, 1863; some of the new dialects
were partially learnt, and we were all hopeful and in full
swing of work.
In February the new Mission Schooner Southern Cross
arrived after a safe and speedy passage from England ;
and this seemed to fill up the measure of our joy and
thankfulness.
The fine weather had broken up not long before, and
now heavy rain fell for some days together.
And then came a grievous trial and sorrow upon us,
A terrible form of dysentery broke out among our scholars.
The dining-hall was turned into a hospital, and the new
Mission vessel into a quarantine ship. Fifty out of
fifty-two of our scholars, during the next seven weeks,
were attacked by the disease; six of them died: it seemed
at one time as if none could survive. Well do we
remember the kindness of the Rev. J. F. Lloyd,
Dr. Dalliston, and other good friends who rendered all
the assistance in their power, which medical skill and
careful nursing cculd supply. The Primate of New
Zealand was absent when the sickness first broke out,
but soon we had his help also. The resources of the
Mission party were severely tried indeed. God in his
mercy preserved all the English and three out of four of
the Norfolk Island members of the Mission from sickness.
All day long and late into the night they worked, cutting
firewood, fetching water, providing every kind of food for
the sick. Never was there so much cleanliness, order and


regularity in the kitchen, where Mr. Pritt and Mr. Palmer
passed <their whole time; all hospital comforts were
supplied at all hours for the poor sufferers, of whom S 7
at one time were in a most precarious state. Indeed
through it all, and it was a terrible time, there was a
strange kind of happiness; every one worked with all his
heart and will, and in the midst of all the trials we
experienced many blessings.
\Ve sailed for the Islands as soon as the disease had
worn itself out and the convalescent patients could be
moved.
The vessel answered all our expectations, fast and
weatherly and remarkably easy.
But the season was very unfavourable for a long
voyage ; the weather was rough and rain fell incessantly;
instead of the steady Trade wind we ha d a succession of
calms and squalls ; the yam crop had partially failed from
the unusual character of tire season; and soon after
Mr. Pritt and Mr. Palmer, with others, had been landed
at Mota, an epidemic broke out in the Island, influenza
with low fever and dysentery, which made it necessary to
remove the whole party. In consequence of this, we were
unable to pay a long visit to the Solomon Islands, for our
vessel was already nearly full, and it would riot have been
prudent to cruise about for any length of time in these
very hot latitudes with a large and somewhat sickly party
already on board. For the same reason we were not able
to re-visit on our homeward voyage the New Hebrides
Islands, to which we had returned our scholars on our
outward voyage. We made our way as quickly as the
unfavourable weather permitted, to New Zealand,
bringing a small party of about 35 scholars from the
Bank's Islands, and a few others from Ysabel Island in
the Solomon Group.
The cold weather—for we had arrived in New Zealand
in Au gust—did not injure the health of our scholars; and
again everything went on brightly and happily for several
months. The same seven scholars who had been baptized
in January, 1863, were now confirmed: we had more
leisure than usual for working up various dialects from
our MSS books ; and great advance was made in the
general management of the school.
But towards the end of the summer the same dread
disease attacked us. The whole year was a very unhealthy
one; many English people, especially young children,
died from dysentery in Auckland and the neighbourhood.
The medical men say that they have never known so
much sickness. It fell heavily upon our Melanesian
scholars, who have little constitutional vigour to bear
them up against severe illness.


Sir George Grey most kindly allowed us to move
down to Kawau v a small Island belonging to him, about
25 miles North of Auckland.
There the same scenes of suffering and anxiety once
again took place. I, who was absent in Australia during
this second visitation of sickness, well know what my dear
friends went through : I thank God who has given me
such fellow-labourers, whose knowledge of what ought to
be done, and whose power of doing it, were equal to their
patient care and tender love for the poor sufferers. One
lad had died from consumption and one from dysentery,
when I was compelled to leave Kohimarama to pay a
long-promised visit to the Australian Dioceses. When 1
returned after three months, I found that six more
scholars had passed away from amongst us.
We had never before been so tried. Fourteen scholars
have died in twelve months. Often we had thought that
some trial must come soon: and God sent it in the most
merciful way We may be tried—He only knows—by
the far more bitter sorrow of seeing old scholars fall away
and the early faith of young converts grow cold. The trial,
and it is a heavy one, has been given in the way in which
we could best bear it now ; and with the trial we, of ail
others, ought most to acknowledge that we have received
a blessing.
Of my visit to Australia I cannot find time to write
fully. It is not easy to express what is very deeply felt.
At the very time that the sad sickness of our scholars
in New Zealand was causing such great anxiety, the
Church of Australia, in Adelaide, in Melbourne, in Sydney,
and Brisbane, was pledging itself to the support of the
Mission. The sickness was a transient though a very
great sorrow'; the adoption of the Melanesian Mission as
the special mission work of the Church of Australia, will,
by the grace of God, prove a permanent source of gladness
and blessing to millions in all ages.
£3 O
Everywhere the fullest opportunity was afforded for
making known the circumstances of the Mission ; and
everywhere the plan originated and for many years carried
on by the Bishop of New Zealand was recognized as a
plan practicable in itself and well suited to the w r ants of
the case. Collections in aid of the Mission were made to
the amount of more than a thousand pounds, in addition
to which a plan for insuring the Mission vessel was
suggested by a gentleman in Sydney, which w r as at once
adopted and put into execution. Much assistance was
rendered in other ways by those who procured stores for
the Mission vessel at cost price and forwarded them free
of charge.


Indeed it is not only by actual money payments, but by
supplying the many articles of food or barter that are
required for our school and work among the islands, that
most valuable assistance can be rendered to the Mission.
I shall have, I trust, leisure before long to enter somewhat
more fully into these matters. T cannot now attempt to
express my deep feelings of thankfulness for an amount of
encouragement and support far beyond what I had dared
to anticipate.
One point only, as of primary importance I may
particularize, viz. the prospect of a Branch Institution at
Curtis Island on the East Coast of Queensland.
If only the climate of that island be found suitable, no
more desirable spot could be found for the purposes of
the Mission.
a. Curtis Island is not only much nearer than New
Zealand to Melanesia, but the ordinary wind from the
S.E. is a fair wind to or from most of the islands of
Melanesia, reducing very greatly the length of the voyages
and enabling us therefore to visit the various clusters of
islands more frequently.
b. The climate is semi-tropical, so that we could keep
a permanent school there, and grow our own yams, etc.
thus economizing the expenditure of the Mission.
c. We may hope by God's blessing that by living at
Curtis Island we may be brought into communication with
the natives of that part of Australia, and ultimately, if it
be God's will incorporate the Australians into our
Melanesian school.
There are many points to be considered before we can
be in a position to speak w ith any degree of certainty on
this matter. But lam bound thankfully to acknowdedge
the many earnest promises of co-operation, that I every
where received, from many persons most anxiously desiring
that some efforts should be made in this direction to help
the aboriginal inhabitants of Australia.
Whether in years to come the head-quarters of the
Mission may be transferred to the East coast of Australia
or not, the connexion with New Zealand can never cease.
It may be one of the many marvels of God's Providence
that men are sometimes permitted to see, that the Gospel
first brought by Rev. S. Marsden from Australia to
New Zealand, should in no long time be carried from
New Zealand to Australia.
Let us all earnestly pray and by the grace of God
work together for the consummation of this blessed hope.
But let us not indulge. expectations of great results ; let
us be content to wait patiently His own good time, using
faithfully the means which He supplies, and leaving all
issues in the hands of Him who alone can control them.


APPENDIX.
MEL AN ESI A N MISSION A CCOU N TS.
1862-3.
fhe statement of Accounts requires some explanation.
Hitherto our financial year has been reckoned from Ist.
July to 80th. June of the following year.
But this having been found inconvenient, inasmuch as
we are always at sea during the month of June, we have
brought up the accounts to the end of 1863, in order that
henceforth the years account may be reckoned from
January to December.
The money upon which the Bills on England are
drawn has been provided mainly by the great liberality of
the subscribers in England to the Eton Fund.
has been paid by them in each of the two last years into
the Mission account. Miss Yonge's Daisy Chain
continues to bear goodly blossoms ; JM6J has just been
paid into the account from that source. The d vidend
upon JP3OOO in the English fund, and various subscriptions
complete the sum paid into an account at Messrs. Herries
and Earquhar, but no statement of the account has been
received from that Firm.
Some few items, e.g. kitchen and school expenses, can
hardly be separated, the one from the other, with exact
nicety ; there are some expenses which may as well belong
to one head as the other, but the average expenditure for
the maintenance of the school is equally apparent.
The Treasurer will be much obliged to any one who
will point out any error in the Accounts. Owing to the
great arrears of business caused by the necessity of
attending to the sick, etc. it is not improbable that there
may be some few erroneous entries.


TREASURER IN ACCOUNT WITH
From July 1, 1862, to December 31, 1863.
RECEIPTS.
I. interest on money in the Bank
11. BILLS OK ENGLAND
By the Primate of New Zealand (to
close the account between him and
Bishop Pattesoa) ... 307 16 6
By Bishop Patteson ... 200 0 0
“ “ ... 300 0 0
“ “ . - - 200 0 0
u a
200 0 0
111. CONTRIBUTIONS.
(1.) NEW ZEALAND.
1. Diocese of New Zealand —
(a.) Offertories:
St. Mary’s, Parnell - - - 115 6
Do. do 21 1 0
St. Paul’s, Auckland - - - 23 7 6
Do. do. - - 20 18 0
St. Matthew’s, Auckland - - 11 13 I
Do. do 7 12 5
St. Peter’s, Onehunga - - - 4 8 0
St.jStephen’s, Taurarua - - - 8 12 6
St." John’s College - - - 3 0 0
St. Thomas’, Tamaki - - - 4 0 0
Panmure - - - - 1 10 0
Wairoa Road - - - - 0 10 0
Otahuhu - - - - - 192
Ho wick - - - - - 5 10 0
Pakaraka - - - - 10126
Waimate - - - - 12 40
Monganui - - - ■ 3 2 6
Otawhao - - - ~ 2 13 6
Raglan - - - - 2 3 0
Taranaki - - - - 32 7 9
187 19 II
b. Donations :
Ven. Archdeacon H. Williams - - ? ,2 !!
Hon. Colonel Kenny - - - *
Do.’ do. - - - * S» 0
Miss Stothard - - - " 6
Anonymous - - - * „ “ ,
/lliuiljrutuuo Q tj
F. Kempthorne, Esq. - - - Inn
Do. Do. - - - - V n n
XJU. - 10 0
Mrs. Nihill - - - - ! ” X
Mr. D. uunter - - - - ? ® J
Mrs. Strange - - - “ } ? o
anio. oiiangc - 110
Mr. G. J. Austin - - - * * ”
O’Neill, Esq.- - - - * ® !J
Rev. J. Kinder j - - - - ? ” n
Rev! T. Lanfear - - - - * ® ®
Mr.'J. Hay ter - - - * *** ?
Mrs Pitt- - - - ■ i J S
nars a itt- - p p O
Per Mr Hunter - - - - ”
Bay of Islands, per Dr Ford - 20 0 0
THE MELANESIAN MISSION.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
2 2 6
1207 16 0
Carried forward 61 7 6 1209 18 9


TREASURER IN ACCOUNT WITH
From July 1, 1862, to December 31, 1863.
EXI ENDITURE.
I. BY BALANCE to AcCOUIIt
11. CAPITAL ACCOUNT
Posts and Rails, and Fencing
Highway Trustees
Books for Southern Cross
59 11 0
18 17 0
5 18 0
111. SCHOOL ACCOUNT
Expenses on shore :
Meat ■
Bread
Biscuit
Flour
131 9 2
85 11 9
3 19 9
6 9 0
Potatoes
Groceries
Clothing
Kitchen Utensils
School Expenses
Printing Materials
Tools -
31 17 0
37 17 10
36 16 3
21 14 5
4 4 5
22 6 3
7 2 9
17 14 4
9 10 4
Cruickshank and Smart
Medicines
Expenses on Board
Expenses on Mota Island
108 13 6
7 7 11
532 14 8
M eat
Bread
156 9 2
47 8 10
Groceries
Potatoes
Dairy
28 16 0
30 16 6
16 17 4
Kitchen expenses
12 3 9
School “
Firing “
Gardening “
Medicines
7 118
7 4 0
6 3 6
7 5 3
25 18 1
Clothing
346 14 1 879
SHIP ACCOUNT
Charter of ‘ Sea Bree*e ’ Schooner
Provisions on board do.
525 0 0
97 8 6
Boats
7 18 6
630
Carried forward
THE MELANESIAN MISS I O S.
£ s. d. £
0 7
6 0
S 9
7 0
£1859 2 4


Melanesian Mission Accounts continued —
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Brought forwaid 61 7 6 1209 18 9
J. E. Gorst, Esq. _ , . 20 0 0
Taupiri Mission Station . _ 6 0 0
6 0 0
H. N. - . . . 45 8 0
Hon. H. Sewell - . _ . 10 0 0
Mr. C. A. Harris . . _ 2 2 0
Fetrard, Esq. - . . _ 5 0 0
Dr Watling . . _ _ 5 0 0
Parengarenga Collection - . . I 10 8
Te Pupuki . . _ _ 1 I 0
Te Tonae - . . _ u 18 2
Hon. vi . Swainson . . . 5 q 0
Ven. Archdeacon Maunsell . . 4 6
Matthews, Esq. . . . 1 0 U
Sir Wm. Martin - . . _ 10 0 0
St. Mary’s Visitors Account - . 4 0 4
I>°. do. . . . 11 11 o
Anonymous (T&ranaki) . . . 2 0 0
C. Davis, Esq. . . . . 210 0
-Hev. R. H. Codrington - . . 10 0 0
Bliss Biundy - . _ _ 10 0
Bliss VVatson - _ . _ 10 0
Ven. Archdeacon Maunsell - . 10 0
Soldiers Pith. Regt. _ . . i 5 ()
Soldiers - . . _ _ 8 10
A 'lhank Offering _ . . 160 0 0
Mrs. Hetley . - . . 10 0 0
306 0 6
Annual Subscriptions
S. H. ford, Esq. . . . 2 0 0
Capt. Kingston - - . _ 2 0 0
H. F. Andrews, Esq. . . . 5 0 0
Rev. T. Danfear - - . _ 2 0 0
E. 15. Dickson, Esq. . . _ 110
Mrs Black - - . _ 0 6 0
„ A. Buckland . . . 0 10 0
Mr Beveridge - - . _ 0 5 0
Miss Beveridge - - . _ 0 5 0
Bits Cadman - - . . 110
„ Chapman - - - . 010 0
„ Corbett - - - - 0 10 0
~ Domett - - . . I 10 0
Biiss Drury - - . _ 0 5 0
E. Drury - . - . 0 10 0
Blr Dyer - - . . o 10 0
Bits Dacre - - . . 1 0 0
Bliss A. Dyer - - . . 0 2 0
Bir. Fendelow - - - . 10 0
Bliss Fairburn - - - _ 0 5 0
BDs. Flower - - - . 10 0
J. 81. Flower - - - _ 0100
Blrs H. Gilberd - - . .. 0 5 0
„ Hargreaves - - - . 0 10 0
„ Hamilton - - - . 010 0
„ Hobson - - . . 0 10 0
„ Hamer - - - . 0 5 0
„ Jones - - - . 0 10 0
j, Krippner - - - - 010 0
81. J. Daw - - . . 0 5 0
Blrs Blould - - - _ 10 0
„ T. McFarlane - - - 10 0
Carried forward
27 4 0 1209 18 9


Melanesiun Mission Account continued —
V. 1 SOUTHERN CROSS ACCOUNT
Repairs
41 0 8
Provisions in harbour - - - 28 9 6
Stores - - - -95 132
Insurance - - - •• 106 IS 4
Wages - - - - 161 3 11
Stores - - - -761
VI. WAGES
78 0 0
36 15 6
VI I. BUILDING ACCOUNT
-119 7 8
55 0 0
VIII. ARTICLES OF BARTER
IX. STIPENDS—
Rev. L. Pritt
-300 0 0
-110 0 0
-130 0 0
Rev. B. T. Dudley
Rev. T. Kerr
Rer. J. Palmer
Carried forward
£ s. d. £ "s. d.
Brought forward 1859 2 4
440 6 7
114 15 6
174 7 S
38 0 0
£3206 11 8


Brought forward
Mr McFarlane
Miss Mercer
Mrs Nation
~ Read
Miss Read
Mrs Stratford
~ Strange
~ Sillery
„ Sanderson
„ Taylor
Mrs Tabuteau
~ Vaughan
Miss Vibert
Mr H. Vibert
Mrs Wright
Mr Woodham
Mrs J. Williamson
Anonymous
2. Diocese'of Waiapu —
Collection at Whakato, Turanga ££
Runanga at Turanga ££ ££ ££
Waerengaahika, Turanga ££ ££
Teira Kupu “ ££ ££ ££
W. Fere “ “ “ “
Hemara Turangiaho ££ ££ ££
Paora Kaupa ££ ££ £t “
Sums under 2s Od at Waerengaahika ££
Bishop of Waiapu ££ ££ u
Ven. Archdeacon W. L. Williams ££
Miss M. Williams ££ “
Miss Turin ££ « « ‘ c
Rev. E. B. Clarke “ “ ‘ £
W. B. Whitirangi “ <£ ££
Hohepa Paraoue £< “ ce
Rev. S. M. S. Tarawera “ u
Wi. T. Te.Ngarara ££ ££ ££
Eamahona Te Awhi ££ ££ ££
Wi. Hoeta Paetoru, Maketu ££ ££
Rev. C. S. Volkner ££ ££ ££
W. P. Te Whakamatae ££ ££
Other Native contributions at Synod ££
3. Diocese of Wellington —
St. Paul’s, Wellington ££ ££
St. Peter’s, ££ ££ “
St. James’, ££ ££ “ £ ‘
St. Peter’s School ££ ££ ££
St. Peter’s Sunday School ££ ££
Bishop of Wellington ££ ££ ££
Mrs Abraham ££ ££ ££ ££
Hon. Justice Johnston £ * ££ ££
H. St. Hill, Esq. ££ . ££ ££
G. Moore, Esq. ££ ££ ££
Rev. F. Thatcher ££ ££ ££
St. Jchn’s, Napier ££
Christchurch, Whaaganui ££ ££
J. Markham Carter, Esq. ££
Carried forward
Melanesian Mission Accounts continued —
1 0 0
0 2 6
1 0 0
0 10 0
0 10 0
2 0 0
1 0 0
10 0
0 10 0
I 0 0
0 10 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
1 0 0
0 10 0
I 0 0
1 0 0
2 8 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
0 2 6
0 4 0
0 3 6
0 2 U
2 9 6
1 0 0
1 0 0
0 5 0
0 5 0
0 10 0
0 5 0
0 4 0
0 10 0
0 2 6
0 2 6
0 14 o
0 10 o
0 3 0
1 4 0
16 13 9
8 11 3
5 5 0
3 6 10
1 3 7
5 5 0
5 5 0
5 0 0
5 0 0
1 I 0
5 0 0
7 io o
2 13 6
£ s. d £ 9. d
27 4 0 1209 18 9
42 16 6 616 16 11
17 o o
3 5 1 75 0 0
1919 0 8


Melanesian Mission Accounts continued —
£ s. d.
Brought forward
3206 11 8
Carried forward
£3206 11 8


Brought forward
4* Diocese of Nelson —
J. M. Butt, Esq. u ££ (C
Bishop’s Chapel ££ “ u
Do. Do. “ “ u “
Christchurch, on 3 Holy Days, and
Alms Box ££ ££ <£
Diocesan Collections ££ ££ c£
Small sums ££ u u u
IMotueka, per Miss Greenwood ££ ££
Do. do. “ « “
Per Bishop of Nelson ££ u £C
Alms Box “ “ “ “
Do. Do. ££ “ “ <•
Nelson Sunday School
Teachers per Mrs. Greenwood ££ u
5. Diocese of Christchurch—
a. Canterbury :
Donations to General Account u “
Do. to Ship Account <c u
Maori Collection per Rev J. W. Stack “
Timsru Sujjday School iC u
Dioctsgaa Collection “ c ‘ (t
K. Jackson, Esq—
“ Jackson Melanesian Scholarship ” u
“ Christ’s College Boys Melanesian
Scholarship ” per H. T. Dudley, Esq.
b. Otago —
Goodwood and Waikowaiti
For 1862 “ “ “
Do. for 1862 « C£ ££
St. John’s Church, 1863 u
Dunedin Parish “ “
(2.) CONTRIBUTIONS. AUSTRALASIA
1. Melbourne —
Per Jas. Spowers Esq. u Cf
St. Peter’s Juvenile Missionary Society
2. Adelaide —
Per F. Wicksteed, Esq. “
Do. Do. u “
3. Tasmania —
Bishop of Tasmania “ “
S. John’s, Hobart Town ££
All Saints’, „ £f ££
Trinity, „ ££ ££
Pen tie ££ ££ ££
u
u
ec
ec
Pontville ££ i £ ££
Richmond ££ . <£ ££
Hamilton ££ ££ ££
The Ouse ££ ££ ££
Franklin Village u ££
Carried forward
CC
CC
CC
cc
cc
cc
Melanesian Mission Aceounts continued
1 0 0
3 11 7
1 7 0
7 2 3
44 6 9
1 1(> 6
4 9 6
6 0 0
3 0 0
2 6 0
0 15 10
16 13 8
60 0 0
35 0 0
10 0 0
2 15 0
90 0 0
Id 0 0
10 0 0
217 15 0
5 6 4
0 17 4
6 3 7
23 14 0
13 19 6
5 0 0
18 19 6
87 6 7
15 10 10
102 17 5
5 0 0
7 5 2
4 6 6
2 4 0
1 2 1
2 5 7
2 4 0
1 9 0
1 11 0
10 11
£ s. d. £ s. d.
19190 8
92 10 I
36 1 3 253 16 3
28 8 3 2265 7 0


Brought forward
Carried forward
Melanesian Mission Account continued —
£3206 II 8


Melanesian Mission Accounts continued ■—
Brought forward
Swansea u “ “ “
New Norfolk “ « “ “
Sunday School Box, St. John’s,
Hobart Town “ ec “
2nd. Donation u “ u
d. Norfolk Island cc (C u
Do. do. “ “
(3.) CONTRIBUTIONS. ENGLAND.
5 0 9
0 19 2
30 18 10
66 9 6
14 14 6
3 3 6
Wantage “ “ “
S.P.G. Special Donation “ u
S.P.G. Appropriated do. “ “
Steyning, Sussex “ “ “
Rev. P. L. D. Acland “ “
Offering, St. Mary “ “ “
J. H. K. Marriage Offering “ <c
Sir Wm. Heathcote “ “ “
G. Wollaston, Esq. £ ‘
Miss Patteson “ “ li
Rev. J. F. Armitage “ u
5 0 0
A Clergyman, per Miss Weale u
J. Cooper, Esq. “ “ “
Wm. Selwyn, Esq. “ “ “
Mrs. Smith, per Rev. S. Blackburn “
Miss Barlow “ “ 11
S.P.G. Grant (4 year)
Windsor (ship) “ “ “
SALES.
Sale of Reports
Sale of Horse
V. FARM ACCOUNT “ “
VI. Bishop Patteson, Private Account “
Per S.P.G. Evesham Cf cc u 4 0 0
Elford “ “ « 10 18 3
Cadbury c< (C te 2 13 0
Evesham u u “ 4 0 0
Wantage “ “ “ 2 0 0
S.P.G. Special Donation “ “ 9 0 0
7 15 10
0 10 0
10 0 0
3 5 10
90 0 0
1 0 0
2 0 0
10 0 0
0 10 0
21 0 0
5 0 0
1 0 0
2 0 0
100 0 0
5 0 0
3 10 6
35 0 0
£ s. d. £ s. d,
28 8 3 2265 7 0
1 2 6
17 18 0 206 45
•296 12 11
38 10 6
138 12 5
300 0 0
£3,245 7 3


Brought forward
X. BALANCE “ “ “ (‘
Melanesian Mission Accounts continued —


MELANESIAN MISSION.
SUMMARY OF RECEIPTS,
From Ist. 1862, to 31s£. December
31 December , 1863.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
I. Interest of Money in Bank - 2 2 9
11. Bills on England - 1207 16 0
111. Contributions,
(1.) NEW ZEALAND
Diocese of New Zealand 616 16 11
“ Waiapu - 17 5 0
“ Wellington - 75 0 0
“ Nelson ♦- 92 10 1
“ Christchurch - 253 16 3
1055 8 3
(2) AUSTRALIASIA.
Melbourne
Adelaide
Tasmania
Norfolk Island
(3), ENGLAND
IV. Sales
T, Farm Account
VI. Bishops Private Account
18 19 6
102 17 5
66 9 6
17 18 0
206 4 5
296 12 11
38 10 6
138 12 5
300 0 0
£3,245 7 3




