

Pens i
iztfwiatous paws
SO* II
:c=*«==«c=34l
cfeSS® #c=r
I||
ccturc
UPON THE
DOCTRINAL EFFECT OF THE REVISED VERSION
OF THE NEW TESTAMENT
JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
Bishop of Melbourne
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
MDCCCLXXXII
PRICE THREEPENCE.


DOCTRINAL EFFECT OF THE REVISED VERSION
OF THE NEW TESTAMENT
I
fe
Z®
a
JAMES MOOR HOUSE, D.D.
I
5
Bishop ojf Melbourne
II
I
!1
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDMEY, AND ADELAIDE
ow
\W.
MDGCiCLXXXI I
tASNy
s-GT^r
PRICE THREEPENCE.


iTtctert
UPON THE
DOCTRINAL EFFECT OF THE REVISED VERSION
OF THE NEW TESTAMENT
JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
Bishop of Melbourne
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
MDCCCLXXXII




LECTURE.
A lecture was given at Sandhurst, by the Bishop of Melbourne, on
Wednesday, the 20th July, 1881, upon “ The Doctrinal Effect of
the Revised Version op the New Testament.” The Bishop
said :
Ladies and Gentlemen, —
I have undertaken a task which somebody, I think, ought to
attempt at this particular time. It is not to give a minute criticism
of the scholarship of the Revision Committee of the New Testament.
That is a task which, considering the eminent character of the
persons composing that committee, any scholar might naturally shrink
from. Nor would the attempt, by whomsoever made, be intelligible
or profitable to nine people out of ten. The people want to know
what changes, if any, have been made, not in the verbal form, but in
the substantial teaching of the New Testament, This they have a
right to ask, and somebody should try to answer this question for
them. Hence the present attempt. I must, however, bespeak your
indulgence, for I fear that in the execution of my task I must appear
not a little tedious to you. My lecture must have the fault of old-
fashioned sermons. It must abound in texts; and, as these quota-
tions have to be made from an unfamiliar book, they cannot be made
from memory, and must involve much turning over of leaves, and
some little loss of time. Since, however, this is a difficulty neces-
sarily inherent in my task, I trust you will make kind allowance for
it. One word let me say first about the title of my lecture. lam
to speak to you about the doctrinal “effect” of the new version.
What I mean is the doctrinal tendency, or drift; for what will
appear as the result of our investigation is rather a tendency than a
solid change which can be expressed in propositions. You may ask,
therefore, why I did not propose to speak to you about the doctrinal
drift of the new version? The title is a much neater one, and
would have looked better on a handbill, but then it might have
misled you. You might have thought that I saw a drift in the mind
of the translators rather than in their work. And this would not be
the fact. More indubitable marks of honesty, of an honest endeavour
to give the exact equivalent of an original, without either doctrinal
•or other bias, I never saw in a translation. Be assured of this—you


have really honest work in the mew translation. The only subjective
element I see in it is a little ttimid conservatism. But then, when
you take into account the impoortance of the sacred documents with
which the committee were dealimg, and their resolve, based upon this
fact, that no change could be madle in the old version without the consent
of two-thirds of the company, tßhe wonder is not that some timidity
appears, but that more of it is mot discernible. One other thing let
me say—l have taken some litttle pains, as much as the time pei-
mitted, to qualify myself for my task. I have read through the
whole of the revised version, amd have noted with some care all the
more important doctrinal changes. If I produce at present only a
selection of these, it is because cour time is limited, and because those
which I have selected enable mie to give a pretty complete survey of
the subject.
With these few prefatory observations, I shall now plunge in mediae
res. I begin with “the last things” first, partly because the altera-
tions in passages relating to eschatology, or the “ science of the last
things,” are amongst the most important and distinct of all which
are made in the new version. In Matthew v. 22, we find “ hell fire”
translated “ the hell of fire,” with the reading “ Gehenna of fire ”
in the margin. I have no doubt at all that here the translators were
wrong. They should have put “ Gehenna ” in the text, and have
made”no mention of “ hell ” whatsoever. But why, you will say 1
Because so many gross and misleading ideas gathered round the word
“hell” in the middle ages. “Hell,” in itself, is a harmless word
enough. It only means a covered place; and with reference to this
meaning of the word, tilers were called helliers (coverers in of a
hollow place) in early English. But in the middle ages hell came
to mean a place full of fire and brimstone, in which souls were
literally burned —a place full of torments and fiends, and all the
horrible paraphernalia of the mediaeval Tartarus. These associations
will always cling to the word, like a parasite that has grown into a
tree. You cannot cut them away; and, therefore, the word ought
not to have been used. For, observe, “ hell ”is no more a translation
of Gehenna than it is of Hades. Hades means “the unseen
world,” or “the under-world;” and in several places (as Matthew xi.
23, Acts ii. 27) the word hell has been exchanged for Hades.
Where “ Gehenna” occurs, hell should in like manner have been
exchanged for Gehenna. Hay, the reason for this change was even
stronger than for the other; for Gehenna has a definite meaning—
it means the Yalley of Hinnom. It is the name of a well-known
valley to the south of Jerusalem, and thus it carries upon its fore-
front the sign that it is nothing more than a symbol. There was a
very dismal swamp, called “Batman’s Swamp,” near Melbourne.
Suppose, then, that, for its filth and horror, it had been adopted by
earlier colonists here as a symbol of the misery of souls cast out
from God. Whenever we had said to an obstinate sinner, “If
you go on in that course you will be in danger of Batman’s
Swamp,” he would have seen that we were speaking symboli-


cally. So it would be with a Jew. When you told him that
he was in danger of the “Valley of Hinnom,” he would know
that you were speaking symbolically. And if, further, you spoke
to him of the “worm” and the “fire” of the Valley of Hin-
nom (as in Mark ix. 33, 34), he would know that you referred
to the corruption and torment of sin in another world under the
images of the rotting carcases of the Valley of Hinnom, and of the
fires kindled there to consume them. It is a very great pity, then,
that the new version relegated the word to the margin which tells
this story. It should have been in the text, and the misleading
word “hell” should have been excluded.
That the Scriptural representations of the future punishment of the
wicked are symbolical is apparent, too, from another circumstance.
The imagery under which it is represented changes in different parts
of Our Lord’s teaching—following, indeed, the imagery of certain
parables in which it occurs. In Matthew xxiv. 51, where the
conduct of the sinner is compared to that of a disobedient slave, the
punishment also is represented as that which a slave would receive.
His master shall “cut him asunder,” or, as the margin has it,
“severely scourge him,” casting him into that prison where there is
“ the weeping and gnashing of teeth.” In the beginning of the
25th chapter of St. Matthew, Our Lord had represented the rejection
of the wicked under the image of the foolish virgins, who were not
allowed to enter into the light and joy of the marriage mansion, but
were shut out into the outer darkness. In a parable, accordingly,
spoken by the Lord at the same time —that of the talents —the
churlish servant is represented as cast into the “ outer darkness,”
where, as before, is “ the weeping and gnashing of teeth.” Again
(Matthew xiii. 42), as the end of the tares is to be burned, so
also the punishment of the wicked is represented under the image
of being cast into the furnace of fire, where, again, is “ the weeping
and gnashing of teeth.” The only symbol which is constant in these
representations is “ the weeping and gnashing of teeth,” made more
emphatic by the proper translation of the definite article. The
great reality represented, then, is sorrow and despair, but the forms
under which this torment is represented vary —now it is a scourging,
now a shutting out into the darkness, and now, again, a casting into
the furnace of fire, the particular form in each case being clearly
determined by the imagery of the context.
It is unnecessary, perhaps, to point out that the representations of
the Apocalypse are all symbolical. The fact stands out on the very
face of the book. It adopts and develops whatever of the symbolism
of Daniel and Ezekiel is most striking and realistic. But who can
doubt that it is symbolism 1 Does anyone ever expect to see a city
1,500 miles high, with enormous gates formed each out of a single
pearl? Or does anyone ever expect to see a “bottomless pit,”
rendered more exactly “ the pit of the abyss 1 ” If so, he must
expect to see also very peculiar locusts ascending out of the smoke of
it—locusts which certainly would have been killed by the fire out of


which they issued, had they been visible and tangible things; locusts
which forsake their natural food, grass and green things, and only go
forth to sting men to death like scorpions; locusts that, above all,
don’t belong to man’s “ future ” life, but to “ this ” life, where there
is grass to avoid, and where there are men to sting. Is it not obvious
that we have here a terrible symbol of the earthly retribution on sin ;
and that in the pit of the abyss we have only an indication that this
retribution shall proceed from the agency of evil 1 The book itself
(chap. xx. 3) teaches us that by “ the pit of the abyss ” is only meant
the secure imprisonment of evil; as also (chap. xix. 20, xx. 10 and 14)
show us that in the “ lake of fire, which is the second death,” we
have nothing more than a symbol of destruction. For what are the
forms which are there said to be cast into the lake of fire 1 Are they
real forms, susceptible of torture, or only ideal forms, susceptible of
destruction ? They are ideal forms pure and simple. One is the
beast—the symbol of Godless force ; another is the false prophet—
the symbol of Godless wisdom ; another is “ Death ” —the impersona-
tion of an accident of human life ; another is “ Hades ” —the" unseen
world. Does anyone think that death or the unseen world is going
to be tortured in that lake of fire 1 No one. Everyone sees that
the meaning is they shall be destroyed. There shall be no more
death or Hades. And why, then, should anyone deny that, when
(chap. xxi. 8) the wicked are said to be cast into that lake, the
meaning is they shall be destroyed, either as to their being, disposi-
tion, or influence 1 Certainly it is the “ drift ”of the new version to
favour these reasonable views of symbolic interpretation. It renders
chap. xvi. 7, for instance, “ I heard the altar saying.” Our version
has it, “ I heard another (angel) from the altar saying.” A talking
altar seemed to be an absurdity to some early copyist of the Greek
text, and so, to make sense of it, he introduced tw'o Greek words
(allou ek). These, however, are not in the best copies, and have
been excluded from the text which the revisers followed. And now,
what is the result of this honesty 1 It plainly proves that the language
used is symbolical; for in symbol you can have either a “ talking-
altar ” or an impersonated Hades.
We have seen what light the new version throws upon the
question of the “ nature” of future punishment. Let us inquire
next if it affects in any manner, and if so, how far, the question
of its “ duration.” The new version retains, we observe, the two
phrases “for ever” and “for ever and ever;” but it gives in the
margin their Greek equivalents—“unto the ages” and “unto the
ages of the ages.” Again I think that the marginal readings ought
to have been in the text. To render these Greek expressions “ for
ever” and “for ever and ever,” is not to translate, but to “interpret”
them. As it stands in the Greek, the expression “ unto the ages ”
represents a future time “indefinitely long;” how long is to be
principally determined by the context in which it occurs. Thus,
when it is said (Luke i. 33) that our Lord shall rule over the house
of Jacob “unto the ages,” the meaning can only be unto the ages


during which such a distinction as that of race and nationality lasts.
But when it is said, as in Revelation iv. 9, that the Lord God liveth
« unto the ages of the ages,” this indefinite expression must be held
to embrace all future ages. A more literal translation of these
expressions would further have revealed their connexion with some
other important passages, which the old version can only be said to
have paraphrased —translating age by world. Such a passage is
Ephesians i. 21. Here the new version translates correctly, not the
“world to come,” but the “age” to come. Doing so it adds
definiteness to the meaning. “ The ‘ world’ to come may be equally
existent now, but the ‘ age to come,’ the age of glory,_ is wholly still
in the future.” It has sometimes been urged that it is allowable to
paraphrase the passages in which such phrases as (eis tons aionas)
occur, because the Greek language furnishes no better equivalent for
the English “for ever.” This is not the case. There are several
Greek words for endless (as ateleutos, aperantos), not one of which is
ever used. Nay, had the sacred writers desired to express strictly
the idea of time without beginning and without end, they could
have done it by a proper use of the word aion. For, as the new
version shows us, this is actually once, but only once, done in the
New Testament. In the last verse of St. Jude’s Epistle, glory is
ascribed to God “ before all time and now, and unto all the ages.”
This absolutely includes “ all duration as we are used to phrase it,
“ from eternity to eternity.” But there is no other passage in the
New Testament where any of the sacred writers uses the adjective
“all” to characterize the ages; a thing which had been easily done
if the design had been to give the idea of endlessness. Well, but
surely, you will say, there is the adjective “ everlasting. But, in
the original, this is only aionios, the adjective formed from the word
we are considering. It is interesting to observe how the latest
translators have dealt with this word. They never translate it ever-
lasting, but always eternal; a word which is related to the Latin
(etas, an age, exactly as the Greek aionios is related to aion, an age.
The ambiguity of the original is thus exactly reproduced in the new
version. And that there is ambiguity in the meaning of this word,
the version very clearly and very honestly reveals to us by trans-
lating, and not merely paraphrasing, as the old version did, certain
remarkable passages. The most remarkable of these are 2 Timothy
i. 9, and Titus i. 2. Here we are told of what happened “ before
times eternal.” Now, if eternal meant here what we commonly
suppose it means —that which is without beginning and without end
this is absolute nonsense, for what could occur before times which
had no beginning 1 If, however, “eternal” here only means ceonicm,
cyclical, dispensational, referring to ages which had their truth to
realize, which realized it and then passed away, all becomes clear,
and all most interesting.
Then it is said that God’s “promise” and God’s “purpose”
existed before all the times, which in their passage have typified,
and partially realized it. There is another possible meaning of the


word “eternal.” It may mean that which in its nature is related to
the “ abiding ” —that which is real, because spiritual. At a very
early period, before the ninth century, some copyist changed the word
“ ontos ” (really, or indeed) into “ aioniou ” (eternal). He might
have done this by mistake, though the form of the words hardly
suggests this. If then, on the contrary, we assume that he made the
alteration purposely, he must have held that the “ real ” was
equivalent to the “eternal.” This equivalence is marked by the
new version of 1 Timothy vi. 19. This passage, which was
formerly translated “ that they may lay hold on eternal life,” now
runs, according to the more correct text, “ that they may lay hold
on the life which is life indeed.” This is very much the meaning
which Mr. Maurice saw in the word “ eternal ” —a meaning which
almost seems to be formulated and explained in Our Lord’s words
(John xvii, 3), “ And this is life eternal, that they should know
Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent.”
These two meanings, then, of the word “eternal,” the “cyclical” and
the “real,” are clearly brought out in the new version; and this
alone shows how thoroughly the revisers were justified in abolishing
the translation “ everlasting.” Everlasting is an interpretation, and
a very “ precarious ” interpretation. And, while speaking of “ condem-
nation,” it is important to remark that the word “ damnation ” has
wholly disappeared from the new version, even as the word “ hell ”
ought to have disappeared. Thus, in Romans xiv., where the
Apostle is considering the question of clean and unclean meats, he
lays it down that it is lawful for a Christian either to eat or to
abstain from eating. But, he adds, let each be persuaded in his
own mind, for he that doubteth is “ condemned ” (not “ damned ”)
if he eat. And “ how ” condemned ? By his own act; for whatever
is not of faith is sin. It is obvious that here there is not a hint of
final damnation. In like manner the word “ damnation ”is banished
from a passage where it has done more harm and caused more
distress to sensitive souls than I could easily describe or you conceive.
“He that eateth,” we read in 1 Corinthians xi. 29, “eateth (not)
‘ damnation,’ but ‘judgment ’ to himself, if he discern not the body.”
And that this judgment is only a temporal one, a “ chastisement ”
sent to “ avert condemnation with the world,” is made quite plain in
verse 32. The word “ damnation ”is excluded even from a passage
where most persons would expect to find it, John v. 28, 29, where we
read in the new version, “ All that are in the tombs shall hear his
voice and come forth ; they that have done good unto the resurrec-
tion of life, and they that have done evil to the resurrection of
judgment; ” whatever that judgment may be, the effect of the
alterations in such passages is to subdue the accent of threatening,
and to rob the awful face of retribution of something of its dread
sternness.
It is natural to ask, next, does the new version throw any light on
the question of a “ possible future probation ” for any of the dead 1
There is very scant reference in Holy Scripture to the state between


■death and judgment. We find in Revelation none of that “ fanatical
particularity,” as Paley calls it, which distinguishes so many false
religions. The parable of Lazarus and Dives is a parable filled with
Jewish imagery, concerning which we cannot do better than remember
the old theological rule —theologia parabolica , non est demonstrativei.
But, saving this passage, there is only one other in the Rew Testa-
ment which can be said to refer directly and specifically to the state
of souls between death and judgment. That, you know, is 1 Peter hi.
18. The old version left it possible to interpret this passage as
meaning that Christ went to the Antediluvians, now in prison, when
they lived on the earth, and by His spirit, through the preaching of
Roah, called them to repentance. The new version, by its more
correct rendering, has destroyed the possibility of such an interpreta-
tion. Here flesh and spirit are so opposed that, as in the Greek, the
word spirit must mean, not “ the Holy Spirit,” but our Saviour’s
human spirit, “in which ” (not by which) He went and preached to
the Antediluvians in prison. We must not make too much of a
single passage, nor press its application beyond its proper scope.
But, bearing these cautions in mind, two things are to be noted.
Pirst, while opening the possibility of change in the state between
death and judgment, our passage describes the means of this change
as purely spiritual. There is not a hint of the gross and carnal
notions of the mediaeval purgatory. It is not by fire, but by preaching,
that souls are called to repentance. Secondly, it is to be observed
that we only hear of the extended spiritual discipline of a particular
class of men. These, it is true, may be only specimens of others.
But if so they suggest to us the continued spiritual discipline of
those whose training was on earth incomplete. What myriads there
must have been in the great overthrow of Roah, to whom, as in all
natural catastrophies, death must have come, so to speak, accidentally.
How can we believe that at such a time, or, indeed, at any time,
natural death always synchronises with the completion of the soul’s
moral trial—that, for instance, no tile falling from a house ever kills
a man except when his will has taken that decided action which
fixes him, “ unto the ages,” either as a friend or an enemy of God 1
Or how can we believe that all the myriads of the heathen, or all the
children in Christian lands who have been brought up by profligate
parents, have come to an end of their moral trial when they suffer
the natural accident of bodily death 1 All these cases it used to be
the practice to hand over to the uncovenanted mercies of God. It
must be a most welcome relief to have some light of revelation, be it
only a gleam, to point out to us the means by which such mercy
reaches its beneficent ends.
I have spoken of the extent of condemnation. The question may
next be asked, does the new version throw any fresh light on the
extent of redeeming love 1 I think it does. In Ephesians i. 10, the
expression, to “gather together in one all things in Christ,” is better
rendered by the larger phrase, “to sum up all things in Christ.”
This phrase reveals to us in its highest generality the purpose of our


Lord’s mission. He came that by His life and work He might SO'
enlarge all minds and change all hearts on earth and in heaven, that
reflecting His image and being transformed into His likeness they
might all be summed up in Him. The vision of redemption thus
opened is so vast that it can scarcely be said to have limits on earth
or in heaven, in time or in eternity. On a narrower stage, that of
humanity, a similar largeness of redeeming purpose is revealed by
the better translation of Romans v. 15, 19. Here, instead of
“ many,” which would imply the exclusion of some, the new version,
by translating “ the many,” has pointed out that the Greek refers to>
all—-to the multitude, the mass of humanity. And thus we learn
that in the divine purpose the gift of Christ’s life was not made to an
elect few, but to the whole family of man. We are led towards the
same conclusion by the objective cast of many of the new translations.
And here it may be necessary to explain what I mean by the
word “ objective.” To the production of Christian sanctity two
things are necessary—the gift of Christ’s life, which is imparted to us,,
and that state of heart called in the Scriptures “faith,” which
depends, partially at least, upon our own will. Now, what is done
to us and comes to us without our own co-operation, I call the
objective element in salvation ; while that which is done by us or in
us through our own co-operation, I call its subjective element.
Well, then, this being understood, I think you will find that, through
the better rendering of Romans vi., the fact is brought out that, in
many verses of that chapter, St. Paul is not so much referring to what
is done within the believer through his faith, as to what was done
for him at a special point of his past history, viz., at his baptism. In
verse I we read, “ we were buried with Him by baptism unto death.”
In verse 6, our old man (not “is ” crucified, as though the act were
continuous, and now going on), but “ ‘ was’ crucified with Him,” at
a point of time in the past—our baptism. Again, in the Bth verse,
we read (not “if we be dead with Him,” if we be in that spiritual
condition now), but “ if we died with Him,” in the past, objectively,
by an act of His grace, in our baptism. Through what was then
done, ideally, and actually by God’s grace, we were put in a certain
position, and gained a certain relation to God. Therefore the
Apostle says (11) that we ought to “ reckon ourselves to be dead to
sin, but alive to God,” not “through Jesus Christ”—as though our
death and life might be apart from Him, but “in Christ Jesus,” even
as we were planted in Him at baptism. Of course this grace is given
that it may be taken and used. It were of no value else. Accord-
ingly, in verse 12, St. Paul bids us realize subjectively what already
is ours objectively by the gift of God in Christ —“ Let not sin,
therefore, reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the
lust thereof.”
The same definiteness of objective reference is brought out by
the better rendering of the tenses in 1 Corinthians vi. 2. It
is not “ but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified ” —as though
reference were made to an abiding state; it is, “ye were washed,


ye were sanctified,” at a definite point of past time, in your baptism,,
that act which marked and denoted your ideal union with Christ.
The connection of the objective work of Christ for us, and the
subjective work of Christ in us, is further brought out by a better
translation of 2 Corinthians v. 14: “We thus judge that
one died for all; therefore all died.” The old version has it,
“ If one died for all, then were all dead,” making the death of
Christ the proof of the spiritual death of the natural man. In point
of fact, there is not a word here about the death of nature. The
point is that there is such a union between Christ and the believer
represented ideally in baptism, and realized by faith, that if Christ
died to sin, then all died with Him. The practical conclusion
follows. If we be dead in Christ ideally, let us take care that
really and inwardly we “no longer live to ourselves, but to Him
that died for us.” The same thought is emphaticized in Titus,
iii. 5, though here, unfortunately, the better rendering is put into
the margin. The thought of the apostle is that salvation does not
originate in acts of ours, whether emotional or practical, but only
in the mercy of God. What, then, did His mercy do for us 1 He
gave us the laver of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost,
the outward ordinance of baptism to assure the gift, the inward
renewing of the spirit to convert that assurance into a reality. It
is almost more wonderful to find “ laver ” in the margin than it was
to find “ Gehenna ” there. “ Loutron ” cannot mean the act of
washing, but the vessel in which the washing is done. It is trans-
lated “ laver ” by Bishop Ellicott, the chairman of the Revision
Committee, in his new version of the Epistles, and so by nearly
all modern scholars. I suppose it was difficult to get a two-thirds
majority for its insertion in the text, owing to the significant fact
that this is the only text in the Hew Testament in which the word
“regeneration” is applied to an individual. It is certainly startling
to find that on the only occasion of its occurrence it clearly refers to
baptism. But there need be no wonder. It is only in accordance
with the prevailing objective cast of New Testament language, and
it clearly means that baptism is that laver which ideally represents
the new birth in which the new life in Christ must begin.
It is important to keep in mind this objective view of salvation,
that everything necessary to our salvation—the life of Christ, the
gift of the spirit whose office it is to distribute that life, and the
ordinances of the church, through which, as through appointed
channels that distribution takes place—that all these are provided
for us by the love of God, independently of our faith, not only before
we believe, but even before we live. This is the peculiarity of
Christianity. Anyone can believe, a Pagan or a Mahommedan not
less than a Christian. The difference is revealed when you ask,
“ What shall I believe 1 ” and “ Why shall I believe 1 ” Here the
Gospel presents to your inquiry a new thing—a gift and possibilities
unknown in the world before. This newness and uniqueness of the
Gospel is well suggested by a better translation of Romans iii. 21—•


“ But now a righteousness of God hath been manifested, not “ the.
righteousness,” as though it were a thing already well known, but a
righteousness apart from the law which I proceed to describe, “ the
righteousness of God through faith in Christ.” I have spoken of
the connexion of faith with grace, with what went before faith. This
leads me next to speak of the connexion between faith and its fruits,
between it and what should follow it. This is made clearer by a
better translation of Galatians ii. 16. The old version was, “A
man is not justified by works, but by faith,” thus excluding works
altogether from connexion with justification. The new version more
correctly renders “ A man is not justified by works save through
faith,” except so far as works are necessary to indicate the reality
of faith. You will see at once that the celebrated opposition in this
matter between St. Paul and St. James is already abolished by this
rendering. But, in fact, it is made yet more impossible by a better
rendering of James ii. 14. We read no longer “ Can faith save him ? ”
as if faith had nothing to do with the matter, but “ Can that faith save
him ?”—such a faith as that, which can only make him tremble without
obeying. St. Paul is thus plainly seen to say, “Works cannot save
except through faith,” and St. James to say, “Paith cannot save
■except it be a fruitful faith.” Suppose, however, that a man has
taken the life of Christ by a real faith, a faith which vindicates its
reality by works. Another question may here arise—Can the man
who has once possessed such faith ever lose it, or must he keep it
because of God’s predestination 1 The new version helps us to give
a better answer to this question also. It translates Luke x. 6, “If
a son of peace be there,” not “if the son of peace be there.” The
latter expression would imply that the Apostles should remain, if
the son of God had gone before them and selected the house. The
former means—lf your “ host ” be a son of peace, who will receive
you, remain. Again, the new version translates Acts ii. 47, not
“ such as should be saved” by the election of God, but “ such as
were being saved ” through their own faithful use of God’s grace.
Again, it translates 1 Corinthians i. 18, “To them that ‘ are
perishing ’ foolishness, to them that are being saved the power of
God.” When this passage stood “to them that perish, the Gospel
is foolishness,” it might mean that the Gospel appeared foolish to
them because they were destined to perdition. But now it can have
no such meaning. Those who are perishing through their own
wilful disobedience need not finally perish; nor, on the other hand,
can it be said that those who are “ being ” saved must be ultimately
saved. “ Once in grace, always in grace,” is now shown to be an
unscriptural sentiment.
I need make no remark on the effect of the new version in
modifying the doctrine of Our Lord’s divinity, because it leaves that
doctrine untouched. For if it omits the passage 1 John v. 8,
containing a reference to the three heavenly witnesses, and adopts
the reading, “He who,” instead of God in 1 Tim. ii. 16, on the
.other hand it translates Titus ii. 13, “ Our Great God and Saviour


Jesus Christ,” and strengthens the affirmation of Philip, ii. 6,7, by
a better and more intelligible reading.
The new version very decidedly accentuates the value of the
spiritual element in religion by two improved translations. In
Mark vii. 19, we read, not “ purging all meats,” which may mean almost
anything, but “ this He said, making all meats clean.” It is difficult
for us to conceive the vastness of the spiritual revolution implied
in these -words. At a time when the great schools of Hillel and
Shammai were disputing about the relative importance of blessing
the day first or the meat first, Jesus stands up and cries, “All these
things are nought; ye are children of God, and to such ‘ all ’ meats
are clean.” To the Pharisee of that day the utterance of such a
senfiment would be as though the heavens had fallen. It deprived
him not only of the chief subjects of his mental activity, but of all
the cherished reasons for his national and spiritual pride. It made
Calvary inevitable. The same paramount authority of the spiritual
in religion is implied by that depreciation of asceticism which is
brought out so clearly by a better translation of Colossians ii. 23
“ But are not of any value against the indulgence of the flesh.”
Here, instead of an utterly unmeaning phrase, we get an uncom-
promising denunciation of mere outward acts of mortification as a
medicine for the soul—in this age, a great and distinct gain. In-
directly, too, spiritual religion is relieved of a burden and a difficulty
by the omission of John v. 3. This was a description of a miracle
taking place regularly, as if by a law of nature, and without any
reference to the spiritual condition of the healed. These characteristics
put it entirely out of harmony with the New Testament miracles,
which are exceptional acts of power, rendered credible even more by
their adaptation to a great spiritual purpose than by the character
and mission of those who wrought them. It is no little relief, then,
to find that the passage which recorded a miracle of so different a
character is nothing better than a late interpolation.
I will just notice, in conclusion, that the new version alters certain
texts which have formed the favourite themes of one-sided preachers.
It robs one sect of its name. The “ peculiar people ” have gone out of
the New Testament. If they want to continue to be scriptural, they
must call themselves now “ The people of God’s own possession,” for
so in the new version 1 Peter ii. 9is now translated. Perhaps, even
to “ peculiar people,” it might savour too much of arrogance to style
themselves, as opposed to all other Christians, “ The people of God’s
own possession. ” But I scarcely know ; if people are only ignorant
and stupid enough, no arrogance appears impossible to them. The
new version omits a text on which a vast number of excited sermons
have been preached, Acts viii. 37—“ If thou believest with all thine
heart thou mayest” (be baptized). Again, it reverses the meaning
of Acts xxvi. 28. In the old version Agrippa seems to say, “ Thy
sermon is so convincing that ‘ almost’ it persuadeth me to be a
Christian; ” whereas, in the new version, he is made to say what he
was more likely to say, and what he actually said—“ Do you imagine


that, with so slight an effort as this, you can make a Christian of
such a man as I ami” I dare say that many preachers will be
disappointed at the loss of a favourite text; but, for my j>art, I think
the subject presented by the new version—viz., the hardening power
of sin and the curse of worldly pride—not only far more interesting,
but also far more useful. Lastly, I may observe that preachers who
are always insisting on the necessity of conversion, and are wont, at the
same time, to assign to conversion a peculiar and utterly mythical
meaning, will experience, perhaps, some little dismay to find their
pet word entirely excluded from the Gospels. It remains only in
Acts xv. 3 and James v. 19, and ought not to have been left at least
in the latter place. But it is hard for a committee to be consistent.
The word formerly translated “ convert” means simply “ turn,” or
“ turn again,” and refers sometimes to turning the body and some-
times to turning the mind, sometimes to turning from evil to good,
and sometimes to turning from good to evil. In these circumstances
there was no alternative but to translate it by a word that would
express its large and comprehensive meaning. And nothing but
good can result from the change. People will see now that, where
the word refers to a desirable spiritual change, it merely describes a
turning of the mind, whether that turning be made suddenly or
gradually, whether with ecstatic phenomena or without them. No
doubt this turning is sometimes attended by such phenomena, and is
as sudden, if not as complete, as a turning of the body. But it is by
no means always so; and if one may be permitted to judge who
himself experienced a sudden and ecstatic change, it by no means
follows that such a form of change has the most sanctifying influence
on the character. Our Lord said, “ Except ye turn and become as
little children, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven ”
(Matthew xviii. 3). Here the thing to be done is to turn the mind
from the proud wilfulness of what is called “manly independence”
to a childlike dependence on God. And I may be permitted to
repeat that I have sometimes seen this spiritual change more
completely effected where the turning was gradual and silent than
where it was sudden and ecstatic.
I have now finished my task, and it is natural for you to ask what
is the result of all this 1 Just what I told you at first. The net
result is a decided drift, a tendency to obliterate some of the sterner
features of the old translations. There is a fuller statement of the
spirituality of our holy faith, of the universality of the love of God,
and of the long-suffering grace which will condemn none till his
moral probation is fairly completed. There is, besides, a clearer
exhibition of the symbolic character of those passages which describe
the nature of future punishment, and of the uncertainty of manv of
the expressions which describe its duration. And these alterations
are not made capriciously. They are not made in obedience to any
critical theory. They are not due to any effort to adapt the text
either to the supposed historical necessities of the first century, or to
the beliefs and speculations of the nineteenth century. If any


change has been made in the text it is on the authority of more
ancient and reliable manuscripts and versions. And though I admit
that the new translation sometimes mars the delicate balance and
harmony of the matchless English of the old version, as in 1
Corinthians xiii., yet it does this only from an anxious desire
to render more exactly the meaning of the original. This being the
case, it is surely very interesting to notice that the drift of change
observable in the new translation is in the same direction as the
drift of all healthy change in modern thought—in that direction
which is indicated in the well-known words of St. John—“ Perfect
love casteth out fear, because fear hath torment.” I draw an augury
of the brightest hope from this fact. It proves to me at least that
the general drift of modern thought is healthy and truthful. May
we not, then, humbly hope that if men will only be sincere and
patient, scientists on the one side, and theologians on the other,
enlarging knowledge will bring us not a diminution, but an
increase of faith—a faith, it may be, of a different tone and temper,
but one which is made all the more confident and assured quite as
much by what it loses as by what it gains.
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, Melbourne.


