

LuJ L ? A*
1 O^.U-
?erH. Pa V1 >
LECTURE
LAW
DELIVERED AT
s \}t Ulttlianics? IStljooi of Qtis, |)ift Stmt, Sgimcg,
AUGUST 3, 1858.
JOHN F. HARGRAVE, ESQ., M. A.,
Of Trinity College, Cambridge,
And of Lincoln's Inn, London, and the Supreme Court, New South TFaJes,
BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
Author of ? A Treatise on the Thellusson Act,?
And Editor of the First Volume of the Twenty-first English Edition of
? Blackstonc's Commentaries on the Laws of England.?
? Of Law there can he no less acknowledged than that her seat is the
hosom of God ; her voice is the harmony of the world ; to her all things in
Heaven and Earth do homage; the very least as feeling her care, the
greatest as not exempted from her power; hoth angels and men and creatures
of what condition soever, though each in different sort and manner, yet all
with uniform consent admire her as the mother of their peace and joy.??
Hooker?s Ecclesiastical Polity, Book I.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY W. WAUGH, 286, GEORGE STREET.
PRINTED BY Pi MASON AND CO., 105, YORK STREET.
1858.


The Lecturer has consented to place these pages before the public at the
instance of a few esteemed friends ; and in deference to their opinion, that
the Lecture might he not altogether useless to others than the audience to
whom it was delivered.
In doing so, however, he unreservedly submits himself to that candid hut
rigid criticism, which he looks upon as the legitimate test of truth and the
best external incentive to improvement.
He begs his readers also to accept the assurance, that his single object in
originally preparing this Lecture was a desire to contribute, as an individual
Lawyer, his fair share of labour to the task of rendering Law Popular ; that
is, Accessible, Intelligible and Interesting, to his Fellow Colonists of New
South Wales.


SUMMARY OF CONTENTS.
Preliminary observations upon Law as a Science and as an Art . . 1
All English Law is the result of Progressive Wisdom . . .2
Present necessity of sound views as to all our social rights ... 3
Abstract Law is Law in its Catholic and Eternal sense . . .7
The Laws of Conscience?Truth?Honor 9
Enunciation by Hooker of four abstract principles essential to the vali-
dity of all Law , , , . . . . ,10
First. Human Law must not contradict the Law of Nature, or the Re-
vealed Will of God 11
Recognition of this principle by the Law of England . , ,12
Example in the Common Law Maxim :?? No man shall be judge in his
own cause
Second. Harmony and Peace must be the object of Law , .16
To what extent this principle is adopted in English Law , . .17
Third. Equity, in the sense of Equality, must direct the enactments of
Law; and Equality, in the sense of Impartiality, must regulate the
administration of Law. In the eye of English Law, all men are
equal ....... qg
Fourth. The Vox Populi, or uniform consent of the governed, gives the
obligatory and final sanction to all Law ...... 20
All systems of Delegation or Representation of the people, are designed
to obtain this consent of the governed: by qualifying and protecting
the natural right, so as to ensure the exercise of the Elective
Franchise honestly, freely and wisely; as well as peaceably and at
regular intervals . . . . . . .22
Concluding remarks on the modern doctrines of the natural Equality of
Man, and the Tyranny of the Majority. . . . . .27
Observations on the value of English History, as illustrating English
Law ? ? . . , . .33


AUTHORITIES QUOTED OR REFERRED TO.
Bacon's Works.
Blackstone?s Commentaries on the Laws of England-
Burke?s Speeches and Tracts.
Cicero?s De Republic!!.
Coleridge?s (Mr. Justice) Notes to Blackstone.
Dalton?s Office of Justice of the Peace.
De Lolme?s Essay on the English Constitution.
De Tocqueville?s Democracy in America.
Edinburgh Review, January, 1852.
Guizot?s History of Civilization in Europe,
Hooker?s Ecclesiastical Polity.
Macaulay?s History of England.
Macnamarra?s Essay on Peace.
? Meliora,? or ? Better Times to Come.??
Montaigne?s Works
Professor Smyth?s Lectures on Modern History.
the French Revolution,
Warren?s Blackstone, abridged and adapted to the Existing Law.
Webster?s Speeches.


LECTURE,
There are two points of view from which we may advantageously
consider ?Law;? as a Science or as an Art; ?that is, either as
a scientific system of Abstract Truths to be known, investigated,
studied, understood and believed; ?or as an artificial system of Prac-
tical Rules, to be obeyed in our daily lives; and of actual duties to
be performed by us all in our several stations of life ; for the peace-
ful and quiet regulation of all the social arrangements of our own
particular Civil Community.
Prom the former point of view, namely, as a Science, Law occupies
the studies and lives of a separate and distinct class in the commu-
nity, which has been usually designated, and in all its branches
included under the single phrase ? The Legal Profession;? or, some-
times, and perhaps more happily, under the phrase ?The Great
Brotherhood of the Law.?
Prom the latter point of view, namely, as an Art, Law recommends
itself to the consideration of every member of every civilized com-
munity, as the source of all his permanent, political, social and
domestic rights; and as defining all his duties and powers in the
innumerable transactions of business or of pleasure, in this and every
other free and independent state.
The Law of England has, however, one great peculiarity, whether
viewed as a Science or as an Art; ?and common to every branch,
almost every chapter, of the Law; and this peculiarity is, that in its
present state, the Law of England is the result of a long series of
successive Reformations, Revolutions, Reforms and Amendments.
It is not to be studied, like the Code Napoleon or any of the ? Codes,?


as they are called, from the pages of a particular hook, or from a
few Declarations, Constitutions or Charters; hut its Precepts and
Maxims and Rules are set forth in a vast number of volumes; are to
he gleaned from every page of our history; and have been
secured to us by a long succession of Civilizing Conquests and Revo-
lutionary Settlements, contained in a National History of above 1800
years.
I know no author who has alluded to this peculiarity of the English
Laws in more appropriate language than Burke; who, in his cele-
brated speech on ? The Resolutions for Conciliation with America,?
thus apostrophises Lord Bathurst; and drawing up for an instant
the curtain which hung over England at the beginning of the 18th
century; ?unfolding,? as he says, ?the rising glories of his country,
and gazing with admiration on the then commercial grandeur of
England, and pointing to America as the little speck then scarce
visible in the mass of the national interest,? uses the following
eloquent but truthful language ? Young man, there is America?
which at this date serves for little more than to amuse you with
stories of savage men and uncouth manners; yet shall, before you
taste of death, show itself equal to the whole of that commerce
which now attracts the envy of the world.?
? Whatever England has been growing to ?by a progressive in-
crease of improvement brought in by varieties of people, by a suc-
cession of civilizing conquests and civilizing settlements in a series
of 1700 years, you shall see as much added to her by America in the
course of a single life !
? If this state of things had been foretold to the youthful English
senator in 1704,? says Mr. Burke, ? would it not have required all
the sanguine credulity of youth, and all the fervid glow of enthu-
siasm, to have made him believe it.
? Fortunate man,? exclaims the great orator of 1775, ?he has live
to see it?fortunate, indeed, if he live to see nothing to vary the
prospect or cloud the setting of his day.
If in these magnificent but truthful sentences of Burke?s, we
substitute the word ? Australia? for ? America,? and picture to our-
selves the orator as addressing an English audience in the 19th
instead of the 18th century, how every word comes home with prac-


tical wisdom to ourselves, and to our own age and to our own
political affairs.
Burke retired from Parliament in 1794; and even then Australia
was ?a little speck visible, though scarcely visible, in the mass of the
national interests of Great Britainbut since the commencement of
the present century and more especially since the birth of any of the
young men I am now addressing, has not Australia shown itself equal
to as vast an addition as was made by America during the 18th cen-
tury to the commerce of England ?
May we not say in the words of Burke ??? Whatever England
has been growing to by a progressive increase of improvement,
brought in by varieties of people, by a succession of civilizing con-
quests and civilizing settlements in a series of 1800 years, we have
seen as much added to her by Australia in the course of a single life/?
May not we exclaim; ?? Fortunate men, we have lived to see
this; fortunate, indeed, if we live to see nothing to vary the prospect
or cloud the setting of our day.?
But my object in having thus quoted and applied to ourselves this
celebrated passage from Burke was to remind you of the distinctive
peculiarity of the national greatness of England : ?lt has grown out
of a progressive increase of improvement, brought in by varieties of
people and a succession of civilizing conquests and civilizing settle-
ments, over a period of 1800 years.
This is the first point that I would impress upon you : Reverence
for the ancient foundations on which our English Laws are built.
?Now, if ever,? says Macaulay, the last of the illustrious self-
raised nobles of Great Britain, whose bloodless banner now ranks
with the time-honoured banners of the Howards, the Percies, the
Russells, the Stanleys, the Nevilles, the Wentworths and the Caven-
dishes, in the most ancient senate acknowledged by or known to the
civilized world ; ?and whose sagacious wisdom will henceforth, from
that high position, assist the deliberations of the British Parliament,
now swaying the destinies of the universe:??Now, if ever,?
says Macaulay, writing in 1853, at the close of the European
Insurrections and opening of the Crimean War, ?Now, if ever,
ought all who enjoy the protection of British Law to appre-
ciate the wisdom and patriotism of our forefathers. All around us


the world is convulsed by the agonies of great nations. Govern-
ments which lately seemed likely to stand during ages have been,
on a sudden, shaken and overthrown. The proudest capitals of
Western Europe have streamed with civic blood. All evil passions,
the thirst of gain, the thirst of vengeance, the antipathy of class to
class, the antipathy of race to race, have broken loose from the con-
trol of all human and divine Laws. Fear and anxiety have clouded
the faces and depressed the heart of millions. Trade has been sus-
pended and all industry paralysed. The rich have become poor and
the poor have become poorer. Doctrines hostile to all Sciences, to
all Arts, to all industry, to all domestic charities; doctrines which
(if carried into effect) would in thirty years undo all that thirty
centuries have done for mankind and would make the fairest pro-
vinces of France and Germany as savage as Congo and Patagonia,
have been avowed from the tribune and defended by the sword.
Europe has been threatened with subjugation by barbarians, com-
pared with whom the barbarians who marched under Attila and
Alboin were enlightened and humane. The truest friends of the
people have, with deep sorrow, owned that interests more precious
than any political privileges were in jeopardy and that it might be-
come necessary to sacrifice even liberty to save civilization. Mean-
while, in our Island, the regular course of government has never
been, for a day, interrupted. The few bad men who longed for
license and plunder have not had the courage to confront, for one
moment, the strength of a loyal nation, rallied in firm array around a
parental throne.?
? And if it be asked what has made us differ from others ? the
answer is?We never lost what others are wildly and blindly seeking
to regain ; ?The authority of Law, ?for the security of property, ?
for the peace of our streets, ?for the happiness of our homes.?
I have already stated, that it seems to me that ? Law? presents
itself almost naturally, certainly most advantageously to our consi-
deration in two points of view, viz., either as a Science or as an Art;
that is (shortly expressed), as a system of Truths to be believed, or
as a system of Duties to be performed.
In a School of Arts it is, of course, in this latter sense that we
must chiefly view it, namely, as the System of Rules artificially pre-
scribed among ourselves and adopted by our own uniform consent,


as defining what is right and prohibiting what is wrong, in our con-
duct towards each other as members of the same civil community.
This is the extent of the meaning of the word ? Law? as an Art;
and in this sense no one under the care of British Law can altoge-
ther neglect its rules for a single day; as Law is in fact:
The Art of living in peace with each other.
Again, since the publication of ? Blackstone?s Commentaries on
the Laws of England? (now exactly a century ago), the study of the
? Law? as ?the art of living in peace with each other,? recommends
itself to almost every class among us, as an art very easy of
acquisition.
I cannot place this part of my subject before you in better lan-
guage than in the words of Mr. Warren, the able editor of the last
edition of ? Blackstone?s Commentaries abridged and adapted to the
existing Law.?
?It was Blackstone?s Commentaries,? says Mr. Warren, ?which,
about the middle of the last century, introduced large classes of
English society to a knowledge of the Laws of their country; of
which it gave them so attractive an account and so full and accurate
a chart, as to render ignorance and indifference any longer inex-
cusable.?
It is true that the publication of these justly celebrated Commen-
taries produced far wider effects than Blackstone ever, I believe,
contemplated. Blackstone, in his Introductory Lecture, professes to
compose these celebrated Commentaries (first delivered as Lectures
to the University of Oxford) merely for the enlightenment of ? the
upper classes? of society; under which phrase Blackstone says he
includes only ?the nobility of England, gentlemen of independent
estate and fortunes, members of the legislature and of the learned
professions ?while all other classes of English society were most
summarily dismissed by Blackstone as ? persons of inferior condi-
tion,? who, according to the political opinions even of the Liberals of
the last century had, as Blackstone says, ? neither time nor capacity
to enlarge their views beyond the - contracted sphere in which they
are appointed to move !?
But all these exclusive notions have long since passed away; and
now, not only have the great middle classes of English communities.


whose growth in intelligence power and importance during the last
half of the 18th century and this first half of the present, has pro-
duced a vast but silent Revolution in all our English institutions,
found themselves compelled to join in the march of intellect; ?but
even ? the millions,? as thoughtful men now designate the humblest
classes of all civilized communities, feel that though man has not, yet
God has, given them ? both time and capacity to enlarge their views
beyond their own contracted sphere,? and that they have a direct, im-
mediate and daily increasing interest in the Laws. So also the most
superficial observer of political events must admit that, as every year
more fully develops the spirit of our Constitution and the popular
element is better enabled to assume its rightful position in the prac-
tical working of our Constitution, the more urgent becomes the
necessity for every member of the community by his own exertions
and enquiries to acquire at least a sound popular knowledge of Law;
and the more dangerous to the peace of the community becomes the
prevalence, and the more imperative the duty of all peacefully disposed
citizens to prevent the dissemination, of erroneous or unsound
notions of any of our social rights.
No one will question the correctness of Mr. Warren?s views as to
the necessity, in the present day, of a popular knowledge of Law even
as a mere question of expediency, to the middle and lower classes
themselves. As Mr. Warren well remarks with respect to England,
? A large proportion of the property of England being now in the
hands of the middle classes, they have to alien it by contract or by
will; and surely thereby acquire an interest in knowing something of
at least, such branches of the Law, as may enable them to act in
doing so with safety. From the middle classes are also selected those
juries, who are entrusted with our properties, liberties, reputations
and even lives; but, above all, the middle classes are now largely en-
trusted with the power of self-government and have become the
depositaries of vast political power through the recent remodelling
and extension of English Municipal and Parliamentary systems ;
whilst the humbler classes are also raised in the social scale by the
wide diffusion of Education.?
Again, a few lines further on, Mr. Warren remarks : ?As to our
Criminal Law affecting all alike; is there any rank or elevation in


life, any uprightness of heart, any prudence or circumspection of con-
duct, which can justify any man in concluding that he may not, at
some time or other, be deeply interested in such knowledge. These
and many other considerations, especially the establishment of the
English District Courts, bringing Law home to every man?s door,
constitute unanswerable reasons for desiring to see Law made at the
present day popular ?that is, accessible intelligible and interesting
to the mass of society.?
All these reasons for rendering Law popular, ? that is, accessible,
intelligible, and interesting to the mass of society,? apply with ten-
fold force to our colony of New South Wales, in the present position
of all its various ranks and classes.
I propose this evening to occupy your leisure by reading to you
a few extracts from writers of high authority, by way of illustrating
the essential characteristics of Law, considered in its abstract sense;
and more especially as exemplified in the Law of England.
I do not think we should derive any real or permanent benefit,
from the consideration of any particular branch of our English Law,
either as a Science or as an Art; unless we first obtain sound, clear and
distinct notions of the nature of Law, in its abstract sense; i.e. in
the widest and most general signification, that can possibly be con-
veyed by the term.
Let us now consider Law in its abstract sense.
The first sentence commonly set forth in all introductory and
elementary treatises on Law, as descriptive of Law in its most
general and abstract sense, is a well known passage from the recovered
and invaluable fragments of Cicero?s Treatise De Republics,, which may
be thus translated; though scarcely to carry the full force of the
original Latin; ?
? Abstract Law is, in very truth that perfect reason essentially in-
herent in our nature, given to us all as human beings, invariable,
eternal; whose voice gives force to right and restrains from wrong.
From this Law it is impossible to release ourselves, either by decrees
of Senates or by the popular will. This Law is superior to all ex-
planation and interpretation. It is the same at Rome and at Athens.
It is the same now and for ever. It is -the one bond which binds
+""-ethcr all nations and all ages by one eternal and unchangeable


union. God is the undivided and universal Judge and author of its
rules; and the man who obeys no Law, seeks to escape from himself,
and rejects the very nature of man.?
The other passage which is commonly set forth in elementary or
introductory treatises on Law, in its most general and abstract sense,
is the following :
? Of Law, there can be no less acknowledged than that her seat is
the bosom of God; her voice the harmony of the world; all things
in Heaven and earth do her homage; the very least as feeling her
care, the greatest as not exempted from her power; both angels and
men and creatures of what condition soever, though each in different
sort and manner, yet all with uniform consent, admire her, as the
mother of their peace and joy !?
The passage which I have just read to you is the concluding sen-
tence of the first book of Hooker?s Ecclesiastical Polity, a work com-
posed about three centuries ago by an humble clergyman of the
church of England, in the seclusion of his parsonage in the county of
Kent.
The time will not serve for me to explain the great constitutional
principles of Hooker?s noble treatise and its value to all students of
English Law; but I may at least mention that the general scope and
intention of this treatise was to soften down the harsh tones of all
the uncatholic and sectarian creeds of the Elizabethan age; to cool
down the heat of religious dissensions, by bringing into one favorable
view the whole controversy, and compelling all the thoughtful and
moderate men of the English nation, whether Roman Catholics or
Protestants, to acknowledge how numerous and important were the
fundamental and Catholic truths of religious belief which the then
contending parties held in common with each other; and how loud
therefore was the call of Christian charity, to uniformity in essentials
and mutual forbearance in non-essentials.
But you will perhaps say, what have we to do with these topics in
a lecture upon Law ?
My friends, you have much to do with these topics, as the great
truths elucidated by Hooker?s noble treatise lie at the root of all
sound Laws; and especially in all social communities where Law and
Religion are so blended together, as they are in all communities


founded upon English. Law. But far more, especially, have you to
do with these topics, before you enter on the consideration of Law in
any of its more limited meanings; and I should be misleading you
and building my subsequent observations on the sand rather than on
the rock, if I were not to impress upon you, even at the risk of weary-
ing you, by repeating this great truth, ?that there exists a Law which
is above even the Law of nature and in some senses antecedent even to
the revealed will of God, a Law to which all human Laws insensibly
endeavor to assimilate themselves ; ?and that Law in all its widest and
most exalting precepts you will best understand by reflecting on the
comprehensive sentences I read to you from Hooker, namely, that?
? Her seat is the bosom of God; her voice is the harmony of the
world; to her all things in Heaven and earth do homage ; the very
least as feeling her care, the greatest as not exempted from her power.?
This is that Law which, Cicero says is ? essentially inherent in our
nature, given to us all, invariable and eternal, whose voice gives force
to right, and restrains from wrong,?? and of which Hooker echoes the
same great truths:
? Angels and men, and creatures of what condition soever; though,
each in different sort and manner; yet all, with uniform consent, ad-
mire her as the mother of their peace and joy.?
This is that catholic and eternal Law which prompts the whispers
of conscience, ?the witness without which God hath not left himself? in
any human heart; ?this is that Law which is common to every form
of religious belief and makes the soul of man rise above the suffer-
ings of the body and has peopled Heaven with its ? noble army of
martyrs,? of every creed.
This is the Law of honor, which binds even the man who believes
in this life only, more securely than any Act of Parliament can
bind:
? The knot that binds me by the Law of honour,? says Montaigne,
? pinches me more than that of legal constraint; and lam much more
at ease when bound by a scrivener than by myself. Is it not reason
that my conscience should be much more engaged when men simply
rely upon it ? In a bond, my faith owes nothing because it has
nothing lent it. Let them trust to the security they have taken
without me ; but I had rather break the walls of a prison, and the
Laws themselves, than my own word.?


Thus much for the various forms which abstract Law assumes, in
regulating the affairs of men and binding them together in one har-
monious union of peace and joy.
But I must not take up any more of your time in discussing these
preliminary but most interesting topics; or following these great
truths to their legitimate conclusions.
What I wished to impress upon your minds, is, I trust, now
effected; and you will ever bear in mind that there is a Law which
is above all legislative control; a Law which is not to be discussed
by man with man but by man with his own conscience; and that
Law is the Law of Honor, as some call it the Law of Conscience as
others say or the Law of Abstract Truth and Eight; or at least as
best known to us human beings, in our human phraseology, under
these and similar expressions and phrases.
Let us now pass onward to Positive Law; and here, I think, we
shall most advantageously occupy our time this evening by consider-
ing how far our own English Law adopts and recognizes the funda-
mental essentials of Abstract Law; taking the passage I read to you
from the conclusion of the first book of Hooker?s Ecclesiastical Polity
as a condensed resume of the abstract principles on which all Human
Laws might be founded. There seem to be four principles involved
in Hooker?s sentences, wdiich may be thus stated:?
Firstly, Every Law must acknowledge as its seat?or the sourca
of its authority over men?? The bosom of God.? That is : God is,
in the highest sense, the author of all Human Law; and we must
seek and acknowledge the binding obligatory power of Laws over the
human conduct and conscience to arise from some higher source than
the ? will of the people.? It is, I say, the will of God, and part pf
the Divine economy of the universe, that all the human beings, within
each particular jurisdiction, should be bound together by certain com-
mon rules for the peaceful regulation of their, social intercourse with
each other; until the day shall arrive when all nations and peoples
and tongues shall be gathered together into one Family ; ?until we
shall become ? One Fold under One Shepherd ?
Secondly, Hooker lays down this principle ;?That the voice of
Law shall be ?the harmony of the world.? So human Laws should
promote the harmony of communities; ?should reconcile, not irritate,


the jarring discords that must ever arise between opposite social
rights ; ?soothe, not aggravate, the contentions that must ever arise
between the clashing interests and conflicting claims of the human
beings ?of every condition? associated in one common social inter-
course, and become, in very truth, to all who own subjection to her
control, ? The mother of their peace and joy.?
Thirdly, we learn from these sentences of Hooker; That Law
must, in her enactments as well as in her administration, admit no
favor or inequality among individuals.
Men of what condition soever must, in the eye of the Law, be
equal. ? The very least shall feel her care; the greatest not be
exempted from her power.?
So also these words of Hooker?s teach us that Equality, in the
sense of Impartiality, must regulate the administration of Law.
Fourthly and lastly, the conclusion of these sentences of Hooker?s
shows us, that all persons to be bound by Law ought to have given
their ? uniform consent/? express or implied, to all legal enactments.
In other words, the people must either individually give their uniform
consent or unanimous sanction to every Law; or the community
must adopt some invention of representation or of delegation, or
some combination of representative systems, more or less capable of
ascertaining and giving legal expression, to the ? voice of the people
so as to obtain indirectly, the uniform consent of the governed to the
Law, by which the community is to be governed.
Let us now examine and apply these four essential principles of
valid Law, with reference especially and particularly to English Law.
As to the first of these fundamental and essential principles of
Law, considered in its abstract sense: ?that her seat shall be the
bosom of Gpd; that is, that all human Laws must acknowlege the Will of
God as the source of their authoritative power to bind the conduct and
the conscience, it will be sufficient to remind my present audience of
the words of God himself;
? By ME Kings reign, and Riders minister justice
And, as incidental to this principle, we have this necessary and
natural corollary :?that human Laws shall not infringe on the Will of
God; nor direct nor forbid anything, contrary to the revealed \\ ill
of God, or to the Law of nature.


I do not see how any one can dispute that the English Law
admits this most necessary restriction to the Legislative power;
but it may be as well to place this point clearly before you,
in the words of Blackstone.
In Blackstone?s first volume, you will read as follows :
? Upon these two foundations ?the Law of nature and the Law of
revelation, depend all human Laws; ?that is to say, no human Law
should be suffered to contradict these. There are, it is true, a great
number of indifferent points, in which both the divine Law and the
natural leave a man at his own liberty; but which are found neces-
sary, for the benefit of society, to be restrained within certain limits.
And herein it is, that human Laws have their greatest force and
efficacy; for, with regard to such points as are not indifferent, human
Laws are only declarations of and act in subordination to the former.
For instance, in the case of murder, this is expressly forbidden by
the divine and demonstrably by the natural Law; and from these
prohibitions arises the true unlawfulness of this crime. Those
human Laws which annex a punishment to it do not at all increase
its moral guilt or superadd any fresh obligation, in foro conscientice,
to abstain from its perpetration. Nay, if any human Law should
allow or enjoin us to commit it, we are bound to transgress that
human Law or else we must offend both the natural and the divine
Law.?
So again, in further illustration of this fundamental principle, that
a human Law is null and void, which enacts any rule contrary to the
Law of nature, I will refer to the following passage from Burke s
Tract on the Popery Laws. No one will suspect or accuse Burke of
undue leaning or tendency to democratic opinions ; and we shall,
therefore, be quite safe in relying upon him as a sound constitutional
authority.
? The Legislature,? says Burke, ? have no right to make a Law
prejudicial to the whole community; even though the delinquents in
making such an Act, should be themselves the chief sufferers by it
because it would be made against the principle of a superior Law,
which it is not in the power of any community or of the whole race
of man to alter; ?l mean the wall of Him who gave us our natui e,
and in giving impressed an invariable Law 7 upon it.?


But perhaps it will be as well it I now call your attention to a
familiar and practical example, from our English Laws, of the applica-
tion of this first fundamental principle of Abstract Law which I am
endeavouring to impress upon your minds : that human Laws can-
not override or contradict any maxim of the Law of God, whether
declared by the Law of Nature or the revealed Will of God.
You are all, ot course, familiar with that common and universal
maxim of the English Law:?that no judge or magistrate, or even
juror, can sit or act in any judicial matter in which he is personally
interested. In popular phrase the English Law says:?
? Man shall be judge in his own cause.?
Not that there is any Statute of the Realm or Act of Parliament
which declares this to be ? the Law.? There is not, I believe, the
slightest trace or record in all the old Parliament rolls or chronicles
of our mother country, from the earliest periods, of any legislative
enactment declaring or enacting ?that no Englishman shall be judge
in his own cause.? How, then, you will say, is it ? Law ??
It is because the Judges of England have, from the earliest records
of judicial proceedings in England, held this maxim to be essential to
English justice. It is part of the Common Law or unwritten folc-
right of England; that is, it is one of the abstract maxims of the
Law of Nature as applied by a long unbroken succession of wise and
enlightened judges, to the administration of English social rights.
It is part of the same old Common Law of En gland which declares
? That every Englishman?s house is his castle?:?
? That there is no wrong without a remedy?;
? That no one shall be condemned unheard?:??
? That every prisoner shall be presumed innocent, until proved
guilty.?
These and many other invaluable principles of Abstract Justice,
quite unknown to any other civilized nation, or any recorded or
acknowledged ?Code of Law,? form ?the old Common Law of
England.?
Now, the familiar legal maxim, ?that no man shall be judge in his
own cause,? is the one of these great maxims of the old Common
Law of England which I selected, in order to impress upon your
minds this important fundamental rule of Abstract Law, namely, that
B


even the all-powerful English Legislature cannot override or contra-
dict any maxim of Abstract Justice. ?If an Act of Parliament,
says Lord Coke the great oracle of the Common Law, ? should
ordain that the same person should be party and judge, or which is
the same thing, judge in his own cause, it would he a void Act of
Parliament, for it is impossible that one should be judge and party;
for the judge is to determine between party and party or between
the Government and a party; and an Act of Parliament can do no
wrong, though it may do several things that may look pretty odd.
Notwithstanding the almost self-evident truth of this great maxim,
there is sometimes considerable difficulty in applying legal maxims to
practical business; but in this we shall have no real difficulty, because
the whole question of the interest of the judge in any subject before
him and the nature of the disqualification thereby brought upon
him from adjudicating in the matter ?and the absolute and total
invalidity of any judgment or decree made by judges interested, even
remotely and indirectly, in the subject matter before the Court?have
been recently clearly laid down, after elaborate argument before the
highest English Court of Law, in the late case of ? Limes v. The
Grand Junction Canal Company.?
This was a Suit in Chancery, which arose some few years ago,
relating to some disputed manorial rights, claimed by a person named
Dimes, against the Grand Junction Canal Company; and in the
progress of the suit, the then Lord Chancellor (Lord Cottenham)
had pro formd signed a Decree, the cause having been set down and
heard before the Master of the Rolls and the other Equity Judges, because
of Lord Cottenham?s interest as a Shareholder in the Canal Company ,
his Lordship, however, fully acquiescing in, and confirming the
Decree of the other judges. The plaintiff, Mr; Dimes, was dissatis-
fied with the Decree on the merits, and appealed to the House of
Lords; objecting, among other grounds, that the Lord Chancellor s
formal signature to the Decree appealed against, rendered such
Decree absolutely void. The House of Lords, after hearing long and
learned arguments of Counsel, and taking the opinion of the Common
Law Judges, reversed the Decree of the Lord Chancellor, on the ground
of interest; which, having existed at the time of hearing the cause,
had disqualified Lord Cottenham from sitting as Judge in the matter,
and rendered his Lordship's Decree, therefore, absolutely void.


The judgment of Lord Campbell in the House of Lords is so
clear and simple a statement of this great maxim of English Law,
and as it seems to me illustrates so admirably the first of the essen-
tial principles of abstract Law I am endeavouring to impress upon
you, that I am sure your, time will be well spent in listening to his
Lordship?s words. His Lordship says, ? With respect to the point upon
which the learned Judges were consulted, I must say that I entirely
concur in the advice which they have given to your Lordships. No
one can suppose that Lord Cottenham could be, in the remotest degree,
influenced by the interest he had in the concern; but, my Lords, it
is of the last importance that the maxim,?that no man is to he judge
in his own case?should be held sacred ; and that it is not to be con-
fined to a cause in which he is a party, but in which he has an
interest.?
His Lordship then concludes thus ? Since I have had the honor
to be Chief Justice of the Court of Queen?s Bench, we have again
and again set aside proceedings in an inferior tribunal, because an in-
dividual who had an interest in a cause took a part in the decision.
And it will have a most salutary influence on these tribunals, when it
is known that this High Court of last resort, in a case in which the
Lord Chancellor of England had an interest, considered that his
decree was, on that account, a decree not according to Law, and was
set aside. This will be a lesson to all inferior tribunals, to take care,
not only that in their decrees they are not influenced by their per-
sonal interest; hut to avoid even the appearing of labouring under
such influence.?
The House of Lords having on this ground set aside the Lord
Chancellor?s decree as absolutely void, confirmed the judgment of
the inferior or primary Equity Judge on the Merits against
the appellant; who had, therefore, merely the satisfaction of finding
that he had been ventilating, as Lawyers say, a great constitutional
maxim of English Law; a satisfaction, fortunately for the peace
of society, which is very frequently enjoyed by persons of a litigious
disposition.
I must now call your attention for a few minutes to the second
fundamental essential of Law considered in its abstract sense, namely,


that her voice shall he raised to promote ?the harmony? of the com-
munity ; she shall be ? the mother of peace and joythat is, she shall
reconcile, not irritate, the jarring discords that must ever arise be-
tween opposite social rights; she shall soothe, not aggravate, the con-
tentions that must ever arise between men of various conditions, hut
living together in one social community.
Far he it from me to claim for Human Law the office of the re-
vealed Will of God, or to arrogate for the ministers of the Law the
duties of the sacred ministers of Religion, whose especial mission it
is to spread ? peace on earth, and good will among men!? lam only
anxious to place clearly before your minds, that this harmonizing of
clashing principles, which is the object of Law in its abstract sense, is
also the guiding principle of English Law in all its branches ; and that
every statute that is passed either by the Imperial Legislature or by
our own Colonial Parliament, to regulate our Colonial Laws, and
every decision of every Court of Law in this colony, is rendered
necessary by the springing into existence of doubtful rights, or by
the more intricate questions, necessarily arising from the contradictory
claims of a highly advanced state of civilization.
The doubtful rights and conflicting claims of an early or primitive
state of society were settled by appeals to physical force or to
arms;?
The good old rule, the simple plan,
That he should take who has the power;
And he should keep who can.
This however is not living in civilized society, but out of society; not
under Law, but beyond the bounds of Law. Therefore, as social
communities become more firmly established, Laws arise to define
more accurately all our social rights and duties ; and the more peace-
ful and harmonious the community, the more accurately do the Laws
define our several social rights and duties, either by the direct enact-
ing powers of an acknowledged Legislature establishing what the Law
shall be, or by the decisions of wise and enlightened Judges declar-
ing what the Law is, and applying the general maxims or enactments
of Law to the special 'circumstances of each case : but all members
of the same coramunitv of what condition soever, and whether


engaged in administering the Law or in obtaining the enactments of
the Legislature, having no other object than, according to Hooker?s
principle, to ? harmonize? the whole community and promote their
? peace and joy.?
Let us examine a little further this second abstract principle, as
applied to the frame and object of our English Laws; and observe
how carefully the harmony and peace of the community enter into
the English Law, as the object and intention of its provisions.
This is well expressed by Mr. Mac Namara, a very clever legal
Essayist;?? Impressed with the importance of Tranquillity to the
Social state, the Common Law of England has evinced great care for
its preservation. Among other salutary measures it has constituted
many high functionaries, the Chief Conservators of the Peace
throughout the Realm; and committed to inferior officers the task of
maintaining the Peace within particular districts. In the former
class, the first and head is the Sovereign ; besides whom and deriving
their authority from him are the Lord Chancellor and all the Judges
of the Realm, who are ex officio Conservators of the Peace.?
?To the second class belong the Judges having limited local juris-
diction, all of whom are appointed ?Conservators of the Peace?
within the precincts of their respective Courts; ?together with the
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Coroners, Constables, and others,
within their respective Hundreds, Towns, and Districts.
?The duties of these * Justices of the Peace,? as they are carefully
styled in the Royal Commission, consisting (according to Dalton, an
old lawyer) in these three things, namely ; ? First, in preventing the
breach of the Peace ; wisely foreseeing and repressing the beginning
thereof, by taking surety for the keeping of the Peace, or for the
good behaviour of offenders; ? secondly, in pacifying such as are
breaking of the Peace -.?and thirdly, in punishing, according to
Law, such as have broken the Peace. But of these three duties,
Dalton continues, ? the first, the preventing a breach, is most worthy
to be commended to the care of Justices.?
I think I should be wasting your'time by adducing any further or
particular illustration or proof, that the general spirit of English Law
is strictly in accordance with the second principle laid down by
Hooker; and that the practical operation of English Laws and their


general intention and object is?? to promote the Harmony of the
Community,? So far, indeed, as lam acquainted with the Codes or
Laws of other nations, I believe there is not any Code of Laws,
either ancient or modern, which so generally adopts this second
fundamental principle of Abstract Law as its guiding principle, ?-as we
find in the English Statute Law; nor do I believe that any nation
either exists now, or ever did exist, in which this great principle is
so familiarly brought home to the daily observation and practical
advantage of the individual members of the community, as where
the English Common Law forms the basis of the Municipal Laws,
Let us now pass onwards to the consideration of the third of the
essential principles of Law, namely, ?Equity,? as founded on the Natural
Equality of Man in the enactments of ? Law and ? Equality? in the
sense of Impartiality in its administration ; that is?ln the eye of the
Law all men shall be equal; ? The very least as feeling her care, the
greatest as not exempted from her power.?
You will find this great principle clearly laid down by Burke, as
the basis of British Law. After alluding to the fallacies broached by
Hobbes in the seventeenth century, and quoting a well-known pas-
sage from Cicero, in support of his own enlarged views of ? Law?
in its abstract sense, Mr. Burke continues thus ; ?? In reality there
are two, and only two, foundations of Law; and they are both of
them conditions, without which nothing can give it force: ?l mean
Equity and Utility. With respect to the former, it grows out of the
great rule of Equality, which is grounded upon our common nature,
and which ? Philo,? with propriety and beauty, calls the 4 Mother of
Justice.? All human Laws are, properly speaking, only declaratory;
they may alter the mode and application, but have no power over the
substance of original Justice. The other foundation of Law, which
is Utility, must be understood, not of partial or limited but of general
Utility, connected in the same manner with, and derived directly
from our rational nature ; for any other utility may be the utility of
a robber but cannot be that of a citizen ?the interest of the domestic
enemy and not that of a member of the Commonwealth. This pre-
sent equality can never be the foundation of those statutes which create
an artificial difference between men (as the old penal Laws did) in order
to induce a consequential inequality in the distribution of Justice.?


1 then concluding with this sentence : ?? Law is the mode of
Human Action respecting Society; and must be governed by the
same rules of Equity, which govern every private action.?
The other branch of this, the third essential of valid Law, namely,
Equality in the sense of Impartiality in the administration of Law, is
thus admirably commented upon by De Lolme, in his celebrated Essay
on the English Constitution :
?No subjects under English Law, however exalted their rank, are
to think themselves exempt from submitting to the uniform course of
Law, or hope to influence or overawe it. The severe examples which
the two Houses of Parliament have united to make on those judges,
who had rendered themselves the instruments of the passions of the
Sovereign or of the designs of the ministers of the Crown, are also
awful warnings to the judges who have succeeded them, never to
attempt to deviate in favor of any the most powerful individuals, from
that straight line of justice, which the joint wisdom of the Legisla-
ture has once marked out to them. This has at last created such an
impartiality in the distribution of public justice in England, has intro-
duced into the Courts of Law the practice of such a thorough disregard
of either the influence or wealth of the contending parties; and pro-
cured to every individual both such an easy access to these Courts,
and such a certainty of redress, as are not to be paralleled in any
other Government,?'
De Lolme then mentions two examples of public legal proceedings,
one against a Peer of the Realm, and the other against a Prince
nearly related to the Crown; both highly illustrative of this impar-
tiality of British Law, and its utter disregard of persons, as well in
its administration, as in its enactments; and then proceeds to show
the general opinion of the English people on this' subject in the fol-
lowing words:
? What struck me most in these transactions was, that these legal
proceedings against a Prince, nearly related to the Crown, were
looked upon by all those I heard speak about them, as being nothing
more than the common and expected course of things.?'
? It was this strict Impartiality which prevails in the Administra-
tion of British Law,? says De Lolme, ? that became a strong induce-
ment to me to enquire into the nature of a Government, by which such


effect-? were pro lacedan>l to compose the celebrated essay which
hears his name.
Again, in another passage, De Lolme remarks: ?Any violation o! the
Laws of England, though perpetrated by men of the most extensive
influence; nay, though committed by the especial direction of tire
very first servants of the Crown, will be publicly and completely re-
dressed. And the very lowest of subjects will obtain such redress, if
he has but spirit enough to stand forth and appeal to the Laws of his
country.?
To us Englishmen, also, it is a peculiar satisfaction to find this
great principle one of the leading provisions in Magna Charta; by
the twenty-ninth article of which it is provided ;
?No free man shall be taken into custody or imprisoned, or dis-
seized of his free tenement, or of his liberties, or of his free customs;
?neither shall he be outlawed or exiled, or in any other manner inju-
riously affected ; ?nor will we take proceedings against him, nor send
against him; ?except by and through the lawful judgment of his
equals, or by and through the Law of the land. To none will we
sell, ?to none will we deny or delay, justice or right.?
These remarks and extracts will, I trust, sufficiently show .how the
English Law is based in all its main outlines on the Natural Equality
of Man, the third essential of Abstract Law as laid down by Hooker :
? The very least shall feel her care; the greatest not be exempted
from her power.??But upon this topic, the Natural Equality of Man,
I will reserve the few other remarks I have to make, for the conclu-
sion of this Lecture.
With reference to the fourth and last of Hooker?s fundamental
essentials of ?Law,? namely ?The consent of the governed , it will be as
well to give you at once a clear constitutional authority, on which to
rely for the application of this principle to all English Law T .
To effect this, I will read to you another well-known passage from
Burke, in which you will find the doctrine of the Consent of the
Governed, or vox populi, stated with all its proper qualifications:?? In
all forms of Government,? says Burke, ?the people is the true Legis-
lator; and whether the immediate and instrumental cause of the Law
be a single person or many, the remote and efficient cause is, the
Consent of the People, actual or implied; and such Consent is abso-


lately essential to its validity. To the solid establishment of every
Law two things are essentially rt quisite : first, a proper and sufficient
human power to declare and modify the matter of the Law; and,
next, such a fit and equitable Constitution as may have a right to
declare and render binding. With regard to the first reqxrisite, the
Human Authority, it is their judgment the people give up, not their
right. The people, indeed, are pi?esumed to consent to whatever the
Legislature ordains for their benefit; and they are to acquiesce in it;
though they do not see clearly into the propriety of the means by
which they are conducted to that end. This they owe, as an act of
Homage and just deference, to a Reason which the necessity of Go-
vernment has made superior to their own.?
And yet, on the other hand, as already explained to you, the Legis-
lature have no right to make a law prejudicial to the whole commu-
nity, nor against the clear principles of the Law of Nature, or the
revealed will of God. One passage on this point I have already
cited to you from Burke?s works; und I must -be allowed to refer you
to another passage, a few lines further on, to the effect that all laws
which tend to the direct exclusion of a great body of men, not only
from the ? favors, privileges, and trusts,? but from the ? common
advantages of society,? are pronounced by Mr. Burke, abstractedly
considered, to be ? null and void;? even ?though ratified by the peo-
ple, not representatively, but even collectively.? ?It would be hard,?
he says, ?to point out any error more truly subversive of all the
order and beauty, all the peace and happiness of Human Society,
than the position, that any body of men have a right to make what
laws they please, or that laws can derive any authority from their
institution merely, and independent of the quality of their subject
matter.?
I trust these extracts will be sufficient to guard you against falling
into that dangerous error, that whatever the people, either collec-
tively or when represented in their proper Houses of Assembly, as
in all our English Constitutions, and the American also, may
agree to, must be right.
The popular sanction is required to give effect to Law; but there
are other and far higher essentials required to give Law obligation to
bind the conduct and conscience. Losing sight of this distinction it is


that which has given rise to the modern phrase ? Tyranny of the Majo-
rity ; which in America/? says De Tocqueville, ?is producing the
most perilous mischiefs and is the cause of much anxiety to all
friends of that Great Republic.? But I must now hasten onwards.
In all these enquiries into abstract principles, we must see that the
duty of the Legislature of established communities, is not so much
to build up the frame-work of a new Constitution, (as would be the
object of popular assemblies in a primitive or rude state of society),
as to obtain the popular sanction to such necessary alterations of
existing rights and duties, as the changes of time, place, or other
circumstances, render advisable ; and as the various classes of the com-
munity vary in their relative importance to the general body politic.
In fact the great problem which from time to time comes before us, is
how we can best, that is most safely and effectually, obtain the sanc-
tion of the people to these changes and adaptations of our Law, so as
to meet these progressive requirements of our social state.
I will not attempt to enumerate, much less to define, the various
but great principles which have been adopted in the English consti-
tutional Law, to ascertain and regulate the elective franchise of the
popular House of Representatives. To do so would be quite beyond
both my powers and my present duty. But I must at least take this
opportunity of distinguishing between Delegation and Representation.
?In America,? says De Tocqueville, ? the system of Delegation
has wrought incalculable evils. There a custom is gaining ground,
which will in the end render all the guarantees of the Representative
Government useless and vain. The electors, when they name a
deputy, often trace out for him a line of conduct, from which he is
not to depart; and except that there is no tumult, it is as if the
Majority met and deliberated in the Market-place.? This system of
Delegation is thus complained of by Mr. Webster, in the opening of
his celebrated speech on the Tariff. ?Different members of the
Senate,? says that great and truly patriotic statesman, ? have instruc-
tions, which they feel bound to obey, and which clash with one
another. We have this morning seen an Honorable Member from
New York (an important motion being under consideration,) lay his
instructions on the Table, and point to them as his power of attorney,
and as containing his directions for his vote.?


? How absurd,? observes Professor Smyth, when commenting on
this mistake in American politics, ?to have a question decided by the
constituents at one end of a country, and afterwards debated at the
other ! Of what use are reasoning and eloquence addressed to those,
who, in the first place, have to lay their instructions on the Table ??
In our own English constitution there is no principle more firmly
established, than that stated by Mr. Justice Blackstone, in
the first volume of the Commentaries, in these words : ?? Every
Member of the English House of Representatives, though chosen by
one particular district, when elected and returned serves for the
whole realm. For the end of his coming thither is not particular,
but general; not barely to advantage his constituency, but the Com-
monwealth. And therefore, he is not bound like a deputy in the
United Provinces, to consult with or take the advice of his consti-
tuents upon any particular point, unless he himself thinks it proper
or prudent so to do.?
Mr. Justice Coleridge, in his edition of Blackstone?s Commentaries,
has most judiciously directed the student?s attention to Mr. Burke?s
statement of this great constitutional principle of the English Repre-
sentative system, as set forth in the conclusion of his celebrated
speech to the electors of Bristol.
But to return from Delegation to Representation;?the great
problem of the 19th century. I will extract the substance of my
remarks on this subject from the Edinburgh Review of January
1852; a Review which you all know, has always supported every
reasonable extension of the franchise, and every other liberal measure
in England. If the time would allow me, I should also like to read some
most sensible remarks on this subject, from a very excellent little book
called ? Meliora,? or ? Better times to come containing a series of
twenty-one Lectures and Contributions upon topics connected with
the improvement of the social condition of the working classes, con-
tributed by some well known philanthropic English noblemen, gentle-
men and clergymen, and some few Essay s by working men them-
selves ; and forming together an invaluable little compendium on the
condition, social and mental, of the English working classes.
I will now proceed to read to you a single quotation from the Edin-
burgh Review, which thus states in a few choice sentences the real


question that sooner or later must arise and must he adjusted and
settled in every community under British Law, namely: how the consent
of the people, the fourth essential element of sound and valid Law, is
to be best obtained, ?under the existing circumstances of a great,
general and uncontrolable desire having arisen for the extension of
the suffrage among the working classes of the 19th Century.
? The desideratum is some plan, which shall give to working men
a greater participation than formerly in the election of Members,
proportioned to their augmented intelligence and independence ; some
plan, which shall not overturn the existing system nor proceed on the
assumption of its incurable and radical injustice, hut which shall har-
monize with its main features and which can be engrafted upon it,
so as better to attain its purposes and carry out its meaning.?
This is the main problem which we, the colonists of New South
Wales, have now before us. We must not overturn any part of our
existing system of Laws nor proceed on the assumption of its incurable
or radical injustice; and we must he especially careful that every
reform of our Colonial Laws, and especially of our Constitutional
Law, harmonizes with the main features of our British Constitution
and is engrafted \rpon it, so as better to attain its purpose and carry
out its meaning.
In our own colony and in all communities adopting the British
Constitution as a model, it seems to me that, if we may not now
safely entertain the utmost possible extension of the franchise among
the electors of the popular branch of the Legislature, it is difficult to
understand when or where this question can he safely entertained.
Every act of the aggregate Legislature is so sifted and examined, not
only by the Press, (a free Press in the highest sense of the word), but
by the long intervals that elapse between the introduction of any Bill
and its final exactment; ?as well as by repeated discussions in both
Houses of Parliament, each having the entire confidence of the com-
munity at large;?and the power of the Crown is so clearly defined,
and made so completely serviceable to the community, by the res-
ponsibility of Ministers; ?that there is in my humble opinion at least
no practical danger to be feared from the utmost extension of the
elective franchise, i.e., to every cue at all capable of exercising the
franchise honestly, freely, and wisely ; ?the only necessary restrictions


which, on a little reflection, you will find to include and extend to all
rightful disfranchisement.
What are called property and residential qualifications, are
so far important as being the simple means whereby the electors
require from each other and among themselves some reasonable
knowledge of each other, and some mutual recognition of each other?s
claims, as honestly interested in the peace and well being of the com-
munity ; as well as being the only practical means of identifying the
the individual electors, and of apportioning the representation
among the aggregate numbers of the community, according to regis-
trations in the public Electoral lists. We need not therefore
comment on these. Nor need w T e observe upon the questions
of duration of Parliament or the ballot; nor upon the question
whether the elections shall be altogether open and pub-
lic ; these being questions which are merely, or chiefly, for the
consideration of the Electors themselves; whose objects, I presume,
would be only to secure for themselves the due election of their
members at regular but stated intervals ; and that the elections shall be
conducted peaceably, without danger of fraud in the return, or undue
pressure on the voter at the time of voting.
But as to the other ? disqualifications,? in the strict sense of the
term, as the Edinburgh Review well says, ??? The advocates of uni-
versal suffrage are themselves compelled to acknowledge the invalidity
and untenableness of their own principle of universality, by violating
it as soon as they have laid it down; and, if fairly worked out, it
WO uld lead to results, which at once make it manifest that some fallacy
lurks under its apparent simplicity. The principle laid down under
the term ? Universal Suffrage, it is obvious, goes the whole length of
declaring that all citizens, whatever be their age, sex, or condition,
being required to obey the law, and being punishable for resistance
to it, are, ipso facto , entitled to votes in the election of the Members
of the Legislature. But, the woman as well as the man is hanged for
murder; the minor as well as the adult is imprisoned for fraud and
transported for felony; the pauper as well as the millionaire is com-
pelled to comply with every requirement of the Parliament;? all,
therefore, would have an equal claim to the elective franchise, upon the
abstract principle alone : ?of being bound by the Laws to be enacted.


Yet no man in his senses ever ventured to push the argument thus
far. The most complete suffrage ever practically proposed, even by
the Chartists, falls far short of Universality; and makes exceptions, as
arbitrary and as fatal to the principle , as those familiar to our existing
system.
Let us consider the matter a little further.
The nearest approach to universal suffrage ever seriously demanded
is, that every male of the full age of twenty-one years shall be entitled
to a vote.
Now observe what vast exclusions and disqualifications are implied
in this apparently very simple
? Adult Manhood Qualification,?
as it is called.
In the first place,?it excludes all women, thousands of whom hold
independent property ; hundreds of thousands of whom pay taxes;
and all of whom, in all Christian Communities, are at least as compe-
tent, intellectually and morally, to exercise the franchise, as a great
proportion of those who now possess it.
And secondly ; ?it excludes at least a million minors, of the male
eex out of the aggregate population of Great Britain, and many
thousands of the population of this Colony, between the ages of 17
and the arbitrary age of full manhood at 21 years.
Now all these classes are called upon to obey the Law; all of
them are interested in the process of Legislation, since all suffer by
partial and unwise enactments.
Yet the advocates of universal suffrage conceive themselves truly
to be guilty of no injustice, ?absurdly to be guilty of no inconsistency
or unfaithfulness to their theory, in excluding them ; and, if closely
questioned as to the defensible grounds of such exclusion, would
probably reply : ?That minors are excluded from the franchise,
though not from the acquisition of property and due submission to
all the laws of the land; because they are not mature enough, morally
or intellectually, to exercise the franchise wisely and judiciously: and
that women are also excluded from the franchise, though not from
the acquisition of property and due submission to all the laws of the
land; because the habits of English domestic life are such that they
could not be expected to exercise the franchise freely and inde-


j oendently ; and with due regard to their own especial and separate
duties to the community.
So then we find the advocates of Universal Suffrage are driven
by their own good sense to contend for the exclusion of large classes
of their fellow citizens on these several grounds, of want of maturity ,
want of judgment, want of freedom, want of independence ; ?that is,
moral, mental and circumstantial unfitness : ?the only grounds of dis-
qualification which have ever been maintained by the advocates of any
system of restricted suffrage; and we return, in fact, to the very point
from which we started, namely,?that each community must adopt such
restrictions of the elective franchise as are consistent with the other
portions of the Social fabric, and as the time, place and other cir-
cumstances of the community render advisable ; a conclusion to our
argument which will at least tend to bring the contending parties to
issue, on much more intelligible and practical points than the doctrines
of ? The Primitive Equality of Man,? or ? The Tyranny of the
Majority.?
Nevertheless, I must not dismiss these modern doctrines of the
? Primitive Equality of Man,? and ? The Tyranny of the Majority,?
without some especial remarks.
As to the first of these phrases, you will recollect that when
engaged in the consideration of the third most important foundation
of Law, namely, the Equality of all persons in the eye of the ?Law,? I
read to you a passage from Burke, showing that all enactments of
positive Law must be founded on ? Natural Equity,? and on the
? Natural Equality of Man.? And Ido not think that I should be
doing justice to the fundamental principles of Law which I have
been endeavouring to impress upon you, if I were to leave these
modern doctrines of the ? Equality of Man,? and the ? Tyranny of
the Majority,? without the following remarks.
It was just before the French Revolution of 1789 that Paine pub-
lished his ?Age of Reason? and ?Rights of Man;? in which he stated
that he had discovered that we, the pitiable people of England, had no
Constitution; and that we had, therefore, only to call a Convention
and make one.?Paine?s works were soon followed by the ? Political
Justice? of Mr. Godwin, who longed for Society without Government,
and Morality without natural Instincts; and Miss Wolstonecroft


supplied the last magic ingredient for the Revolutionary Cauldron,
whose bubbling draughts were to restore our worn-out world to reju-
venescence, by her celebrated Essay on the ? Rights of Women.?
These melancholy misconceptions, I had almost said caricatures, of
the true doctrines of Natural Equity and the Natural Equality of
Man, were sufficiently exemplified to our own observation and
received a fair trial before the present generation of English-
men, in Fergus O?Connor?s Land Scheme at Snig?s End, in that half-
Chartist half-Mormonite establishment at ? Harmony Hall? ? which
was the subject of a suit in Chancery a few years back, and in vari-
ous other so-called ? Socialist ? schemes and projects.
Now, although the general verdict of all persons who understand
and appreciate the blessings of British Law, has been already given,
and given publicly, upon all these Socialist schemes yet, as they seem
to be in some degree revived by the Mormonite movement towards the
United States, I cannot conclude this most important branch of my
subject, without one further attempt to place the modern doctrine of
the Equality of Man fairly before your minds, and its connection with
the Laws of Nature and of God as well as with the Positive enact-
ments of all civilized communities; and I cannot find any better
statement of this doctrine than in the words of Professor Smyth, from
whose Lectures I can never too frequently quote ;
? The original Equality of Man,? says Professor Smyth, ? belongs
to his awful relations to the Deity, the great Creator of the World;
and this Equality is seen, in the inevitable changes of his being, and
the events of his existence ; in his birth, his growth, his decline, his
diseases and his death; ?in his appetites, affections, pleasures and
pains; in his moral and religious duties; in his hopes of a Here-
after and his obedience to his God. In these great, paramount and
mysterious respects we are all equal; but in no other. In our rela-
tions to each other, as the members of a civil community, all Per-
sonal Equality disappears. We are differently constituted; we come
into the world under different circumstances of birth and natural en-
dowments, different relations, different duties and necessities ; differ-
ent opportunities for good or evil arise ; and all that can be done for
the original Equality of Man, his Equality in the eyes of his Creator,
is to allow every man, (as far as law and civil ordinances are con-


cerned), to do what he thinks good, if he do it without injury to
others. No other Equality, but this sort of Equality, is possible.?
And again, in another passage, after appealing to the good, practi-
cal, common sense of all English audiences, against the visionary
schemes of the French political philosophy, Professor Smyth asks:?
? Why should there now be a contest going on between the people
and their masters; between the many and the few ? Those who are
placed low in the scale of social existence are neither placed there
nor kept there, by those who are above them. The gentlemen of
our days are not wanting in feelings of benevolence to those beneath
them; and never in the history of the world were such exertions
made by the upper and middle classes of society, to rescue the
laboring classes from ignorance and vice, and to extend to them the
benefits of knowledge and the comforts and support of Religion.?
? Is it expected,? he continues, ? that the rich shall parcel out their
estates, or break up and divide their capitals, and cause the poor to
cease out of the land ? or (if they did) could such an effect be thus
produced? Far different seems the economy of an overruling Pro-
vidence. It is by a system of mutual dependence and assistance; of
reciprocal obedience and control; of diversified elevation and depres-
sion; by interchanged offices of kindness and duty;?and not by
primitive systems of rude Liberty and Equality, that it has pleased
the Almighty Father to call forth the virtues and provide for the
wellfare of his creatures.?
I must now recall your attention to another modern phrase, the
? Tyranny of the Majority/? of which we hear and read so much in all
writings about American politics; and of which some men, even
here, express a sort of morbid timidity.
Of the travellers who have written on the Tyranny of the Majority
among the Americans, I will only refer to De Tocqueville as cited by
Professor Smyth. I should observe that De Tocqueville, (though a
Republican) does not acquiesce in the great Republican maxim, that
every one is to submit to the Majority,
It is not, he says, ? that I object" like other European writers, to
the weakness of the American Government; ?l object to its force:
not to the extreme of Liberty that I find there, but that there is no
protection against tyranny,?


De Tocqueville asks; ?
?Is any one treated with cruelty and injustice in America, to whom
shall he appeal ?
?To the Public Opinion ? It is that which forms the Majority.
?To the Legislative Body ? It represents the Majority, and obeys
it blindly.
?To the Public Force ? Public force is only the Majority under
arms.
?To a Jury ? It is but the Majority, clothed with the power of pro-
nouncing its own decrees. The Judges themselves are in some states
elected by the Majority ; and, however unreasonable or unjust your
treatment, you have no course but to submit.?
To this Tyranny of the Majority De Tocqueville finds a barrier, in
the Lawyers of America; and he makes the following profound, but
most practical remarks, on their position with reference to the future
stability of that great Republic; ?
? The Lawyers of America,? says De Tocqueville, ?where there is no
nobility, no men of letters, and where the people are distrustful of the
rich, form the superior political class, and the most intellectual por-
tion of American society. They can, therefore, gain nothing by
change. They are then made conservative, and this is a feeling,
added to the love of order which is so natural to them. They are
the American aristocracy, and they form the most powerful;?and so
to speak, the only counterpoise to the Democracy.?
Important testimony this, my friends, to the value of the ? Great Bro-
therhood of the Law,? considered as the natural barrier under Repub-
lican Institutions like America, against the excessive pressure of the
Democratic principle; but which I quote to you, not from any idea that
in any social communities founded on the Constitutional Law of Eng-
land, any such office is assumed by the Lawyers ; but rather as show-
ing you the general conservative tendency of the English Law, even
when adopted by Republican Governments; as well as suggesting
this remark, that the study and practice of the English Law will
insensibly raise in every candid mind all proper barriers against the
undue preponderance of the naturally democratic principles of every
individual and isolated member of a free and independent com-
munity.


But besides being pleased with the American Lawyers, De Tocque-
ville finds great safety for America in the Municipal Institutions;
where ? Democracy may consume its dangerous activity, and where the
people may serve a sort of apprenticeship to their Republican duties.?
These Municipal Institutions he dwells on at great length, and evi-
dently considers this as one of the most important parts of his work ;
and so do others. If any of my hearers should like to pursue the
subject of Municipal Institutions a little further, they will find an
admirable chapter on the subject in M. Guizot?s History of Civiliza-
tion in Europe.
In considering the effect of the passage I read to you from De
Tocqueville as to the Tyranny of the Majority in a pure Republic,
and in applying its warnings to any community founded upon English
Constitutional Law, as at present practically operating throughout
the British Empire; you must ever bear in mind the great peculiarity
of the English Constitution in so balancing and guarding the most
opposite interests of all ranks and orders in the community, that each
is insensibly compelled to communicate its due proportion of activity,
and no more than its due proportion of activity, to the practical
business of good legislation.
There are most excellent reasonings on this topic throughout De
Lolme?s Essay, and in almost every page of Professor Smyth?s Lec-
tures, but as they do not directly and immediately elucidate the sub-
ject of this evening?s Lecture, I must not read them to you, I must,
however, in reference to this ? Tyranny of the Majority,? refer you
to some admirable warnings, in Professor Smyth?s Lectures
against the danger of applying these Abstract Principles of Natural
Right to existing and established communities.
? Judging from the conduct and reasonings of too many among
us,? says the Professor, in one of the Introductory Lectures on
the French Revolution, annually addressed to the University of
Cambridge, ?we should say that the French Revolution has rolled
over us with all its thunders in vain; and that we are still as
thoughtless, presumptuous, and ignorant, as we were, before those
terrible scenes had taught us the rashness and fatal effects, of
abolishing existing distinctions of ranks and orders and ancient
Institutions; and the absurdity of relying for good laws upon the


single, unaided operation of the great republican principle of ? self-
government,? as it is called; that is, ?the Art of governing by
the Majority?the mere Majority, no matter how constituted or num-
bered; the Art of resolving a Kingdom into its Parishes, and govern-
ing by its Vestries.?
But I must hasten to a close.?lt would be quite beside my duty
to discuss any of these theories. We are, I trust, all of us content
with the practical liberty to be enjoyed under British Law ; and for
my part, at. least, having never heard or read of any Nation or Commu-
nity which enjoyed more practical liberty than Englishmen, I listen
with great indifference to any of these theoretical speculations. I have
ever thought that the application of theoretical principles of Abstract
Bight to our established institutions must be fraught with extreme
peril to all our daily comforts and peace ;?and, that any person ac-
quainted with the great land-marks of English Law, and acknow-
ledging, as every such person must, how carefully the Natural Liberty
of Man is provided for and how little the Natural Equality of Man is
interfered with in all our English Institutions ; or rather how anxi-
ously the Natural Equality of Man is guarded and fenced about, ?
in the enactments of all English Laws, as well as in their adminis-
tration ; ?that any such reasonably well-informed person should be led
astray by these speculative theories from our practically ultra-repub-
lican Liberty, surpasses and has ever surpassed my individual and
unaided comprehension.
I fear I have wearied you by these remarks; ?but you must see
that I was unavoidably led into them, as part of the consideration of
the fourth essential of Valid Law, the ? Consent of the People;? a
phrase which every ? politician? clothes with his own peculiar ideas;
and as to which you must exercise your oavu judgment. I could only
bring before you a few of the opinions of those great and wise men,
who have investigated the fundamental basis of Abstract Law, ?and
who have laboured anxiously, and often thanklessly, to guard us against
the sophist, the demagogue and the experimentalist.
But to be effectually guarded against all these perils, so that you
may preserve undiminished the English Constitutional Liberties;
which, as Blackstone says, in the final words of his Commentaries, are
? the best birthright and noblest inheritance that your posterity can


claim at your hands,? you must, by the unerring light of the history
of your own country, test the accuracy and truthful wisdom of these
abstract principles. ?It is there, in the history of our own country,?
says Professor Smyth, from whom I have already quoted and as the
Lecturer to whom, in their youthful days at the University of Cam-
bridge, those great Constitutional authorities Hallam and Macaulay
listened with patient and anxious reflexion ; and from whose lessons
of public wisdom and political honor hundreds of England?s noblest
public characters may, in the present day, trace their own philanthro-
pic and high-minded principles, and the pages of whose Lectures you
will never open without instruction: ??It is,? says Professor Smyth,
? there, in the history of our own country, that we shall learn those
lessons which are, of all others, the most important:?to pre-
vent Revolutions, still more than how to conduct them: ?acquire
timely habits of caution and forethought, of modesty and calmness ;
obtain instruction, which we do not purchase by our own suffering ; ??
and have our existing passions and prejudices, bur selfishness and our
unreasonableness awed into silence and subdued and transformed into
practical wisdom, by Meditation on the Past.
I must now conclude this Lecture.
Earnestly and with a sincere desire to communicate sound practical
wisdom, I have this evening endeavoured to perform the duty which
the good opinion of others thought me able to undertake, in explain-
ing, as far as the limits of an evening?s Lecture would allow me,
some of the fundamental essentials of Law, in their application to the
particular Laws under which we live in comfort, in one civil com-
munity as British subjects.
As always happens, when an individual comes out of his own
limited routine of thought, and casts down what Lord Bacon calls?
The idols of his own den,
I have most pleasantly to myself refreshed my own mind, by recalling
these old friendships of my youthful studies.
And, not less delightfully or advantageously to myself, have I re-
newed this evening the impressions of old-fashioned legal principles,
long since engraven on my mind; impressions which have also, I would
fain hope, been communicated to your minds this evening; and must


have produced in all our minds, I trust, this gradual, unalterable
conviction: ?that there are some eternal unchangeable and catholic
truths in these old-fashioned principles of Hooker, Burke and
Blackstone, which are manifested even in our own times by their
complete and as it were fresh and practical adaptation to our own
living selves, in all our own daily duties, political and social; ?whether
as subjects of the mighty British Empire ; ?as colonists of New South
Wales; ?or in the still more important office and responsible duties,
now cast upon all of us in every condition of Colonial life, of each
contributing our share to bind together into one Harmonious Federa-
tion, all the subjects of British Law, in this the Australian
Hemisphere.
I have now only to thank you for the patience with which you
have listened to me, during this attempt to render Law interesting to
you; and I shall indeed rejoice, if any of you should hereafter be in-
duced to investigate the Laws of England any further for your own
gratification and mental improvement, in any of the authors whom I
have cited; or, if anything I have said this evening should hereafter
be usefully remembered by any who have this evening honored me
with their attention.




