

Y/U. /
CONFIDENTIAL j/ // Fi - ,y„ /#
LECTOR
MOORING TORPEDOES
*
E. C. GRACKNELL,
MAJOR COMMANDING TORPEDO AND SIGNALLING CORPS.
1881.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




MOORING TORPEDOES.
The question of mooring, which appears so simple a matter at first sight, is
really one of the most difficult and important questions to be solved in con-
nection with submarine mining, more particularly for buoyant mines when
fired by observation, as the exact spot should be as nearly as possible the
same ] but, as you are aware, the change of tide from ebb to flow will alter the
position of a charge, or even a change in the direction of the wind \ although
the mine may be some distance from the surface, the effect is felt, and unless
the case is very carefully moored it will drift some feet from its original
position.
The object to be attained is to keep the torpedo as stationary as possible
on the exact spot it is intended to explode, which, in deep water with tidal
currents, is almost impossible, for one reason—the rise and fall of tide will
give you a different flotation, and allow your mine to be driven up and down
the channel, and sometimes twisted and turned on its own sling-chains, which,
of course, would be liable to injure or destroy the insulated electric cable.
The anchors or heavy weights should be sufficient to withstand heavy
seas without shifting or straining the cables. This necessitates, for buoyant
mines, to keep them perfectly rigid, an arrangement of three chains such as those
used by the Austrians in the Adriatic in 1866, which consisted of a wooden
triangular platform, to which heavy weights were lashed. The platform held
the mine in position by three wire ropes or chains, which kept the charge the
required depth. This was managed by means of a self-acting arrangement,
consisting of a pulley attached to the extremity of each of the wire ropes
through which the mooring-chains pass, and are fired by means of a self-
acting key. This key is of considerable weight, and slips down as the charge
is hauled into place ] but the moment the chain is slackened the two arms,
which are arranged to allow the chain to pass through in one direction only,
catch into the link of the chain and hold the charge firmly in its place.
The apparatus is constructed to allow the chain to pass freely through it,
and is provided with bolts and nuts to admit of its being separated, in order
to disconnect the chains when required.
In connection with the buoyant mines for 500 lbs. (cotton) a mushroom
sinker has now been adopted, weighing 7 cwt.
Some experiments were carried out by Eieut. Chadwick, in the Medway,
near Upnor Castle, for submerging charges, which are sufficiently interesting
to refer to here. In the Medway there is a strong tidal current, and in some
places great depth of water, so that a submarine mine, if placed on the bottom,
would require, for any destructive effect, to be provided with a very heavy
charge of gun-cotton. It must therefore be floated up from moorings to
which it is attached. This, of course, increases the chances of something going
wrong, and in nine cases out of ten the floating torpedo twists the submarine
cable with the mooring-chains, and causes some derangement, unless the wooden
triangle referred to was inconveniently large, which would make an easy prey
to an enemy’s creepers ; and one was carried away at the Upnor experiments
by the anchor of a barge. It was also found during these experiments that
when two cables only were used for mooring, with a view to keeping the mine
in a perfectly stationary position, that unless they were kept a very long way
12a I—Bl


apart they were certain to become twisted round each other; and if during the
process of lowering the mooring-cables got a single turn round each other the
possibility of keeping them apart was out of the question, and they were
found to revolve as though the two cables were attached to the same point;
in fact, with the 3-knot tide in the Medway, the moorings invariably became
twisted up in such a way that the electrical conductor would inevitably
become much kinked, and in many cases injured. To obviate this, Lieut.
Chadwick proposed, for small charges at moderate depths, that they should be
lashed on to spars, on which a rough framework to fit the form of the torpedo
had been arranged, the mooring-cables to be attached to the extremities of the
spar, thus securing the necessary distance between the points of attachment to
prevent the chance of entanglement.
The next was a ladder arrangement for mooring, which was tried in
connectioh with some experiments on board H.M.S. “ Cambridge.” A buoyant
torpedo, consisting of a 27-gallon iron oil-cask containing 15 gallons of water,
and a strongly buoyant nun-buoy to represent a circuit-closer, were fitted with
two mooring-ropes from the circuit-closer to the torpedo, and thence to the
mooring-ballast, the ropes being separated by wooden rounds like a ladder, to
resist the tendency to twist. The arrangement was placed in 10 fathoms of
water in the Hamoaze, Plymouth, a place liable to strong eddy tides, and at the
end of twenty-four days it was removed. Whilst it was in position it was twice
examined by divers, who reported that the mooring-ropes and connecting
wires were clear of turns; but when taken up a round turn was found near
the base of the ladder, near the ballast; but this arrangement is liable to
become entangled with sea-weed, the weight of which would sink the circuit-
closer.
Lieutenant Chadwick recommended the following mode of lowering mines
into their places ; —The mines, with their moorings, were carried to the place
where they were to be submerged in a barge provided with a derrick or crane ;
the mushroom sinker is lowered by means of two ropes attached to two eyes
in the sides; each of these ropes leads through a sheave in the end of a davit
and thence to a crab capstan to prevent twisting.
The conclusions arrived at from these experiments were as follows:
That a single cable should be used wherever possible, and that a wire rope
will not twist like a hempen one; that the mushroom sinker is the best form
for soft or muddy bottoms—for a hard or rocky bottom a dead-weight must
be depended upon.
With a current up to 4 knots, a single iron cable, 3-inch, with a sinker
which holds well, will be sufficient; but when the current is very strong and
with a considerable rise and fall of tide it may be better to moor with two
cables, one down and one up the stream.
From the experiments in the Medway it was found that two cables
attached to a case, close to each other, twist together immediately, and the
case is drawn down out of position. Where the best form of sinker cannot
be obtained heavy blocks of stone, pig-iron, or any heavy weights can be used
for moorings.
In practice the greatest difficulty exists in mooring any object in a
perpendicular position, especially when two mooring-chains are required.
Lieutenant Jekyll, R.E., recommends that chain-cables be laid across a
channel, as the mines can then be laid and moored in straight lines ; but
before sinking the heavy chains small mooring-chains should be rove through
the links, at places marked, and the ends buoyed. The conducting wires
should then be laid and the ends attached to the same buoys. In this way the
cables could be tested and everything made ready before the mines are
required at all.


There is no doubt that by using chain-cables there would, in one way, be
a great advantage, by having the mines so arranged that their positions could
be easily determined, and by doing away with a multiplicity of anchors and
anchor-buoys.
A 2|-inch cable would be quite strong enough for 100-lb. mines, and
would counteract any reasonable flotation that would be given them, as a
chain-cable of this size would weigh 4001bs. to the fathom.
Mathieson has suggested a modification of this plan, as follows :—A
strong hempen cable is first laid across a river or channel, marked at intervals,
where it is intended to lay down the line of mines.
To place the moorings in position the following plan is adopted : —A
mushroom sinker and gear having been made fast to one of the davits of a
pinnace, the hawser just mentioned is under-run and passed over the bow of
the boat at the fore rowlocks and warped along until she is abreast the mark
previously made on the hawser; one end of a branch hawser is now bent on
at each mark, the extremity of the branch hawser is made fast to the mush-
room sinker to be passed into its proper position. For small charges, say
lOOlbs. of powder, a distance of 30 feet from the directing hawser would be
sufficient, or perhaps a little over. It now only remains to cut away the spun-
yarn lashing, securing the cable, which retains the moorings at the extremity
of the davit, and, thus set free, the sinker falls into its required position.
The sinker being got into position, any further arrangement for attaching the
charge, electric cable, and circuit-closer may be carried on without difficulty,
or the charge, circuit-closer, &c., might be previously attached to the sinker
and launched with it.
There is one thing which, in my opinion, has been entirely overlooked in
these arrangements. It would be most dangerous and impossible to protect
the cables against countermining and explosive creepers, if laid in this way,
as they would easily catch the mooring-chains and hawsers and readily destroy
them. There should never be by any chance a cable or wire across the line of
tide or current.
Favourable weather and slack water, if possible, especially in a tidal
channel, are very essential when getting moorings into position. The diffi-
culties are much increased by a fresh breeze and rough water.
There can be no doubt that this plan (if it were a safe one) would afford
very great facilities for the examination of charges after they have been sub-
merged. To reach any particular charge it would only be necessary to under-
run the main hawser until the required branch was reached, when the mine
could be raised and examined. If the main hawser became broken it would
not be very difficult to bring it to the surface for repairs. When the main
hawser is not in use it should be drawn as taut as possible, so as to prevent
unnecessary motion. The system would answer very well up to 7 fathoms if
there was no such thing as countermining.
The exact position of a mine, as near as possible, must be known to the
defenders, and to ensure this an arrangement in lines is best for this object.
In broad and deep waters the difficulties would be increased, and the moorings
would have to be arranged with intermediate vessels or buoys for hauling
them into exact line, by which the barges with the mines ready for lowering
would be guided. It would be better to place these moorings in position at
leisure, and thus the most difficult and tedious part of the operation would be
completed, ready for putting the channel in a state of defence.
With electro-contact mines, as you are aware, they have to be placed in
position from 10 to 15 feet below the surface. To accomplish this a hauling-
down gear has been proposed, by running a hawser through the sinker for
mooring the mine, then passing it through the ring of an anchor at a distance


and attaching it again to a buoy, with considerable flotation near the surface.
This appears to me to be a very clumsy and unnecessary arrangement, as the
mines can be moored to their sinkers by arranging the length of the steel rope
cables before they are submerged, without allowing either buoy to appear at
the surface, which would only become a target for an enemy.
When charges are laid on the bottom they should be of sufficient weight
to ensure their remaining stationary. Lieut. Wallace, in his account of the
demolition of wrecks in the Hoogley, says :—“ Sometimes, in a strong tide-
way, a charge of 500 lbs. of powder required a weight of 4005)5. to submerge
it. When in slack water less than half the weight was sufficient.”
The next point to be considered is the best plan of lowering a heavy charge
into its position at the required depth below the surface, and when lowered
attaching it to the sinker. Two modes have been suggested by which this
may be effected, after ascertaining the exact depth of water by sounding :
Attach the sinker with the required amount of cable and lower them both
together ; or by lowering the sinker first and drawing the charge down to it,
and when it has reached the required depth fasten it securely. But by the
latter means you require the diver, which is an unnecessary expense, and he
can generally be more profitably employed.
After considerable practice the first method has been found quite
practicable, with 500-lb. charges, up to a depth from 10 to 12 fathoms in the
open sea. In the experiments at Chatham the apparatus used for placing the
charges in position was a pontoon raft, constructed of any materials that
could be obtained on the spot. Some of the charges moored in the earlier
stages by a single mushroom sinker were lowered from a raft by means of a
derrick. A raft of this kind formed a tolerably good platform from which to
carry on such operations in smooth water, but requires a gunwale to prevent
small stores from being washed or lost overboard.
Colonel Stodherd sums up his experience in mooring submarine mines as
follows :
Ist. When it is necessary to place the moorings in position at leisure, be
very careful to get them into the exact sites previously decided on
for the mines.
2nd. Arrange all running gear in the simplest form, and try it at intervals
to see that it keeps in good order.
3rd. When a channel in which the moorings have been previously placed
is to be put in a state of defence, it is only necessary to bring the
charges to the required point, and haul them down in position.
4th. With a current up to 4 knots or more an hour, a mine may be
moored with a single cable, provided plenty of buoyancy is given.
sth. With a current up to 4 knots or more, where the charges must
be held in a defined position, it may be necessary to moor them fore
and aft—for this purpose a double line of moorings is required, and
in hauling down it would be necessary to take care that the top is
horizontal when the mine is in position.
6th. Under ordinary circumstances, that is to say, with a depth of 10 to
12 fathoms, it is not found necessary to place the moorings first in
position and haul the mines down to them.
The most approved sort of sinkers for use with ground and buoyant mines
are those formed of cast-iron, and weigh respectively 7 and 5 cwt.
Boats and barges must be provided with small derricks or davit-crabs for
placing the mines in position ; tie barges should be capable of carrying
fourteen to twenty mines, with mooring-gear, cables, &c.


The mode of mooring a 500-lb. buoyant mine complete, with cable, sinker,
and mooring-gear, is represented on the diagram. Special protection is found
necessary between the cable and the circuit-closer, and it has to be stopped
at intervals to the wire rope bridles, leaving plenty of slack.
The chain attached to the sinker is an ordinary Ar tripping chain, connecting
an outer ring of the sinker to the cable, and stopped to the latter at intervals,
so that when it is necessary to raise the mine it may be done by under-running
the electric cable, by which the tripping chain would be brought to the surface,
and the sinker raised, and the strain on the electric cable be avoided.
To moor a 100-lb. Matheison’s mine is very much after the same plan ; the
mine has a given flotation, and is branched off from the main cable, which is
passed through a disconnector in the junction-box, from which the branch
cable passes through the circuit-closer to the platinum wire fuze, and thence to
earth, by being connected with the metal casing of the primer. A 5-cwt. sinker
should be used for these mines.
There is a difficulty in mooring submarine mines when there is a consider-
able rise and fall of tide, so as to show no indication on the surface as the
depth of water decreases, but none of the present arrangements have been
very successful. The only practicable way out of the difficulty is to moor the
mines midway between the high and low tides, so that at the lowest water
they will be 5 feet below the surface. Of course this would not do for such
places as the “ Severn” and the “ Wye,” where the rise and fall is about
60 feet, but for this coast there will be no great difficulty with a rise and fall
of only 4 or 5 feet.
Extemporised moorings must be arranged when the cast-iron sinkers cannot
be procured, such as the triangular wooden platform proposed by the
Austrians, which, when weighted with pig-iron or stone, is well adapted for a
rocky bottom or bad holding ground. There is a serious objection to this
method, namely, the mooring with three chains or cables, as they are liable to
become twisted, and there is no reason why only one cable should not be used.
Large stones and pig-iron, or, in fact, any heavy weights, when the regular
cast-iron moorings cannot be procured, may be used, but the stones should be
irregular in form at the bottom, and should not be quite flat on the surface,
as they then obtain a much better holding. The Germans used large blocks of
stone in 1870 and ’7l, and found them very efficient. The Austrians recom-
mend very heavy moorings, as much as seven times the weight of the charge,
but they generally use buoyant mines, hauled down to their positions after
the moorings have been placed, and without considerable excess of weight the
moorings, during the hauling down, are very liable to get out of position ;
and it was found in practice where it was intended to haul a mine down
to moorings previously laid, considerably more than double the buoyancy
would be necessary, for the reasons already given.
The question of buoyancy for a buoyant mine is a matter of importance.
Eor instance, in still water and up to a 4-knot current it should not be less
than f of the weight of a 600-lb. mine ; but this does not include the attach-
ment chains, the sinker, and the cable. Eor very strong currents more
buoyancy should be given and much larger moorings should be allowed.
An excess of buoyancy is generally recommended, to allow for slight
leakage or any other disturbing cause which might tend to reduce its efficiency,
more particularly when improvised arrangements have to be resorted to. In
muddy bottoms the weight of the moorings is not so important, as the sinkers
are to some extent buried in the mud, which forms a much more satisfactory
holding ground.
To facilitate the search for anchors or sinkers at the bottom by a diver,
it is always considered better to paint them white.


Nearly all these remarks will apply to our electro-contact mines at Botany
and Newcastle, where we have in one case strong currents and in another
deep water; but they will not apply to Sydney, more particularly as the pro-
posed arrangement for submerging the ground-mines by first dredging out
holes with the clam-shell dredger, placed in accurate position, and then burying
the mines in these excavations and covering them carefully over with sand,
will save all the risks and dangers from mooring-chains and sinkers and the
possible chance of their shifting their positions, and above all keeping them
safe from countermining and creeping.
The electro-contact mines must, I regret to say, be moored as described,
and will, of course, be liable to all the dangers of heavy seas and counter-
mining ; but this cannot be avoided, except by passive obstructions, such as
nets, ropes, and other gear likely to catch the screws of unfriendly vessels.
But it must be remembered we do not attach much importance to the electro-
contact mines, as they will not form any portion of the main defence of the
harbour of Port Jackson.
Sydney ; Thomas Richards, Government Printer. —lBBl.




