





V\l "55^
Vv
LECTUEE.
My Temperance Friends,
I HAVE somewhere heard of certain members of a
congregation who waited upon their bishop with
the complaint that in utter disregard ot their
earnest petitions and their strong protests, their
clergyman had continued for ten years to preach
to them one and the same sermon. This circumstance
they represented as a great grievance, and implored
his lordship’s interference on their behalf. Naturally
anxious to know what that remarkable sermon
had been the bishop enquired of the complainants what
was the subject. With evident uneasiness and confusion
each looked at the other with the hope that some one
might be so fortunate as to recollect something about the
subject, but in vain ; whereupon the good bishop remarked
—“Gentlemen, you had better go back and hear that
sermon once more.”
While not vouching for the authenticity of that anec-
dote, I think it not improbable that though the Temper-
ance question has been before the world for several years,
it may still be necessary to recommend public attention
to it “ once more,” and that such a course may be attended
with very profitable results.
Daniel Webster, we are informed, was once asked


what was the most important thought that ever occurred
to his mind. He placed his hands on his brow, paused,
and then replied, “ The most important thought that ever
occurred to me is the sense of my individual responsibility
to God and man.” Individual responsibility to God and
man! Yes, however much it may be questioned, or
ignored, that is a state from which none can possibly be
free. That is your present state, and mine also; and if I
know my own heart aright, it is under a deep sense of my
individual responsibility to God and man that as a
pledged abstainer, I now publicly advocate the great and
philanthropic cause of temperance.
Upon a question like that of temperance, about
which so much has been written and spoken, it may well
be supposed that scarcely anything original can remain to
be expressed. Of this 1 have been fully conscious, but
not being so concerned to produce anything original, as I
have been to set before you the testimony and experience
of others, which, all things considered, must have more
weight than my own, I would immediately acknowledge
that in the preparation of my lecture I have freely availed
myself of every source of information within my reach—
a proceeding which, justice to yourselves, to myself, and
above all, to the subject itself, most imperatively de-
manded ; and I trust, as one result, that, without giving
needless offence, or through fear holding back any portion
of the truth, I may be enabled to present the subject to
you in a plain and practical form.
Upon a calm and careful survey of this vast question
we are confronted by the following facts, the evidence of
which is so overwhelming and convincing that to the
disproof of them anyone may be safely challenged.
The first fact I would name is this —That drunkenness
is a widely prevalent sin; a sin from which no grade or
calling in society is free.
To ascertain the vast extent of this enormous evil
must ever remain impossible to human research, yet there
is reason for believing that there is no evil more exten-
sive. The very fact that in one country alone 60,000
human beings—precious souls for whom Christ died—
annually fill the drunkard’s grave, marks out this evil as
one of immeasureably gigantic proportions ; and could
all the cases of drunkenness, public and private, be col-
lected a result would be disclosed of which the mind could
form no adequate conception.
It is a great error to rank drunkenness as among the
catalogue of ordinary sins. It is a special evil, and one
unhappily affecting every class of society, and both the
sexes.
2


That I may not be deemed personal on this point |I
will address you in the language of Edward Baines, Esq.,
M.P. That statesman speaking of the seductiveness of
intoxicating drinks, says—“ That no man living who nses
intoxicating drinks is free from the danger of ultimate
and habitual excess ; and there seems to be no character
or circumstances that free men from the danger. I have
known men of the strongest and clearest intellect, and|of
■Vigorous resolution, whom it has made weaker than
children and focls. I have known gentlemen of refine-
ment and taste whom it has debased into brutes. I have
known poets of high genius whom it has bound in a
bondage worse than the galleys, I have known states-
men, lawyers, and judges whom it has killed. I have
known kind husbands and fathers whom it has turned
into monsters. I have known elegant and Christian ladies
whom it has converted into bloated sots. I have known
ministers, in and out of the Establishment, of high
academic honors, of splendid eloquence, nay, of vast use-
fulness, whom it has fascinated and hurried over the
precipice of public infamy, with their eyes open, and
gazing with horror at their fate.” And to like effect
the hon. Schuyler Colfax, Vice-President of the United
States, in an address delivered at Washington, very
solemnly remarks—“ My friends, from the most learned
profession, from the bench and the bar, from even the
sacred desk, this demon, like death, has seemed to love
to choose a shining mark.” I dare say there is scarcely
an individual in any community but can count up in-
stances from personal observation of the lamentable fact
we are considering.
The second fact that I would name is this— That
drunkenness is encouraged according as facilities for obtain-
ing alcoholic beverages increase. “The evils that imme-
diately resulted from the passing of the Beer Act afford
proof that English intoxication is the result principally
of fermented liquor. By throwing open the beer trade
the legislature anticipated that intemperance would be
diminished through the population substituting malt
liquor for spirits ; but experience proved the very reverse
—drunkenness increased all over the country, showing
the consumption of that article to have engendered
drunken habits in the community.”
“ It is a curious and important fact,” observes Dr.
Colquhoun in his work on “ The Police of the Metro-
polis,” “ that during the periods when distilleries were
stopped in 1796 and 1797, although bread and every
necessary of life was considerably higher than during the
preceding year, the poor, in that part of the town where
b 2


the chief part reside, were, apparently, more comfortable,
paid their rents more regularly, and were better fed than
at any period for some years before ; even although they
had not the benefit of the extensive charities which were
distributed in 1795. This can only be accounted for by
their being denied the indulgence of gin, which had be-
come in a great measure inaccessible from its very high
price. It may fairly be concluded that the money for-
merly spent in this imprudent manner had been applied
to the purchase of provisions and other necessaries, to
the amount of some hundred thousand pounds.”
Now the lesson from these examples is obvious. “De-
crease the facilities for obtaining intoxicating drinks and
you decrease drunkenness.” “ Increase the facilities and
you encourage drunkenness.” We are, therefore, not
surprised to find that sobriety-loving people in a little
centre of population, not very far distant from us, should
view with alarm any prospect of the introduction, of
drinking places into their midst. There is no surer
method by which to turn a sober, into a drunken commu-
nity than to supply such community with every facility
for obtaining intoxicating drinks. And that which we
now advance is no matter of mere private opinion, but of
fact—stern, incontrovertible fact !
The third fact that I would name is this— That in pro-
portion as drunkenness increases so crime in general in-
creases. In proof of this I cannot do better than place
before you the testimony of judges, gaol governors, gaol
chaplains, and various functionaries of the law, all of
whom are in a position to pronounce with authority on
this subject.
The venerable Sir Matthew Hale has thus recorded
his_ own conviction “ The places in the judicature
which 1 have long held in this kingdom have given me an
opportunity to observe the original cause of the crimes
and enormities during the last twenty years ; and by
that observation I have found that if the murders, bur-
glaries, robberies, riots, tumults, adulteries, rapes, and
other enormities that have been committed during that
time were divided into five parts, four of them have
been the product of excessive drinking.”
Judge Coleridge, at the Oxford assizes, stated that
“he never knew a case brought before him which was
not, directly or indirectly, connected with intoxicating
liquor.” Judge Erskine, at Salisbury, states as the result
of his observation that “ninety-nine cases out of every
hundred are caused by drinking.” Judge Alderson, of
York, says—-“ If all men could be persuaded from the
use of intoxicating drinks the office of Judge would be a


sinecure.” And Sir William A’Beckett, who was some-
time since the Chief Justice of Victoria, and Sir Alfred
Stephen, the Chief Justice of New South Wales, state
that ‘ ‘ more than three-fourths of the criminals brought
before them was owing to the influence of strong drinks.”
Here, then, we have the testimony of judges, and with
it agrees that of gaol governors. Mr Wontner, for some
time governor of Newgate, expressed his conviction that
“ ninety-nine out of every hundred prisoners that came
to Newgate committed their crimes in consequence of
intemperance.” Mr Mayor, of Bideford gaol, Devon,
writes—“ I believe intemperance to be the cause of the
greatest part of the crime and misery which, as a nation,
we are suffering under.” Many similar testimonies might
be added from such officials, but let us hear what certain
gaol chaplains have said on the subject. The Rev. G.
Holt, chaplain at one time of Leicester gaol, says —“He
ascertained that the remote or direct cause of every indi-
vidual’s confinement therein, for either misdemeanor or
felony, was either intemperate habits or the pernicious
custom of giving strong drink to children.” The Rev.
D. Ruell, who for ten years was chaplain of two of the
Metropolitan prisons, says —“I have no doubt that three-
fourths, or four-fifths, of our prisoners have been influ-
enced by drink ; and as to murder, maiming, and other
crimes attended with personal violence, they, for the
most part, are actually committed under the excitement
of liquor. ” And the Rev. Mr Scott, chaplain of Glas-
gow gaol, states—“ Of the many thousands annually im-
prisoned I think it would not be possible to find one
hundred sober criminals in any one year.” From com-
mitting magistrates and justices of the peace also comes
like testimony. One says—“ Were it not for intemper-
ance the Police Court might be shut up and another
‘ ‘ believed he was under the mark in stating that four-
fifths of the crime was caused by intoxicating liquors.”
It would be easy indeed, were it necessary, to bring for-
ward similar evidence to almost any extent ; but we are
content, and submit that the evidence adduced estab-
lishes beyond all gainsaying the fact that “ drunkenness
is the parent of almost every crime ;” and that “in pro-
portion as drunkenness increases, so crime in all its varied
forms and degrees is sure to increase.” Thus, it will be
seen—“that the Temperance movement has to deal with
a huge and real evil —an evil fraught with the most
pernicious and disastrous consequences to every
community, and deeply abhorrent in the sight of God.”
In the presence, then, of these facts, viz., “That
drunkenness is a widely prevalent sin affecting every
5


grade oi society,” “That drunkenness is encouraged
according as facilities for obtaining alcoholic beverages
increases,” and “ That in proportion as drunkenness in-
creases so crime in general increases”—l make bold to
say that no right-minded person could withhold his
assent to the following proposition—viz., “That mea-
sures are necessary, and should be taken, for the sup-
pression of the terrible and degrading crime of drunken-
ness.”
Now whatever room for difference of opinion there
may be as to the measures which “ should be taken,” it
cannot be denied that drunkenness will necessarily de-
crease in proportion as the total abstinence principle be-
comes the rule and not the exception.
In stating this, I beg to be most clearly understood. I
do not for one moment teach that the total abstinence
principle is to supersede the glorious Gospel of Christ.
God forbid that I should. “ preach another Gospel” than
that which Christ proclaimed. I do not teach that re-
forming a drunkard is equivalent to saving his soul ; for
though drunkenness is one way, it is not the only way to
everlasting ruin. I tell him though he reform, if he
would be saved he must repent of sin, believe in Christ,
and live a holy life. Ido not teach that signing the
pledge is securing the future sobriety of him or her who
signs it ; far otherwise, I maintain the need of daily
grace, which must be daily sought of God’s Holy Spirit,
and which will then be daily given. Thus guarding my-
self against being misunderstood, I would confidently
assert that Total Abstinence from all intoxicating bever-
ages is essential to the 'prevention of drunkenness, and
that the universal adoption of such a principle would be
pre- eminently conducive to the physical, motal, and
spiritual welfare of the whole human race.
Looking to the fact that “when the Temperance
Reformation began, some of the earliest arguments
brought against it were borrowed (as was supposed) from
the armoury of Scripture texts, and down to the present
time many who hold aloof from that cause defend their
estrangement by a similar appeal to Scripture precedent
and approval;” “and many persuade themselves that the
ordinary means of Christian evangelisation are sufficient
to eradicate this prolific vice with its dismal progeny of
social curses;” I would, before entering upon the proof of
the general principle I have advanced, bespeak your close
attention to the following unassailable truth : —That the
practice of total abstinence from intoxicating drink,
whether for one’s own sake or for that of others, is in
accordance with and therefore sanctioned by the teaching
6


of Holy Scripture. In support of this I remark, that it is
in accordance—
I. —With the spirit of certain injunctions of Holy
Scripture. I would enumerate a few :—“ Be not among
wine-bibbers”(Prov. xxiii., 20). “Wine isamocker, strong
drink is raging ; and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not
wise” (Prov. xx., 1). And who, I ask, may not he deceived
thereby? How many have been ‘‘deceived thereby,”
e’er they were aware! Total abstinence from it is,
therefore, the only absolutely safe course. Again, “Look
not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth
his color in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. At
the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an
adder” (Prov. xxiii., 31, 32). It is manifestly the design of
the wise man to point out the physical cause of all the
misery and mischief he portrays in this passage, and this
he finds in the nature of intoxicating liquor, and hence
both reason and inspiration counsel abstinence even from
the desire of an article which is inherently so harmful.
And once more, “If thy hand offend thee, cut
it off “If thy foot offend thee, cut it off
“If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out” (Mark ix., 43,
47). The principle involved in these instructions is too
plain to be misunderstood. “Anything, however dear,
and even of real and great value, is to be renounced as
soon as it becomes a cause of evil.” “ None will contro-
vert the fact, that to the inebriate, strong drink comes
within the prohibitive scope of this precept, and that he
is called upon to dash away from him the liquor which
has enthralled and cursed him.” Then, again, we have
these injunctions : “ Let us watch and be sober.” “ Let
us who are of the day be sober (1 Thess. v., 6-8). Again,
“Be sober:” “Watch unto prayer.” And, again,
“jThat the aged men be sober” (Titus ii., 2.) As all
words in their first or general use sprung out of certain
ideas, and were, therefore, intended to express those
ideas, we may be sure that the original signification is
the true one. Now, the word “ sober,” and the word,
“ watch,” in the last text, if literally rendered, mean “be
abstinent”—not “abstemious,” but “abstinent.” The word
is neepsate, and is derived from two words, nee, which
signifies “not,” and piein, “to drink.” Thus the
literal signification of the word neepsate is, be total
abstainers from intoxicating drinks. When the word
“sober” signifies “ mental sobriety,” i.e., “soberminded-
ness,” then another word, sophron or sophronos is used.
But were it to be granted that the word neepsate bears
the sense “of strict sobriety and self-possession, the


apostolic meaning would be, ‘Be as sober and self-pos-
sessed as those who do not touch wine’—a distinguished
compliment to total abstinence.”
Thus total abstinence is in harmony with the spirit
of certain Scriptural injunctions. It is also in accord-
ance—
2. With examples contained in Holy Scripture.
Samson, Daniel, John the Baptist, the and
the Ilechabites, were all total abstainers from intoxi-
cating drinks ; and J ohn the Baptist, an abstainer from
any form of grape juice. These are examples against
which we have never been warned or exhorted, and
which God has never condemned. Perhaps some will
say —“ But what about our blessed Lord ? He is to be
our great example. He was a wine-drinker, and surely
we are free from blame if we follow him : it is to no pur-
pose that you mention inferior examples while we have
this on which to rest, and justify the moderate use of in-
toxicating beverages.” “ Well,” I answer, “ 1 shall re-
serve my remarks respecting our Lord’s example until a
later stage of my lecture ; but meanwhile I shall simpjy
hint that evidence favors the conclusion that our Lord
himself was a total abstainer from intoxicating bever-
ages.
Further, Total Abstinence is in accordance—
3. —With the course of conduct laid down by the Apostle
P aul as that which he would himself follow out in the in-
terests of others should the necessity for doing so arise. He
says—“ It is good neither to eat flesh nor to drink wine,
nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is of-
fended, or is made weak.” (Rom. xiv., 21.) Again he
says—“ If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat
no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother
to offend.” (1 Cor. viii., 13.) And finally he says —
££ All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not
expedient.” (1 Cor. vi., 12.) It has been contended
that the plea of total abstinence from intoxicating
beverages as based upon the “ example ” and “ self-de-
nial” argument, is “weak,” and even “ fatal to the
total abstinence cause.” The objection has been thus
stated : —“Over-dress has ruined thousands. Is not mode-
rate and becoming dress the cure and preventive of such
evil consequences ? There was a foolish king who killed
himself by eating too many lampreys. Shall I starve
lest others imitate that royal slave to appetite ?” To this
the answer has been ably given in these words—“ There
is no parallelism between these cases and the total ab-
8


stinence ‘ example ’ argument. The proper remedy for
over - dress is not nakedness, but abstinence
from that kind of clothing which is styled
‘ over - dress ’ by those who want to set
an example. The proper remedy for dealing with a
lamprey-loving monarch is not starvation, but abstinence
from that peculiar kind of food which he thought he could
not and would not do without. The proper remedy, in
the same way, for addiction to intoxicating drinks is not
dying of thirst, but abstinence from that special kind of
drink that does the mischief. God has given dress ; God,
has given fish ; God has given drink. But if any special
kind of any of these becomes to us a cause or occasion of
sin, abstinence from that special kind is the duty of those
to whom it thus becomes dangerous, and is lawful for all
those who from any reason may choose to abstain, and a
fortiori for those who believe or know by experience that
they can help a weak brother by such abstinence.”
From the proofs, then, which have been advanced, it
is established that total abstinence from all intoxicating
beverages is in accordance with, and is therefore sanc-
tioned by, Holy Scripture ; and thus fortified, we have a
fair and conclusive answer against all who charge ab-
stainers with a ‘ ‘ conduct at variance, not only with the
privileges, but also with the duties of the Christian dis-
pensation. ”
PART 11.
In the preceding portion of my lecture, I set before
you three facts, viz.—“ That drunkenness is a widely
prevalent sin, affecting every grade of society that
drunkenness increases in proportion as the facilities for
obtaining intoxicating beverages increase and “ that as
drunkenness increases, so crime of every kind increases.”
In presence of these facts, it was contended “ that mea-
sures are necessary, and should be taken, with a view to
suppress the crime of drunkenness and with respect to
such measures, I advanced the position “ that drunken-
ness will decrease in proportion as total abstinence from
all intoxicating beverages becomes the rule, and not the
exception and to lay a solid foundation for the adoption
of that principle I have furnished you with evidence
“ that the principle of total abstinence from all intoxi-
cating drinks is in accordance with, and therefore sanc-
tioned by, the teaching of Holy Scripture.” In this part
of the lecture I purpose to lay before you certain con-
siderations with a view to urging the adoption of that
principle.


The First Consideration shall be— That alcohol is use-
less as an article for supplying food , or warmth, or power.
Now, as 1 am not a medical man, my opinion in this
department of the subject will probably be of no value in
the judgment of many, and hence I shall be careful to
place the matter before you in the language of those quali-
fied persons who have devoted special attention to the
matter.
Scientific investigation has established beyond all
doubt that alcohol is not food, and so can never supply food.
The use of alcohol is justified by some on the conviction
which they innocently entertain that alcohol is food ; but
is it really so ? To this question a rigorous and searching
investigation answers loudly No ! It has been well re-
marked by an eminent authority, Dr B, W. Richardson—
“ That nature has produced water and milk for man to
drink, and they are in truth all the fluids that are essential.
This lesson, which nature teaches by her rule of pro-
vision for the necessities of animal life, is supplemented
by many other facts each equally authoritative. There is
ever before us the great experiment that all classes of
living beings beneath man require as drink none other
fluids except those I have named. We see the most use-
ful of these animals performing laborious tasks, under-
going extremes of fatigue, bearing changes of heat and
of cold, and enduring work, fatigue, and change for long
series of years, sustained by their solid food, with n o
other fluid than simple water. We see again whole
nations and races of men who labor hard, endure fatigue
and exposure, and who live to the end of a long and
healthy life, taking with their solid sustenance water
only as beverage. When we turn to the physiological
construction either of a man or of a lower animal, we dis-
cover nothing that can lead us to conceive the necessity
for any other fluid than that which nature has supplied.
When we turn, therefore, to the use of such a fluid as
alcohol under any of its disguises—as spirit, as wine, as
beer, as cider, as perry, as liqueurs—we are driven!© look
upon it as something superadded to the necessities of life;
to look upon it, in a word, as a luxury. In such a sense
it has always been received amongst those nations which
have most indulged in it. It is something added to the
ordinary life ; something unnecessary, but agreeable.
Wine, added to the meal, transforms the meal
into a feast ; it is supposed to make glad the
heart, but it is never supposed that if the wine
were not possessed, the life would be shortened. When
we now offer wine it is, by the effect of habit and educa-


tion, an offering of a thing that is super-necessitous, and
in such wise a compliment, an indication of a desire or of
willingness to be exceedingly hospitable. All the evi-
dence of a general kind which can be gathered from these
observations points to the uselessness, for man, of such an
artificial agent as alcohol.” “Alcohol,” observes Dr.
Richardson, “cannot by any ingenuity of excuse for it be
classified amongst the foods of man. It never supplies
matter for construction ; on the contrary, it injures
construction.”
Dr. T. K. Chambers, physician to the Prince of
Wales, says : —“ It is clear that we must cease to regard
alcohol as, in any sense , an aliment, inasmuch as it goes
out as it goes in.”
Dr. Henry Munroe, Professor and Lecturer, says :
—“ Every kind of substance employed by man as food
consists of sugar, starch, oil, and glutinous matters, in
which not one particle of alcohol can be detected. All
these substances must first decay before alcohol can be
obtained. Alcohol contains none of these substances,
and therefore cannot be food.”
Professor Perira, in his treatise on foods, says :
“ Ales are not fitted for ordinary use, on account of their
intoxicating and stupefying qualities.”
Baron Liebig states that the whole purpose of brew-
ing is to get rid of the nitrogenous blood-forming ele-
ments of the grain, and to transmute the useful sugar
into alcohol. “We can prove,” says he, “ with mathe-
matical certainty that as much flour as can lie on the
point of a table-knife is more nutritious than eight quarts
of the best Bavarian beer. That a person who is able
daily to consume that amount of beer, obtains from it,
in a wdxole year, in the most favorable case, exactly the
amount of nutritive constituents which is contained in a
five-pound loaf, or in three pounds of flesh.” And Dr.
Lee says —“There is more real nourishment in a three-
penny brown loaf than there is to be found in three
barrels of Allsopp’s ale containing 365 gallons, and costing
£35.” Thus, as science assures us that alcohol is never
changed into any other compound in the living body, so
it can never be food.
In the next place, alcohol does not impart warmth to
the body. To the question—“ Does alcohol cause increase
of animal heat ?” Dr. Richardson says—“ In putting
this inquiry before you, 1 am prepared to answer it by
direct knowledge gained from individual experiment. In
the course of some researches I had to make for reports
rendered to the British Association for the Advancement


of Science, it became part of my duty to ascertain what
effect certain chemical agents exert over the animal tem-
perature. Amongst these agents was alcohol. At the
time when my researches commenced, viz., in the year
1864, there was nothing definitely known on the subject.
The thermometer was not then in such general use aS it
is now, and it had not been applied, as far as I know, to
this particular determination. Generally, however, it
had been assumed by the majority of persons that alcohol
warms the body, and to ‘take just a drop to keep out
the cold,’ had been the practice which the experience of
ages seemed to justify. It is fair, at the same time, to
say that Dr. Lees and some other far seeing observers
had for many years held and asserted a different view.
They had not entered into minuteness of experimental
detail, but they had observed from the effects of alcohol
on those who had been exposed to cold in the extreme
North and in other regions of ice and snow, that the
drinkers did not live on like other men. Thus, so far as
I had what is called experience to guide me, I found con-
flict of opinion. It was not my business, however, to
accept guidance of this kind, but to appeal to the only
safe guide, the direct interrogation of nature by experi-
ment.”
“ The facts obtained I may epitomise as follows :
The progressive states of change of animal function from
alcohol are four in number. The first is a stage of ex-
citement when there exists relaxation and injection of
the blood vessels of the minute circulation. In this first
stage the external temperature of the body is raised, and
the effect on the extremities of the nerves is that of a
warm glow, like what is experienced during the reaction
from cold. The heat felt in this stage might be con-
sidered as due to the combustion of the alcohol. It is
not so ;itis in truth a process of cooling. During this
stage, which is comparatively brief, the internal tem-
perature is declining ; the air expired from the lungs is
indicating, not an increase, but the first period of re-
duction in the amount of carbonic acid, and the reddened
surface of the body is so reduced in tonicity that cold
applied to it increases the suffusion. It is this most de-
ceptive stage that led the older observers into the error
that alcohol warms the body.”
“The second stage is the stage of excitement with some
muscular inability and deficient self-control. In this
stage the temperature first comes down to its natural
standard, and then declines below what is natural.”
“ The third stage is one of rambling, incoherent,


emotional excitement, with loss of voluntary muscular
power, and ending in helpless unconsciousness. During
this stage the fall of temperature rapidly increases.”
“ The fourth and final stage is that in which the heart
itself begins to fail, and in which death, in extreme in-
stances of intoxication, closes the scene. As the fourth
stage is approached, the decline of temperature becomes
actually dangerous. There is always during this stage a
profound sleep or coma, and while this lasts the tempera-
ture continues reduced. Through every stage, then, of
the action of alcohol—barring that first stage of excite-
ment [though you have seen that it was “in truth a pro-
cess of cooling”]—l found a reduction of animal heat to
be the special action of the poison.” Hence, Dr Richardson
continues—“l am bound to intimate that the popular
plan of administering alcohol for the purpose of sustain-
ing the animal warmth is an entire and dangerous error,
and that when it is brought into practice during ex-
tremely cold weather, it is calculated to lead even to fatal
consequences from the readiness with which it permits
the blood to become congested in the vital organs. I
cannot too forcibly impress the fact that cold and alcohol
act, physiologically, in the same manner, and that, com-
bined in action every danger resulting from either agent
is doubled.”
“ Whenever we see a person disposed to
meet the effects of cold by strong drink it is our duty to
endeavor to check that effort, and whenever we see an
unfortunate person under the influence of alcohol it is
our duty to suggest warmth as the best means for his re-
covery. These facts prompt many other useful ideas of
detail in our common life. If, for instance, our police
were taught the simple art of taking the animal tempera-
ture of persons they have removed from the streets in a
state of insensibility, the results would be most bene-
ficial. The operation is one that hundreds of nurses now
carry out daily, and applied by our police officers at their
stations, it would enable them not only to suspect the
difference between a man in an apoplectic fit and a man
intoxicated, but would suggest naturally the instant abo-
lition of the practice of thrusting the really intoxicated
into a cold and damp cell, which to such a one is actually
an ante-room to the grave.”
In the next place, alcohol does not supply power to the
body. In reference to this matter Dr. Richardson,
who from his position is an authority, and whose opinion
is backed up by thousands of medical men, says in his
Cantor Lectures on Alcohol, delivered before the Society


of Arts ; —“lt was fair to ask whether, if heat were not
produced by the spirit, some additional stimulus might
be communicated by it to the muscular fibre. There is
nothing in what we see relating to the action of alcohol
in man that would lead us to suppose it capable of giving
an increased muscular power, and it is certain that
animals subjected even for short periods of time to its
influence lose their power for work in a marked degree.
Indeed, if_we were to treat our domestic animals with,
this agent in the same manner that we treat ourselves, we
should soon have none that were tameable, none that were
workable, and none that were edible, I thought it,
nevertheless, worth the enquiry whether at any stage of
the alcoholic excitement living muscle could be induced
to show an extra amount of power. The result of the
experiment showed that muscular excitement has been
mistaken for muscular power-, and that, though the
muscles are then truly more rapidly stimulated into
motion by nervous tumult, muscular power is actually
enfeebled .” “I would earnestly impress,” says Dr.
Richardson, “ that the systematic administration of
alcohol for the purpose of giving and sustaining strength
is an entire delusion. lam not going to say that occasions
do not arise when an enfeebled or fainting heart is tem-
porarily relieved by the relaxation of the vessels which
alcohol, on its diffusion through the blood, induces ; but
that this spirit gives any persistent increase of power by
which men are enabled to perform more sustained work
is a mistake as serious as it is universal.” It is remark-
able that “ trainers of men for feats of strength invariably
forbid all kinds of intoxicants.”
Seeing, then, that alcohol is utterly useless as an
article for supplying food, or warmth, or power, I would
on this ground strongly urge total abstinence from
all intoxicating drinks.
The Second Consideration that I would advance in
support of total abstinence shall be— Thai the use of alcohol
even in strict moderation is positively injurious to the
human system. If we are led to believe from the Word
of God that “ wine is a mocker,” and there are dissuasions
against the use of it, then we may expect to find that
alcohol exercises a pernicious influence on the human
system both physically and mentally; and such is the
case.
Dr. Russell T. Trail says—“lf you go to medical
records to learn how alcohol affects the human system,
you learn there that it inflames the coats of the stomach,
disorders the liver, excites the blood vessels, vitiates the


secretions, renders the bland juices of the body acrid and
irritating, poisons the blood, paralyses the nerves,hardens
the brain, produces dropsy, dyspepsia, jaundice, maras-
mus, consumption, gout, imbecility, insanity, and deli-
rium tremens, and so on through nearly the whole cata-
logue of human maladies.”
Dr. Gordon says—“ It would be difficult, to find a
more destructive poison than ardent spirits.” Professor
Perira says —“ The local effects of alcohol are those of a
powerful irritant and caustic poison.” Dr. James Ed-
munds says —“ Alcohol is, in fact, treated by the human
system not as food, but as an intruder and as a poison.”
Dr. Richardson says—“ That the first organ that shares
the general disturbance that the introduction of alcohol
into the system produces, is ‘ the heart.’ The membran-
ous structures which envelop and line the heart are
changed in quality, are thickened, rendered cartilaginous
and even calcareous or bony. Then the valves, which are
made up of folds of membrane, loose their suppleness,
and what is called valvular disease is permanently estab-
lished. Again, the muscular structure of the heart fails
owing to degenerative changes in its tissue. The elements
of the muscular fibre are replaced by fatty cells. Those
who suffer from these organic deteriorations of the heart
learn the fact so insidiously it hardly breaks upon them
until the mischief is far advanced. They are for years
Conscious of a central failure of power from slight causes,
such as over-exertion, trouble, broken rest, or too long
abstinence from food. They feel what they call ‘ a sink-
ing,’ but they know that wine or some other stimulant
will at once relieve the sensation. Thus they seek to
relieve it, until at last they discover that the remedy fails.
The jaded, overworked, faithful heart will bear no more ;
it has run its course, and,the governor of the blood-stream
broken, the current either overflows into the tissues,
gradually damming up the courses, or, under some slight
shock or excess of motion, ceases at the centre. ”
Dr. Richardson further says —“ If the lungs could
be seen, they, too, would be found with their vessels in-
jected. If the brain and spinal cord could be laid open
to view they would be discovered in the same condition.
If the stomach, the liver, the spleen, the kidneys, or any
other vascular organs or parts could be exposed, the
vascular engorgement would be equally manifest.” He
further says —“The organ of the body that perhaps the
most frequently undergoes structural changes from alcohol
is the liver. The liver of the confirmed alcoholic is pro-
bably never free from the influence of the poison ; it is
too often saturated with it.” And here it will be desir-


able to remark that, if under the continued use of alcohol
a fat state of body is produced, such fat is not entitled to
be regarded as healthful, but is more truly described as
“ fatty degeneration.” Lallemand and Perrin proved
that “ a small dose of alcohol would cause globules of
fat, clearly distinguishable by the naked eye, to float in
the blood. ” This fat is deposited instead of real muscle,
producing what is called “fatty degeneracy.” Dr.
Sewell also bears his testimony against even the moderate
use of alcohol, for he says that “in the stomach of the
temperate drinker, the man who takes his grog daily,
but moderately, or sips his wine with his meals, the
living membrane always becomes red and inflamed, and
that the blood vessels of the inner surface are so far en-
larged as to be visible, and distended with blood.”
‘ ‘ Hitherto the purely physical action of alcohol has
alone been treated]; a few sentences must now be added
respecting the influence this agent exerts over the mental
functions. One of the first effects of alcohol upon the
nervous system in the way of alienation from the natural
state, is shown in loss of memory. This extends even to
forgetfulness of the commonest of things—to names of
familiar persons, to dates, to duties of daily life. If this
failure of mental power progress, it is followed usually
with loss of volitional power. The muscles remain ready
to act, but the mind is incapable of stirring them into
action—thus there is failure of speech. A second effect
of alcohol on the mental organisation is the production
of that craving for its incessant supply, to which is given
the name of dipsomania. In those who are affected with
this form of alcoholic disease a mixed madness and sanity
is established, in which the cunning of the mind alone
lives actively, with the vices that ally themselves to it.
The dipsomaniac is, however, capable of recovery, within
certain limits, on one, and only one, condition —that the
cause of his disease be totally ivithheld.
The effect of alcohol on the mental functions is shown
in yet another picture of modern humanity writhing
under its use : I mean in the form of what may
be _ called intermittent indulgence to dangerous excess.
This form of disease has been named the mania a potu ,
and it is one of the most desperate of the alcoholic evils.
The victims of this class are not habitual drunkards or
topers, but at sudden intervals they madden themselves
with the spirit. They repent, reform, get a new lease of
life, relapse. In intervals of repentance they are worn
with remorse and regret; in the intervals of madness
they are the terrible members of the community. In
their furious excitement they spread around their circle


the darkness of desolation, fear, and despair. Their
very footsteps carry dread to those who, most helpless
and innocent, are under their fearful control. They
strike their dearest friends ; they strike themselves.
Retaining sufficient nervous power to wield their limbs,
yet not sufficient to guide their reason, they become the
dangerous alcoholic criminals whom our legislators, fear-
ing to touch the cause of their malady, would fain try to
cure by scourge and chain. Our remedy for such aber-
ration of nervous function, if we were legislators, would
be simple enough. We should not whip the maniac back
again to the drink ; we should try to break up the evil
by taking the drink from the maniac. Such, too, seems
to be the only sensible course to pursue. But the most
solemn fact of all bearing upon these mental aberrations
produced by alcohol, and upon the physical not less than
the mental, is, that the mischief inflicted on man by his
own act and deed cannot fail to be Transferred to those
who descend from him, and who are thus irresponsibly
afflicted. Amongst the many inscrutable designs of
nature none is more manifest than this, that physical
vice, like physical feature and physical virtue, descend in
line. It is, I say, a solemn reflection for every man and
every woman, that whatever we do to ourselves so as to
modify our own physical conformation and mental type,
for good or for evil, is transmitted to generations that
have yet to be.
Not one of the transmitted wrongs, physical or men-
tal, is more certainly passed on to those yet unborn than
the wrongs which are inflicted by alcohol.
On this point Dr. Russell T. Trail remarks—“ What
a thought ! A drunken parent can never be a father or
mother of healthy offspring ; nor can an habitual mode-
rate drinker be the progenitor of an issue as sound and
as perfect as it should be.”
Now, this mass of unimpeachable evidence I would
crown with the following opinion, which has been signed
by Dr. Carpenter and five thousand more first-class
physicians—“ We, the undersigned, are of opinion that
a very large proportion of human misery—including
poverty, disease, and crimes—is induced by the use of
alcoholic or fermented liquors as beverages. That the
most perfect health is compatible with total abstinence.
That persons accustomed to intoxicants may with perfect
safety discontinue them at once. That total and universal
abstinence from alcoholic beverages of all sorts would add
greatly to the health, the prosperity, the morality, and
the happiness of the human race,”
On the ground, therefore, that the use of alcohol.


even in moderation, is positively injurious to the human
system, as affirmed and proved by the highest medical
authorities in the world, I warmly urge the principle of
total abstinence from all intoxicating liquors.
A Third Consideration I would present to you in these
words— “ That the use of alcohol, even medicinally, is so
seldom justifiable.'” Upon this point I will not venture to
express my own opinion, but that of medical men of high
standing and authority. Dr. Henry Munro, lecturer on
Medical Jurisprudence, says—“ Perfect health can only
be obtained by total abstinence from all intoxicating
drinks, because alcohol deranges the natural functions of
the body, and produces a morbid condition of the tissues
with which it comes in contact.”
Dr. Carpenter says —“Nothing in the annals of
quackery can be more empirical than the mode in which
fermented and distilled liquors are directed or permitted
to be taken, by a large proportion of medical men.”
Dr. J. W. Beaumont, lecturer on Materia Medica in
Sheffield Medical School, says—“ Besides inducing an
inflammatory condition of the system, alcohol perverts
the blood—diseases it; and it is owing to this circum-
stance that many chronic complaints are made worse and
more prolonged by wines, ales, and other liquors ordered
habitually by medical attendants. I have treated several
thousands of cases of all kinds, occurring in general prac-
tice, without alcoholic liquors of any kind, and have been
gratified with the successful results. The medicines take
effect more potently, and answer their end better.”
Sir Benjamin Brodie, surgeon to Queen Victoria,
after a long life of experience, gives in his Psychological
Inquiries his final verdict thus —“Alcohol removes the
uneasy feeling and the inability of exertion which the
want of sleep occasions, but the relief is only temporary.
Stimulants do not create nervous power ; they merely
enable you as it were to use up that which is left, and
then they leave you more in need of rest than before .”
Dr. Mudge, M.R.0.5., bears his testimony thus—
“ I became deeply impressed with the awful character
and extent of drunkenness, and desired the diminution,
and if possible, the extinction, of that horrible and
deadly sin. I saw scores and hundreds arrested by
abstinence in their downward courses, but of these not a
few were set moving again towards the abyss by medical
advice. I thought I would do with as little as possible
of alcoholic stimulants in the form of drink, and was thus
led to try cautiously to do without them in cases in
which before they had been administered. The result of


these trials was very decidedly in favor of abstinence ;
and, consequently, alcoholic drinks have legitimately
disappeared from my list of medicines.”
In a lecture reported in the Lancet, Samuel Wilks,
M.D., physician and lecturer on medicine to Guy’s Hos-
pital, remarks—“lt is assumed that a strength-giving
property lies in these alcoholic drinks ; that just in pro-
portion to a man’s feeling of weakness, so he will require
one of them. Now, this popular opinion is shared in, I
am sorry to say, by many in the profession. I con-
stantly hear medical men say that they give brandy to
all their patients, for they always find them low. If you
kill a dozen patients with brandy, you need have no
fear. It is a medicine which the patients approve and
friends commend. You have done your best.”
To these testimonies I shall add one more—a testi-
mony of high value, inasmuch as it is free from any sus-
picion of being formed under the bias of any total absti-
nence principles (not that the former have), but that this
one had existence years before the temperance movement
began. It is the bold, clear, and vigorous testimony of
Dr Higginbotham, the eminent surgeon of Nottingham.
He says—“ For the first twenty years I ignorantly gave
alcohol in some diseases, as was customary with the pro-
fession. Yet at so early a period as 1813, I discontinued
it in typhus, and typhoid, and other fevers with the most
marked beneficial results; in 1818 in all cases of mid-
wifery, and at a later period in delirium tremens, and in
all other diseases, from a full conviction of its injurious
properties. So that I had lost all faith in alcoholic
stimulants, and discontinued their use several years be-
fore the formation of a temperance society.”
‘ ‘ During my long practice, I have not known or seen
a single disease cured by alcohol; on the contrary, it is
the most fertile producer of disease, and may be con-
sidered the bane of medicine and the seed of disease. It
is destitute of any medicinal principle implanted by the
Creator in genuine medicines—such as Emetina in Epe-
cacuanha, Rhine in Rhubarb, Jalapin in Jalap, Quinine in
Peruvian bark, &c.”
He further says —“I have found acute diseases
sooner cured without alcohol, and chronic diseases much
more manageable.” “My greatest trouble has been for
many years in preventing patients from being destroyed
by the use of it; Ido not say the abuse, for I consider
the use the abuse.”
“No person can form any idea, except from ex-
perience, of the superiority of the practice of medicine and
surgery when alcohol is banished from it. It is the
d 2


complete emancipation from the slavery of alco-
hol ; and the practitioner has a freedom in
practice which he never before experienced. He will
find an improved method of treating disease by the ex-
change of alcohol for natural stimulants ; a proper use
of water, pure air, exercise, and nutritious food ; the
employment of genuine medicines ; and a variety of
stimulants will occur to him in practice of a non-intoxi-
cating quality, adapted to various cases he may have to
attend. For about thirty years I have not once pre-
scribed alcohol as a medicine, so that I have now fully
tried both ways, with and without alcohol. My non-
alcoholic treatment of disease has been so satisfactory
that I have not once during the thirty years’ experience
been desirous of deviating from it ; so strongly am I con-
vinced of the truth and superiority that I should con-
sider myself criminal if 1 again recommended alcohol
either as food or medicine.”
With respect to all this testimony I would say it is
furnished by the medical profession, and to quote an old
proverb—“A word to the wise is sufficient. ” On the
ground, therefore, that the use of alcohol even medici-
nally is so seldom justifiable, I would strongly urge
total abstinence from all intoxicating liquors.
As time would fail me, even if your patience would
admit it, were I to present all the grounds on which
total abstinence might be soundly urged, I shall content
myself with one more, and that
Fourth Consideration shall be — “That total abstinence
is the only method of successfully meeting the danger axis
though well meant usages of society in respect of alcoholic
beverages .” That the usages of society in this particular
need to be reformed admits not a doubt. Count up, if
you will, the occasions on which it is thought necessary
that alcohol should play a part, and then consider how
at each such time temptation is offered, and needlessly
offered, to those to whom to be tempted is almost fatal
to their strongest resolutions. A child is bom—drink.
The child is christened—drink his health. There is a
marriage—what, not drink the health of bride and bride-
groom 1 There is a death, and drink, too. You are for-
tunate, you must “ shout.” You are unfortunate, take
the cup to drown your care and cheer you up. You
have business to transact—buying, you must drink ;
selling, —you _ must drink. So says Society,
and nothing is perhaps more trying to bear and
hard to contend against than the ill-disguised impatience
and surprise of Society if its customs are not honored.


Alas ! they are too often honored at the risk of the im-
mortal soul. Take an example or two of many thousands.
“A young man, wellborn, and of good fortune, became
an habitual drunkard. He married, and would reform
through temperance, but remained a drunkard still.
Epilepsy supervened ; and, seeking medical aid, his case
was honestly explained to him. The immediate source of
all his evil was shown to be drink, and he was urged to
abstinence as his only means of safety. He resolved on
the effort, and wisely moved his residence, so as to escape
the associations and associates of evil. He lived for
many months soberly, happily, and in health. But in
the course of time a son was born to him ; and in an evil
hour the christening was arranged to be of what is called
the ‘ social’ kind. Toasts were given, and the toast of
the day came round. It was his son’s health. He drank
it in water. A relative sitting by said jeeringly, ‘ What
a father are you ! Drink your son’s health in water !
Shame ! Drink wine, were it but for once, like a man !’
He could not bear the taunt. With a trembling hand he
quaffed the wine 1 like a man,’ and then he drank glass
after glass ‘ like a beast.’ He was carried drunk to bed ;
his cruel bondage returned with tenfold force ; he sought
his home once more—a broken man—epileptic, disgraced,
ruined —content to die a drunkard’s death, and doomed
in a few short weeks to fill a drunkard’s grave.”
Take another. The Rev. A. H. Granher states that
“ at an ecclesiastical convention a discussion on temper-
ance brought up the wine question. A part of the clergy
advocated its entire disuse, and a part took the other
side. At length an influential clergyman rose and made
a vehement argument in favor of wine, denouncing the
radical reformers for attempting to banish this token of
hospitality from use. When he had resumed his seat, a
layman, trembling with emotion, rose and asked if it was
allowable for him to speak. The Chairman having
signified that he would be heard, he said— ‘ Mr Moderator,
it is not my purpose, in rising, to answer the learned
argument you have just listened to. My object is more
humble, and I hope more practical. I once knew a father
in moderate circumstances who was at much incon-
venience to educate a beloved son at college. Here
his son became dissipated ; but after he had graduated
and returned to his father, the influence of home acting
upon a generous nature actually reformed him. The
father was overjoyed at the prospect that his cherished
hopes of other days were still to be realised. Several
years passed when the young man had completed his
professional study, and being about to leave his father,
21


for the purpose of establishing himself in business, he
was invited to dine with a neighboring clergyman, dis-
tinguished for his hospitality and social qualities. At
this dinner wine was introduced and offered to this
young man, and refused ; pressed upon him again and
again, firmly refused. This was repeated, and the
young man was ridiculed for his singular abstinence. He
was strong enough to overcome appetite, but could not
resist ridicule ; he drank and fell; and from that mo-
ment became a confirmed drunkard, and long since has
found a drunkard’s grave. Mr Moderator,” continued
the old man, with streaming eyes, “ I am that father,
and it was at the table of the clergyman who has just
taken his seat that this token of hospitality ruined the
son I shall never cease to mourn.”
My friends, I am persuaded that you all know or
have heard of many instances of the drunkard’s course
having been either commenced or resumed and carried to
its fatal end through the drinking usages of society. I
do not condemn those usages on the ground that they are
ill-intentioned, but that they are unwise, unnecessary,
and perilous, and each one who assists to maintain them
cannot free himself from a share of the responsibility of
the evil consequences to which they not unfrequently
give rise. The only safety is in total abstinence. It is
but a hollow friendship at best that could be disturbed
or forfeited if at the social gathering alcohol is not pre-
sent. lam not sanguine enough, however, to believe
that great radical improvements in this respect can be
quickly accomplished. It will be the work of time, and
if these usages are modified or abandoned according as
more light may help to show the need, the movement
with which we are connected will proceed with firmer
step. On the grounds, then, “ That alcohol is useless as
an article for supplying food, or warmth, or power
“ that the use of alcohol, even in moderation, is posi-
tively injurious to the human system “ that the use of
alcohol, even medicinally, is so seldom justifiable and
“ that total abstinence is the only method of successfully
meeting the dangerous usages of society in respect of
alcoholic beverages”—on these grounds I|strongly recom-
pend and advocate the principle of total abstinence.
PART 111.
Having in the First Part of my Lecture suggested
Total Abstinence from all intoxicating beverages as"? the
surest preventive to drunkenness, and In the Second 5 laid
down a few considerations for the adoption of |that
22


principle ; I shall proceed in this remaining portion to
represent the adoption of Total Abstinence in what j
conceive to be the light of a positive duty in some respects
and of the highest expedience in others ; and also the
considerations which incline me to the belief that they
who adopt the Total Abstinence principle, follow more
truly than others, in this respect, the example of our
Blessed Lord.
1. I imagine there will be no difficulty in gaining
universal assent to this thesis, viz. —That to the prevention
of Drunkenness Total Abstinence is essential in the case of
the confirmed drunkard; and therefore that it is the duty of
the confirmed drunkard, if he would not again fall, to
abstain totally from all intoxicating beverages.
As the most determined anti-total abstainer could not
consistently with common sense and the matured judg-
ment and experience of the most enlightened and qualified
members of the medical profession, supported by the
painful experiences and acknowledgments of thousands of
now reclaimed drunkards, deny this, I may accept this as
proved, and proceed at once to another thesis, viz.—
2. That to the prevention of Drunkenness Total Absti-
nence is essential in the case of the threatened drunkard;
and that it is, therefore, the duty of the threatened drunkard,
if he would not again fall, to abstain totally from all
intoxicating drinks.
And who is the threatened drunkard ? I will not be
personal, or attempt to decide that question in any given
case, but I will simply hold up a mirror, in which, if any
sees himself or herself reflected, the conclusion may be
surely drawn by that one that he or she is a threatened
drunkard.
And speaking figuratively, this is the mirror which 1
have borrowed from a friend’s store to use for public
good : —“ Let thoughts such as these help the trial : Am
I becoming more and more fond of strong drink ? Does
the occasional and unwilling want of it become more and
more irksome ? Is there an insidious tendency setting in
gradually but decidedly to increase the accustomed dose
in order to obtain the accustomed effect ? Do I more and
more feel that to give up the practice wholly would
require no little self-denial and sacrifice of likings and
comfort ? No later than a night or two ago was I lo-
quacious in company—more fluent than forcible—con-
tentious, too ? Was there in walking home more than
usual of the elastic element in my boot soles ? Was the
atmosphere peculiarly hazy, and the gas lamps or other
lights larger than their wont, as well as decidedly
irregular in their arrangement ? Have I a dry tongue


and an aching head this morning, with an unpleasant
heavy feeling at the heart of something wrong there ?
And am I constrained to admit, on recalling my dim
recollection of the past, that I did take rather too much,
and made but a bare escape from inebriation ? And have
such things happened once and again ? Ah ! that man
must dally no longer with an ideal Temperance ! He is
on the slippery ground ; his feet have lost their holding ;
he is already gliding down ; and if we would save him
from the dread abyss below, he must be pulled up sharp
and suddenly.”
My friends, let us look into that mirror. If we see
not ourselves there, let us be very thankful, and adopt
Total Abstinence as the surest way of never being
reflected therein ; but if we do see ourselves therein, then
let us take warning, and at once (as we safely may) adopt
Total Abstinence, that the mischief go no further.
‘ ‘ There is, however, a class of drinkers, threatened
with excess, who offer the excuse of bad health for their
drinking. But plainly it is the duty of both physician
and patient in such cases not to go on palliating and per-
petuating one disease by the introduction of another,
but at once to take decided measures for effecting a
radical cure, and so purging the system of all necessity
for stimulants. During these measures let physician and
patient faithfully watch for the time when (the supposed)
therapuetic necessity for strong drink has passed away,
and then Abstinence becomes incumbent upon both —
on the one to prescribe, on the other to practice.”
Now, while I feel I may travel thus far without
encountering opposition, I imagine that my next thesis
will not be so readily accepted, viz.
3. That Total Abstinence from all intoxicating liquors
■is of universal expediency. But though many will most
likely withhold their assent to this particular, I neverthe-
less claim it on the testimony already supplied as to the
injurious effects of alcohol on the human system when taken
daily even in moderation. No one, I submit, can wilfully
pursue any course that is likely to damage his body,
without, at the same time, running counter to the Divine
will, which requires us to use every lawful means for pre-
serving our bodies, as much as we possibly can, in such a
state as to be best fitted for the duties of His
Kingdom.
I am well aware that this applies to many things
besides that of using alcohol, but as we are immediately
concerned with the question of alcohol we must neces-
sarily confine our remarks to that question. But here I
am at once met with the objection which we may state in


these words—“ You are at liberty to abstain if you like,
but you have no right to condemn my practice if I par-
take of intoxicating drink in moderation ; for I am con-
tent to follow the example of my Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.”
Now, I yield to none in valuing the importance of
our Lord’s example, and should be the last to condemn
those who make a conscientious effort in all things to
follow the example which He has set. When, however,
we would determine to walk in the way in which He
walked—to do as He did (for then only are we safe) —
it becomes our duty to ascertain what that example is
which He has set, and which, therefore, we should be
safe and justified in attempting to follow.
Limiting our attention, for present purposes, to one
part of our Lord’s example, let us consider what light
Scripture throws, directly or indirectly, upon our Lord’s
use of Oinos (that is, wine).
In entering upon this part of the Temperance
Question I beg to disavow any merely controversial
spirit. The matter at issue is too grave—too important—
to allow it to be marred by bitterness and strife ; but an
honest desire to set forth what I believe to be the truth
unfortunately brings me into collision with certain views
which have been publicly propounded on this subject;
and, indeed, justice to all who have conceived it to be
right to adopt Total Abstinence principles, demands of
me to bring forward such evidence as will show that the
course which Total Abstainers have adopted, and urge
others to adopt, is neither “weak” nor “false,” nor a
reflection upon the blessed Master himself ; in short,
that evidence is in favor that those who adopt the principle
of Total Abstinence from intoxicating liquor more nearly
follow what was probably the example of the Lord than
those do who partake of intoxicating drink even in
moderation.
It is, indeed, more summary than convincing in an
off-hand manner to dismiss the whole question by saying
that in the Greek Testament only one word {oinos) was
employed to signify every kind of wine—that our Lord
was charged with being an o-mos-drinker —and hence,
that He must have partaken of intoxicating oinos —and
hence, therefore, that we at the present day may plead
His example and partake of intoxicating We
resist this mode of putting the matter as wholly incon-
clusive, inasmuch as it is a petitio principii —a begging of
the question. And as illustrating the unsoundness of
this mode of reasoning let me suppose a case. Suppose
that we had but one English word including every kind
B


of wine, fermented and unfermented, and that that word
was “wine.” Suppose that at a banquet every kind of
“wine,” some intoxicating and some unfermented, were
produced. Suppose that it were proved that at that
banquet a Good Templar or a Total Abstainer partook of
“wine.” Would it be fair to conclude from the use of
that generic term that the “wine” of which he had par-
taken was intoxicating, and that he had therefore broken
his pledge? Had he partaken of wtfermented “wine,”
he would certainly have partaken of “wine;” but in
such case he would not have violated his pledge ; for he
is not pledged to abstain from unfermented, but from
intoxicating beverages only.
Since, then, the word oinos includes every kind of
wine, intoxicating as well as unfermented, just as the
word “ man ” includes every member of the human race,
whether male or female, nothing can be determined
either one way or the other from the use of the word
oinos by itself; we must therefore be guided to a con-
clusion by other considerations.
If, then, the ‘ ‘ Moderationist ” is to gain anything
of importance from the example of our Lord as justifying
the course that he (the Moderationist) pursues, then he
must fully establish it that our Lord partook of alcoholic
beverages ; for the using of unfermented wine, which is
not intoxicating, could be no example to justify the use
of any fermented wine, which is intoxicating.
Let us then endeavor to ascertain towards what con-
clusion a fair inquiry into the subject will lead us—that
is to say, let us endeavor to find out, if possible, which
of the two is the more probable—that our Lord did, or
that he did not partake of intoxicating wine.
In deciding upon this question let it be first
determined how far in the same direction Abstainers and
Non-abstainers can go together on this matter. They can
and do agree—
Ist. That our Lord was maligned as a gluttonous
man and a wine-bibber—an oinos-drinker.
2nd. That our Lord partook of oinos (wine).
3rd, That our Lord did supply oinos at the marriage
feast.
4th. That our Lord did use “the fruit of the vine ”
at the institution of the Lord’s Supper. And
sth, That in our Lord’s time there was oinos (wine)
which was unfermented, and oinos (wine)
which was fermented but not intoxicating,
as well as oinos (wine) that was fermented
and intoxicating.


Now arises the question, What was the nature of the
oinos (wine) of which our Lord partook—was it intoxi-
cating or non-intoxicating ? Let us enquire. We must,
of course, refer for our information to those instances in
holy Scripture in which oinos is mentioned in connection
with our Lord, and so—•
In the first place, the great miracle at Cana
will demand our attention. Without here reviewing
the miracle itself we shall at once admit the
fact that at that wedding our Lord did produce
immediately several gallons of oinos (wine), and though
we are not told that our Lord partook of oinos at that
time, we shall still freely admit that it is most probable
that He did. We can, indeed, conceive of no good
reason why He should not have partaken of that “ good
wine” which He had just made, and which was necessarily
free from any man-devised adulterations.
What, then, was the probable nature of that wine ?
From the word oinos alone we cannot learn its nature,
but we are helped to a conclusion by other means. From
the statement of the governor of the feast that “when
men have well drunk,” &c., some conclude that the
“wine” was necessarily intoxicating ; but this by no
means follows.* The word methusthosi, in the original,
which is in our version translated “ drunk,” does not
exclusively signify intoxication, but excess. It does not
necessarily mean that men have “ become drunk” in the
sense in which those words are now usually understood,
but might mean simply that by excessive use of even
unfermented wine they have so lessened (as is quite
possible) the sensitiveness cf their palate as not to be
able to discern between the inferior and the superior
oinos.
But even if the word methusthosi were taken in the
sense of intoxication it is absolutely certain it had no
reference to that feast; for it is absolutely certain that
our Lord would neither have graced such a feast with his
presence, nor would He have provided a large additional
supply for feasters who were then “well drunk.” From
the use of the word methusthosi we cannot conclude that
that oinos was intoxicating.
Again, the opinion that that oinos (wine) was intoxi-
cating is founded upon the notions—first, that fermen-
* Observe, too, that “this opinion (as to quality) was
expressed by the president when he had merely ‘ tasted ’ the
wine, and could not have been founded, therefore, upon any evi-
dence of its alcoholic strength—its power to inflame the body or
disorder the brain.”
27


tation is necessary to constitute the juice of the grape
“ wine.” Well, it certainly is so according to onr modern
ideas ; but it is not so in reality: unfermented wine was
a common article of consumption in Palestine in our
Lord’s time, as it had been for ages before; and secondly,
that a fermented article must be intoxicating. But this
is a fallacy of which we are daily reminded. Vinegar is
the result of fermentation : but I have never heard of
any man getting drunk on vinegar. Then, again, the
bread we eat is fermented, but it certainly is not inebri-
ating ; and it is notorious that the greatest bread-eater
is never known to be in the slightest degree in conse-
quence drunk. “ The explanation is simple. The
alcohol formed in the dough (by the action of the yeast
on the sugar of the flour) is expelled in the baking ; and
when it is known that a large class of ancient wines were
boiled and reduced to a jelly state, the conclusion in
regard to their non-alcoholic state is clear to any but the
most prejudiced mind. When it is also known that the
custom of filtering away the gluten of grape juice was
common, in order to break its strength, and that wine
was mixed with two, three, and even four times its own
bulk of water, the result of fermentation must have been
to provide (as in ginger beer) a liquid practically unlike
what is conceived of when mention is made of an
‘intoxicating drink.’ ‘lt is, therefore,’ says a great
authority, ‘ a hasty and entirely erroneous conclusion
that even fermented grape juice must have been con-
sumed in the form of an alcoholic and inebriating
fluid.’”
As, then, there is only one word—“oinos”—signi-
fying all kinds of wine, we may confidently accept this
statement —that all intoxicating wine is oinos, but it
does not follow that all oinos is intoxicating ; just as
truly as, that every Red Indian is a human being, but
every human being is not necessarily a Red Indian.
Considering, then, that unfermented wine was in daily
and plentiful use in Palestine—that unfermented wine is
not intoxicating, and may therefore be safely produced
in large quantities, which cannot be said of intoxicating
wine ; and considering, also, as one remarks, that <£ that
wine at Cana was not brandied wine, nor wine combined
with various substances, such as is drunk in this land,”
we may therefore conclude—and it is the only legitimate
conclusion—that the 120 gallons of wine produced by our
Lord at Cana was the “ good wine”—the unfermented,
non-intoxicating oinos ; and therefore, in the language of
the Rev. Albert Barnes, we may add—“ no man could
adduce this instance in favor of drinking wine unless he


can prove that the wine made in the water-pots of Cana
■was just like the wine which he proposes to drink.”
It is, I think, going rather too far to credit our Lord
with having taught that young married couple by his act
that they ought to have a stock of intoxicating wine in
their house, as if such an article were necessary or likely
to be conducive to health of body or mind, when the
unimpeachable verdict of scientific investigation is to the
effect that alcohol when taken daily in even moderate
quantities is worse than useless, is positively injurious.
Surely our Lord did not supply them with oinos of such
a kind that of ft might be said—“wine is a mocker,
strong drink is raging.” (Prov. xx. 1.)
The mere statement that our “ Lord, not only gave
this intoxicating oinos to a young married couple, but
himself drank it without scruple,” is not proof that that
wine was intoxicating, and we think we have shown that
it certainly was not so.
Thus so far as this miracle of Cana is concerned it
supplies no evidence that that wine was intoxicating,
and thus, therefore, no example is given by our Lord of
partaking of intoxicating drinks.
In the second place, we are reminded, that our
blessed Lord was charged by his enemies as a “ glutton-
ous man and a wine-bibber”—“an oinos drinker.” Now,
I suppose in every libel there is some under-stratum of
truth ; and so here, only, however, to the extent of our
Lord’s own statement —“ that the Son of Man came
eating and drinking.” It is true, therefore, that He led a
life different from that of John the Baptist, with whom
he had been unfavourably compared by his enemies ; but
it was not true that he was gluttonous or an oinos-
drinker in the invidious sense conveyed by our transla-
tion. About the character of the oinos, we again remark
that nothing can be determined from the use of the word
itself. But it cannot be too strongly set forth, as helping
us to a conclusion against its having been intoxicating
oinos, that the point of the charge was not that of
inebriety, but of wine-loving, which latter would have
been quite true if our Lord had been, what in fact He
was not, a lover of even unfermented wine, or of any
fermented but not intoxicating wine. His enemies
accused Him of blasphemy, and of having a devil ; they
charged Him with being a lover of wine, because He did
what John the Baptist did not —partake of
the juice of the grape—the fruit of the vine, but
they never accused Him of drunkenness. To plead the
example of our Lord the “ Moderationist ” must, there-


fore, be in a position to show that, when charged as an
oinos drinker, our Lord certainly did use (though in
moderation) intoxicating oinos. Anything short of this
cannot be sufficient to rest upon as the foundation of the
principle which the “ Moderationist ” maintains.
In the third place, our attention is called to the in-
stitution of the Lord's Supper. We are told that our
Lord chose intoxicating oinos to be an instrument of
grace in the sacrament of the Holy Communion.
lam not a little startled by this. It certainly is
most remarkable that the word oinos does not once occur
in the Greek Testament in the narrative relating to the
Lord’s Supper.
If it be said, “ that the words ‘ fruit of the vine’
stand as a figurative expression for intoxicating oinos”
I reply, even if it were so that the words “ fruit of the
rine ” stood for oinos, it is no proof whatever that that
oinos was intoxicating. Far otherwise ;it is not possible
that fermented wine was used on that occasion at all. It
was the Passover, and the law relating to the Passover
absolutely forbade any leavened thing to be found in any
house. “ Seven days shall there be no leaven found in
your houses ” (Exod. xii., 19). The word leaven in this
case denotes anything fermented, and is applied to drink
as well as bread, as in Ruth ii., 14 —“ And dip thy mor-
sel in the vinegar ” — Chometz, the thing fermented ; and
though “it is true that the Jewish Passover was six
months after vintage, yet in grape countries nothing is
easier than to preserve an abundant supply of grapes
from one vintage to another.” “Josephus, in his ‘ Wars
of the Jews,’ states in reference to the fortress of Mas-
sada— 4 There was also wine and oil in abundance, with
all kinds of pulse and dates heaped up together. These
fruits, all fresh and full ripe, were in no way inferior to
such fruits newly laid in, though they had been there
little short of 109 years when the place was taken by the
Romans.’ Thus an abundance of freshly kept grapes
could have been procured, and their juice expressed, at
this last supper of the Lord,”
The only conclusion, bearing upon our subject, that
can be drawn from the institution of the Lord’s Supper
at that Passover season, is that at the time our Lord was
not a partaker of intoxicating omos —fermented oinos
being ceremonially and legally forbidden ; and hence,
that intoxicating oinos is not the oinos which our Lord
has chosen to be an instrument of grace in the sacrament
of the Holy Communion.


Thus the example of our Lord in the use of unfer-
mented wine at the institution of the Last Supper, cannot
by any mode of reasoning be adduced as a precedent to
the “ moderationist ” in the use of intoxicating drink.
In the fourth place, it is mentioned as one of the
events connected with our Lord’s crucifixion, that “ they
gave him vinegar to drink, mixed with gall, and when he
had tasted thereof he would not drink ” —(Matt, xxvii.,
34), It is very remarkable that in the three most ancient
manuscripts of the Greek Testament, viz., the Alexan-
drine, the Vatican, and the Sinaitic, the word which in
our authorised version is translated “vinegar” is oinon
(wine).
Constantine Tischendorf, in his introduction to the
Tauchnitz edition of the New Testament, says—“ The
learned have been and are very much divided in opinion
as to which readings represent the Word of God most
exactly ; but one thing has been admitted by most who
understand the matter, and it is that the oldest documents
must come nearer to the original text than those that are
later ”
According to this principle, “ admitted by most who
understand the matter,” the passage under consideration
should be rendered—“ They gave him wine to drink,
mixed with gall.” There is, however, no proof that that
wine, thus drugged, was intoxicating. It may have
been, and most likely was, deadening to the feelings ;
but even if it had been intoxicating, it forms no shadow
of example for the daily, though moderate, use of intoxi-
cating drink ; for though our Lord tasted it, or so far
received it as that it was applied to his lips, it is distinctly
affirmed that “he would not drink it”
I cannot think that what the “ moderationist ” seeks
for, from the example of our Lord, is warrant for simply
tasting an intoxicating liquor, as if not aware at the time
of its nature, but of drinking it down , for which latter,
this incident furnishes no countenance whatever, but the
very opposite.
Thus, from the Scripture examples referred to, it is
conclusive that our Lord did not partake of intoxicating
oinos, and this conclusion I would further support by
considerations for which I alone am responsible, and
which are satisfactory at least to myself. I reason
thus—
Ist. In Palestine, in our Lord’s time,'there was abun-
dance of unfermented wine as well as of fermented but
not intoxicating wine ; such wine as -was exhilarating,


harmless, and cheering ; such wine as might be therefore
called “ good wine,” and be regarded as one of the “good
creatures of God.” Is it likely, therefore, that our Lord
who was Master and Lord of all the mysteries of nature,
would have used, and have, therefore, set us an example
of using an intoxicating fluid, which science has proved
to be not only utterly useless as an article for supplying
food, or warmth, or power, but is also positively in-
jurious ; and which, even when taken in moderation
daily, has a tendency to unfit one for public service,
and hence is calculated to hurt that body which God
expects us to use every lawful means to preserve for his
service and glory 1 I, for one, think not.
Then, again—
2nd. Is it possible that our Lord would have acted
in any way contrary to Scripture injunctions already given,
or would have violated, by anticipation, the injunctions that
were about to be formally given to his church ?
Not possible !
Of what wine, I ask, was it said, “It is a mocker,”
and “raging,” and not to be “looked upon” with a desire
to partake of it ? There can be but one answer : it can-
not apply to the good, harmless, cheering wine, of which
there was such abundance, but to intoxicating only. Are
we, then, to assert that our Lord partook of that kind of
wine concerning which the Scripture does not say “use
it in moderation,” but “look not upon it,” and concern-
ing which the Holy Spirit of God has sounded such notes
of warning ? I cannot think so, and lam well content
that the burden of proving that he did, does not rest upon
myself.
Then, further—
3rd, Is it lilcely that our blessed Lord would have set
an example which it would be perilous for anyone to attempt
to follow ?
Assuredly not! Suppose, lam dealing with a con-
firmed inebriate, and urge upon him the duty of Total
Abstinence as his only safeguard. In answer, he admits
his weakness and sin, but under the influence of some
temporary sorrow he makes a resolution—a good one as
it seems to him—that in future he will drink only in
strict moderation. Perceiving that such a course is one
which he should not dare to attempt, and which no sensible
person (be he ever so strongly opposed to Total Ab-
stinence) would dare to recommend him to attempt, I say
to him, “ That [will not do. If you taste one drop of
alcohol you will\want more, and you know from experience,


that will be fatal to your intentions of sobriety.” In reply,,
he says to me, “You set me an example of drinking in
moderation.” What shall I reply ? Shall I, if I were a
“ Moderationist” say to him, “do as I say or recom-
mend, but do not as I do ? ” Of what value would
my example or counsel be to him ? But, suppose
that instead of pleading my example as a
“ moderationist,” he were to plead the (so-called) exam-
ple of our Lord, what reply could I make ? Shall I dare
say to him, “ Whatsoever he bids you observe, that
observe and do, but do not after his work ?” Shall I be
driven to allow that our Lord has set an example which
the whole world might not safely attempt to follow, and
which I might not recommend the whole world to fol-
low I Surely not ! I must, however, either be in that
position, from which I instinctively shrink ; or else I
must believe (in the absence of positive evidence to the
contrary) that our Lord never did set any example of
using intoxicating drink.
Once more—
4th.— ls if likely that our Lord would set to any soul
what I may call a “ temptation example V’ Positively
no ! Our Lord has taught us to pray, “lead us not into
temptation.” Task, “ Would it not be a ‘temptation*
to one whose besetting sin was drunkenness to be in the
midst of company each member of which is partaking of
intoxicating drink, though in strict moderation ?
Would it not be a temptation to him, under such circum-
stances, ‘ only just for that once, ’ himself to partake at
infinite peril to his soul If sc, I further ask, “Will
anyone venture to strengthen that example and that
source of temptation by adding thereto the example of
our Lord ?” Would it not have been a “ temptation” to
such a one had he been of that company at Cana when,
the lavish supply of 120 gallons of (so-called) intoxicating
liquor was produced ? Let that question be well
weighed ! I am fully persuaded of this, that no man
will ever be able to plead at the judgment seat that the
attempt to follow the example of his Lord was the be-
ginning of his downward career to a drunkard’s grave !
I should have no hesitation in saying to any one,
“ The blessed Master has never set you the example of
partaking of intoxicating drink at all.” I would say to
all, “ 1 concede to you perfect liberty to partake of
intoxicating drinks in moderation, on the ground of
your free-will, or of your “liking it,” or of its having
done you no harm that you are aware of, or that you
do not see your way to giving it up, or that you do not


wish to be singular, or that you see no harm in it. On
any such ground 1 do not venture to interfere ; but I
implore you not to adduce the example of our Lord as
justifying you in the use of intoxicating drink in any
extent, lest you should even seem (which I know you
would not desire) to make Him in any sense the author
or abettor of evil.
1 think, then, that I have adduced satisfactory
evidence that while it is certain (as at the Passover) that
our Lord partook of unfermented wine, and that it is
very probable he partook also of fermented harmless
wine, yet that he did not partake of intoxicating drink;
and hence I claim our blessed Lord to have been the
purest total abstainer from all intoxicating drinks that the
world has ever seen.
But I must now be drawing to a conclusion. I trust
you are fully convinced that the Temperance movement is
one of considerable importance ; that it is so intimately
connected with the well-being of man and the glory of
God that it possesses the highest claims upon your atten-
tion, sympathy, and support ; and under the hope that
s\ich is your belief, 1 would say a few words pointing out
the sources of help from which the Temperance movement
might reasonably expect to derive power.
Not to dwell here upon the need of Divine help,
which all will admit, we shall limit our present remark to
sources of human kind, inasmuch as God very constantly
employs human instrumentality in carrying on His great
works.
I remark that the Temperance Movement needs—•
In the first place, the sympathy and help of the
medical profession. I know of no body of men that could
render better and more valuable and effective service to
the temperance cause than the members of that honorable
and high-minded profession. From their great learning,
wide experience, and pure philanthropy, they are espe-
cially well fitted to lead public opinion in the interests of
temperance, and they are naturally looked to as guides
and counsellors in this matter.
Leading men of that profession, who have patiently
and exhaustively examined the question, and whose
opinion (and whose alone) on that account commands the
highest respect and the most unhesitating acceptance,
have pronounced against alcohol as an article useless for
supplying food, or healthy fat, or warmth, or power (as
muscular development), and of doubtful value medicinally
except in certain extreme cases. Let, then, the medical
profession, as one of its members advises, teach “ the


people that alcohol, whether absolutely hurtful or not, is
at any rate a perfectly useless article of food or drink ;
that it neither does nor can do any good to the healthy
body ; and that the notion that it supports the vital
powers, nourishes and strengthens the enfeebled frame, and
exerts a preservative influence on the system by which it
actually prevents the lighting up of disease, is a delusion
and a snare, which has been the ruin of thousands.”
Then, we add, a success may be attained far beyond the
most sanguine expectations of the most ardent advocate
of total abstinence.
I remark now, that the Temperance Movement needs,
in the second place, the sympathy and help of the clerical
profession. The Times, in a leading article, says :
tc Drunkenness is at length understood to be as syste-
matic a curse to the nation as any of the diseases whose
ravages are weekly recorded by the Registrar-General;
and the Church appears to understand that she would be
behind the age if she failed to take a distinct and promi-
nent part in attacking this national foe. It is certainly
her place, and, as the Archbishop of Canterbury said,
she has advantages which, no private association can com-
mand. She has her organisation ready in every parish,
and a man is everywhere present to work it. The only
wonder is that with such an agency more has not been
done before ; but perhaps the Church has too long neg-
lected the influence which other communities have found
to lie in the force of association. It has dealt with men
too much as individuals, and has neglected to bring an
organised common opinion to bear on them. But we
may also anticipate some advantage to the cause of tem-
perance from its being grasped by such comparatively
steady hands as those of the Church. It will be made
moderate and respectable : and if it do not at the same
time lose its energy, it will be all the stronger and more
successful.”
The Bishop of Exeter, Dr Temple, in a charge to th e
clergy of his diocese, said he would make a few observa-
tions on the duty of the clergy, entrusted as the Church
was with the religious charge of the whole country, not to
see a great sin doing the most terrible mischief to thou-
sands and thousands of their people, without seriously
considering the cause of the evil, and what was the
remedy. He referred to the sin of drunkenness. He
wished very much indeed that the clergy would lay to
heart, where such an evil was present amongst them, the
duty of considering in what way they could best do battle
with it. He did not so much refer to legislation. As
F 2


subjects of her Majesty, they would rejoice in every im-
provement which the law might attempt to introduce
bearing on the subject. But that was not what chiefly
concerned them. It did seem to him that in every
way they should labor to do what they could to raise the
moral tone of the large and increasing class of persons
who were tempted to this sin. Let them not think that
anything was more their duty than to wrestle with this
dreadful mischief. He was certain the clergy could do a
great deal to arrest it. “I am sure,” said his lordship,
“that they could do a great deal to make the body of the
people feel how much depends upon themselves, to make
them feel not merely the duty of sobriety, but the duty of
upholding sobriety, to make them feel the duty of showing
how important they think this carefulness over their con-
duct is. lam quite sure that although it may be a long
and difficult task, yet if the clergy would but undertake
it, they could do much more than they think. Much is
done by steady and frequent perseverance in urging upon
people the mischief which the sin causes, much is done
by perpetually recurring to the subject, much is done by
urging upon others their duty of discountenancing the
evil when they meet it; much is done if we are patient
and persevering, if we use all the tact, all the thoughtful-
ness, and all the consideration that we can, to help to lift
up our brethren to a higher level, and make them
by their own common feeling cast out this evil
spirit from amongst them.” “ 1 speak very
earnestly on this subject,” adds his lordship,
“ because I feel that there is hardly any service which the
Church of England could render to this country greater
than that of grappling with this mischief.”
Such are Dr. Temple’s views, and justice only can
be done to them when they are not only admired but also
acted upon by every minister of Christ. Let the clergy
then take up this matter, and they may rely upon it,
however little of human sympathy and encouragement
they may meet with, they will have that which is above
all price—the answer of a good conscience towards God
herein, and the approval of Him whom they profess to
serve.
Finally, the Temperance Movement needs the sym-
pathy and help of every class of society. Dr. Storey, in his
work on “Alcohol : its Nature and Effects,” very justly
observes—“ To educate the public mind and to awaken
the public conscience concerning a given subject is
equivalent to enacting laws on that subject, because out
of the mind and heart of the people the laws are made.
The trickery and chicanery of the selfish and avaricious


cannot long prevail against a Just and righteous cause
upon which the people are well educated. And the
Temperance Cause will be triumphant only when the
people are thoroughly informed upon the subject. All
information given to the people should be principles and
facts drawn from standard medical, scientific, and other
reliable sources of authority. Such information thus
obtained will have more weight on the mind of the
people than mere eloquence, and do more to convince
them that the cause of Temperance is just and worthy
than any other form of appeal. Theory and fancy do
very well for ornament ; but argument is worth more
than rhetoric only, and facts have more value than high-
sounding words.”
Good people, you have much power in your own
hands. It rests with you in a great measure to deter-
mine what the laws of the land shall be. Take every
opportunity in your power of informing yourselves on
this Temperance Question, Give it your warmest sup-
port. Do so at once, and continually. It is a cause
noble and ennobling in the extreme. See what under
God’s blessing it has already done. On its mission of
mercy it has followed the poor victim of intemperance to
the haunts of infamy and vice, and amid reeking fumes
of poisoned maddening spirit— amid foulest oaths, and
curses, and fightings—amid the most revolting scenes of
filth and debauchery, and devilry, it has won some of its
most glorious trophies. In the pure and holy spirit of
brotherly and sisterly love it has gone to the poor, fallen,
degraded victim of sin, and helped him up from his low
and lost estate. To countless homes it has restored that
joy, and peace, and unity, and plenty of which intemper-
ance had so long deprived them. It has housed, and
warmed, and clothed, and fed, and taught, and blessed
countless “little ones,” whom intemperance had made
homeless, and cold, and naked, and hungry, and igno-
rant, and miserable. It has bound up many a breaking
heart. It has dried many a weeping eye. It has
cheered many a desponding husband, or wife, or father,
or mother, or brother, or sister, or friend. It has
arrested the uplifted arm of the would-be murderer, or
the would-be suicide. It has given back to society, to
honor, to position, to usefulness, many who had been
deemed past recovery. Who, in fact, can measure the
extent of its usefulness and success ? God only knows
this, and eternity will show us. Beneath its banner of
high and holy freedom it numbers hundreds of thousands
who were once posting headlong to ruin. It is des-
tined to accomplish even greater things than


TAf p
&I&LIO
38 F 7SB t>
these, 0 friends, help on this great, and good,
and needful cause with heart and soul. Offer
it no opposition lest haply you should be found to be
fighting even against God. I cannot impress upon you
too strongly that it is God’s work, and may not be hin-
dered by any with impunity. God has, indeed, so signally
acknowledged this work as his own, that, reviewing past
success which could never have been attained by human
aid alone, we are constrained to exclaim —“ This is the
Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes and well
may we, therefore, pray, as every lover of his fellow-
creature and of God cannot fail to pray— u God bless
AND SPEED THE NOBLE CAUSE OP TEMPERANCE !”
Printed at the “ Launceston Examiner ” Office.
