

DELIVERED IN T
ptchattitjs’ fwstittttifltt at §wW«,
26th SEPTEMBER, 1862,
EMBRACING THE SUBJECT OF
A VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD,
UNDER THE FACILITIES AFFORDED FOR TRAVEL IN THE PRESENT DAY,
ALEXANDER GIBSON,
OF AUCHENREOCH, <SsC.,
DEPUTY INSPECTOR-GENERAL OP HOSPITALS H.M.S. RETIRED LIST.
BRECHIN: PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY D. BURNS.
MDCCCLXII.




PREFACE.
In laying before my hearers an account of a voyage round the world, rny main
object is to show how easily, and at how small personal risk this can, at the
present day, be effected.
A knowledge of this fact may induce many, who now employ their leisure
hours in tours of a more limited character, or in sitting at home, wrapped up
in the perusal of trifling books or periodicals, to exert themselves to obtain a
correct idea of countries of which they may have often read, and to improve their
health by a long, yet varied and easy tour, in the course of which they require
no interpreters nor guides, but may pursue their course in comfortable vessels,
where no other language is needed but our honest Anglo-Saxon tongue, and in
which they may enjoy every comfort which can be found at the best hotels in
England or the Continent. The expenses of such a voyage as may be seen
from the accompanying table, are by no means heavy, being quite within the
compass of a moderate income.
It will be remarked that in the accompanying lecture, I have started from
Bombay, the chief commercial port of Western India, and have conducted my
hearers down the western coast, giving somewhat of a detailed notice of the
various ports and countries which have to be passed. This I do, because infor-
mation in regard to these, though pretty abundant in the works of our older
travellers, may in vain be looked for in modern works ; and the notices of them
which I have given are nearly all founded on personal observation, as my Forest
Duties in India were chiefly connected with the countries near the western
coast, and along the Creeks, Rivers, and Mountains adjacent thereto. In fine,
X may say with the poet—
“ Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti,
Si non his utere mccum, ”
A. GIBSON.
Auoheneeoch, 18th September, 1862.




LECTURE
EXPENSES OF THE VOYAGE AS MADE BY ME.
From Bombay to Australia by steamer, £BO 0 0
Fifteen days’ hotel at Ceylon, including extras, 25 0 0
Hotel expenses at King George’s Sound, Melbourne, and Van
Diemen's Land, ... ... ... ... 15 0 0
Steamers to and from Van Diemen’s Land, 7 0 0
Mail coach expenses in do., 8 0 0
PaaconrA -Fmm MolKrtnrno Unlla.n in Porn QA A A
Passage from Melbourne to Callao, in Peru, 30 0 0
Hotel expenses, Callao and Lima, at three dollars per day, 12 days, 9 0 0
Passage per steamers from West Coast of America to England, ... 78 0 0
Passage by rail from Panama to Aspinwall, ... ... 5 0 0
Do. carriage of Baggage, which is charged here at 10 cents per lb., 5 0 0
Hotel expenses at various places on route, 10 0 0
Passage from Marseilles to Bombay, including transit through
Egypt, 102 0 0
Coach expenses from London to Marseilles, 7 0 0
Extras, as Stewards’ Fees, &c., 5 0 0
£386 0 0
-Time occupied in the above voyage, including stoppages, six and a half
months.
Having left Bombay on 31st January, 1861, we shall continue our route
southward along the coast of Southern Oonkan, commonly called the Pirate
Coast. It obtained this name from the circumstance of its being, until within
the last 60 years, wholly in possession of piratical chiefs —Angria, Doolup, the
Colapore Raja and others.
These quasi-princes seized on the ships of all nations whenever they were
strong enough to do so, and even in some cases they were able to seize the Go-
vernment vessels of war. They usually sailed in long sharp bowed crafts, some
of 1500 tons. I recollect having seen one of this size rotting on the beach at
Mai wan.


South of Bombay is Kenery, a rocky island which vessels try to make in
reaching the Harbour. On the Main opposite to Kenery you may notice the
picturesque Castles and Forts, which belonged to the great head of those
pirates, Angria, These are now crumbling to ruin under the peaceful sway
of the Bi’itiah Government, the country having been annexed in 1845.
On the southern boundary of this small Principality, which used to give to
Angria a revenue of about £30,000, we note the fine and complete fortress of
Choule or Rewadunda, built by the Portuguese, who 300 years ago, were very
powerful and held many stations and fortresses along this line even as far north
as Surat. Bombay was then one of these powerful stations, and was, as you
are aware, given to Great Britain, as a part of the dowry of the Queen of our
merry Monarch, Charles 11. In the 16th century this fortress of Choule sus-
tained a seige of 3 years having been beleaguered by the Armada and army of
the Mussulman Kings of Beejapore, who brought 300 vessels such as they were,
and some thousands of land troops to bear upon the fort. They however failed
in their undertaking, and soon after that, their kingdom passed away.
They had transported their army by the Creek, which, as you may from the
map observe, runs past Choule. In this fort, there are still ruins of magnificent
churches and palaces far exceeding in style of architecture and in size any which
the English yet have in Bombay, or indeed in India. The Fort is now tenanted
only by a few fishermen, gardeners, and oilmakers, the latter chiefly J ews. These
Jews are scattered all along this Coast, and in Malabar, and in Angria’s country
rather thickly.
Their tradition is that their ancestors came to India after the first captivity,
i.e. long before the Christian era.
They still retain their characteristics as a separate people, never intermarry-
ing with the other classes, whom they greatly exceed in fairness of complexion.
They are cultivators, weavers, bookbinders, and oilmakers, and are a most
peaceful and industrious class of men.
The creek above mentioned divides, as you may see from the map, the terri-
tory of Colaba from that of the Hubshee, who is still an independent Prince,
being one of the very few now left in India.
His possesssion dates from the time of the Beejapore Kings, under whom his
ancestors held the hereditary office of High Admiral or Emirul-Behr, that is
Prince of the seas. The Government of India have always let him alone, and
shorn him only of those territories which interfered with the inland pos-
sessions of the British. The Peshwa also having had his ancestors long estab-
lished as town clerks in one of his villages, (Sewurdhun) seems to have meddled
with him but very partially, and he exhibits the curious spectacle of almost the
only Prince in the extent of our Indian dominions, who has no Agent of the
ruling power to direct or guide him.
This country is under-populated and badly cultivated, as the ruler taxes his
people in the most arbitary manner, and not unfrequently kidnaps some of the
fairest women of the Brahminical class, who are so rash as to continue to live
under his rule —in order to cross the breed with some of the handsomest wooly
headed Africans, whom he continues, in spite of Lord Brougham and Mrs
Beecher Stowe —to import, in a quiet way. -The country, by reason of its scanty
population, is still a favourite resort for the tiger, the leopard, and the elk.


The Policy of Government in leaving this Prince so much to himself, though
laudable as a general rule, has its inconveniences, one of which is that as
English vessels are not unfrequeutly wrecked on this coast, the cargo is often
plundered, and the dead bodies of English sailors have, to my knowledge, been
left exposed on the beach to the mercy of the waves and the beasts of prey for
days. The territory of the Hubshee is bounded to the south by the creek or
estuary of Bankote, the entrance to which is crowned to the south by the beauti-
fully situated Castle of Fort Victoria, built by the English after the fortress of
Severndroog had been taken from Angria, by the squadron of Admiral
Watson, acting in behalf of the Marhatta Peshwa. In return for this service
a Pergunna of twenty-live villages and the long town of Bankote were ceded
to the English, who thus obtained their earliest footing in the Marhatta
dominions. Its name was from the first Victoria. Bankote is a large straggling
place chiefly noted for its manufactures of rope and oil. It is largely
tenanted by Mussulmans, degenerate, weakly, and irritable.
From hence, for a distance of 200 miles along the coast, and extending inland
to the foot of the Ghats is the British collectorate of Ruttnagherry, a country
which though only partially distinguished by richness of soil, is owing to its
temperate and healthy climate, very thickly peopled. All along the coast
houses of substantial construction, nestled in beautiful well watered glens open
to the sea, and well w r ooded with the cocoa nut and oondie (calophyllum
Inophyllum) may be noticed, while more inland on the flat ridges of Laterite,
may be seen grassy plains abounding in forage during the rainy season, and
giving subsistence to numerous herds of cattle. In many villages situated on
those moderately elevated plains, the epedemic cholera has never appeared.
I could give a much fuller account of all those places on the western coast,
which is well known to me, but this cannot, with propriety, be done in a lecture
devoted to a tour round the world.
I therefore confine my remarks to places on or near to the coast line. Fol-
lowing this rule, I now notice the numerous creeks and forts which line or open,
to the shore within sight of vessels sailing to the South. Of these, the first is
Kelsee, a pleasant little town, the favourite residence of pensioned native
officers, civil and military. They have mostly their gardens filled with cocoa
nut and other trees, and backed by the hills which rise above the creek on both
sides, and afford pasture for cattle. The fertile fields on the coast are chiefly
manured by the fish (sardine), which is caught in great abundance all along the
western shores.
Further on appears another creek, Anjerla, running up fifteen miles into the
country, and showing its hilly banks covered with Teak Forest, preserved by
Government. To the south of this may be seen the rather celebrated fortress
of Severndroog, which, as above observed, was taken by Admiral Watson,
acting on behalf of the Marhatta Peshwa, from the pirate chief Angria,
who was then transferred to Colaba. The main fort is situated on a rocky
island severed from the Continent only at high water. There are several sub-
sidary fortlets on the heights close by, which were flanking defences to the
mam one. Altogether, the place was very strong, and made an obstinate
defence. Of the whole of the forts, the walls alone remain, the few buildings
left being used for civil purposes.


From thence we pass clown twelve miles to the creek of Dabhul, a large
estuary which runs into the interior for about twenty-five miles, i.e. , to near the
foot of the Ghats, and affords the means for great traffic in salt fish, rice, iron,
steel, cloth, &c. A road from the upper country meets the creek at the extreme
of the tide way. There is a flourishing bazaar or market, which continues four
months during the fair season, and is chiefly attended by people from the upper
country, who dispose of their grain, sugar, &c., and carry up in return the
products above mentioned, as stores for the supply of their wants. Nearer the
mouth of the creek, is the ancient city of Dabul, formerly the seat of a British
factory, about 200 years ago, and is even alluded to by Pliny, the Roman
historian, under the name Dabhala. In those days the creek must have been
much deeper, but like all the estuaries and rivers on this coast, it is becoming
every year more shallow, and is accessible now to no vessel of above twenty
tons. Consequently, Dabul has dwindled, and though still a respectable town
has little trade. The inhabitants are mostly respectable Mussulmen, cultivators
and boat owners.
Proceeding to the south, we find, at a distance of thirty miles, the Zygurh
estuary, its entrance crowned by a fort, situated on a high table land of Eaterite.
The creek is accessible to vessels of thirty tons, and leads twenty-five miles into
the interior, ending near the Ghats, Thirty miles further south is the Civil
Station of Rutnagherry having a fort (now ruinous) formerly intended to protect
the town.
Ruttuagherry is the head-quarters of the Collectorate, and the station for the
Judicial Officers. It is a fine healthy place, built on Laterite Rock, and over-
looking the native town. This station was one of those which had a very
narrow escape during the eventful year 1857. A detachment from the mutinous
regiment the 29th, the head-quarters of which were at Colapore, was stationed
here. Kolapore is eighty miles distant. There they murdered three of their
officers, young lads, but the mutineers were shot down, and the mutiny
suppressed. The Ruttnagherry detachments were ready to join their brethren,
when they were surprised by the arrival from Bombay of a company of
Europeans, who had been pushed down the coast in a steamer, in the height of
the rainy season or monsoon. But for this timely arrival, the station would
have been plundered—murders committed, and the plague of insurrection would
have extended widely.
Form hence for 120 miles down the coast nothing calls for remark, until we
reach the creek of Rajapore, an ancient town, where was formerly an English
factory, in which Sir John Child, afterwards so famous iu the annals of the
Company, received his early training. This factory used to furnish the baftas
and other cloths, still so largely manufactured in the southern Marhatta
country;
It is generally supposed that the cotton manufactures of India are nearly
extinct. This is very far from being the case. Hand-looms for the manufacture
of cotton and silk goods are to be found in almost every village, and from the
abundance and cheapness of the raw material, these can successfully compete
with the more light and flimsy productions of the European loom.
The town Rajapore contains many mercantile native establishments for the
purpose of carrying on the large inland trade which still exists here. At Raja-


pore, as well as at other parts on this coast, is a hot spring, and also some
interesting cold springs, which fill suddenly at an uncertain period in the hot
season. The source of these, and the law by which they are regulated, no one
has as yet been able to explain. Here also is some trade with the Arabian
coast, from which several large dows or cargo boats annually arrive, and carry
away rice, cocoa nut, and coarse cloths. The mouth of this river is protected
by a fort now in ruins.
Twenty miles further down the coast is the inlet of Yiziadroog, the only one
on the coast which has any depth of water. Its entrance is protected by the
large fort of Geriah, now deserted. This castle was taken by the British,
assisted by the Marhattas ninety years ago. Lord Clive, then on his return
from Europe commanded the land forces, and the British fleet was under
Admiral Watson.
The resistance was obstinate, and the plunder obtained was large in amount.
The Marhattas were kept out of a share of the plunder by a cordon of British
troops drawn across the peninsula ; and years after this Morari Rao, the Mar-
hatta leader, when he visited the southern provinces, during the wars of Hyder
Ali, made this a pretext for attempting to exact £lOO,OOO from the Madras
Government, as the due share of the Marhattas of the Yiziadroog plunder.
This is the only creek on the west coast of India, excepting Goa, which has
water and shelter for large ships, but even here the entrance is tortuous and
dangerous. A harbour at the neighbouring village of Waghotun has lately been
attempted as the road from Belgam debouches on it, and the communication to
Kolapore and Belgam is much more easy than that by the Rajapore Creek. It
is not, however, easy to turn trade from the channel in which it has run for
hundreds of years, and therefore the new town and market remain untenanted.
Fifty miles farther down is the town of Malwan —a populous place on the
coast, and having some trade chiefly in grain and up-country products, including
bones for manure. Many of the people are Christians of the native Portuguese
class, and the Malabar early Christians. Here also reside a great number of
military pensioners, as the place is cheap, and fish, cocoa nut, &c., abound.
A man may live well for 4s per month. A little to the south of Malwan begin
the boundaries of the
SAWUNT WARIE STATE.
This extends down the coast for about sixteen miles, and inland towards the
Ghats for thirty miles. It is one of those mediatised or protected Govern,
ments, being in fact managed by a British officer—a fixed income being allotted
to the Raja and his followers, and the surplus applied to the improvement of
the country. This little territory was formerly famous for the piracies com-
mitted by its people, who are a turbulent and warlike set, and have, in my
time, rebelled three times, and given no end of trouble to the British Govern-
ment. The last rising occurred in 1845, and after much fighting and great
devastation (rendered necessary by the obstinate defence and sanguinary pro-
ceedings on the part of the rebels) was finally put down by General Outram in
the most gallant and complete manner. The people of this state were formerly
famous for their pirate ships, which were the scourge of this southern coast. The
inhabitants were all trained to arms. They are fond of liquor ; and most of the
population read and write, but are not less licentious on that account. The


country has much forest, is hilly and picturesque. It is bounded by the Ghats
to the east. The air is salubrious, and fever little known. The revenue is
about £20,000 per annum. The fort of Kairee forms the southern boundary;
and after this begins the Portuguese settlement of
GOA.
This extends about eighty miles down the coast, the shore being generally
backed by hills—except when it is steep and precipitous—even to the sea. The
Goa estuary is the only one of size sufficient to admit large ships (with exception
of Bombay) on the western coast. It is at once recognisable by two prominent
Headlands—on the northern one of which there is a lighthouse, and on the
southern a monastery, now deserted since the Constitutional Government was
established in Portugal.
The city of Panjim, or new Goa, is rather a well-built place, containing Go-
vernment stores, &c. The private houses are pretty numerous, and the town
contains about 50,000 people, but there is little commerce, and no merchants of
any substance. In fact the commercial code here is on the old prohibitive, or
at least restrictive character. An annual ship despatched from Portugal, and
one or two from Mozambique, comprise all the square-rigged vessels to be seen
in that port. Since, however, the establishment of the constitution in Portu-
gal, there is some improvement in the commercial relations with other countries.
In August 1857 the governor of Bombay despatched to Goa during the height
of the monsoon, or rainy season, two companies of European troops, to be
pushed up into the interior. The then governor of Goa at once allowed them,
on his own responsibility, to land, and rendered every assistance necessary for
their transport. By this timely measure, the southern Marhatta country was
saved from a rebellion, which was just about to explode at the great stations of
Darwar and Belgam. This must have involved a most wide and disastrous
spreading of the insurrection. The governor of Goa in thus acting contravened
a standing order of the Government of Portugal, but a bill of indemnity was
passed, by the Cortes, approving of his conduct.
The country of Goa is well cultivated—being carefully parcelled out into rice
fields, cuoca nut plantations, and mango gardens. The land tax is very mode-
rate, but excise taxes heavy. The pay of the Government functionaries, mili-
tary officers, &c., is about l-6th of that which prevails in the British dominions,
but the Goanese manage to make a respectable appearance on it, as they are
subject to no charges for marching, change of station, &c. The number of Por-
tuguese who go to Bombay to earn their bread, as cooks and servants, is very
large, and they carefully bring back their earnings for investment in the improve-
ment of their fields, &c. As domestics, they are known to be quiet, well-
behaved people—their chief failing being a disposition to drink. In all the
English European regiments, as well as in gentlemen’s houses, they form the
staff of cook boys and other domestics.
Old Goa lies five miles up the river from the new city Panjim. It is now
literally a city of churches and monasteries. Of these many have been very
beautiful, and the gardens still show the remains of the careful culture of fruit
trees, for which the monkish orders seem to have been in all countries noted.
The Church in which is the shrine of St Francis Xavier, the apostle of the
Indies, has been a splendid building. It contains the remains of a fine Library,


tlio drawers inlaid with brass, and the rooms hung with portraits (full length)
of various celebrated men of the Catholic Church, such as Cardinal Bellarmiue,
&c. The shrine of this Saint is of solid silver, adorned by a portrait from the
hand of Guercino, a celebrated painter of Italy. In 1859, the shrine was
opened, and the body of the Saint exposed for about a month to the gaze of the
faithful. One of the arms had been cut off and taken to Home about two hun-
dred years ago, by Aqua viva, the general of the Jesuits. It still may be seen
there in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore.
The number of native Christians who visited the shrine in 1859, was very
large, and, as usual in such cases, sundry miracles were said to have been
wrought on lame and other diseased subjects, who, strong in faith, touched the
remains. Of some of these miracles, certificates w'ere given by Portuguese
magistrates and police superintendents, just as in the case of the miracles heard
of as wrought by the Virgin Mary in France, within the last ten years.
I have now brought you to the end of the Bombay Territory, inclusive of the
Portuguese Dominion ; and if you ask —Why devote so much space to this par-
ticular tract of country ? I reply—that in most of our geographical books, and
naval directories, we find this still marked as the pirate coast,* without any
reference to the vast change which has taken place in its circumstances within
the last fifty years, and that what was formerly a country almost untrodden
by Europeans is now one of the most settled and peaceful districts belonging to
the British Government.
I now proceed to introduce you to the territories of the Presidency of Madras,
which begin immediately to the south of Goa, and stretch down to Cape Comorin.
Of these, the first is the province of Cauara, comprising north and south
Canara—above and below the Ghat mountains. It is with the latter only viz,,
that below the Ghats, that we have to deal. It may be described generally as
a rich province, famous for its cardamum and pepper gardens, fruitful in rice,
and abounding in building timber of the best quality as to grain and straightness.
The country also is like the south Conkan, intersected by creeks and tideways,
partly fed by rivers having their rise in the Ghats, and increased as they ap-
proach the tidal influence by various streams, and the sea as a lower feeder.
The first of these to be noticed has its outlet at Sudasheghur, where is an outpost
of Madras troops, and a small town, chiefly peopled by fishermen, cultivators,
and small merchants.
The mouth of the creek is on its outside to the south sheltered by a chain of
islands, and in the lee of these, attempts are now being made to form a harbour,
where large vessels can lie to receive the abundant supply of cotton, which could
be exported from the inland Mahratta country above the Ghats to this, as the
most direct port for its shipment. A great detour for its export will thus be
saved, as you may observe that the Neelcoond Ghat to the South, by which it,
at present, finds its way to the coast, is very distant from Darwar as compared
to the route inland of Sudasheghur.
Viewing this proximity to the cotton and cloth-producing countries of Darwar
and Hoobly, the English had about 300 years since established a factory at
Carwar in this creek; and we read in the old histories, of English noblemen
having come here in the time of Charles 2d to enjoy the sport of tiger
* Encyclopaedia of Geography, by Murray, pp. 996. Ed, 1834.


shooting, and the baiting of wild cattle by bull dogs, which they brought with
them.
The factory has, for many years, been withdrawn, so that the foundation of
the houses is barely traceable. The cloth which the factors used to purchase,
is now supplied in quantity by other routes, and is excellent in quality.
At Hoobly there are upwards of 7000 looms devoted to its production, and
the manufacture, far from showing any sign of decadence, has of late years much
increased. If you take a glance from the sea, up into the interior, you will
observe the high swelling hills, covered to the top with forest, while here and
there the beautiful spice gardens may be noticed, shaded with umbrageous
trees and traversed by bright silver streams, and altogether conveying the idea
of a tropical Paradise, at all times cool and free from malarious exhalations.
Sixteen miles further down, we reach the Gungawullee creek, or broad river and
tide estuary, which drains the country from the foot of the Arbyle Ghat, by
which much timber is floated to the coast. Near this, to the south, is a most
celebrated place of Hindoo worship, Gokurn Mahableshwur. A visit to this
confers on the votary the privilege of exemption from the penalty of former
sins and faults. It is consequently much resorted to even from distant pro-
vinces.
Sixteen miles to the south is the Tuddry creek and river, which has near its
entrance the port of Coompta, now a great place of export for the cotton of the
upper country, which reaches the coast by the Ghat of Neelcoond, where an
excellent, but much too narrow road, renders the transit easy. Inland of
Coompta, are several towns, situated on the river banks. Of these—one is
Meerjan, supposed by Mr Burton, the traveller, and others, to be the Musiris
of Ptolemy. There exist, indeed, in the forest in this vicinity, many proofs
that the country has, at one period, been thickly peopled. The land, even to
the tops of the hills, and in what is now the thickest of the forest, is regularly
divided by stone enclosures—showing that in former ages it must have been
thoroughly cultivated by a numerous population. The wooded coast is next
broken by the large estuary in which is situated Honore or Honawur, a
small station for troops—and the Revenue and Judicial Establishments for the
lower province. It is a quiet antique looking place, having the bastions of the
fort now covered with the luxuriant bush vegetation of the tropics.
The place is celebrated as having sustained a long siege from the forces of
Tippoo Sultan, about seventy years ago. It was then garrisoned by Bombay
troops, under Major Abingdon, and the account of the siege, which will be
found in Orme, is of great interest. Luckily for our side it failed in success,
otherwise the fate of the besieged would most likely have been identical with
that of General Medows and his officers and men, who, after having sur-
rendered, under a paction, were cruelly poisoned or put to death by order of
Tippoo Sultan.
Honore is a picturesque place, with its red soil, beautiful river-banks, and
waving lines of cocoa nut trees, which are grown here in great abundance,
each tree paying a tax of about Bd. per annum to the State. The creek and
river, beautifully diversified with swelling hills and habitations scattered amid
clumps of trees, leads up to the foot of the Ghats, where is the ancient city of
Gussappa ; and beyond this to the east, far away in the hills, are the falls of


Gussappa, whore the river falls down in divided streams to a depth of 1200
feet at least. The scenery and vegetation here are magnificent; but I must
not stray so far from the subject we have in hand as to extend the description.
Suffice it to say that this is one of the lions of our western coast, and as such
is often visited by travellers from Bombay and Madras.
Off the mouth of the Honore Creek is an island, which appears to be composed
wholly of specular iron ore of the richest quality, but very difficult of reduction.
It may, in future years, be of great consequence for the supply of ore.
From hence is a stretch of coast 100 miles in length to Mangalore, the shores
being varied in the manner above noticed, by creeks and streams running from
the foot of the inland hills, and meeting the tide half way, and generally
closed by a bar which excludes any other than small vessels from entering.
The creeks, banks, and indeed the country generally, is studded with populous
villages and thickly sprinkled with plantations of the frankincense tree, the
mango, &c.
There are also many temples of large size, dedicated to the worship of
Bauddha—(one of these I have seen in the Mysore country, where a monolithic
figure of Bauddha 180 feet in height crowns the summit of a conical mountain)
—which is by no means extirpated, as many suppose, from the Continent of
India; —on the contrary, in some districts half the inhabitants are of the
Bauddhist class, and hated by the Brahmins, who take every opportunity of
insulting them, and of defiling their temples as receptacles of image worship.
For instance, I recollect well that, in the holy Hindoo city of ISTassick, about
thirty years ago, the Buddist merchants and traders had, with the permis-
sion of Government, erected a temple. A crowd of Brahmins broke into this,
defiled the images with ordure, &c., and did all the damage they could. The
aggressors were severely fined or imprisoned by the magistrates ; but being rich,
they mostly avoided the imprisonment by paying the fines immediately. Again,
you will find in the Memoirs of Malwa, by the late Sir John Malcolm, that in
the ancient city of Ougein, where are many Buddist merchants and bankers, these
parties had on one of their Saint’s days a great procession, in Which were carried
numerous images of Buddha and other Saints of the Calendar. As the proces-
sion moved along in the sandy bed of the Chumbul, it was met by a single
Brahmin, who sneeringly observed—“ you call these your Gods, do you?” and
taking up a round flat stone, the symbol of Eternity, from the bed of the river,
held it up before them, exclaiming—“this is God !” Forthwith, a furious riot
ensued, the armed police were called, and finally, 400 dead bodies were the
result of the fray.
Also, of late years, as the protection of Government is equally extended to
all classes of its subjects—whereas, under the former rule of the Peshwa, the
Brahmins were a specially protected class—the richer of the trading classes,
who are mostly of the Dissenting and Budhist persuasion, in many cases, in
building new temples, adorned them with steeples, an innovation which had
never been known before ; —whereupon the Brahmins and rich Hindoos sent
repeated, and often most insolent petitions, to Government complaining of the
invasion of their supremacy, as the established church of the country ; and it
was sometime before they coxdd be made to understand that Government
declined in any way to meddle with the free-will of individuals in such matters.


The Ghat Hills in this quarter run high, and above them all may be seen
towering still higher the Baba Boodun Hills, in Mysore, having an altitude
of 5000 feet, and a climate of the most delightful description. Several coffee
planters have already settled there, and more will doubtless follow in the course
of years.
The hills towards the shore are often resplendent with rivulets, like silver
threads glancing in the morning sun, and falling from cliff to cliff till they reach
the lower levels.
The whole of this lower Canara country is eminently healthy, and in many
places, as at Honore, cholera has never prevailed as an epidemic.
The laud is divided into wargs or estates, each of which a man enjoys without
question, and without any limitation of lease, the land tax being fixed and very
moderate. In fact, tenant-right there exists on a scale which would be won-
dered at in England or Ireland.
The station of Mangalore is a large civil station, containing English and
native judges, collector, &c,, with a proportion of native soldiery sufficient for
the protection of all these establishments. The houses are well-built, the roads
good, and the station is altogether a choice one, being cool and healthy. The
port furnishes large exports of grain, coir-rope, gums, &c., to Arabia, and also
some Mysore coffee, which afterwards appears in the market as Mocha coffee.
The soil of the interior is fruitful, and here, as in many other parts of Malabar
and Kanara, the same field will yield three crops of rice per annum. The
theory of this growth is very instructive, and may well shew the folly of the
common idea entertained in England, that the Hindoos are very far behind in
their knowledge of cultivation.
In Mangalore are nany native Christians, mostly of the Roman Catholic per-
suasion. There is also a seminary kept by the Basle missionary brethren.
There is an English church and a chaplain for the European establishments.
From Mangalore to the cantonment of Cannanore, when begins the province
of Malabar, is a distance of about ninety miles, —the shore being varied only by
the remains of droogs, or forts, formerly the residence of independent chiefs,
who were all subdued by Tippoo Sultan, as he in his turn was by the English.
These forts have mostly clustered round them good sized villages contain-
ing many fishermen and artizans. By the care of the Madras Governments,
for the comfort of travellers, Bungalos or rest houses are formed at the distance
of about fourteen miles from each other, and always close to a village, for the
convenience of travellers procuring supplies.
The only large Creek in this line is that of Cassergode, which is formed from
a river flowing from the Coorg Hills north of Mercara, and is found useful for
the transport of wood and of rice to the coast. B} 7 this creek are exported from
the Coorg Hills those immense spars called Poon, which are used for the
masts of large ships, a single one often costing £9O. The tree which produces
these is a truly magnificent one when seen in its native forest (Calophyllum
Longifolium). From the southern part of this coast at Hosdroog runs a back-
water, a natural lake navigable for boats to within four miles of the station at
Cannanore. It forms a convenient line of travel, especially in the rainy season.
The coast from Cannanore is somewhat bare, and lined with sandy downs,
which have at their edge grass land, some time ago barren.


Mr Maltby, however, formerly collector here, has given ont these lands in
perpetuity to parties desirous of breaking them up, and improving them, at a
rent of two shillings per acre per annum. The consequence of this provident
measure is, that they are now being broken up, and fenced with walls, and water,
courses and wells have been dug in every direction; so that in the course of another
generation, the whole shore will be lined with cocoa nut trees, as Malabar now
is, to the great benefit of the cultivator and the merchant. The proximity of
these fields to the shore will ensure a never-failing supply of sea weed and fish
manure. Such is the advantage which an enlightened and wise administrator
can confer on an extensive district of country. All this region was formerly
under the sway of Tippoo Saltan, who reduced the forts of the Polygars, or
local princes, which line the coast.
Close to Cannanore, is Mount Dilly,—a high promontory, which separates
Canara from Malabar, which stretches down the coast for 200 miles. Much of
Malabar belongs to the British Government, and the remainder is under the
dominion of the Rajas of Travancore and Cochin.
The interior is distinguished by high mountain chains, of which the most
striking is the Keilgherry, or Blue mountain range, rising to the height of 8000
feet, and enjoying a climate nearly equal to that of England. There is also
the Anamala range of hills, which divides Malabar from Coimbatore, and where
may be observed the open Pass through which the i ail way now runs to reach the
Western coast at Beypore.
The lower ranges form the district called Wynad, now the seat of many
flourishing coffee plantations, which bid fair to outstrip in productiveness those
of Ceylon, owing to the much greater facility for obtaining the labour necessary
for cultivation and picking. The inland country is covered with forest, in which
the elephant, the elk, the wild buffalo, the tiger, and the leopard range in
freedom.
Most of the land in this province is private property, and cultivation of the
rice and the cocoa nut in the lower levels is carefully conducted. Creeks and
rivers of some extent thread the Province from its Eastern Border to the sea,
but these are not navigable save for small boats and native craft.
The country is also traversed by backwaters or canals running some way
inland, and by these, pai’ties may journey by boat, even in the rainy season,
which is a great advantage for commerce. The more inland mountains are
covered with magnificent forests of poon, teak, &c., while the lands nearer to
and on the coast, exhibit one unbroken mass of cocoa-nut tree vegetation. The
cocoa nut is now in great request, and its price has doubled within the last
twenty years. This rise is caused by its oil being now made applicable to the
manufacture of stearine candles, which have nearly superseded the use of wax,
so that its consumption has no limits. Besides this, oil is manufactured in
Malabar from the Sardine fish, found in great quantities on the coast, and here
also is made from a large cod-like fish, an oil equal to that of cod-liver oil.
Many other products are now raised and exported from this rich province, but
of these it is not my business to speak of at any length here, and therefore the
only one I will remark on is iron, for the smelting of which an extensive
foundry was established years ago at Beypore. The ore having been found
too refractory for smeltirg profitably, by the common country process, was


subsequently subjected to reduction by the hot blast, the process having been
carried on by officers, who had studied the subject in England, and in the
Carpathian furnaces of the Austrian dominions.
However, from what I have lately heard as to the inability of this Company
to supply sleepers to the railway, which debouches here, I am of opinion that
even with their present advantages, the works do not pay. One cause of this
is the high price of charcoal fuel, which has more than doubled within the last
ten years.
The dominion of the Travancore and Cochin Rajas is extensive in Malabar,
and the former has erected an observatory on the lofty peak Aghostier (6000 feet
high), and situated in the eastern parts of his territory. This Rajah is one of
the few native princes who have taken any interest in these high and important
pursuits.
In Malabar are many churches of native Christians, originally converted by
St. Thomas, in the early ages of the Christian era, and holding themselves
quite separate from the Church of Rome, which, through the Goa priesthood,
has made many attempts to bring them within its pale, having in former years
indulged in active persecution, but with partial success. They are a quiet
obedient race, and have for ages been tolerated if not assisted by the native
Princes of Travancore and Cochin. Tippoo Sooltan, while in power, was
however an active persecutor, having tried to reduce many of the communities
into a state of slavery.
At that time he attempted to penetrate into their country, through the cele-
brated Aramboolee lines—a strong defence formed of a wide belt of prickly shrubs,
sown in purpose. The defence appears to have been conducted by a captain
in the British service, who was killed. His grave is annually the object of
pilgrimage, made by the numerous Hindoos, as well as Christians in that
vicinity.
To the south the coast of the Peninsula becomes more narrow, and slopes more
into a plain surface, until it ends at Cape Comorin, which forms the southern
boundary of the Indian Peninsula. From hence we leave the land, and stretch-
ing by the mouth of
THE GULF OF MAN AAR,
where there seems to blow a continued gale of wind, we reach in twelve hours,
steaming the road of Point de Galle, in Ceylon. On the way we pass Columbo,
bat at such a distance that it is not seen.
POINT DE GALLE.
This harbour is reached in the sth day by steam, from Bombay, and forms
the house of call for all the steamers converging from Australia, China, Bengal,
Madras, and Suez. You will observe from its situation on the map, that it is
admirably fitted for this purpose, and also as a place for sailing ships to call at
for orders. A vessel arriving here anchors in the outer roads, and immediately
the commander despatches telegrams to Bombay, to Madras, to Calcutta,
Akyab, and Rangoon. He thus learns the rates of freight, which can be
obtained at those stations, and is in a position to steer his course at once to
that port at which he can have the greatest sum per ton for his freight. A
material saving of distance, time, and trouble, are thus ensured ; and this is one
of the numerous benefits resulting from the electric telegraph in India.


The harbour of Galle is small and inconvenient, and, moreover, rocky in
certain points—insomuch, that a ship parting from her anchors has no room,
but is likely to be wrecked. This was the case with the steamer which carried
Lord Elgin and Baron Gros to China, in 1859. The South West monsoon had
just commenced. These officers and suite had repaired on board, and the
anchor was just up, but the steam not ready, when a sudden squall took the
ship, and drove her on the rocks. She immediately became a wreck, but steam
having luckily been got up, the crew were able to move her to the sandy bottom
on the east side of the harbour, where her passengers were saved, and finally
the whole of the treasure (£270,000) recovered by means of divers. On talking
with the divers, I found that they did not at all dread the sharks, devil
fish, and other voracious creatures that frequent those seas. Those animals
were frequently observed swimming above and around them, but were apparently
scared by the strange-like garb in which the divers were enveloped, their close
helmets, and heavy shoes, weighing 14 lb. each. In no case did any accident
occur.
The pori; being, as above mentioned, so conveniently situated for sailing craft *
in the outer roads during the fair season, we may always see six or eight large
vessels from Australia, Mauritius, or elsewhere.
All around Galle, the country is densely wooded, chiefly with cocoa nut
trees; Some of the houses around the harbour are picturesquely situated on
hills, the base of which is washed by the sea. The cocoa nut and the other
products of the tree are the great article of export. The inhabitants are a
singular feminine-looking set, having long hair variously ornamented with
combs—the head and upper part of the body naked, while the lower is enveloped
in a white sheet, drawn closely round the person. The style of dress and the
want of the turban have an unpleasant effect on a person accustomed to the
better and more gracefully clothed people of India or China. The view from
the port is rather fine, as we see a number of hills and mountains, all apparently
clothed with forest vegetation, and the pleasant green relieves the eye accus-
tomed to the brown or adust plains of India. In case of detention at Galle, one
may occupy the time in excursions to Dondra, and Humbantotee, where are
temples traced from the Buddhist Records to have been built seven centuries
before the Christian era. Of these, many portions have been at times removed
by thievish amateurs, but still enough remains to show how great their extent
must have been.
One may also take advantage of the mail cart to visit the interior at Kandy,
where the land is high, and the route picturesque, and the made roads in the
country being good, the journey is little painful, but dangerous by reason of the
bad quality of the horses in the post cart vehicle, and the consequent liability
to accidents.
In going to Kandy, the road is led along by the sea side as far as Columbo,
where the night is usually passed, and on the following day the traveller reaches
Kandy. Coffee plantations are numerous in this part of the interior, but the
culture is not so remunerative as is the case in Malabar, owing to the frequent
great want of labour, particularly at the picking season—hence much money
has been lost in this culture, especially by persons who are not on the spot to
manage their own estates, and are thus driven to employ the more expensive


supervision of a European overseer, who can hardly be employed under a salary
of £2O a month.
The port of Galle was only in the present century taken from the Dutch. It
is situated on a tongue of land washed on both sides by the sea. The town,
inhabited by the European community, is situated entirely within the fort, the
houses being built on the Dutch plan, with a broad veranda in front, and one or
more courts behind. They are mostly of one story, and very hot towards even
time—some are two stories, these are cooler. All are well and substantially
built, as stone is abundant here. Tiles are the universal covering for the roof.
The native town and bazaars are situated outside, along or near to the beach.
Most of the houses are embosomed in trees. The bazaars and markets are spacious
and well built of stone, with a covering of lime. Leprosy, in the form of the ele-
phant leg, used to be very common here, but duringthe thirty-live years which had
elapsed since my last visit to the port, I found that it had decreased ten-fold.
This speaks well for the sanitary arrangements, drainage, &c., of the place.
The Roman Catholics are numerous here, as are the Buddhists, which latter, in
fact, form the bulk of the country population. The people of the fort and town
are a mixture of Dutch and English, half-castes, Chooleas, or natives of the
Coromandel coast, Malays, &c., with a sprinkling of English. The hotels are
numerous, as the resort of passengers to this, the converging point for the
steamers from India, Australia, China, Borneo, and Singapore, islarge. Two com-
panies European soldiers, a battery of artillery, and a few local police suffice for
protection. Rate of entertainment is about twelve shillings per diem, for three
meals and bed, without liquors. The latter are generally dearer in price and
inferior in quality to those of India. Rupees, shillings, rixdollars, &c., are
indiscriminately received in the shops. Precious stones are offered for sale in
quantities, but much care and discrimination are required in purchasing them.
Boxes of various woods, and ornamental baskets, made of Porcupine quills are
offered for sale in quantities.
The steamer for Australia arrives from Suez by the direct route, and her ar-
rival is so timed, as to allow of her carrying the mails and passengers which
come in from Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, Singapore, Labaan, and China, just
about the time of or previous to her arrival. We may see lying at Galle, the
cut stones, damps and iron work of the Bassas’ light-house, lying there all
ready to be put together. They were thus sent out from England at a cost of
£90,000 for erection on the Bassas, a rocky shoal north-east of Galle. One or
two ships are annually lost here. Unhappily no foundation on which a light-
house can be placed has yet been fonnd, so that the materials remain useless.
Behold us then embarked in the S. Atlantic in a fine screw steamer of 1200
tons, carrying about 1000 tons of coals, and about 750 mail boxes containing
letters, papers, &c., from all quarters of the globe.
The mails are under special charge of a navy agent, generally a half-pay Lieu-
tenant or Commander, whose special duty it is to see thattho boxes are properly
stowed, protected from the weather, and otherwise cared for, Nevertheless it
must be said that notwithstanding all these precautions it too often happens
that many of the letters arc damaged and rendered illegible, by reason of the
wetness of the hold, and in the imperfect finishing of the zinc boxes, wherein they
are retained. The wetness of the hold again is due to the too small size of the


vessels, ami their deepness in the water consequent on the heavy cargo of coals.
Between decks there is no room for the mails, as passengers occupy every inch
of the available space.
Leaving Ceylon with a well laden ship, we stretch down to the southwest,
and in passing have a fine view of the inland high hills, such as Adams Peak, &c.
About this peak, are many legends both Hindoo and Mahomedan. I will not
fatigue you by recounting these.
Soon we leave the land behind, and are in the bosom of the Southern At-
lantic. Our course lies far to the south and west of Sumatra, Java, and the other
islands, which form the Eastern Archipelago, and we are quite untramelled by
any proximity to land and the variable breezes, thunder storms, and currents,
which such vicinity always gives rise to. We have, however, the south-east
trade wind to cope with, and until we have crossed the line and got 4 degrees
to the south of it, the weather is variable, and somewhat warm. From lat. 4
south, the south-east trade wind is generally expected to set in. This wind as
you may see blows just from the quarter to which we intend to go, therefore
we must look for a strong head-sea, and unpleasant shaking of the vessel, as w r e
plough through it, rather than rise upon it. In such weather, the screw labours
heavily, and indeed viewing the heaviness of its gear, and the impossibility of
repairing any serious accident which may happen to it, the risk is great in
working a screw steamer at such a distance from land. The voyage is varied
by few or no incidents.
The nearest land passed is the Cocos islands, which are just south of Java
Head, and even these are left at a distance of three hundred miles. I could
have conducted you by the inner route to Australia through the beautiful straits
of Malacca, the coast of Java, the Celebes islands, the Spice islands, New Guinea
and other great islands in the Harafura sea, to debouch upon Sydney by the
eastern coast of Australia, but this route, by reason of the numerous currents,
scattered islets and other obstacles is both tedious and dangerous, therefore it
has been abandoned for the line we are now on.
The weather now feels cold and bracing—albatrosses, cape "pigeons, and other
birds follow the course of the ship, a few whales may occasionally be seen.
The route for Australia by the Mauritius from Suez, was for some time tried,
but it having been found to be more circuitous and the centre port not so well
situated as Galle, the latter route was chosen. The first land made, in proceed-
ing S.E. is that of Cape Lewine, which is the S.W. promontory of Australia,
in that direction. It lies a little to the south of Swan River. You may expect
a somewhat heavy sea and breezy weather in nearing this point. Passing it you
haul up E., and finally E. and by N. in order to reach King George’s Sound,
which is the first halt on this coast of Australia, and is important as a coaling
station. You enter a fine bay well landlocked, and shut in by islands, and find
before you an English looking town, named Albany, with a long wooden jetty,
and small cottage-like white houses peeping out from their gardens or from
bush scrub which runs down to the beach. At the back of it rises a circle of
granitic and quartzy hills, shewing in some places their shining cliffs, under
which is a good deal of tree vegetation, principally of the black-gum, or
Eucalyptus,
You land and come upon a sprinkling of settlers, such as shop-keepers,


artisans, and fishermen all European or Australia-born. A resident on a salary
of £3OO per annum governs the place. A church in the English village style,
having a square tower, and the jail and small two storied dwelling of the go-
vernor, complete the picture in the background, and eastern angle of the town.
There are some sandy cart tracks, dignified by the name of roads, leading to
the interior ; and along one of these may be seen the mail starting for Swan
River, a light cart with two good gig horses. The distance is about three hun-
dred miles, and this is accomplished within three days.
The rocky hills which surroimd the town of Albany, as well as the stony
islands which encompass the mouth of the harbour, albeit they are well covered
with bush and a sprinkling of blue gum trees, contain no animals worthy the
researches of the sportsman, but the kangaroo is pretty extensively found a
little way inland.
A few miserable degraded natives may be seen moving about the town,
endeavouring to earn a penny by exhibiting their war dance, throwing the
boomarang, &c. They appear the most degraded race in the world.
Fish are abundant in the harbour, and the climate, though rather warm, is
healthy and free from malaria.
Judging by the crops which are raised within the enclosures around the
dwellings, the soil must be, when aided by manure, fertile.
A few whale-boats are kept in readiness at this sound, as the adjacent sea is
occasionally visited by whales.
A steamer from Adelaide meets the steamer of the main line at this Sound,
to receive the direct passengers for that port; and the news of Europe is thus
forwarded by electric telegraph from Adelaide to Melbourne and Sydney, anti-
cipating that brought by the main line by several days.
The distance from King George’s Sound to Melbourne is about 1300 miles,
and the voyage occupies five days. Kangaroo island is the only insular land
passed, and going to the south of it, the lighthouse at Cape Otway is seen, and
inland of it a waving and hilly country, which appears to be still covered with
primeval forest —having many large trees of the Eucalyptus and other species,
but especially the former.
We now round into the outer bay of Port Philip, on the west side of
which is situated the settlement of Geelong, some miles inland ; while to the
east are the Quarantine Buildings, placed near the water’s edge, and sheltered
by high ground often steep towards the sea.
It was at this place that the first landing of attempted settlers took place in
in 1803, in the expedition of Colonel Collins ; but at that time the coast looked
so unpromising that the idea of a location here was abandoned, and the ships
were steered across Bass’ Strait, when the settlements of Launceston and Ho-
bart Town were made. Had the expedition been pushed a mile or two further
up the Bay, the magnificent harbour of Melbourne—viz., Hobson’s Bay—might
have been discovered.
The channel at the mouth of this, the outer Bay, is somewhat narrow for
one and a-half miles, but the fair way is clearly indicated by the buoys placed
on the shoals. After twenty miles, we enter Hobson’s Bay, a magnificent
inland water now studded with shipping, and exhibiting the various features
of progress seen in a young country. Tall masts, chimneys of manufactories,


docks, jetties, and the smiling villages of St Kilda, Williamstown, and Sand-
ridge, give unmistakable evidence of the presence and enterprise of British
settlers, —while the city of Melbourne, with its tall spires, warehouses, &c., is
seen in the distance, and beyond it the Hilly which stretches on the
right towards Mount Alexander, and to the left due north and west, towards
the gold-fields, which have so greatly contributed to the material wealth of
England.
The city of Melbourne—though not thirty years ago, it was an unreclaimed
bog and sandwaste—now shows larger than many large cities in England, which
date from hundreds of years. The long-straight and wide streets, lined by
rows of excellent houses, and abounding in water-supply, show what can be
done under a liberal system of Government. Many of the shops are splendid,
and every convenience found in the older cities of Europe is seen. The great
width of the streets, however, renders them peculiarly bleak, and open to the
sweeping winds which almost daily blow along them. These winds are in the
sum mer hot, but at other seasons very cold and piercing—the change being
sudden, so that a hot morning is uniformly succeeded by a cutting wind in the
afternoon.
By reason of these sudden variations, the climate is on the whole not favour-
able to health. Bowel complaints, such as diarrhoea and dysentery, are very
common. The prevalence of these, however, is not entirely due to the climate,
but much is the fruit of undue indulgence in spirituous liquors and compounded
drinks. These are begun by 11 a.m. at latest, and continue at intervals till
late at night. The railway system is being rapidly developed in Melbourne,
and by means of it the districts in which the diggings are situated, have pro-
bably, by this time been made easily accessible. When I was there the rails
had been carried to half the distance ; and as the receipts from duties on gold
dust continue high, it is probable that ere now as much more has been
completed.
The conveniences for locomotion in this new colony, are great. The
excellent breed of, and abundance of horses, leads to our finding omnibuses in
the greatest abundance, and at reasonable fares. The streets too, are kept
smooth and well repaired, for the transit of all sorts of vehicles. One may
see the English waggon in its various modifications laden with merchandize for
the gold country, taking its departure at night-fall. Camels have been lately
introduced and apparently with some success—several of them have had young.
The Volunteer movement has made great progress. A splendid assembly of
4000 armed men, I saw in the Wurebee plain on 4th April 1861. They had
assembled from Melbourne, and all the other numerous townships; and each body
came on the ground accompanied by their own band, or drummers or fifers ; and
in some cases where they had none—the National Anthem or other patriotic
songs were chanted by the Companies, as they converged to the Head Quarter
flag, on the plain, which in extent is unequalled, 1 fancy, by any in
Europe, while the long rows of tents and refreshment booths, resplendent with
crystal and ice, and adorned with piles of the most beautiful ripe apples,
peaches, grapes, and oranges, (in April), gave full evidence that the physical
comforts of the volunteers and the spectators, the latter amounting to upwards
of 20,000, were carefully attended to. The sight was a most cheering one, as


evidencing the effects of British civilization, love of order, and obedience to
authority, in peopling a country, which, thirty years ago, was occupied only by
a few wild savages—the Kangaroo and the Emeu.
The lines of regular steamers, which now ply from Sandridge, (the port of
Melbourne), to New Zealand, Adelaide, Wurnambool, Sydney, Launceston, and
other places, are of the greatest service, in conveying the productions of the
different detached settlements from one to the other, to say nothing of their
effect in extending the general intercourse of the settlers.
To Launceston, in Tasmania, formerly Van Diemen’s Land, the “ Black Swan ’
and “ Boyal Shepherd,” ply twice a week. As I made this tour I may describe
the nature of the passage which is one of about thirty hours across Bass’ Straits.
There is also an external line once a week or twice a month from Melbourne to
Hobart Town, round the north east end of Van Diemen’s Land, passing through
Bank’s Straits. The former is the route generally preferred as shorter, and
more comfortable. The passage across the Straits is easy, the water being
often smooth, and twenty-four hours after leaving Sandridge,—the bold coast
about Circular Head is descried, and in four hours more the Tamar is entered.
The river winds beautifully among well wooded hills, the forest diversified by an
occasional clearing—for about fifty-two miles, when we get into the Beach
leading to Launceston, where the steamer lands her passengers at an excellent
wooden pier, and the houses of the town are seen rising in regular streets in
front, and these, terminated by a chain of small hills, over which different roads
lead to various parts of the country.
As Tasmania became a British settlement thirty years before Melbourne was
discovered, and peopled, every thing here has a more finished and settled look, at
the same time the evidences of rapid progress are here much fewer : in fact,
since the discovery of the gold regions in Australia, population in Van Diemen s
Land has somewhat retrograded, owing to extensive emigration to Port Philip,
Alberts Land, Moreton Bay, Adelaide, &c. At the same time, the appearance
of the town and the feeling of the climate at once indicate that we are in a
country having a temperature much more similar to that of Europe than is that of
Australia. Even the appearance of the horses and the fine complexion of the
tall juveniles their drivers, at once show the difference, and indicate that here
both man and beast are much more robust than is the case in the neighbouring
continent. A fine level road, the result of convict labour, leads from Lauuces-
ton to Hobart Town, a distance of 120 miles.
This road bisects the island at its greatest length. On each side of it are
flourishing farms, or grazing tracts, and not a few picturesque and English-
looking farm houses. Adjacent to the road are numerous villages, such as
Perth, Oatlands, &c., each of them distinguished by the churches belonging to
several Christian denominations —a court house and hotel. The gardens also
and orchards, which skirt the road, showing trees loaded and often bent down
with crops of peaches, plumbs, and apples, give unmistakeable evidence of the
temperate and cool nature of the climate. Twenty miles before entering Hobart
Town we come on the Derwent Eiver, which is seen widening into the exten-
sive estuary on the right, or Western Bank, on which is situated Hobart Town,
Hobart Town is a neat well laid out and clean city, with many churches,
the Houses of Assembly, the Governor’s residence, &c,, &c. The latter is a


castellated building, situated in an English looking park, having many fine
large trees, and flanked by the Botanical Gardens, which contain many beautiful
exotic shrubs, as also specimens of all the indigenous trees. The buildings of
the city are merely of beautiful cut free stone. The pavements are excellent.
Coaches start from Hobart town to New Norfolk, and other places daily.
They are quite equal to the English stage coaches but better horsed, and on
each may be seen emblazoned the City arms and motto, “ sic fortls Jlorbartia
crevit Up the Derwent 21 miles from Hobart Town, is situated New Norfolk,
a lovely rural village, perched on the high bank of the river, and containing the
usual number of churches of the several denominations, court-house, goodhotels,
the Bush Inn, and other substantial buildings. Beyond this, the country to the
west is more sparingly settled, but still contains many extensive sheep walks,
and good farms ; it is wooded thickly, and the forest situated in narrow dells
with rising slopes and hills in a manner very similar to that observed in the
western forest districts of the Bombay presidency, only that we have no malaria
as in India—nor any wild animals, which need be feared, neither do there re-
main now any bushrangers or wild aborigines, whose attacks may be dreaded.
Altogether this island is a very choice one for an agricultural settler.
A steamer, as before mentioned, communicates with Melbourne, by the eastern
side of the island, passing through Bank’s It is found very convenient
for the transport of produce and animals for the butcher, from Queen’s Land,
Gipps’ Laud, late Moreton Bay, &c. I may here mention that from the very
superior quality of the Van Diemen’s land wool, it is found more profitable to
import sheep from the neighbouring continent than to kill from the indigenous
flocks.
In crossing the Straits (Bass’) from Launceston, we again arrive in Hobson’s
Bay, and taking advantage of one of the fine American or English clippers which
sail from this port for Callao or Valparaiso, we may reckon on a comfortable
voyage, inasmuch as the ships are always light and buoyant, and with a careful
choice of the line of sailing, steady winds may be generally reckoned on. Un-
happily the vessels bound from Melbourne to the west coast of South America are
almost always in ballast, unless they can get a freight from New Zealand, which
is an eight-day’s sail, and where there is now considerable and growing demand
for machinery, iron work, &c-, made at Melbourne, and transported thither.
From Sydney again, a freight of coal is frequently taken to Valparaiso, Callao,
or California. From this it will be seen that if coal should (as is very likely)
be discovered at Melbourne or Geelong, the trade to the west coast of South
America will immensely expand. Occasionally wheat is carried from. Valparaiso
to Australia, but the greatest import is from California, where the trade is now
greatly developed.
Leaving Hobson’s Bay and once outside the lighthouse, which ends the Cape
or headland at the outer bay, a ship is steered W. by S. so as to sight Cape
Otway distant 80 miles. This course may seem a much more roundabout one
than that which leads by Bass’ Straits and from thence by the north-east corner
of Tasmania towards New Zealand, but the fact is there are two strong reasons
for preferring this route to the other. The first is, that by reason of the risk
of calms and the strong currents which often set in on the numerous coral reefs
found there, the insurance offices decline to insure except at a greatly enhanced


premium, vessels sailing by this course. 2nd.—The sea is by no means so clear
of islands and reefs as is the case iu the more westerly course, which is begun
by taking departure from Cape Otway, and from thence through a clear tract
of sea, skirting the south-west Point of Van Diemen's Land, until the Lat. of
48 to 50 deg. is reached, after which we run up east longitude in one parallel
from about 140 deg. and pass between the Auckland groupe of Islands and the
southern end of New Zealand, taking care to give a wide birth to the Snares,
which are a groupe of rocks lying off the southern end of that continent. Soon
after leaving New Zealand, we pass by the Antipodes, being 180 deg. east
Ijngitude, and just opposite to Greenwich, the thickness of the Globe being
between them thus :
* GREENWICH.
* ANTIPODES.
We now begin to run down west longitude, keeping in the same parallel of
latitude. When we reach the west longitude of 90 deg. we haul up consider-
ably to the north, so as to make a diagonal course for the coast of Peru. Some
sight the Island of Juan Fernandez. We sighted no land at all before making
the coast. While down in the high south latitudes, at from 48 to 50 degs., we
can almost depend on having strong west and south-west winds—if the latter
should blow, the weather is cold to a much greater degree than would be the
case in northern latitudes of the same height.
We saw and felt the influence of the Aurora Australis which shone with a
brilliancy far exceeding anything I ever observed in northern countries, being in
fact like a series of illuminated towers or steeples, as might be seen in the sub-
dued light of an opera scene. From what I have since seen and heard, I have
reason to believe that the brilliant aurora proceeded from an iceberg that must
have been close upon us. As to the kind of weather we had, it may be de-
scribed as being a succession of strong breezes, quite fair, until we reached
Soundings, in South America, with several heavy gales, especially one off the
south Cape of New Zealand. Rounding the southern end of New Zealand, we
pass between this and the group of Auckland islands, —black, treeless, inhospit-
able, and bare.
Many sea birds, as albatross, cape pigeon, &c., are in those latitudes, but few
fish excepting occasionally a shoal of grampus whales. On the forty-first day,
we made the coast south off Canete, which is about eighty miles below Callao.
The contrast of this coast to any I had ever seen was very striking. We ex-
perienced a total failure of the breeze we had had, and which had brought us
along at an average of 184 miles a-day from Cape Otway near Melbourne.
I have not here said anything of the other route from Australia, which con-
ducts us by the north end of New Zealand, the Friendly and Marquesas Islands
direct to Panama, because this route can never be used with advantage, except
by a steamer, in proceeding from Australia to South America. It is, however,
the great route for vessels passing from Panama to Australia, and will be of
importance, so soon as the arrangements for a Steam Navigation Company,
from Panama to New Zealand, or Sydney, can be entered on.
The proximity of mountains, varying from 3000 to 4000 feet in height, being
apparently destitute of vegetation, and having a foreground of lower land,


chiefly of sandy hills or naked rocky steeps, the whole shrouded in a thick
mist, feeling very cold, and not clearing oft’from the hills till 10 a.m., —shewed
that we were in a new sort of country.
We are not able to see much of the open valleys which here and there break
on the monotony of the coast, and show good signs of cultivation. All appears
barren, and except a chapel or a white cross high up on some of the steeps,
nothing would indicate the habitation of man. If we take the coast from Val-
paraiso upwards, it is much the same as to barrenness.
The Ports of Arica and Islay are the southermost within the limits of ancient
or Upper Peru, new Piolivia, and is some eighty miles inland. Until we reach
the Andes the coast land exhibits the same barren and grassless appearance—
sandy gullies very dry looking, but having an extensive sprinkling of high cacti
some fifteen feet in height. After this, we ascend to the Pampa, or 2d table,
which is still more barren and herbless ; but we are awarded by the view en-
joyed from hence of the Snowy Andes of Bolivia, at the foot of which lies the
city of La Paz —also by the sight of the snowy Volcano close to the city of
Arequipa, and looking like a gigantic sugar loaf. Also the Cordilleras south
and south east of Curco, the ancient city of the Jucas.
Sailing from Islay along the coast to the north, we reach Chala, Pisco,
Tambo, Moro, Serra-Azul, and Canete. Off Pisco are the Chincha islands, so
valuable to us on account of their guano. Of these there are three islands, steep
to, and quite barren. The northern one is now four-fifths cleared, and has on it
the various buildings required for officials, as the Governor and the Doctor in
charge, an hospital, &c. The second island to the south is now about half bared;
and a steep cliff of guano, it may be sixty feet high, is visible in front of the
shipping. The cutting into this material has gone straight down, and the
lower portion seems to be composed of solid carbonate and sulphate of ammonia,
so hard, that lam told blasting is required to get it out. The third island is
yet untouched, and it is estimated that what remains on the two may suffice
for twenty-five years’ consumption. This year (1861) there was not one-third
of the usual number of ships for loading guano—as it is probable that the
various artificial manures now manufactured in Europe may have reduced the
annual consumption considerably. This is a serious matter for the Peruvian
governments, as it is the chief source of revenue which they have to depend on.
The other ports, Tambo Mora, Serra-Azul, Canete, &c., are all at the mouth
of wide valleys which open from the eastern mountains on the Pacific. These
valleys form a great contrast to the barrenness and sterility of the rest
of the coast, which is a mere line of bare hills half covered with sand, but
which contains in various parts of it the remains of large Indian towns, suites of
chambers, &c., all built of unburned bricks, or adob, which, from the experi-
ence of ruins at Nineveh, New Mexico, and here, we may pronounce to be
indestructible in a country where rain seldom falls.
The valleys above mentioned contain a good extent of plain land, being from
6 to 8 miles in width at their mouth and running gradually for about 30 miles
inland. They are devoted to the cultivation of the grape, the sugar cane, red
pepper, rice, and other tropical productions, and there are several large manu-
factories of wine and spirits. The best is that of Pisco, where a fine white
brandy and wine are produced. This product is capable of great extension, as in


opinion of many, the wine made here is equal to Madeira, The olive also was
formerly extensively cultivated in these valleys and on the banks of the moun-
tain streams leading to them, and were carefully attended to by the religious
communities erst scattered through these valleys, but as these are now mostly
dispersed, this and the troubles which have at various times fallen on this un-
happy country have destroyed the trees so that not a tenth of the number which
formerly existed is to be seen, neither are their any new plantations. Of
cherimolia and other fruit trees affording a more ready return there is a goodly
sprinkling, and the vine is of common cultivation.
In a valley to the south of Islay, Moquegua, I have seen a wine produced
equal to the richest of Schiraz, which is, as you know, a Persian wine, and the
sherry of the Pisco valley may stand a comparison with much that is produced
in Spain, and on the western coast of Chdi, at Conception, a good wine of the
quality and colour of Bordeaux is produced.
As no rain falls on the western coast, irrigation for all the growing crop is a
first necessity. This is effected by means of offsetts from the rivers into a
main channel, and this carefully subdivided is led over large spaces of flat
ground. The growth of Indian corn, rice, and mullet is in these valleys ex-
tensive. In fact as there is little or no grass on the hills, cattle and horses can
have no other food except this and the alfafa or Lucerne which is also commonly
raised.
The ancient Peruvians who were no mean adepts in culture, kept up the
fertility of their fields by importing guano from the neighbouring Chincha
Islands, and this practice is continued at the present day. As no rain falls on
the coast the want of it is partly made up up by the heavy dews and fogs which
prevail during the cold season. The latter are very thick so that none of the
higher land can be seen at early noon, and it is only after they have cleared off
that the hills even near the coast, some of which are 3500 feet high, can be
seen. Occasional glimpses of the Andes can be obtained from vessels sailing well
outside, but to have a good view of them we must ascend to the interior table
laud or Pampa as I did, and from thence the view of them is one that well
repays the fatigue of the journey.
The population of the west coast is made up of half cast Spaniards, Indians,
wooly headed negroes, with a small sprinkling of English, Germans and French.
Since the liberation of the negroes which was completed in 1854, labour is often,
with difficulty, obtainable, wages run high, and hence many undertakings which
could otherwise flourish have often a precarious success. Within the last few
years a few planters have introduced Chinese, with good results, and cotton
culture is by their means becoming more extended. The country is admirably
fitted for the growth of cotton of the best quality.
In coming up this coast, a navigator requires to be provided with very good
charts, for as in all countries where the rock is granitic or quartzose, the simi-
larity of the rocks which appear in or near the sea is very apt to mislead.
Thus the bay of Chilca is so similar to that of Callao, that it may be readily
mistaken for it, and in fact in our case this was so.
There are two entrances to the harbour of Callao from the south—one the
Bocaron, or somewhat narrow passage, and the other round the island of San
Lorenzo, from whence Sir Walter Ealeigh brought the potato. Once in, the


harbour is fine and spacious. The old town was formerly on -the southern point
which forms one side of the Bocaron entrance, but this, years ago, was totally
swallowed up by an earthquake, and the encroachment of the sea. The present
town is situated along the beach to the north, is well built, and contains about
30,000 inhabitants. The castle forms its southern boundary, and it is
famous for having formed the last stronghold of the Spaniards, and under
General Eodil sustained a siege of two years before it was taken. The houses
in the town are well built, and the market well supplied with fish, vegetables,
and meat. The shops are here chiefly kept by Americans. The hotels are poor
and dirty, and the charge three dollars per day for travellers. There is an
extensive hospital, principally for English seamen, who 'pay a regular sum per
day realised through the council.
Lima, or the city of the Kings, so named in memory of its having been
founded on the anniversary of the Wise men of the East who came to witness the
birth of the Saviour, is the chief city of Peru, and the largest in this part of
America. It is not more than six and a half miles distant from Callao, which
is in fact its port, and is now reached in less than half an hour by rail. The
road follows the valley of the Rimac, and is quite flat, in fact, shortly after
leaving Callao runs through a series of gardens, containing the usual cultivated
products for the supply of the capital, among which the Cherimolia and Orange
trees occupy the greatest space.
I may here mention that the Cherimolia of Peru is quite a distinct tree from
that of Mexico. In fact it it the tree known as the “Ramphul” Unoua
Reticulata of the East Indies, where it is very common. Lima is a large town
—may contain 150,000 inhabitants. The streets are laid out at right angles,
and generally straight. The houses are low, as may be supposed in a country
liable to earthquakes. The streets are badly paved and dirty. There is, how-
ever, side pavement in most places. The houses are built in the Spanish style,
having a patio or small court with a few shrubs. The reception room is the
first one inside the veranda, and the smaller rooms branching off from it.
There are two alamedas or public walks—the old and new—the latter adorned
with a fine marble statue of Columbus, There is a choice garden near this
alameda, containing a great variety of indigenous and exotic trees and shrubs,
well arranged and carefully kept. Near it is an extensive series of oold baths,
fed by springs which arise in the conical granite mount which overhangs the
northern side of the city, called San Cristoval.
The city contains some fine buildings. In the great square is the Cathedral,
and adjacent to it are numerous other churches ; particularly worthy of notice
is that of St Domingo, distinguishable by its high steeple. The interior of these
churches is very poor and neglected. A solitary candle at even song renders
only darkness visible. A few old persons or cripples may be seen at their
devotions in the aisles, and the altars erst covered with plates of silver, have
mostly had these replaced by sheets of tin. The Monasteries are deserted, or
tenanted only by a few Friars, So are the Nunneries in which linger a few old
Nuns. In one there is a tine painting of the crucifixion by Santa Rosa, as well
as other works of art, but they are so badly hung, or so begrimed with dirt, that
in most of them the outline of the figures is barely traceable.
The hall of the Inquisition is now used as the Council of State, It is ahand-
27


some and solid building, with immense beams, and carved roof. The Museum
is curious, but the collection of minerals is but meagre. That of ancient
Peruvian implements is considerable, and the several specimens of dried
humanity, placed just as they were taken from their place of interment are not
pleasing objects. The head of the spermaceti whale, with the long jaw armed
with powerful sharp teeth, of which I show a specimen, is striking, but the
objects most worthy of attention are the pictures of the early Spanish Conquerors
and the Spanish Viceroys, arranged in regular order. W e have Pizarro. Almagro,
and others of the early chiefs, and it is amusing to study the variations, from
the mail-clad figures of the early rulers, to the embroidery and lace of the
last century, finally merging into the ungraceful large collared and swallow-
tailed coat, which prevailed in the earlier quarter of the present century. We
have Simon Bolivar filling up one of the later spaces. There is no trace of
Lord Cochrane, as he is no favourite with the Peruvians, in as much as, during
the war of the independence, he carried off the treasures (some two million
sterling) which had been entrusted by the state to his safe keeping. He carried
it off, not with any piratical intent, but in order to pay his soldiers and
sailors, who had been left so largely in arrears by the Provincial Government.
The Hospital of St Andrew is a splendid foundation, and is now managed by
a committee of the citizens. It is a free hospital and is of the greatest benefit
to the poor, and to those classes who, not actually beggars, have from accidental
causes fallen so low as to require assistance when sick, although not objects of
regular charity. The river Rimac is crossed Jpy an old bridge of the time of
the Spaniards, and on the other side of the river are the old and new alamedas
before mentioned.
At Callao a new dry dock was constructed in the island of San Lorenzo, and
one of the finest of the Government frigates having been put into it, the dock
not being of sufficient strength, broke down under the weight of the frigate, and
she capsized and sunk with her crew on board.
In speaking of the mode of life and character of the Peruvians, I can but give
the information received from friends who have resided in that country. The
population of Peru is supposed to be about two millions, of which three fourths
are Indians, and the rest are of the whites and mixed races. The Indians
occupy the interior, which is at a great elevation above the sea level, and
seldom or never appear on the coast; but only come down as far as necessary
to deposit the produce of their region, and to return with the supplies of
European goods and native brandy which they may require. They are to be
pitied, being the remains of a fine race which has been cruelly sacrificed by
Spanish mis-rule, and severely scourged by terrible diseases, and modern
revolutions, and apparently with little hope of amelioration in their condition,
or improvement in their social state, as the dreary region which they inhabit
offers no inducement for emigration, and the elements of instruction they
receive from their spiritual guides, are so scanty as to raise them very little
in the scale of civilization—they were once Pagans, and are now under the
Roman faith, but it is to be feared that their ideas of religion extend little
beyond the worship of the images of the saints with which their churches are
adorned. Their habits are so extremely dirty, and their abodes or small town-
ships of huts so very miserable, that sometimes the traveller is led to


think which is most the animal, the Indian or the Alpaca, the Llama, or the
sheep which he tends. Their great vice is drunkenness, and to he intoxicated
for days together would seem to be their highest idea of eaithly bliss. Their
occupation consists chiefly in tending flocksjor larger proprietors, or often their
own small proprietors, many of them being the possessors of a few Alpacas and
sheep, on their own account. Agriculture is limited to the potato, to barley,
and to quincin, a kind of brown sago,—also the Indian corn plant further in the
interior, and the gathering of Peruvian bark. They are also good hand-loom
weavers, and produce a great deal, or say, nearly all their own clothing. The
Ponchos, small carpets, and various other articles of apparel which they can
make are sometimes surprising, and highly praised by amateurs, —thus showing
the hidden talents which still remain alive, after so much ruin and oppression ;
and it is yet to be hoped, that through the influence of the number of influen-
tial men residing amongst them as landed proprietors, &c., and from the
increasing demand for European goods, that they may gradually improve.
The white and mixed race, who form the influential part of the population in
Peru, can well lay claim to natural talent and veracity of character equal to
what is found in any other nation, and if they only possessed the means and
facilities for improvement which are found elsewhere, they would not fail to
profit thereby, as there is no lack of will in this matter ; but in consequence of
the long chain of revolutions which have agitated their country for many years
past, all their public establishments for education have suffered severely, a
misfortune which is deplored very much. Another difficulty from which they
suffer, is the want of employment amongst many, a circumstance which does
not take place to such a degree in a manufacturing country.
No body can reside amongst them without being immediately struck with
their natural politeness of bearing and good address which is born with them
generally, and it may well be said that they have a cordial urbanity in mode
and speech, which might w r ell be implanted into other countries with some
advantage to society. They are proverbially hospitable to the extent of their
means, and the kind attention which a visitor receives at their hands, leaves a
very pleasing impression. The ladies possess a great natural talent for music,
which has of late been much cultivated to the great benefit of all. The guitar,
the national instrument from old Spain, once found in every house, has
now become a mere relic of antiquity, almost unknown—whilst the elegant
piano-forte is found in the houses of an extremely large number of the com-
m unity. I should say even more in proportion than in many other nations—
considering the means of the people.
The mode of living is becoming more and more Europeanized, and when a
friend on this side asks what it is like, one can only reply—a house comfortably
furnished in European style, breakfast between eight and nine, but commencing
with a dish called chupe, something resembling fresh stew, instead of always
ham or steak, but varied at times ; then the chocolate and bread and butter,
finishing with a glass of water. Dinner very much as on this side, at about
three. Tea as you like or not —it is not quite generalised—many taking but
two meals a day. They are not great wine drinkers, but prefer Foreign Wines
if they can afford them, the wines of the country being too strong and alco-
holic, they being made almost entirely for the production of the brandy sold to


the Indians and lower classes who consume much. Latterly, however, a very
superior class of wines has begun to appear at a place called Pisco on the coast,
which will probably sooner or later come into note. The principal drink of the
lower classes, is chicha or beer, made from Indian Corn—and brandy from the
grape or cane.
Leaving Callao, we coast along a shore having the same character as that we
passed to the south, viz., hilly, barren land, with an occasional open valley
—and the sea studded with rocks, and rocky headlands, projecting far into it.
There are few signs of population ; in fact the coast is in its general aspect not
fit for the nourishment either of men or animals.. Truxillo is the first station
of any consequence. A steamer plies to it once a week, chiefly for the purpose
of bringing cattle and vegetables for the use of the city of Lima,
Further north is the Guyaquil Eiver, in the republic of Ecuador, the com-
munication with the city being kept up by means of a small steamer, which
delivers the mails at Payta. The latter city you will find mentioned in the
voyage of Commodore Anson. It was one of the places plundered by him. It
is a small town, situated in a bay, and contains little except fishermen’s huts.
There is a custom-house, a church, a jetty, and a good house of iron for the
residence of the Government officials.
The bay is much frequented as a rendezvous for the American whalers, which
prosecute the sperm whale fishery in the Northern Pacific. We now pass along
to the east of the island of La Plata which is one of the islands where the old
Buccaneers are said to have buried much of the treasure which they had
plundered from ships and stations on the coast.
We are now coasting by the republics of Ecuador and New Granada, which
have extensive territory on this sea board, and as we go on, we open up the
groupe of islands in the vast bay of Panama, on one of which “ Tabugo”
depot for the steamers to the Southern Pacific, and on another (Flamanko) is
the rendezvous and depot for the American ones to and from California. These
islands are well wooded, and of a rich green. Much of the laud, (which is
mostly hill and shelving ground) is cultivated with maize, sugar-cane, pepper,
tobacco and other tropical products.
The Buccaneers isle again is quite uninhabited and nowhere cultivated, as it
contains no water, but it is a lovely spot, and just such a one as a romantic
novelist might paint as an earthly paradise. Tabugo is an ancient Spanish
town. The Pacific Steam Company’s works here are very extensive and com-
plete. The supply of water is abundant, and the luxuriant tropical vegetation
put me in mind of India.
The Pacific steamers deposit their cargo and passengers here, or rather they
are transhipped into a swift steamer of small draught, which runs across to
Panama in about an hour. The harbour of Panama is shallow and rocky, so
that large ships cannot come near the town. Passengers and cargo are landed
at a jetty and from thence is a long distance to the town, through a series of
dark dirty lanes overflowing with tropical vegetation and filth, and having the
sea on one side which throws up the usual quantity of rubbish and filth of every
sort. It is a relief to get from these, into the town which is a shade better as
to cleanliness without having much to boast of either. The American hotel
is pretty good, the charges being about fifteen shillings per day, but the table


d’hote is of a very mediocre character. The varieties of drinks, and the iced
sherry cobbler render however the temperature bearable. The internal con-
veniences are as usual on the west coast extremely bad. The city i‘s pretty
large, but somewhat ruinous particularly as to its Abbeys and Nunneries. The
Cathedral is large and quaint with figures of all the Apostles, and the remains
of what was a magnificent altar erst covered with plates of silver, but these
have now been replaced by tin, in fact one sees here no evidence of progress but
many of signs of decay.
A good road from the centre of the town to the railway station is much
wanted, but even this small effort of industry seems to be beyond the means of
the people.
The place supports however the Panama Star and Herald conducted by a
worthy gentleman Mr Boyd, and extensively read from St Francisco even to
the south of Chili. It does not spare the local governments, when they need
correction, which is pretty often. Some old deserted convents and nunneries
are here. The shops are few—mostly for naval stores, cloths, sombreros or
straw hats, and fancy articles of low value. The pearls found among the islands
of the Bay are cheap here but their value is lessened except for mourning orna-
ments by the dark colour, which they often show.
The railway station is large and convenient, but the charges are high, being
25 dollars—£s for a single passenger with no allowance of baggage except hand
bundles, all the rest is charged at the rate of 5d per lb. These rates may seem
high, but when we consider that the railway performs in three and a-half hours
the work which used to occupy ten days of painful and dangerous travel, the
charge is by no means out of the way.
The railway carriages are in the American fashion, having a double row of
seats with a gangway between, and conveniences in a separate small van at the
further end. Second class passengers pay 124 dol. but are accommodated in the
same carriage. On the whole the arrangements are unexceptionable. Leaving
the railway station we at once plunge into a thick tropical forest having here
and there a clearing for plantations, indian corn, sugar cane, or tobacco.
There is a perceptible ascent on the line until we reach the water-shed be-
tween the Atlantic and Pacific, when we come upon the spring-heads uniting
to form the Chagres river and gradually opens to our view amid the splendid
tall trees of the forest, the spread of the Atlantic having left the Pacific now
behind us. As we descend, having the Chagres river to our left, we see some
signs of habitation in the shape of beehive like reed huts, of the most primitive
construction.
The station houses on the rail are all wooden erections often gaily painted,
and much in the American style, white walls and green jalousies. There does
not seem to be much temptation to dwell inthem, seeing that the forest is so thick,
almost up to the thrcshholds and there is no sign of human life near them. As
we approach Aspinwall or Colon the former being the American and the latter
the New Granadian name—the road leaving the Chagres river is carried along a
raised causeway backed by an extensive and unhealthy looking swamp, contain-
ing scattered huts. The station itself is a block of houses entirely shops and
hotels, American fashion. The railway leads right down to the pier, where the
British steamer lies, and a similar branch deflects to the northern pier, where


the American steamer is ready for her passengers. Some way out in the shallow
bay, are to be seen the guard ships of the rival powers, ready for the protection
of the integrity of the railway in case any sudden emeute or invasion of its neu-
tralities were attempted, while far away to the south are seen the hills and deep
woods which indicate the place where the Scotch settlement of Darien was at-
tempted 175 years ago. It will always have a melancholy interest to a true lover
of Scotland.
Gradually emerging from the shallow waters of the Bay of Chagres, we hold
an easterly course for the Virgin Islands— in one of which (St Thomas’), adja-
cent to Porto Rico, is the depot for the concentration of the mails. This is a
six days’ voyage. We lose sight of the land just off the low coast near
Carthageua. At St Thomas’ the steamers from Blue Fields, or Greytown,
Jamaica, Porto Rico, Dcmerara, St Domingo, Havana, &c., all converge, and
are timed so as to meet the Panama steamer, which in case of accidents is
limited to twelve hours of waiting for them. We arrived at 9 A.M., and the
steamers gradually dropped in up to 5 p.m. , when the Jamaica mails arrived.
We had previously transhipped cargo and passengers into the “Seine,” one of
the large Atlantic steamers. This transhipment requires to be carefully con-
ducted by reason of the valuable cargo of gold, gold-dust, silver ore, bars, &c.,
which have to be transferred, and as the packages are often very small, the
secreting of one or more would be no difficult matter. Therefore the register
most be kept with great care. St Thomas’ is a small harbour, much landlocked
by projecting hills and tongues of land ; the town small, but orderly and clean,
is situated in the biggest end of the horse shoe, which the harbour represents, and
is backed by a hill considerably above the town itself. Such a situation is
a sure nest for malaria in any part of the tropics -be it Bombay in the East,
or the Virgin Islands in the West. Hence it need be matter of no surprise to
find that yellow fever is a frequent visitant here. It is believed that this cause
of insalubrity has been removed by the cutting of a short canal, sufficient to
allow the entrance of the sea from the western part of the island. This acts as
a regular besom to sweep away the collected filth and malaria of the harbour.
The heat is also great here by reason of the harbour being so completely land-
locked.
No time is lost in transhipment here, and at this place passengers provide
themselves with a stock of Havana cigars, which, I may safely say, are neither
cheaper nor better than those obtained in London.
From hence we have a voyage of twelve days to the islands of Scilly, and
about one more to Southampton, in roomy, well-aired vessels, vastly superior to
those that ply on our eastern line, and we have another advantage, that the
liquors are not furnished in the passage bill, but served out at a bar, and paid
for as required—the settlement taking place every Monday by means of signed
tickets, which are filed as given by each individual passenger. This makes a
considerable difference in the rate of passage money. For instance, 1 was
thirty days on board from the southern coast of Peru. My charge amounted to
£7B, exclusive of liquors,—whereas in the eastern steamers, it would have been
at least £lOO, including liquors. The West India steamers are all of them
paddle boats, the new ones being about 3400 tons.


The sail up the British Channel in summer is very grand, and to a person
who like me had come from far countries, truly delightful.
We leave Scilly, rapidly pass the lands and the Race of Portland, and are
by noon of the 15th day safely at anchor in the magnificent Steam Dock of
Southampton.
I have brought you thus far on our voyage round the world ; but we have
still to show the Mediterranean and Eastern waters, before i deposit you at
Bombay—from which, as above mentioned, I started on 31st of January.
We are, by this time (on 13th July), being within a day of five and a-half
months. Allowing that no time is lost in completing the circuit, we take ad-
vantage of a steamer which sails at 9 p.m. from Southampton to Havre, and
arrives there at 9 a.m.— from thence the transit to Paris occupies eight hours—
and, should speed be an object, a passenger may be taken by rail the same
evening for Lyons.
The route is long and monotonous, varied only by the fine parks, forest and
palace of Fontainbleau. The route by Dijon and the Burgundy Country is of
little interest—the trees being few, cultivation poor, and the towns and villages
all old and long ago finished. On the present trip (Nov. 1861), I remarked not
a single new house in process of construction all the way from Fontainbleau to
Lyons. The stations of the railway also are singularly deficient in life and
movement—few people, and but little produce appears collected for export, and
the deliveries at the stations are few.
The country improves considerably in richness as we descend into the valley
of the Rhone, but we see none of those fine herds of cattle to be observed in the
meadow pastures of England, and the fields of Scotland,
At 3.30 p.m. we reach Lyons (Perache), as here are two towns—one on the south
and the other on the north. There are plenty of good restaurants near to the
railway station ; and there is a short time to view the town—which is large,
picturesque, and Edinburgh-like in the style of the houses.
We already begin to see the effect of the southern climate in modifying the
vegetation.
Having had a good four hours rest at Lyons, we get on the rail again at 9
p.m., and passing through a rich and picturesque wine country, having the
broad Rhone on our right, and beyond it the hills which separate eastern from
central France, and passing Valence and Avignon, we reach Marseilles
to breakfast. By timing our arrival so as to make it on the sth, we need only
be detained for one day, and the hotels are excellent, and reasonable in their
charges. The city has little worth seeing, except the new Exchange, the Tri-
umphal Arch (a meaningless erection, except as giving a space for the statues of
the Bonapartean Generals), but the Public Garden, combining zoology and botany,
is a gem. The Hippodrome also is worth visiting, but it is open only on Sun-
The steamer sails from the New Harbour (La Joliette), situated to the west
of the old one, and flanked by many tall warehouses of good proportions.
The voyage from Marseilles to Malta is by the Straits of Bonifacio, having
Corsica on our right, and Sardinia on our left. We can just get a glimpse of
Caprera, the abode of Garibaldi. We now hold on, out of sight of the Italian
shore, but come nearer as we approach Sicily, along the coast of which we steer


Bear enough to see some of the towns ami public buildings, particularly the
great manufactory at Masalla, conducted principally by British enterprise and
capital. Unfortunately we are too far from the coast to see Girgenti, the
ancient Agrigentum, with its magnificent bay and array of Grecian temples
erected some 2800 years ago, and some of them nearly entire. These I visited
from the landward side in April last, and can strongly recommend them to the
attention of the tourist, who should, however, carry with him a revolver and
handy short sword, as robbers are rather common in that region.
We reach Malta at the regulated time—viz., the morning of Saturday—
having left Marseilles on Wednesday morning, the Gth. The stay of the boat
at Malta is limited to two hours, just sufficient to allow one to have a look at
the town, the fortifications, the splendid barracks, the Government house with
its fine armoury and paintings, and the Church of St John, which contains some
fine paintings, statues, and some splendid tombs.
The boat arrangements are very good at Malta, a shilling only being allowed
as the charge at Quarantine Harbour per head. The demi-tropical look of the
town is the first sign of transition which the traveller towards the East has, in
coming home from Southampton.
The chief objects which first strike a stranger at landing at Malta are the
great number of priests, with their black stockings, ungraceful hats, and knee
breeches; the multitude of British soldiers loafing about, with seemingly no-
thing to do ; and the large sprinkling of beggars which crowd the doors of the
public buildings and churches. The town of Malta is built on a ridge of lime-
stone rock, and from the middle or highest portion of the town most of the
streets (each having a figure of a saint at its corners) lead down to the two
harbours —viz., Quarantine and that of Yaletta.
The land of Malta is very rocky and sterile, but the inhabitants, who are
an industrious set, visit all the countries around the Mediterranean, to return
and invest their earnings in the careful cultivation of their otherwise barren
farms. The magnificent harbour of Yaletta bristles with cannon, and the large
line of battle ships in calm repose in the harbour, overlooked by the magnificent
palace-looking buildings of the Knights, now turned into barracks, form the
materials for a grand picture.
We must now retrace our steps to Southampton, in order to describe the
outer or sea passage via the British channel and the Straits of Gibraltar. This
is preferred by many as less expensive than the other by Marseilles, but it is
subject to the serious drawback of much greater length, added to this that in
the British Channel rough weather is perhaps rather the rule than the exception,
particularly from the time of passing Ushant to rounding the Cape St Vincent.
There is nothing to be seen in this passage until we make the Berliuhas or
Birlings as they are called—these are detached, and conspicuous rocks and
islets, just north of the Tagus; Rounding Cape St Vincent we have rather a
distant view of the south coast of Portugal, but as we pass on we have a nearer
look at that of Spain, when we see the Sierra Nevada, or snowy mountains,
running away up inland of Cadiz.
The sth day in a good passage, brings us to Gibraltar where the steamer only
stops long enough to allow us to land and take a hurried view of the town, with
its wine shops, jewellery, fruit stalls, and tobacco stores. We cannot enter


into a description of the fortress —the neutral ground, &c., but remark that
Tarifa lying just opposite is a quaint old Spanish place, backed by a sheep
grazing, and beautiful green and well watered hills. In three days you reach Malta
so that you see the difference as to time between the two I’outes, is not a little,
and that in comfort it is so great as to justify the outlay of a few additional pounds
for embarking at once from Marseilles.
Leaving Malta in the forenoon of Saturday 9th, we attain the harbour of
Alexandria on the evening of Tuesday 12th, the far stretching low shore of
Egypt, being only rendered visible from a distance by the light-honse. Wind-
mills on the heights, the smoke of sundry arsenals, manufactories, &c., and
finally the rather crowded shipping in the good harbour of Alexandria will be
noted. As 'we stand in, we see the long monotonous line of sandy coast which
stretches away into the Lybian desert, as far as the eye can reach to the right.
The steamer anchors opposite the railway pier, and the mails being the first thing
to be looked after, they are carefully taken on shore and then the passengers
follow.
The Southampton passengers having probably arrived are detained at Cairo,
the Marseilles mail passengers are at once pushed on, and travel through a flat
country, showing the mirage, &c., if passed through by daylight, but at night of
course nothing can be seen to vary the monotony of the scene. After making forty
miles, we halt for half-an-hour, at Kafr al Zyat, where a meal is furnished to
the travellers out of the cost paid for ti'ansit, and should the voyager have taken
this expense on his own shoulders, he pays about ss. for a bait here. Good
coffee, and pillao are generally obtainable, the other dishes are mostly indifferent.
Four hours from this, we reach the station at Cairo, passing through a rich and
well cultivated country, having many rows of poplars and acacias especially
along the canals, and houses built in a style something between the Italian
and Asiatic, are now frequent. They are generally of a white colour with
perhaps a gaudy relief of yellow or pink stripes altogether painful to the eye.
The station at Kairo is a mile from the town, so that if we have the luck to be
Southampton passengers, we may have to wait in Cairo two days, for the arrival
of the mail from Marseilles and thus have an opportunity of looking at the
Pyramids, the Mosques, Mockattam, the tomb of Mohammed Ali, the Shoubra
garden, and old Cairo, —all of them objects worthy of being seen. The popula-
tion is dense, especially in the bazaars. The European shops are kept by-
Levant people, and Italians who deal in caviare, pickles, anchovies, tobacco,
shewy prints, and inferior English goods. The great or native bazzar has
very narrow and inconvenient streets, covered over. Wares of all sorts are
obtainable here. It is shut after sunset, and indeed throughout Cairo the streets
are comparatively deserted after sunset except by groups of musicians, and sherbet
and coffee drinkers assembled at the coffee houses, alfresco, if it is in spring or
summer.
At night any one moving about without a lighted paper, or other lantern is
liable to be taken up, and confined. The Coptish women moving about or
riding on asses with veiled faces, and looking like double baloons of black silk,
are worth notice, as are the palaces of the Egyptian Grandees, spacious, and silent,
while a few “ Chauses” of various colours from the fair Albanian to the woolly
negro, lounge about the doors dressed in a cut-away, brown or black jacket,
F


baggy trousei’s, long stockings, and yellow shoes, and the eternal fez, or red cap,
which is so unsightly a piece of Egyptian head gear in place of the turban which
was formerly worn.
On the whole the Egyptians are an ugly and sickly looking people, all the
more so, by reason of their frequent want of eyelashes and the prevalence of
opthalmia. They have not the same healthy and brisk look which the natives
of Western India possess.
In pushing on to Suez we have a four hours trip, through a country speedily
becoming desert after we leave Kairo, and the desert strewn with petrifactions
as in some distant age there seems to have been a large forest here.
The hills in the desert are at first low, dry, and barren, the lower half
mere masses of drifted sand, and the upper of naked rock ; as we approach
Suez they become higher, and more abrupt. The desert itself, as seen under a
mid-day sun, is by no means inviting, being one extent of barrenness unrelieved
by a tree or by anything above the size of a house-leek, and all the vegetation
has leaves of this fleshy character. The desert, however, has a fine climate, and
the freshness of the morning air in crossing it on the back of a donkey, as I once
did, is very pleasing compared to the sultriness of an Indian clime.
The station houses in the desert are few r and very primitive, being simply barn
looking places of boards with a shingle roof. Reaching Suez, we now find the
railway brought close to the edge of the Red Sea.
We have, iu transit, had no time to notice the well, called Joseph’s, which
contains brackish water but eagerly drunk by the animals in route. It is no
doubt very convenient.
Alighting at Suez we now’ find a spacious hotel, forming a square, and pro-
viding food and the means of rest for the traveller, at rates which if not cheap
are at all events not dear, considering the expence of bringing supplies and even
drinking water thither,—3s Cd for a good breakfast with washing, towels, and
other conveniences—including a perusal of all the English and Indian papers, is
not out of way, but 5s for an indeficient dinner is rather so.
The passengers are detained at the hotel for some hours, to allow of the mails,
baggage, &c,, getting on board, and also to permit the arrangement for the
steamer to sail in the evening, as by doing so, the narrow part of the gulf of
Suez is reached by day light. It were dangerous to attempt to pass it in the
dark. The steamer lies a good way out on account of the shallowness of the
water, and passengers are conveyed on board without any charge, and tumbled
on deck in time for a tea dinner, the only meal practicable amid the immense
confusion of baggage, berth finding, &c. You always find some unhappy beings
who have been done out of the accommodation which they had, or fancied they
had bespoken.
Glad to get rid of the fatigue and bustle of the day, you lose no time after
your evening meal, followed by a cigar, in tumbling into your berth, which, if
you happen to voyage in the crowded season, is likely to be shared with you by
two or three others.
ith day light you find that the ship is passing through the narrow and
somewhat shoaly pass, in the straits of Jubal, which forms the entrance to the
gulf of Suez, and you may now, in looking far to the left, see the entrance to
the gulf of Acaba, and at the head of it and scattered in thick profusion, the


barren mountains among which the Israelites so long wandered, being Sinai,
Horeb, &c., all of them brown, rugged, and high. From hence, the sea widens,
and for four days the Abyssinian shore can be seen dimly to the right, while
country of Arabia is still more dimly visible to the left. Passing further down
we may discern the ripple and often broken water which surrounds the Dcedalus
shoal, a dangerons reef and sand bank which have been fatal to sundry ships,
but being nearer to the Arabian side, is less in the way of the numerous coal
vessels of European build, which navigate the Red Sea. As we approach the
lower end—rugged and barren islands are more frequently met with, and the
straits, of which the island Perim forms the right side, are passed, and we are
now in the fair way to Aden, which is fairly outside the sea.
Then we may observe far to the right, near the Somauli shore, the island
Gibel Dokan, which has lately become once more, an active volcano as it
appears to have been many years ago, but remained long dormant. A long
curl of the smoke is all we can observe of it, from the ship, so that even now
it is but in a state of quasi-activity.
Perim has merely a light house in it—no fortifications, as for some time was
stupidly asserted in the Foreign journals, and even stated in some of our own
guide books. There is no water on it, none near as at Aden, so it is not likely
to be a place which could be made any thing of as a fortress.
We may now reckon by the morning of the 7th day, if the passage has been
fair, on reaching Aden, in approaching which you see first the high mountains
of Arabia Felix above Senna, and in that vicinity. Wefinally anchor, by break-
fast time on the 7th day, in the secure and well fortified harbour of Aden.
Above the anchorage is a high volcanic peak, and to the south steamer point
which runs some way out, and forms the southern side of the harbour, guarding
it from any gale or rough weather from that quarter.
The northern is equally well protected by the tongues of land which run out
from the island itself, and finally by the long trend to seaward of the flat Arabian
coast to the north. The ship is soon surrounded by Somali boatmen, who con-
vey the passengers on shore for a trifle, and they may, if need be, alight at a
hotel, which is good, with moderate charges, and plentiful meals with fine fish,
or Arabian mutton, very sweet. Should, however, the traveller prefer to pass
the little spare time he had in viewing the camp, he may take advantage of a
gig or buggy, as it is here called, and with a companion go to view the camp,
skirting the foot of the peaked hill above mentioned, and rounding in by a
narrow way well guarded and commanded by guns in every direction, till he finds
himself in a hollow basin surrounded by hills, and containing all the military
and other buildings, some tolerable Parsi shops, and an industrious population
of labourers, Jew artificers, &c., all of whom have come hither in search of
employment, since the British obtained possession. In the deep gorge of the
naked mountain, on its eastern aspect, is a series of large reservoirs, originally
built in the time of Solyman the magnificent, to receive the torrents of water
which flow down from the hills on the rare occasions, during which rain falls here,
for when it does fall it comes down for some hours with true tropical violence;
The value of these receptacles may be understood when I mention that there is
not a spring of fresh water in the whole peninsula, and that what is commonly
used is all imported from the neighbouring main-land. In returning from the


cantonment, the traveller should not omit to take the road through the fine
tunnel, which pierces the eastern hills, and leads to the Turkish wall, where
is the narrow neck of the Peninsula, from whence the Arabs used to make their
attacks upon Aden; Before this tunnel was made, our troops had, owing to the
nature of the hills and the ground, to make a detour of two miles ere they
could reach this wall, which is the weakest spot in the fortification. Now the
troops by passing though the tunnel, can be massed here at once.
All the strong points of the place have now been taken advantage of. There
are tine batteries and galleries which com mand the harbour, the wall, and all other
assailable points. In fact above £lOO,OOO has been spent, and usefully spent,
on these fortifications. By noon, the ship will have done coaling, so that by
1 p.m., the traveller will be fairly en route across the Indian Ocean to Bombay.
This is generally a seven days trip, and the vessel continues in sight of the land
until the first of the Cooria Muria Islands is made. These are considerably to
the north of Aden, and consequently we are now in the fair way for standing
across. There is very seldom any heavy weather during the fair season, in
this, the outward passage, but in the monsoon a good deal of heavy sea.
Travel in the Bed Sea, during the fine months beginning with May, should,
of possible, be avoided, as the heat then is terrific, far exceeding anything we
generally have in India ; but for the remaining seven months it is very
agreeable.
From the quantity of northing in the course, the wind is generally fair.
I have now brought you to Bombay from whence we started, after having
performed the tour of the world which may be with ease accomplished within
six and a half months, and at an expense hardly exceeding £3OO, including
casual hotel charges, &c., on the way.
FINIS.


E R R A T A.
Page 7, Line 25,— For “ epedemic” read “ epidemic.”
~ 12 ~ 13, —For “ or” read “ a.”
~ ... ~ 40,- For “ Medows” read “ Matthews.”
~ 14 ~ 29, For “ when” read “ where. ”
~ ... ~ 36, For “ Governments” read “ Government. ”
~ 16 ~ 3, —For “ Carpartliiau” read “ Carpathian. ”
~ 17 ~ 2, —Add, “to drive.”
~ ... ~ 32, —For “ Hambantotee”read “ Hambantoti.”
~ 18, 2d Line from bottom, —delete “in.”
~ 19, Line 25, —For “debouch” read “debouche.”
~ 20 ~ 7, —Delete “Gig.”
~ 23 ~ 4, —For “ merely” read “ mostly.”
~ 25, —Cancel lines 9 and 10, up to “ until.”
~ ... Line 18, —For “Curco” read “Cuzco.”
~ ... ~ —For “ Ucas” read “ Incas.”
~ ... ~ 29, —For “ two” read “ three. ”
„ 26 ~ 3, —For “ were” read “ was.”
„ ... ~ 15, —For “ crop” read “ crops.”
J} ... ~ 18, —For “ mullet,” read “ millet.”
~ ... ~ 24, —2d up, delete.
~ ... ~ 29, —For “ wooly” read “ woolly.”
f „ 28 ~ 13, —For “ later” read “ latter.”
~ 29 „ 17, —For “ veracity” read “ vivacity.”
~ ... ~ 42, —For “ fresh” read “ Irish.”
~ 33 ~ 4, —For “ 15th” read “ 13th.”
„ 34 ~ 2, —For “ Masalla” read “ Marsalla. ”


