

* ' ' .
* v. ,
M n * - ' *■■ % * ■ o
LECTURE
' ■ $
$ - v «
i * :%-? ■
* , *
■ - -.;.
•»•_ • ■ * * * '
THE TENDENCY OF MODERN
CIVILIZATION.
THE VERY REYT DR. EORREST,
T . '
Rector of St. John’s College, Sydney), f,
. r .
v ; - Delivered in the Hall of the Maitland School of Arts, on Tries-
' 4 day, 16th Nov., 1870, in aid of the new schools,
lately erected, in connection with St.
John’s, West Maitland.
[The profits from the sale of the Pamphlet will go to the schools.] W
PEICE, Is. A *■>
. 04/ w • 1-Y
L, ■■ ,
\ WS& Wm
& f
L _ WEST MAITLAND ;
•»
HENPV TTTOMAP. PRINTER AND PUBLISHER. HIGH-STREET.
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, HIGH-STREET.
MDCCCLXX.


Prom J # R.Scott,
Per. W.J.E.
Deputy Coroner, Cessnook


■f- °l (o % o
55/F^go
X £-5 -77
PEEPACE
The following Lecture was delivered by tbe Very Eevd. Dr.
Eorrest, Rector of St. John’s College, Sydney, on Tuesday, tbe
15th November, in the School of Arts, West Maitland, in aid of
the schools recently erected by the Sisters of St. Dominic, in
• order to afford sufficient accommodation to the increasing number
of pupils in their highly prized Institution.
Though the object of the lecture was merely of local interest,
yet the importance of the subject and the masterly manner in
x *j J
which it was discussed, as well as the depth of thought and pro-
j found reasoning, which characterize it, suggested the expediency
of having it published in Pamphlet Eorm and placed within the
reach of all at a moderate charge. The large and intelligent
audience present on the occasion seemed to approve of this pro-
posal and hence the lecture appears in its present shape.
Those who carefully peruse it will find in it, as was observed
by the Honourable Judge Owen and Mr, Colquhoun, who in
very graceful terms proposed a vote of thanks to the Very Eevd.
Lecturer, ample matter for serious consideration, and will
understand the correct principles which should guide them in
estimating at their proper value the unduly exaggerated progress
and boasted civilization of the present age.




THE TENDENCY OF
MODERN CIVILIZATION.
The observations I am about to address to you on this evening:
are a continuation of a lecture delivered a few weeks since. 1
shall trespass on you, therefore, for a few moments, by present-
ing to you a summary of what was discussed on that occasion,
before I proceed to the immediate subject of this evening’s
lecture. Modern progress is confined almost exclusively to the
material world. Its apostles ignore, if they do not deny, the
moral world—its laws, its principles, its object. What is ignored
is soon forgotten, and then doubted and denied. Whatever is
the explanation, the fact stares us in the face, to use a scientific
expression, that scientific men and the investigators of nature
are not, generally, what we call religious men—they have a
suspicion of dogmatic teaching, not to say they dislike it. The
visible world presents a tangible, palpable reality, which comes
home to them with irresistible force and evidence. The laws of
the material universe, too, become so beautifully simple, notwith-
standing their apparent complexity to the uninitiated—they are
so constant, so enchanting in their beauty and adaptation, that
the enthusiastic student of nature, absorbed in investigating and
contemplating them, has seldom time or taste for studies of
another and far different kind. Indeed this is true, to a great
extent, of those who have devoted themselves to some one of
these various departments into which science has partitioned the
physical world. The naturalist, who studies the habits,
instincts, dwellings, &c,, of birds or beasts, is rarely to be seen
investigating the orbit of a comet or calculating its distance from
the earth, or its periodic time. The chemist rarely encroaches
upon the domain of the botanist; or, if he does, it is with
principles and views entirely different. The same exclusive
devotion to their respective walks, with few rare exceptions,
characterises the great names familiar to the student of natural


science. This exclusiveness, and the habit of mind it begets
and forms, may explain, to some extent, the almost total forget-
fulness of the moral world which we witness in scientific men.
They are the leaders of thought—the half educated and the
ignorant look up to them naturally and properly—they accept
from them the truths of science with unwavering faith. The
respective sciences come forward with their special discoveries;
the world is astonished at the wonders revealed to it; and men
stop with delight and wonder to talk of and admire this accumu-
lation of wisdom ; and, as they cannot admire, and talk, and
adore without some definite name to embody what is so admir-
able, by some fortunate coincidence, this accumulated wisdom is
called progress. The new discoveries —the secrets of nature —
engross the public mind ; nothing else is spoken of. It is pro 5 -
gress, but in a particular line. It is something, but not every-
thing; too much may be made of it; the world has existed
without it; and men and nations were great before these dis-
coveries. If you teach men to fall down and worship it you
abuse this gift. If you say it alone is entitled to the respect
and admiration of men, you exaggerate its value and you degrade
man. Modern progress is partial. It is mainly confined to the
body and its wants; it is exaggerated, and cannot claim the un-
divided homage of man, without degrading his higher nature,
and making him its slave. Its exclusive study is destructive of
expansion and elevation of thought, it neither elevates nor
ennobles the higher faculties of man; it is fatal to science and
philosophy, for it is narrow and special; it leads to the decay of
the fine arts by its corruption of taste and lowering the standard
of beauty; it is fatal to social progress, for it neither originates
nor perpetuates habits, feelings, laws, or institutions of a high
order, or of lasting influence. And, as lam about to show you
on this evening, this exaggerated material progress, without
moral religious training, contains in it the elements of ruin, and
threatens the rights, the liberties—nay the very existence
society The material progress of our times, the development
of human industry in arts and manufactures, the triumph of
human science ignoring not to say rejecting virtue, morality,
religion, contains the germs of social ruin. It is fatal in two
ways. First, in the ideal it pursues Secondly, in the means by
which it works. I shall speak of these only at present. What
then is the agency by which modern industry accomplishes the
wonders which we witness ? The triumphs of modern science


over the obstacles of the material world, and the victory of mind
over matter are the simple results of the laws of nature applied
by man to establish his empire upon earth, and rule over the
material elements that encompass him. His triumphs are the
evidences of the gigantic powers of nature. He can succeed by
applying them—he cannot accomplish anything in opposition to
them. The All-wise Maker of this wondrous world has estab-
lished the laws by which it is governed. Man ascertains these
laws, utilizes these forces that exist everywhere throughout
the vast laboratory of nature where those subtle agencies have
worked unseen for ages before man suspected the cause of the
phenomena that are now intelligible to children. Such instru-
ments, such agents of more than Titanic power, are most
formidable in human hands, and sooner or later will be turned
against man himself, unless a moral progress, proportionate to
his natural faculties, provide a guarantee against their abuse.
In the course of that material progress that is the wonder of our
time, man seizes upon the forces existing in nature, and is thus
armed with powers that grow daily in their giant dimensions,
until man and his free will can no longer offer any resistance.
Such agencies are at once blind and irresistible, and human
liberty suffers as they are augmented. The empire of matter is
to a certain extent increased, but the liberty of man diminished
in its influence. It is not hazarding an opinion without a
sufficient reason to judge of the future from the past, and, I am,
therefore, concluding legitimately when I show you that without
moral progress, without virtue and religion, the material progress
which is-the pride and glory of our age, will ultimately tend to
the ruin of society. It is evident to any reflecting man that
unless some strange and unforeseen obstacle be interposed, and
there is no reason to think there will, the progress of science, and
the knowledge of the laws and forces of the natural world, will
necessarily increase man's power to such an extent that in a few
he will employ motive power and machinery so vast, so
gigantic, that the mechanical wonders of our time, which
astonished even those who called them into existence, must
appear little better than the toys of children. This is the usual
course of things, sciences of a few year's growth, of yesterday,
produce wonderful results. Every step made is a new source of
power; the more we know, the more rapid is our progress in
knowledge; science begets science; power enables us to acquire
more, just as bodies falling from a slate of rest gradually acquire


a velocity that seems incredible, though commencing from
nothing. The desire of knowledge grows with every new dis-
covery, and every additional truth fires the ambition of the
investigator of the Hws and secrets of the visible world. Thus-
the genius of man, seizing power after power, achieves a series
of conquests, and every victory becomes an incentive to further
triumphs. Assuming this as evident to every attentive observer,
may we not fairly conclude as to the future? If man, devoid of
science, and almost every effective instrument, has succeeded in
constructing for himself such instruments as we see, what will
he not accomplish with his vast knowledge, which increases daily,,
and the assistance of that gigantic machinery, the very sight of
which is oppressive from its irresistible power ? Supposing that
no unforeseen catastrophe is to interrupt the onward march of
human invention, that no impassable abyss is to divide us from
the future,, that the light of science is to continue not only
undiminished but augmenting, the progressive increase of the
forces which man can employ, baffles all the calculations of sober
thought, and even the powers of the wildest imagination. The
fnture of science, invention, discovery, cannot be contemplated
seriously without grave apprehension. For, in the midst of the
accumulated forces of nature, which the genius of man is destined
to combine, man himself becomes helpless and insignificant, and.
his liberty is annihilated in their inevitable action. He has dis-
played his power over the material world by using the forces of
nature to secure his triumph, but his victory itself is the evidence
of his weakness—he is dependent upon forces which he himself
must obey, which he must follow obsequiously, which he cannot
resist, which he did not create, but which he found existing in-
dependent of him and despite him. Man has unchained a giant
and the monster holds him in his iron grasp —unrelenting,,
pitiless; so that while his sway is extended over the domain of
nature, it is by calling to his assistance powers that overwhelm
his weakness, while they annihilate his liberty. An- example
familiar, and therefore intelligible, to everyone present, will
illustrate my meaning. We are justly proud of the invention of
the steam -engine, and the splendid results which have followed.
It is an epitome of the progress of this century ; an embodiment
of the triumphs of man over matter, and illustrates at the same
'time his power and his weakness, his dominion and his depen-
dence. Justly proud of his conquests, man flies as it were from
kingdom to kingdom —a conqueror greater than Alexander, for


he lias brought into subjection a greater power. A greater
conqueror than the occupant of the triumphal car, man can
exclaim, “ Let the ruler of the world pass?” It is a splendid
dominion, but it is not absolute; he is a conqueror, but a slave ;
he is a king, but he has abdicated ! He has ceded his rule to
steam, the locomotive wields the sceptre now. Seated upon that
engine man is a thing not a man ! Whirled along like lumber,
with equal velocity and as incapable of resistance, he is
a slave not a master. To be released from the fatigue of
travel, man has to submit to the despotism of laws which are
independent of him; and while he is carried from one place to
another with incredible velocity, he has to submit to the desperate
chance of being carried from this world to the next. Consider
how little is required to ensure this awful death. Let the
engine-driver only forget to touch a certain spring, to observe a
certain signal, his own life and the life of others are in peril,
under the necessary action of the laws of matter. A trifling
obstacle on the rail, a neglect or omission of some of the numer-
ous officials occupied on the line or on the engine, will suffice to
crush to atoms the conqueror and his car of triumph. It has
happened more than once that trains have come into collision,
mangling and destroying the helpless victims they contained,
and shattering each other to atoms. The recollection of the
dreadful fate of the passengers by a railroad in America, is fresh
in the memory of all. So inexorable are the laws of the material
world, so helpless is man in the grasp of the monster he can
make. And when he shall have multiplied a thousandfold his
conquests, and combined the irresistible forces of nature to an
extent that imagination cannot picture, what if he should become
the enemy of his kind, and convert the vast and varied elements
under his control into engines of destruction ? Do not mistake
my meaning. I do not say that science is of necessity a fatal
weapon, and material progress, and the discovery of the secrets
nature, an evil or an advance to ruin—far from it. Science
is noble; it is good ; it is from Heaven-—from the Father of
Lights; it is his gift to his children ; but it is a power, and who
will deny it is a formidable one ? Formidable even now in its
infancy; but in the future, when matured and augmented to an
extent we may conjecture without realising; when children will
smile at our ignorance; when the impossible of our time will be
the actual and the ordinary; when the secrets of nature mysteri-
ously concealed from us shall be revealed to our children ; when


men shall see, and know, and touch what is not even conjectured!
as possible by the philosophers of this time: how formidable is-
it not destined to become ? A formidable power for good, or for
evil, for man or against him, according to the use or abuse of
human liberty. But you will say man will be careful,,watchful,
prudent, when armed with such formidable weapons. No rash-
ness, no presumption, will accompany him as he bears the torch
of science through the explosive elements that fill the tremend-
ous laboratories of nature—he will walk with guarded steps upon
the brink of the volcano, and will not venture to explore its
depths—he will estimate the forces of nature without risking the
perilous experiment of a test—he will know them accurately—
he will calculate to a nicety their tremendous power. But what
if he should wish to employ them and to abuse them? We
must entertain this question. We cannot conjecture what per-
verted power may dare and accomplish, having under its control
the vast resources of a great nation, aided by the inventions of
modern sciences, steam, electricity, and the various engines of
destruction with which they have furnished civilised nations.
History and our own experience tell us of daring, dreadful deeds
accomplished by one man in a few days—aye, in a few hours.
Bad and wicked and perverse men have ruled the destinies of
mankind as long as we can follow them by the light of authentic
history. Are the rulers and the nations of the future more
likely to act otherwise ? What is Babylon butchered in the
dead of night in the midst of its drunken debauch ? What are
revolutions, accomplished in a few hours—dynasties of a thousand
years crushed in a day, and swept away for ever ? What are
these facts of history to the possible catastrophes of the future ?
when the spirit of destruction shall seize upon the irresistible
powers of nature to exterminate perhaps an entire nation by the
agency of a few civilised men. There is nothing extravagant in
such anticipations. Two points are unquestionable. First,,
that the progressive activity of modern science, and the gigantic
results of its investigations of the powers and forces of nature
must increase in a ratio that will astonish even the philosophers
themselves. Secondly, that the incalculable powers which
human science thus places at man’s disposal are effectual for
evil as well as for good; that they may be indifferently employed
for the defence or the destruction of mankind. Do not talk of
the impossible—our century has witnessed the impossible of our
fathers, an accomplished fact. Examples are unnecessary. I


maintain then, without hesitation, that the material progress of
our day menaces civilisation, and is destined to be fatal without
the protection to be found in the moral progress of nations.
The sagacious Leibnitz has said, “ that a bad European is worse
than a savage, because of the refinement of his wicked ness; ” I
will add he is more formidable also. His superior enlightenment
increases his powers of destruction, and the inventions of civili-
sation are for him so many weapons to render his barbarism
terrible. A man without any idea of moral obligation—without
a sense of duty, obedience, respect for the rights of others—
without love of his friends, or fear of an overrulling Providence —
without virtue or religion—is a formidable barbarian, when armed
with the inventions of civilisation. The simple savage is but a
child compared with him, albeit a dangerous child. He may
wound or kill with his club or spear, but what would he not
effect if armed with the appliances of civilised life ? Suppose
that education has implanted no moral principle in his mind ;
that he is unacquainted with the moral obligation of obedience,
of respecting the life and property of others; that virtue, religion,
conscience, God, eternity, have no meaning or no influence for
him ; but instead, arm him with the weapons which experience,
science, and civilisation have contrived or invented. Instead of
the club, give him the sabre, the lance, the rifle, the cannon —
show him to direct or construct the steam -engine, teach him the
secrets of the scientific man, the telegraph, the railroad, electricity,
magnetism—instruct him in the most effective mode of destroying
his fellow-men on a grand scale, let him into the secrets of the
art of w r ar —suppose him still uncultivated in mind, that is a
savage : what a scourge is he not certain to become ? Figure to
yourself a man with all his noble faculties perverted, possessed
of bodily strength and animal energies, gifted wnth rare intelli-
gence and even genius, but corrupt in heart, and destitute of
moral principle; without any sense of duty, of truth, justice,
virtue, religion—would you hesitate to pronounce that he is
declined to become the curse and the scourge of society ? If
then you have to deal with a nation of such men, what can
be expected ? The common instincts of mankind prove the well-
grounded apprehension as to the abuse of power by immoral and
wicked men. The greater the power, the greater the apprehen
sion of its abuse. When a nation is demoralised, it will infallibly
abuse its powers. An individual may possibly disappoint the
anticipations formed of him. A nation never docs. Society is


governed by moral laws, as general and as invariable as those-
that are established in the physical world. There are tendencies
in man's nature, which consistently with individual liberty are
ever found to produce like results, and one of these tendencies is
to abuse the material powers at his disposal. Self control, moral
restraint, duty, conscience, virtue, religion alone can check this
tendency, and keep it in subjection. Their influence must increase
with the temptation they control, and when these are wanting,
there is no check to the wild license and excesses of a demoralised
people. We shudder at the thought of an incursion of barbarians
the blood runs cold when we contemplate by an effort of imagina-
tion, the horrors and excesses of a remorseless horde destroying
the homes of civilised men. But I know you will think it
impossible practicallyit cannot be. Alas ! my friends, it is a
danger much nearer to men than they seem to think. What is
a quarter of a century in the life ot a nation ? It is but as a
day in the life of a man. Let the present desperate study of
nature and material progress continue to absorb the minds of
men ; let the same indifference or contempt for truth, justice,,
virtue, continue; bring up the rising generation with no Higher
aim than to enjoy all the blessings of an exaggerated material
civilisation; confine their views to this world, ignoring, if not
denying, the other; teach them that there is nothing in man
superior to the body, and that to gratify all its wants, to multiply
them, to satisfy them, is the sovereign end of his existence. Tell:
this young generation—the fathers and mothers of the next —
that virtue is the name of an antiquated folly ; that conscience is
cowardice; that religion is superstition; that the Scriptures are
human inventions—a sort of compound of poetry, fable, falsehood,.
and some sad, but real human experiences; that sin, and God,
and Heaven, and Hell, like creation, and the fall of our first
parents, the redemption, the resurrection, have no reality outside
the imagination of man ; that man's origin and end are unknown.
With two generations imbued with such principles every house
would be the home of barbarism, and no incursion from
without will be needed to accomplish the horrid work, at the-
thought of which the heart sickens. The savages of the
Southern Archipelago, of New Zealand, or of our own continent,,
would be tolerable compared with the cultivated barbarism that
a material civilisation, destitute of morality and religion, must,
inevitably produce. Ho not deceive yourselves with the belief
that this is possible merely , and at some indefinitely remote


period. It is little more than half a century since the world
beheld the most civilised nation of modern times, renowned in
arms and in the arts of peace, the advanced guard of the army
of progress, led on by the great masters of thought and opinion,
become the enemy of the human race. Not France only, but
Europe was deluged with human blood. Impiety seems to have
unchained as many demons as there were men. Virtue was pro-
scribed ; vice was deified; in the name of liberty they inaugu-
rated the reign of the most frightful tyranny the world has
witnessed, or a nation endured ; in the name of equality they
established an indiscriminate and universal degradation; in the
name of fi’aternity the soil of France was saturated with the
blood of its own children, and God being dethroned, they
adored an idol, and the goddess of reason was appropriately
worshipped in the person of a prostitute. Gentlemen, 1 almost
feel that I have offended your intelligence, and that I have
wounded the Christian sentiments of my audience by stating the
simple facts of history. Here was progress without God, virtue,
or religion. It is a frightful lesson and a warning. May it not
be lost upon the guides and leaders of our generation.
In Sydney there exists a Society of men teaching their chil-
dren these horrible doctrines.
The following are some of their principles:—
“ 1, They do not deny the existence of a God, though they do not
believe in the Gods of the Jews and Christians, of the Turks or
Pagans. The God they recognise is the power inherent in nature,
making itself visible everywhere by the effects which it is every-
where producing.
2. They do not deny the doctrine of a future conscious life for
man, but they do not believe in it; they see no proof of it.
3. They do not believe in the supernatural origin or divine
authority of any religion or any book. The Bible, the Koran, the
Book of Mormon, the Yedes and Shasters of the Hindoos, the
Zends of the Persians, the ancient books of the Chinese, and the
modern Bibles of Shakers and Swedenborgians, are all alike, in
thei* estimation, purely human productions, abounding in error.
4. They do not believe in prayer, nor in any form of divine
worship. For prayers they substitute prudence and well directed
labour; and the best worship of God they believe to be the
service of man. For faith they substitute knowledge ; for baptism,
cleanliness ; for the Lord’s Supper, the commemoration of the
wise and great of all ages and nations; for fasting, temperance ;
for churches, schools ; for submission to authority, reverence for
truth ; and for religion, obedience to all the physical, intellectual
and moral laws of the universe.


They govern themselves by what they know, and not by what
they do not know. They make it their business to attend to their
known interests in the present world and not to what they regard
as unknown and doubtful interests in another world. If there be
a future life, they think they will be most likolf to insure it who
act as they do in the present world. The doctrines of the miracu-
lous birth, and the miraculous life of Jesus, as well as the history
of his resurrection and ascension, they regard as fables. The
doctrine of an eternal hell they regard as a monstrous fiction of
ignorance and hate, as mischievous to the last degree. In short
they believe all nature to be governed by fixed laws, in conformity
to which our well being depends. To teach men to understand
and obey these laws is, therefore, the great aim of all their efforts,
both in educating the young, and addressing adults. It is hardly
necessary to add that their objects and principles are directly
opposed to those of orthodox Christianity. Christianity, they
think, aims solely at preparing men for a future life, and it does
this by teaching them to despise the advantages and pleasures of
the present life. It teaches men, as they say, not to look at the
things that are seen, not to set their affections on things below,
and declares that those who love the world and the things of the
world do not love God, and cannot be saved. It represents riches,
plenty, cheerfulness, and the good things and pleasures of the
present life as dangerous, as enemies to the soul. It pronounces
woes on those who are rich and full and those who laugh, and
represents a jest or an idle word as exposing a man to damnation.
Afflictions, want, pain, reproach, persecution, all that men of the
world regard as calamities, it represents as blessings not joyous
for the present, but calculated to yield the peacable fruits of
righteousness afterwards. These notions Secularists reject.
Such are the leading doctrines or opinions entertained by
Secularists as derived from the statements of those who are re-
garded as authoritative exponents of its principles.
The Sydney Secular Society is founded to propagate by means
of Lectures, Discussions, and Tracts, the following objects :
1. That every person ought to have the fullest liberty of thought
and action compatible with the like liberty of every other person.
2. The defence of such members as may suffer injury, be
persecuted for the legitimate exercise of this liberty.
3. That universal, fair, and open discussion of all subjects is the
highest guarantee of truth, and that only that theory which is
submitted to this ordeal is to be regarded, since only that which
endures discussion can be trusted
4. That moral, intellectual and material means alone can be
relied upon in all phases of existence.
5. That morals are based upon humanity, independent of either
religion or theology.


6. That whether the inequalities of human condition wall
■compensated for in another life or not it is the business of in-
telligence to endeavour to rectify them in this.”
Do not believe those who tell you that true human progress is
contained in the great discoveries of the age—in the increase of
science and development of human industry. Some men, and they
are not among the ignorant, nor of a common stamp, would persuade
you that civililisation means railroads, steam-ships, gas-light, tele-
graphs, banks filled with gold, a crowded exchange, enormous capital,
a world-wide commerce, daring speculation—that it is embodied in
what is so dazzling and attractive to the multitude, in equipages,
banquets, dress, furniture, dwelling, all of unrivalled magnificence
Is this so ? Is this the essential condition of civilisation ? Far
from it. All this may be an accident, or ornament, a circumstance,
an adjunct of civilisation. The education of a people or of a nation
constitutes its civilisation. A child reared without moral training
is a young barbarian. The same is true of a nation. Develop
all the instincts, energies, faculties of the body, neglect the mind,
ignore or despise conscience, duty, truth, justice, you have bar-
barism-barbarism in purple and fine linen, in silk and satin robes
b: rb ;m riding in gilded equipages; living in a palace instead
at, but still barbarism. The body is not the whole of man.
i icre is in man a second and higher principle. He has a soul as
well as a body, and his complete progress involves his advancement
as an intelligent, free, and accountable being. Virtue is the
motive power in moral progress—the study of nature in material
progress. The neglect of man’s higher and nobler faculties is
barbarism; and a barbarism the more formidable when armed
with the appliances of modern discovery, There is a mutual and
continual dependence divinely established between the soul and
the body of man. They act and re-act upon each other always
and necessarily. The well-being of the one is reflected in the
other. The development of all the human faculties, the physical
or bodily, as w r ell as the moral and intellectual, and the due
subordination of the inferior to the superior principle—of matter
to mind, of the body td*the soul, of the perishable to the immortal,
of the blind laws of the material order to the moral laws of free
inference —this is true progress and true civilization. I name
them with pride—progress and civilization ; they are the watch-
words of the world, a double echo to the voice of mankind, crying,
onward. They are the expression of a Divine instinct in man, and
indicate a Divine precept. They afford, moreover, an independent
and splendid testimony to the doctrine of the Church regarding the
Fall and Redemption of man. 1 have detained you longer than I
intended, and I have to thank you for the patient attention you have
given to my observations. The subject is important rather than
interesting and the necessity for true principles and enlarged views


F*i£*o VA
A/ <rryy
. . • . >
upon this vital question, must be my only apology. In our times
the most extravagant errors are proclaimed and applauded in the
name of progress. The old land marks between truth and error,
justice and injustice, have been removed; right and wrong have
confounded, like truth and falsehood, ancU while material
progress continues its giant strides, the moral world is returning
to chaos. The very elementary prmaiples of morality arc mocked
and disregared in this age of progress. In the name of freedom,
in the land of liberty, men rally und»r tne banner of independent
citizens to make and to perpetuate slavery. In the old world
there is equal inconsistency. A new science called the logic of
facts has superseded the older form of that science which Greece
bequeathed and mankind approved. A reign of terror has com*
menced ; force and fraud are the ruling principles of nations ;
the weak are crushed, insulted, robbed, exterminated. “ The
strong hand uppermost ” is the watchword, but it has ever been
the motto of bai'barism. Are we lapsing into this with all our
boasted progress ? To protect the weak against oppression ; to
maintain right against brute force and violence; to adhere to
truth, honor, justice, and religion, were at all times characteristic
of civilisation. Whatever else may belong to our age, surely it
cannot boast of its chivalry. Who has the smallest reliance ou
the honor or truth of modern statesmen or politicians ? Even
children can tell that, in the various forms of government existing,
interest and passion and prejudice are too successful rivals of
right and truth and conscience. Our lot has been cast in event-
ful times; it is the age of inconsistency in high places, but as the
fashions descend, so will There is an invitable
sequence even in the “ logic of facts, and it will work itself out
if necessary at the mouth of the cannon. To conclude, I have
to remind you that modern progress is partial and ;
that it is only a part, and that a subordinate and secondary part,
of human progress ; that the moral order has as real an existence
as the material; that the exclusive and exaggerated cultivation of
physical sciences tends to degrade the soul of man ; that it is an
obstacle to the due development of his h>, her faculties and moral
nature; that it leads him insensibly to forget his origin, his end,
his destiny ; that while it puts him in possession of the formidable
powers which exist in the visible world, it supplies no safeguard
against their abuse, and that virtue, conscience, religion, are
alone capable of protecting society and preventing a gigantic
material progress, the triumph and glory of our age, from becom-
ing the scourge of mankind, and plunging the world into an
abyss of barbarism.
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, WEST MAITLAND.
p *
f3ie<Lic>
