

LECTURE
RETTING and % RACECOURSE,
DELIVERED BY
REV. W. H. FITCHETT, M.A.,
WESLEY CHURCH ,
"WIEZDISTB SIDE'S", OCT. 12. ISSV.
flDelhcmrne:
M. L. HUTCHINSON, PUBLISHER, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
Eae Bros., Printers, 41 and 43 Elizabeth Street North.


ISBS.
M. L. HUTCHINSON’S
Ifap if fliliilis^
Printed in Colours, with all the NEW RAILWAY LINES and
A JMEW M/cf OF MEbBOURNE & SUBURBS.
Mounted and Yarnished.
READY I IDT A. FEW DAYS.
(sttcupgcw iSooH
15 COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


X6SI7
BETTING AND THE RACECOURSE.
The Protest of a Christian Church.
The following address was delivered in
Wesley Church, by the Rev. W. H. Fitchett,
BA., on Wednesday evening, the 12th
lost.; —
ITS MORAL EFFECTS AND ITS COST.
I speak to-night as the servant and repre-
sentative of a great Christian church ; but I
do not propose to plead for any Puritanic
theory of life and morals. Ido not pretend to
announce that there is an eleventh command-
ment just received by special revelation,
which runs—" Thou shall not go to the race-
course,” and a twelfth which says, 11 Thou
shalt not bet.” The invention of new sins is
so unprofitable, not to say unnecessary, an
industry, that I certainly do not propose to
apply myself to it. A horserace, in truth, is as
intrinsically innocent a thing as a
cricket match, and we have all enough
of human nature in us to heartily
enjoy it. We are so made that anything into
which rivalry enters stirs our blood, and that
with no ungenerous excitement, A dozm
horses trained for fleatnees contending in
speed ; a cluster of boats with flashing oars
leaping off at the crack of a pistol; two well-
matched elevens on the cricket field; two
football clubs contending for a goal—the
interest such contests kindle is neither un-
natural nor ignoble. But we stand_ in the
presence of a huge and organised vice, the
vice of gambling, which, like a mon-
strous parasite, thrusts its bitter roots
nto otherwise innocent amusements And
of all amusements racing lends itself
to gambling with most of completeness.
Racing in Cap-week, the racing which in a few
more days will bo on us like a deluge, is but a
pretext for some of the moat enormous gambling
on the face of the earth ; gambling which
grows every year bigger and madder, and
more furious, until, as with the impact of
Niagara, it sweeps away the entire com-
munity.
THE TURF A GAMBLING APPLIANCE.
In talking of “ gambling and the race-
course,” I am talking not of two things but
of one. All that belongs to the racecourse-
horses and owners, jockeys and starters and
judges —are as absolutely a mare set of
appliances for gambling as the balls on
a roulette table. " The turf,” said the
Argus, not a week ago, “ depends
for its support upon the backersand
that word “ backets” may be abbreviated into
"bets.” The “Badminton” volume on racing
is the bible of the turf; and it declares that
" racing without betting is simply an egg
without salt.” I appeal to your cominon
sense in the matter. The passionate excite-
ment of the Cup—the fierce interest that
stops the pulses of 120,000 people—what is
its inspiration? Is this mighty crowd held
breathless by the stupendous question of
whether a jockey in crimson and white will
pass a given post six inches in front, or six
inches behind, a jockey in green and black?
Is half tho colony assembled to decide the point
whether a given set of legs can cover two
miles in three and a half minutes, while another
set of legs requites three and three-quarters?
The interest which makes the pulses of those
crowded thousands leap is this —that with every
beat of the flying hoofs, tens of thousands of
pounds dance out of one set of pockets into
another. The real stakes played for in the
(jap are men’s fortune and character, men’s
happiness and misery, men’s life and death.
AN APPEAL TO THE OON3OIENCR OF THE
NATION.
We propose in this gathering to make a plain
appeal to tho conscience of the nation. Mr.
Gladstone said that newspapers are “the watch-
dogs of civilisationbut in this matter
the " watch-dogs ” are bribed. The churches
may be called the watch dogs of morality ;
and in the presence of huge public madness
and vice we have an imperative duty of
protest laid upon us, which it would be


worse than cowardice to surrender. 1 have of facta to compare with this? But
been told with a sneer, told with many sneers,
that we shall do nothing by this service; that
all on; oratory is wasted breath ; that a single
church standing in the path of that enormous
crowd which is rushing into the madness of
gambling resembles nothing so much as Mrs.
Partington, with her historic mop, trying to
arrest the progress of the Atlantic. Well, if I
saw a duel betwixt an old woman’s mop and
the Atlantic itself, and knew that on ins aide
of the mop was right, eternal right, (be
right that touches God’s honour and
the welfare of the world, it is not the mop for
which I should feel concerned, I should rather
judge the Atlantic to be in a very bad way.
For my part, I am cheerfully willing to flourish
such a mop in such a cause. I hope there will
never die amongst us that noblest courage
which, in Lowell s words —
dares to be
In the right with two or three.
We must not ]lose the great faith that God
and a good cause are always in the majority.
Have we forgotten history? We can look
back across sixteen centuries to Athanasius
contra mundum. And sometimes you eerve
the world best by resisting it.
THE ENORMOUS ECONOMIC WASTE.
The protest which, in the name of the
Christianity and common sense of the colony,
I urge against gambling and the racecourse,
rests, first, on their enormousa economic waste.
It is an argument, perhaps, addressed to the
breeches pocket, but none the less cogent.
The champion “ bookmaker ” of the colonies,
Mr, Joseph Thompson, the “ leviathan”
gambler—to whom all other gamblers are but
sprats and minnows—has just been working
a very curious sum for us. He has been
calculating how much changes hands through-
out Australia over tbe yearly racing, and ha
estimates the sum to be L 20,000,000 starling !
Tbe aggregate public revenue of all Aus-
tralia—Victoria, New South Wales, Queens-
land, South Australia, Tasmania, New
Zealand—only reaches L 23,000,000 ; so here
is a sum which would keep tbe whole
machinery of government in movement
throughout Australia; which is equal to ail
we spend in public works, railways, prisons,
irrigations, defence ; and it is flung yearly into
the cesspit of this single vice ! Twenty millions
sterling ! The total amount raised in direct
taxation throughout Australia is less than ten
millions; the racecourse, that is, taxes us L 2
for every LI that the State levies on us. The
aggregate population of Australia is only
three millions and a half, so that, if Mr.
Thompson’s figures are correct, gambling and
the racecourse represent a yearly expenditure
of L 6 per bead for every man, woman, and
child, including the babies, throughout the
colonies I is there anywhere else in the
world of sane and civilised men a set
perhaps you are incredulous about these
twenty millions ; and I frankly admit that the
arithmetic of a gambler is of very dubious
quality. But in the yearly budget of gambling
there are some items which are beyond all
doubt, and which really help to make these
twenty millions credible.
THE RING.
For example, there are 250 registered book-
makers in Victoria alone. These professional
betting men resemble t e lilies of the valley
in one respect—“they toil nob, neither do they
spin, 1 ’ except, indeed, ingenious webs for very
simple flies ; but, on the whole, they are an
expensive hody ot men. Nobody that I know
of bas better reason for fasting and wearing
sackcloth ; but nobody does it less. They
seldom wear the blue ribbon ; they harve,
in fact, a generous taste for expensive
jewellery and costly drinks ; and, taking big
bookmakers with the little, we may assume
that their personal expend! ure is at least
LI,OOO a year. The personal expenses, that is,
of what you may call the workmg-statf of the
great army of gamblers are at least L 250,000
per annum. That is certainly muoh more than
the amount expended in supporting the clergy
of every name in the colony. 1 don’t ask you
to compare the clergy and the gamblers in
point of respectability or mility; but I ask
you to remember that the colony spends
much more in sustaining the apostles of
the turf than the ministers of the Gospel.
The revenue of a single racing club is L 60.000
a year, and there are 458 registered racing
clubs, big and little, in this colony alone !
The advertised stakes of the races in a single
year are L 150.000, and the stakes bear to the
bets the relation that Falstaff’s ba’porth of
bread did to his intolerable amount of sack,
Mr. Thompson says that tha bets of Victorian
bookmakers alone average L 2,000,000 yearly,
and on that point I think he is a competent
witness. What is the most striking fact of
all is that the amount which passed through the
totalisator in New Zealand in a single year
amounted to more than half a million
sterling, and this represents the small
batting in the poorest of the colonies 1 What
are we to say to these figures?
THE BETTING ON THE CUP.
Dr. Dale said recently that gambling in Eng-
land bad grown to a scale which bad filled him
with horror and dread, but we certainly beat
England. We beat England in drink. The
rate in England is L 3 7s. lOd. per head,
while the rate in Victoria is L 5 per head,
But we gamble even more than we drink, for
the gambling rate of the colony is at least L 6
per bead for every man, woman, and child.
The multiplication table writes a condemna-
tion of this vice as stern as tbe Decalogue
itself, In view of such facta I do not


ask whether 6 ara a Christian nation, foola, seems, about “ Cup time,’’ at least, to be
for we certainly are not. We are a people a fair description of the population of these
with a good deal of Christianity amongst us,
but certainly not ruled throughout by the
moral ideas of Christianity. Here, for example,
is the Queen s Fund, which is intended to
serve womanhood, which bears the name of
the best of Eoglish Queens, and which is the
child of the bast and moat honoured lady in
this land, Lady Loch. And with months of
toil we have collected some L 9.000 for it.
But in a single day, upon a single r*os, more
than one hundred times L 9.000 will be won
and lost in bets. Will any min, not a lunatic
or a gambler, pretend that is a sane condition
of affairs? We shut up a few hundred
lunatics in the Kew Asylum, but I protest
we have a better title to shut up temporarily
the lunatics who give and take such vast
odds on the Cup.
THE EVIL OF GAMBLING.
About the cost of gambling a world of bad
logic is talked. It is urged, for example, that
the money is not actually lost, it is only trans-
etred from one set of pockets to another.
But the change, it may be replied, is from the
right set of pockets to the wrong ones. The
money goes, in tbe main, from honest com-
merce to mere bookmakers. Moreover, tbe
money that passes through the evil fire of
gambling undergoes a curious degradation in
the process. A man who comes from the Gup
with his pockets full of bank-notes won by
beta will not value them as if they bad been
gained by honest labour. They have been
lightly got, and they will be lightly
spent, and spent probably in vicious
pleasures. Moreover, any merchant will
tell you that a trade whose turnover is
L 20,000,000 annually must have an enormous
fixed capital. Tbe gambling industry bas its
capital exactly as tbe softgoods trade has.
There is a fixed gambling pool—a veritable
Black Sea, or rather Dead sea of imprisoned
and wasted money permanently withdrawn
from wholesome commerce to keep the game
of gambling afoot. It is beyond ail reasonable
denial that gambling impoverishes the com-
munity. It drains tbe hfe-blood of commerce.
There is not a tradesman in the land but bas
fewer coins in the till, more bad debts in his
books and is in greater dread of bankruptcy,
because of gambling. Tennyson says of
Wellington, the greatest and most typical
of Englishmen, that he was rich “in saving
common sense;’’ but in view of ihe facts I
have quoted saving common sense must be a
peril hed gift amongst u°, or it must emigrate
about the month of November. To be taxed
in such a cause and to such au ex ent, and
with an ignoble vice for tax-collector, is an
enormous stain on tbe common sense of the
nation. “ Thirty millions, mos'ly fools,” was
Carlyle’s curt summary of the British people.
Three and a half millions, almost altogether
colonies.
A MORAIi CORSE
But there remains an indictment of gambling
which is graver and loftier, and which
appeals to the instructed conscience of the
nation, Gambling is to be dreaded, not
merely for its economical waste, but tor its
deadly moral mhchief. In its every shape it
is a form of immorality, a violation of the
law that “no man shall go beyond or
defraud his brother in any matter,” There
is an element of fraud in every bet.
Betting is always an attempt to get somebody
else’s money without earning, and without
giving an equivalent for it. In honest
commerce where money is taken there is an
equivalent given in service, or goods, or land.
But in a gambling transaction the equivalent
vanishes, and the honesty vanishes with
it. The matter is usually beclouded
iu a fog of sophistries; but let us
translate it into a shape simple and
concrete. If you go into a grocer’s shop with
the design of getting a pound of sngar without
giving any equivalent for it, you are going
on a rogue’s errand. If yon go into
Flinders lane intending to get a line of
“ woollens”’ without paying for them,
you are setting out on the business o' a
scoundrel. And why should that be honours
able and right on the Flemington course which
is dishonourable and wrong in Flinders lane
or the “block?’’ Does morality change its
complexion in this fashion with geography ? It
is said that in a bet there is an equivalent
given ; each man has bis chance ; and a bet is
really a barter of chances. But what is the
“ chance ” which is given ? It is the chance of
not suffering a wrong, but of committing it ;
not of being robbed, but of committing a
theft 1 A .bet, transacted into the vernacular,
means, “I will give you a chance of robbing
me—that is, of getting my money without
giving me an equivalent—if yon will give me
a chance of robbing you I” It is a bargain of
pickpockets ! The crowd which will assemble
on Gup Day, with all its glitter of jewellery
and gleam of fine dresses, may be described as
a great assemblage of persons who have tem-
porarily renounced the ordinary standard of
morality, and by mutual consent, with perfect
good temper and eyes wide open, are all
engaged in an attempt to pick each other’s
pockets ! You must re-write morality ; you
must cross at least one inconvenient “not”
out of the Decalogue before you can pretend
to assert that this is anything less than
enormous dishonesty.
CAUSES OF CONDEMNATION.
You will perhaps say that this is tbe oant
of the pulpit, the whine of tbe Puritan $ but I
can sustain this reading of tbe ethics of bet-


ting by a long proces ion of witnesses who are directed against every form of gambling. In
not theologians and divines, with the bias of the eye of the law, a gambling-house is a
not theologians and divines, with the bias of
their class—who are statesmen, lawyers, men
of science, men of the world. Here, for
example, is Mr, Proctor’s little work, “Chance
and Luck.” Mr. Proctor is the editor of
“Knowledge,” and a famous astronomer. He
cannot be suspected of any bias in favour
of Christianity, for he rejects its history and
its doctrines. But hear what Mr. Proctor
says of betting. “ I regard batting,” he says,
“ as essentially immoral, so soon as its true
nature is recognised.” When a bat is paid
“money has passed from one person to
another without any work done by which
society is benefited. The feeling underlying
the transaction baa been greed of gain, how-
ever disguised as merely strong advocacy of
some opinion. The great majority of bolting
men, professional or otherwise, want to win
money, which is right enough, and to win
money without working or doing some good
for it, which is essentially immoral.” Hear
what the greatest of English novelists,
Charles Dickens, says. He has been
looking with his shrewd eyes at a
successful betting man, and he says, “I
look at the back of bis bad bead, repeated in
long lines on the racecourse and on the betting
stand, and outside the betting rooms,
and I vow to God I can see nothing in
it but cruelty, covetousness, calcula-
tion, insensibility, and low wickedness,”
Hear wbat one of the great lawyers of
Eogland, Chief Justice Oookburn, says. “ The
pernicious and fatal habit of betting,” he
declares, “is so demoralising and degrading
that like some foul leprosy it will eat away the
codecience uofil a man comes to think lhat it
is his duty to himself ‘ to do his neighbour as
bis neighbour would do bimHerbert
Spencer, as you know, bas undertaken to re
write the morals of tbe world on a non-Chris-
tian basis, and hear what he says;—“ln
betting, benefit received does not imply
effort put forth, and the happiness of the
winner involves the misery of the loser. This
kind of action is, therefore, essentially anti
social; it sears the sympathies, cultivate a
hard egoism, and so produces a general
deterioration of character and conduct,” Now,
these witnesses, I repeat, are not to be
suspected of a theological bias ; and who will
pretend to excuse the babit which even they
thus scorch in words of tire ?
RECOGNISED BY THE LAW AS A HUGE
PERIL,
But I can appeal to an even stronger
authority than these. The laws of a nation,
as you know, are the transcript of its
conscience; they are its deliberate and regis-
tered judgment of the character and general
tendency of given actions. Now, I appeal to
the statute-books of all nations. Through tbe
best period o' Roman history, and all through
English history, there runs a line of statutes
common nuisance, and a bet is an illegal
transaction. What stands behind all these
statutes but the assumption, countersigned by
all experience, that betting is a huge misch'ef,
full of peril to the commonwealth ? Why
have all civilised nations more or less com-
pletely given up lotteries as a means of raising
money ? By the testimony of the statute-
books of nations 1 am entitled to say that
the gambling of the Gup week —the gambling
to which half of this City will lend itself—is a
branded felon.
A LUNACY OF GREED,
Now, do you who believe in God and in the
moral government which is over tbe universe,
do yon think that we can plunge as a nation
into enormous immorality of this kind with-
out the moat deadly mischief? Every vice
breaks through some hedge of law, and beside
tbe broken hedge stands the avenging Angel,
with bis sword of fl*me! I have reminded
yon of tbe cost of gambling as measured by
coin; but there is a deadlier cost
which coin cannot measure a cost
in character and in happiness. Gambling
honeycombs society with immorality ; it sows
tbe seeds of incalculable misery. Hear wbat
the greatest of English newspapers says of
betting in London: —“If it were not for
the facilities tor betting offered on every hand
in the city ninety nine hundredths of this
misery and degradation would disappear from
tbe face of the earth.” Is not that true of
Melbourne ? Hear again what the London
“Spectator” says:—“Univeisal experience
shove that gambling tends to become an over-
mastering passion, a kind of lunacy of greed.
Gambling is like drinking alcohol. It
develops a furious passion, a moral drunken-
ness under which men lose self-command,
their principles are weakened, their industry
disappears, and they become little better
than moral lunatics.” Hear what one of the
most experienced of London magistrates said
the other day in the Bow street Police-court
when passing sentence on a poor wretch who
bad gone through the familiar nuod of
pilfering that he might bet;—“ I wish that the
clerks in mercantile houses of London could
come to this court and see wbat I see and hear
wbat I hear. This is only one of a multitude
of oases where prisoners placed in your
position have confessed that their rob
bariea are entirely due to betting. It
is most lamentable this betting ; I regatd it
as a curse to the country, because I see how
young men are lured, until they fall into a
state of misery and wretchedness.” How
exactly those words apply to Melbourne,
A PROCESSION OF SCOUNDRELS.
The “Argus” the other day gave a long list
of the English aristocracy wbo bad adorned


the English turf, and been adorned by it. Ibis not be a Chinaman.” The newspapers feed
true that many of the English nobility hive the evil fire by reporting for weeks in advance
been racing men; but with what re-
sult ? Hear what Thomas Hughes, the
author of "Tom Brown’s School-days” says
about them. “ Shall a man touch pitch and not
be defiled? There is not a man of them
whose position and character have not been
lowered by the connection, while in tbe
majority of cases it ends in bringing down tbe
standard of morality to that of blacklegs.’’
I bold in my band " William Day’s Re-
miniscences.” Day was &ne of the greatest of
English trainers, and through this book
passes a long succession of titled racing men.
But it is a procession of scoundrels such as yon
would scarcely find outside —or Tor the matter
of that inside—Pentridge, from tbe bad old
Duke of Cleveland downwards. Even Lord
Palmerston, the type of honourable English
racing men, shows badly in this book. Day
tells tbe story of how he went to tbe House of
Commons, called out the Prime Minister
from a great Irish debate, and asked him to
give an important public appointment to his
brother. And the Prime Minister of England
used tbe great trust of bis office to give an ap-
pointment to a member of his own stable !
What a howl would go through Victoria if our
Premier did anything of the sort 1 You
find even in Palmerston that curiously in-
verted morality common to all gamblers, which
counts a betting debt more sacred than an
honest obligation. Day tells the story of how
Lord Palmerston’s butcher succeeded, with
infinite trouble, in getting a bill very long
overdue at last paid. When tbe poor fellow
bad signed the receipt Lord Palmerston draw
on a glove, carefully picked up tbe pen the
butcher had put down with the tips of bis
fingers, and threw it out of the window, to
show his contempt for "tbe mercantile mind.”
WOESE THAN SMALL-POX.
Hughes says that tbe turf taught these Eng-
lish nobles tbe morality of blacklegs ; and I am
tempted to add that it gave them tbe
manners of larrikins It is the curse of
betting that it makes honest men thieves,
truthful men liars, brave men cowards.
How many careers it has wrecked 1 How
many graves it has dug 1 We fall into a panic
at tbe news of tbe smallpox across the
Straits; but I protest that if we could hire an
annual attack of smallpox as a substitute for
our annual racing madness, it would be
cheaper, healthier, safer. Now, our com-
plaint is that this curse of betting, which is
tbe canker of civilisation, which wastes our
wealth, which puts peril in the path of every
mother’s child, receives shameful encourage-
ment. Tbe law is kind or blind to it.
If a Chinaman, indeed, is caught
playing fan-tan ho is sternly "run in”
and fined ; but that is because be has
committed tbe indiscretion of being a China-
man We have added an eleventh com-
mandment to the decalogue; “ Thou shalt
all the odds. They might almost as well
report the market rates for burglars’ tools.
The secretary of the Racing Club has a free
railway pass as a distinguished public bene-
factor. The Parliament which passes laws for
the suppression of gambling adjourns on Gup
Day that it may gamble. Almost every
"Government Gazette” announces a bank
holiday somewhere in favour of the local
races. Worst of all, the State-schools are
allowed to be closed on Cup Day, and from
each one a tiny rivulet of boys and girls is sent
to swell the mighty torrent.
WK MUST FIGHT.
Iq view of facts like these, what are we to
do? We must fight! They have turned out
of tbe school-books “ The Last Fight in tbe
Coliseum,” tbe story of tbe brave monk
who went down into the arena, and at tbe
cost of bis life stopped the bloody games of
the amphitheatre. Tbe “ last fight” in the
Coliseum 1 No. That very fight in a new form
is tbe one we must wage ; a fight for Christian
morality against a brutalising and immoral
spot*. We must keep clear of the turf ourselves.
We are oitzms, and we must use our votes
and influence to arrest what is practically
State encouragement of gambling. Have we
no men in Parliament who will make a stand
when next it is proposed to adjourn on Cup
day? Why do you business men, who your-
selves bate gambling, yet close yonr places of
business on Cup day and send your clerks
and servants to swell the general torrent of
gambling ?- If we must have a spring holiday,
let us make a Christian League and start one
at another time. The Church has on this
matter a duty of teaching which it has
neglected. It on need expret no help
from the newspapers; their financial
interest in the matter is so great
that, to an extent of which they are themselves
perhaps unconscious, they are biassed. We
must "beat tbe dmm ecclesiastic!” That
famous phrase from " Hndibras” has furnished
the barb for many a sneer, but let no one
despise tbe " drum ecclesiastic 1” When
struck in a good cause, and with a true hand,
it is like tbe shot fired at Lexington; it is
"beard round the world !” lam speaking to
many ministers and to many Sunday-school
teachers. As a plain, imperative service to
imperilled public morality, go to yonr pul pita
and yonr classes, and expound with unshrink-
ing courage the ethics of the turf. And have
faith that you will succeed. How many
brntal vices have been killed! Duelling has
perished; the prize ring is dying; we shall
yet reform tbe theatre ; and we will mend tbe
turf, or end it; perhaps both. On a memor-
able occasion, and in tbe moment of defeat,
Gladstone said to bis opponents, " Time ie on
our side.” And time is on our side; and
better things than time: God, truth, and
ight.
Rae Bros., Printers, 41 and 43 Elizafceth-strcet North, Melbourne,


