

LECTURE
ON THE
“LIFE AND TRAVELS OF THE APOSTLE PAUL,”
BY THE
Rev. THOMAS BINNEY,
DELIVERED IN THE EXHIBITION BUILDING,
MONDAY, AUGUST 15, 1859,
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR HENRY BARELY, K.C.8.,
IN THE CHAIR.
MELBOURNE;
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
30 SWANSTON STREET, AND NEAR ST. PETER’S CHURCH, EASTERN HILL.
-AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1859.
Ira}




LECTURE
ON THE
“ LIFE AND TRAVELS OF THE APOSTLE PAUL,”
BY THE
Rey. THOMAS BINNEY.
DELIVERED IN THE EXHIBITION BUILDING,
MONDAY, AUGrUST 15, 1859,
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR HENRY BARKLY, K.C.8.,
IN THE CHAIR.
MELBOURNE:
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
30 SWANSTON STREET, AND NEAR ST. PETER’S CHURCH, EASTERN HILL.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


■■-■■■■ -- ? r


MR. BIMEY’S LECTURE.
LIFE & TRAVELS OF THE APOSTLE PAUL.
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen—
In appearing before you this evening to deliver a lecture on the
Life and Travels of St. Paul, it is my intention, not so much to read
the Bible for you, as to indicate to you a way of reading it to
advantage, which must be undertaken and carried out by your-
selves. My object is to point out a way of reading and studying
the Bible thoroughly, and in doing this I have found that there are
two very important things to be considered —time and place. In
reading history you must pay attention to these, and you ought to
read New Testament history in the same way as any other book,
attending to place and time. By such a mode of study you will
impress upon your memory such a knowledge of the book as will
never be effaced from it. lam surrounded to-night by many reve-
rend and learned gentlemen, who, I have no doubt, understand far
more of the subject on which I have to speak than I do myself;
yet it may not be uninteresting to them to have recalled to them
the knowledge which they have in their memory, and to observe
how thoughts which are familiar to them shape themselves to
another mind ; whilst that portion of the auditory whom I have
particularly in view may, I hope, receive some stimulus to, and
guidance in, reading the Bible; understanding that I do not so
much seek to give minute information, as to point out the way of
accomplishing what you may go about and do for yourselves.
It is my intention to take you three times over this map (point-
ing to a large map of St. Paul’s travels, exhibited in the rear of the
platform), if time will permit and your patience be not exhausted; —
the first time in relation simply to the fact and place , pointing out
to you the journeys of St. Paul ; the second time in relation to
time, giving you some idea of the chronology of the New Testament;
and the third time, to point out to you the time and place when
and where the apostle wrote his principal letters. And when I


shall have completed my travels by taking you over the map in
these three ways, I hope that I shall have lodged in the minds of
many of the young persons now present an outline of study which
they would do well to fill up for themselves.
In proceeding with the subject, I beg that it will be distinctly
understood that 1 have not come here to night to attempt any grand
or profoundly philosophical analysis of the character of the Apos-
tle, but simply to give you an outline of his life, which I shall
divide into five chapters. Chapter the first extends from his birth to
his conversion. Chapter the second from his conversion to his going
forth upon his foreign mission. The third chapter will include his
three foreign missions, each of them composing a section in that
chapter. The fourth will contain his prison life, comprehending
four-and-a-half years spent in different jails. The fifth and last will
be a supplementary chapter, which has not been written by St. Luke,
and which is not contained in the gospels, but without which we
cannot understand some of the gospels of the New Testament, and
in which I believe as profoundly as I do in those which are actually
given to us by the sacred historian.
Commencing with the first chapter, I need hardly tell you that
St. Paul was born at Tarsus ; I believe of respectable parentage,
and I think of good Jewish blood. Now there is a great deal in
good blood, as well as in good breeding, and the Apostle was a He-
brew of the Hebrews —of pure descent from a noble race —of the
tribe of Benjamin, the tribe that first gave a king to Israel. His
father, I apprehend, was a man of some respectability, having a
Roman citizenship. His son, who was free-born, says nothing about
his mother, but I do not believe myself that there was ever a great
man in this world who had not a clever mother ; and so far as
posterity is concerned in having great men, it is far more important
to have clever women than clever men. If a man has a fool for a
wife, most likely he will be the father of fools; but a clever woman,
even if she has a fool for a husband, will be the mother ox clever
men ; and therefore I believe that the development of the female
mind, and the strengthening of its faculties by education, is of vast
importance to the world.
Paul also had a little sister, and I do not know but that he re-
ceived some blessed influence from her, for the relationship of an
intelligent brother and sister is one of the most beautiful things in
the world. As a boy he obtained his secular education at a Gentile
school at Tarsus, then distinguished for its schools; and no doubt
that which he afterwards spake of his son in the faith, Timothy,
was equally true of himself : “ From a child he knew the sacred
scriptures,” and his young heart was easily touched by religious im-
pressions. At a proper age he left Tarsus, and came to Jerusalem
to pursue his studies. Here he was instructed by the most ac-
complished professors of the law, and no doubt he took his degrees
with honor. He was never a fast young man. He was never vicious:
never immoral. For you will understand that though he calls him-


self “ the chief of sinners,” that was only in reference to his persecu-
ting the Church. He was never immoral, but always deeply reli-
gious, always in earnest, even in the religion which he put away
when he ascended to a higher and purer spiritual religion. With
all the might that was in him, he served the God of his ancestors
with a pure conscience. It appears that he was absent from Jerusa-
lem during the ministry of our Lord : but where he was, and what
he was about, we cannot tell. Probably he had to return home, and
may have been pursuing his studies. One thing I know that he was
doing (and it is worthy of the attention of young men): as a young
man he was then going through a deep, earnest, religious expe-
rience full of vicissitudes and trials between the flesh and
the spirit—struggles between reason and passion; groping in
darkness for truth, and seeking to get further into light.
I know that such was the case, for he says in one
of his letters that he had gone through such an experience previous
to his conversion. Thus, as a young man he was getting a deep in-
sight into a religious life. He came back to Jerusalem after the
apostolic age had begun, so that this experience came upon him at the
time of the persecution. And here I wish you to notice what per-
haps you may not have noticed in a cursory reading of the book (and
that may be one of the advantages to be derived from a lecture of this
sort, in just giving you a hint how to read it) —you will observe that
two persecutions were in action at the commencement of the Christian
era, very different in their character. You will find that the first per-
secution was carried on by the Sadducees, and it arose from these
circumstances. It was due almost exclusively, and turned upon the
resurrection of Jesus, and his Messiahship. The fact of the resurrec-
tion, you see, cut at the very root of the Sadducean doctrine. The
Sadducees were the rationalists or the materialists of their day. They
did not believe in immortality, they did not believe in angel, or
spirit, or resurrection; and, for the people to receive the resurrection
of J esus, was to utterly destroy and cut up by the roots the Saddu-
cean system. Therefore you will find that they were exasperated.
On the other hand the Pharisees did believe in a resurrection. They
might not approve of all the doctrines of Christianity, but so far as
they believed the fact of a resurrection, they could afford to be very
candid. So far as the apostles went in this direction, they were sup-
porting their creed, and so far the Pharisees were well satisfied. But
presently there was a further development of the Christian idea,
and there is no harm in that when we rightly understand the matter.
The Christian idea did admit of development. It was not fully un-
derstood by them who taught it at the first : they did not all at once
comprehend its spirit—its great catholicity ; and to me that is one
of the proofs of its divine origin. It was far too great and wonder-
ful a thing for men at first to comprehend. They had a diviner
thing than they knew of. Did it then come from them 1 Did they
invent it ? If as it a result of their creed ? Was it the outburst of
their feelings, when it was a thing which they could not understand 1


No ! It was a great divine thing, filled with the love of God and of
mankind filled with a spirit of catholicity—of universality, which
the apostles did not at first comprehend. To me this is one of the
proofs that it was from God, that it admitted of development. In a
while some of the church began to comprehend this, and you find
Stephen at the head of them. Probably he had received a more
liberal culture, and possessed a more liberal spirit to comprehend the
catholicity of the system. With others he began to see that there was
a more spiritual element in Christianity, one that would do away with
the law and with ritualism, and that would embrace all mankind. But
when Stephen began to discuss this development, the system was seen
to strike at the root of Phariseeism. Then the Pharisees became the
persecutors, and you will find that the second persecution was carried
on by them; and here it is that Paul betrays all his heathen ardour
as a persecutor. Stephen held his disputation in the Synagogue,
and it came to high argument. It seems very probable that this
Synagogue was the one which Saul attended, as it is in the locality
to which he belonged ; and it is not at all improbable that he had
come to take part in the argument and controversy with Stephen,
for he afterward spake of the saint who was martyred, and “gave
his voice against them, and consented to his death.” By the way, this
leads me to notice that when he was at Tarsus, during the ministry
of our Lord, and at which time it is unknown what he was doing, I
may mention that some think he got married—a very good thing
when it is wisely done. This opinion is entertained on account of
the phraseology which he sometimes cites, and which is supposed to
indicate that he was a member of the Sanhedrim. It was essential
to being a member of that Council that a man should be married.
They were a singular people, those Jews ; they had a wonderful
insight into spiritual truth, and into the human heart. Their Sanhe-
drim had the power of life and death, and they thought so serious a
responsibility should not be entrusted to a man who had not under-
gone the sanctifying and purifying influence of a hearty, earnest love.
But I do not think that the language implies that he was a member
of that Council. To return to our subject : we come to the persecu-
tion of Stephen, Saul’s journey to Damascus, and his conversion.
And here I will just remark that there are different accounts of his
conversion—namely, that which St. Luke gives, and that which St.
Paul himself gives. In reading over these you may be struck with som e
things which seem scarcely to harmonise. But to me this resembles
the gold and silver shield ; and young people who read many books
must frequently have recourse to this mode of explanation. You will
remember the story of the two knights who rode up to a statue
which had a shield, on the one side gold, on the other
side silver. One admired the golden shield, and the other
said it was silver. So they began to fight about it. The fact is,
it was both gold and silver, but one had seen only the one side, and
one had seen only the other side. This is too much the case in
religious disputes. The contending parties will not look at both


sides, but only at one side, and so they go on quarrelling instead of
taking a full look at the whole subject. Now, in the two accounts
of the conversion of St. Paul, you will find various little differ-
ences in the phraseology with respect to Ananias. St. Luke says he
was a disciple who came from the Christians, and spoke to them of
Jesus, St. Paul says he was a devout man according to the law.
He came to him as such, and spoke to him of the God of their fa-
thers, and of the manifestation of the divine appearance. This
divinity is just the gold and silver shield over again. Ananias was
both a devout man and a disciple. He had received Christianity,
and entered into the higher sphere of spiritual truth. The differ-
ence arises from the different views of the two men, St. Luke is
the Christian historian, writing a book for the Christian people and
the Christian Church, but St. Paul, addressing an infuriated mob of
his fellow-countrymen who had been ready to tear Stephen to pieces,
says to them that he spake “ of the God of our fathers.”
The second chapter includes the period of his life from his con-
version to his going forth on his great Gentile mission, which I may
briefly dispose of. And here I would advise you to adopt a practice
which you will frequently find of value—that is, to supplement one
book by another, to get information out of the law which is not to
be found in the history, and to obtain information from the history
to cast light on the law. This is one of the most interesting things
you can do. Now it is mentioned in one of his letters that the
Apostle immediately after his conversion on the road to Damascus,
did not return from Damascus to Jerusalem, as might be the im-
pression received from the history. He was a longtime at Damascus,
and thence he went into Europe. It was three years before he went
up to Jerusalem, where he stopped only a few days, and saw one or
two Apostles. And here is another instance in which you must
compare the history with the letters, and look at both sides of the
question in order to get a complete view. The one account is not
inconsistent with the other, but the supplement of it. The historian
says that Paul’s life was in danger—that there was a conspiracy
against him, and that he was urged to leave Jerusalem, and
so brought down to Caesarea. Paul himself says, “ I was
in the temple, and the Lord spake to me, saying, that they
would not listen to me in Jerusalem, and that I must go hence.”
There is no inconsistency in these statements ; the one is the earthly
side, meeting the eye of the earthly observer, and is recorded by
the mundane historian who speaks of his external life. But St.
Paul himself is exhibiting to you his inward life—his intercourse
with the Lord. The two views are perfectly harmonious, the one
being the earthly, the other the divine.
So he goes to Tarsus, and is there for a considerable time, preach-
ing in Syria and Cilicia ; and whilst he is there the Gentiles are for-
mally introduced into the church in the person of Cornelius; the
gospel spreads abroad, and the Gentiles, especially in the great city
of Antioch, receive the gospel and are formed into a church. Bar-


nabas, going clown to Antioch, finds the work going on to such an
extent that he goes to Tarsus, and brings Paul, and so they labour
together for a considerable time there. Then a circumstance occurs
which leads to a collection for the poorer saints at Jerusalem, and
Paul and Barnabas go with it. It is curious to trace whether Paul
was present with the saints at Jerusalem when Peter was brought
out of prison by the church. It is singular that this meeting—
the most important I suppose, for it is particularly mentioned and
described in the history—took place in the house of a sister of Bar-
nabas, who was Paul’s companion, with whom he had gone up to
J erusalem ; and it is therefore within the limits of probability that
Paul may have been present. If so, you see Paul, who a few years
before would have delighted in putting Peter into prison, assem-
bling with the church, and praying him out of it. St. Paul and
Barnabas return to Antioch, taking with them Mark, a nephew of
Barnabas. After stopping there a little time it was intimated to
them, by the command of God, that they should depart on a foreign
mission.
This brings us to the third chapter, which includes St. Paul’s
three great Journeys, and which I shall pass over very rapidly,
as this is not a time or place for very minute discussion. Well
Barnabas and Saul starting from Antioch, cross over to Cyprus,
touching at Salamis, and going from thence to Paphos. They then
cross over to Antioch again, and round again to Derbe and Lystra.
It is a very short journey, though it takes up a great deal of time,
and contains two or three things that are worthy of notice. I can-
not help feeling struck with what occurred at Paphos. It is almost
representative. There was Sergius Paulus, a Roman of high intelli-
gence, wishing to get at the root of things. On the one side was
the degenerate, perverted, and effete Judaism in the person of Elymas
the sorcerer. On the other side is the Judaism renewed, sanctified,
and elevated by Divine power in the person of St. Paul. They are
brought together in the contest, and Sergius Paulius is looking on
and judging. And the Apostle’s success there may be regarded
as prophetical of the success which awaited him elsewhere. While
at Antioch a circumstance occurred which greatly disturbed them,
Barnabas desiring to take Mark with them, and Paul disapproving the
proposition. And some of the young men here may lay it to heart.
For before long Mark had got tired of the work ; his young enthu-
siasm had evaporated. He was not a hero, at least not there, and
he wanted to get back to his mother ; and so he gave up the manly
and heroic mission, took ship, and went off home. Following the
Apostles in their course, you will observe a difference in the phrase-
ology which describes the history of their doings as they journeyed,
and as they returned. As they went everywhere they were preach-
ing the gospel ; as they came back they acted differently, assembling
with the disciples, and endeavouring to give form and consistency :
providing means of giving perpetuity to those who had already
received the faith, by forming them into churches, and giving elders


to every city. So they passed on to Antioch. Here they called to-
gether the church, and told them not so much of their sufferings,
not so much of their persecutions which they had endured—but
of their success. How it is a question whether, during the time
that they were stopping at Antioch after this first journey,
Paul went up to Jerusalem. There was quite time for
two journeys, and I only mention this as one of the things which it
will be interesting to study. During that time occurred the contest
between Peter and Paul. Peter was a man of large heart you know,
but of strong impulses, and not always judicious, and wanting in
moral courage ; and when he came down to Antioch, he acted in such
a manner, that the apostle Paul, who was a man of determination and
of high honor, one who clung to duty and truth, had to -withstand
him.
Then came the time when Paul and Barnabas separated upon their
second journey. God was leading the men by a way that they
knew not. When they proposed one thing, God was preparing
another and better way himself, and they were led to do that which
they had not contemplated. They thought to visit their brethren
and the churches—and Barnabas said “we will take Mark with us.”
“ Hot so,” said Paul; and they each stood to their point : the uncle
clung to the nephew, and would have him. Paul would not. Here
the two good men —loving men—who were friendly afterwards : and
Paul friendly with Mark too, afterwards, made the contention so seri-
ous, that they parted from each other, perhaps in anger. Barnabas
took Mark, and went off to Cyprus. Paul took Silas, and went to
Derbe and Lystra. So they both went to visit the brethren and the
churches, the one going to where the other had left off. God was
preparing Paul for something greater than he had in his
own mind; and you will observe that on leaving Antioch there
were only Paul and Silas, but a little further on, at Lystra,,,
Paul met with Timotheus, a young man who had been carefully
trained by his pious mother ; whose young mind had probably received
the faith on previous journeys. He was well spoken of by the brethren,,
and Paul would have him to go forth with him. To this Ms mother
consented. She gave him up —consecrated her idol to God; and the
three went up into Galatia, being the first time that Paul had extended
his travels so far. They thought of going through Asia, but were
prevented, and came down to Troas, where, not knowing what was
the will of God, they_ waited for a time. It is a blessed thing for
any of us, when in difficulty and perplexity, filled with anxiety and
not knowing what to do, to wait upon God. Oh ! the blessedness of
learning just to be quiet. I believe in silent waiting. Do not be
in a hurry; do not take things into your own hands; wait, and light
will come. Speech is silver; but silence is golden ; and never is
silence more golden than in the time of perplexity and anxiety, if
you will but wait patiently. Well, they waited patiently; and now
there are four of them. Three came to Troas, but looking at the
book we find a change; the historian is added to their


number (for I bold the theory of Luke being their writer). Here
St. Paul had a vision as of a man in Macedonia appearing in Troas,
and saying, “ Come over into Macedonia and help us.” Paul had no
idea of that when he started—not the slightest idea of extending his
journey into Europe! But God was leading him into great achieve-
ments. So, “assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us to preach
the Gospel unto them in Macedonia, we took ship and went.” And
such a ship! think of it ! what it caused ! whither it was going !
and what were the results and fruits of that voyage ! God leading
these men from that old mysterious land, within which the radii
of light, the prophets, the institutions, and the covenants had been
for ages confined, sending them forth to the great Western world—to
races that Avere become the mightiest in civilization, art, genius,
literature, and science. Was there ever another ship like that, com-
ing from the Eastern world to the Western 1 Paul, with his mighty
intellect, logical power, and fervid zeal; Luke, with his accomplished
education —for he possessed one of the most accomplished, highly
cultivated intellects of the time —Silas, with his earnest zeal, as a
preacher and as a prophet—and Timothy with his kindly, youthful
mind.
When they got to Macedonia, to Philippi—you will remember the
story of the jailer there ; how the magistrate scourged them and had
them put into prison, sending the next morning to let them go. But
“Ho,” said Paul, “we will not go.” Paul understood the rights of
man. A great moral lesson was to be taught to these persecuting
magistrates, and he said, “ No,” “ they have beaten us openly, un-
condemned, being Romans, and have cast us into prison, and now do
they thrust us out privately 1 Nay, \ T erily, but let them come them-
selves and fetch us out.” Some people think that to be religious isalways
to be sneaking and mean-spirited, and that Christian humility will
lead to all sorts of personal humiliations ; but religion is a manly
tiring, and godly religious men ever stand forward for the rights of
mankind; and in our own country it is to religious men that we owe
the rights and privileges of our time.
From Philippi they went to Thessalonica, Luke appearing to
remain behind there, whilst Paul goes on to Athens. There, if time
permitted, I should like to point out to you the great truths in his
discourse at Athens. It is wonderful to observe how the Apostle
adapts himself to his auditory. At Athens he reasons with them
the same as a man endeavouring to establish the first principles
of natural religion : he reasons with them as philosophers
who have God’s great book, the material universe, and
their own human consciousness. And so he goes on, subject by sub-
ject, until he leads them to the miraculous and divine. In the
Synagogue at Thessalonica, preaching to the Jews, a great many
questions Avliich he reasoned with the philosophers, are settled. They
are agreed on all the truths of natural revelation, but they have a
book revelation, and are agreed on many points taught in the law
and the prophets—they expect a coming Messiah, an anointed:


but they differ in their interpretation and exposition. He takes them
to the scriptures, and shows them a Saviour Messiah, and goes on to
testify “Men and brethren, this Jesus whom I preach unto you is
the Christ.” There is the difference between the two ordinances,
and the two modes of reasoning are very suggestive.
Paul then proceeds to Corinth, and preaches. A great commo-
tion ensues, and he is taken before Gallio, and accused. But Gallio
cared for none of these things, and dismissed them. He was partly
right and partly wrong. He was the secular ruler, and when they
appealed to him upon a religious question, he said this is not my
province. I cannot go into a discussion, or controversy. But when
these contending parties caught hold of the apostle, and beat him,
thus violating the law by commission of physical violence, then
Gallio was wrong in not taking action. After staying there some
time, Paul crossed over to Ephesus, and then passed over to Cae-
sarea, and so finished the second journey.
On the third journey he goes round the same way, and gets up in-
to Galicia again, where he stays a considerable time. It is probable
that he also took a run across to Corinth, for although this is not
mentioned in the history, some references in his history make
it very probable. Whilst in Ephesus, towards the close of
his stay there a disturbance took place. It was caused
by Demetrius, a silversmith, who brought a great crowd
of people into the theatre; who, when the four men came
forward, cried and shouted, for two mortal hours, “ Great is
Diana of the Ephesians.” I saw a meeting like that some time ago.
It was a political meeting, in Sydney; and it struck my mind
forcibly that it was precisely the same tiring over again. A mob
were shouting and vociferating, and a man on the platform crying
out, “ Gentlemen—Gentlemen.” But the gentlemen would not hear
him. You will remember that the tumult was at last calmed down
by the wisdom of the town clerk. How, I will just mention toyoualittle
problem. You will find in the 20th chapter of the Acts, that after the up-
roar was ceased, Paul called unto him his disciples, and embraced them,
and departed, going over into Macedonia; and when he had gone
over that part of Europe and given them much exhortation, he came
into Greece, and there abode three months. The book does not say
how, or in what way he went into Macedonia; and it does not say
how long he stayed there—anditisa curious thingforyouyoungpeople
to find out, taking just these words, first of all, going from Ephe-
sus to Macedonia ; and how long a time is there contained in these
few lines : the history does not tell you, and you cannot find it out
by reading the Acts. That is the historian’s statement : it is very
condensed. These feAV lines contain the history of twelve months—
the history of a year’s life of the apostle Paul. Only think how the
sacred writers compressed their writings: the wonderful details
which go to compose a whole year of the apostle’s life are
contained within those four lines. Now-a-days we have the lives of
some people in seven volumes —in seven or eight volumes—and they
b 2


are not apostles either. Well now, from the second letter to the
Corinthians we can supplement the history, and you will find that
Paul went from Ephesus up to Troas. He had written to Corinth.
He was very anxious about the effect of his letter. He expected to
meet with Tychicus : and it is rather comforting to find that this
man Paul, with his energy and mental power, has really some human
infirmity like ourselves ; for you find that at Troas, though a great
door of usefulness was opened for Mm, and he was besought to stop
and reap the harvest which he had sown, he could not. He was in
such a state of distress and anxiety because he did not meet
with Tychicus, that he could neither rest nor preach, or do
the work which seemed before him. In this state of nervous
agitation he went on to Troas, and to Thessalonica, and so on to
Philippi ; there he met with Titus, From Thessalonica and Philippi
he went right up into the north, into Illyricum, and came right
down again to Corinth, where he spent three months. At the end
of three months the Jews were lying in wait for him, and he had to
go round by Philippi, and thus came to Troas, to make up in some
degree for what he had done a year before. You can trace him from
place to place, staying up at night, or walking twenty miles from
place to place to meet and converse with the disciples ; you can
trace him all along until he came to Jerusalem. And so that is the
end of that section.
At Jerusalem, when he gets there, he states what has been done
amongst the Gentiles. Here there were a great many Jewish be-
lievers, disciples receiving the Messiahship of Jesus, who were still
zealously attached to the law. Ido not wonder at it; different dis-
pensations of God overlap one another, the new and the old always
intermingle. Still in the twilight, as the light is deepening and in-
creasing, there is an overlapping of the two dispensations—the new
and the old ; and there will be a contest—a contest between the
old light and the new light in the minds of those who receive it.
So it was with a great number of the Jewish believers, although
they had received the Gospel, and received Jesus Christ, they were
strong for the law, and against Paul. But no doubt there was a
calumny and misrepresentation. Paul did not teach them so, he
did not say to them, “ You need not, you must not, you ought not
to attend to these old rites.” He rather said, “You have been
brought up with them, and you can live with them ;” but he stood
up for the liberty of the Gentiles, holding that it was not necessary
under the Gospel for the Gentile to become Jew, but to become a
Christian. But they had got the misrepresentation that he taught the
Jews everywhere that they might neglect then- rites and ceremonies ;
so James said, “How we recommend you, as there are heathen men
among us who have a vow on them, to show them the customs and
sacrifices, and let it be seen and manifest to all that in spite of the
tilings that are said about thee, that thou art a very good Jew after
all.” lam not quite sure that the advice was sound, but it was
well meant; and the apostles were not always inspired in their prac-


tical conduct, as we have seen in the case of St. Peter, when St.
Paul withstood him face to face. No good came of it, for it led to
after circumstances which are interesting and very graphically told.
It ended at last in Paul being taken by the Roman officer, and
being put into prison. And this leads us to the next chapter of
his life—his prison life, and which I shall sketch very briefly, giving
you the points, which you can look up and examine for yourselves.
Paul’s prison life, then : He is now in prison. He was first im-
prisoned at Jerusalem; and you know how the Roman officer, not
understanding the language which he was speaking to the Jews, and
not understanding them, because their language was different, hur-
ried Paul off to prison; the next day he brought him down before the
council. And then Paul appeared before the Council. Things occurred
—things were said and done which led him to see that there was not
the slightest hope of justice, and no means of obtaining it. Well, I
think very adroitly—l am not quite sure about the rightness, but
with extreme cleverness, and with great adroitness—he set them at
loggerheads amongst themselves. It was his only chance, his only
hope. He saw that he was before a body of prejudiced men; for he
knew that of old. Seeing what they were ; observing that one part
of them were Sadducees, and the others were Pharisees ; perfectly
understanding the feud that was between them, however they might
join together, like Herod, to do him injustice, he cried out, “ I am a
Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee, and for the hope and the resurrection
of the dead lam called in question this day.” Immediately all the
Pharisees took Iris part. They began to be very candid, and very
liberal, and said to the others, “If an angel or spirit hath spoken
unto this man, by no means be in a hurry to do anything.” The
contention at last became so great that Paid was in danger of being
pulled to pieces ; but it was his only chance. I am not quite sure
that he was a Pharisee ; by the phraseology I think it is considered
that he was the son of a Pharisee in a certain sense; but it was
sailing very near the wind to say that he was a Pharisee. So he
went back to prison. There is a feeling of doubt in Paul himself,
for you will remember that on a subsequent occasion he says, “ Have
you anything’ against me except it be that one thing that I spake of 1”
I am not quite sure whether he does not just a little intimate there
as if he had gone a trifle too far.
The next point is, that one night when he was in prison, he has
a vision, and the Lord appears to him, and comforts and encourages
him, and says to him, “ Paul, they shall not hurt thee, for as thou
hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at
Rome ;do not be discouraged.” And the very next morning his
nephew, the son of his sister, came and said, “ Uncle, there are more
than forty men who have sworn an oath, and they have the sanction
of the priests, that they will neither eat nor drink until they have
killed thee, and they are going to ask the chief captain to bring you
down again to the council, under color of inquiring more fully into
your case, and before ever you are aware, or any one else, they will


set upon you and complete their purposes.” Now, if Paul had been
a weak enthusiast, if he had not been a thorough man, understanding
the men and the time as far as he could —if he had been a weak
enthusiast, he would have said, “ Oh, my dear young man, don’t talk
to me of their having sworn a vow to kill me ; I fear not forty or
fifty thousand men; I have had a vision to-night in which I was
told that I must see Rome. I bear a charmed life, and cannot be
injured ; don’t talk to me of the oath of forty men.” He did not
do that. He knew better that what might be the divine idea, pur-
pose, or intention had to be worked out by human agency ; that it
was proper to take measures for safety ; and therefore he listened,
and being assured by the young man that he had the information
on the best authority, he went and knocked at the door : the door
was opened by one of the officers, to whom Paul said, “Take this
young man to Claudius Lycius immediately, he has something to say
to him.” So the young man was sent to the Roman officer, and
laid before him the particulars of the conspiracy, and the oath, and
immediately, directly, Lycius gave orders for horsemen, and soldiers,
and guards, who were chosen and appointed to carry Paul down that
night to Caesarea. And so he escaped the conspiracy; and that was
God’s way of working out Ms own idea through a human instru-
ment, in his own time and season.
Well now, it is a beautiful study ; what comes next 1 lam only
sorry that I cannot remain here long enough to study it with you ;
but it is beautiful. Observe Paul, now a prisoner at Caesarea, and
observe his third appearance in court. The first before Felix, when
the trial is very regularly conducted, and distinctly recorded ; when
the orator or advocate who had been hired, comes forward, beginning
with a feeling address to Felix, and then laying down the counts of
the indictment. He lays down three distinct counts of indictment
against Paul, and the Jews concur. And then Paul addresses him-
self to Felix, and regularly takes up count after count, and disposes
of them. Felix, a sagacious man, understanding the feeling and envy
of the Jews, looking at their case, he puts it oft for a time, and.
ends it without giving judgment. And so Paul is kept in prison,
and then something comes in there most instructive to Felix. Felix
had decoyed away from her legal lord and husband, his wife Bra-
silia, and was living with her in sin; and you can understand how he
was led to tremble, he, the son of a slave, before the son of a free
man, risen to where he was, although the Roman historian shows he
was living in sin and in vice, having the power of a king, and the
disposition of a slave ; and you may understand how he felt before
Paul, whose discourse was of temperance, righteousness, and judg-
ment to come ; and how the baseness of the man caused him to hear
the Apostle again and again, and even to endeavour to corrupt the.
Apostle. He actually descended to that; hinted at it, as if Paul
would be corrupted, and would purchase right and justice by money;
and yet Felix tried to do that.
Then you have another appearance before Festus. Festus suggests,


the idea whether Paul would go up to Jerusalem. No; he knew
better; so he takes his stand as a Roman citizen. He said, “ No, I
will not go to Jerusalem ; I will not even stand here; I will appeal
to Csesar ; let my case be taken before Caesar.” This was the highest
tribunal before which he had a right to speak ; he would not be tried
by a local tribunal, and therefore appealed to Caesar.
Then comes Ms third appearance before Agrippa : that magnificent
description ! You will remember Macaulay’s description of the trial
of Warren Hastings, and how he describes the scene ? Well, I
think that that description of Paul’s appearance before Agrippa is
worthy the effort of any man of genius to depict, as Macaulay has
depicted that scene. There were the military and persons of civil
distinction—everybody of any importance in the place, all gathered
into court. The King is there with Pestus, and Paul is brought
forth —every eye is fixed on him—and Festus introduces the subject
by declaring before Agrippa that the prisoner has appealed unto
Caesar ; that he did not understand the matter ; and that this was
got up to give him an opportunity of speaking, and as an illustration
of the writing which should go before the Supreme Tribunal. So
Paul came forward, and proceeded to deliver that calm, graphic repre-
sentation of Ms mission, until Festus cries out under the influence
of his words ; —“ Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth
make thee mad.” And then Paul’s reply ! “I am not mad, most
noble Festus ; but speak forth the words of truth and soberness:
for the king knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak
freely ; for I am persuaded none of these things are hidden from him;
for this thing was not done in a corner.” And then bowing to
Agrippa (for Agrippa was a Jew) he said:—“King Agrippa;
believest thou the prophets 1 I know that thou believest.” Then
Agrippa said unto Paul, “Almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian.” Was there ever an answer in this world so nobly beauti-
ful as that which immediately followed 1 “I would to God that not
only thou, but all that hear me this day, were both almost and alto-
gether such as I am, except these bonds.” Was there ever anything
so beautiful as that appeal 1 I just give you these hints ; but the
words are there, and you can study them for yourselves.
And then again there is the voyage, which ought to be a lecture
by itself. In that account of the voyage how Paul gradually comes
out, and ventures to give his advice to the captain and the centu-
rion. He gives an opinion—he knew he had a fight to give an
opinion—but very naturally the centurion rather thought he would
take the opinion of the captain, and he kept to it, and went on;
but he went on wrong, for it came on stormy and tempestuous.
Paul could then have said—if you had hearkened to me you would
have escaped all this. And here I may mention that Mr. Smith, of
Jordan Hill, near Glasgow (some of you may know him, or know the
place ; I have seen him down at Helensburgh, near the Gareloch),
has written a whole octavo volume upon the shipwreck of St. Paul.
It is an excellent volume, for he gives extracts from the logbooks of


many of her Majesty’s vessels when they were in similar circum-
stances to the ship in which St. Paul was; and he shows that the
seamanship, as it comes out in the record of St. Luke, of those who
were in the ship with St. Paul, was very similar to the seamanship in
her Majesty s navy, and the logbooks of some of the ships bear out
that idea.
I have not time to go over the arguments as to the place where
they landed, but there is a doubt as to whether it was Malta. Paul,
however, was imprisoned there, and continued in prison for a consi-
derable time till he was liberated. He was in his own house, chained
by the hand to a soldier two years, and so the history ends.
Now, we come to the last chapter. I think there was a supple-
mentary chapter in Paul’s life ; and that after he was liberated, that
he had a first imprisonment and liberation ; then another journey,
and a second imprisonment, very different to the first; and then
death ! and martyrdom when he was contemplating going to Home.
He intended to go to Spain, for he mentions that in his epistle to
the church. Some people think he went to Spain; they think so
from some expressions of the old ecclesiastical writers ; but I think
it is very doubtful. Further, his unexpected imprisonment of four
and a-half years, which he did not anticipate when he wrote about
lus journey into Spain. But, I think in his last writings, in his
letters, when he expected liberty, he purposes going into Colosse;
he purposes going into Macedonia; he purposes being at Philippi ;
and he purposes being at several other places. I think a supple-
mentary chapter could be made out from his letters. At last he was
apprehended, brought to Rome, and imprisoned; and he says,
“ How, I am ready to be offered ; and the time of my departure is at
hand ! I have fought the good fight, and have kept the faith. I
have finished my course ; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness.” So he anticipated the end, and the end came;
he was a citizen of the upper world—the Hew Jerusalem, as he says
himself, “An oflicer and apostle of Christ.” He had to suffer
death; he was a citizen of no mean city ; and, therefore, he was
saved from a shameful death ; and was permitted to die by decapita-
tion. I doubt not many of the practitioners of the church
are particularly accurate with the circumstances of his
death; his _ being led out of the city to a certain
locality, to die as a martyr to truth, and to that master whom
he loved so much, and had served so long.
(The lecturer here intimated that the first portion of his lecture was
concluded, and that he was prepared to complete it if agreeable to
the audience. This was unanimously approved, and the lecturer re-
sunrfed the subject after the performance of a hymn on the organ.)
.As I told you already to-night, it is very important in reading
historical records to keep your eye on the time as well as place. So
when you are reading the Bible, or any other book, if there is a record
of some particular person that you want to find out, you want to find
out the time—how old he was—and you are repeatedly referring back


to the beginning to look out when he was bom. I remember saying
to a lady who was proposing to write her father’s life, “ Now, I will
give you a piece of advice. Put at the top of one page, all the way
through the year, and on the other page his age —that will be of
great assistance to the reader, and give great interest to the reading
of the book, for the reader could just look at the top of the page to
see the year and on the opposite page to see the man’s age,
and that is so interesting to know.”
Noav, the chronology of the Acts, and of the New Testament, and
of St. Paul’s life, is somewhat difficult—but I can give you a few
hints that will be of some guidance to you. The first is to begin
rightly, by understanding what is meant by “ A.D.” You know what
is meant by that perhaps. I have no doubt you will say Anno Domini.
If we said A.D. 20—what would that mean 1 Perhaps you will say
that our Lord was 20 years of age. Now this is the very point you have
to understand, and that point you will find has a great deal to do with
the chronology of the Apostolic era. You can easily see that Anno
Domini could not be used until long after Christ had been in the
world. It must have got a footing among nations before literature
or historical documents could be dated from its commencement. It
was not used till the sixth century. A monk of the name of
Dionysius Anoclseus first invented the era Anno Domini; and he
made a mistake. It is now fully understood and admitted that he
made a mistake, and that he fixed the A.D. four years too late !
It is admitted that Our Lord was born actually before the year which
he called Anno Domini. When then you come to the time of our
Lord’s ministry that difference is great, and has much to do with the
chronology of the first apostolic fact. When we come to the gos-
pels, you cannot gather from them the duration of our Lord’s
ministry. There are no points by which you can gather the duration
of his ministry. It might be one year to four, or more. Some
divines have thought it was only one year, but when you take St.
Luke and St. John, you get this curiously. Our Lord is said by
Luke to have begun the ministry when about thirty years of age.
St. John gives you so many distinct passovers and annual feasts at
which our Lord was present during his ministry. So that you can
make out that his ministry was three years : perhaps a little more.
Therefore you come to the result that he was 33 or 34at the crucifixion
And it would give a mistake to say that because our Lord was 33,
that therefore he was crucified in the year A.D. 33. Properly he
was crucified in the year A.D. 29. Supposing he was 33 or 34, the
date of the year of his crucifixion would be A.D. 30, in consequence
of the mistake. I think you will see this mistake has important results.
We shall see. Look at your Bibles, and I dare say that in the top
of the margins of most of them, the date given as the year when our
Lord is beginning his ministry will be found to be A.D. 30, and
when he was crucified as A.D. 33. But that is a mistake, arising
from the mistake which was made in fixing this date. But there
are some Bibles in which this is corrected, where you will find in


the top of the page A.D. 26, as the date of the commencement off
his ministry, and at the crucifixion you null find A.D. 29, or
A.D. 30.
Now the question is, can we tell when Paul was convicted, withi-
out which you cannot very well read the history. There are thie
facts, and different things which take place, and nothing in the his-
tory goes to give you an exact idea of it. Well then we go on ini
our difficulties, and try to get some resting place, and we find it hern
—first, there is a difference of opinion amongst learned men on that
point; there is no difference of opinion with reference to the death
of Herod in A.D. 44. We know that the Apostle did not commence
his first journey until the first year, because he was up at Jerusalem.
We take a calculation of his journey to bring him back in his
going to Antioch. We find Mm going up to Jerusalem a second
time, for he mentions that he went up to Jerusalem to meet the
apostles and fathers. That was near the year 50. He re-
fers to it in these words : —“ After my conversion, three years after,
I went up to Jerusalem 14 years.” Now that is the second going up.
I cannot give you all the reasons for that conclusion, but we come to
the conclusion that that going up was about the year 50. Otherwise
how are we to interpret those two dates, “ three years after my con-
version, I went up ; fourteen years after my conversion I went up.”
Was it 14 years after his conversion, or 14 years after three years 1
If we count 14 years after three years, we reckon 17 ; and if we reckon
back, taking 17 years from 50, it gives us 33. This is far too much be-
tween his conversion and going to the Gentiles ; and besides, the lite-
ral meaning of the words, if properly looked at, Avill show that he reckons
both durations after his conversion—the 14 years, and also the three
years, 14 years after his conversion, we reckon that would come
to 36, which was the time of his conversion by that calculation—
we look at it, it seems to me to be the case. It allows development
for the history, and just only enough for what took place between
that and the first going forth to the Gentiles. There are other ways
of testing this, by political events, and by things mentioned in the
scripture history, but this is one of the simplest methods which I
have given just now.
Paul thus was converted in the beginning of 36. He goes down
to Damascus, and comes back in three years —about 39 or 40. He
then goes up to Tarsus until 41 or 42, and to Jerusalem in 44 ;
goes on his first voyage in 45. In 50 he starts upon his second
voyage, which occupies a considerable time, and he remains six
months in Corinth. This will bring us up to the second journey in
50 or so, and then you come to the third, wMch occupies four years
more, up to 58 or 59 ; two years more in prison in Caesarea, then the
voyage, and two years’ imprisonment at Rome, which brings us to
62 or 63. He was then liberated and perhaps remained at liberty
for two years, when he goes back to Rome. Thus making up to 66.
I have gone through this calculation in a hurried manner, but when
you once get the beginning, you will find that there are many things


which give you the time with respect to the duration of the separate
journeys.
And now you see there is something singular ; the Crucifixion and
the Pentecost is A.D. 30. Fifteen years after that, and not before,
the apostle to the Gentiles goes upon his foreign mission. He is
converted in 36. Nine years after that, and not before, he goes upon
his foreign mission. We should have been in a hurry ; but God can
afford to wait the development of things ; He can restrain and keep
men back from being impetuous ; although we may consider things
in haste. Fifteen years after the Pentecost and nine years after his
conversion, commenced Paul’s great foreign mission. And even then
his vision was confined to the holy land—solely to the Jews. And it
was after that that the apostle was sent over to Europe ; to the
Gentiles of the Western world.
Now, then, the last chapter bears reference to St. Paul’s office.
He was chosen by God to be not only a speaker but a writer. The
living voice is a great instrument. It is a great thing for a man to
have the power of embodying thoughts in words which shall implant
themselves in the hearts of others, there making an impression that
cannot die ! which shall mould character and develope ability—this
power of living, earnest speech ! It is a great thing to be a maker
of books that will live ; that catch the thought and the feeling that
flitteth away, and that make visible the firmament as the handiwork
of the great Creator. Is there such a bliss in the world as that
when a man dies he knows that his thoughts shall live hereafter 1
that he shall be as much alive by that book, and come into contact
with mind, heart, feeling, conscious faculty—as much as if he was
actually alive ; for he is there, and these thoughts of his become the
permanent possession of his race —a light and a power in the world.
The apostle Paul was chosen to be this. He was chosen to be a
maker of books—a writer, an author; leaving behind him that
which would influence the age and the world to all time. It was a
great distinction.
But when did he write these books 1 And where % During the
three years at Damascus? Not a line! During the two years
more at Tarsus 1 Not a line ! Nearly two years at Antioch ? Not
a line ! He goes upon his first journey ; goes back; he spends
nearly three years more at Antioch. He has left these churches
established at Iconium and Antioch, and Derbe, and Lystra. Not a
line yet. He goes upon his second journey in 51 ; he travels over
all these regions until he gets into Europe ; over Philippi, Thessalo-
nica, Athens, Corinth. Not until then, twenty years after the
crucifixion, and more than fifteen years after his conversion—the half
of his apostolic life—not till then were his thoughts embodied in
writing.
At Corinth, some think that he began with writing to the Gala-
tians. lam rather inclined to put it later ; and I speak with regard
to what I am certain about. You will find in his letters that he
began his Apostolic authorship with writing at Corinth the first


epistle to the Thessalonians ; and you will observe a little note at
the end of that epistle. This note, however, is no part of Divine
Scripture. Sometimes these notes are correct, but not always. In
the case of this very epistle you will find the note says : —“ The
epistle was written from Athens.” It was no such thing : it was writ-
ten from Corinth. It is obvious enough that at Athens Paul was
alone. He left Athens and went to Corinth ; and while he was at
Corinth, Timothy and Silas joined' him, for it is said, “ Timothy
and Silas joined him in the salutation proof positive that it could
not have been written from Athens, where they were not; but from
Corinth, where they had joined him. His sacred authorship began
at Corinth, where he had time enough to write his second letter.
Then he leaves to go away, and goes upon his first journey, staying
at Ephesus a long time ; and there, I think, during his residence at
Ephesus, he wrote his epistles to the Galatians ; my impression is in
favor of that date—and towards the close of his residence at Ephe-
sus, he wrote the first epistle to Corinth. I could point out to you
little texts and Bible expressions bearing on those in the letter, show-
ing that he wrote the first epistle to the Corinthians toward the close
of his stay there ; and it is supposed that he took a hasty run over
to Corinth and back again : it is also supposed that he wrote a
little letter, previous to that epistle, which we have not. Upon that
there is a difference of opinion ; but there is a good deal to be said
for it. But with respect to what is written : he wrote there the
epistle to the Corinthians. From Ephesus he went to Troas, where he
was depressed, and went on hurriedly into Macedonia; and after he had
met Titus, under the influence of his feelings, which were relieved,
he sat down and wrote his second letter. The second letter to the
Corinthians was written in Philippi, in Macedonia, after Titus had
joined him. The mental agitation through which the man had passed
during the previous three months, shows itself in the composition, in
which there is a good deal of the human element as well as of the
divine. It is a blessed thing that these writings were written in such
a state, because thus they become a double revelation—being not
only a revelation of God, but also a revelation of man. Paul then
goes down to Corinth, where he spent two or three months in the
house of his friend. Plis mind had recovered from its nervous excit-
ability, and during 37 months he concentrates the whole energy of
his life, and there writes the most wonderful and elaborate of Ms
writings —the Epistle to the Romans. Then he comes to Jerusalem,
and is imprisoned, and it is very singular that throughout the whole
course of his imprisonment, wMle in that gentlemanly kind of
custody, not a letter did he write. We cannot refer any to that time.
Yet one would think there were many churches, but not a letter was
written at that time. You come on then to Rome, and while he is
imprisoned at Rome, four letters are written—to the Galatians, Ephe-
sians, Philippians, and Philemon. They do not stand in the order
in which I think they were written. Looking at them, and observ-
ing the internal evidence, I should myself put them in this order :


First, the Ephesians (though there is great doubt about that being an
epistle to the Ephesians), the internal evidence seems to indicate that
the church was one which had only heard of Paul, as there is not a
single place where he had been three years. There is an old tradition
also of its being an epistle to the Laodiceans, but at any rate there is
no doubt that it is his.
Well, that was the first; the Colossians, you see, is an echo of it;
I think it was written second. It is an echo of several things in the
Ephesians. Philemon, I think, was next, and Philemon lived at
Colosse, and the epistles were taken by the same messenger. Philip-
pians is the last.
He expects to get into Macedonia again. Well these four letters
then are distinct, and now there remains only four not ac-
counted for : —the first to Timothy, the second to Timothy, to
Titus, and to the Hebrews ; and I have accounted for all the rest.
Of the Hebrews I see no possibility whatever of fixing with any
certainty the place or time of this epistle, and there is great doubt
whether Paul was the writer. But there is no doubt at all—and I
have always taken my stand there —there is no doubt at all that it
was a composition of the apostolic age, most likely of Paul’s, or
some other if not by Paul, and there can be no question whatever
as to its catholicity. There it is, giving us information with respect
to the spiritual aspect of Judaism, showing us how Judaism, in its
rights, laws, and prophecies, finds its spiritual interpretation in
Christianity, for Judaism and Christianity are not two religions, but
one and the same. Judaism is Christianity in the dawn, and
Christianity is Judaism in the day ; the one is the germ coming up,
the other is the developed flower. The Jew when he becomes a
Christian is not, properly speaking, as Disraeli says, converted. He
only advances ; he advances forward and upward ; of the interpre-
tation of the old faith he sees a new light, but he holds to the old
in style, with his faith grown and developed into a diviner thing.
Then I say the epistle to the Hebrews gives you that idea, the
spiritual aspect, and interpretations of the old faith, whether Paul
was the author or not.
How, with respect to the first epistle to Timothy. There was a
great controversy about that, with which I shall not trouble you, as to
its earlier date, but its later date. In Acts xx, he says—“ Embraced
the brethren, and departed for to go into Macedonia.” Well, can
anything be clearer than his going from Ephesus into Macedonia;
and then the first epistle to Timothy began. When we look at the
letter that he wrote before he went, we find him saying that he had
sent Timothy and Erastus away into Macedonia, I think it is im-
possible that Timothy could have returned, because I find when I
come to the second letter to the Corinthians, winch he left just a few
weeks, that he left Ephesus and went into Macedonia, and then Ti-
mothy is there ; for Timothy joins him in the salutation in the second
epistle to the Corinthians, and. it is not likely that Timothy imme-


diatcly left and joined him in Macedonia, when yon find that just
before he had not been there at all.
I give up then the early date of the first epistle to Timothy, and I
believe that epistle was not written until after Paul’s first imprison-
ment, and during the time of that supplementary chapter, and the
journey, which we made out when Timothy was at Ephesus, and
Paul was going at that same time. Titus was written at the same
time, and second Timothy, the last of all, is written du-
ring his second imprisonment. And if you look at the
representation of that imprisonment, you see they are,
and you see by that letter that Paul had been, at Annapolis, at
Corinth, at Miletus, at Troas, and several other places between the
close of his first imprisonment and the commencement of his second ;
for I cannot suppose that the parchment which had been left at
Miletus had been left there before: altogether the evidence is in favor
of the later date. It was the second imprisonment; and the second
epistle to Timothy was the last that he wrote. With that his sacred
authorship concluded ; and I think there is something interesting in
the fact. The probabilities are great that the apostle was dictating
his last words, at the conclusion of the second epistle to Timothy; the
last human name that fell from his lips was the name of a British
woman —one who had been born in the old grand land which is ours—
“ Pudens and Claudia.” Among the last words in the last chapter of
the last verse of the last epistle of Paul the apostle to the Gentiles,
which he was then dictating to his amanuensis, or perhaps writing
with his own hand, the last name of a woman that fell from
his lips, or from his pen, we have every reason to believe,
from looking at contemporary Roman history and other
writings for what we can make out with respect to a person of that
name, shows that she was a British woman who had come under the
influence of the Christian superstition. That was a woman with
whom we feel ourselves in some degree associated as a native of our
own land. She received that living, glowing word, so full of human
friendship and tenderness, and full of sentiment and devoted love,
and the last words of the apostle’s lips were associated with the
land to which we belong.
Thus, your Excellency, I have endeavoured to fulfil my promise, by
giving a sketch of the life and travels of this great apostle of
Christianity. I have gone three times over the map, giving time
and place, and authorship. I hope you will excuse the many defects,
and accept what I have done in all honesty of intention.


VALEDICTORY ADDRESS.
At the conclusion of the Lecture, the following address was pre-
sented to the Rev. Thomas Binney, by Sir William Stawell, in the
name of the meeting :
“To the Reverend Thomas Binney.
“ Rev. Sir —Permit us to express the pleasure your visit to
Victoria has given us, and our regret that the time of your departure
has at length arrived. It is a matter of satisfaction to us to know that
the main object for which you left home, the re-establishment of your
shattered health, has, through the blessing of Providence, in so
happy a measure been attained, and that you are returning to the
sphere of your former labors with a reasonable prospect of occupy-
ing it again with your usual power and success. Our prayer is, that
God may long preserve your life, with energies undecayed, and with
growing usefulness, and that the scenes you have witnessed, and the
intercourse with your fellow men and fellow Christians you have
had, in your travels in the southern hemisphere, may furnish you
with materials which you may be able to turn to good account for
the benefit of mankind at large.
“We tender you, Rev. Sir, on behalf of thousands of our fellow-
colonists, our heartfelt thanks for your abundant and disinterested
labors since you came among us. While still struggling with weak-
ness, you did not spare yourself whenever an opportunity occurred
of promoting the public good. We can assure you your services
have ministered to us both delight and instruction, and our hope
and belief is, that the seeds of precious truth which you have so plen-
tifully sown broadcast in these regions, will yield fruit for ‘ both
worlds,’ in the lives and characters of not a few of the young and
vigorous men who have come hither to improve their fortunes.
“The cause, too, of brotherly charity and Christian union, so
dear to your heart, and which has found in you so able an advocate,
we trust has received a mighty impulse as the result of your visit;
and, if the distance which divides Christians should be at all les-
sened amongst us by your influence, we are assured this will be
among the most cherished and grateful of your reminiscences.
“ Our prayer to God is, that you and Mrs. Binney may be
favoured with a safe and agreeable voyage, and that you may return
to your friends and your flock in the fulness of the blessing of that
Gospel it has been your delight to preach.
(Signed) “ HENRY BARELY, Governor,
“ Chairman of the meeting.
“Melbourne, 15th August, 1859.”
Mr. Binney, in acknowledging this address, said he had been
taken completely by surprise, as he was not aware of their kind


intention to present him with an address. He had been treated in
the other colonies before this as a “distinguished guest,” and had
received all the concomitant honors ; but he certainly should have
been pleased if they had on this occasion exalted him into a grade
higher, and made him a right royal personage at once, when he
would have had the right of being shown the address before its
presentation, and so have been prepared for it. (Laughter.) He
felt surprised at standing before such an immense audience ; and one
who had not visited this country, he said, could form no adequate
idea of it, unless witnessing such an assembly as that which he stood
before that night. It proved to him most incontestably that the
people of these colonies were not all given up to money-making go-
a-headism, but that they had ideas of the beautiful and the refined.
After some further remarks, the rev. gentleman sat down appa-
rently much affected..
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, ELIZABETH STREET SOUTH, MELBOURNE,




