

;■/ V-' : i'>6?'fc|' ; ■• • / jr V* - A
BY
L. KEITH WARD, B*A.,' B.E. '|-■{
GOVERNMENT GEOLOGIST
Adelaide: G. HASSELL & SON
Adelaide: u. JtiAbbiiJL,.L, cc bUJN
■ 1917


:rs , s y - .i i l
VffA U, >■/'■>'; yfsfc&fC * ,?VsJ
t * 1 * r‘ ' ? - w n f ? r }U< \h n
■
'. ... .' . M... . ... ~, L * ... \
; * h-I
„ , • of Jl6elaifce, j
1917.
Six lectures on the'tfevelopment/of fhe resources pf the State
by an efficient application of science to industry, and on the
service of the University to that end.
June 12 — The Place of Modern Languages, by Lady
J r ’' ' ; k J’ l Galway. .
July 10— The Two Functions of the University and
Their Cost, by Professor Mitchell.
Aug. 14— The Dependence of Agriculture on Train-
: C ing and Research, by Mr. A. J. Perkins,
Director of Agriculture.
11—Geology and Mining, by Mr. L, Keith Ward,
Government Geologist.
Oct. 9— Chemical Research, by Dr. W. A. Hargreaves,
Director of Chemistry.
Nov. 13—Efficiency in Engineering, by Mr. W. G. T.
Goodman, Chief Engineer and General
Manager of the Adelaide Tramways Trust
V* t >; v- . v-*s&V'v- ■
■
. " <, ■ 1 ', ' ’
' \ , ,r I o ' J , ‘ I , ”
?■ *II ' l|i| fe i pl 4 I i t' '
t w&a 11 kli & i , v fei k


A/ , mi s/ 5 o 4-2
GEOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY
AND IN THE SERVICE OF THE
STATE
The European war and the dislocation of the normal
trade of the world have led to much discussion as to the
possibility of rendering various countries independent by
the judicious development of their natural resources.
While, however, this aspiration is in many respects a
most worthy one, it is not to be readily realized for re-
stricted areas in respect of certain natural products. The
facts of distribution must receive proper consideration.
To appreciate this point it will be well to glance at the
following table, showing the proportions of the world’s
output of gold and the munition metals contributed by
the principal producing countries during the year 1913,
as far as can be ascertained from all available sources.
Even so well-endowed a country as the United States exhi-
bits noteworthy deficiencies of useful metals.


CO
M
0 s
0-7 00 CO 00
o in o c\i
m rt
OJQ OUJZ
U9;s§unx
co to
r-n' M
07 co
rot" to t>»
oi fo o- co
•-i cm
07 07 ©
X 07 ©’
in ©
7—'
V
aiQ I 9S PTN
o ©
in in
co oo
in in ©
o ro tj>
uinii9pqX|o^\[
o in m
vo ©
in in °
*4—»
• H
c f
3 o
S 1
u
<D *
r -1 c
43 .2
CJ
'Tj rS
ZL
fl o
cj cu
O ©
m 07 o in
oo m ©
'sJ*
9S9ireBirep\[
07 cm
m cn
vo Cv in o
07 ov i un
Tf oo ro io h m ©
o-7 ■—* o o m- cn
ro
p-eaT Stj
C\T OJ
in in 07 o» o ©
o oi in m in
m ©
UOJI BIJ
OJ VO !>■ ro c<l CO 00
fOHfONOH CM
< (P
O "t O' o*»
o 07 ai in o*
h 07
r "0
'O H
o *
in n {.o
07 rf* ro ©
agddoQ
h rq ts ro TO
o in T d - n
in ©
f '4— I <u
C S?
in 07
m oo
C". o
fO O' CO
ro LO
9JQ SUIOJqQ
C w
tr <->
O
<u
u w
p
(gqxn-Bg;)
umiuimrqy
fO 00 O CM o CM
O r-l O 00
M- 05
Auouipuy
Cd £ -U
|T tS : g ■& ::: : : !.«
§ w■§ „ >S « I 3
o “ o mS £ _ I S o _
U K.2-c .3 „S 3 <j « i, 2 J 2
C/)K><£cfl r Of I ] ■g S a
H ri fIW c W W 'tf C
£ r d^'a3'o n3 -3£ ►_) g 13 rt U 3
« j c >.SS « >■&
®a § S §’e'C> < * ■S Ta &’3 § 113
Dw<;u£mP hsAp^zm
OJ
H


o rn co
tj- f—i m
<M CM
9JO 3 U !Z
rn iO
d rn
m i> oo
h d O
rH ■'t
ii9;sSunx
9JQ I 9! P!N
<D <y
6 a
o ©
in ™
tO rt*
ro h
uinu9pqA|oj\[
9S9U'bSu , B J\[
N" OCN to
vo cn I—l oo
PB3T §!J
<N G) rn
d cn
CN CN
UOJI SIJ
rf
d ©
q rn co o
vo d cn d
»q n- ©
CN O CN
agddoQ
9JQ 9Uioaq3
(gpxn'eg)
umiuiumjy
o ®
Anouiquy
*•;;; ; rt ; ;
w fc
S 6
f- 1 rt -5
Z b£) tfl .
h d : 3 : : : .<u -m :
a (jo §q J
3 o
: | :: : :
(fj
2
r= S
2 H .
: B
s —> «
<u 'r cj a
Z O bjo UJ
U «
T 3 3 "
O 2 G O
f - w §ig H
is aa z.
M U cfl .2
<D P m
O <! <
d mh r ’ - o
O W Co -M rr-I pr\ mm
° S> a Sg 2 - I
hg J, w " •§ .g (2
R do rt -C u j C
*Z a3cvscD < n;ot^Ql'svH - o;a3b J o
c/)(/)OU(/)Q^UfeOW<


As far as South Australia is concerned, the effort to at-
tain too great a measure of industrial independence is cer-
tain to break down on financial as well as on scientific
grounds, and would involve a serious waste of time, en-
deavour, and money that could be more profitably em-
ployed in other directions. To me it seems necessary
to concentrate energy upon the attainment of an ideal
which involves the full development of all those resources
which we possess for the advancement of Australia and
of the British Empire as a whole.
The part to be played by geology in the development of
natural resources is large. The sphere of action of the
geologist is by no means limited, and it is ever expanding
as the science of geology, in the broadest sense of the
word, grows and bears fruit. To-day the geologist is
called upon to undertake such varied work and to advise
on problems of such widely different characters that he is
forced to call on specialists for assistance in very many
branches of his ordinary work. For example, palaeonto-
logical investigations and determinations are almost inva-
riably referred to one or other of a very small number of
specialists in this branch of geological science. The man
who has himself been trained as a geologist readily ap-
preciates the value of advice from another who has given
many years of close study to one particular division of
the subject. The appeal to the specialist is ever a sign
of strength—not weakness; for, when reduced to its final
terms, such an appeal is merely the expression of the de-
sire of the scientist to ascertain the truth. Nothing is to
be lost, but everything may be gained by referring to the
highest available authority who is qualified to formulate
a disinterested judgment on any question concerning the
development of natural resources. Unfortunately it is


necessary to insist on the value of disinterestedness in all
that concerns the discussion of such problems.
The impartial analysis and classification of data, and
the study of all their relationships constitute the essential
methods of science. For example, the scientific study of
the mineral veins of a region involves not only the collec-
tion of the isolated facts of occurrence, but also their re-
lationships in time, space, content, form, and topographic
development. Out of such study comes the real under-
standing of the significance of all the features exhibited
by a single vein.
The man who has been trained in scientific method, and
who is not recreant to his training, cherishes the ambi-
tion that his work shall attain the maximum of accuracy.
It matters not to him that, when he is called upon to ad-
vise with regard to matters in which many separate inte-
rests are involved, his judgment be deemed unpopular.
The methods of science seek to eliminate the personal ele-
ment, not to accentuate it; to rely on facts and not on
sentiment. Such being the attitude of the man trained in
scientific method, it is a matter for surprise that the ser-
vices of the scientist are not in greater demand in connec-
tion with all developmental operations.
The training received by a scientist in an educational
institution serves him very much as the aeroplane serves
the military map-maker. It lifts him to a position of
vantage from which he can see the details in their proper
perspective. The higher the training of the scientist or the
altitude reached by the observer, the wider the range of
vision. To press the analogy still farther; the untrained
man who is brought face to face with a new and unex-
pected development in the course of his technical opera-
tions, may be likened to a stranger set down at random


in an unknown land and faced with the problem of reach-
ing the capital without map, compass, knowledge of the
language, and means of transport He may arrive ulti-
mately at his destination through sheer pluck and physi-
cal strength. But at what expense! The trained man.
on the hand, may, under like circumstances, be
compared with an aviator provided with an aeroplane,
with maps, and with the knowledge of how to use these.
He has but to rise at will until he can recognize the rail-
way lines, the rivers, hills, and towns shown on this map.
and he can then set his course directly towards his ob-
jective. He will surely be the first to arrive at his desti-
nation.
In the course of his investigations the professional geo-
logist finds many cases in which the services of a scienti-
fically-trained and properly-qualified man could have in-
dicated the utter futility of expenditure before it was
incurred, if the advice of such a man had been sought and
taken. As instances may be quoted the many dry wells
sunk in many parts of South Australia in search of water,
on the advice of persons who claim the power of detecting
its presence or absence by means of a forked stick. Re-
liance on the divining rod has been responsible for avoid-
able waste in mining operations also. Fruitless efforts
have been made to locate the source of alluvial deposits in
places where no veins occur, through failure to recognize
the changes of geography in the evolution of river sys-
tems. Other examples are to be seen in the many smelt-
ing plants or batteries that have been erected from time
to time in the northern districts of South Australia to
treat copper-bearing or gold-bearing ores of which the
quantities available were altogether insufficient to justify
the erection of smelters or machinery. Much time and


money have been spent in prospecting for coal seams in
the Cambrian rocks of South Australia, and State aid for
this purpose has been asked for on more than one occa-
sion. The chances of discovering seams of coal in the
Cambrian strata are quite as remote as the chances of dis-
interring a railway engine among the ruins of Hercula-
neum. Search has been made for the source of boulders
in the Cambrian glacial tillite by prospecting in the vici-
nity of the places where the boulders occur, through lack
of appreciation of the fact that the ice-borne boulders may
have been carried hundreds of miles before being dropped
where they are now found.
Such .cases as these point to the necessity for a wider
recognition of the value of scientific services, if only on
the ground of economy. The futile squandering of
labour and capital on attempts to prove and develop natu-
ral resources by methods that are foredoomed to failure,
is calamitous from more than one aspect. The State
itself retains the ownership of many of these resources,
and is deeply concerned with their proper utilization.
The processes whereby mineral deposits are formed are
exceedingly slow in their operation, and they produce a
single supply of material which is not renewed when ex-
hausted. If mineral deposits are wastefully worked
there is an avoidable loss of material that can perhaps
never be recovered. Moreover, there is not an unlimi-
ted amount of capital available for the development of
mineral resources. If a proportion of the available capi-
tal is unwisely consumed, there is so much money with-
drawn from possible application to propositions that are
under expert control, and that possess reasonable pros-
pects of success. The elimination of avoidable waste —
whether of materials or of the labour and capital neces-


sary for the attempts to recover them—can only be effec-
ted by a universal acceptance of the belief that the best-
trained men must be employed on all work for which
their training specially fits them.
Looking more closely into the subject of mineral re-
sources and problems of their development, we find that
there is need of trained men at every stage. The dearth
of prospectors of the type so widely distributed a genera-
tion ago is most noticeable. Some of the older prospec-
tors are still at work, but there are few young men en-
gaged in prospecting. The old type, now rapidly be-
coming extinct, has rightly won the admiration that is
freely bestowed on men who have faced long years of
hardship and toil with fortitude and undiminished hope-
fulness. Yet it must be admitted by all who have been
brought in contact with these useful pioneers that much
of their labour might have been more wisely applied. The
geologist has the greatest respect for such men, and
would do all in his power to help them. All the assis-
tance that can be given is a small return for the services
that the prospector has rendered to the country, and,
indeed, to geological science. The discoveries of the
past, geological exploration and the progress of know-
ledge with regard to ore deposits enable the geologist to
begin the work of delimiting the areas that are specially
worthy of attention by prospectors. As this work pro-
ceeds the prospector who will take the pains to inform
himself will be spared much futile effort.
A full history of the prospecting operations carried out in
the past in South Australia would reveal the fact that cer-
tain areas have been prospected again and again by different
prospectors, each successive search being carried on
without knowledge of or without reference to the


results of work formerly carried on in the same
area. The prospecting of the future will undoub-
tedly be under scientific direction, and the State will prob-
ably bear its share of the expense. The trained man
qualified to take charge of operations must have a detailed
knowledge of general geology, of the science of ore deposits
and of cartography. He will be able to advise and direct
the operations of searching; he will be able to recognize and
test different types of ore; he will, through his special train-
ing, be unlikely to overlook the less common minerals; and
he will be able to leave a full record of the work done in
the form of a map that will be available for future refer-
ence.
When a mineral discovery has been made and mining
operations begin, it is only too commonly found that these
are entrusted during initial stages to wholly untrained men
for direction. In the event of the mine developing well,
a more highly-trained man is appointed at a later stage, and
he finds himself hampered by workings and equipment un-
suitable for filling their proper places in a larger scheme of
development. The remedy for such ill-conceived plans is
not to be sought in the appointment of a separate mining
engineer possessed of sound knowledge and wide experi-
ence to the management of every small mine. The sum
of money available for prospecting and development in the
initial stages of mining is seldom large. But much of the
money available will be more wisely spent if the directors
of companies and syndicates were to ask the advice of a
consulting engineer of high standing in his profession. The
Department of Mines in South Australia undertakes much
of the work that is elsewhere carried out by the consulting
mining engineer and metallurgist.
Larger mines are usually in charge of well-trained mining


.engineers for the simple and sufficient reason that it is
found economically sound to employ the services of such
men.
Apart from the actual search for minerals and the ex-
ploitation of mineral deposits there are, connected with the
proper understanding and development of natural re-
sources, other indispensable activities which demand the
services of trained scientists in the employ of the State.
The work of “stock-taking” of the mineral resources is
an important function of the Department of Mines, and is
in a large rpeasure entrusted to the geologists, constituting
in fact a considerable proportion of their work. An im-
mense amount of this work remains to be carried out in this
State, and it is essential that it be entrusted to the Geologi-
cal Survey to accomplish for the reasons that:
(1) Most mineral occurrences are due to the operation
of geological processes that have been in opera-
tion over considerable areas;
(2) Many mineral deposits—such as those of salt and
gypsum —are interrelated, and cannot be pro-
fitably studied separately.
(3) The guidance of future prospecting operations
must be based on the broad geological study of
known occurrences.
Outside the ranks of geologists there are few who attach
sufficient importance to the absolute necessity for depend-
ence on a sound basis of geological knowledge for all such
work. The foundations of all future work in South Aus-
tralia were laid down by Mr. H. Y. L. Brown in his geo-
logical maps of the State, and in the other records of his
labours which extended over 29 years.
Many problems of great importance to the whole com-
munity call for discussion from the geological aspect. Some


such problems are those connected with the extension of
the existing railway system: for instance, the problem of
the selection of the route of the Northern Transcontinental
line. Other most important questions are those connected
with the establishment of reservoirs for which sound sites
are essential; with the search for underground water, as,
for example, in the vicinity of Adelaide during the disast-
rous drought of 1914-15; with the drainage of surface
water into porous rocks with the object of withdrawing it
permanently from flooded land, as at Dismal Swamp; and
with the location of the best available stone for the con-
struction of the roads of the State.
Moreover, legislation designed to control the utilization
of natural resources, in respect of both minerals and sub-
terranean water, should be framed in the light of the geo-
logical knowledge with regard to their occurrence, charac-
ter, and distribution.
Inasmuch as such problems do already occupy much of
the attention and time of the State geologists, there is no
need for apologies to be offered for what is left undone.
The opportunity for a considerable extension of such work
exists; and the demands of the community for investiga-
tions of this character are always more numerous than can
be satisfied. As far as can be arranged, preference is
given to the work which is considered to be of the greatest
ultimate benefit to the State, but these considerations are
necessarily subordinated to immediate demands in very
many cases. A better adjustment of the work to the re-
quirements of the community will be possible when the
people themselves have a fuller appreciation of the value
of the work carried out in their interests, and when they
demand the maintenance of a staff sufficient to cope with
the work. The methods of work are capable of modifica-


tion within wide limits, and in actual practice are very
largely governed by the numerical strength of the geologi-
cal staff, by the objects of the particular investigations that
are undertaken, and by the state of development in the
region under examination. From this condensed state-
ment it should be apparent that there are almost unlimited
opportunities for useful geological work to be carried out
in South Australia in the interests of the community.
It is proposed now to turn to the investigation of the part
played by geology in the educational system of the State,
and of the means whereby the University can best foster
the advancement of the science of geology with a view to
the wider application of the knowledge of this branch of
science to the development of natural resources. If agree-
ment can be reached with respect to the essential aims of
teaching this branch of science in a University, and if, by
a review of the practice followed in many Universities, it
is found possible to arrive at the definition of the proper
scope of academic training, we shall be in a position to con-
sider suggestions in regard to expansions that may seem
desirable in South Australia.
My own personal opinion is that much the strongest
claim of geology for an important place in the University
is based simply on the educational value of the subject.
The special merits of geology lie in the fact that the methods
which it employs are to a very large degree complementary
to those of such other sciences as physics and chemistry.
The experimental method is inapplicable to many of the
facts and principles of geology; but the faculties of obser-
vation are not more properly trained by any other science,
nor is the properly controlled use of the imagination equally
well fostered by other studies. Professor R. A. Daly has
stated the matter succinctly in the words:—“Not only is


geology now characterized by rigorous thought; by its
nature as a science involving long excursions into space—
inaccessible places —and time —epochs long passed —geology
is peculiarly fitted to stimulate the regulated imagination, a
process at the core of the highest education.” The geolo-
gist is ever trying to construct an accurate mental image,
a thought model, of the portions of the earth which he has
under consideration.
The second reason for the teaching of geology in a Uni-
versity lies in the fact that it must ever constitute an essen-
tial portion of the curricula mapped out for the training of
professional men—agriculturalists, foresters, civil and min-
ing engineers, and surveyors. The particular branches of
the subject to which most importance is to be attached in
these several courses are different, but it is essential that the
fundamental outlines of the subject should be taught before
specialization along more restricted lines is commenced.
Moreover, thirdly, geology is the major—but not the sole
—subject to which the professional geologist must devote
himself during his course of training. Here, too, speciali-
zation is almost necessarily introduced, and most universi-
ties offer some range of subdivisions of the subject which
aim at training geologists specially equipped to undertake
investigations in petrology, palaeontology, the study of ore
deposits and economic problems generally, geography, vul-
canism, and seismology.
The relative importance of the reasons for the teaching
of geology in a university seems to me to follow the above--
mentioned order of presentation.
Geology in its higher branches can be taught only at a
university or at an institution of equal standing. It is a
branch of science that is thoroughly well established on the
trunk of knowledge. It is not a separate and independent


organism. Nor does the professional geologist derive sr
port from one branch separate and distinct from that which
the universities describe and dissect. This point needs to
be emphasized for the reason that many students appear to
be possessed of a curious idea that the geology taught in
university courses is in some ill-defined respects different
from the geology on which the professional geologist relies
in his ordinary work. The subject is one and the same,
but the lecturer’s task is to teach it, while the professional
geologist’s task is to apply to the problem under considera-
tion all that geological science has to offer. The difference
referred to is merely that which exists between exposition
and application, but. the science is the same. Huxley said
that applied science was no more than the application of
pure science to particular problems. The professional geo-
logist may not include in his written reports a full state-
ment of the reasoning employed to arrive at certain conclu-
sions, but these conclusions are nevertheless based on a
careful consideration of the geological features presented
by the case under review, and on a reasoned study of the
actual and probable influence of these features on the econo-
mic problem on which he is-called upon to advise.
The study of the geological courses set forth in the calen-
dar of the University of Adelaide, and the comparison of
these with the corresponding syllabi of other universities,
will, of course, result in the drawing of different inferences
by different persons—according to their opinions, training,
and conception of the proper scope of the subject. To me
it appears that the variety of courses offered to students is
large in proportion to the numerical strength of the staff
and to the number of students that attend the senior classes.
It therefore appears probable that, as numbers increase, the
opportunities for research work by the staff will diminish.


The accomplishment in research by members of the staff
has been indeed, remarkable, and the State owes a great
debt of gratitude to Professor Tate, Mr. Howchin, Dr
W oolnough, and Sir Douglas Mawson for the work pub-
lished over their names. Any geologist is ready at all
times to acknowledge this debt, and to bear witness to the
fundamental value of their work in the service of the State.
As far as may be judged by examining the syllabi in
geology arranged by universities in Great Britain and Ame-
rica, it would seem that a greater proportion of time is
allotted to field study there than in South Australia. This
feature is doubtless due largely to the fact that each lec-
turer in Adelaide is responsible for the teaching of several
branches of the subject, and that he cannot at the same time
conduct field classes for one group of students and give lec-
tures or superintend laboratory work for other groups.
Still more noticeable are the provisions for the encour-
agement of study by more mature students in the Ameri-
can universities. The inducements thus offered, coupled
with the important factor that the American student appears
more ready than the Australian to make a strong effort to
secure the highest possible, education, have resulted in the
graduation from the geological schools of a number of men
who are exerting a notable influence in the life and thought
of the nation. All professional geologists look back with
regret upon the time when it became necessary for them to
leave the university. Another year’s work would have
made such a difference to them! Nor are the organiza-
tions which employ geologists any less strongly imbued with
a sense of the value of post-graduate work. In fact, some
of the larger Geological Surveys make provision for al-
lowing the younger geologists to continue their studies after
they have already entered upon their professional careers.


But the feature of the British and American universities
that seems to me to offer the most marked contrast to the
universities of Australia in respect of the teaching- of geo-
logy is the place that is given to a branch of the subject that
has the widest human interest—geography. In some
extra-Australian universities geography is treated as a
branch of geology; in others, it is relegated to a separate
department. In one British university, that of Liverpool,
geography is taught, although no provision is made for the
teaching of geology. Any tendency to dissociate geography
from geology is, in my opinion, to be deprecated for the rea-
son that the two branches of study have so much in common.
In Adelaide geographical lectures are limited to the teach-
ing of commercial geography as part of the commerce
course and of physiography, which is the only other branch
of the subject taught as portion of a curriculum.
Very intimately connected with such comparisons be-
tween the contents of geological courses in various univer-
sities, and especially in regard to advanced coures, are the
actual and potential demands for geological teaching. It
does not appear that the actual demand in Australia is great
at the present time. The staffs maintained on the Geolo-
gical Surveys of the Australian States are very small in
proportion to the extent of their territories, and the staff in
South Australia is small in comparison with those of other
States.
Most geologists who join the staff of an Australian State
Geological Survey remain members of that staff through-
out the duration of their working lives. Their value to
the State Surveys is greater as their familiarity with the
territory in which they work increases, and there is no rea-
son for the State to complain of the lack of temptations
that might draw men from the Civil Service into private


employment. But the fact remains that, unless the staffs
maintained by the State Surveys are very largely increased,
there are few opportunities for highly-trained geologists to
find the kind of employment for which they are specially
fitted. In this respect American Universities are much
more favourably situated; as there is not only a general ap-
preciation of first-class geological work, but also an active
demand for well-trained men on the part of the State and
Federal Surveys, and of private employers as well.
I firmly believe that there is a large potential demand for
geologists in Australia, and that this demand will become
actual as soon as Australians gain a real appreciation of the
value of scientific work. The brief statement that has
been given above, to indicate some of the problems towards
the solution of which geological investigations are necessary,
may serve to convince a select few of the necessity for a
greater measure of reliance upon expert knowledge. But
it does not appear to me that any such statement really
reaches the great majority of the community. It seems
that the right attitude of mind towards scientific investiga-
tion must be created before the community can be con-
vinced of the necessity for the more complete application
of science to problems of development. This is a funda-
mental educational problem, the solution of which will not
be accomplished, in all probability, by any single expedient.
I would, however, offer for consideration a suggestion that
appears to me to contain great possibilities.
Briefly stated, this suggestion is for the establishment of
a school of geography within the University of Adelaide,
and for the incorporation of the subject of geography in the
curricula of all courses leading towards degrees. If this
suggestion proves worthy of adoption and an arrangement
can be made with the Department of Education for the uni-


versity training of school teachers in the principles, methods
and practice of the higher branches of modern geography,
an organized training in scientific method from the very bot-
tom of the educational system to the top can be established.
The study of geography is not entirely neglected at the pre-
sent time; but there is no doubt but that it is capable of very
considerable development, particularly in respect of the in-
terpretation of Australian data and in the study of advanced
problems by mature students.
A very considerable amount of authoritative information
with regard to natural resources of all kinds exists in the
form of reports, graphs, and maps scattered through the
Australian departmental and scientific publications. The
scope of the geographical work ready and waiting for sys-
tematic investigation is almost unlimited. The records of
the Commonwealth and the State Statistical Departments,
the publications of the Federal Meteorological Bureau, the
proceedings of the Royal Societies, and the reports of the
State Departments of Agriculture, Chemistry, Forestry,
Lands, Mines, and Public Works are full of data destined
to form the basis of geographical research. While these
data rest unutilized they are not fulfilling their proper func-
tions, and the community is not in a position to realize in
full the real facts underlying its corporate life, the sources
of its wealth, their relative importance and interdepen-
dence, the possibilities of extending spheres of production
to their legitimate limits, the potentialities of the applica-
tion of the experience of other countries, and the need for
measures of conservation.
The scope of modern geography is very broad, since it
may be defined as the study of the relationships between
the earth and organic life—especially human life. The
syllabi of the university courses in geography in most cases


include lectures grouped under tihe following subdivisions
of the subject: —Physical geography, oceanography, clima-
tology, and meteorology, cartography, regional geography,
industrial and commercial geography, biological geography,
anthropogeography, and the conservation of natural re-
sources.
The establishment of a geographical school in the Uni-
versity of Adelaide would certainly result in the detailed
study of Australian problems, and by these means afford a
better knowledge of the potentialities of South Australia.
The full interpretation of the relationships between produc-
tivity and the environmental influences of geology, soil, cli-
mate, and relief is not to be accomplished in a short period,
but it is work upon which a commencement should be
made at once.
There is no branch of human stuidy and enquiry which, to
such a marked degree as geograplky, correlates the data of
different investigators who are seeking to establish the re-
lationships between different kinds of facts. Geography
can provide much of the corrective influence needed to
counteract the divergent tendencies of other more specia-
lized branches of science.
The main theme of this argument is that, in my opinion,
the greatest service that can be rendered by the University
of Adelaide in the way of promoting scientific development
will be effected through an organized system of education
in the method of science, beginning with the primary edu-
cation of children. It is a scheme that may be confide
placed before a British community. It is suggested not
merely to establish a class of mem having special qualifica-
tions which fit them to dictate proper methods of procedure
for adoption by those not so qualified. Rather it is pro-
posed to enable, if possible, all members of the community


to appreciate the value of facts and of research; and for
this reason the medium chosen is a subject of fundamental
interest and value and one which is indispensable in the
earliest stages of education.
The special educational value that may be attributed to
geography lies in the fact that it brings together and
examines side by side the results obtained by scientific re-
search and the experience won by those who are engaged
upon the work of the world. On the one hand the chemist,
physicist, geologist, meteorologist, botanist, zoologist, phy-
siologist, and anthropologist, bring their contributions of
learning; and on the other hand the miner, metallurgist,
engineer, surveyor, forester, agriculturalist, pastoralist,
manufacturer, and merchant offer their empirical data.
The geographer receives and uses all such materials, and by
studying their relationships makes his own great contribu-
tion to education and to progress.
It seems that the establishment of a school of geography
will achieve much towards the accomplishment of the pur-
pose of a university, if we may accept the definition of the
function of a university enunciated by Charles Badham
“To give to civil society its dignity and its permanence.”
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




Wholly set up and printed in Australia
tit the House of
G. HASSELL & SON, ADELAIDE
.' i v * ■
' <Vf , B * I , , / r 1 y ‘ j
