

FOURTH LECTURE
LECTURES ON THE JESUITS
Delivered in St. Peter’s Schoolroom, Sydney, May 19 th, 1879,
[Price, Threepence. ]
By Bev. Canon Moreton.
TUB ACCUSATIONS OP CERTAIN POPES AND OTHER
DISTINGUISHED ROMAN CATHOLICS AGAINST THE
ORDER OF JESUITS.
fUAT Protestants should accuse the Jesuits of disturbing
the peace ot countries, of intrigue, and of trying to crush
the liberties of people is no cause for wonder. Charges
have been laid against them of a more severe nature by some of
the most distinguished members of the Roman Catholic Church.
This I shall attempt to prove in the present lecture. Let us
suppose the trial taking place in a Court of Justice, the prisoner
at the bar is the Order of the Jesuits, the witnesses against them
are members of the Church of Rome; you are the jury, I am
acting the part of barrister for the prosecution, and if any
gentleman thinks proper, at the close, to call my statements in
question, we will consider him in charge of a brief for the
defence,
George Bronswell was Archbishop of Dublin, in the year 1558.
“ What is your Grace’s testimony ?” “ There is a fraternity
which has lately arisen called the Jesuits, who will seduce many,
who, acting the part of the Scribes and Pharisees, will strive to*
overturn the truth * * God will, in the end, cut oft’ this
Society, even by those who have most supported it and employed
it * * they, the Jesuits, will become odious to all nations.”
Here is a testimony and a prophecy of a Roman Catholic Arch-
bishop, only eighteen years after the foundation of the Order.
Next, we call into Court, Abbe Martial Marcet de la Roche
Arnauld, an accomplished Frenchman, of good family, and a
strict Roman Catholic. This gentleman entered the Order, ho
was received with marks of esteem by some of its leading
members. Now let him speak, “At the horrible aspect of
these pertinacious and daring men (the recollection still makes


me shudder), I averted my eyes through terror, and on seeing
the sanctuary of peace, sullied with the horrors of crime and
imposture, I trembled at the thought of being within its walls.
I resolved to escape as soon as I could without danger, and
when I crossed the cursed threshold, I exclaimed, ‘ Just Heaven !
Can any honest man live among them ?’ ” I take one more sentence
from this distinguished man. “Do you wish to excite troubles,
to provoke revolutions, to produce the total ruin of your
country? Call in the Jesuits!” We have not called in the
Jesuits. Has the Eoman Catholic Archbishop? If the Abbe
could come back to life he would tell us to be on our guard, to
keep clear of their “ cursed threshold,” for they will “ ruin our
country,”
Let us hear the testimony of the University of Paris, 1613, at
that time strictly a Roman Catholic Institution. The Jesuits
had claimed to be admitted to the degree of M A., which claim
the University repudiated, and declared themselves ready to
prove that there is no article in religion which they have
not corrupted —if the teaching and practices of the Jesuits were
to become general, “ deserts and forests would be preferable to
cities ; and society with wild beasts, who have only'their natural
arms, would be better than with men, who in addition to the
violence of their passions, would be instructed by the doctrine of
devils, and dissimulate, and feign, and counterfeit the charac-
ters of intimate friends, in order to destroy others with greater
impunity.” The members of the University, still speaking of
the evil teaching and practices of the Jesuits say, “They would
pass their monstrous opinions as the religion of Christianity ”It
is needless to add that the Jesuits were not allowed to graduate.
To admit the name of a Jesuit on the roll of the University
would have been considered a blot on that roll. The University
authorities “quoted no fewer than thirty Jesuit fathers who had
written against the authority of kings and magistrates.”
We have consulted an Archbishop, an Abbe, the University of
Paris, and surely the witnesses agree in condemning the
prisoners at the bar. But more evidence is required before
“ the case goes to the jury.” We appeal to the civil authorities,
and call Sully, Governor of Poictiers. We listen to his testimony.
“ Ever since the town of Poictiers had been obliged to allow the
establishment of the Jesuits, I have received nothing but com-
plaints, by word and by letter, against those fathers, from the
Bishop, the Lieutenant-General, and the principal inhabitants,
either separately or collectively. * * The inhabitants had put
them in possession of a college, and had expended in their
favour very considerable sums of money, but in the two years
they had been among them, and been charged with the greatest
part of the youth of the town it could not be seen that they had
produced any ellect.” .
Sally’s evidence amounted to this, the good people of Poic-
tkrs had given the Jesuits considerable sums of money, build


ings, and placed the greater part of the youth of the town under
their instruction, and the only results were “ the Governor
received nothing but complaints from the Bishop and others!”
Will the people of Sydney give their money for similar results?
If so, may they do it with their eyes wide open. Let us look
the evil in the face, and then, like slaves, quietly bow our neck
to the yoke which the Jesuit would rivet upon it, wear it and
hand down the loathsome load to our children!
In a certain Book, which it is presumed is ot no real
authority among the Jesuits, we read of one who was con-
demned out of his own mouth. The sentence of the future
Judge on that ruined soul, in the first century, may not inappro-
priately be applied to the Jesuits of France in the seventeenth
century. Matthew Moya, a Spanish Jesuit, confessor to the
Queen Mother of Spain, published a book, by the permission of
his Superiors, in defence of the moral opinions of the Order.
Marais, a Roman Catholic divine, declared, before the University
of Paris, in 1664, “ That it may be considered the common sewer
of all the filth and impiety of which the human mind is capable.”
The Faculty of Theology pronounced a censure upon it on
February 3rd, 1665, and declared that their respect for decency
prevented them from noticing the abominations which it con-
tained on the subject of chastity. The advocates of Louis XIV.
declared to him that it abounded in propositions fit only to
pervert all Christian morals. Methinks if one half the charges
could be proved against the most hardened criminal that the
Church of Rome has witnessed against the Order of Jesuits,
his soul would sink under the weight, and almost crave that
justice should be satisfied in inflicting vengeance upon him !
But stop —all the “case” has not yet been heard for the
prosecution.
Europe was too narrow a sphere for the Jesuit to cap-
tivate, capture and enslave. The great heathen world lay
temptingly spread out before him. “ All these will I give thee,”
said their prince, “if thou wilt fall down and worship me.” If
only thou wilt incorporate my religion with thine, I will use my
influence with them to become thy converts! Jesus spurned the
tempter from Him. Sixteen hundred years after the same tempting
offer was made to the “ Order of Jesus," and was gratefully
accepted! We call the doings of the Jesuits in the great
empires of India and China as our next witness against them.
Xo, not their doings, but the testimony of “certain distinguished
Roman Catholics ” on those doings.
Francis Xavier, the first Jesuit Missionary, reached India in
1542, and if only he had possessed a pure Evangelical creed, with
spiritual-mindedness, one would delight to connect his name
with that of the sainted Henry Martyn. I do not hesitate to
say, that, both when I lived in the East, and since, I have seen
much in the character of Francis Xavier to admire, and may
well have been ashamed of my own indolence when contrasted


with his zeal. But in the lonely Asiatic grave of Xavier my
admiration of Jesuit Missions lies buried.
Francis Nobili, a leading Jesuit Missionary, reached India in
1606. “He was surprised to see how small the progress was that
missions had made.” He seems to have attributed the cause to
the two-fold reason —that the former missionaries had laboured
chiefly among the lower class, and that they had mixed too much
of Christianity in their system ! “He therefore resolved,” says
Nicnlini, “to play the part of a Hindoo and a Brahmin.” He
submitted to their penances and observances. He and other
Jesuit Missionaries took great care to conceal from the natives
that they were foreigners, and were equally careful not to shock
the prejudices of Brahmins, by ministering to people of low or no
caste. “To the poor the Grospel is preached,” but this formed no
part of Jesuit theology in India in the seventeenth century. It
is true that by this stroke of worldly policy many Hindoos swelled
the ranks of the Order. In Mysore alone 60,000 had been
baptized. What a harvest! “ When Tippoo ordered them to
become Mahometans, ‘ Not one,' says Abbe Dubois—mark ! not a
Protestant Missionary; no, a Roman Catholic—‘not a single
individual among so many thousands had courage to confess his
faith under this trying circumstance and become a martyr to his
religion. The whole apostatized en masse, and without resistance
or protestation.’ ” The form of Christianity which the Jesuit
Fathers had taught them was so much mixed with heathenism
that the Hindoo must have been puzzled to see in what their
conversion consisted; rather they must have thought that they
had converted the Jesuit Fathers. Nicolini speaks of the Jesuits
as “ nourishing them ” —the heathen—“in those idolatrous and
diabolical superstitions.” Cretineau, the Jesuit historian, men-
tions the customs of some of these Missionaries. “ Disguising the
name of the Cross“ omitting certain ceremonies in baptism ;”
“ giving heathen names ;” “ marrying children at seven years of
age;” “ allowing married women to wear the Toly —the symbol of
heathenism ;” avoiding assisting the Pariahs in their illness—
refusing them the sacraments of confession and communion ;”
“ resorting to revolting rites.” Nicolini mentions one, and adds
that decency forbids the mention of others. For eight years,
therefore, they went on from one abomination to another, till the
scandal became so great, so universal, that the Roman See was
again moved to interfere. Accordingly Clement XI. delegated
Charles Maitland de Tournon, Patriarch of Antioch, with unlimited
authority, to investigate into and settle the matter. He reached
India on 6th November, 1703, when he commenced his investiga-
tions, upon which he reported June 23rd, 1704. His report may
be seen in Nicolini, pp. 114—117. It forbids the manner of
baptizing; commands that the Missionaries shall not permit the
idolatrous ceremonies to take place in marriages of Christians ;
the Missionaries must seek out and minister to the most despised
classes; Christians must not cake part in heathen festivals and


sacrifices ; heathen ablutions and superstitious bathings were
prohibited on all Christians, and more especially on preachers of
the Gospel [the italics are mine] ; false and impious heathen
penances are prohibited from being applied to those who have
received the sacred unction of chrism.” From what the Patriarch-
legate prohibited, it may be clearly seen what was the nature of
that Christianity which the disciples of Loyola introduced into
India. And these Fathers showed that they meant to stand by
their work. It was true that Clement XI. had sent his legate,
and that the legate had investigated and condemed the heathenism
practiced in the name of Christianity. But who ever saw such
a phenomenon as a Jesuit repenting and amending his ways?
It is certain that the Jesuit of India betrayed no such weakness.
At any rate the lusty declaration of the undersigned may be put
in as evidence against such a charge : —“ I, John Yenant Bouchet,
Priest of the Society of Jesus, Superior of the Carnatic Mission,
do testify and swear, on my faith as a priest, that the observance
of the rites, as set forth in the preceding answers ” [the Jesuits
had stirred up their converts to request the continuance of the
heathenish rites] “is of the greatest necessity to these missions,
as well for their preservation as for the conversion of the heathen.
Further, it appears to me that the introduction of any other usage,
contrary to these, would be attended with evident danger to the
salvation of the souls of the neophytes. Thus I answer the reverend
Father Superior General. * * * Signed, &c , 3rd November,
1706.” Sum up this piece of evidence, and you will see how
matters present themselves. Jesuit Missionaries, in order to carry
out their ends, disguise the very slender modicum of Christianity
which they possess under a veil of heathenism, the Pope hears it,
sends a legate to investigate the report; the legate, after due
investigation, condemns the practices, and requests their disconti-
nuance ; the Fathers stir up the people to request their continu-
ance, and ‘‘John Tenant Boucher, upon his oath as a [Jesuit]
priest,” declares that if the said heathenish practices were altered
“ the salvation of the neophytes would be in danger!”
The Patriarch, having finished his legatine work in India, pro-
ceeded on the same Mission to China, where we will leave him for a
moment to make his investigations, while we take a glance at
Jesuit matters which obtained in the empire before his time.
They had been the pioneer Missionaries among the Chinese, and
found the Confucian mind all ready for their master touch. It
mattered little, so it seemed, that the Chinese should become
Christians —they must swell the ranks of the disciples of Loyola.
And, true to themselves, the end was made to justify the means :
the end, discipleship —the means, the continuance in heathenism.
Still, I should bo dishonest were I to attempt to conceal the fact
that the early Jesuit Missionaries, John Adam Schale and others,
taught the Chinese some useful scientific knowledge. The Jesuits
were followed by Franciscan and Dominican Missionaries, who
were not a little astounded as they beheld the form of Christianity


which had been introduced to the heathen by their brethren of
the Order of Jesus Rumours of their evil deeds had reached
Rome but Rome remained silent. In the year 1643 a deputation
waited upon Pope Urban V T III,, to lay before his Holiness “ some
ill-sounding propositions” from the Chinese Mission. The Pope’s
sickness had reduced him to a state of great feebleness. Fie
raised himself erect, strucK the arm of his chair twice, and cried,
“ Heresy ! heresy ! This affair must be turned over to the
Inquisition !”
Seventeen questions were sent by the Propaganda to the In-
quisition for the decision of that venerable tribunal. From the
nature of these questions we can form a tolerably clear idea of
the kind of Christianity which the Jesuits had taught in China.
A few of the number will answer our purpose. “Itis a general
custom in China, at certain seasons of the year, to collect contri-
butions for sacrifices to demons and to idols, and defray the cost
of idolatrous feasts.” “ May Christians and their ministers con-
tribute for these uses, in order to avoid tumults between Chris-
tians and Pagans”? “Yes, they may if they do not mean to
consent to idolatrous acts”! “May Chinese Christians offer
sacrifices to Ching Hoang, a local god” ? “ The Inquisitors think
not.’’ “ May Chinese Christians offer sacrifice to Confucius
“ No, this ought not to be admitted under any pretext whatever.”
<’ May Christians make offerings of meat, and caudles to
the souls of their ancestors” ? “ Certainly not.”
From the ordeal, in the Roman Inquisition, set in motion by Urban
YIIL, we turn to the legate who had just landed on the shores of
cured for him an audience of the Emperor. At the same time they
secretly stirred up the Emperor against him, and obtained his
banishment from the Empire ! Then they wrote to him a letter
full of condolence and tears. How much like the tears of a
crocodile ! And so the poor Patriarch evidently felt. Read a
part of liis spirited reply “ Night and day I shed tears before
God, not less for the distressed state of the Mission than on
account of those who are the cause of its affliction; Jor, if I knew
not the cause of the evil, and the authors of it, I might endure all
more cheerfully. The Holy See has condemned your _ practices ;
but much more to be detested is that unrestrained license with
which you try to bury your shame under the ruins of the
Mission; and now you betake yourselves to means that cause
horror (modo ad horrenda confugitis). ,
Before leaving the subject of the Jesuit Missions I must ask
you to listen to the witness of another whom the Roman
Catholics will respect, however much that witness may be disre-
garded by the Jesuits.
In the year 1741 Pope Benedict XIY. published a bull against
them, in which he calls them “Disobedient, contumacious,
crafty, and reprobate men” (inobedientes, contumaces, captiosi,
et perditi homines). Look at the evidence brought against this


Order of Jesus! Two popes condemn it—one with “ heresy,” and
and the other as being “ reprobate men,” the Patriarch con-
demns them, and the Homan Inquisition, so far as that gloomy
body could condemn anything bad, condemn them also.
While these events were taking place with regard to the
Brotherhood in Asia, the members of the same Order were not
asleep in Europe. The kings of France and Spain knew it, and
poor Clement the XIV. soon had cause to know it also. To his
short and melancholy history, as Pope, we must now turn our
attention. So many and great had been the intrigues and crimes
of the Jesuits in the Roman Catholic states of Europe that little
less than a universal wail besieged the throne of the Pontiff to
interpose for the general peace of society. Clement XIII. had been
perplexed; in heart he was not unfavourable to the Order, but to
the demands of the Catholic princes and statesmen he dare not
turn a deaf ear. He listened to the just complaints of a long
enduring Europe, and no sooner did he listen than he died!
The College of Cardinals felt that their task was one of no easy
nature, as it was obvious that the contest was not so much as to
who should fill the vacant throne. The real question was, should
the Jesuits still rule, or should their Order be suppressed. The
kings of Spain and France were determined on the latter. After
months of fruitless efforts, on the part of the Sacred College,
Cardinal Ganganelli was raised to the Popedom as Clement
XIV. Humour says that before his elevation he had signified
his wish to suppress the Jesuits. But of this there is much
doubt. He had risen from a humble rank in life —was studious,
amiable, cheerful—“ and proved one of the most enlightened and
well-intentioned Popes that ever ascended the pontificial chair.”
From the study of the Schoolmen he had gone to the Fathers,
and from these to the Holy Scriptures, He allowed about four
years of his pontificate to pass before he suppressed the Jesuits.
The kings of Spain and France often urged him to action. He
thought it wiser that he should fully inform himself of all the
complications of that vexed question. As time went on he had
little cause for doubt as to where the path of duty would lead
him. He told the King of Spain, in a letter, that “ the member
of the Society—the Jesuits —had merited their fall from the
restlessnes of their spirit, and the audacity of their proceedings.”
While yet delaying to strike the blow the Spanish ambassador
hinted to him that in the event of the Order being suppressed
Avignon and Benevento would be restored to the Papal See. To
whom he made the noble reply, “ Remember that a Pope
governs the Church, but does not traffic in his authority.” At
length the 23rd of July, 1773, dawned on Clement, and on that
day the brief suppressing, “ abolishing for ever the Order of the
Jesuits” was signed by him at Rome, and in affixing his signature
to it he said. “We sign our death !” Nicolini has given, in his
valuable history of the Jesuits, the gi’eater part of this Brief p.p.
387—400. I can quote only a few sentences from it. “ Accu


sations of the greatest nature, and very detrimental to the peace
and tranquility of the Christian Republic, have been continually
received against the said Order. Hence the origin of that
infinity of appeals and protests against this Society which so
many Sovereigns have laid at the foot of the throne of our prede-
cessors, Paul IV., Pius V., and Sixtus Y. * * * We have
seen, in the grief of our heart, that neither these remedies, nor
any infinity of others since employed, have produced their due
effect, or silenced the accusations and complaints against the said
Order. Our other predecessors, Urban YII, Clement IX., X., XL,
and XII., Alexander VII, and YIIL, Innocent X., XII., and XIII,
and Benedict XIY., employed, without effect, all their efforts to
the same purpose. # * * Under the reign of Clement XIII.
complaints and quarrels were multiplied on every side; in some
places dangerous seditions arose, turmoils, scandals * * the
Kings of France, Spain, Portugal, and Sicily found themselves
reduced to the necessity of expelling and driving from their
kingdoms these very Companions of Jesus” (Jesuits). Then,
dwelling on these evils, the Pope proceeds to say: —“ After
mature deliberation, we do, out of our certain knowledge and the
fullness of our apostolic power, suppress and abolish the said
Companv. * * * We declare the said Society * * to be
for ever annulled and extinguished.” Clement, in signing this
Brief, as he himself predicted, signed his own death-warrant.
That the vengeance of a Jesuit does not sleep, the Pope’s altered
appearance too plainly indicated. From being strong and healthy
he soon became weak, reduced almost to a skeleton. He saw
poison and daggers wherever he went, and felt the awful dread
of assassination. See the poor old man —weak, ill, and depressed
—preparing his food with his own hands , because he has too much
cause to fear that the Jesuit is seeking effectually to kill him by slow
poison. His blood became corrupted, and the close atmosphere of
his apartments, which he feared to quit, aggravated the effect of an
unwholesome diet. His disorders increased —the mind suffered
with the body. He often ran from one place to another as if
pursued, asking for mercy ! “ Compulsus feci,” “ Compulsus
feci,” I have been compelled ! What, compelled to eat poison ?
“ Have mercy on me !” Whom does he ask for mercy ? I think
Nicoliui is not far in the wrong. He considers that the poor
aged Pope was begging of mercy from those bad men, who were
slowly taking his life. But what did they know of mercy ! The
only mercy they could show was to end his days. Shortly before
his death he became tranquil, then the fatal symptoms again set
in, and on the 22nd of September, Clement XIY, who had dared
to suppress the Order of the Jesuits, breathed his last. May
we not say a martyr to his duty, and a witness against the
Jesuits ! “ Several days before his death his bones were withered
like a tree, struck at the roots, dies away, * * Scientific men,
who were called in to embalm his body, found the features livid,
the lips black, the limbs emaciated and covered with violet spots,


the heart was much diminished. The sight of the Pope’s dead
body was quite enough to satisfy every one as to the sort of
death he had died.”
I have now placed before you the testimony of Priests, States-
men, Kings, and Popes against the Jesuits—all of them Roman
Catholics —and I think that no Protestants could speak against
them in stronger terms. They knew what the Jesuits are, and
let us be wise and learn from them, or we may be wise when it is
too late.
I may perhaps consider that I have done all I undertook-in this
lecture, namely, to show you how certain Popes and other distin-
guished members of the Church of Rome have condemned the
Jesuits. You may, however, ask me as to the state of the Jesuits
at the present time. How, for instance, can it be that the Order
was suppressed by Pope Clement XIY. in the year 1773, and yet
now we find Jesuits teaching under the authority of an Archbishop
who holds his authority from a successor of Clement? The
answer is simple and easy. Pius VII. re-established the Order in
1814. It, of course, forms no part of my duty to attempt to
reconcile the opposite conduct of two infallible Popes.
But it does form a part of my duty to cease this lecture—the
last of the course—with a word of warning. In the present day
there is no fear of a Pope doing as did Clement XIY. The Jesuits
have become the ruling spirits in the Church of Rome. The
Church must bow to them, and not they to the Church. Here
even the Pope forms no exception. When Pius IX. ascended the
Papal throne, all Europe regarded him as a liberal man, except
the Jesuits, who viewed him as “a semi-heretic, and offered up
public prayers for his conversion.”* He lived long enough, under
Jesuit tutorship, to call and preside at the Vatican Council*
The present Pope has not, at present, shewn any sympathy
with the Jesuits, rather circumstances seem to indicate that be
views them with suspicion. Time will show into what his
relationship with them will develop. In the mean time, the
prediction may be ventured that they will mould him to their
will, as they did Pius IX., or they will despatch him as they did
Clement XIV. If the statement which the Protestant Standard,
of last week, gave on the authority of the Pall Mall Gazette, be
correct, Leo XIII. may well ponder over the last days of
Clement.
“A report was current in Paris, some days ago, of the
attempted poisoning of the Pope by Jesuits. * * On his
Holiness being informed of the story, he is said to have called
his private Chamberlain, and said ‘Thank the visitors and
announce also in the ante-chamber that I am feeling quite well,
and that the poisoning is only for the present a pious desire.’ ”
“ Speaking quietly of the matter, the Pope observed, ‘ The
Jesuits are too wise. Were they to attempt and succeed they
# Desanctis, p. 139.


know that the crime must be traced home to them, and that my
successor would pay my debts to them.’ ” The Jesuits clamour
for more power, and the Pope says, “ Let friars act the friar, and
not meddle with Mundane affairs.” Their whole history shows
that they will not leave “ Mundane affairs ” alone.
Nothing short of the most absolute power will ever satisfy
those restless ambitious men.
I should be sorry to say One word which could savor of
bigotry or lead to religious strife. I wish to live in peace. But
peace must not be purchased at the expense of truth, of liberty,
and of national rights.
I consider that even our Roman Catholic fellow-citizens should
be on their guard against the Jesuit. If not they will assuredly
draw them into mischief, and cause them to suffer in the public
estimation. The Jesuit will plot, his plots will be discovered,
the Protestant spirit of this community will be aroused, and the
Roman Catholic will suffer. More than seventy times have the
Jesuits been expelled from different nations. Cardinal Pole
would not have them in England, as I have shown in a former
lecture. Oh! that the Roman Catholics in Sydney would follow
his example! .
Our course, as Protestants, is clear. Let us be more united,
and while we wish to live in peace with all men, never lose sight
of our foe, the Jesuit. Watch him at the ballot-box, in the
Government offices, in the School, in the Parliament. Let us be
bold, and uncompromising for all our civil and religious rights.
May we have more zeal for our religion, more given to
the reading of our Bibles, more prayerful, more active in doing
good, more Christ-like!
F. White, Printer, 166, Pitt Street, Sydney.


