





v imi*s
ixcvimi:
SCEPTICISM, CREDULITY & FAITH
DELIVERED BY THE
REV. W, L. REES,
AT THE
TOWN HALL,
BEECHWOBTH,
On TUESDAY, 23rd JUNE, 1863.
BEECHWORTH :
B. WARREN, PRINTER, “ADVERTISER” OPPICB,
EOBD STREET.




f? ' / /
INTRODUCTION.
Ik thas bringing the following Lecture more
prominently before the public, I am actuated
by a desire to advance the real interests of
# th lv Very hi K hl y «ba!l Ibe pleased, if,
from the nature and the consequences of
Scepticism, Credulity, and Faith, as I have
here attempted to display them, any doubting
spirit be helped to confidence and peace, or u
one who now does not think of these matters,
be prompted to enquire into the mysteries of
Philosophy and Revelation.
W» Li REES.
Deechworth,


♦
\.Apy#)vao&TAi
: • ' ;• 1 '• • I 'i' * ■■
h-.U xa s 9 I a-ii •: Tt* sia«w
'if 3,' i > >■ if ■ Vl > •>'
-■s . I '
:• !■- )■.■].-- < ■ ' •
aI -• ’ : v: ■‘J ■-( -Uqe *
g;rf J;.f i., ?.i .•. :.i \'■ >.i ■ > ■ “ 4
KM I f ' I*
,’t »i;.. ; . ■ .• 'o ■ •• ■ ::
J© .-or.ejsvoi sji oii ■ si'via* et I•».*•{<*■ ’ = > _
.eoit* bu 3
■jsaaa , i /i?
* ; 45 £


afta-it .! * Gs.a £
A LECTURE, &c.
Mr Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen,
’ s scarcely possible for me to commence
the subject, which I have to bring this even-
ing before a Beechworth audience, in a better
manner than by quoting what suggests itself
to me as the ablest and truest passage in Mr
Bowmans lecture. It is as follows: ‘ln
silencing the expression of opinions distasteful
£ 0 ™? ™,/ e commit (as pcinted out by
Mr Mill) a double wrong. We deprive the
individual of the liberty we claim for our-
selves, (for no persecutor ever refused to hear
himself) and we commit robbery against the
whole race ; for if the dominant opinion be
m error and the be true, society is
deprived of the chance of exchanging error
lor truth, and if the suppressed opinion be
wrong, we lose the more vivid perception of
truth produced by its Contact with error/
And again, *To silence the free expression


of opinion, is to arrogate infallibility for our*
■elves, tor our party, our church, our sect or
class in society/ It is then in vindicition of
these noble principles that I appear before
you, and take upon myself the task cl an*
swenng as ably as I can, tbe lecture on
* Scepticism,’ lately delivered by Mr Bowman.
lam not here to argue for victory. 1 have
not taken up tbe gauntlet so boldly thrown
down by my learned friend simply from the
love of controversy. I also, am a searcher
after truth. My aim is to find and to obey
her, and if Mr Bowman can prove that he is
right and 1 am wrong, then I will cast away
the faith in which 1 have be n traimd from
childhood, and I will believe with him. Nor
do 1 at all stretch my privilege i-.in thus
publicly uttering my thoughts in this matter.
As a Minister of the Christian Religion, as a
humble student of philosophy, it is at once
my duty and my pleasure to bear a part,
however insignificant, in the educaion of the
world. We leave to others the management
of commerce, the evolutions of armies, and
the government of kingdoms, but in all ques-
tions relating to mental and religious science,
we claim, if not a superior, at any rate, an
equal knowledge; and the right to defend oar
ideas of truth in all times, and against all
assailants. To vindicate true philosophy
from tbe attacks of every foe; to lift up, with
what skill we can command, the standard of
truth, and lead the nations onward and up-
ward through sin, and strife, and sorrow ;
this is a part, and a glorious part, of our
mission. We do not claim for ourselves
either infallibility or inspiration. We are as
likely to err as our fellows. But we are
seeking, as our opponents so often boaatingly
tell us they are seeking, truth amidst a world
of shadows. We stand on equal ground—no
more—no lew—and thus, while we allow


their right to dlGTer from us conssientionsly
ia opinion, we reserve the same privilege for
ourselves. And when they utter what wa
consider to be a shallow, or a sham philo-
sophy, we wi 1 expose in all its nakedness the
foundation upon which they build, and de-
clare its rottenness to the world. And here I
may be allowed to hope, that no one in this
assembly or elsewhere, will for an instant
thick that there is any personal feeling be-
tween Mr Bowman and myself. The import-
ance of the subject lifts it far, very far,
beyond the reach of our personal feelings.
We merely represent different sides in this
great question, and I trust that I shall say
nothing which could at all injure the feelings
of respect and kindliness which at present
exist between us. I was not present when
the lecture was delivered. It Is as well that
I was not, fer perhaps, carried away by the
powerful oratory, and noble enthusiasm of
the lecturer, 1 should not have been so com-
petent to criticise his production as in my
quiet s<udy. Sitting down, then, to examine
the opinions of the sceptical school, I found,
somewhat to my surprise, that there were in
this essay or lecture, several paradoses and
anomalies. The first, was the fact that it
contradicted its own reasoning. *As the
wold grows in age,’ says the lecture, *it
grows also in knowledge. The religions
creeds, the political systems, and social
organisations that satisfied the wants of its
infancy, are unable to meet the requirements
of its manhood. The human intellect as it
advances casta off, one by one, the fetters by
which it has been enthralled.’ From this it
is certainly evident that the world—at any
rate in the opinion of the sceptical school—
has gradually advanced during the lapse ox
ages to what now exists. If this ke so, what
does a following passage mean, which tells ua


* that three centuries ago such intense darky
ness, superstition, and credulity brooded over
■what ought to have been the empire of intel-
lect ; that now, we cannot understand the
mysterious enthrallment ’ In fact it is up n
the background cf this darkness that the
sceptical spirit throws out its splendors and
emits its beams. The world, we are to d,
had been gradually increasing in light
and knowledge, and yet only 300
ago it was enveloped in mid-night gloom If
it be said that tha world nad been still darker
in distant ages—all history denies it—and
even the sceptical s.hool itself, points back
to the sunny and Augustan ages of Greece
and Rome, and contrasts th“m triumphantly
with the present. I then find the following
laid down as an infallible rule;—‘‘No
proposition is certain (though of course it
may be true) so long as therb is any one who
denies it, and he remains unheard and un-
answered.’ Passing by the facts, that the
absence of denial does not prove the certainly
of any proposition—and that this principle,
carried out to its limits, would involve all
things in uncertainty ; I find that through-
out the whole lecture, there are pro-
positions treated and considered as certain-
ties, which the vast majority of thinking men
deny; and their objections will, I fancy,
prove komewhat diffic ult to remove. Viewed
in this light—judged by its own criterion,
the lecture, its arguments, and deductions,
are equally destroyed. The second charac-
teristic of the lectu e was somewhat remark-
able: It not only contradicted itself, it also
contradicted the great Irstorians, essayists,
aud philosophers, of the 19th century. This
is strikingly displayed in the treatment of
the great Puritan movement, which agitated
England in the I7ch century.- While con-
sidering this portion of his subject, the


lecturer speaks of the ‘ morose end hypocriti-
cal austerities of Puritanism.’ The period
of Puritan power, is ‘ an ege of gloomy
superstition and forbidding fanaticism,’ and
the great Rebellion is an ‘ uprising of the
ignorant and the debased.’ And so, wh le
speaking of the delirious pr fltgacyol England
during the reigns of the two last Stuart
Kints, much ot the odium is east upon the
Puritans, while the spread of freedom, and
the growing liberty of the British people,
are ascribed to other causes. Now, all this
is directly contrary to the evidence of history,
and clearly opposed by nearly all modem
writers. Macaulay. Foster, Hallam, Vaughan,
Kn'ght, Nugent, Guizot, Brougham, Carlyle,
and a whole host of writers, poets, and states-
men, have -thrown to the dogs the fabrica-
tions of Clarendon and the accusations of
Hume, and tell us, in the exact words, which
Hume himself, the very prince of sceptics,
despite hisr hatred to the Puritans, was com-
pelled to use, ‘ tee precious spark of liberty
was kindled and preserved by the Puritans
alone ; and it is to them that the English
owe the whole freedom of their constitution.’
•In the age which directly followed that
of the Puri ana’ says Carlyle, in his Lectures
on Heroes, ‘ their cause or themselves were
little likely to have justice done them.
Charles the Second and his Rooh sters, were
not the kind of men jon would set to judge
what .the worth or meaning of such men
might have been. That there could be any
faith or truth in the life of a man, w-as what
these poor Rochesters and the age they
ushered- in had forgotten. Puritanism was
hung on gibbets—like the bones"of the lead-
ing Puritans. Its work, nevertheless, went
on accomplishing itself. All true work of a
man, hang the author of it—on what gibbet
you like—must, and will accomplish itself.


We hate oar Habeas Corpus, oar free Re*
presentation of the people ; acknowledge*
ment, wide aa the world that all men are,
or else mast, shall, and will become, what we
call free men ; men with their life grounded
on reality and justice, not on tradition,
which has become unjust and a chimera I
This in part, and much besides this, Was the
work of the Puritans. And, indeed, as these
things became gradaully manifest, the cbarao*
ter of the Puritans began to clear itself.
Their memories were one after another taken
down from the gibbet ; nay, a certain portion
of them now, in these days, are as good as
canonised. Eliot, Hampden, Pym, nay,
Ludlow, Hutchinson, Vane himself are ad*
mittad to be a kind of heroes, political
Conscript Fathers, to whom in no small
degree we owe what makes us a free Eng*
land ; it would not be safe for anybody to
designate these men as wicked now.* Here
we see that Thomas Carlyle ascribes to the
Puritans, all the good, and to Charles and
his Rochesters, all the evil of that unhappy
time. Macaulay, both in his Essays and
Bistory, has paid to the memory of these
Puritans the highest eulogiums of which
language is capable ; and in his Es ay on
Milton, after sketching in sublime colors,
the Puritan charact°r, and considering the
attacks which have been made upon them
by their victorious enemies, closes thus
* Yet, when all circumstances are taken into
Consideration, we do not hesitate to pro*
couuce them a brave, a wise, an honest, and
an useful body.* It would be difficult to show
that amongst modern scholars one in twenty
holds the views concerning Puritanism, and
the Ft titans, propounded in Mr Bowman’s
lecture. The ' iron tyranny’ of the pro*
tectorate, ' the gloomy superstition, the for*
bidding tanaticism, and the morose and hypo*


critical austerities, of Puritanism ;* all
these were produced and upheld by Hampden
a- d Milton, by Wither and Banyan, by
Blake snd Fairfax, by Owen and Howe,'by
Pym and Cromwell. Beneath this s > called
‘ iron tyranny,’ our Patters and our country
sprang by one mighty bound into the highest
position amongst the nations. The whole
civilised earth feared and respected Britain.
Her navies were everywhere triumphant.
Her wrath was everywhere dreaded. The
sails of her commerce brightened the ocean.
And while at home, peace aid prosperity
filled the land with gladness ; abroad the
persecuted and oppressed cried to her for
safety, and >fot|nd it beneath her shield.
I cannot leave this characteristic exposition
of the views of the sceptical school, without
pointing out the fallacy contained in one of
its leading principles, via., * Energy, however
misdirected, is better than stagnate n ; it is a
symptom of life ’ That is, evil is better than
nothing. It is a good thing then, that
Gardiner is not hung or imprisoned, because
energy, however misdirected, is better than
stagnation, and so in relation to all things
which cause harm, And use their powers to
devastate and ruin, it is better than if they
slumbered peacefully in the tomb, or cell of
punishment. Thus we mast regard Altila,
Ner®, Caligula, Robespierre, and batan, as
blessings rather than as curses And in
regard to the * dead weight of respectability,’
so much deplored, I merely have to state
that in most men’s thoughts, this is s merciful
provision, for the fear of the opinions of
society keeps men, with its silent influence,
from committing crime, more effectually than
all dread of punishment. Lastly, 1 join
issue with Mr Bowman upon the morning of
the term ' scepticism’ itself. The meaning
of (bat term, given by the lecturer, is to bo


found nowhere, at any rate, so far as I can
learn. It is of the utmost im-
portance, particularly in metaphysical or
philosophic enquiries, that the terms which
are used should be explained, and understood,
as clearly as possible. To use words wh ch
symbolise abstract ideas and thoughts, with-
out having some perception of their meaning,
is to start upon a voyage without a compass
and without a chart. I shall, therefore,
attempt to define the general meaning of
* Scepticism, Credulity, and Faith.’ ‘ Scepti-
cism’ is the doctrine of the sceptics.
The word sceptic is derived from
SKEPTIKO3 (skeptomai), which properly
signifies considerative and inquisitive.
He, and he only is a sceptic, who is
ever weighing the reasons one side and the
other, without ever deciding between them.
Scepticism thus consists in doubting of every
thing, in affirming nothing at all, and in
keeping the judgment in suspense on every
subject, Sextus Empiricus tells us that
scepticism is identical with the faculty of
opposing all appearances, and of making all,
even contrary things, equally probable. These
were the great maixms of the sceptics. * Ou
mallon touto e tkeino' 4 This is no more
than that.’ 4 Panli logo logos' ‘Every reason
has another against itand ‘ Ouden orizo .’
‘ I .determine nothing.’ With the sceptics,
, all things were equally uncertain, their minds
yvere not allowed even to receive a bias from
senses, op nions, or evider ce, towards one
thing mote than its opposite, and it is said
they carried this so far, as to deny that any-
thing is either good or evil, just or unjust,
true or false, or that anything is this more
than that. Pytrho, who lived under
Alexander the Great,is commonly reputed the
founder of the sceptics ; hence they were
known in ancient, times as * Pyrrhonians.’


13
Their distinguishing tenet was, ' That all
things are uncertain and incomprehensible ;
Contraries equally true ; and that-the mind is
never to assent to any thing i but to keep up
an absolute hesitancy or indifference.’ Socrates
has been called a sceptic from his celebrated
saying ‘ I know nothing but this f that I
know nothing’ This seems, however, as
rather a rebuke to the positive assertiors of
the Sophists and Dogmatists, than a declaration
pf his own uncertainty. A truer motto for
scepticism was announced afterwards by
Metrodorus, ‘ I know-nothing ; not even
this, that I know nothing.’ He who decides
upon any questions which are agitated
a sceptic. Thesceptic nevfer decides. The
sceptic cannot ■ decide. It may perhaps lu
argued that the strict meaning of this term
has been modified by' centuries of custom,
and has therefore, somewhat relaxed from its
iron rule. Tn this the answer is easy; The
leading sceptics of modern days have trodden
in the very path of their ancestors. ' I need
only point to David Hume and Desearte>
who endeavoured to introduce doubt 1 into
every department of knowledge and scienc *.
to show that scepticism is the same how
as when Pyrrho conversed with the wor-
shippers of Brahma, and Laertius noted down
the names of- the Tyrrhenians. So mu«h lot
the meaning of scepticism. Credulity is
capable of a much easier and simpler explan-
ation. Credulity is the belief of any
propositions without sufficient evidence of
their truth. .Faith in its general sense is the
belief of propositions supported by sufficient
testimony or evidence. And now that we
have seen the comparative meanings of these
three terms, we may ask what effect each
would be likely to have upon the actions, the
happiness, and the life of men. We commence
gith scepticism, Man is a social being.


Formed by the wise Creator for the enjoy*
ment of domestic and social happiness, he
possesses those qualities which at once fit fci«n
lor the reception and bestowal of these pure
felicities. In the home ate found the
strongest ties of affection, and the surest
safeguards of virtue. There the sternest
heart beats tenderly. There, even for him
who is outlawed by a world, are those whose
besoms glow with love. storms, cold and
pitiless, may be raging without, but within
all is calm and sunshine. There, are eyes
which always weep in sympathy at our
defeats, and souls which triumph in our
victories. Let the whole earth oppose ns, let
Borrow and care and sickness add their
terrific weight, still our household, our
home, remains, and we can rear a bold front
Md defy our foes. From tbs sacred affec*
ttans, the trembling but deathless sympathies
of home, we carry to the world much that
fits us for its conflicts, and enriches it with
generous impulses. What would the world
be to us if our hearths were desolate, our
families scattered or dead, our homes des*
troyed f Now let scepticism enter the saored
portals. Dia trust, contusion, and sorrow rush
in beneath its sombre shadow, and the home
is gone. The holy obligations of married
life f the filial affection of youth, the parental
Care of manhood, the Qodlike instincts of
nature, and the authority of laws which have
bound all hearts together, all are attacked.
Doubt hangs gloomy npon every countenance,
and suspicion eats 4 as doth a canker* into
every heart. Amid the darkness and gloom
the only bright spot is seen where the infant,
all too young to understand the blessedness
of the 4 sceptical faculty/ hangs with the
Stations instincts of its nature, in the confl*
eaoe of its nneonsoious love npon the
mother's breast. But soon the child—now


Crowing with delighted love as he climbs
upon the knee of a father, or tangles his tiny
fingers amid the glossy ringlets of a mother—
■will awake to a consciousness of his great
inheritance, and, taught by scepticism, will
doubt the right of his father to command,
and sneer at the rich love of bis mother**
throbbing heart. Nations are made up of
families. Carry Scepticism into the nations,
and what will it produce there! England
for example. Thank God, the throne of
Britain rests Upon no sttoh Volcanic founds
ation ai scepticism. It is bnilt upon the
hearts of 30,000,000 Of honest and faithful
Britons. It is supported by the trust, the
confidence, and the love of brave and loyal
subjects. It stands first la the rank of
nations. It Is the freest and happiest empire
under Heaven. That • meteor flag of Eng-
land,* ‘the flag that’s braved a thousand
years, the battle and the breese* yet floats
upon every sea, and beneath its folds liberty
and j ustice live. The credit of its merchant
princes, the energy of its men of science, the
wisdom of its statesmen, the strength of its
mailed hosts, the honor and virtue of its
people from the palace to the cottage, are
equal this day, if not superior, to anything
the world has ever seen. We trust and pray
it may long be so—we ate no Britons if we
do not. Wo trust that when other thrones
are tottering, and other states going down
in the vortex of revolution, even though the
earth be wrapped ia the clouds and flame of
boundless anarchy, our country and put
Queen will still be safe. As the nighty
hills, when the tempest howls and bursts
upon them, yet lift their brows towards
Heaven, as proud and fearless as in the
■oft breathings of the summer wind, so W«
trust will it be with Britain. ,


As some tall cliff, that lifts its awful form
Swells from the vale and midway leaves the
storm, '
Tho’ clouds and darkness round its bosom
spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.
But let scepticism be the dominant principle
and how would things be altered ? Our
beloved Queen, now revered by all, would be
doubted by her statesmen, and while she
regarded Ihem with suspicion, the nation in
its turn would fear'and distrust both. Soon,
very soon, that glorious fabric, the British
Constitution, now the envy and admira ion
of the earth, which has been reared Stone by
stone during a thousand years, and cemented
by the best and noblest blood of martyrdom,
would crumble into dust. The people would
repose no confidence in tbeir rules, and those
rulers divided amongst themselves, would
throw abroad the seeds of disaster, suffering,
and de’pair, Thus” the strife, the tears and
blood of cehturies would be wasted, and our
great fathers would indeed have labored in
vain, and spent their strehgth for nought.
Once, and once only, in modern days has
this been tested. ■ I need scarcely say that
its theatre was unhappy France Beneath
the teaching of the leading sceptics of that
day, Voltaire. Rousseau, Mirabeeu, Frederick
the Great, Diderot* D’Alembert, and their
followers, all public faith was destroyed.
The wrongs of the people, heightened by the
frenzied denunciations of the master spirits,
spurred into the activity of destruction the
passions of a multitude always excitable. At
length the spark - fell upon this heap of
gunpowder and tar barrels, and swept it
upwards in one wild confused destruction,
Duriag the Reign lof Terror*‘that devilish
carnival of horror, when the guillotine was
choked with victims, and the streets of Faria


fan red with tbe beet blood of France, when
the very foundations,of society were destroyed,
when even hope itself seemed about to forsake
the darkened land, the work of scepticism
was revealed somewhat in its naked and
awful truth. Mr Bowman seys that the
leaders and inciters of the revolution «acnot
be blamed for this ; that • war, rapine,
murder, and confiscation formed no part of
their teaching.’ This indeed is.strange. Who
sent the monarch and the flower of the
F.ench Noblesse to the scaffold? Fid not
Marat publish, repeatedly in his celebrated
journal, ‘ L’Ami du Peuple,’ the statement
that France could hot be saved till eight
hundred of the Assembly were hanged in the
gardens of. the Tuilleries ? Does not history
groan beneath the heavy anathemas which
the revolutionary chiefs showered upon the
aristocracy? Was not their anger washed
out in blood and rapine? Does not Mr
Bowman himself immediately afterwards
Statd that the essay on the Social Contract
written by Kousseau ‘ was genera ly read and
believed, and became the Bible of the French
revolution, the inspired oracle of the Satanic
Government of Terror, under the Jacobins.’
Turning our attention from tbe disastrous
effects of scepticism upon the families and
nations of mankind, let us contemplate it in its
action upon science and philosophy. Now
both these, together with art and literature,
are guided by known rules ; rules as in-
flexible as those of the Medes and Persians,
But scepticism acknowledges no rules. It
doubts theta both in their existence, in their
truth, and in their action. It throws to the
winds the experience of ages. It disbelieves at
once the traditions of the ancients, and the
reasoning of the mode ns. It recognises no
certainty, it obeys no |aw. Its province is to
bnqmrej to sift, to scrutinise—never to de»


dde. In this it differs from the tnle spirit of
enquiry. Generally, enquiry is a means to
an end—that end being the attainment of
truth. But in the eyes of the sceptic, en-
quiry is the ultimate good. Beyond it, te
him, there is nothing. Therefore we find, as
it clearly laid down in the National Cyclo-
paedia, * the abnegation of man’s proudest
faculty, reason, the perpetual indecision on
every point, so little accords with the fertile
and prodigious activity, and creative power of
the mind, that the real professors Of scepti-
cism have been universally indolent, easy
hatnred, sensual men, with whom tbe specul-
ative doubting was stimulus enough.* It
may here, perhaps, be said by the disciples
of modern scepticism, * Oh 1 we do not mean
this total abnegation of decision f we only
use the term to signify a free and candid
enquiry into the things around us and within
Us.’ To this I answer that 1 cannot help
what you mean, I have to answer what you
say. If, while England is at war with Russia,
yon hoist the Russian colors, you may expect
to hear tbe roar ot the Whitworth or the
Armstrong, and feel the shock of British war.
If it be so, and I hope, for the sake of reason
and your own sake that it is, then here and
now I ask you to deelnre publicly, what you
do believe, and What you disbelieve, that we
may not be compelled to fight in the dark
and do battle with a shadow. Great things
have been accomplished in tbe earth, noble
actions have been performed, and glorious
discoveries made. But scepticism is innocent
of them all. If one who professed tbe doe*
trines of Pyrrho has signalised himself in
these, it is in defiance of his principles. All
that has been accomplished has been the
working out of great plans, the pursuit of
truth, the attainment of knowle ige, and the
exemplification of exalted benovolenee. Men


who have done these things have studied, and
toiled, and fought, ani died, that they might
give to us something worthy of our accept*
aßce, and might add to the store of human
possessions, the deep secrets of philosophy
and science, or the priceless boo of liberty.
Strong faith h d they in the right and true.
They bad confidence in themselves and in
their principles, and, casting away all doubt
and hesitancy, they entered with whole hearts
into their various tasks. Nor has credulity
added much to the world’s happiness, or the
world’s wealth, | agree with Mr Bowman
that credulity is little likely to advance the
interests of troth. In its train copies super-
stition, cowardice, and tyranny. Still, look-
ing at all the circumstances, the credulous
nan is a happier man than the sceptic. For,
If the first, believes all, whither true or
false,- be, at any rate, believes the true
whereas the second, in doubting or disbe-
lieving all, if he disbelieves falsehood also
disbelieves the truth. This fact is strongly
illustrated by the history of Greece and
Borne. Ruled by the ancient mythological
fa tbs, there was both in Greece and her
younger rival and ultimate oonqperor, much
that is worthy of our admiration and respect.
It was not till the current faiths were shaken,
and at last destroyed—in the one by such
men as Aristophanes, and in the other by the
Latin satirists, —that public virtue and mo-
rality became utterly last. Terence and
Juvenal might ridicule and help to destroy
much that was wrong, but in doing so they
paved the way for a more complete darkness.
There was before some fear of punishment for
sin, and some hope of reward for virtue, but
when the people were taught only to laugh
and sneer at what had been their
highest incarnations of piety, morality, and
truth, we need not wonder that soon only the


wrecks of their former honesty and virtue re-
mained for the warning and detestation of
humanity. But I am no advocate for cre-
dulity. Fling abroad the standard of edu-
cation, let? the ‘'Schoolmaster go abroad’ and
beneath the illumination of science and
philosophy, credulity and prejudice, igno-
rance and superstition, shall pass away
as the shadows ‘and mists cf dawn. It
is to me the opposite pole to scepticism.
My hopes. rest between them on the
rock of faith, ‘Try all things, hold fast
that which is good.’ It seems to me this has
befen the motto of the earnest searchers after
truth of every age and evefy nation. For in
them'ell there was found a faith, a confidence
in the testimony rf others, in the evidences
of reason, in the lessens of experience. They
believed that they hadfa work to do—and
• they did it. They believed, perhaps, in * the
good time coming,’ and strove to help it bn,
with mare or less strong hands. They be*
1 eved in the right, and just, and true, and
were ready to stake life itself upon their
faith. They were men of strong decision ;
and having found out what they believe! the
right path—they trod it, royally enough
sometimes, —even to death. It was this faith
—built upon enquiry and evidence, and
thought, and reason—that carried them on to
victory. * The greatness pf individuals, and
of nations,’ says Yinet, ‘may be measured by
the greatness of their faith.’ ‘Everything,’
srys another profound thinker, ‘ which draws
our attention from the seen and present, and
directs it to the past, the distant, and the
future, aids in the formation of a noble cha-
racter, and elevates man in the scale of
being,’ but Faith, and Faith alone, does
this. ‘ Tell me ’ sayS Goethe, ‘ Tell me
that a man believes in Something—what
he believes is of secondary conse*


auence.’ Upon the battle held* of earth th
bravery, the strength, and the patriotism of
mtn have kindled fires which yet gleam down
the tide of time. But was it scepticism which
carried Hannibal across the Alps, or Cmiar
across the Rubicon? Was it scepticism
which wreathed around the brows of Leonidas
and his Spartans the garlands of immorta ity,
or nerved the heroic maid of Orleans for
her sublime and patriotic task. Was it
scepticism which enabled Clive to conquer at
Plassey against overwhelming odds, or which
directed the arrow of Wilham Tell. Was it
scepticism that strengthened one Sidney on
the field of Zutphen and another before the
judges of England, or that the navies of
England triumphant under Blake, and her
armies and herse.f invincible under Crom-
well ? Did it embolden Humpden when he
stood up single-handed in defence of Eng-
land’s liberties, or Hassell when he sealed
tho-e liberties with his blood ? Was it
scepticism or fahh which flew at the mast-
head of the gallant Victory, at Trafalgar,
when, beside the signal for action, the seamen
of Britain saw glittering in the sunbeams—
* England expects every mao to do his duty,
and knew that England and Nelson trusted
wi f h implicit confidence in them? Was it
sceptic sm or confidence in the justice ©f his
cause which supported Washington through
the long struggle oj: the war of Independence ;
which sustained the noble band of ilaveiocx.
on the Lucknow march through fire, and
streams, and hunger, and wounds, and
death; which fired the heart of Robert
B uce, or which in the last great charge at
Waterloo hurled the warrior sous of England
upon the hitherto unconquered legions of the
old guard, and swept the last army of
Napoleon from that memorable field, as the
a'itamn leaves are swept by the rushing storm


Poetry too has had its heroes. Sweat and
glorious singers have breathed the minstrelsy
of the heart and of nature.
We give in charge
Their names to the sweet lyre. The historic
mass
Proud of the treasure, marches with it down
To latest times 1”
Was Homer a sceptic ? Or did scepticism
thrill through the heart of Milton, when In
h s blind old age he determined to draw from
his golden harp a song ‘ which the world
shall not willingly let die | Does scepticism
shine out from the pages of the Bard of Avon ?
Science has performed wonders, but in 1 s
glory scepticism does not share. In the
sciences of medicine, snd law, and government,
and physics, the children of Britain have
added additional lustre to the race that gave
th> m birth. In that list the names of Davy
and Jenner, of Burke and Pitt, of Hale and
Selden, stand out the bright particular stars
Of a majestic firmament-r-rbufc the greatness of
not one of these was owing to his calling him*
self a sceptic Shall we direct our gaze to
discovery I Was it doubting that conquered
in the case of Columbus, or that carried the
gallant but ill-fated Burke and Wills across
Australia, Shall we appeal to philosophy f
Jo her temple Bacon, Newton, Locke, and
almost innumerable men like minded, have
been proud not only to lay their trophies at
the feet of simple Philosophic Faith, but
have bowed amongst the lowly worshippers at
the altar of the Christians God. Do we
extend our researches further, What do
such lives as those of Walt and Stephenson
teach us f Did not the one by observation
and bedef in certain laws work out the
steam engice, and tbs other, in apite of
numerous failures, bridge oyer the wont


morass in England, and open up a How and
wonderful means of transport upon the
earth I Philanthropy adranees and offers to
us her evidence, and pointing to the names
of Howard, Wilberforce, and Clarkson,
whispers that the motive power of these
mens lives was an earnest and self-denying
faith—faith in the rights of man, belief in the
existence of misery, which they might
assuage, attl of principles of justice and
kindness, which established by God Him*
self are eternal as His throne* Leaving now
the height of philosophy, let us desiend
into the dust, the toil, and care of eVery«day
life. What would scepticism effect here f
Let it essay its efforts upon the mart, and
there destroying the merchants confidence it
will blight the commerce of a nation. Let
it fasten itself in the mind of (he tradesman
and it will paralyse h's business. If it casts
its shadows upon the husbandman his fields
will be untilled, and bis barns empty. In
fine to whatever branch of life's business
scepticism be applied, the effect is ruinous.
Doubt, suspense, and hesitation must of
necessity follow it, and all progress, all
action, is at an end, * Strike,* says the old
proverb, ‘strike, while the iron is hot.’ ‘Stay,’
says scepticism, ‘ stay and consider, and do
not strike at all.'
* There is a tide in the affairs of med
Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune}
Omittid; all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.’
The voyaee of life, therefore, to the sceptic,
must be * bound iu shallows sndin miseries,*
because he cannot decide to act. The great*
ness of the first Napoleon has been ascribed
to this*-that he knew exactly when to strike.
But had he practised the doctrines of seep*
ticiam, even his pernicious greatness would


never have been attained, for bis bold heart
and mighty hand would equally have been
fetfeed by hesitancy and indecision. It is
n f >t necessary that we should be gifted with
tuperhuman wisdom to see this fact;
Scepticism is not practised, either in the
dally routine of existence, or in the pursuits
of art, politics, literature or science. No
man ever became great or successful in any
one path save that of destruction, under the
influence of this boasted doctrine. Not one
of the leading sceptics, either in ancient or
modern days, did, so far as i know, ever try
the effect of his principles on any of the
ordinary affairs of life, but all, without one
exception, acted in the same general manner
as those who were governed by the strongest
faith in the great laws, realities, and truths,
of the universe. There remains then, only
one direction in which it can be said that
scepticism has exerted any perceptible
influence at all. Indeed, it is in relation to
religion only, that svtep'icistn exists. Remove
religion from the field, and scepticism decays.
Ihere would be then no motive to induce
men to profess principles which would be
dady contradicted by their actions, or to
behave as maniacs, in order to obey those
principles which they professed. That this
is most singularly infelicitous, T will now
attempt to show. The Bible is the religion
of Christians, In that book are contained the
doctrines, the history, the miracles, and the
prophecies of Christianity, There, too, are
recorded the lives and characters of its most
eminent teachers and chi'dren. There, in
the radiance of immortal.ty, shine the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Kings. Apostles,
Martyrs of olden days. la its songs we hear
a music, akin to that of Heaven ; ard from
its scenes, we catch over the dust and ruins
bf centuries, a glory sublime and beautiful.


There are preserved for our delight and
imitation the characters of Kingly and
heroic men. In that long and unbroken
g erie-i of the good, the illustrious, and the
merci'ul, we see, as we see no where else, how
truly great, may be the humanity of which
we boast. There statesmen more wse than
Pitt or Cineas, more politic than Richelieu,.
or Machiavelli, rule the destinies of mighty
empires. There poets, whose souls breathed
in the atmosphere of universal numbers, and
drank at the fountain of universal melody,
pour forth strains more lofty and enduring
than Homer or Mil on. There Kings, whose
majestic attributes eclipse the ephemeral
splendors of Frederick, of Henry, or the
* G*and Moharque,’ reign over happy lands.
There prophets, beside whom all other
prophets ate imposters, and sages, compared
with whom, all other sages are but children,
open the gates of whdpm. and give her
treasures to the world. There, towering
abot.e all other cgen in august and lonely
majesty,.does Christ —God s idea of a man, in
his own perain—lift Faith Hope, and
Charity* upon the Throne of the Universe,
7 jl
“ These were the bravest warriors,
That ev r buckled sword ;
These the most gift ed' poets,' ■' ,
That ever breathed tv word.
And never Earth’s philosopher, • k
Traced with bis goldeft pen, ,
jOn the deathless page, words -half; 'so
sage,
As they wrote down for men,
Now it is mopt plainly laid down in the
Bible itself that faith, and faith alone was
the mainspring: of all they did. In.fact it
could rot be otheiwiae. Much that th ?y said,
much that they performed,' was in implicit
obedience to orderp, which were not only ho-


yond the judgment of the semes, but of the
reason also. It was, therefore, their faith in
the unseen, but acknowledged God, which
prompted them to speak, to act, to suffer,
and to die. Beneath the influence of this
faith, sin and vice were threatened with
destruction, and virtue and holiness were
i ailed as the friends of humanity. During
the 18 centuries which have elapsed since
the voices and pens of inspiration have been
still, the influence of the Bible has been
largely felt. The civilisation of 1863 is in-
debted for all its better ingredients to the
wise teaching of the founder of Christianity.
Not only has it thus opened and reyealed the
road to mortal distinction, It, and it alone,
has lifted the curtains of eternity, and an-
nounced to us the existence of an illimitable
future* It if the Gospel**the good tidings.
It comes to us—authenticated by prophecy,
by miracle, by truth, as the message of out
God. Appealing at once to the conscience,
the affections, and the intellect, it demands,
in no hesitating voice, the belief and obedi-
ence of mankind. It bears in one hand the
glittering sword of justice, in the other the
keys of Heaven, while its tongue now thunders
forth the awful sanctions of the law, and anon,
in ‘Tones as sweet as those which Angels
use, tells of a Saviour and His boundless
love. It is this Bible—this revelation of the
justice and mercy of God, that scepticism
attacks. Thus, in the course of time, scepti-
cism has come simply to mean, disbelief in
the revelation of God. And has scepticism
achieved so much in other ways that wo
should follow its guidance here! Has its
influence been so beneficent, its teachings so
certain on other subjects, that on this, in-
comparably our most important concern, it
should be obeyed» Does It offer to us any
stronger certainties than we already possess f


Does it pro ound a purer system of morale t
Are the inducements which it offers for the
attainment of virtue—supposing it to under*
stand the meaning of virtue—superior to
those contained in the sacred Bo >k J Are
its disciples prompted by its commandments,
or its spiritual influence, renowned for holi*
ness of character, and meekness, and pbilan*
thropy t Does it propose to make ut more
happy, or more useful upon earth, and more
certain of attaining happiness beyond the
grave ? Can it open the treasures of light,
and pour down upon us the effulgence of
truth ? Now—this the Bible promises, and
Is, and has been, daily lulfilling its words.
But scepticism, coubting, indecision, call it
what you will, cannot in its nature accomplish
snch notable deeds at all. It destroys the
ancient landmar s between sin and holiness,
it surrounds the traveller with its mists, and
it darkens every beacon lit by the hand of
mercy to guide man upon bis perilous wsy.
For knowledge it gives uncertainty, for faith
suspicion, and for sunshine darkness. It
lures man to destruc ion. It stands by the
highway side and entreats the traveller to
abandon theo.en road, to leave the streaming
splendors of the midday sun and to follow its
feeble glimmer through the swamp, the
morass, and the tangled brake, onward to
death. From the darkened sky ‘at one fell
swoop’ it dashes every star. Felr no longer
aids to keep us in the path .of rectitude and
hope, the last anchor of the soul, is lost amid
the tossing surges of despair. Where are the
oracles of scepticism I By whom or by what
are those oracles inspired ? Let it reveal to us
its prophets and its priests. Who amongst its
followers cherishing a spirit kindred to thst ef
Cramner, of Latimer, of Wickliffe, and
Augustine, have gone forth to rear its
standard in savage lands, or dared the strong


arm of power in defence of truth, or
witnessed for that truth amid the flames of
martyrdom ? Who like Howard ever gave up
the quiet enjoyment of a life of ease to
* guage the dimensions of human misery,’ and
by penetrating the filthy dungeons of Europe,
Asia ard Africa, and searching out the birth-
place and cradle of the plague, offered his life
as a sacrifice upon the altar of humanity ?
Who amongst them ever spoke peace to the
troubled soul, or reanimated courage or
virtue in the heart of man ? These are the
province, the paths, the triumphs of
Christianity, of that religion founded upon
the justice, the wisdom, and the love of God.
And we believe that God haa not created us
to grope in hopeless night, but has given us
enough certainty on which to build. And it
is this faith which fits us for our life here
and will open to us the portals of an eternal
and certain life hereafter;














