

Al/h
2-
C - ) .»>*7 jij
DELIVERED AT
The IMPERIAL INSTITUTE,
LONDON, S.W.,
Mr. E. T. SCAMMELL,
Special Commissioner of the Western Australian International Mining
and Industrial Exhibition (Coolgardie, 1899),
UNDER THE PRESIDENCY OF
The Hon. E. t WITTEKOO|W,
Agent General for Western Australia,
, ON
MONDAY, JANUARY 23rd , 1899.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
Xonfcon:
GEO. DU BOISTEL & CO., Printers, Broad Street House, E.C.,
and at 30, Bridge Street, Bristol.




DELIVERED AT
The IMPERIAL INSTITUTE,
LONDON, S.W.,
Mr. E. T. SCAM M ELL,
Special Commissioner of the Western Australian International Mining
and Industrial Exhibition (Coolgardie, 1899),
UNDER THE PRESIDENCY OF
The Hon. E. fl. WITTEHOOjVI,
Agent General for Western Australia,
MONDAY, JANUARY 23rd , 1899 .
PRICE THREEPENCE.
Xonfcon:
GEO. DU 30ISTEL & CO., Printers, Broad Street House, E.C.,
and at 30, Bridge Street, Bristol.




Übe (Hestcrn Australian International
fflining anb Industrial 6ybibition.
INCORPORATED.
COOUGARDEE, W.A., 1899.
ADMINISTRATION AND FINE ARTS BUILDING.
Mam Entrance.




The Work and Wealth of Western
Australia.
This was the title of an illustrated public lecture delivered at the
Imperial Institute, on Monday, January 23, by Mr. E. T. Scammell, the
Special Commissioner for the Western Australian International Mining and
Industrial Exhibition. The Hon. E H. Wittenoom (Agent-General for
Western Australia) took the chair, and there was a large attendance.
In briefly introducing the lecturer,the Chairman said he (Mr. Scammell)
had arrived in this country as the representative of the Western Australian
International Mining and Industrial Exhibition. He had had a long and
varied connection with the Colony, and had travelled over a considerable
portion of it. He had associated himself with a number of industries there,
and was well acquainted with the resources of the Colony. He had been
over the goldfields, and they would hear from him what he had found out
lor himself, rather than what he had obtained from mere heresay.
Introduction.
In responding to the Invitation of the Council of this Institute,
I must express my personal thanks to them for affording me an
opportunity of addressing an audience in London, under their
auspices, upon a subject so interesting to myself and so impor-
tant as that of “ The Work and Wealth of Western Australia,” —
a title suggested to me by Sir Frederick Abel.
Then, too, as a member of the Institute, I have the greater
pleasure in discharging this duty as it enables me to say how
earnestly I desire that the great and indeed splendid object of
the Institute may be realized, and that it may yet prove one of
the potent factors in the Union of purpose and of effort which
we all wish to see accomplished in the relations of the Mother
■Country with her dependencies across the seas.
In addressing you on Western Australia, it is not my intention
to occupy any time in speaking of the geography or history of
that Colony. This has been so fully and ably done in previous
lectures, here and elsewhere in London, that, so far as the present
audience is concerned, it is unneccessary for me to occupy one
moment in dwelling upon these points.


The first point to which I shall ask your attention relates tec
the Industries of Western Australia.
These specially comprise— Gold, Agriculture and Timber,
with Coal, Copper, Lead and Tin, Diamonds and Pearls. It
will be sufficient for me to deal with the first three, contenting:
myself with a brief reference to those that follow.
Gold.
It is Gold, the dream of the impecunious, the bane of the
avaricious, the current need of the civilized world, which has
brought Western Australia to the front. What will not men do-
for Gold ! What sufferings will they not endure, what dangers
will they not encounter, what toils will they not undertake, what
difficulties will they not overcome in its pursuit!
“ Gold ! yellow, glittering precious Gold (which according
to Shakespeare), will make black, white ; foul, fair ;
wrong, right ; base, noble ; old, young ; coward, valiant.”’
The pursuit of Gold—how ardent, interesting, even heroic it
often becomes.
Had I dwelt on the History of the Colony, I should certainly
have said something about the work of the Explorer, who, to use
Palby’s phrase, as applied to the devoted Missionary in foreign
lands, endures “labours, dangers and sufferings,” in the task of
“ opening up the ways ” for the nations. I should have spoken
of the work of the Porrests and others, and particularly of the'
journey of Austin, who, in 1854, declared that “the belt of
country round Mounts Kenneth and Magnet, and in the neigh-
bourhood of Lake Austin was probably one of the finest Gold-
fields of the World.” An opinion and prediction which may yet-
be verified.
But I refer to this now only to say that the prospector for
gold is, himself, often and equally worthy of his meed of praise.
Under the inspiration of the ‘ Sacra fames auri ’ many a simple
miner —whose thirst for gold may be after all, but the desire


to secure a competence for those dear to him, and a love of
adventure and of the free life of the field and of the desert, —
has done deeds Homeric, deeds Heroic, which in their deep
human interest are worthy to be recorded among the annals of
the pioneers of Empire.
It would take volumes to do justice to the Romance of the
Goldfields of any land—as Bret Harte has found in California,
Rider Haggard in Africa, and Rolf Boldrewood in Australia.
And Western Australia may yet furnish its sheaf of stories, as
full of moving incident and pathos as any of those related by these
Knights of the Pen. The track of the Gold Seekers, there, is
often one of blood and tears and of the bones of men. It must
be so, I suppose—That all great discoveries and all great
enterprises are built up with human life and founded on the
sacrifices and sufferings of men. How great the charm of that
life, however, is, with all its difficulties and drawbacks, the
Prime Minister of England as well as Sailor Bill, just home
from Klondyke, might tell. But so it is, and so it will be while
Men are Men and Gold is Gold.
From 1881, when Gold was discovered in Kimberley, until
now, the work of prospecting and so of exploration has been
going on,until for 1,000 miles fromNorthto South there are patches
of auriferous land, some of which, like Kalgoorlie and Kanowna,
are known to be of fabulous richness.
Coolgardie was the gold centre, par excellence, until the
rise of Kalgoorlie. But, altho’ Coolgardie is eclipsed, and all
other gold producing districts in Western Australia, from Kim-
berley to Norseman, by the phenomenal yields of the leading Kal-
goorlie Mines, yet, as surely as there will be a to-morrow, so surely
some of these districts will write their names large on the roll
of Western Australian Gold producers. For the Gold is there.
It is there in many places, in low grade ores, in refractory ores,
in pug—but it is there. And it only needs the skill and enterprise
of the miner backed,if you will,by British Capital, wisely expended,.


THE
RAND.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
1888
208,122 ounces
1894
207,131 ounces
1889
369,677 „
1895
231,512
1890
494,817 „
1896
281,265
1891
729,238 „
1897
674,989
1892 1,210,869 „
1898 (about) 1,000,000 oz.
to bring the Gold into circulation, and to make Western
Australia, not in promise or prophecy only, but in fact, one of the
the leading gold producing countries of the world. In 1886 the
output of Gold was 302 oz., valued at £1,147 12s. Od. In 1898
the output was 1,050,182 oz., valued at £3,990,663, making a
total to date of 2,692,802 oz. (about 79 tons avoirdupois),
valued at millions sterling ; and yet, notwithstanding this
great output, there is no doubt that the Colony is only on the
threshhold of its auriferous future. Tire returns from the
various parts of the fields show that, while Kalgoorlie holds, far
and away, the first position, the whole of the Eastern division and
the Murchison too have their tale to tell of great and increasing
yields. What it will mean when thousands of stampers and all
kinds of gold saving appliances are at w T ork, w T hich should render
8 or 9 dwt. stone payable, it is impossible to say. In a com-
parison between the Eand output and that of Western Australia,
the “ West Australian ” (Perth) says in a recent issue : “ Since
Western Australia has reached such figures, comparisons with
the yields of the other Australasian Colonies, fair as they are,
have something of the appearance of an attempt to crow. But
there can be no harm in pointing out that we have now an
export that can reasonably be set alongside the Eand returns
of six years ago. If the start of the Eand output is placed along-
side the figures for our Colony since the year when the Coolgar-
dies began to turn out gold, the result is not to our discredit.
When we have as many completely equipped plants in
operation as there are in the Transvaal, our figures should follow
dhose of our South African rivals up to date, even although we


have none of the cheap labour and steady quality of stuff that
make 9 dwt. pay the Eand Companies.”
Then, too, the comparison in the assay value of the ore is all
in favour of W.A., for that Colony still holds the high average
of 1 oz. 8 dwts. per ton. The Returns just to hand from the
Mines Department show 1 oz. 7 dwt. 18 gr. per ton.
In so far, therefore, as the Gold Mining Industry of Western
Australia is concerned, it may now be taken for granted it has
come to stay.
But what of the British and other Capitalist in relation
thereto ? He has sunk a great deal of money in the Colony, or
in ventures connected with the Colony (a very different thing,
as Capel Court knows). He has paid his money and paid
some millions of it too, to very little purpose. It is true he is
getting some return. The dividends paid during 1898, according
to recent returns, amount to £BOO,OOO, which, with the profits
of Exploration Companies, make a total of about 1J millions
sterling. This further fact, also, should be considered—there
are other mines, besides those at Kalgoorlie and Menzies, which,
as they are equipped with suitable machinery, will come into
line.
But, after all, what of the money spent for which there has
been no return, the Companies that have been wound up, or re-
constructed with no hope of resurrection ! This. They may teach
the investor, or would-be investor, a lesson—a lesson old as
well as new. Ist that “ ’tis not all gold that glitters,” and 2nd,
that the statements in a prospectus, and the promises of Company
Promoters, or even of Boards of Directors are not always reliable.
No, nor even the glowing reports of the Mining Expert who
examines his Mine from the Hotel Bar or from the shady
verandah ■where drinks are served. But, notwithstanding all
this, and there has been very much of it to the disadvantage
of Australia as well as of England, the country with its


auriferous treasure remains; and the British Investor, wha
wants a fair return for his investments in Western Australia,
should get some fuller knowledge of the Country and its re-
sources, and should see that his capital is expended by men
of experience upon whose judgment he can rely, and
whose character, like Cassar’s wife, is “above suspicion.”
Surely, it is possible for capital to find useful and profitable
employment in a land subject to British Laws and governed by
the British Race, where the openings for investment, wisely
used, are so many and so patent as they are in Western
Australia.
I am glad to be able, from a considerable acquaintance with
the operations of the Mines Department in Perth, and from my
knowledge of the general movements of the Mining Industry
throughout the Colony, to bear my testimony to the fact that
the efforts of the Government of the Colony are directed, not-
withstanding all slips and errors, to the affording every facility
to capital as well as to labour in the development of this great
Industry. The fact that the dual title has been abolished, the
labour conditions modified, and the amalgamation of leases
granted, fully prove this, so that it may be emphatically and
confidently affirmed that the purpose of the Government is
to bring the Mining Industry into harmony wdth the wishes of
the legitimate investor, who seeks an honest return for his
capital.
In regard to the provisions in the recent amended Mining:
Act, applying to the opening of Share Registries in Western
Australia in connection with “ foreign,” that is, outside
Companies, there are certainly grave objections, which have
given rise to some very candid expressions of opinion in England
and South Australia. On this point I should like to read you
the opinion of the “ West Australian,” of December 16th, which,
I think, puts the matter very plainly—


“It must be confessed,” the writer says, “that whatever may
be the equities of this cry, those who examine the Act will
become easily convinced that the requisite care has not been taken
in drafting it. The haste with which it was hurried through both
Houses of Parliament, while it evidences in the strongest way
the determination of the majority to introduce some measure of
the kind, is also responsible for a Bill which can hardly be made
to work smoothly, or indeed perhaps at all. The framers of the
Bill apparently did not seek to fit in the change with the existing
law. Little attention seems to have been given to the provisions
of previous Acts, which refused to be accommodated to the new
measure. Things are ordered to be done, but no sufficient way
of carrying them out is prescribed. Older methods are at
variance with the new Act, and yet no w T ay is set down for the
substitution of the newer forms. Conditions are enforced, of
which no certain knowledge can be had. The essential dis-
tinctions between our own company law and that of England, for
■example, are ignored, and so we might run on. If it is not to
create a storm of opposition against which it would be impossible
to stand, the Bill will have to be re-cast, and, if possible, should
be withdrawn till that time has come. If the Imperial Govern-
ment can see it in its power to suspend the operation of the Act
for a few months it would be well to exercise the power. The
intrinsic or legal difficulties of giving effect to the measure sug-
gest this course. As a matter of fact, it will be found almost
out of the question to do much, if anything with the present
Act. ..The Act may have to be amended, it will certainly not be
repealed except to give place to a more perfect and satisfactory
measure.”
I am glad to see that the Mines Department at Perth has
decided to issue Monthly, instead of Weekly, Returns. This
■course I suggested when I was in the Colony, as I saw that in
•so doing, the Returns would be of greater service to the Mining
Industry, and would be in line with those of the other Gold-
producing Colonies.


It is to be hoped that the Mint, which may be regarded as a
necessary corollary to the gold production of Western Australia,
may soon be ready to commence operations.
In this comment on the Gold Resources of the Colony, I have
carefully avoided exaggeration and have simply stated facts, the
evidence of which may be found in the returns of the Mines
Department, in the issues of the Chambers of Mines, of
Western Australia and London, and in the private and news-
paper reports that are being received from all parts of the fields.
Agriculture.
But, important as gold is—pre-eminently important as far as
Western Australia is concerned—the older Industry of AgricuL
ture claims the very serious attention of all who are interested
in the resources of the Colony. The time was, when Western
Australia was humourously spoken of as the land of “ sand,
sin, sorrow and sore eyes,” and the idea prevailing even in the
minds of those who knew that there was such a Colony, was
that it consisted of a sand waste—where birds without song,
flowers without fragrance, and rivers without water alone broke
the monotony of its eternal barrenness.
Now, however, a juster conception is being formed. I must,
myself, admit that my first, and more than my first impressions,
were distinctly unfavourable to the Colony, —except as a
gold-producer. But fuller examination has proved to me that
there are two Western Australias. There is the Western
Australia of the interior, with its sand dunes and far-stretching,
sun-scorched plains; and there is the Western Australia
of the coast-lands. And even of these same sand plains, when
the rains have fallen upon them and the flowers have sprung
up and clothed the whole earth with beauty,
The Flora of the Colony is a marvel and a glory.
It is always so in the Spring and Summer near the sea. But
it is equally so far back in the interior after a rainy season. In


an interesting article by my friend, Mr. E. J. Bickford, on
the vegetation of Western Australia, he refers to a report by
the late Baron yon Mueller, the great Australian Botanist,
who speaks of the “ enormous floral realms of Western Austra-
lia,” with enthusiasm, and who says that of 3,700 species of
extra-tropical plants found in the Colony, “ the almost incredible
number of 2,400 are not to be found anywhere else.”
Referring to the Genus Acacia, the Baron says, —“ The
bursting into flower of the numerous species of Acacias is
greeted by the beholder with delight, especially as they are the
principal harbingers of Spring ; and it seems strange, consider-
ing their fragrant bloom and spacious outlines, that many of
them have never, as yet, reached a European conservatory..
The native flora of Western Australia is not without some
esculents. It possesses a really palatable and nutritious
spinach, and also some other salsolaceous plants. Many cases
of suffering for want of food, and even final starvation, could
not have occurred if these plants had been more generally
known and appreciated in the out-lying districts.”
But, so far as it concerns the Lands of the Colony, it is now
being conceded that they have some claim to be regarded as
among the finest Assets of the Colony ; while Agriculture, at
the very mention of which in connection with Western Australia,
men were wont to shrug their shoulders, is felt to be a serious
and a promising industry. Take these facts from a little brochw e
of mine on “ Westralia up to Date,” issued last hiovember,”-
“Western Australia contains Millions of Acres of land suitable
for cultivation. The following Returns, recently issued by the
Agricultural Department, show the productiveness of the soil.
Wheat averaged in 1897, 10 - 44 ; Barley, 13 63 ; and Oats 17-44
bushels to the acre ; while Potatoes gave 3 tons 15 cwt. to the
acre. Some of the farms have been cultivated for many years
without any dressing beyond ordinary stable manure. The area
of arable land for 1897 was 65 - 67 per cent, greater than that oi


1896, while the expansion of Agriculture this year promises a.
still larger per centage over 1897. The Rainfall for 100 miles,
or more from the coast is sufficiently large and constant to
ensure successful Agricultural operations, so that for 30 years or
more, while the seasons have varied, a failure has not been
known. Large areas of land may be cleared at a comparatively
small cost ; but, in most instances, as in some of the lands of
the S.W. Division, the heavier the cost of clearing, the more
valuable the soil.
The possibilities of Fruit Culture in the coastal lands of Wes-
tern Australia are practically unlimited. All kinds of extra,
tropical fruits can be grown in abundance —grapes, oranges,
kernel fruits and stone fruits particularly. There are, at a low
estimate, 5,000 square miles of land, omitting unsuitable
portions, favourable to grape cultivation ; while the areas suited
to orchards are as large as they are varied. Vegetables can be
grown in the neighbourhood of the coastal towns, and in the
alluvial soils of the river banks, to a degree that is almost,
incredible.
There are extensive areas suited to the production of Stock,
especially in the Northern Districts of the Colony. But efforts
are being made to encourage this in the neighbourhood of the
Goldfields, where, notwithstanding the small average rainfall,
there are many thousands of acres of land suitable for the
purpose. During the past ten years the number of Horses,
Cattle, Sheep and Pigs have increased from 50 to 200 per cent.”'
I have not time to enter into the extremely liberal Land Laws
of the Colony, nor to show what advantages are offered to the
would-be settler. I may say, however, that when I spoke in
Wales a few days ago on this subject and stated that merely to-
recite such provisions, as those to which I referred, would make
the eyes of Welsh and English farmers sparkle, the audience
was stirred to the deepest interest, and had I been making an
emigration speech, I have no doubt whatever that I could have-


secured a number of applicants. I was particularly struck with
the emphatic opinion of a leading Welsh journalist, who attended
the meeting at Llanelly, where I addressed the Chamber of
Commerce, and who said that he should let his country-men
know, in their own tongue, far and wide, the opportunities that
Western Australia offers in connection with the lands of the
Colony.
I should like here to bear testimony to the excellent work
which is being done by the Minister of Agriculture, the Hon.
Geo. Throssbll ; who is an enthusiast in his office, and whose
desire is to make the land resources of the Colony known,
and to prove to the toilers of Great Britain and Ireland that'
here is an opening for them and their families, which, if availed
of, would turn many a labourer into a man of substance, and
solve not a few of the problems which vex the villager and the
farmer of the Mother Country.
Timber.
Gold, however, and Agriculture are not the only great
Industries of Western Australia. Timber is another and a
most important one. I took the opportunity before leaving
Western Australia, to visit, with Mr. J. Ednie Brown, the
Conservator of Forests, some of the Forest Lands of the South-
West.
I had a look at the experimental farm at Drakesbrook, and
saw the progress of forestry-culture there—a progress that
would astonish the man who only thinks of Western Australia
as a land of gold. I then drove with Mr. Brown, amid drench-
ing rain, to Yarloop, where I stayed at the cottage of Messrs.
C. & E. Millar, and the next day inspected their mill at
Waterhouse, travelling by the zig-zag line through the Jarrah
forest. From Yarloop I went to Jarrahdale and spent a very
full day among the mills and forests of the Rockingham Rail-
way and Timber Company. Prior to this I had visited the-


Canning Jarrah Company’s Estate with my friend, Me. Eeank
Wilson, the manager. So that I have been in a position to
fairly inform myself of the prospects of this industry. And I
can say, emphatically, that its developments and promise justify
its being regarded as a great industry. But look for a moment
at these figures from “ Westralia up to Date,” the statistics
of which are quoted from Government Returns.
“ There are over 20,000,000 acres of Forest Land in Western
Australia, or between 30,000 and 10,000 square miles —the
area of Great Britain. The matured and marketable timber in
these Forests is estimated to be from 60,000,000 to 70,000,000
loads, valued at £120,000,000 sterling. Jarrah, the paving wood
par excellence , occupies an area of some 8,000,000 acres, while
Karri, only second to it in importance and value, covers
1,200,000 acres. Among the other Hardwoods of the Colony,
Tuart takes the first place, but Wandoo and other Timbers are
of considerable commercial value.”
When I was on the Continent on Exhibition business, recently,
I heard some reports in regard to the use of Jarrah for paving
which I consider of importance to the Western Australian
Timber Industry, and in respect of which I have asked my
informant to obtain for me the particulars, especially in re-
ference to Germany. I mention this fact in order to express an
opinion I have long held that it would be well if the Government
would organize, in connection with the Agent General’s Office, a
Commercial Department with a City office, which would
furnish for City men, who are interested in Western Australian
affairs, a useful bureau of information, in regard to all the
Industries of the Colony, and would keep the Government and
the heads of the various departments in Perth, through the
Agent General, in closer touch with the Commercial and In-
dustrial Movements of Europe.


Coal and Copper.
As to the other Industries of the Colony, time will not permit
me to do more than refer briefly to Coal and Copper. In the
first Interim Report I submitted to the Perth Chamber of Mines,
refering to the subject of the Coal Industry, I stated that
“The Collie Coal Field is situated about 25 miles east of
Bun bury, on the S.W. Coast of Western Australia, and about
120 miles from Perth, The area recently proclaimed as a Coal
Reserve is 231 J square miles. The quantity of Coal in the
original reserved area, 100 square miles, is estimated by Mr.
Jno. Evans, late Manager of the Bull! Colliery, N.S.W., to be
2,560,000,000 tons.
The existence of coal in the locality has been known for many
years, but public attention was first drawn to it by Mr. D. Hay,
of Bunbury, in 1889. has tested the area by a
series of diamond and hand-drill bores, the deepest of which is
about 1,000 feet. In these bores a series of large seams of
coal have been cut.”
Professor McCoy, of the Melbourne University, has expressed
the highest opinion of this coal, and the tests to which it has
been subjected prove it to be, to use the Professor’s own words,
“of great commercial value.” The completion of the Govern-
ment Railway to the Collie, and the opening of the Government
Mine, which has been taken under lease by Mr. H. M. Deakin,
will speedily prove the value of the coal measures of this
district. And if the results are satisfactory —if the West Collie,
the Collie Proprietary, and other Mines, show that they possess
coal of good bituminous quality, the future of this industry is
assured, and the opportunity it will afford to the British
Capitalist will be of no small importance. As I had the
advantage of visiting this district and of sampling the coal at
60 and 140 feet in depth, and as I have seen it used on land
.and water, I am able to bear my personal testimony to its value.


In regard to the Copper and Lead Industry, I have also had
the opportunity of making some personal investigations. I
made a special visit to the district of Northampton and
Geraldine, and on the occasion of my last trip to the
Murchison fields I went out from Yalgoo to examine the find
of copper near that town. I can, therefore, say, with confidence,
that there are, certainly, large deposits of copper in Western
Australia ; not only, however, in the districts to which I have
referred, but in others where some of the “wise men” from
the Eastern Colonies are at this time busy prospecting. In
my report to the Chamber of Mines, I say “ the first
Lead and Copper Mines in Australasia were opened in
1842 in the district of Northampton, Western Australia. From
that date until 1870 they were worked with considerable success.
There were also several smelting works in operation, at which
the lead ore was reduced to pig. The copper ore was exported
to England. In order to promote the industry, a railway, the
first in the Colony, was constructed by the Government from
Geraldton to Northampton, a distance of 30 miles. Along the
whole course of this line lead and copper deposits were found.
Subsequently another rich group of mines was discovered about
40 miles north of Northampton, on the Murchison river. The
belt of mineral country is stated by Mr. Woodward, late
Government Geologist, to be at least 70 miles in length. Owing
to the fall in values and the cost of mining, the industry lan-
guished after 1870, and until recently the mines have been left
practically unworked, only sufficient ore being raised to ballast
the wool ships from Geraldton. Now, however, that the prices
of lead and copper are rising, and the costs of transit and
mining are lessened, many of the old claims have been taken up,
and there is a prospect of a permanent revival of the industry.”
The rise in the value of copper, and the action recently taken in
America in regard to a proposed copper ring will certainly give
a new impetus to the exploitation of this mineral in our Colonies


and should draw the attention of the capitalist to the industry in
Western Australia.
I dare not stay to speak of the Lead deposits, or to enter into
the controversy which, according to the newspapers of Western
Australia, was in progress a few weeks ago between Capt.
Saml. Mitchell, of Northampton, and the West Australian
Smelting Works, as to the quantity of lead to be found in his
district, excepting to say wfith him, that it cannot be affirmed
that a district has been mined when the deepest depth attained,
and that only in one or two shafts, is 300 feet.
Other Industries.
The Tin Industry is small, but, according to Mr. Woodward-
and other geologists there is an area of some 25 miles of stan-
niferous country in the S.W. upon the Blackwood Eiver, which
should be thoroughly tested with the view of future development.
I know nothing of the Pearl Fishing Industry, nor was I
brought into contact with it in any way, so that I can only
refer you to what has already been written and said on this
subject by others. Nor can I say anything about Diamonds,
excepting that the reports of the discovery of diamondiferous
land at Nullagine and elsewhere, are likely to keep the attention
and interest of prospectors alive until something more
“ fetching ” has been found, when Hatton Garden may have its
boom in W.A.’s.
In closing this brief review of the Industries of the Colony, I
may be reminded that I have said nothing about Sandal Wood,
which was once the most important Export, nor of Iron and
other Minerals and Asbestos which have been discovered and
may by and bye pay for profitable working—nor of the Fishing
Industry, the harvest of the seas, which only waits the reaping,
nor of the possibility of creating Manufacturing Industries, an
attempt at which will be made in connection with the rolling of
the steel pipes for the Coolgardie Water supply. But these


are petite industries, the value of which bear no comparison
and can bear no comparison for years to come, if ever, with
those of which I have already spoken. It is sufficient for us, at
present, that Western Australia has gold, lands, timber, and
other resources of enormous value, of such value indeed that
it seems a strange transition and yet one that we must
make to the question of
The Commercial Depression of the Colony
Into the details of this depression, the fact of which one is
bound to admit, it is unnecessary for me to enter. The cause,
however, is, I venture to think, not far to seek. In the first
place, it is the result of a perfectly natural reaction, after a
period of sudden and inflated prosperity. Like the other
Colonies, nay, like all countries where gold has been discovered,
the rise in the values of land and merchandise, and the traffic in
everything relating to the Colony were considerable-even
phenomenal. To this_ there must succeed, in the nature of
things, a period of depression. If, for a time, everybody’s
geese in Western Australia were swans, what marvel that now
the fallacy is discovered, it leads to the opinion that there are
no swans there at all, —or if there are they are only black.
Then, too, the expenditure, which, with a greatly augmented
income, becomes itself augmented, remains or may remain a
burden upon the resources of the country. And this is what
has happened in Western Australia. This is what happened in
Victoria, in New South Wales, in Queensland.
Now, to adjust the expenditure to the revenue must necessar-
ily be a work of some difficulty. Happily, this work is being
done ; I may say, has been done. At once, without hesitation,
perhaps too precipitately, the Government of the Colony have
“ faced the music.” They have retrenched here and there
almost everywhere—with the result that numbers of men who
were employed on the public works of the Colony have had to
be discharged, and a large amount of personal distress ensues.


The check to the flow of capital, occasioned, first of all, by the
■capitalist ceasing to invest in Western Australian ventures, and
then by the Government in dealing on the lines of retrenchment
with their public works policy, must necessarily lead to
commercial disarrangements, and these naturally accelerate the
downward trend.
Thus, the slump in Western Australians in London leads to a
slump in the Colony’s credit. This means less borrowed money,
or power to borrow, for necessary developments, and so the
trouble comes. It is not a question of the Colony’s resources
at all —nor even a question of population, although that is
a matter of moment, seeing that the credit of a country is
determined largely by its population. So that if there be
•only a small population such as Western Australia possesses —
170,000 or thereabouts—the borrowing capacity of the Colony
will be'limited by that consideration ; a subject which seems to
me not to have been fully considered by the Government of the
Colony, or at any rate, by the Parliamentary parties, or some
plan of emigration on sound and practical lines, would, ere
this, have been adopted.
But, speaking generally, the commercial depression of the
Colony can only be a passing phase in its onward progress - a
phase which may and will be, in some of its features, a salutary
thing for the Government and the people, however trying and
painful it may be for the time. I say this in no mere
philosophic or unsympathetic spirit, as I have been and am
myself a sufferer from this depression. But I am as fully
convinced that the cause is but temporary, and that it will soon
pass away, as I am that the sun will shine again when the clouds
roll by. Upon this subject I may qimte the brave words of the
Premier, who, on the occasion of the farewell to Sir George
Shenton, whom all Australians in London are pleased to
welcome here, said :


“ All the great industries of the Colony were flourishing, and
if the other Colonies were able to say that their agricultural,
pastoral, timber and gold-mining industries were flourishing
he did not think they would consider that a depression existed.
The revenue of the Colony was not so great as it had been a-
year ago, or two years ago, but still two-and-a-half millions was
an immense revenue. The expenditure was too great, and it
was their duty to try and lessen it. The revenue was good
enough. It was splendid. The expenditure, however, had been
far in excess of what it should have been last year, and therefore
it had been necessary for them to curtail it. He believed that
next month or the month after they would be in a position to
say that they were living within their income. He had had his
troubles during the past six months, but he was determined to'
bring the expenditure of the Colony down to the revenue. He
would rather go out of office before he would bring discredit on
the financial position of the Colony.”
In regard to the general question of the financial position of
the Colony, the statements made by the Agent-General in his
recent addresses at the Colonial Institute, and before the
Liverpool Chamber of Commerce, and the excellent digest which
the Australian journals, published in London, and other London
newspapers interested in the finances of Western Australia,
have from time to time given, fully and clearly show that the
liabilities of the Colony bear no comparison with its available'
assets. And although the Government are certainly open to'
criticism, in regard to some portions of their expenditure, and
that criticism has been by no means sparing, yet now that the
difficulty has been fairly grasped and the lesson, as we hope,
learnt, there need be no further question as to the financial
soundness of the country, nor mistrust as to the management'
of its affairs.
The Exhibition.
Before closing my lecture I must ask your permission to'
refer in a few words to the Western Australian International


Mining and Industrial Exhibition, which is to be held at
Coolgardie in the coming Summer, and of which I was
appointed the Special Commissioner on leaving West Australia
last June. Ido not think that I can do better in this connection
than quote the words of the Agent-General himself in his
address in Liverpool. “ This Exhibition, though not a Govern-
ment undertaking, has received their patronage, and has been
assisted with a donation of some £B,OOO, and a building site p
whilst the Government have arranged to carry all exhibits free
over their railways from Fremantle to Coolgardie. It is a
splendid opportunity for the manufacturers of Great Britain to
show this offshoot of the Empire what they can produce in the
mother country.”
Into the question of whether it was wise to hold an Exhibition
at Coolgardie, especially an International Exhibition, rather than
at Perth, at so early a period of the Colony’s new development,
Ido not think it necessary to enter. I had my opinion on the
matter at the time the subject was first mooted in the Colony.
But when once the decision was arrived at-the die cast —I
saw that there was nothing to be done in the interests of the
Colony, as well as of the Exhibition, hut for every one to do his
best to make the venture a success.
It was that conviction that led me to consent to take the
position of Special Commissioner, and eventually, in view of the
difficulty of securing a suitable Agent, to undertake the work of
Official Agent as well —a work so arduous and exacting that I
am betraying no confidence when I say, that had I known what
I know now, I should have declined the position with thanks.
Although the formal opening of the Exhibition must be,
according to the necessity of the local arrangements, in March,
the Commissioners have granted, at my request, an extension
of time for receiving European and United States Exhibits to
the end of April ; and have extended the duration of the Ex-
hibition a further month, that is, to the middle or end of July,


This concession has been rendered imperative by the delays
which have occurred both here and in Coolgardie, delays, how-
ever, over which I have had no control, and which, I suppose,
are inseparable from a work of this nature. As to what the
result of my efforts will be, I cannot, at present, say. I have
estimated the total space to be filled by the Exhibits of Great
Britain and the Continent of Europe at 25,000 sq. ft., and I hope
to attain this result. But Ido not hide from my Commissioners
that to do this, under the circumstances which have
obtained in relation to their project, in London particularly, is
no mean task, and if I fail to accomplish it fully it will not be
because the most strenuous efforts have not been put forth to
realize that end.
I feel that in concluding this brief statement I must bear my
testimony to the assistance rendered me by the Agent General,
who has always received my requests for aid, and discussed
my plans, most courteously, and, as far as he could, has rendered
me every service in his power. The same applies to the
Members of my Advisory Board. I think, also, that a meed of
praise is due to Lieut-Col. Seitz, whose energy and ability in
dealing with the Continental part of my work it is difficult to
over-estimate.
I should like to say, here, that the Foreign Office gave me, at
the request of the Agent-General, every facility in approaching,
through the British Ambassadors and Ministers plenipotentiary,
the various Continental Governments. I found also that the
names of Sir Albert Rollit, Sir Frederick Abel, and other
members of my Advisory Board were of great assistance. It
may interest you to know that Col. Seitz and myself were
received with the greatest consideration, and that much interest
has been shewn in the progress of the Colony. Indeed, I look
upon the work done in my Continental tour as of great value
to Western Australia, apart altogether from the Exhibition—a
work that I hope will be followed up, and which through the


Agent-General’s Office is being followed up by the dissemination
of literature relating to the Colony, and by widening the area of
enlightenment in reference to Australasia as a whole.
As to the advantages which the Exhibition will afford to
Exhibitors, particularly of Mining and Agricultural Machinery,
and of Gold-Saving Appliances, I have no doubt whatever. Nor
do I question the interest which will be taken by the Colony at
large, and particularly by the Gold-fields towns in the Exhibi-
tion itself. The co-operation of the Eastern Colonies has been
assured, and a large number of its leading men have promised
to visit Coolgardie during the time that the Exhibition is open.
I hope, too, that a number of gentlemen from this country, who
are interested in Western Australia, will take the opportunity of
visiting the Colony during the next few months, and so will
avail themselves of the special excursion facilities which will be
afforded by the Government of the Colony, and the special
opportunities which wall be placed within their reach for inspect-
ing its various resources.
I feel further that it is incumbent upon me to express my regret
that the Government have not seen their way to support the West
Australian Chamber of Mines, and the Incorporated London
Chamber of Mines in their Greater Britain Exhibition, to be
held at Earl’s Court this year. I hoped that the Government
would have sent a duplicate of the excellent exhibit of the
Colony’s resources they are sending to Coolgardie. It may be
that even now this may be done. But, be this as it may, I trust
that the West Australian Section of that Exhibition may be
worthy of the Colony, and that the Exhibition itself may prove
a great success. At the same time, I must congratulate the
Government on their intention to exhibit at Paris next year,
because I am of opinion that the more fully the resources of
Western Australia are known, not only in Great Britain but on
the Continent of Europe, the better it will be for the general
interests of the Colony at large.


Conclusion.
I have had no time to refer to the Public Works of the
Colony —the Government Railways, the Fremantle Harbour
Works, the Public Batteries and the Coolgardie Water Scheme
all of which may be confidently regarded as more or less
remunerative.
Nor have I been able to refer to the Political History of
the Colony, or to say a word on the question, so interesting
and important to Australia and Great Britain, of Federation.
My duty has been to dwell upon the work and wealth
of the Colony and to prove, as far as the limits of such
a lecture may allow, and in terms rather popular than tech-
nical or statistical, that the resources of the Colony and its
outlook are great and assuring. With this I must be content,
assuming, as I am satisfied I may do, that an audience like this,
composed as we are of persons who are deeply interested in the
progress of that Empire to which it is our boast to belong, will
ever hope and will ourselves labour to realise that hope, that
still greater prosperity may attend the development of Western
Australia and of all the dependencies of Great Britain, and that
they and we may be drawn still closer together in the bonds of
fraternal, commercial, and industrial intercourse and in that
wider federation, which shall eventually include all the English-
speaking peoples of the Globe.
26


The lantern slides which were thrown on the sheet at the conclusion of
the lecture proved very interesting, and showed conclusively the progress
the Colon}’ is making. There were views of Perth, Fremantle, Albany,
Coolgardie, Menzies, the Murchison and Kauowna, in addition to others
showing some of the famous mines, such as the Golden Horseshoe, Hannan’s
Brownhill, Lake View Consols, and the Australia, also some fine forest
views showing the size of the karri and jarrah trees.
At the conclusion of the address, the chairman said he was sure they
would agree with him that they were all indebted to Mr. Scammell for the
lecture he had given them. He had referred at length to the various
industries of the colony, and discussed them with a good deal of intelligence
and interest. He started with the gold-fields, and referred to their brilliant
prospects and to the results already achieved. He went on to speak of the
great timber industry, and he might have told them that it was most
difficult to meet the ever-increasing demand for their jarrah and karri. He
had spoken of the agricultural industries, which were progressing by leaps
and bounds. People of the right stamp were going out to the
Colony, and turning the uncultivated lands into smiling homesteads.
But they knew that every rose had a thorn, and in his rosy description he
had not forgotten to mention one or two of the thorns. He had spoken
of a decreasing revenue. That was a matter which had been referred to in
the press from various points of view. It was generally consideied a sign
of retrogression, and he must admit that, superficially, it was fair to
consider it as such. But in this case, so far from it being a sign of retro-
gression it was a sign of progress. The revenue of Western Australia was
very largely produced from taxation—that was, Customs duties—and the
policy of the Government had been to tax those articles of consumption
which could be produced in the Colony, in order to induce people to settle
on the lands and go in for cultivation. Formerly, nearly all the food
consumed was brought from the eastern colonies, but now large supplies
were grown in the Colony, with the result that there were not so many
imports to tax, and the revenue was declining. But far from that showing
retrogression, it was a sign of progression. Their indebtedness amounted
to £10,000,000 ; but all the money had been spent on reproductive works,
on railways and tramways, harbours and rivers, and other things, and
when he told them the income from the railways alone up to June 30 last
was nearly sufficient to pay the interest on that debt, he thought it would
be frankly admitted that those who had invested their money in Western
Australia had no reason to be dissatisfied with their investment. He asked
them to join with him in thanking the lecturer for the interesting address
he had delivered.
The vote of thanks was carried by acclamation, and a similar compliment
to the chairman closed the proceedings.


1508
00074225




