

LECTURES
EDUCATION.
MADAME C. COOK.
THREE IN NUMBER.
“Private Teachers and Teachings.— Yesterday evening at the Odd-
fellows’ Hall, in Elizabeth-street, Madame Charles Cook delivered the first
of a series of lectures on Teaching,-dividing her subject into three heads —
Manners, Accomplishments, and Literature. There was a numerous and
attentive audience—one that appeared cordially to appreciate both the
matter of the lecture and the mode of its delivery. In the course of her
address (much of which was viva voce), Madame Cook gave many shrewd
and amusing hints on the subject of education, and especially in its more
practical aspect as regards family life. Several of the suggestions to parents
were decidedly good, and calculated to remedy the present numerous defects
of “private teachings.” The.entertainment concluded with a clever Tender-
ing of one of Mrs. Caudle’s lectures, which gave great amusement.” —
Sydney Morning Herald, September 1, 1876.
<£gtmfg:
LEE & ROSS, “EXCELSIOR” STEAM PRINTING WORKS,




LECTURES
EDUCATION.
MADAME C. COOK.
THREE IN NUMBER.
“Private Teachers and Teachings.— Yesterday evening at the Odd-
fellows Hall, in Elizabeth-street, Madame Charles Cook delivered the first
of a series of lectures on Teaching, dividing her subject into three heads—
Manners, Accomplishments, and Literature. There was a numerous and
attentive audience—one that appeared cordially to appreciate both the
matter of the lecture and the mode of its delivery. In the course of her
address (much of which was viva voce), Madame Cook gave many shrewd
and amusing hints on the subject of education, and especially in its more
practical aspect as regards family life. Several of the suggestions to parents,
were decidedly good, and calculated to remedy the present numerous defects
of private teachings. ” The entertainment concluded with a clever render-
ing of one of Mrs. Caudle’s lectures, which gave great amusement.”—
Eydney Mommy Herald, September 1, 1876.
LEE & ROSS, “EXCELSIOR” STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
231 & 233 CASTLEREAGH STREET.




ft uss/f
u-s-ir
PREFACE.
♦
WiiY seek, in a good cause, the patronage and name of one more
than another 1 In this generation aristocracy is fast waning into
democracy —et qui suit. I have seen, as an old teacher, that the
mistake of education rests, in this colony, more with the parent
than the pupil. As to the governess, she cannot do her duty
unless she be strong-minded and independent of consequences.
With the above attributes, she has no trouble in expanding the
intellect of young Australia, which “ surpasses all understanding.”
Where one lady or gentleman dare take that standing, there are
at least 50 in 60 that, never having held any position, with a
smattering of every condiment necessary to make the teacher,
toadying to the parents’ suggestions, and filching from Ollendorf
and Levisac, or Detruc. They spoil the pupil —contract their
mental development, and crush their natural talent. Why are
children here more than elsewhere, wilful 1 Simply, they being
crammed with the contents of various ideas contained in
books, they have no healthful play to their natural ideas,
and the teacher has not the suvoir out of the book to
explain and analyse their cute questions, which, in themselves,
are lessons frequently to the masters or mistresses. These
lectures I have specially written for the colonies, where I have for
years been largely patronized, and thus show my appreciation of
all classes that came under my care.
R F. COOK.
Versailles, Sydney.




LECTUKE T
MANNERS, ACCOMPLISHMENTS, AND
LITERATURE.
Ladies and Gentlemen, — It does not want a strong Amazonian
to come forward and express sentiments arisen through a long
course of experience. A lady in private is a lady in public, and I
hope I am not overstepping the bounds of propriety when I say I
am only throwing the gauntlet to challenge some ladies more fit
for the task, more palatable to the eye, more talented than myself.
This wise entertainment X must preface by one of the wise sayings
of Solomon, “Of making many books there is no end.” I need not
remind you, ladies and gentlemen, that this was uttered when the
art of making paper was unknown and writing was not dreamt of.
Everybody reads in our day, but the question is, whether know-
ledge devoured in a mass of works of which the greatest in
demand indicates a low standard of mind ; for, there are too many
books, or rather men read too much, and study too little. What
the crucible is to gold education is to the mind. The refining
process adds nothing to the intrinsic worth of the metal—all the
chemical process would fail to make it a baser metal—so you may
definitely conclude all the educational systems cannot make talent
when there is none : and so vice versa. Be sure, ladies and gentle-
men, it is within the reach of every one (that is not destitute of
mind) to hew the marble block upon which he or she may chisel in
imperishable characters his or her name and fame. Benjamin Frank-
lin, the great philosopher and statesman, was a printer’s boy; Doctor
Herschell, the astronomer, was a lifer’s boy in the army; Simpson,
the Scotch astronomer, was a poor weaver’s son ; Shakespeare was
a scene-shifter and candle-snuffer in a theatre—he it was who said
Be great in act as you have been in thought,
And put on the dauntless spirit of resolution.
I cannot take a better moment than the present to say surely such
language was not meant exclusively for the lords of the creation !


No, no; if not all, there surely are some here who do not believe
in the inferiority of sexes. For argument sake ; did not the Great
Creator make man of the rough coarse earth 1 Not so woman—
she was of a more refined material. History gives us many
examples, which serve to illustrate the intellectual equality of the
sexes. Pericles had his counterpart in his wife; and likewise Caesar.
Peter the Great had his Katherine; Napoleon Buonaparte quailed
under the denunciations of Madame de Stael ; and England has
produced many celebrities of high grade. Great are the number
of men in all ages who are not ashamed, in their brilliant career,
to acknowledge they owed their position to the influence and
teaching of their mother. Women, therefore, hold and move in
a most important sphere. She has the moulding and fashioning of
minds which in a future are to govern. I, therefore, hope I have
convinced some, if not all, that a female is not overstepping the
bounds of propriety and modesty when she takes upon herself the
task of entertaining those who are so kind as to patronize her.
We will first discuss the foundation-stone work of education by
treating of the words, manners, mannerism, and mannerly. How
little we pay attention to those words. Still, they are the basis of
a great or lesser future. Manners make the man—not the coat or
false education, or pocket. The latter often make us lose respect for
the owners. Money buys acquaintances, manners make friends.
Riches buy tools to act for them; manners make fools of them.
The want of manners exposes us to jeers, sneers, ridicule; and often
makes the object a subject of laughter and derision. Manners
prevents that in toto. See the very beggar at your door, whose
manners denote “ the light of other days now faded ” —he or she
will sqeeze a little bit of silver from the purse of the hardest
heart. What effect has manners on your children ? You need
not remind any of them to behave when in the presence of man-
nerly people —instinct tells a child the difference of manners; and
though young they can oft form an opinion more accurately than
elderly persons. See a mannerly child on its way to school—see
a mannerly child in school—see the headway that child makes at
school—how the teacher enlarges on the Older, talent, behaviour,
of her mannerly pupil, and predicts a great future for that mild,
and ambitious, child. Who does he or she belong to] Lord
Donehoue or Lady Gimcrack ] To neither. He or she is the off-
spring of respectable parents. It is not the dressed child of a
millionare, who seldom or ever is mannerly. Somehow, their first
lesson is not to speak to this one or that one. If they go to school
their ill manners make them distinguishable for ringing door bells,
loud laughing, deriding the poor, mocking the lame, and endea-
vouring to show that wealth commands ill-breeding. Manners to
the young should be much more cultivated than learning, because
it is the foundation of his or her future career and the stepping-
stone to their future position in life. Mannerly people are always


kind, courteous, condescending, amiable to their equals, considerate
to the afflicted, attentive to the poor, and not harsh to the unfor-
tunate. The unmannerly man is purse-proud, impertinent, and
arrogant amongst his equals, doubts every one, suspects every one,
believes no one, spurns the poor unless publicity be given to his
gift, growls at his employees, and really assumes towards every
one, more or less, worse manners than is natural to him or
her. Manners soften the ills of life ; the want of manners make
all around us miserable, and life a burthen. Mannerly is not
bowing, smiling, simpering, smerking, apologizing, toadying.
Studying the countenance to see how you should answer—the
man or woman of manners despises these tricks of custom. To
keep in with purse-proud, arrogant, ignorant people, you will see
daily persons who would run the risk of being crushed by a vulgar
omnibus, so as to be seen bow to Bill So-and-so or Jack So-and so,
who, like the moth, instead when it came from its chrysalis would
take its flights to regions unknown, will flicker, though the wings
are singed, round the lamp which disfigured it. Mannerly people can
be rich, and are rich, in mind, if in affluence, by doing good works.
’Tis mannerly to speak truthfully, and assert your right to hold an
opinion ; but, ’tis unmannerly to boast, to brag, to crush the man-
nerly, for no other reason than that they are mannerly. Manners,
as a rule, show the yiorhl state of private families; for, if the
children have manners there cannot rest a doubt but that the
whole household are respectable well regulated in all their x’elations
of life. Why, as a rule, are children in this very town unmanage-
able, unruly, and parents seem almost to have lost all control
over them 1 How frequently, in all grades of society, do we hear
parents exclaim, “ Oh, children are different here to at home !”
They are not different, ladies and gentlemen ; but the parents are
different. I will tell you nine cases out of ten, my experience, by
close observation. The first five or six years, when the greatest
attention should be shown, so as to weed their little faults, and
form a rock for their budding virtues, the following plan is, as a
rule, thoughtlessly acted on for peace and quietness :—Child cries.
“What do you cry for?” “I want a penny.” “What fori”
“To buy a lolly.” “Where will you get it h” “At the shop.”
Child gets the penny, runs to the shop, returns without hat or
bonnet. Having conquered the parent —the first step of disobedience
and want of manners ; firstly, it never asked if he or she might go.
Here lays a mistaken idea : “ I did it for peace and quietness.”
Some say, “ Oh, I cannot bear to hear a child cry.” Some even
say a greater riddle : “ Oh, if I had not given it he would have
screamed the house down.” I could go on in this strain all the
evening, but evidently, however mannerly the parents of such
children are they heed it not in their offspring. Consequently, a
love of squandering money, showing temper, unconstrained dis-
obedience, become settled in this little garden plot, and, like a


rank weed, spreads and takes hold of the moral intellect till it has
to be thrashed, like grain before it can be eradicated. How often, in
this colony, do we see young children visiting adults. The thing
is so stupid, a man or woman asking for a boy or girl of six or
eight years to come and visit them. Poor children, they must
answer questions when asked ; and if they are mannerly and
truthful, answering in their simplicity often make gi’eat words.
Then, if they have an idea they ought not to answer, being too
young to avoid tattling, they equivocate. Once that takes place,
the shame once torn from a truthful child often follows it through
life. Besides, we, as pai’ents, wish our children to partake of our
ideas, tastes, and wishes. Their little minds are soon bended any
way, and although we, as grown-up persons, may visit Mr. and
Mrs. Smith, and like their society much, wo might not know exactly
their routine of every day life ; and if we let our children go and
spend two or three weeks with them at a stretch you may depend,
ladies and gentlemen, they take the tone of those they associate
with. Eventually it erases their natural manners. In fact, it has
been proved, both physically and mentally, nothing is more preju-
dicial and pernicious to youth than associating with grown-up
people. Children should mingle with children—the amalgamation
of sexes highly desirable. It gives to both a mannerism and tone, tends
to their health, polishes and shakes off all shyness, and counteracts
boldness. Children’s meetings bring out their natural talent, and
cement friendships for years. You cannot make a child deceitful.
The nature of a child is of itself so beautiful that it will show
itself. I will wind-up manners; merely adding, we must not
confine bad or good manners to children ; for, if they have a bad
example, of course they copy it, as a rule. Whenever we employ
parties it is not necessary or mannerly to make them feel they are
employes. If we confer a favour ’tis unmannerly to let any one
be the wiser.' Tf we make an appointment ’tis unmannerly to
break it without assigning cogent reasons. What is more unman-
nerly than, at a public entertainment, to destroy the effect by
loud talking, or singing with the tenor 1 What manners can that
man or woman have who tells a wilful untruth of an innocent
person because they don’t like them 1 What sort of manners do
they possess who go from house to house gossiping 1 Better to
pick a man’s pocket than a man’s character. I think I must have
shown to one and all the necessity to cultivate manners more and
learning less for the young. To such as pay attention to this, the
foundation of learning, growth, and cultivation, must tend to lead
youth, in time, to an unerring hand, like a bright star shedding a
ray on all around, and fitting to take their flight to a better land.
Manners was from the beginning. Recollect Eve —she ate and
politely handed it to Adam. I think I cannot say but I hope I
shall be able to please all that are present as much as I feel pleased
at your kind attentive healing. To the Mayor and gentlemen


councillors of this municipality : I thank you for your prompt
patronage. To the ladies and gentlemen present lam glad to say
that the rest of this entertainment will permit your laughing gas
to commence expanding. During a short time I shall dilate on
accomplishments. Then, no doubt, by that time Mr. Caudle will
find his way home.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS.
I do not suppose in any part of the globe teachers are so well
off, so well paid, and, as a rule, do so little. Parents are large,
nay grand, in their intentions towards the rising generation, and
every available talent is swallowed up regardless of expense for
the rising youth of this great colony. The wisdom one can scarce
cavil with, as each individual fancies that they are competent
judges. Still, a fact undisputed remains for me here, fearlessly, to
say, does, as a rule, the home profit by the money expended in
accomplishments ] This is the point I wish to bring forcibly before
you. We are not all equally gifted. We cannot, young or old,
come up always to the point of expectation ; but, if truthfulness
was adhered to by the professor, we should have more pleasing
young gentlemen and ladies, instead of, as they call themselves,
amateurs —quite a myth of a name in accomplishments, like
gentlemen jockeys in the racing world. How many of your
families learn such fantastic pieces of music that you can scarce
pronounce praise ] Indeed, it seems such a fighting of the fingers,
such a noise, that were you blind you might ask yourself if some
one had not left the instrument open and the cat and dog were
endeavouring to do a minuet upon it. It seems a rule, n -«t an ex-
ception, that a certain system is taught, all, as a rule, have the
same beginning book. Why, when there is a variety] Oh,
because Mrs. Smith says Miss Jones teaches her girls and Mrs.
Brown finds Miss Jones perfect. She, may be right in her opinion;
for she pays for it; but if parents would ask themselves has Mies
Jones the reputation of Cranmer, Kalbremner, Mozart, whose
sonatas, as exercises, have never been equalled, and who entirely
did away with the strumming of the present day. It is a rule, not
an exception, when you engage to teach instrumental music, to be
told, “ You, I hope, play well.” What has the playing to do with
the theory ] It is not the players who are the best teachers ; but a
thorough knowledge of music is indispensable for the accomplish-
ment ever to become utility. We must have a pupil taught not only
fantasias but ballads; and those ballads, some of them must be a
thing of the past as well as the present. How the word fashion has
ever crept into tunes amazes the thoughtful. Fifty years ago plain
Henry Bishop, afterwards Sir Henry, wrote “Home, Sweet Home.”
See that grand air, “God Save the Queen !” by Dr. Haller, written
in George the Second’s time. I have not time to-night to quote


more \ but every pupil should repay the parent who has so cared for
him or her, by singing to them the tunes “they loved so well. How
many instances have we when a girl, after learning some years, is
asked at soiree to play , she will say “ I cannot without my
music ” or “I never play.” What mortification for the parent! what
a disgrace to the teacher, I have not imposed my young daughter
before you to-night, ladies and gentlemen, as a singer or player;
but the parties I wanted to enliven this entertainment were not
disengaged. I therefore made use of her whom I had spent so
many hours teaching. In fact, lam utilising her accomplishment.
She is too young to deserve praise ; but she does her best—who
can do more 1 And any young friend present can see that even a
little girl is acceptable in time of need.
FRENCH.
Every one learns French; at least, so they say. lam
a French lady, born at Tours. I speak seven languages as well as,
I believe, I speak English ; but then, I really learned to speak. I
never knew a scholar to require, in those days, a hamper of books
or bales of paper. You don’t want your girls and boys to trans-
late Telemachus and write a quarterly letter—you want them to
talk, to entertain foreigners. They are getting as plentiful as
blackberries in the colonies. I have been twice round the world,
and always could transact my own business, because I could make
myself understood ; and have been enabled to do many kindnesses
by making others understand. In my next lecture I explain where
and why so few speak French, German, or Italian. You
will hear of scenas from Trovatore, Traviata, Tligoletta, being
daily taught and sang. If you ask what it means, perhaps you
will get the same answer as I frequently have: “ Why, it’s
Traviata ; don’t you know ? Did you never see Lucy Escott play
Traviata 1 Don’t you know?” “But, what does it mean T I
would say. “ Oh, it’s a story like, like, like that novel—-Camilla.”
Poor “ lost one ” —you do not even get a name.
Then, there’s drawing—how neat, how nice. Did you really,
my dears, do this 1 ? Oh, yes ma —the pupil at home. How few,
how rare, how scarce is it, to see a young lady or gentleman with
her or his folio and drawing materials at home. Does it never
occur to the parent, if they did do that at school ? Why don t
they do it at home 1 What becomes of these boys and girls who
periodically appear to us, through the newspapers, from this school
and that 1 How few and far between do we hear of any colonial
talent. It is not for want of natural ability ; for the natives have
naturally great abilities. Therefore, if they don t produce pianists,
linguists, artists, there must be a wrong somewhere. That wrong
I hope soon to put before you. Parents must have, in this day of
impositions, a more matter-of-fact view of education before homes


can be made happy. Every house where money is expended on
education must and ought to be every night a family soiree. Why
has not every room a small table or easle in the corner, with a
family portfolio, where any one at any time can sit and draw whilst
another plays. In another corner of the room how easy can be
a fixture, a frame with a piece of needlework in, so that any one
at any time can sit and work ; for conversation requires no eyes.
If these small items, which the poorest can procure, and if order
and system be in the household, all we learn becomes of intrinsic
value, and repays the father and mother for their long watching.
On the other side, if parents pay for what they never see, discon-
tent, temper and all, creeps into the family circle. Ladies and
gentlemen, keep, at all events, educated respectable young men
from yonder gaol, the larrikins from the drinking shop, the young
clerk from the gaming table or night rambles. If their homes weie
more attractive they would not want to leave them. Education,
by itself, is not always a safeguard. We have, this last two years,
in this town or city of Sydney had, unfortunately, practical illus-
trations—the same education that makes us a charm to all around
us frequently, for the want of haj py homes, hurl us to destruction.
For the female portion I scarce to-night can dilate on facts. As a
rule, though, were we more charitable, they would be less degraded.
All have not the same tastes, and teachers ought to consult tastes
more. Some are brilliant, some timid, some proud, some humble,
some daring, some pleasing. Now, I will finish this evening by
giving you the pictures of two firesides. Gentlemen and ladies, make
your own deductions. Father, comes home from office tired, perhaps
vexed. So many things in a day to ruffle the family-man s
temper. He comes home because he is weary, and expects rest in
the bosom of the family he is toiling for. Perhaps with him
money matters, this day, have not gone smoothly, and he has pro-
mised his wife a cheque for Anna Maria’s music, drawing master,
and other things. The boy has become one of the funny whims of
the school, a cadet, and he must have clothes to join this little
farce of the model school. Well, here he is, -at home. Tea on the
table, he, so thoroughly worn out he cannot notice any one
but looks round for his wife. Here is his wife, instead
of sitting down chatting, she has to be in and out bringing
in the tea-pot, chops, &c. (for I suppose they only have a
servant for a week and week’s notice); whilst Sarah Jane and
Anna Maria are frightened to soil their hands or disturb their
chignons. The son, if in a trade, begins to say how his master
did this or that; if a clerk, he is too grand to see the heavy look
of the father. The meal is over. No conversation at that table to
enliven it; perhaps they may allude to the Evenimj News which
contains the loveliest of lovely murders or the most dreadful of
dreadful accidents; and then the father again becomes weary.
His daughter returns to her room, and his wife is left to wash up..


He thrusts his hands in his pockets as far as they will go, and then
he thrust his legs under the table as far as they will go, throws
his bandana handkerchief over his head, and tries to have forty
winks. His wife, when she has done in the kitchen, returns quite
happy that all is ready for the morning. Sarah Jane is at the
piano. Annah Maria sits, with her two elbows on the table,
thinking of what ? Why, directly pa and raa are settled I must
run down at the back and tell my young man where I am going to
to-morrow, so that he can meet me. Then the son, whom so much
money has been spent on to make a gentleman of him, where is
he 'I Oh, look over on that sofa. He is so tired—doing “nothing”
—that he has to take a sleep before he ventures out. Presently,
the finale to the fantasia in X Y Z comes to an end by some
astonishing loud playing ; the mother is delighted at brilliant
and clever performance, which awakes the father, who is so dis-
gusted at the row his daughter has been making, that he jumps up,
takes the bedroom candle, and goes to bed. All you hoar of these
selfish children is, when the door is shut, “Oh, pa’s always so
cross !” This, really, is not an uncommon picture; but we will
come to another. The father, after a day s toil and trouble, returns
to his home, his wife, his children. The woman of his choice, she
has well repaid him for all his cares, by having everything ready
for his return. Eliza, the eldest girl, has just put his slippeis,
which she worked, by his chair. The second daughter is waiting
for the knock, to bring in the smoking steak. The son who is to
be a tradesman has washed his face, changed his working clothes,
and smiles at the surprise he is going to give them at the table,
when he will produce a little miniature cart he has made in his
own time. The son who is a clerk has little bits of news, harm-
less, but promises his sister she shall go to a lecture by a lady who
promises to do and say nothing ridiculous. Although she has no
chairman he believes she gets on very well. Tea over, father and
mother are privileged to doze ; the two girls play quietly a duet;
the one goes and tries to finish some little drawings or paintings
on small cards. They are for the bazaar. The son is trying over
a song with the other sister, and the other boy is making a toy for
the baby. Presently, the daughter plays some of the old ballads
from which the new tunes are being taken from: “We Met,”
“Oh no, we never mention her,” “Alice Grey,” “Ben Bolt,
“ She wore a wreath of roses.” Father looks at mother, as much
as to say, “My dear, this is all your doings.” Mother looks at
father with a twinkle in her eye, as much as to say pardonnez
’tis yours ; then begins, “ Do you recollect when first I met you T
“ Yes, my dear ; the night I wore a wreath of roses,” ma says.
Children then listen, with a bit of fun in their countenances, at
the reminiscences of the courtship of their parents. Papa
then sings, “Oh, would I were a boy again;” ma, she
“Oh no, we never mention it.” So, the whole family are


amusing each other j a friend of the old folks calls in; they recite,
or sing, or play \ some young friend drops in, takes a turn at
whatever is going on ; at 9 to 9-30 the table is pushed aside, a
little dance. The family Bible is introduced in this mannerly
orderly well regulated family, and gratitude to God is on every
countenance for the blessings enjoyed, and gratitude to parents for
all they have gone through for their sakes. Parents are equally
pleased. Boys don’t want to go out, because they have amuse-
ments at home; and girls feel a pride when they look on
their brothers as dear kind boys. The young visitors, male
and female, soon establish themselves in this well regulated
family. Thus, accomplishments become utilized, if not excellent —
amusing : (for all cannot be professionals), Refinement, if I may
use the term, would crawl into the bosoms of any family, no
matter whether they be rich or poor, high or low (according to the
people’s ridiculous notions), similar tastes would find similar minds,
and ultimately they would twine like the vine round similar hearts.
The consequences it does not want any very clever pei’son to guess.
Parents openly would approve of their children’s choice, and the
word subterfuge, the sly meetings, &c., would be a thing unknown
in that family.
Now to the last accomplishment for this evening:—
DANCING.
Oh, none of you need be frightened ; don’t be shocked respect-
ing dancing ] don’t make up your minds I am going to say
anything very wicked. lam born a French woman, and I verily
believe I was born dancing, I teach it, and I really, ladies and
gentlemen, find less vice in it than many other accomplishments.
There is no tete-a-tete like in music and singing; theie’s no sitting
beside you as in drawing. No; all is open and aboveboard. There-
fore, listen, please, to what 1 have to say, and what I will prove,
and I feel sure some of you will send me some pupils. Dancing,
like music, is specially spoken of in Scripture and ancient histories.
It has not been handed down to us as a vice—always with expres-
sions of joy, grace, happiness. So pretty is real dancing that
even fiction makes it poetry. Fairies, as a rule, are repi’esentcd
dancing, on a moonlight night, under the shade of a mushroom ;
some under a rose leaf. The Elves of the Rhine Sir Lyttelton
Bulwer describes as balancing themselves on blades of grass. The
dervises, or wise men of Persia, before they sat down to debate
always formed a ring and danced. The girls of Rome danced
before their warriors. I cannot find in any country records of
impropriety in the dance, until assembly rooms became like
registry offices —for both sexes sans question. About thirty years
ago the polka, &c., was introduced by the Poles; it suited them—
not us. I cannot find anywhere dancing to be handed down


to us as improper, tending to vice. Now comes what I would
feign not have to say; but, in this series of education, I am bound,
in honour to myself and pledged to my kind hearers, to say truths,
though to-morrow I might see it thrown back to me. There’s no
denying it, this is the age which tries both sexes. I cannot find
any precedent for four hundred years, where fiction was preferred
to truth—and nature. Patches and fronts of false hair, false
cheeks, false figure, false height, false education, false gods; and
then dancing, like everything else, holds a false position. ’Tis
only in rare instances an art. Can the father conscientiously allow
his children to join these dancing rooms where one person’s money is
as good as another’s 1 where the man meets the maid, and the maid
meets the master 1 What sort of dancing masters or mistresses
are they who see strange men take young blushing girls, scarce
entering their teens, round the waist as if in a vice, with his hand
grasping hers, and forcing her arm like the crossing of the letter
T—their bodies so close that the compression must be painful—
and not check such positions 1 What affianced man can contem-
plate the girl of his choice in the arms of one of our daring volun-
teers frantically stepping the polka 1 Poor polka ! how funny you
have become. In your fallen country, Poland, you were the
national dance—graceful, cheerful, the dance ot kings and peasants
—really you are more degenerated than your fallen countrymen.
They may rise again, but you are so strange, you bear such a bad
repute, you are so degraded, you cannot, even in this strange country,
be introduced in respectable society. Alas ! weep; for you have
fallen, never to rise higher than the dance rooms. The beautiful
German valse, the graceful quiet mazy dance for two, here is turned
into a boisterous, rude, indecent romp, which are taught by one,
two, and a hop; the men straddle their legs like an acrobat, and
the females whirl till their dresses expose their thick
ankles and clumsy feet—this very dance so popular amongst
men and the servants put you in mind of a Chinese cracker
whirling round a bundle of horsehair and a boiling washing
pot, the top of the dress being white and the neck representing
soap-suds. As for face, arms, legs, they cannot be discerned.
Forty, fifty, couple spinning round for a wager. Ladies and gen-
tlemen, slow exercises have the same effect on the body as slow
exercises on the fingers of those learning an instrument—they
expand the chest, develop the bust, straighten the backbone,
enlarge the muscles, improve the gait, introduce manners. When
this part is well gone through a more sanitary, graceful, improving,
cheerful amusement and accomplishment does not exist; for young
and old, all can join in the motley group.


LECTURE 11.
ON TEACHERS AND SERVANTS.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —Many I see before me who were here
on the last occasion I had the honour to appear before you. When
first the idea of presuming to call an audience together on the
world-divided topic, Reformation in Education—’twas merely for
private families. Private families lack, as a rule, the want of nicety
in engaging the requisite talent. Often have I heard it said, “ Oh,
well; the lady I have Ido not care for; but, she seems quite as good
as we can get here.” A great mistake ; for there is more talent hei’e
in these colonies—for the population —than in any part of the world
double the size. It requires discrimination, for experience must
be in the age, like the pearl of Port wine, and age in the present
age est nul part. Again, “ Miss S. is very nice, but she cannot
manage our Sarah Jane.” I could go on the whole evening.
However, as I see a respectable, discriminating, and kind assembly,
who must have come to hear some new suggestions, I fancy my
task is not so difficult if I am capable of making clear
ideas to-night, with regard to the two positions. I
must here state, before I provoke the wrath of the great
system of infallible knowledge, and attack the Board of
Education (par, excellence ), to whom (en jmssant), I make
an appropriate salam; these lectures are really strictly private,
et si par exemple, I have had the temerity to tread upon private
property (for all that pertains to the State is so, I believe). Pity
“pity,” and put it down to ignorance, not impertinence. I
call an incompetent governess quite as much a nuisance in a house
as a saucy servant. I shall be amply rewarded if you go away
satisfied that a lady lecturer can be bearable, can be amusing, can
throw out hints, and while away the hour. In fact, lam
here as much to show any lady who thinks she can impart
a new idea, in these telegraphic times, to this wonderful and
rising generation of Australia, she is acting as a universal bene-
factress, to do so without any squeamishness—if there is such a
word in the English language. My last argument, on Manners ,
proved clearly that is the starting point of education, attached to
learning in conjunction with accomplishments, will make any young
family holy, happy, and content; for, manners makes you hos-


pitable, education refines that hospitality, and accomplishments
bind the whole in a family soiree, where the parents form the
audience; the young are the mannerly part, and those who can
read, sing, play, become the actors. In such a family who would
care to leave its freshness for the opera houffee, with its laxity of
circumstances and language, or an improbable sensational drama;
say nothing of the style of many of the performers, who do not
even take the trouble to act their nonsensical parts. Now, to
make myself understood to all parties, without being, thought like,
unlike the old man and his donkey, I wish, with my distinctness,
to please both sides; but I would not like to be turned over, or
turned out—l think I would rather run with the hare. First,
then, to governesses; and recollect, ladies and gentlemen, I know
quite well those who do not coincide with me will say she is a
monomaniac; for none have ever dared to step forward unchal-
lenged to put down popular systems, and home conventialities;
but what have been denounced as such rHimporte, as long as some
go away pleased, and others do not ask for their money back, I
shall infer, to an extent, they have had their value. It is no use
shaking your heads, you cannot be a first-class instructor of either
sex without birth, breeding, toning, cultivation, much observation,
great patience, and a firm and kind disposition. Recollect that if
you want fine horses, fine cattle, of any sort, not only large but
symmetrical, you must cultivate, watch, and tend them. How
much more care and attention, combined with careful training,
must you have when entrusted with the regulating of the minds
of a future generation. Every teacher should not only know of
the past, but must teach what takes place at present, for the pupil
est pour le future. What sort of teaching is that which drums
into a girl’s head of William the Conquerer, and leaves William
the Emperor of Russia unknown 1 Great care should be taken to
prevent the instructress from having too many books. Simply
that one original piece must be worth a hundred copies; and as
long as youth are allowed to copy we shall continue to find
Australian works a curio instead d’une affaire ordinnaire. It is
strange, though nevertheless a fact, immediately the young Aus-
tralian visits Europe, and there partakes of education, en gros,
his native talent overtops all your European college bred-and-
born students ; showing clearly the breed—though transplanted
from its parent soil—by this said transplanting has surpassed the
original seed, and inquires only the same care of cultivation to
excel it. Their odes, their essays, are lauded from one college
to another. This is easily explained. Education is, or cught to
be, free; for, as the mind differs, so the brain differs, the
tastes differ; consequently, when pupils are compelled to say
what is in a book, they feel more or less obliged to think as
the writer of that book; their own thoughts being entirely
thrown aside. Should they want to explain in their way, the


teacher calls their attention to “ the book.” Should they remon-
strate they are called “ impertinent,” “ ignorant,” or “ rebellious
and they are crushed, instead of being lauded for originality. I talk
of private tuition. The pupil is allowed a wide range, free, unfettered,
laissez-aller way. They are sent to Europe, a new creature of a
new country, with cultivated necessaries laid on a good foundation,
and only wanting a wider field to expand this genus de
homo nuovo. Up to the present time (1876) we can scarce
say that our teachers, natives of the colony, no matter who,
or what they are, where or how they have been educated, can
have any pretension to be finishing instructors, be they ever
so clever—they lack the most essential want, experience.
Therefore, we must go to the mother country for a time, and see
what they send us. As a rule, they are the daughters of clergymen,
■officers both army and navy, and barristers, who, during the lives
of their parents, were nurtured with tenderness, educated care-
fully, first-class finishing masters to study under, surrounded by
luxury, steeped in extravagance. The father dies ; his inheritance
to his children —his debts—his penury. The recollection of the
past. After all is over, the family come to a conclusion they must
work. They are not fit for service; who will marry them now
they are poor ] (Just as if they had not been so for many years).
They will start as governesses. These women are the good
teachers. Hope, to them, is dead; friends, they have none;
acquaintances they do not want. require to earn their bread,
and are determined to maintain their position as gentlewomen.
They thrive when they are instilling into their pupils superiority
to others of the same class ; and their greatest grief is to have any
interference in their plans of imparting, or checked by parents not
permitting them to carry out their ideas. For a good teacher has
order, system, and plans which, if disarranged, turn her mind
from her original purpose, and renders her incapable of imparting
all she meant, because her employers have made a mistake by
interference. In Europe a lady of position, talent, and knowingly
clever, has £IOO per annum, the use of the family carriage, her
own bed and sitting room. She never intrudes in the drawing
room unless invited ; she never dreams of marriage ; rather toil
all her days than forget what she was. The daughter of her
employers may marry for money. She would only marry a man
■who would have made her an offer in days gone by. With these
strict notions, it is not at all uncommon in Europe for young
governesses to stop in a family until they are all grown up, and
not unfrequently the family settle on them an annuity; thereby
precluding the possibility of want overcoming her. Where the
family is large, then is introduced a nursery governess. Their
functions are as follows :—They see the young children are ready
for prayers in the school-room, where they join the older branch of
the family; they superintend their breakfast, they take them for


a morning walk ; they prepare them for the school-room ; and by
their cheerfulness, respectful manners, and orderly commands, and
under the influence of the finishing governess, they eventually
become clever; for they are always in attendance to watch and super-
vise their young charge. Her apartment is the nursery, without
drudgery. She sees, with nicety, to their little wants, and is
always ready to mind all that pertains to the appointments of her
department. Tradesmen’s children are seldom good governesses or
tutors. As a rule, they are well off in money matters. They are
sent to boarding school; get so petted, so admired, that their
notions seldom are sufficiently staid. Their parents being wealthy,
at the end of a certain period they are sent to those enigmatical
seminaries where expense forms the nucleus of attraction; and
they return home with a fashionable exterior. Parfaite amour.
These girls want to get married. They seldom would be an
acquisition in a family as governess. Indeed, my personal
experience, which extends over thirty years, leaves me to
observe, a “ boarding school miss ” is spoiled from getting a
living, from any educational point. They are, as a rule, very
different to what they ought to be—they learn what they
like and how they' like, do what they like, and turn out
very different to what their parents like. All families will find
it much to their advantage and their children’s welfare to have a
private individual domiciled with them; not losing sight of their
children. We should hear less of clerks gambling, girls making
mesalliance , if private teaching in respectable families was the rule,
not the exception. Somehow, in this country you will give £IOO
per annum at a school, and you offer a lady not more than you
give your cook. Now, we will talk nearer home. Many ladies
and gentlemen have come to this colony under engagements; their
agi’eement appearing all couleur de rose. The voyage over, their
destination reached ; a stranger amongst strangers ; they pine lor
the old country and pursue the routine I pointed out a while ago.
What is the consequence 1 They are not treated with consideration.
What does she want lis a common question. Has she not more
than ever she had 1 decidedly not. I suppose she thinks herself
better than us 1 decidedly not, for her decadence was too great ever
to dream of comparison one way or the other. These little non-
sensical phrases are innocently spoken by thoughtless parties, and in-
stead of the teacher being treated with courtesy a breach is made at
the offset; and I feel confident that not two in ten who come out with
families stop their engagement, simply through each conceiving a
wrong impression of each other ; so that the colonists seldom care
to engage the finished lady from home, and falls back upon the
young inexperienced governess of the present day. Query if many
of them understand really what they undertake, as I am about to
prove to you. There is, amongst the governesses from the public
school, girls, strictly respectable, who, having been a pupil for


many years, present themselves in the training school. But here
ends their capabilities. Go to their homes ; see the position in
society they hold; they pass examination; they get from
£25 to £3O or £4O. See what that money does—see what
evil it brings—see how it ruins the innocent. For they begin
to receive money at fifteen years old—for what 1 To take
them out of their position. Girls of such parentage, &c.,
ought to go to service ! and ought not to pass the rubicund
of society. They may be crammed with knowledge; they are
respectable enough; but how can they teach what is more
necessary than book lore —■ position ? How have they been
situated ] What position is their family in, that they could instruct
your children in the elements of manners 1 What education have
they 1 I will tell. An excellent system, a knowledge of many
things, but like Martha, “ lack the one thing needful.”
How do these children of public schools behave, as a rule,
directly they are out of their sight] Fights, knocking at doors,
ringing bells, assaulting a black man, irritating a drunken woman,
and if you go to complain, you are told they cannot attend to
every little tale that is brought to them. I speak from experience.
These are the manners at a public school! The foundation of edu-
cation, order, and everything that is good is there, but managing.
Of course, as long as salaries are given to a certain class, we shall
have no servants —all teachers; and by-and-by there will be no
pupils ; for, like the Kilkenny cats, they will eat each other up. I
know of ladies lately who underwent a long course of home education,
were getting good salaries, and employer as well as employed lived
for a considerable time each equally pleased with the other ; some
six months ago a number of these “crammed swallows ” went up the
country, and really took situations varying from £SO to £BO per
annum ; taught music ; how ] The employer never asked from
whom they had learned, or for how long. They taught French from
Ollendorf and its key, and were so accomplished and young that
these ladies were eventually dismissed. They, the new governesses,
were scarcely placed—one did this, the other that, and so on—all
went wrong. Why ] these girls, when they got into private houses,
had no experience in manners, or anything else; were presumptive
and impertinent, making a dead set either at the master or the son.
It was not their fault; it was the wrong position they were in.
These young governesses have no heart, no mind ; it is all money ;
for were the employer to ask them where they reside when at home,
and were to make a point of visiting that home, nine cases out of
twelve you will see a decent hard-working woman scrubbing, scrap-
ing, with a lot of children, more or less, like herself, living on this
girl’s salary out of the public till. Again, I impress on one and
all, ladies and gentlemen, fashion the mental department of
your children, and your choice will decide their future. I have
clearly put before you the advantages of the two classes of


governesses. Those who want many books cannot know anything
themselves. Books, of course, are necessary, but fair play to
pupils in composition, elocution, debating questions, analysing
logically, bring out tastes pour le future.
I must once more emphatically say that this is not said out of
any animus that I have to any class. I merely say what I know
as a fact of a class —not individuals. lam expounding clearly to
private individuals that the class of people which it would be
desirous for the Board to pass seldom present themselves, simply
for reasons I have this night brought under notice. Ladies who
o o
would like to add to their knowledge the present national system
in this colony, have to see young girls pass by them, get into
schools, &c., &c., while they remain statu quo.
Now to servants. Can any reasonable thinking person amongst
our community want a girl or woman to do what they have not done
themselves, if not actually themselves, their fathers and mothers
before them ? I know no one. lam a bird of passage. I ask no
questions because I do not want to be enlightened on what does
not concern me. If Mr. S. has £IO,OOO, it- is not necessary for
some kind creature to say, “ Oh, well he may—his father was this
and his mother took in ship’s washing,” and so on. No : from the
beginning of this or any other new country, people of all grades
and all countries leave their birthplace simply to try, in a new
world, to alter what some call fate, others fortune. Therefore, to
think, in these enlightened times, that a domestic in the north
should traverse the Atlantic and land in the Pacific, dieu sail oil,
to remain a domestic is a notion if not exploded will have to be ;
and all your immigration plots of bringing out servants to be
servants here is out of question. How can any thinking mind
imagine a woman or girl who has been three months hearing
“ Jack’s yarn of the new gold country they are coming to, where
men are waiting on the wharf to pick them up to marry them ;
each man has his own weight in gold, and a large mine where he
can dig as much more as he likes !” How can these girls settle
down 1 No, she has been building castles in the air, and has come
on shore with a dogged determination, if she has to go to service,
she will marry the master’s son ; for she knows quite well what a
lot is in this country; and no real lady and gentleman, including
the viceregal party, but what was no better than they should be.
No matter what well appointed house she is fortunate to go into,
she has made up her mind “ that they are nobodies I” and though
she sees luxuries in such plenty, carriages, footmen, all. No ! her
mind is made up. She leaves this place, and, as a rule, never
Betters her position—goes down, if anything. Should she have
the misfortune, with her ideas, to be good looking, there are more
facilities in this part of the world for her castles in the air becoming
actual, and she a lady, than anywhere else. Therefore, be well
assured, ladies and gentlemen, for good servants —as some of us


can testify, and more have heard of—l speak of the servant who
is a friend of the family ; I speak ot the servant whom in many
family mansions you will see their likenesses on the wall with the
ancestors ; I speak of the servant who sacrificed wages, emolument,
all, to stand by the master and mistress whose house he or she had
been brought up in, whose protection they had had from their
youth up, and whose wealth had made them wealthy; and whose
children, perhaps children’s children, had had their portraits taken
to hand down to future generations, as the faithful good servants.
Therefore, one and all must turn your attention to importing
families who, wanting to improve their condition, improve the
colonies ; but pray do not imagine you will ever import the genus
domestica ; they are like the moa—out of date, and their bones
shall be sought for amongst the curios of the past. Now, I can
tell you how, where, when, you shall find a fine race of white
children for you to rear for the future generations. Now,
each person cast your eye of enquiry towards up country,
where there are very decent people with large families, who
have the wish, but not the means, for their children to be
taught the Word of God and to read and write, I say, turn your
attention to these kind of servants, and through information from
ministers or an advertisement you get a bush child at six or eight
years old; healthy; always been used to hard work ; and that
child will, under surveillance and with kindness, do, on the whole,
as much as a grown up person. * Here, ladies and gentlemen, is a
re edique Topsy. She has been with me eighteen months. By
her incomprehensible figure, her fat cheeks, her rosy face, her grin,
you could not do else than think she had not been in town more
than a day. This child, ladies and gentlemen, is in her morning
costume, a leather apron. Why 1 She wears that because she has
to clean the kitchen fireplace and light the fire. This apron will
not burn. Her duty, then, is to clean the master’s and her own
boots, wash her face and hands; lay the breakfast for three;
and I can assure you, ladies and gentlemen, I do not live in a
muggy way. I have my tine breakfast cloth, with the usual plate,
ware, &c. She then has her breakfast, generally of bread sop ;
afterwards cleans the knives, forks, empties the slops, and is ready
at 9-30 to go to Trinity School; at 12-30 she returns, lays the
lunch cloth, and dusts (under surveillance) the drawing, dining,
and two bed rooms; has her dinner (of meat), washes up the
lunch plates, and is at school at 2-30 ; returns at 4, lays the dinner
cloth, puts in the pantry extra, for fear an extra person should
come in, and then goes sometimes for a message or mends her
clothes; at 5 p.m. she has her tea; for at 6 she has to be standing
at the right-hand of her master, to hand round the plates; at 7,
after washing up, she goes to bed. This child comes from the Goul-
burn side. The mother, very respectable, was left a widow with a
large family. I had no servant at the time—l sent up for two girls.


The one at eight I intended to rear for the kitchen and one for up-
stairs. The one at eight was not a good disposed child.
This one will be, if she is spared, one of the finest servants
in the colony. She is now eight years; she knows her
work ; she has never missed Sunday school; and at the Trinity
Picnic she was the finest child there and the finest runner; having
run two matches and getting prizes. This is what you must, one
and all, do, get a Topsy. Rear your servants, ladies and gentle-
men. Do not depend upon periodical spasmodic philanthropy of
this lady and that lady, to open asylums to rear servants ; and,
presently, you come to the conviction that the girls in this institu-
tion are only reared for this one and that one. No; there are
many up the country who would confide their children to your
care for ten years ; but I would advise all to have nothing to do
with town children; let them be bush children. If they are coarse
and ugly, so much the better. Be kind and firm. You will find
that their defects will disappear. They are all good workers. Be
kind to them, but do not allow them to eat with you or to be
continually at your elbow. They then grow up perceiving the
difference between master and man. lam sure each person who
takes this step will never regret it. And, by all means, send them
to school; for it brings them in contact with other children. It
is the great punishment (far greater than beating or starving) to
keep them at home. Topsy, you can now make a curtsey to these
ladies and gentlemen, and I hope your good character will be the
means of many bush children being held up in a future generation
as the faithful servant and the friend of the family. I said, in my
last lecture, I never knew a lady who really did not understand
what and how all house duties ought to be performed ; and I cer-
tainly never knew a lady who preferred doing her own domestic
duties if she could afford a servant. But what astonishes me, who
has, as you see (so I have to own it), passed the zenith of my day,
to bear the necessity of opening schools to learn to dust, to cook,
to sweep—all, in vulgar phraseology, fudge ; for all ladies under-
stand how to supervise their household, and it is only the parvenue
who feigns to ignore what she really is au fait at.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have endeavoured to show you that a
governess must be experienced and must be treated well \ that
many mistakes, through education, are daily being made by the
facility of the public schools ; and many are teachers who really,
through birth and social position, ought to be servants ; and, as long
as you are satisfied to employ these teachers, there will be a
scarcity of servants.
My next lecture will be upon the necessity of History, both
ancient and modern.


CHORUS.
DEDICATED TO THE FIFTY SUBSCRIBERS OF THIS WORK.
A little laugh, even at one’s own expense, is, we are told by
medical men, a wholesome medicine ; but I cannot laugh. lam
grateful. The pourquois and the parce que may not be unaccept-
able to the fifty subscribers who have given their names to this
publication. Particularly grateful to them I am, because they
received me courteously, heard my tale to retail facts, and
responded to my demand. Many amongst the names were gentle-
men, young, who really will scarce know what to do with it when
received ; others will give it a position.
As the song says, “ With one accord listen to my song
Gentlemen, —I have been exactly one month getting fifty
names ! The excuses, the funny sayings, the extraordinary sub-
terfuge used to avoid this little modicum, was laughable to the
extreme, and as it will form the foundation of a Christmas tale,
w T hich will come out in a periodical, for the moment I will say
pax vobiscum. You, though, may like to learn how la creme de la
creme treated—not me—but my pi’etty little notes on nice scented
paper.
I have published before—six lectures on New South Wales.
These lectures I began in San Francisco, and they took me all over
America, and on my return all through New Zealand, commencing
at the southern ports Otago.
Revenez a mon histoire. I bought one pound’s worth of stamps,
all bearing the orthodox portrait of Her Majesty ; then I went in
for envelopes and paper. I wrote merely a note thus worded :
“ To May I be permitted to put your name down as a
subscriber to a work lam desirous of publishing 1 I enclose the
names of a few gentlemen who have favoured me, &c., &c. May
Ibe favoured with an answer ? ” Now all those who have seen
me, I hope, will say I was mannerly, mats que direz vous, when I
tell you, by the aid of the Directory, I addressed seven real
judges, really subscribers; there was only one who had manners, and
he sent me quite a snufiy letter of two pages. He must certainly
have been a bachelor, and when I referred again to the Directory,
and saw to what Court he belonged, I exclaimed—Prodigious !
No wonder you decree with such facility between man and wife.
My next day’s posting was a matter of fifty-two real M.L.C.’s. I
calculated that I might get thirty answers. Can any of you guess
how many of them had manners 1 Perhaps some invidious sub-


scriber will say none. Guess again.— One. He must be a jolly
man, and a man of manners ; he returned my note, putting in a
business way a corner up, writing thereon —“ Put me down one
Lucas.”
My next move was rather republican and continental. I
addressed the Savans en masse , “Messieurs Professieurs.”
Though University men, they might have seen I was not used to
grand folk ; but they never answered. I began to look blue, and
my postage stamps, paper, &c., looked thinning; and my old quo-
tation of Shakspeare came to my mind—“ Be great in act,” &c.,
and I took the Directory again, wrote to the Postmaster
General, who visited me until fortune frowned on me, and raised
him above the vulgar herd ; he of course had no manners. I then
turned myself and notes to another learned specie —barristers and
lawyers, adfinitum. I received one answer—declining. Well, I
thought, I shall have to go begging. Then I recollected I had not
addressed the knights and some real ladies. I had an answer from
one lady only; she is, and always was, a lady. The Barnum
people were always for many years pre-eminent in courtesy. The
Sir ’ s was a very prudent answer; of course he belonged to
the Crown. He did not commit himself to be a subscribei ,if the
work came out I might call; and wishing me every success, &c.
Well, I thought all this talk about “Upper ten,” “Patronage,”
“Advance Australia,” will never get my work out. I called first at a
Government office. I would publish your names, and hold up the
fifty subscribers as mannerly, not because they took a number, but
because they treated me as a gentlewoman, and all I can say at pre-
sent of the whole is, that honor shall be given to the Caesars on all
occasions.
The present work consists of the lectures as I gave them, without
revising them as a book. The next number, which I propose issuing
about the 15th of next month, admits of the—Possibility,
Probability and Capability of the future of Australia, particularly
New South Wales; of the arguments, pro and con., of different
systems of education of various countries; the boou of public insti-
tutions with respect to educating the million, and the various
abuses they are liable to. The whole will include the continental
system of private teaching; the mistake of vacations; and the
necessity of home influence.
J R. F. C.


3 1508 00246656


