





LECTURE
ON THE LEGITIMACY
OF THE
Papal Sovereignty,
BY THE
KEY. BE. OTTAVIO BARBANTI, O.S.F.
|Ton rvipit movtalia,
&ui regna flat
• /
Brev. Born,,
“ He, that giveth Celestial Kingdoms,
Taketh not away Terrestial ones.
Homan Breviar , Epiphany Hymn
Melbourne;
Printed and Published by T. VERGA, 78 Russell Street.
*
<s
MDCCCLXX.




TO THE READER .
%
The Lecture which is here offered to the public,
was delivered by the author in St. Patrick’s Hall,
■»
Bourke Street West, Melbourne, for the benefit of
“ St. Francis’ Young Men’s Society/' As some
Newspapers have given the accounts of it in such
a mutilated form and unchronological order,
as to render the meaning of certain propositions
obscure and doubtful, the author has consented to
have it published in full. The Lecture when deliv-
ered was enthusiastically applauded and was termed
a learned and instructive Lecture. It is to be hoped
that the reader will feel the benefit of it at this very
time, that the Papal Sovereignty is so much impugn-
ed bv the imitators of those, who to their sham®
and destruction, cried out “We will not have this
Man to reign over us/* —Luke xix, 14.




On the Legitimacy
OF THE
PAPAL SOVEREIGNTY.
&enc quoti lutili ut nemo ampiat eovonam tram,
« Hold fast that which thou hast, that no Man
TAKE AWAY THY CROWN.” —ApoC. ili., 2.
; ”
Napoleon I, that haughty and ill-fated conquerer, who
for a while sported with crowns as with toys, uttered a
sentence, which shortly afterwards he himself found, to his
own reproach and humiliation, to be eminently true. On
giving the order to General Radet to seize on Pius YIT,
and to compel him, in the Emperor's name, to renounce
his temporal dominion, or to suffer himself to be arrested,
and led a captive into France, Napoleon said, “ That the
Papal Sovereignty was a master piece of genius and human
policy.” * And certainly he was right, for as a French poet
not the least friend of the Papal Sovereignty, says u lt is
in the recesses of the Vatican that policy reigns, and Rome
either in peace or war, is destined to be the mistress of the
earth.” f
* L’Evidenza della verità strappò dalla bocca dello stesso Napo-
leone nel tempo die piu mirava alla destruzione del governo pon-
tificio ch’era stato questo il capo d’opera du genie e dell’umana,
politica. — Memorie Storiche del Cardinal ,p. 6.
+ Au fond du Vatican regnait la politique.
} ome dont le destin dans la pais, dans la guerre,
I si. d’etre en touts les temps maitresse de la terre”
Quoted by Cardinal Cocca 4, Part J, e ir, / 61


But though Napoleon said right, still he did not say all.
He should have said, the Papal Sovereignty is a master
piece, wherein God’s finger is to be found all through ; for
a sovereignty that dates its origin back to the foundation
of the Eastern empire; a sovereignty that has sustained
many gallant struggles and trials of every description ; a
sovereignty that has baffled its adversaries, and beaten
down the weapons ot the mightiest powers of the world ;
a sovereignty that has saved Europe more than once from
utter barbarism, and arrested the despotism of the Empe-
rors, and diminished the inconveniencies and pretensions
of the feudal sy stem ; a sovereignty that has opened its
maternal arms to sciences, to literature, to legislation, to
tine arts, when they found no abettors in the Areopagus of
Athens ; a sovereignty that for thirteen centuries has been
the benevolent asylum of the poor, homeless, oppressed and
wrongly persecuted; this sovereignty, I say, must be
something more than the masterpiece of genius and human
policy. It must be the work of God ; a work designed
by His wisdom, governed by His providence, consolidated
by His mighty hand, forth», benefit of humanity, religion
social order, and public security.
And it is of this sovereignty that I have the honor to
speak to you, and to lead your attention through all its
phases. I would, therefore, wish you to understand pro-
perly the nature of my theme. Ido not speak of the fit-
ness of the papal sovereignty, nor of papal authority over
princes, nor of the papal political influence, nor of the papal
deposing power, nor of that question, which has been
rejected as an absurdity by all theologians, “
sit do minus tofius mundi ,” whether the Pope be sovereign
of the whole world.* 1 confine my remarks to the legiti-
macy of the Papal Sovereignty, pointing out to you its
* Bellarminus de Horn. Pont., Lib. Y., c. 2, 3


providential origin, its marvellous growth, its majestic
antiquity, and I have no doubt that, every sincere, impar-
tial, unprejudiced thinker will agree with me in engraving
in golden letters around the tiara, that adorns the venera-
ble bead of the Pope, the divine motto : —“Hold fast that
which thou hast, that no man take away thy crown.”
Tene quod habss ut nemo accipiat coronam tu am..
PART I.
I. Frequently Sovereignty is confounded, by people
who are not well up to theological distinctions, with Supre-
macy ; an essential difference exists between them, and to
confound them would be equivalent to upsetting; the con-
stitution of the Church.
The Papal Supremacy is a scriptural and dogmatic fact,
which is to be believed with divine faith ; the Pope has
received it not from the people, not from the Church, not
• from the College of the àpostles, not from any potentate
of the world, but immediately from Jesus Christ; and by
it the Pope is the Vicar of Christ, the lawful successor of
St. Peter, the visible head of the church, the father and
doctor of the faithful, the centre of unity, infallible ir.
all his decisions regarding faith and morals, and upholding
a primacy of honor and jurisdiction over the entire Church
of Christ.
The Papal Sovereignty is an historical fact, connected
with a marvellous disposition of God’s all ruling providence,
and by it the Pope is the temporal lord or king of that ter-
ritory known in the political history of Europe as St, Peter’s
patrimony, or the States of t Church.
IT, The antagonists of the Papal Sovereignty on account
of the different motives by which they are actuated, may be


divided into three classes, namely, religions, infidel , and
political antagonists.
The religious antagonists are those, who behold with a
kind of anger and dismay the revival of the Catholic sprit
which signalizes the present era. They see that the church
is so symmetrical in ail her parts, so beautiful in her unity
so powerful in her strength, that she makes daily inroads
upon the domain of error ; she achieves conquests in new
and heretofore untrodden regions, and more important still,
she regains the ground supposed to have been lost to her
for ever. Now, to check this glorious movement, and if it
were possible, to beat back the victorious banner of the
Church, those who are opposed to her and desire to stop
her marvellous progress, assail the temporal power of the
Pope, that territory, that throne, that sovereignty, which
secure the independence of the Holy See, and assist ma-
terially the Father of the faithful in promoting the interests
of religion, and preserving the freedom of the Apostolical
authority.
The infidel antagonists of the Papal Sovereignty, assail
C / %j 7
it with a well understood object. They know that the
Church is the arch-enemy of infidelity and anarchv, always
inculcating that “ There is no power but from God,
and they that resist the power, resist the ordinance of God
and purchase to themselves damnation.”* And so lorm as
n
she is the consecrated ark of religion, she will likewise be
the truest friend of order, the support of society, the strong-
est bulwark of every legitimately constituted authority.
Paralyze the power of the Church and destroy her influence,
and thrcne and altar, Society and religion, public and pri-
vate tranquility are equally imperilled. Hence the often
* Rom. xiii, I, 2.


repeated ciies of the anarchists, denouncing the Church as
the fosterer of tyranny', and the sworn enemy of progress
and popular liberty ; and striving to impress these maxims
un the public mind by extolling the glory to be achieved
by breaking the degrading chains of the Papal Sovereignty.
“ The abolition of the temporal power,” says Mazzini, "car-
ries necesarily with it, in the minds of those who under
•/ *
stand the power of the papal authority', the emancipation of
the human race from the spiritual authority ’ *
The political antagonists of the Papal Sovereignty look
on the Pope as the exemplification of Christ’s words, “My
Kingdom is not of this world.”f They seem to entertain
the noblest feelings and highest ideas of the papal supre-
macy and spiritual authority. They affect respect and ven-
eration for him, and profess to be most obedient children of
his in all that concerns religion and ecclesiastical discipline ,
but they cannot bear to see him mixed up with political
ft/
matters, and dealing with sovereigns as wi h equals. They
say, that this is altogether contrary to the sacredness ot his
character, and destructive of his pontifical influence. Be-
sides this, the two powers, spiritual and temporal, are quite
incompatible the one with the other ; the exercise ot the
spiritual power must of necessity interfere with that ot the
temporal power. Crozier and sword do not agree. Jsuw, as
the Pope is bound by a divine appointment to look after the
interests of religion, and to mind the spiritual welfare ot
Christendom, he cannot be bent on temporal and political
concerns. The renouncing, therefore, of his sovereignty,
would wonderfully enhance and consolidate nis supremacy
and would gain to him more solid love, esteem and venera»
tion from the faithful his spiritual children.
* Quoted by Maguir®, R&vis and itt Rulev, c. xii, 2nd Ed.
f St. John, xviii, 36.


It is not within the scope of this lecture to unmask the
falsehood and inconsistency, which lie at the bottom of these
statements, and to answer all the objections that the assail.
lants of the Papal Sovereignty want to bring forward : this
would, most undoubtedly, furnish us with copious matter
for a lecture by itself. What 1 have to convince you of,
is the legitimacy of the Papal Sovereignty ; and even this,
not by way of critical discussion, but by simply expound-
ing the facts, which are positively and historically true.
111. The author of Mores Carholici tells us “ that the
Church had virtually acquired possessions long before the
time of Constantine ; for the emperor ordered that all the
thing’s which had been unjustly taken away whether houses
or lands, should be restore d to her ; at the same time ma-
king it lawful for persons to leave property to her by will.”*
The property which the Church might have held befor 0
Constantine, is to be understood to consist of that Wal
O
provision made by the faithful for the support of the sacred
ministers. Since the Levitical Law and the Law of the
Gospel were published, the obligation of enabling those who
serve at the altar to live by the altar, has always been im*
pressed on the mind of the laity. Hence the positive law,
grounded on the law of nature, to pay the tithes ; t which
law was recommended by Christ, enforced by the Apostles,
practised by the people of God, and enacted by the Churchy
* Voi. 1. Book 1. c. iii.
f The Tithes were Prcediales, Per sonnies, and Mixta. ■ They
were divided in three parts ; one for ornamenting the Church one
for the poor and pilgrims, and the third for the Priests. In the nri
mitive ages, there were the Primitiss, or the first fruits ; and they
were offered to Gfod, for the support of his ministers, in grateful
acknowledgement, as Osiginks sajs, lib. vili, •* Contra Celsum,” of
his supreme dominion over all. At present, there are in use the
oblations, or dues.
t Deut xxiv, 14, xxv, 4; Luke x, 7 ; 1 Cor. ix, 13, 14; Tim.
y 18 ; Cone. Tnd. Sas. zvx, chap 12 de liefor. ; Bede, lib 4, c.LI V.
in Luc. 12.


But the Church became an actual land-holder invested
«
with authority and temporal dominion, when she emerged
from the obscurity of the Catacombs, fertilized by the blood
of the martyrs, and beautified by the eminent virtues of
countless virgins and confessors. That soil which had been
trodden by the champions of faith, could no longer bear to
be trodden by the lew-d and spiteful feet of pagan tyrants.
The time had come when on the hanks of the 'fiber were
to be heard the joyful tidings, that were announced by a
Prophet along the river of Babylon, “ Arise, arise, put on
thy strength, 0 Sion, put on the garments of thy glory,
O Jerusalem, the city of the Holy One; for henceforth the
uncircumcised and the unclean shall no more pass through
thee. Shake thyself from the dust ; arise ! get up, 0
Jerusalem ; loose the bonds from off thy neck, O captive
daughter of Sion.”*
IY Constantine the Great, having 1 defeated at the wails
of Rome, the Emperor Maxentius, and having entered the
city in his triumphal chariot, directed his first attention to
the Church, and set her at liberty. He recalled from exile
the Christians who had been banished, and restored to them
their places of religious worship; he built churches every»
where, and enriched them with magnificent ornaments,
vessels and endowments ; he conferred honorary privileges
on ihe ministers of the Christian religion ; but above all,
it was the Pope who attracted his admiration and devotion
He •was deeply affected at the idea of his persecution and
distress, and he thought it his duty to bring him from the
prison and scaffold of the martyrs to the throne of Caesar,
and to add to his pontifical robes the splendour of the pur-
ple To this praiseworthy end, Constantine gave to Saint
Silvester his imperial palace called Lateran, placed at his
* Tsaias Ili, 1, 2


disposal all the resources he had in Italy, and converted
the adjacent building into a church, which became bead
and parent church of all other churches vrhis et orlis *
From this commences to date “St. Peter’s Patrimony’’
and the first public document we have on record of the in-
auguration of the Papal Sovereignty ; for if it be true what
critical historians give as an authentic fact, we have to ad-
mit that Constantine, on leaving Rome for the East, left
the Pope lord of it. He knew well, that the eternal city
could not be Papal and Imperial at the same time, and
the unlimited authority of St. Peter’s Chair would embarass
the policy of the Caesars. “In Rome,” says Count de
Maistre, “ while it was yet pagan, the Roman Pontiff
already embarassed the Caesars ; he was only their subject,
they had power against him, he possessed nothing at all
in opposition to them ; nevertheless, they could not keep
their ground beside him. There was stamped upon his
forehead the character of a priesthood so exalted, that the
Emperor, among whose titles was that of Sovereign Pontiff,
tolerate him in Rome with no more patience than he could
suffer in his armies a Caesar, who contested the empire with
him. An unseen hand was driving them away from the
Eternal City, in order to give it to the chief of the Eternal
Church. In the mind of Constantine, perhaps, there was
# Constantine, a Briton and a pTgan, while marching against
Maxentius, offered sacrifice to Apollo ; but, knowing that his forces
were inferior to those of his enemy, he had recourse to the God of
the Christians. A Fiery Cross appeared to him, in the cloudless sky
with the words, “In hoc Sigilo Vinces/' “In this Sign thou shalt
conquer/ 5 To show his gratitude for such a favor, Constantine
ordered that an exact representation of the Cross should be made, on
the top of which he put his royal crown, blazing with precious jewels,
and bearing the monogram of Christ, and it was called Labarum .
Fiity chosen men were appointed to carry it by turns, before the
Emperor, where he went to battle. He was baptized and cured, by
virtue of baptism, of an incurable leprosy. From that date the
Gross became the proudest decoration of the Caesars.


mingled with the embarrassment to which I allude, a be-
ginning of faith and reverence, and i doubt not that this
feeling influenced the determination he came to, of trans-
ferring the seat of the Empire, much more than all the po-
litical motives that are attributed to him. Thus was accom
plished the decree of the Most High ; the same walls could
not encircle both the Emperor and the Pontiff ; Constan-
tine ceded Rome to the Pope ; the conscience of mankind,
which is infallible, understood it not otherwise.”*
Y. Christian Religion being set on the imperial throne,
the generous act of Constantine was soon eagerly followed
by other pious and well-disposed princes, who embraced
Christianity, and became most fervent and obedient chil«
dren of the common father of the faithful, and w T ith their
spontaneous and noble donations enlarged the possessions
of his temporal dominion. The fourth century had not
yet elapsed, and Saint Gregory the Great possessed no less
than twenty-three patrimonies in Italy alone j which he
administered, as Gibbon says, with the temper of a vigilant
and moderate landlord, and which made one of the Roman
Nobles exclaim, as St. Jerome relates, “Promise to make me
Bishop of Rome, and I will at once become a Christian.” f
Towards the close of the 6th century the Pope had pro-
perty everywhere in the islands of the Mediterranean and
Adriatic Seas, in Sicily, in Illirico, Dalmatia, Germany,
Gaul, Spain, and Africa. King Arepert increased the pa*
pal possessions by giving to John II the Cottien Alps,
which contained Genoa and all the maritime coast as far as
the frontiers ot France. On the elevation of Innocent 111
to the popedom Conrad, duke of Spoleto and Assisi, seeing
his subjects anxious to be ruled by the Pope, surrendered
# Le Pane, liv ii, c. vi. __ ..
■jf Zaccaria Anti- Febbronius A indie. 1. IV,. disc is* e. ili.


into his hands various fortresses with their respective dig
tricts; viz,, Spoleto, Assisi, Rieti, Fuligno, and Nocera.
The Countess Mathilda, fearing the army of the Simoniacal
Emperor Henry IV, gave to Gregory VII the provinces of
Tuscany and Ligury. These territories being given to the
Pope not as private landlord, but as the head of the Church,
he possessed and administered them in that capacity.
*
VI. I might produce numberless instances illustrative of
these historical statements ; but one will suffice for all,
St Gregory the Great j the Pope who was dragged from
the cloister to the Papal throne, by the unanimous voice
of the clergy, the senate and the people, writes that “who-
soever attains the place which he occupies, is overwhelmed
with external business to such a degree, as to doubt often
whether he be Prince or Pontiff.'’* His Epistles, says-
Gibbon, are filled with salutary instructions to abstain
from doubtful or vexatious law suits $ to preserve the
integrity of weights and measures ; to grant every res-
sonable delay, and to reduce the capitation of the slaves
of the globe, who purchased the right of marriage by an
arbitrary fine.
During the Pontificate of this Great Pope, we find
him sending a Governor to Kepi, with injunctions to the
people to obey him, as the Pontiff himself. We find him
also senoing* Constance the tribune to Naples, charged
with the guardianship of the City, and exhorting the
soldiers to fulfil his orders. W r e find him directing Sabinian
Bishop of Caliipolis, a city dependant on the Papal States»
to see that the citizens should not be over burdened.
In a word, we find Gregory the Great issuing regulations
of a mere temporal concern, and acting as an independant
Sovereign in his kingdom. When he apprehended that
* Lib 1, Epist. xxv, ad Joan Episc. Constantinop. etc.


Àrìulphus, the king of the Lombards, might attack
Ravenna and Rome, he gave orders for defence ttf’the
commander of the troops. When he apprehended also
that Agilulph, another king of the Lombards, might
invade Sardinia, he wrote to Jamiarius and Gennadius, to
make resistance ; assuring them that he would neglect
nothing iu his power to be in readiness. "When the Vete-
rans of the exarchate neglected to protect Spoleto, he
commanded the Italians to gaiard that City and others j
and in danscer of a crisis, he consented to appoint tribunes,
and to direct the operations of the provincial troops.
When Agilulph condescended to make peace, Saint
Gregory thanked him for it, and urged him to see, that his
officers respected it.
VII. There is, however, one point, which to modern poli-
ticians seems to be as inexplicable as the Gordian Knot :
namely: How did it come to pass, that in such a short
period, and in times of so many political convulsions, the
Pope became so wealthy and mighty a Sovereign ? The
reply is one of the easiest that can be had.
After the removal of the imperial throne from Rome
to Constantinople, devastations, plunders, cruelties, blood
sheds and outrages of the most frightful nature, were the
only inheritance left to Italy and Rome. From Constan-
tine to Charlemagne, the provinces that had embraced
Christianity, were continually overrun by swarms of savage
hordes, who had no other goal to aim at, but the pampering
of their brutal passions, avidity and fierceness. The ex-
archate that was appointed as a deputy lieutenant, and had
fixed his residence in Ravenna, either through easiness of life
and cowardice, or through want of union and confidence in
his ministers had become unable to resist the deluge of the
barbarian inundations. Gregory the Great raised his
voice against it, and acquainted the Emperor with this inca-


pacity ; but in vain : even the Emperor seemed to have
sank into a fatal slumber. Aleric, the king of the Goths,
was the first who laid his brutal army into Italy to ravage
its provinces, and pillage Rome. Attila, a tartar and the
Scourge of God, came next at the head of his Hunns :
then Genserie, the king of the Visigoths, and the terror
of Africa, with his Moors and Vandals : and after him
Odoacar, the Scythian, with his Herruls ; and lastly Albion
the founder of the Longobardian kingdom in Italy.
In the midst of these calamitous times, Italy no longer
knew to whom it belonged, and its people were reduced to
desolation and despair. The only refuge they had was the
Pope, that providential man, who like unto Jeremiah “ had
proved himelf to be the lover of his brethren, and of
Israel ; the man that prayed much for the people, and for
all the Holy City.’ * On him they fixed their eyes 5 to
him they entrusted their fate ; and upon him they called
as their guardian, their father, and their protector. Thus
by the force of circumstances, the Pope was substituted in
the place of the Emperor ; and the people of Italy and of
other contiguous countries, acknowledged him as the re-
presentative of the Divinity, from whom might and
protection emanate, and respected him as their Sovereign.
Many of those saved and protected people led by the spirit
of faith, devotion and gratitude, copying after the example
of the Primitive Christians, who laid feet of the
Apostles, the price of their prope ,+ tender the Pope their
lands, their houses, their estates, and increased the Papal
possessions, which providentially swelled into cities, provin-
ces and a kingdom; and thus in the attachment of a grateful
people, the Pope found the purest reward of a citizen and
the best rights of a sovereign. The origin of the Ponti-
fical Sovereignty/’ says Kenrick, ii is traced by Gibbon t®
* 2 Mach., xt, 14.
f Act ir, 34.


the necessity of superior guidance and support, which the
Roman people felt ; to which we must add the voluntary
submission of various cities anxious to share the blessings
of a mild protectorate.” *
VIII. When there was a question of public order, tran-
quility, and social welfare, the Pope proved to be the best
qualified for such a task. Of him we might say, what Ec-
clesiasiicus says of Josua, u That he called upon the Most
High when the enemy attacked him on every side, and the
Great and Holy God heard him ; he made a violent assault
against the nation of his enemies, and destroyed the adver-
saries j that the nations might know his power, that it is
not easy to fight against God.’’f Witness Leo the Great,
who for the safety of Home presented himself with his
fearless spirit and irresistable eloquence, to Attila, miti-
gated his fierceness and arrested his devastating course.
Witness Gregory 111 ; when Luitprand invaded Romagna,
and advanced with a numerous army to the gates of Rome,
summoning the Senate to receive him as their king, the
Pope presented himself to the usurper and laid before him
his just claims, and compelled Luitprand to withdraw his
troops from the states of the Church ; and so the Pope was
left in peaceful possession of his capital. Witness Pope
Zacchary, who acted in the same manner, when he sent an
embassy to Rachis, the duke of Frioli, who had obtained
the throne of Lombardy, and concluded with him a treaty
of peace, by virtue of which all Italy enjoyed the long
sought for tranquility.
No conclusion, therefore, can be more legitimate than
to say, that in reality the Pope has always been a Sovereign,
because he has dealt as a Sovereign with people, and he
has transacted business with Sovereigns as with equals
* The Primacy ,part 2, c. i.
f Eccl. XLVI, 6, 7, 8.


If anything was wanting to him, it was the bare title.
But the time is now come when it might be said of him as
Sirach said of Aaron, : <( A Crown of Gold upon his mi-
tre, whereon is engraved Holiness, an ornament of honor,
a work of power, and delightful to the eye for its beauty'’*
This is the time which singles out a new period in the
history of the Papal Sovereignty: a time, when the mailed
hand of Pepin freed the Homan states from the political
influence of the Eastern Empire, tore the exarchate of
Ravenna from the clutch of the Lombards, and put the
Papal Sovereignty under the protection and powerful
intervention of France.
IX. The treaty of peace, which Zacchary stipulated with
Rachis, did not last long*, Astulphus, an ambitious and
perfidous King of the Lombards, broke the peace with
Rome. He set his army in array of battle, and marched
straightly with a roving rage towards the Papal city, and
besieged it. He threatened to put the Romans to the
sword, if they did not receive him as their Sovereioau
Incalculable are the evils and atrocities which he com-
mitted, and the terror and desolation which he spread
through all the luxurious Italian provinces.
Stephen 111, that Sainted Pope, who neglected no
peaceful means that his zeal would suggest him, to stop
the outraging invasion of the Lombards ; having implored
in vain, military succour from Constantine Copronimus,f
directed himself to Pepin, the son of Charles Martell, and
the founder of the Carlovigian race, and entreated him for
* Eccl. xlv, 14.
f Up to the time of Copronimus, the government of Italy and
Rome had been exercised under the protection of the successors of
Constantine the Great. It is difficult to know why Copronimus did
not comply with Stephen’s request ; probably it was because of his
being an Iconoclast, and because he knew that the order of his
fatner, to assasinate the Pope, had exasperated the Romans, and
provoked them to a revolt against the Emperor.


assistance and protection. To this end, the Pope ordered
public prayers and fastings : then, he left Rome, passed
through the field of his enemies, crossed the Alps, and
went himself in person as a humble suppliant to Pepin.
The good hearted Monarch received Saint Peter’s succes-
sor, with all honor, due to his Papal Sovereignty, and
most willingly assented to all, that in the name of justice
the Pope asked for. Of one thing he seemed to be parti-
cularly careful, that the effusion of human blood might be
spared ; and so he requested Pepin to settle the question
by friendly agreement : but the tyrant of Lombardy
received Pepin’s message with insults and threats. Furious
as a lion, he desisted not from pouring forth deadly threats
against the Romans, says an historian, affirming that all
should be destroyed by the sword, unless they submitted
themselves to his rule.*
The Lombardy war was thus resolved on ; Pepin lost
no time marching 1 into Italy, to beseige Pavia the Capital
of the Lombards. Astulphus knew his own weakness and
the childish pusilanimity of his subjects ; and upon such
consideration, he entered into a peaceful agreement with
Pepin, and promised to restore to the Pope, all his
territories. But Pepin was scarcely in Prance, when
the savage Lombard, disowning his promises, re-commenced
hostilities, and compelled Stephen 111 to call once more
on the powerful assistance of the French Monarch. Pepin
proud to show the warlike spirit of his army to the restless
Lombard, hastened into Italy, and in the year 75 5, waged
the most glorious and decisive war that he had ever fought.
He not only wrested from the Lombards the exarchate of
Ravenna with its dependencies, but also Bologna, Ferrara
all the Pentapolis stretching along the coasts of the Adriatic
Sea, from Ancona to Rimini, and all the territories in-
* Quoted by Ranke, Hist, of the Popes, v. 1, book 1, §2, Note 1.


land, as far as the Appennines, including twenty cities ;
and Pepin restored all this to the Pope, calling it Saint
Peter's patrimony, or the Papal States.
Wherefore, if there had been hitherto any doubt in the
mind of those politicians, who do not avow as a legitimate
title the necessity of times and the free will of the people,
the question of the Papal Sovereignty is now settled. All
those territories which Pepin rescued from the hands of
the Lombards, by right of conquest, have become his own.
No one can contest to him such right, He fought for it:
O o 7
he carried on the war at his own expense ; he exposed his
army and his nation to an immense risk. He won the
victory ; and he is now free to hold, what he has conquer-
ed as a standing trophy of his warlike valour, or to dispose
of it to whom he likes. But, he knows that it belongs to
the Pope, that it is the dowry of the Holy See, that the
Pope appealed himself to him for justice and protection.
Upon the Pope therefore, Pepin bestows all his conquests,
and lays in the hands of Stephen 111 a solemn deed of the
grant, written on parchment, “ and causes,” as Ranke
says, “ the keys of the conquered towns, to be placed on the
Altar of Saint Peter.”*
In addition to this, Pepin accompanied the grant with
the following address, which he directed to ' the Greek
Ambassador, who had followed him in his campaign :
“ No ambitious views, no thirst for worldly glory urged
me to war. It was not to encourage the abuse of power
or to court the favor of any man upon earth, but to scourge
the tyrants of Italy, to succour the oppressed, and to
expiate my sins, that I have twice passed the Alps, and
exposed my life so often in the field. God granted me
* Log. cit. Bellarminus quotes passages from various histo-
rians, which confirm the account of Pepin’s donation to the Pope,
Be Ron. Pont., lib. 5, c. ix.


victory. In return, I have consecrated my conquests to
his honor, and the service of the Church ; and no human
consideration shall ever tempt me to take back the gift
which I have once bestowed.*’*
X. Charlemagne, the son of Pepin, seemed to have been
raised up by Providence for the consolidation and enhance-
ment of the Papal Sovereignty, Having* extended his
sway over all the provinces which composed the Western
Empire, and gained glorious victories in Germany, Gaul,
and Spain, he placed a brilliant gem in his crown by pro-
tecting the Papal Sovereignly against another invasion of
Lombards, when at the request of Adrian I, he compelled
Desiderius, duke of Tuscany who had succeeded Astulphus,
to restore to the Pope the towns belonging to him. He
then confirmed the royal grant of his father, and amplified
St. Peter’s Patrimony by annexing to it part of the domain
which he had conquered from the Lombards. On this occa-
sion Charlemagne, being at the zenith of his glory, felt that
nothing w r as wanting to his grandeur, but the imperial
diadem. Concentrated in this lofty thought he resolved to
visit in person St. Peter’s Shrine, and he entered the
Eternal City elate with victory.
Leo 111, having succeeded Adrian, w r as at the head of the
Roman people. On Christmas Day, Charlemagne, assisting
in the Vatican at the divine Mysteries, and ignorant of
what awaited him, prostrate before the altar, received at
the hand of the Pope, the imperial diadem, who hailed him
as it were, by inspiration u Emperor of the Romans,” and
anointed him with holy crism. Loud acclamations w r ere in
that instant echoed through the sacred dome. Ihe people
saluted him in raptures of joy, and made the whole buil-
* Reported by Reeves, General History, Till Century, sess. 5.


ding ring with the often repeated ovations : a Long life
and victory to Charles, crowned by God ! the most pious
august, the great and pacific Emperor of the Romans.”
He then uttered a solemn oath, and swore in the name of
Christ, to be the defender and champion of the holy Roman
Empire, and to protect the papal dominions, with all the
resources at his command.
From that day, Europe started a new era : the solemn
acknowledgment of the Papal Sovereignty, which was
followed by the restoration of the Western Empire, the end
ing of the middle ages, and the revival of literature, science,
fine arts, religion, canonical law, ecclesiastical discipline},
academical titles, and university degrees.
XI. Lewis, surnamed the meek or La Debonnaire, the
son of Charlemagne, confirmed by a formal deed, signed
by himself and his three sons, Lothaire the heir to the
throne, Pepin the Duke of Aquitania, and Lewis the Duke
of Bavaria, in a national assembly held at Aix-la Chappelle,
the donation of his father and of his grandfather to the
Holy Ree, adding moreover to this the whole duchy of
Rome and other extensive territories.*
When Saint Peter’s Patrimony was torn to pieces, and
sacreligiously usurped by the turbulent Marquis of Tus-
cany and the Earls of Tusculum, and the two prostituted
sisters, Mazoria and Theodora, wantonly attempted to
govern Rome by their political influence and criminal
* Gratianus relates the constitution of Lewis to be as follows;
“Ego Ludovicus Eomanorum Imperator Augustus, statuo et concedo
per hoc pactum conflrmationis nostrse tibi Beato Petro Principi Apos
tolorum, et per te vicario tuo domino Paschali Pontifici summo et
successoribus ejus in perpetuum, sicut a prsedecessoribus ve>tris
usque nunc in vestra potestate et dittione tenuistis et disposuistis
Bo u; an am civitatem cum ducatu suo et suburbanis, et territoriis ejus
montanis et marittimis, lictoribus et portubus, seu cunctis civitatibu*
eastellis, oppidis ac villis in Tusciee Partibus/’ Beerei Qratiani
disi, lxiii.


disorders : Otho I, son of Saint Mathilda and the brother
of Saint Bruno, Bishop of Cologne headed a glorious army
to the papal city, to put a stop to all the disorders and
scandals. Pope John XII received him with open arms :
the people, the clergy and the senate rejoiced at his en-
trance and coronation. Otho, on being vested with the
Imperial Crown, issued a mandate for the restoration of all
the cities and territories, which had in any way been
dismembered and usurped from the Papal Sovereignty, and
confirmed by a solemn act, the former grants of Pepin,
Charlemagne and Lewi&.
The same was done by Rudolph, Count of Harpsburgh,
the founder of the political grandeur and monarchy of
Austria. Elected Emperor in the year 1273, and confirm-
ed by Gregory X, he ratified all the territorial grants of
his imperial predecessors in favor of the Papal Sovereignty,
and promised to support them to the utmost of his power,
XII, Still in the mind of some enlightened politicians
there was a time, in which the Papal Sovereignty appeared
to be on the eve of decline. It was the time when, Italy
divided by the two hostile factions, the Guelphs and Gibel-
lines, and Rome deserted by its legitimate Sovereign, had
become the prey of the two quarrelling parties, the Orsinis
and Colonnas ; and in the end, Lewis the Duke of Bavaria
was saluted by a mob on the top of the Capitol, King of
the Romans, crowned by an ex communicated Cardinal,
and confirmed by Peter Corbario, an antipope, whom the
new usurper had caused to be elected and consecrated,
under the name of Nicholas Y.
Though we have to avow, that Rome, bereft for seventy
years by its supreme lord, resembled the city of which
Jeremiah speaks in his lamentations : doth the
sit solitary, that was full of people ! How is the mistress


of the Gentiles become as a widow ; the princes of -
vinces made tributary ”* ; still it is an. undeniable fact
that the mysterious policy of France : the bloody war, that
after the death of Henry VII, was waged between the two
competitors to the throne, Frederic and Lewis ; the fierce
animosities of the Guelphs and Gibellines ; the opposite
interests of the Orsinis and Colonnas; the creation of an
antipope, and the coronation of an usurper, did not in the
least diminish the Papal Sovereignty. During this
troublous time, the Pope was a Sovereign in his own pos-
sessions. Avignon was a property belonging to the Holy
See ; Clement Y had purchased it from Jane, the Countess
of that Province; and from Avignon the Pope ruled the
Roman affairs as far as circumstances allowed him. Mean-'
while, the Romans grew tired of their new king and
anti-pope; so that the first had to quit the papal city
embittered with troubles which brought an untimely death
upon him : and the other, seeking by a sincere repentance
reconciliation with God and the Church, made a public
recantation of his illusions, threw himself at the Pope's-
feet, humbly implored forgiveness, and received it.
Thus, Urban V entered in triumph the eternal city,,
to the universal joy of Christendom, and invited Charles
IV to give him a helping hand to restore order and eccle-
siastical discipline : who did accordingly, leading a powerful
army into Italy, dispossessing the usurpers of the Papal
Provinces, punishing the petty tyrants, and re-establishing
due subordination to the Papal Sovereignty. And not
content with this, Charles IV confirmed, by a Golden Bull,,
all the privileges and donations which the Emperors, his
predecessors, had bestowed on the pontifical kingdom.
* Lamentations I* 1*


XIII. But extraordinarily grand and worth relating waa
the reception of Urban’s successors, in the eternal city.
Urban V, having gone back to Avignon as mediator of
peace between the King* of France, and the King of
England, by a serious illness was brought to the tomb, and
was succeeded by Gregory XI ; who, on receiving a depu-
tation from the Romans, quitted at once the French soil,
and hastened his return to Reme. His entry was magni-
ficent as well as extremely pathetic. The streets were lined
with rejoicing people set in devotional procession. Nothing
was to be heard in every corner, but joyous canticles, and
cheering acclamations. The Pope traversed the whole city
riding in triumph. Towards the evening*, he alighted at
St Peter's Church where the Te Deum was solemnly suns ;
%/ O
the Vatican became gradually illuminated : eight thousand
lamps were lighted to represent the loyalty and attachment
of a people, who reverenced in the Pope not only the
dignity of the vicar of Christ, but also the majesty of a
Sovereign.
From that era up to the present age, which is the same
as to say, for nearly four centuries, the Pope reigned un-
disturbed on his Pontifical throne. The struggles which he
had at times to endure had in view an object altogether
separated from his Sovereignty. In fact, the famous prag-
matic sanction of Bourges in France under Charles VII,
attempted to restrain the Pope’s Spiritual power, and not
his territorial boundaries. Henry VIII and Queen Eliza-
beth disowned his Supremacy, but not his Sovereignty.
The desperate attacks of the Turks under Ali Pasha, aimed
at the abolition of Christian name, and not at the destruc •
tion of the Papal Crown. The aggressions of Luther and
Calvin were nothing but virulent invectives replete with
incoherent slanders against the Pope, supposed by them
to be an abuser of spiritual power. Joseph 11, the successor


of Maria Theresa, managed with his Josephine Laws to
curtail the Pope , s jurisdiction in ecclesiastical matters, but
not the influence of his temporal authority.
XIV. Behold, we have now reached the last period of
the Papal Sovereignty : a period of trials and evil omens,
and yet full of hope and glowing with triumphs. It is the
period that comprises the u kingdom of terror and French
Revolution.” Alas ! The degrading vices of the Court ofi
Paris under Louis XV; the pagan philosophism of Voltaire,
Rousseau, D’Alembert, Diderot, Helvetius, and Montesqui-
eu; the fiendish machinations of freemasons and secret
societies headed by Condorcet, Lalande, Volney, Mirabeau,
Robespierre, and others of similar nature and sentiments ;
the formal abolition of Christianity, and the worship of
Reason, the Goddess, represented in a prostitute of the
worst character, and placed on the altar of Notre Dame in
Paris ; the brutal massacres and scenes of horror enacted
in Paris in the court-yard of the Carmelite Convent, at
Saint Firman, at the Conciergerie, at Meaux, Rheims,
Lyons, and Versailes, brought Papacy to such a state as to
bear resemblance to that Mysterious Heroine described
in the Apocalypse supported by the moon, clothed with
the sun, wreathed with a crown of twelve bright stars, and
yet persecuted by the infernal dragon, and compelled to
take two wings of a great eagle and fly into the wilder-
ness, u where she had a place prepared by God.”* The
conspirators, under the appellation of philosophers, shouted
out for joy, and hailed the downfall, both of the Papal
Sovereignty and Supremacy.
Bv the order of the directors, Pius YI was dragged
•/
away from his papal throne in a miserable carriage during
a violent thunderstorm, and obliged to wander about, ex-
* Apoc. xii, 1,6, 15.


posed to all kinds of trials and indignities, until as a prisoner
and an exile arriving at Vienna, on the Rodon, he changed
his life of suffering, for a life of bliss. The Jacobin tree
of that mobbish liberty which was proclaimedby the philoso-
phers in France, is now planted on the Vatican, and the
Roman Republic starts into existence out of the fragments
of the Papal Sovereignty, The deistic cabal has spread its
horrid net through all European courts, and appointed
correspondents, emissaries, and clubs everywhere.
XV. But, that eternal God who said, u I will destroy
the wisdom of the wise, and the prudence of the prudent I will
reject : and I will proceed to cause an admiration on this
people by a great miracle turned into a sudden calm, the
whirling and furious tempest, f
* Ist Cor., 1, 19. Isaias xxxi, 14.
f This miracle is beautifully sketched out by Monti in his can-
tica called La Basvigliana, Canto ill. Ugo Basville, being
commissioned by France to sow in Rome the maxims of the repub-
lican liberty was discovered to be an emissary and killed by the
people. Monti, describing his apppearance before the tribunal
©f God, introduces him thus to confess his folly.
La fronte sollevò, rizzossi in piedi
L’addolorato spirito, e le pupille
Tergendo, a dire incominciò. Tu vedi
Signor nel tuo cospetto Ugo Basville
Dalla Francese libertà mandato
Sul Tebro a suscitar le ree scintille.
Stolto, che volli coll’ immobil fato
Cozzar della gran Roma onde ne porto
Rotta la tempia e il fianco insanguinato :
Che di Guida il Leon non anco é morto ;
Ma vive e rugge e il pelo arruffa e gli occhi,
Terror d’Egitto e dTsrael comfort©.
E se monta in furor Faste e gli stocchi
Sa spezzar de s nemici, e par che gridi
Son la forza, di Dio, nessun mi tocchi
Questo Leone in Vaticano io vidi
Far coll’antico e venerato artiglio
Securi e sgombri di Quirino i lidi
B a me che nullo mi temea periglio
Fe con un crollo della sacra chioma
Tremanti i polsi e riverente il ciglio.
Allor conobbi che fatale é Roma
Che la tremenda vanita di Francia


Against all human hope, Pius VII was elected at
Venice : the victorious Austrians opened to him the gates
of Rome, and the people welcomed him with emotions of
an extraordinary joy. Friendly negotiations were imme-
diately opened between the Pope and the European powers
for the purpose of establishing Religion, order, and eccle-
siastical discipline ; in which Napoleon in the capacity of
First Consul, took an active part. But, alas ! how easy it
is for a proud man to forget himself, when blinded by a
glimpse of a transitory glory ! On being declared Emperor
and crowned by Pius VII, the Pope had hardly returned
to Rome, when Napoleon, a victor in Vienna, sent forth
a decree, annexing the Papal states to the French Empire,
and bringing the Pope to a formal renunciation of his
Sovereignty.
No doubt, the Pope protested against it, condemned
such iniquitous usurpation, and published the famous Bull
Quum memoranda ilia die ; by virtue of which he excom-
municated all that were concerned in Napoleon’s decree.
The haughty Emperor sneered at the Bull of excommunica-
tion, and boasted that it would not make the arms fall
from the hands of his soldiers * He gave peremptory orders
to his General at Rome, to seize on the Pope and force him
to give up his Sovereignty* The General, in compliance
with the Emperor’s mandate, entered the apartments of the
Pope at midnight, disarmed his guard, and requested him,
in the Emperor’s name, to renounce his temporal dominion ;
Sul Tehro è nebbia che dal sol si doma.
E le minacele una sonora ciancia
Un lieve insulto di villana auretta
D’abbronzato guerriero in sulla guancia.
♦ The following are the words said by Napoleon with regard to
the Bull of the Pope : “Ignore-t-il combien les temps sont changes ?
Me prend-t-il pour un Louis Debonnaire ? Ou croit il, que se*
excommunications feront tomber les armes des mains de mes so
dats/’ MemoireSf %ì puT J. de bulgues * 1826.


or, in the event of his refusal, he would be Jed awav a
captive into France.
The advanced-aged Pope, with the freedom of an
Apostle and the firmness of a lion, answered to the trem-
bling General : “ If you have thought it your duty to execute
these orders, because you have sworn fidelity and obedience
to the Emperor ; think how we ought to maintain the
rights of the Holy See, to which we are bound by so many
oaths. We cannot, and we ought not, and we will not
either yield or renounce that which is not ours. The
temporal dominion belongs to the C lurch : we are only her
administrators The Emperor may cur. us in pieces j but
he will never obtain its renunciation from us
On such statement, the word of command was given,
and the Pope carried off first to the hard prison of Fenes *
tr elle, and from thence to France, with no other hope, but
that of his predecessor, to die an exile. Rome remained
meanwhile, under military government ; its provinces were
governed by prefects ; and at last, a newly born babe was sa-
luted King of the Papal City,
But, that God, who said to the raging sea: u Hitherto
thou shalt come, and shall go no further ; and here thou
shalt break thy swelling waves ”,t put forth his mighty
hand to project the Sovereignty of his Vicar on earth.
Napoleon, to his own humiliation, experienced the sad
effects of the censure that was hurled against him and which
he had ridiculed f ln the Russian Campaign, his soldiers
were no longer able to hold arms in their hands. Hail,
* Cardinal Pacca, Memorie Storiche, Part 1, c. vi.
f Job xxxviii., 11.
j Count de Segur, a general of Napoleon relates in Ms Mstory
lib. ix., c.xi, “Chele armi dei soldati parvero insopportabile peso
alle loro braccia assiderate. Nelle loro frequenti cadute cadev-
ano ad essi dalle mani infrangevansi e perdevansi nella neve. Se
si rialzavano, se ne trovavano privi, poiché no le gittavano, ma
gliele svelsero la fame ed il freddo.” The same is to be read in
the memoires par M. de Salgues, T. xx., c. v. —“ Le soldat ne put


snow, ice, stormy winds, which fulfil the of
acting: as ministers of God’s vengeance, plucked the arms
from the frozen hands of his army. Napoleon was
then forced to compulsory abdication ; which was followed
by the total defeat *t Waterloo; and lastly, by the most
humiliating exile and imprisonment, in the rocky island
of St. Helena. Whereas, the enslaved and illtreated Pon-
tiff entered triumphantly the eternal city ; took possession
of his dominions, and Rome bowed down its head with an
immense joy to the Immortal Chiaramonti.d
XYI. Pius the IX, is the last triumphing victim, that
I have to mention, of freemasonry and revolutionary
efforts. His elevation to the Pontifical throne, bears a close
resemblance to the last part of Christ’s history ; when he
was apprehended, mocked and condemned by those people
who, shortly before, sang pious Hosannas to him, and
would have him for their king. Extraordinary acclamations
and demonstrations of joy accompanied the election of the
Great Mastai to the Popedom. But, the echo of these
acclamations had not yet ceased to ring when freemasonry
and revolution turned into a cry of death all the ovations
with which long life and happy reigning had been inaugu-
rated to Pius IX» Thus, to avoid being slaughtered at
the hands of tigers in human skin, Pius IX was obliged to
disguise himself, to quit at midnight his city, and to look
for shelter in a strange land. But it is written in the book
of wisdom, that, “ She conducted the just when he fled
from his brother’s wrath through the right way, am*
showed him the kingdom of God , and gave him the know -
tenir ses armes ; elles s’echappoient des mains des plus braves
and c. viii., “ Les armes tombaient des bras glaees, qui _les portai-
mt.” See Card. Pacca Jlemorie , p. ii., c, iv.
* Ittici oxlviil 8.
f It is worth noticing that the first anagram made on Chiara-
monti, the family name of Pius vii., rendered the sublime motto,
Chinati Roma , Bow down 0 Rom e.


ledge of holy things, made him honorable in his undertak-
ings, and accomplished his labours. In the deceit of them
that overreached him, she stood by him and made him honor
able. She kept him safe from his enemies, and she defended
him from seducers and gave him a strong conflict, that he
might overcome , and know that wisdom mightier than all*
Yes, this is the marvel that shines forth through all the
history of Pius IX’s critical moments.
Providence having spared him from the first peril and
restored him to his Pontifical throne, gloomy clouds dim -
med again the charming sky of the Italian soil, and
threatened the Papal Sovereignty with another violent and
ruinous tempest. Freemasonry and revolution joined in
federal compact, set anew at work their wits and plots ;
and by means of false political principles, open bribery
and desperate aggressions, succeeded in stripping the good
heated father and passionate lover of his country, Pius
IX, of the best portion of his territorial possessions, and
made him pour forth the doleful complaint of Isaiah ;
u Hear ye, heavens, and give ear 0 earth : I have brought
up children and exalted them, and they have despised me.
Woe to the sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
wicked seed, ungracious children.’’!
XYII. But let events happen as they are fashioned by
God’s all ruling' providence. It is not for us to know the
future destiny of the Papal Sovereignty. Political
changes and anarchical convulsions may dethrone the Pope
as they have dethroned many other legitimate sovereigns :
hut after all the Pope shall always be the Pope ; that is,
* The man born to he the prince his the sup-
port of all nations, the ruler of his fioche the stay of all
* Wis. x. 10, 11. 12.
f Isai. i., 2, 4.


people ’* : the man representing on earth, Him, “ who is
TilK BLESSED AND ONLY MIGHTY, KING OF KINGS, AND
LORD OF LORDS.f
PART SECOND.
XYIII. And now, as I have led your attention through
all the phases of the Papal Sovereignty, and laid open to
you its providential origin, its marvellous growth, its
majestic antiquity, every one is able to understand that
there is no sovereignty known in the world, so legitimate
as the Papal Sovereignty. It is a Sovereignty that has
been assaulted with all manner of earthly weapons, and yet
existing*. It is a Sovereignty that has passed through the
darkness and strife of the middle ages ; that has out-lived
the outrageous, all sweeping irruptions of the barbarians ;
that has witnessed the storms and revolutions which have
scattered thrones, uprooted dynasties, and dispersed even
races of men. History tells us of kingdoms, empires, and
nations which came into existence in a very brilliant and
flattering light, and which flourished and obtained power
and glory ; but, in the end, they had to undergo the vicis-
situdes of the times ; and now they are no more. Where
is the formidable Empire of the Macedonians, of the Per*
sians, of the Chaldeans, of the Romans, of the Franks, of
the Greeks, of the Germans ? They have perished ; and are
smash'd into pieces by the litt stone was cut out of
a mountain, without hands t But the Papal Kingdom
still stands erect ani dumi fed in the midst of their ruins,
like one of those firm, lofty columns which rear their heads
above the fragments of the Roman Forum, and glows out
like a bright beacon amidst the darkness of a boisterous
* Eccl. xlix., 17.
f 1 1 m. -vi., 15.
J Daniel ii., 34.


night. And it presents itself to us, not in a state of decay,
not as a mere remnant of antiquity, not as an historical
record, hut full of life and youthful vigour, full of all per-
vading and influencing’ spirit.
XIX. Gibbon says that the temporal power of the Popes
is confirmed by the reverence of a thousand years, and their
noblest title is the free choice of the people, whom they had
redeemed from slavery,*
The learned historian Muratori calls the Papal Sover-
eignty u The most just and the most ancient, since it is
marked with the seal of so many ages and the consent of
so many Augusti .”+
Sismondi, another critical historian, says e< That the
powder of the Popes over the city of Rome is founded on the
most legitimate of titles, their virtues and benificence.’’J
Count de Maistre writes, “ There is not in Europe, a
Sovereignty more justifiable, if it maybe thus expressed,
than that of the Sovereign Pontiff. It is like the Divine
Law, Vera justified!a in sevieti
Pasquier, a very judicious writer, concludes that “never
did any principality begin from so low an origin, according
to the world’s thoughts, as the principality of the Pope;
for it was built on an absolute poverty, on a continued
affliction, on sworn martyrdom. And never did any prin-
cipality arrive at such an extreme degree of greatness, as
the Papal principality. And that, not like other monar-
chies by the force or arms, but by the renouncement of
“ t
arms, by keeping aloof from intrigues of empires, and in
spite of all sorts ot obstacles that were opposed to it from
its first commencement, and of all dangers which, in later
* Quoted by Macguire, Rome and its Ruler, 1. Edit. con. chap.
f Ann. d’ltalia T xii. pait xi., Rema an. 1754.
J History desia ttep , I tal V. 1, p 122.
I Loc. cit. lib. 11., c. vi., from the Psalms, xviii., x.


times, through mistake ,or hostile jealousy, have encom-
passed it j for there was never a dignity so much assailed
by contradictory opinions which tended to undermine it, as
the Pontifical dignity. The dignity of the See of Constan-
tinople, which vainly attempted to claim equality with the
Roman See by means of the favor of the bimperors, and by
arrogating lofty titles based on its local connection with the
chief seat of worldly power, enjoyed but a very short res-
pite, and great as well as shameful was its fall and its pun-
ishment. But that of Rome stood immoveable, and un-
interruptedly triumphant as if, to use the Gentile imagery, the
fortune of the Eternal City, weary of being commanded by
arms, wished to try what new grandeur might be obtained
under men, who made profession only of the word of God,
and of the Scripture.”*
XX, Having said so muoli of the Papal Sovereignty,
I bring this Lecture to a close, by inviting every sincere,
impartial and unprejudiced thinker to exclaim, in the name
of justice legitimacy and truth, and to make the echo cross
the ocean and reach the Vatican, that its sublime dome
may resound with that divine motto, which desert -s to be
engraved in golden letters around the tiara that adorns the
venerable and stately forehead of the Pope :
quod Itahe-L wt mm ampiat coroaam tuam.
“ Hold fast that which thou hast, that no Man
TAKE AWAY THY CROWN.’’
Eecherches de la France, lib ili., c. ir.








