

LEEDS AND YORKSHIRE AUSTRALIAN
EMIGRATION SOCIETY,
IN CONNEXION WITH THE PORT PHILLIP AND CLARENCE
RIVER COLONIZATION COMPANY.
GEORGE GOODMAN, Esq. President. SVITIÜEE HICK« Esq. Vice Ho. WILLIAM BRICE, Esq. Treasurer.
The Public are respectfully apprized that a Society has been formed in Leeds, (in connexion with the Parent Society in
London, under the direction of Da. Lang,) for the purpose of enabling those disposed to Emigrate to the Port Phillip and
Clarence River Colonies to do so with the readiest facility and the greatest advantage.
The climate of the Colonies is the most salubrious known; the districts well watered ; the soil rich beyond comparison,
and the proximity of the Settlements to the ports at which emigrants will be landed, renders it far more ready of attainment, and
secures for the settlers a market for their produce in the already formed towns. Dr. Lang, speaking ot the Western Plains, which
extend from the port of Geelong upwards of two hundred miles, says : —“ On some parts of the plains the grass is so rich, and the
climate so mild, that a single acre of ground, in its natural state, is capable of maintaining a bullock or heiler, without artificial
food of any kind, all the year round ; and from fifty to sixty bushels of wheat have been reaped per acre, although the general
produce is thirty-five.”
Mr. Pry, resident Commissioner of Crown lands in the Clarence River district, reports, —“ The astonishing vegetation,
with which the plains are clothed is almost inconceivable ; such indeed as I have scarcely witnessed elsewhere. It is impossible to
imagine a conutry more worthy of having bestowed upon it the labour of the husbandman, or one more likely to remunerate him
for his toil ; they are remarkable, not alone for the excellence of the land, but for being placed under a climate, than which none
can be more conducive to the process of vegetation.”
The demand for the labor of all classes of artizans in the colony is great, and every kind of service receives the most liberal
compensation.
The facility the Society affords to emigrants of small capital, is as follows -For every £2O subscribed, the party subscrib-
ing is entitled to nominate for a free passage him or her self or one adult ; and to receive in the colony (whenever it may be con-
venient to pay for one section of eighty acres, costing £lOO, or at the then existing prices of the Company’s land,) credit for the
£2O paid. All emigrants under this Society have to be approved as eligible by the Government Commissioner. Members ot the
following businesses, under forty years of age, or females under thirty-five, would be deemed eligible : —Farmers and farm laborers,
shepherds, mechanics (of all handicrafts employed in house-building, ship-building, and in the maintenance of agriculture.) as car-
penters and joiners, stonemasons and bricklayers, plasterers, blacksmiths, saddlers, wheelwrights, woolsorters, curriers, &c.
[Note. —Any number of subscribers may unite their several interests of prepayment under one trusteeship lor a section of laud,
and afterwards divide it according to their several proportions.]
For further information, &c., apply to Mr. Jowett, Bookseller and Stationer, 37, Upperhcad Row, Leeds, if by post,
enclosing a postage stamp.
The first night for enrolling- Members, and receiving* Snbscrifitions, will fie
on Monday jEveniiig 1 , Mefi. 20, at the Secretary’s Residence, 3Î, TLpi*erliead
Mow, liCeds, at Jßig-fit o’Clocfi.
RULES.
t. That this Society be designated the Leeds and Yorkshire
Australian Emigration Society ; of which the object shall be to
promote Emigration from Leeds and Yorkshire to the Australian Set-
tlements of Port Phillip and Clarence River.
2. That the members of this Society shall consist of two classes, —first,
of those who do not intend to emigrate to Australia themselves, but who
would join the Society from motives of philanthropy and profit combined ;
and secondly, of persons actually intending to emigrate to Australia.
3. That a subscription of not less than £1 per annum shall constitute
a member of this Society of the first class.
4. That a Subscription of 2s. od. per week, of 10s. per mouth, or of
30s. per quarter, or a larger amount, according to the means or conveni-
ence of the party, shall constitute a member of this Society of the second
class ; but that no person shall be admissible as a member of this class,
or in other words as an intending emigrant, who is not in connection with
some Christian church or congregation, or who cannot produce satisfactory
testimonials as to character and qualifications.
5. That the funds arising from the subscriptions of both these classes
of members, shall, after defraying the necessary expenses of the Society,
be appropriated from time to time for the promotion of the emigration of
members of the second class to Australia, under the auspices of the Port
Phillip and Clarence River Colonization Company, and be payable for the
purchase of land in Australia to the treasurer of the said company, on the
condition of securing a free passage out for the nominees of the Society,
in the proportion of one adult, or two children, for every £2O they shall
pay for land.
6. That any member of the second class, paying from his own resources,
either in one sum or in successive instalments, not less than £lO for a
single adult, or £2O for a husband and wife, shall be entitled to be nomi-
nated for a free passage from the available funds of the society, in prefer-
ence to all others ; and that in nominating other members of this class for
a free passage, a preference shall be given to those who shall have paid
the highest amount from their own resources.
7. That any member of the first class paying not less than £2O into
the funds of the Society, shall be entitled to nominate for a free passage
to Australia any adult person otherwise eligible, and to receive such in-
terest besides for his money as is given by the Society.
8. That any member of the second class, or intending emigrant, shall
have credit for the whole amount of his payments into the funds of this
Society as a payment for land in Australia ; the said laud to be at the
regular selling price of the Port Phillip and Clarence River Colonization
Company, and the purchase to be subject to the regulations of the said
Company.
9. That the business of the Society shall be conducted by a President
or Chairman, a Vice-president, a Treasurer, a Secretary and Agent for
Emigration, and a Committee of fifteen members, with power to add to
their number, to be elected respectively by the members of the Society at
their annual general meeting.
10. Parties having subscribed as second class members, and not being
disposed, by altered circumstances, to emigrate, may have their money
returned, without interest, on one calendar month’s notice being given.
The first iliip to tlie Mort MiliHip District will sail on or afiont the
13tli of Marcli next.
