

LENTEN DUTIES.
A
PASTORAL LETTER
TO THE
CLERGY AND LAITY
OF THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
BY
ROGER BEDE
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY AND METROPOLITAN.
SYDNEY.
1880.




LENTEN DUTIES.
A
PASTORAL LETTER
TO THE
CLERGY AND LAITY
OF THE
ARCHDIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
BY
ROGER BEDE
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY AND METROPOLITAN.
SYDNEY.
1880.


SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., PEINTEES,
146 PITT STEEET.


DISPENSATIONS.
1. Sunday is a day of neither fasting nor abstinence.
2. Meat is allowed, at dinner only, on all day except
Wednesdays and Fridays, the Saturday of Ember Week, and the last
four days in Lent.
3. On Fasting Days a collation may be taken in the morning
and in the evening. At collation a small quantity of milk may be
used ; and those who feel unable to take bread in sufficient quantity
may use a little butter.
4. Cheese and butter are allowed on all days at dinner.
5. In place of butter, lard, or dripping is permitted, except
on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday.
6. Eggs are allowed on all days at dinner, except on Ash
Wednesday and Good Friday,
7. Persons engaged in laborious work, or in delicate health,
or to whom fasting would be injurious, are exempt from the law.
8. In all cases of doubt, a dispensation must be obtained
from the Priest.
9. When a dispensation cannot be got without grave incon-
venience each one may act according to his conscience.
10. Easter Confession and Communion must be made
between the First Sunday of Lent and Trinity Sunday, both days
included.




ROGER BEDE, by the Grace of God and the Favour
of the Apostolic See, ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY AND
METROPOLITAN, to the Clergy, Secular and Regular,
and the Faithful of the said Archdiocese,
HEALTH AND BENEDICTION IN THE LORD.
Reverend and Dear Brethren, and
Dear Children in Jesus Christ,
Here we are once again, entering upon the pene-
tential fast of Lent, and invited by holy Church to take
into especial consideration the end for which we were
created, and the way in which we have been striving
during the past year to attain that end. Year passes
after year, and each year brings us nearer to the
accounting-day, when all opportunities will cease for
making good the past, and for working out our salvation.
We are so accustomed to sailing on along the sea of life—
so used to the life which we are leading—so habituated to
the courses into which we have fallen, that it becomes a


difficult task to realize the truth, that all this, most
assuredly, will come to a sudden finish; that we shall be
stripped of all our possessions, borne away from all our
friends, and find ourselves in presence of the everlasting
Judge, to give an account of all our thoughts, words,
deeds, and omissions.
Nor will there be any exception of persons with
regard to the final issue of human life upon this planet.
He who has been born to the imperial purple, and has
been nurtured in all the softness and luxuries of a royal
court, whose eyes have been accustomed to sights of
grandeur, whose ears have ever been filled with the deli-
cate flatteries of courtiers, whose presence has been the
sign of public pomp and private adulation—he who has
drunk deepest of the cup of human greatness and applause,
comes, at last, to the same end as the starving beggar
huddled in rags, covered with sores, and abandoned by
all men. He comes to be the prey of a disease stronger
than himself, which, finally, levels him to the earth, and
turns a well-tended and carefully-nurtured body into a
putrid corpse, not to be distinguished from that of the
beggar who crawled unnoticed by his door, and laid him-
self down by the wayside to die. The moment the
beggar and the king become a corpse, that moment their
souls appear before the All-just, whose eyes of fire are as
flames piercing into the hidden marrow of man’s most
secret thoughts, and discovering, with infallible discern-
ment, all his tortuous ways. Their fate for eternity
depends on the same list of questions, and according to
their answers to them will they rejoice for ever with the
Eternal Father, or be buried, finally, in the excruciating
flames which never shall be extinguished. Pomp and
state, and form and circumstance, and ceremonial and
vain-glory, and purple and fine linen, and sumptuous
repasts, and the music of flattering words will then have
passed away for ever. And poverty and hunger, and
rags and disease and neglect, and the scorn of men will
have gone by too. That which seemed as if it were to
last for ages, now appears as if it had been a dream.


The diadem of jewels and the rim of gold and the crown
of sharp-piercing thorns no longer press the king’s or the
pauper’s head—their sentence has been pronounced, and
they look back to the past either with supreme satisfac-
tion or with poignant despair, according as, during the
time of their probation, they had striven to do the will of
their Father who is in heaven.
So with all the ambitions and struggles in every
walk of human existence. What does the jealousy of
one nation of another, the clash of armaments, the
rivalries and antagonisms of trades, the contests of parties,
and the strivings and the intrigues of politicians denote,
but the ever-living energy of the human spirit, exerting
itself for a short while on this earth, as if it were to abide
here for ever, and manifesting that capacity for action, for
hatred or for love, which will only then receive its full
development when the spirit has been freed from its
burden, and it energizes in its unimpeded power in the
world to come. As the splendid cloudforms, blazing with
the changing illumination of a setting sun, in a few
minutes, as the sun disappears, are robbed of all their
brightness and of every ray of light; so here, too, when
the sun of life has set, all these flashes of energy and
genius are put to rest, and the flesh is carried to the
grave, and the spirit returns to the God that created it.
So, also, with the more meditative employments of
the human spirit. The philosopher spends his days, and
the silent hours of the night in investigating the origin of
human thought and the genesis of human freedom ; he
wearies himself in ceaseless endeavour to discover the
elements of life, the primal molecule of matter, and the
beginnings and germs of the various existences which
spread themselves around him; and thus he passes his
career, year after year, till old age comes upon him, and
his brain weakens, his eyes become dim, and sinking into
the imbecility of second childhood, he loses all that store
of knowledge which he had spent a long life in acquiring.
He, too, at last, is stretched out on his bier, and stiff and
cold, is carried to his grave. All his discoveries, all his


confident reasonings, all his pride of intellect, spent upon
transitory things, —all these things are no more for him,
only in as much as they have been strictly sifted and
weighed in the balance, and tell for or against him, in
proportion as they had ministered to the end for which he
was created, or had been made instruments for drawing
him away from the service of the Almighty God.
So, too, with those that are living the ordinary lives
of the generality of mankind. They are born into this
world, they grow up to man’s or woman’s estate, they
amuse themselves for a time, as the case may be; they
settle in life, they rear a family, they grow old and
helpless and feeble, and they die. Their friends mourn
their loss for a time, visit their grave, erect a monument
to their memory, and record on it how much they were
beloved, and how soon alas ! they had been called away.
But in course of time the grave is visited less frequently,
the flowers upon it wither, the tombstone crumbles, and
becomes covered with moss, and decays and falls, and
breaks and disappears; and he whose body has mixed
with earth some six or seven feet below, is now practically
forgotten and expunged from the memory of man. His
name which was written in the sands of time, has been
washed away by the great tide of human affairs, and by
the on-going of the world, which, heedless of human life
or human death, has to fulfil its destiny.
And yet he, that common man, who made so small
a mark, who has left no history to record, having no more
personal significance in the generations of men, than a
leaf in a forest or a blade in a corn-field—this obscure
and quickly-forgotten man, as the king and as the
philosopher, no sooner became a corpse, than his spirit,
created for immortality by God, appeared before the
Judgment-seat, to be judged with a just severity, and to
be punished everlastingly, or rewarded with infinite
delights according as he had fulfilled the law of Christ
and had kept His commandments. Obscure, ordinary,
monotonous, trivial, though his career may have been ;
simple, narrow, plain or confused as his thoughts may


have been ; ignorant of books, inexperienced in men,
bound down to his little country village for life, though
he were ; and speedily forgotten by the small narrow circle
of the village friends which formed his only society or
relaxation; though he, here below, lived in the humblest
sphere and in the simplest way that well could be
imagined—still, that man had an immortal destiny, like
the king, who ruled the world of men, and the philosopher,
who ruled the world of thought. His obscure life was full of
infinite meaning and value to him, and of high possibilities.
However narrow his circumstances, they were not so
narrow that he could not save his immortal soul in them,
and purchase everlasting life. His intellect may have
been but partially developed, but he possessed mind
enough to be able to love God with all his heart and his
neighbour as himself. The king could do no more than
this ; the philosopher, with all his learning, was bound to
do as much. Their relative conditions, truly, here below,
had been as widely different as one could well conceive ;
yet they were made for the same end, possessed the same
means of attaining it, and were destined, finally, to live
eternally together. Thus the great and the learned, the
poor and the ignorant, find, at last, a common standing-
place. They stand before the same Judge, who is.not a
respecter of persons, and are punished by Him or
rewarded according to their works.
Now, what is the natural effect upon our minds of
these considerations ? If we will allow ourselves to think,
if we are not too much immersed in worldly affairs to
make us afraid of introspection, we cannot but be
impressed with the old thought, that time is short, and
eternity is long, and that we must make the very
best use of the present time that our eternity, when it does
come, may be a happy one. We are, moreover, impressed
with the fact that this life, apart from the end to which it
was made to minister, is of small account; and that we
are little better than swarms of summer insects, spinning
out their little hour, unless we have been made for some
end beyond the grave. Our conditions in life may be


different; some are rich, some are poor; some learned,
some ignorant; some are called to do great things and act
a great part; others live in obscurity all their lives; the
varieties and changes and differences between man and
man are endless, and no two are alike; but all meet
here, all are alike in this, that it all swiftly passes
away. Death comes to the door of all, all are summoned
before the Judge, and the same issue is placed before all—
endless happiness or endless misery, not according to what
they were, but according to what they did, according as
they acted that part well and manfully which had been
entrusted to them.
Dearly beloved, let us not be fools and madmen. It
is not yet too late to mend our ways This holy Fast of
Lent is especially set apart as a time of meditation, as a
season in which to examine our conduct and see whether
or no we are squandering and misusing the golden hours
of life, given us for the especial purpose of working out
our salvation ; whether or no we have been so sunk in
material interests, worldly ambitions, earthly seekings,
that, as a matter of practical fact, we have greatly
neglected the paramount work of saving our immortal
souls. We are all sensible of the great temptation ever
besetting us to neglect the other world for the sake of this
world. It is one of the strongest, if not the very
strongest of our abiding trials. If we could overcome
this temptation our souls would be saved. If we could
persuade ourselves to give God what belongs to
Him, and not give a large share of it to Caesar,
or to the world, then we should be on the high
road to heaven. This we know —nothing is clearer to us.
We are conscious of it every time we go to confession,
every time we examine our consciences, and more par-
ticularly when we fall ill, or any calamity overtakes those
we love, or anything occurs to startle us into serious
thoughts, and into a consideration of the future.
And how does it happen that, in spite of this firm
conviction, we so perseveringly act as if we were, in
reality, convinced that the very reverse was true % —as if


we, in our hearts, believed that “ a bird in the hand is
worth two in the bush that it is best to make the most
of this world, and to let the world to come take care of
itself, or, at least, take its chance, after we have dedicated
the main energies of our days to the service of this world
and its perishing ambitions ? How comes it to pass that
we believe one thing so intensely, and practise the other
thing so persistently? Are we conscious hypocrites?
Are we double-faced rogues, and so debased as to make a
distinct habit of saying one thing and doing another?
This cannot be. It is contrary to our ordinary frame of
mind, to our general practice in other things, and to that
innate sense of truthfulness which manifests itself in our
common intercourse with our fellow-man. How, then,
can it be accounted for ? There are three mam causes
which tend towards encouraging us to live as worldlings
whilst professing to be followers of Christ; and if they
could be removed our difficulty would be vastly
diminished.
What, then, are these three main causes of our great
prevarication ?
First of all, in general, we may say, that the world
of sense, in which we live, is close upon us; we live in it,
and move, and have our being in it. From the moment
we open our eyes and feel ourselves to have an existence,
to the moment of our departure hence, we are solicited
by it in ten thousand ways, and it appeals to us in every
varied form, through the doors of all our senses. We
feel as if we were part of it, one of the elements which
makes up its existence, and an integral portion of what
we see with our eyes, feel with our hands, and hear with
our ears. As we grow older and our passions develop,
instead of it possessing less mastership over us, it
increases in its power ten-fold. The world opens before
us, its ambitions and pleasures and duties and attractions
allure us, and fill our hearts and minds: and we become
knitted to and enchained by the subtle threads of endless
attractions which enslave us in its service, and subdue us to
its rule. Home and friends and occupations, and strivings


of advancement or ambition fill our imaginations from
morning till night, and there is little room left for other
considerations which seem less real, and have to do with
conditions which have, so far, little practical bearing
upon our conduct. Thus we sink down into a carnal,
low, and slothful condition of being. We are more and
more bent okhnultiplying comforts, and at chasing away
the daily inconveniences and troubles of life. Our one
aim, unless we are eaten up by higher ambitions, is to
live in easy circumstances, and to make life as
pleasant and as bearable as we may. We seek ever for
life’s sunshine and shun its shadows and clouds. Cold
and hunger and roughness, and hard lodging, and coarse
food, and inconveniences, and a poor appearance before
the world, we do our best to escape ; and then think
ourselves to be in a favourable way, and to have reason
to be satisfied when we are farthest from the Cross, and
least like our Master. We seem wholly to forget, so
absorbed are we by the present and tangible
world, that we have upon us the burden of our sins,
and a future before us which will eventually bring
with it the stripping away of all our possessions,
and the judgment of the Almighty Judge. The world
seizes hold of us as soon as we are born, holds us in its
grasp all our lives long, impregnates us through every
pore of body and soul with its especial spirit, and only
then abandons us when death snatches us away. Thus it
is that we seem to prevaricate so grossly. We are in the
possession of a mighty enchanter, and there is only One
powerful enough to give us strength against him, and an
antidote to counteract the poisonous exhalations which
corrupt the mind and stain the imagination of the
strongest.
What, then, is the first of the three main causes of
our enslavement ? It is allowing the world to take too
large and abiding a hold of our imagination. We become
stained, nay saturated, with its spirit, because we do not
make any strenuous efforts to check it in its advances by
filling our minds and imaginations with thoughts and


arguments and images which should, from time to time,
take the place of worldly things. If earth wholly possess
us how can we expect to think of heaven, or to know, or
care much about heavenly things ? Whilst we acknow-
ledge the overwhelming fascinations of things of sense,
we make small effort to oppose them ; and whilst feeling
confident that we are being carried swiftly and smoothly
towards the rapids, we appear too much magnetized to
bestir ourselves in earnest and pull against the flood.
The second main cause of our enslavement is our
natural distate for what is painful or unpleasant. We
began our life crying with pain, and trying to escape
hunger, and seeking after comfort and solace and
sympathy. And as we began so we went on. Our lives
have been, principally, a steady struggle to escape what
we do not naturally like, and to attain that which gives
us pleasure. Hunger and thirst, and hard living, and
inconveniences of all sorts we shun as a kind of nuisance,
and pass our lives seeking ourselves, and what will he most
agreeable to flesh and blood. If we labour and toil, it is
that we may rest and be at ease; if we endure hardships
and privations, it is that we may eventually secure to our-
selves all the greater liberty and the greater comfort. In
the midst of all our trials and strivings we have a steady
eye to the issue—to gaining an equivalent at some future
day. Thus selfishness creeps upon us and we become
possessed of immortified spirits. Earth is so pleasant
that Heaven is almost distasteful; and the comforts and
conveniences and pleasures of life are so satisfying that it
seems to be almost unreal to talk of any other state of
being, or of giving up something of present fulness in,
order to purchase an everlasting reward. Our eyes have
films on them, our hearts are sluggish, and our whole
being becomes gross, carnal, and almost impervious to
anything higher or nobler than the good things of this
world.
The third main cause lies in a debasing selfishness
which makes us think of ourselves, and of ourselves only,
in all we do and say : and induces us to measure all


things around us, and all people, by the rule of our own
convenience. If we do give in charity, it is to satisfy a
natural sympathy which it is unpleasant to restain ; if we
do put ourselves to inconvenience for the sake of others,
it is from human respect: if we be induced to abandon
our slothful ways for a time, we do so with some ulterior
motive which will all the more exquisitely minister to our
darling passion. In a word, we live for ourselves, and, as
far as we can manage it, all other people and all other things
shall live for us. We make ourselves the centre of the
universe, and all around us, we take it, are made to minister
to our wants, to obey our behests, and to anticipate our
wishes.
Thus, by means of this threefold cord we are bound
down to earthly things, and become inevitable slaves to
those allurements and those inveterate habits which rob
the soul of God, and empty it of all genuine religion.
Faith may remain. We do not dare to deny ; but our
assertions are feeble, and our creed is pronounced in a
half-hearted manner, through our consciousness that the
very utterance of it is like passing judgment on ourselves.
Thus we live on in a torpid state, in a most dangerous
condition ; and daily lose more and more of our early
fervour, if we ever had any; and, as a necessary conse-
quence, become all the more case-hardened to the efforts
and influences of Grace.
Dearly Beloved, —We do not say that any amongst
you have arrived at such a painful condition as that which
we have just sketched for your consideration. But this
may be said without much fear of contradiction : that
there is not one amongst you who may not become better,
more spiritual, less worldly-minded than he is. All of
you have been living in this atmosphere of a carnal life
all have been influenced, more or less, by that powerful
presence, by that great world of men in which your lot is
cast. Much dust must have accumulated during the
year. Possibly you have lost some of your fervour;
possibly you possess a less vivid appreciation of the world
to come, say fewer prayers, frequent the Sacraments less


often, and are gradually slipping away from the gates of
Heaven. Or you may, on the other hand, be living in
mortal sin, and have given up, in despair, at least for the
present, all thought of putting yourself right.. You
say : “I cannot now, I am not in the disposition; I
cannot pray, I cannot think of God, my mind is not
steady enough, some other Lent—next Lent, I will try
what I can do ; but this Lent it is impossible !” And do
you tell me you have got as far as that! Poor soul! How
long have you given yourself to live ? May you not be
struck down by God this very night ? Who has promised
to give you a penitent spirit next year ? Has He promised
wdio, according to your admission, refuses it now ? 0 tempt
not your Christ and King; but say to yourself, “Now is the
acceptable time. This is the day of salvation !” Sell not
your birth-right for a mess of pottage, lest the time come
and you cry, and cry in vain, with a great and exceeding
bitter cry. Put it not off lest the Lord say to you when
you want to enter in: “ Too late, too late, you cannot
enter now!” But return, arise at once, and go to your
Father, and He will bless you, and pardon you, and save
your soul from the snare of the enemy, and open your
eyes to the vision of everlasting rest.
Such being the three main causes of Christian pre-
varication, w T hat, now, are the direct antidotes ?
They, also, are three in number. The first is Prayer.
Keep the world of sense at bay by introducing the world
of spirits. Allow heaven to take possession of your heart
and mind, to impress you, to thrill you through with its
entrancing vision. Open the eternalgates and see within;
and kneel down on your knees, and adore, and pray, and
wonder, and know that that is your everlasting home.
Meditate on Christ’s life, passion, and death, and on His
glory, and on His coming to judgment. You can, if you
like, during this holy season, exercise yourselves in living
and moving, and having your being in the kingdom of
your Father. This is one of the especial duties of Lent,
to pray more than usual, with greater fervour, and with
a more concentrated spirit. It is by this practice that


the saints became saints. Their hearts throbbed with
love because they fixed their eyes on the beauty of their
Christ; they spurned the earth and all its allurements,
simply because they had seen and had chosen Heaven
with its everlasting gifts. They were thus filled with as
enthusiastic a love for heaven as you have been for earth ;
and toiled day and night for it, yes, far more laboriously
than you have whilst spending yourselves upon perishing
things. If, then, you are in earnest about your souls
and about your salvation, you will make up your minds
to pray earnestly and frequently during Lent, and to live
as much as possible in the society of Christ and of His
saints. Say your morning and night prayers fervently ;
meditate for a short time every day upon some spiritual
subject; read some religious book; attend holy Mass
when possible, and aim all through at making a good
Confession and Communion.
The second antidote is the practice of Fasting. Here
you will check your immortified spirit. Here holy
Church comes to your assistance, and binds you by law to
deny yourselves. She bridles you up, and reminds you
that you are, after all, not in Paradise yet, but in a place
and condition of probation. She points to the example of
your Redeemer and of His greatest saints as patterns of
Fasting and Prayer and Penance. She reminds you of
St. Paul, and his brethren, who were in fastings often
and in watchings ; of St. Peter fasting in Simon’s house;
of Moses and Elias, and Daniel, and thousands more, who,
by denying themselves, learnt to conquer themselves, and
by obeying the law of the Almighty earned for themselves
a penitential spirit, and the entrance to everlasting glory.
Nor did they confine themselves merely to fasting : they
lived mortified, careful lives, bearing in mind constantly
that the reward is not to be given or taken now, but it is
to come hereafter; that it" is a future premium for
present well-doing, and a token of a holy, God-fearing
life. Here then, again, you see how fasting and the spirit
of it directly thwarts that self-seeking temper and love of
indulgence which are so apt to enslave the soul and


demoralize the body. Here it is evident that holy Church
knew exactly what remedy to prescribe. If you pray in
the way we recommend, earnestly, frequently; and
meditate—allow heavenly thoughts to possess you ; and
then purify your bodies by wholesome self-denial, you will
feel the change coming over you ; you will grow out of
your grossness, and become lighter, more active,
more adapted for the enjoyment and appreciation of
heavenly conversations. In a word, you will be
changing daily and perceptibly into Christian men. You
will take a juster measure of the world ; you will grasp
more firmly the true principles of life; and put them in
practice with less irksomeness, and with an ease which
will surprise you. Add, then, fasting and self-denial to
your prayers There are many things you could do to
try your spirits and to bring lowly thoughts into your
minds. Your own sincere desire to do your duty will
suggest to your what you might undertake. You will
never regret humbling yourself before the mighty hand
of God. He will return an hundred fold into your
bosoms, and feed you with food, such as you have never
tasted before, sweeter than honey in the honey-comb.
Lastly, comes Alms-giving. Here is the.antidote
against that overweening selfishness which grows upon
you imperceptibly, unless you be on your guard. By this
holy practice you are exercised in thinking of others, and
in taking off your thoughts from yourselves. Alms-deeds
imply a broad and ruling principle—that of charity to
our neighbour. Whilst obeying holy Church, especially
at this season, in doing works of mercy, aim at following
out the principle in its full expansion. Aim at thinking
less of self. Place others in the centre, and measure
yourselves by them. Let them take the first place, and
exercise yourselves in the holy practice of thinking of
them first, and after of yourselves, if you must think of
yourselves at all. Here, also, our Lord and His saints are
our patterns. How unexampled was not our blessed Saviour
in this ! He only considered Himself as a Victim for
our sins. When He thought of Himself it was to con


sider liow He could most absolutely forget Himself; or,
rather, how He could best sacrifice Himself for the sake of
others. They were always in His thoughts, and their
happiness and advantage were sought by Him, and
bought at the price of His most precious blood and His
death upon the ignominous cross.
Dearly beloved, Prayer, Fasting, Alms-deeds, and
Christ for your pattern —these are your works for Lent.
These practices will assist you to unfasten your bonds, and
free yourselves from the influences of a worldly life ; these
holy instruments will assist you in working out your
salvation, in purging your souls from the effects of past
sins, and in preparing yourselves for loving God more
generously for the future. They will be especially blessed,
for they are recommended by holy Church herself at this
penitential season and for these especial ends.
God grant that we may all use them fruitfully during
Lent I God grant that we may so pray to Him as to be
filled with heavenly thoughts, and holy desires, so that
the world may take its proper place, and we may ever
put it, not first, but second, putting heaven ever first, all
through our lives ! God grant that we so subdue
ourselves that our passions become, not our masters, but
our slaves, and that our souls and bodies he thoroughly
in hand to do the work that our Master has placed before
us, sacrificing our bodily ease and our mental comfort,
out of love of Him and in imitation of His Son,
our Saviour. God grant, that our hearts may be
enlarged with a great charity, and that oui mam
thoughts may be, not of self, but of otheis,
of the poor, the sick, the infirm, the sorrowing,
and the suffering; so that our natural selfishness
may break up and be dissipated and give way to that
divine love which seeks not itself, which is not puffed up,
but which, in imitation of our Hedeemer, is ever on the
watch to act mercifully towards others, and to pour
the oil and wine into the wounded heart. God grant us
all, dearly beloved, to live in His Holy Grace, to love
Him above all things, to persevere to the very end , and,


finally, to taste of that everlasting reward which He has
promised to those who, in prayer and fasting an ams
giving, purify their snirits from the alloy and dross o
earth, and fashion them, with His holy help, for the
companionship of Angels and of Saints.
« The God of all grace who hath called us into ±iis
Eternal Glory in Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a
little, will Himself perfect you, and confirm you, and
establish you. To Him be glory and empire for ever and
ever. Amen.'"”
Given at Sydney, and appointed to be read in all
Churches and Chapels of the Archdiocese of
Sydney, on Quinquagesima Sunday, 1880.
ROGER BEDE
Archbishop of Sydney and Metropolitan.
* 1 St. Peter, chap, v., 10,11.






