

Humorous Sketches
Lest We Forget
A RETURNED 50LDIER
M, mmmrmm, pitimmam


Wff CoIJ.ECTION^yI?
|j[ Rational LIBRARY" JjjJ


FOREWORD
This book is compiled by a returned soldier. It
if a book of humour, with plenty of laughs running through it
Laughter is the one cure for all ills—doctors and philosophers
ail recommend it. So, by buying a copy of this book, you are
helping yourself— to health and happiness.
Yours faithfully,
H. HEDGES,
Returned Soldier
Compiled by G. Burnett
{NoSconnoction'with Limbless Association


VERSES FOR A GUEST ROOM
FOR A SMAI L HOUSE
The kids are asleep on the sofa
While the wife has to sleep on a cot;
We pass it off brightly and act most politely,
But really w mind it a lot.
Of course we're delighted to see you,
May nothing your comfort here mar; .
But you can't realise in a house of this size
What a gosh damned nuisance you are.
FOR A MEDIUM-SIZED HOUSE
I have given you the guest room
But it's really not the best room,
For the best room is the one I use myself.
May your sleep be calm and easy
Chough your room's a trifle breezy
And your bed, you'll find, is harder" than a shall
Though your room is damp and chilly
Still I think it would be silly
If I gave my warmest blankets to my guest.
For it's not unlikely, is it,
That you may cut short your visit?
And I like my warmth and comfort when I real,
FOR A LARGE HOUSE
You serenely drop in
Though you weren't invited;
We all have to grin
And pretend we're delighted.
You smoke our cigars
And you drink our best liquor;
You take out our cars
Without even a flicker.
You raise quite a din
While the children are sleeping.
Do you think it's an inn.
Or a road house we're keeping?
You arrived in these parts
Without giving us warning.
And it won't break our hearts
—Newman Lev
If you leave in the morning.


GETTING THE BEST OUT OF LIFE
There is not a dream which may not come true, if we have
the energy which makes, or chooses, our own fate. We can
always, in this world, get what we want, if we will it intensely
and persisently enough. -Whether we shall get it sooner or
later is the concern of fate; but we shall get it. It may come
when we no longer have any use for it, when we have gone
on willing it out of habit, or so as not to confess we have failed.
But it will come. So few people succeed greatly because so
few people can conceive a great end, and work towards that
end without deviating and without tiring. But we all know
the man that works for money day and night gets rich ; and
the man who weeks day and night for no matter what kind of
material power, get the power. It is the same with deeper,
more spiritual, as it seems vaguer issues, which-make for hap-
piness and every intangible success. It is only the dream*
of those light sleepers who dream faintly that do not come
true. We get out of life, all of us, what we bring to it; and
that, and that only, is what it can teach us. —Arthur Symoni.
THE GULF BETWEEN
Digger Jones, of the Ist Div. A.S.C., was! washing down
his two donks, in a shell hole at Fleurs, about 50 yards from
the old duckboard track, where the mud and slujh was about
two feet deep, in 1916. Having cleaned and groomed one
down he led him back and stood him on the duckboard track,
A staff officer, dressed in white corduroys, glittering spurs
and polished leggings, wending his way to battalion head-
quarters, was annoyed to find a mule blocking his pathway.
Approaching the mule he gave it a heavy shove, forcing back
into the slush, much to the annoyance of Digger Jones. "Here
what the h— do you think you're doing," he yelled indig-
nantly.
"What do you mean by blocking the track with your con-
founded mule," said the officer, "Hi have you arrested for this
What is your name and number?"
Digger Jones surveyed the ground between them, an#
I ktp, replied: "You come over and get it."


CHOOM HEADS EM
Near Erquingham early in May, 1916, a party of Diggers
chanced on a Tommy two-up school. This started us, for
apart from a few small units, the A.I.F. had come to Franca
from Egypt only a few weeks previous. Determined to teach
a lesson to the Poms, who dared amuse themselves with our
national game, we joined in. But we came a cadorna—broke
by a Choom who headed 'em as consistently as we insulted
mm. In an estaminet some days later we again met the Toxn-
®y. Under the stress of much vin blanc he showed us a
double-headed penny and confided that it had been given to
him months ago by a wounded Digger who had gone from
Anzac to a Blighty hospital. Instead of getting hot about the
ears because he had tricked us, we congratulated Choom be-
cause he had sufficient initiative tc IT bibe new ideas, and sug-
gested that he would do well u lie transferred his home t#
Australia, apres la guerre.—S.V.D
o :
WHO WAS RIGHT?
How many applet did n,ve and Adam cat? The o'u ver-
«imi says Eve 8 and Aciam 2 (Eve ate and Adam too.) Total
10. . .si« what certain American newspapers have to sa*
abc-un: Nebraska Herald," Eve 8 and Adam 8; tot?! 11.
Mississif i Gazette :* We don't see this Eve 8 and Adam 83;
total 90. "New York Screamer': Our contemporary is entr e-
'y wrong, Eve 81 ano Adam 812; total 893. "Ohio Ad.-r-
-ti»er":We reason like this: Eve 814 herself and Adam it
Eve; total 8938. "Illinois Telegraph": Eve 8142 know how it
tasted and Adam 28142 see what it might be like; total 36. 284
8.L.5., Nowra.
o :
A spinster living in a London suburb was shocked at the
language used by two men repairing telegraph win s close to
ner house.
She wrote to the company on the matter, and the foreman
was asked to report.
| bis M. d;J in the following way:—
"Me and Bill Fairweather were on this job. I was up the
telegraph pole, and accidently let the hot lead fall on Bill. It
went down his neck. Then he said : 'You reallv must be more
sareful, Harry."


THE CHARGE OF THE THIRD BRIGADE
I Do you hear what they say, we're soon going away
To make name and fame for Australia?
And the news we have heard, is they've chosen the 3rd,
The Brigade which knows not the word failure.
Twa3 just break of day as we steamed in the Bay, [
Shot and shell all round us was flying, • j
\ And with desperate will we swarmed up the hill
Tho' we left comrades wounded and dying.
Against great opposition we took the position,
Prepared to hold out to the last,
We fought all that night, until daybreak brought light,
Though the fighting was furious and fast.
There's many a friend that has met with his end,
j Ushered out like the close of a story,
They fell in the fight for freedom and right,
And their memories are halo'd in glory.
A word to the scribes who profuse diatribes,
Attempted to wreck our fair name,
The weapons we use are not ink and abuse,
But rifles and men who are game.
The boys of the Third of whom you've all heard,
Are bright, cheerful, happy and hearty.
And tender no thanks to the wowsers and cranks
Who belong to the Stop-at-home party.
H. W. MORRIS, Gallipoli, April 30, 1915
FORETHOUGHT
Sweet young thing, snorting along the road in a powerful
roadster, is pulled in by a motor cycle cop. "You were making
45 miles an hour; I'll have to pinch you," said the cop. "Ob
if you must, do it where it won't show please," purrs the flap
The inquisitive visitor to the studio of the famous but
crotchety artist propounds the query: "What do you mix your
colors with?"
"With brains, sir," replies the painter in dignified tones
"Ah!" comments the visitor. "So you paint minatures?**


THE EVACUATION OF ANZAC
O, Anzac! On thy sea-girt shores
Many dear comrades lie,
Who fought and fell for Empire's cause,
Whose fame shall never die.
'Twas on that glorious April day,
We charged those shot-swept steeps,
Australia's sons, whom none could stay,
Now—many a Mother weeps.
A Mother's loss—the Empire's gain,
Their lives they freely gave,
To forge a link in Empire's chain,
They filled a hero's grave.
O, Mothers of our glorious dead,
Lift up your heads on high,
What if the Immortal souls have fled,
Their deeds shall never die?
H. W. MORRIS, Tel-el-Kebir, Egypt, Jan., 1111.
SUPER-STIFFNESS
Early in 1918 it was the custom at the Grantham (Eng.)
Machine Gun School to allow four days' leave a month for
good conduct. "Quig," a digger in our hut, was never more
sober than he could help, but he at last determined to earn
the four days' leave, and have what he called a "real bust-up."
He earned it all right, and only we in his hut had any
notion of what he went through to accomplish the task.
The day before he was due to commence leave, we were
called on parade, and the names of a draft for France wefle
read out. Once a man was put on draft he could not leave
camp, and, as each name was read poor "Quig" grew more
restless.
As though by deliberate intent to torture, his was the last
name on the list. All the bottled-up spirits of those weeks of
perfect conduct went into that one string of curses.—"Dub."
The absent-minded man arrived home late and entered the
bedroom, where all was dark. Suddenly he stopped, stiffened.
"Who's below that bed ?" he asked.
"Nobody," repied the burglar.
"Funny," muttered the man, "I could have sworn I heard
noise*"


DEADLY GAMBLE
At Lone Pine our front line was close to Abdul's. Oppo-
site our section was an expert sniper using a fixed rifle trained
m to a certain loop-hole just large enough to take a rifle barrel.
Nearly every time the steel guard covering the loop-hole was
lifted during daylight hours the sniper sent a bullet through
the opening. After a number of casualties we learned not t®
stand behind the open loop-hole.
To break the monotony of trench warfare we placed a
small sheet of tin, divided in two by a perpendicular chalk line,
in line with the loop-hole, and about eight feet behind it. We
then made bets, backing the right or left side of the target.
One of us, standing well to one side of the closed loop-hole,
carefully lifted the steel guard. A few seconds later a bullet
came through the loop-hole and hit our target.
A few hours later "Bluey" was winning several hundred
piastres (on the cuff," of course) and were calling him "thi
luckiest thing alive." After more bets had been made "Bluey"
lifted the steel guard. The sniper's bullet lightly touched the
edge of the loop-hole and deflected, killing "Bluey" instantly.
We did not play with the Abdul sniper again.—"Trapper."
o :
HIS TICKET
The hard-doer had been crimed so often that his pay-
book was a mass of entries in red ink. He was up again for
being A.W.L. The Colonel had a glance at his pay-book, and
then exclaimed. "Why, man, this book is a disgrace to the A.I.F
Now, tell me, what does it remind you of? 0 "A flamin' pak
a-pu ticket," repied the hard-doer. "Well, I'm sorry," said
the Colonel, "you've drawn a blank. Seven days' C.B."— 4sth.
A school teacher said to her class of boys;—
"I am going to give each of you three buttons.
must think of the first as representing Life, the second Liber-
ty, and the third Happiness. In three days I want you to pre-
duce these buttons, when I shall expect you to tell me what
they stand for." f
On the appointed day she asked one of the boys for hii
buttons.
"I ain't got 'em all," he said. "Here's Life, and here's
Liberty, but mother has gone and sewed Happiness on my
trousers."


LIFE
Man is brought Jnto this world without his consent, and
leaves it against his will. During his peregrinations on eartk
his time is spent in one endless round of contraries and mis-
understandings. In infancy he is an angel; in boyhood a
young devil; in manhood anything from a lizard up; in duties
a perfect fool; if he raises a family 1 he's a chump; if he raisce
a cheque he's a thief, an<Lthe law; raises trouble for him. If
a poor man he's a poor manager, without sense; if rich, dis-
honest, but considered smart. If he is in politics he's a log-
roller and a crook: out of politics you can place him as an un*
desirable citizen. If he goes to church he professes; if hi
stays away he's a sinner. If he donates to foreign missions
he does it for trade; if he doesn't it's because he's mean.. .If
he does you for anything he's a shark: if he doestn't he's a
mug. If he saves he's a miser ;if he spends he's a spendthrift.
If he meets with an accident his friends are sorry. If kisses a
pretty girl he's fast ;if he doesn't he's a slow as a funeral. If
he has a hobby he's a crank; if he hasn't, he's a waster. If hi
oils up he's a hog; if he won't shout he's a mug. When hi
comes into the world the girls want to kiss him; before he goes
out they want to kick him. If he dies young there was a great
future for him; if he lives to a ripe old age he is considered a
wu Cr ' onl y t0 save funeral expenses and nark his family.
When he is dead they recognise he was a real good fellow.
After all, life is what you make it.—Exchange.
MAGIC WORDS
The C.O. of a Salisbury Plains camp was not above abua-
mg his officers in front of their men. But he found one officer
a one-pip artist—who was not content with silent resent-
ment. In pretty plain language he told the C.O. that ha
wasn t going to submit to that sort of treatment. Those of ua
I ? Tj r £-n andin £ ! n th ? front rank thought for a moment
that old Bill would be seized with apopolexy. When he re-
covered himself, he snarled out: "Another two words from you
—and 111 have you packed off to Australia 1"
.Via. t j Crc s a, ° ok j n Bill's eyes that showed plainly
that he had met his Waterloo, when there came that calm lonr-
"1 WiSh t0 hCII y ° U ' d te " mC th ° Se word '


CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY
In the Engineer's camp at Brighting-sea, Essex, in ltl§,
a burly drill instructor, sporting a fine array of badges and a
broken nose, was in charge of a dozen trainees. He kept them
working at lightning speed for about half an hour, then gave
them a ten minutes 1 breather. One of the trainees remarked
that, "A cove ought to biff him and straighten his nose."
On falling them in again the instructor roared, "The man who
would like to straighten my nose, take two paces forward I"
The whole squad stepped out, and nothing happened.-"19803,"
A clergyman, noticing in his congregation a girl he had
not seen before, shook her hand, and said: —
Tam glad to see you here. If you will give your mat
and address I shall be very pleased to call on you."
Hanging her head, the girl replied: I've-1 ve got a friend."
Tom and his father were calling on a big game hunter,
and Tom had been put on the floor to play with a tiger-akin
rug.
He iinterrupted his elders' conversation with so many
questions, that finally the hunter took Tom on his lap and told
him about the tiger hunt.
Tom returned to the rug, examined it with renewed inter-
est, and then inquired
"How did you shoot it so flat?"
Re-embarking at Alexandria en route for France, in early
'l6, were details of the various Units quartered thereabouts
The Draft Oi/cer, a red-tabbed Tommy, was incensed over the
slow motion action with which some of the men trooped up
the gangway. "Hurry up there," he cried. "You damned Aus-
tralians are more nuisance than the whole British Army."
"Yes," replied a long lighthorseman, just returned from skirm-
ishing along the Nile, "that's what the Senussi said."—"Hard-
•p."


BIOGRAPHIES
THE WOMAN'S
Man
Marriage
Mending
Midnights
Melancholia
Memorial
THE MAN'S
Woman
Wedding
Work
Worry
Whiskey
Will
BACK-BLOCKS RACES
In my time in the back-blocks of New South Wales there
used to be many "unauthorised" race meetings. That was
many years ago, and I speak of the very small towns outback.
Any sort of old nag would do. No questions were asked
by the committees as to past history, pedigree, and so on, ani
altogether racing was a very happy-go-lucky sort of pastime.
I remember a brother banker used to ride over to my
branch (24 miles) on Sundays and holidays, and one day he
and I thought we had a very soft thing on at the local scratch
races. A packer drove up to the "course" with what was ap-
parently a heavy load piled on to a black mare. She was
dirty and unkempt, and before long the packer was loudly
offering to back his old screw against any horse in the paddock
People laughed loudly at the absurdity of the boaster, none
more loud than my friend Jack and myself. We poked fun
at the man and his beast of burden. Thereupon he turned t©
us and offered to bet an even tenner that his old screw would
beat Jack's natty colt two miles.
Now Jack prided himself on his colt, which was develop-
ing fast, and promised to become a dyer.
Jack took him up, and the fellow also accepted my offer of
another £lO bet.
The course was cleared, the black mare relieved of her
load (which was only featherweight), and the horses got to th§
post, owners up. Bless my heart, if that black didn't come
home in the easiest of canters, Jack flogging his colts, lengths
behind.
We paid over our hard-earned tens, to learn later in the
day that this packer got quite a nice living moving about from
town to town wagering against country bumpkins like us, atti
winning always with his speedy "pack-horse."


STARS
A wharf in France. A Digger pacing up and down, very
wrathful for he has just been told that his projected leave hag
keen stopped. A Yank strolls along, and, seeing the Digger
approaches for a friendly talk and little leg pulling, as hi
imagines.
Follows a remark as to the weather.
Grunt.
Another remark regarding the war.
Grunt.
Then, "Say, Aussie, my hat's very like yourn/
"Mine's three years older."
Pause.
"Say, my flag has more stars than yourn."
Like a flash the exasperated Digger turned and landed
kira one fair between the eyes. "Look at the flag again, Y auk,
and you will see some more stars."
Exit omnes.
IN THE WAR AREA
(By L.S.D.)
An Aussie in a quiet spot, doing sentry duty. Enter a
General.
"Who are you?" asked the latter.
"Oh! I'm bit of a sentry. And who are you?"
"I'm a bit of a General."
"Hell! Wait a minute while I get my rifle, and I'll give
you a bit of a salute.''
(The Editor takes the liberty of disbelieving this yarn.)
TICKETS, PLEASE!
While standing on Prince's Bridge Station in 1919, 1 saw
several Diggers from Mont Park and McLeod step off the
train. As one Dig. passed the barrier the ticket collector
shouted out, "Hey, this ticket is no good." "Well, keep the
damn thing, I don't want it,'' was the quick reply as the Digger
disappeared into the crowd.—"Hard Case."
11


LEISURE
(By W. H. Davies.)
What is the life, if full of care,
We have no time to stand and stare.
No time to stand beneath the boughs,
And stare as long as sheep or cows.
No time to see, when woods we pass,
Where squirrels hide their nuts in grass.
No time to see, in broad daylight,
Streams full of stars, like skies at night.
No time to turn at Beauty's glance,
And watch her feet, how they can dance.
No time to wait till her mouth can
Enrich that smiles her eyes began.
A poor life this, if full of care,
We have no time to stand and stare.
8-5-35.
**To the Full General Insurance Company.
"Gentlemen, —Your masterly inactivity in the matter of
insurance claims is very annoying. You call yourselves the
Full General Insurance Company, but from the amount of
rapidity of your disbursemets, I should not rank you as even
a full Corporal company. Here we are, in the very deuce of
a hole, not even our fares home, and breakfast to-morrow
problematical. These river trips are the very dickens, and it
is almost impossible to estimate your expenses, If the letter
Micklethwaite has sent to his father, the one Binns has sent
to his aunt, and the one I have sent to by godmother produce
nothing, we shall proably have to remain here for the rest of
our natural lives; and it will be your fault. I have put forward
two splendidly-worded claims, and you have not even acknow-
ledged them. When I tell you Binns has an uncle, who is a
solicitor and a pretty hot one at that, you will realise that you
are only riding for a fall. So wire the money at once, and you
®*y be in time to prevent me taking action.
Yours truly,
ARCHIE RAMBLER."


"DAN DALY WINS"
OFFICER CULLEN heard the clock in the Oldport town hall strike
twelve. Officer Cullen yawned. Four more hours to go; few
more hours to patrol the silent streets. He moved his big
policeman's feet down Garfield Avenue at a slow pace. He swung fc*
night stick idly. He thought about the thing policemen think about.
He thought how soft the rich men in the mansions along Garfieii
Avenue had it; he thought how pleasant it would be if the town raised
his salary from thirty-two dollars and fifty cents a week to forty, he
thought of the second-hand car he could buy in that event; he thought
if his wife and for a moment speculated on the advantages and dtp-
advantages of monogamy; he thought about the hangnail on his left
index finger; he thought about the crack a brother officer had made
at the station house that evening in regard to his-—Officer Cullen's—
growing baldness; he regretted that his repartee had not been more
devastating than, "So's your old man"; he thought about the joys ot
consuming a porterhouse steak bedded down in onions; he thought
and then he stopped thinking. He had seen something.
He was passing the most palatial house on Garfield Avenue, a solif
impressive house set in an acre of shrub-studded lawn. The house was
dark. But it was not the house that attracted Officer Cullen's atten-
tion. It was something white lying on the grass, not far from the
wide verandah. The spotlight of the full moon seemed to focus on
that white patch. A towel blown from a window, he thought, and was
about to continue on his way, when he decided to have a look, any-
how, if only to give himself something to do. He strolled up the drive.
Then his pace quickened to a run, for he saw that the white thing wag
the glistening bosom of a man's evening shirt. He bent over the figure
that lay there and made a hasty examination. Two facts hit him.
One was that the man huddled on the lawn was dead; the other was
that he had been beaten to death.
From the signal box on the corner he called police headquarters.
"That you, chief?"
"Yeah." It was the voice of a man not fully aroused from slumber.
"This is Cullen. I found a dead man on my beat. Mr. Falconer'i
place on Garfield Avenue. It looks like murder."
"Are you sure it's muider?" queried the sleepy voice.
"His head's smashed, chiei."
'Mebbe," said the sleepy voice hopefully, "it's suicide, and the
eerener can handle it."


"A man don't go round smashing his @wn head," staled QMmr
€nll«n.
The chief appeared to be thinking this over.
'No," he decided presently, "it ain't usual." Then after r®g<§@ti©is*
"Perhaps he fell out of a window, or got hit by a car, ©r something
accidental like that."
"Don't look like it chief."
"Well, then," said the chief resignedly, "I guess mebb® I'll have
to come down there."
How an otherwise progressive town like Oldport cam® to have
a man like old Dan Daly for its chief of police was a question for
students of civic matters to ponder. He had been the town's only
nonstable some forty years before. When the town attained the dig-
nity of a uniformed police force he had become a patrolman. When
he got too old and fat to waddle a beat, something had to be done
with him; and as nobody had the heart to compel the old .fellow te
go to woik, he was made chief of police. It was commonly said ©f
aim that he had not been fully awake in six years.
As Oldport was a well-behaved New England community whose
«rime wave seldom included anything more serious than a juvenile
t aid on a melon patch or a public snake dance by a farmer full @f
hard cider, it did notTnatter much if the chief of police was not, an
intellectual giant. Old Dan Daly had friends, as easy-going, go©#-
aatured people often do; but the most loyal of them did not dispute
the assertion of some of his critics that he was the laziest and dumb-
est man in a dozen counties.
Chief of Police Daly arrived, finally, at the Falconer residence.
He had stopped to pick up Hoyt, the district attorney, and Doctor
Waterman, the coroner's physician. The district attorney and tha
doctor hastened up the drive with long eager steps, for they were
youngish men, zealous to do their duty.
Ch«ef Daly after dislodging his ponderous stomach from under tiee
steering wheel of his car with difficulty, followed them panting.
Well, doc.," asked Chief Daly, "is it really murder?"
"It is," said the doctor, and added with a slight shade of mails*
ia his voice, "Yes, it's a job for you, all right, chief."
Dan Daly sighed.
Who kilt him?" he asked, turning a stern eye on Officer Culiem,
"Blest if I know, chief," said the patrolman.
"It happened on your beat, didn't It?"
"Yes; but I ain't to blame for that, am I?"
"When I was a constable," said Dan Daly severely, "nobody g®|
.urdered on my beat. . . . Well, who is he, anyway?"


District Attorney Hoyt turned & thin, keen, legal face to the
"It's Edwin Bain," he said.
"Why so it is!" said Dan Daly. "Now ain't that a shame—a alee
inlet-spoken fellow like that. Who could have kilt him?"
"That's what you have to find out," said the district atto*ae?
shortly.
••Did anyone wake up Mr. Falconer? Maybe he knows who 4M
It," said Dan Daly.
"Great idea, chief," said the district attorney dryly. But sarcasm
waus wasted on Dan Daly.
"Well," he said, "seeing that it happened right in his own
yard, I guess I'll wake him up and * k him how come." He started tm
front door of the mansion, but jtopped. "You do it, Cullen, Mt
said.
Officer Cullen approached the front door with a certain amount M
diffidence. Even in urgent circumstances, one does not ligthly break
Mto the sleep of the town's richest man, who is also a political leader
and reputed to be one of the most astute and successful lawyeri m
the state. A drowsy butler who answered the doorbell went to cat!
Mr. Falconer, but not until he had been assured that the matter w&»
•Efficiently grave to warrant what the butler seemed to consider a®
act of daring.
George Falconer came down presently in a silk dressing gown
Me was a dignified, self-possessed man of forty, and at the moment pat-
ently cross at being called from a warm bed on a cool night.
"What's wrong, Daly?" he asked. "Burglars?"
"I wish it was burglars, Mr. Falconer," said Dan Daly But it
ain't. I am afraid it's murder."
"Murder?"
"Yes. There's a man out here with his head beaten in
"What man?"
"Edwin Bain."
"What? Ned Bain? Are you sure?"
"Look," said Dan Daly.
"This is terrible!" said George Falconer. "Terrible! How iff
It happen? Who did it?"
"I wish I knew," said Dan Daly.
"And think of it happening here, practically on my doorstep!'
§&id George Falconer.
"I don't suppose you know who done it," ventured Dan Daly.
"Hardly," George Falconer turned from the chief. "What facts
you, Hoyt?" he asked the district attorney.


"Nothing much yet, Mr. Falconer. Doctor Waterman, the ehM
■ad I just got here. The patrolman on tho beat, Cullan there, eaw
■emethlng white on the lawn, investigated and found—this."
•It looks to me," observed Dan Daly thoughtfully, "like hia head
lad been beaten in with some blunt instrument."
The district attorney glanced at the chief of police impatiently.
"That's obvious," he said. "Now all you have to do is find the
istrument and the man who used it."
"I was thinking of that," said Dan Daly. He lowered himself le
sis fat knees and began a minute scrutiny of the lawn.
"The chief seems to think," remarked George Falconer, "that the
murderer has been so obliging as to leave his weapon behind, Just le
simplify matters for him."
He addressed Doctor Waterman.
Shall I have the poor fellow taken into the house while you send
for the ambulance, doctor?"
Wait a bit," called Dan Daly. "Don't move nothing. I got le
leok for clews."
"Very well." George Falconer shrugged his shoulders. "The ehlei
has been reading Sherlock Holmes,' 1 he said to the district attorney.
"George!"
They heard a woman's voice call the name. A figure had appeased
in the door of the house. Her face looked white in the moonlight.
le b'edL" nna '" ** ld George Falcon er to his wifi you'd better go hash
"What is it? What's happened?" she aske
"A man's been—well killed."
"Who?"
"Bain."
She gave a little cry
"Ned?"
"Yes. Ned Bain."
"Oh, where is he?"
"Never mind. Go back to bed."
She started for the little group gathered around the prostrate
Igure. George Falconer stepped toward her, took her arm, tamed
her round sharply. ' lwl,i
"Go in the house, I said." His voice was low.
"But, George '


'Do as I toll you."
Ho kept his grip on her arm and led her back into the house; then
he closed the door and came back.
"Found anything, chief?" he asked.
Dan Daly emerged from under a bush, wheezing in triumph
"Tup," he said, "I got it —the blunt instrument. Found it right in
plain sight, too." He held up a heavy blackthorn stick. "Wonder
whose it is," he said. "Here, Cullen, given me your flashlight."
Dan Daly examined the stick.
"That's what he used, a!l right," he said. "Still damp. And say
what's this? There a silver band on it, with the initials G.8.F." He
rubbed his chin. "G.B.F.—why, say, them's your initials, ain't they r
Mr. Falconer.?"
"Yes. they are."
"Is this your stick?"
"By Jove —it is!"
"How did it get here?'
'l've no idea."
"Ain't you? That's funny.'
"I've got a dozen sticks," added George Falconer.
Dan Daly stood staring at the stick. Then he rubbed his chin and
muttered to himself. Then suddenly he said, "Mr. Falconer, would
you mind letting me see the sole of your shoe?'
"What's the idea, chief?" asked George Falconer, with some as-
perity.
"I ain't saying nothing—not a thing," said Dan Daly. "But I would
like to see the sole of your shoe."
George Falconer looked at the district attorney, shrugged hip
shoulders, laughed.
"A little scientific research, eh, chief?" he said. "Well, I want
te help if I can."
Dan Daly bent over and examined the leather sole of Oeerge Fat
eoner's bedroom slippers. Then he straightened up and faced Mr.
Phleoner.
"They it," announced Dan Daly.
"What?"
"Your shoe fits a footprint near the body."
"That looks bad for me, doesn't it?" he said. "Well, chief, I dmw
say one could find plenty of footprints all over the place."


"I don't mean new footprints," said Dan Daly. "This one wms
made before you came out."
"Now look here, Daly, what are you getting at?"
"Mr. Falconer, I ain't saying nothing—not a thing, I got to cotlee
evidence that's all. That's my job."
"So you have," said George Falconer, and there was an amußti
eontempt in his manner. "I am entirely at the service of you gentle-
men." He bowed in the direction Hoyt. The district attorney t©eh
Dan Daly aside.
"See here, chief, you musn't make a fool of yourself," Hoyt saii
"How do you mean —make a fool of myself?"
"Acting this way."
"But I got to find evidence," said Dan Daly doggedly. "And I
guess I know evidence when I see it. Here's a man kilt, and I fin#
another man's stick did the job,a nd that man's footprint near tht
body. And that ain't all. When Cullen went in the house, there wai
®m© of Mr. Falconer's raincoats hanging on a rack in the hall —an#
there were bloodstains on it. Why, Mr, Hoyt, it's a clear case, at
plain as the nose on your face."
The district attorney spoke in the tone of a parent addressing as
unreasonable child.
"Chief," he said. "I know a little something about evidence my-
self, and I want to tell you this before you make a lot of trouble £©r
yourself: The three pieces of evidence that make you think Mr, Pal-
goner had something to do with the crime are three excellent reasosi
why he did not do it." -
Dan Daly scratched his grizzled head.
"I don't get that," he said.
"Listen, said the district attorney. "In the first place, no mai
kills another without a motive."
"I think mebbe I see a motive."
"Really? I'd be interested to hear it."
"There wasn't no love lost between Mr. Falconer and Edwin Bairn/ 4 '
mid Dan Daly.
"Oh, that old story," said the district attorney.
T know," said Dan Daly. "But, anyhow, it might be a motive.
You know that Bain was engaged to marry Mrs. Falconer years ag®,
and then Falconer came along and carried her off. He always was the
kind that gets what it goes after. Well, folks say that Mr. Falconer
and his wife ain't been happy together. Now Bain was a nice good-
natured fellow, but once a few years ago he had a row at the country
Blub with Falconer because of the way Falconer bawled out his wtii


In front of people. Gave Falconer particular hell, I heard. And thor
mr too, that lately Bain's always playing golf with Mrs. Falconer"
"Gossip—rumors," said the district attorney. "No good as evi-
dence."
"I think," said Dan Daly, "I could prove that Falconer didn't treat
his wife any too well, and that Bain liked her."
'What if you could?"
"And I could prove, I guess, that Falconer, thpugh he hasn't any
to© good a reputation himself where women are concerned, didn't like
bit.
"Even so, where would it get you?"
"Well, it's a motive, ain't it?" said Dan Daly. "If I was on a jury,
I wouldn't ask any better evidence that what we've got right here.
Falconer hates Bain. He asks him to come to his house. They have
a row. Falconer follows Bain out and hits him with his stick. If
that ain't a clear case, Mr. Hoyt, you can safely call me a Chinaman,
which I certainly ain't."
"I'm afraid," said the district attorney, trying not to show fell
exasperation, "that I'll have to call you a Chinaman, chief. This is
no open-and-shut case, with everything on the surface. Anyone with
a brain in his head" —the district attorney looked steadily at the chief
—"can see that.
"I don't," said Dan Daly.
"Think!" said the district attorney. "Does George Falconer look
Mke a fool? Did he get to be a rich man and a political power and a
mighty clever lawyer by being a fool? Look at him. Smartness and
coolness are written all over him. He's noted for being just about as
brainy and level-headed as they make them."
"I ain't saying he ain't," said Dan Daly.
"Now look at the facts," went on the district attorney. "Suppose
we grant that it is generally believed that Falconer had a grudge
against Bain. Bain is found murdered at Falconer's very door. He was
struck down by Falconer's own stick, the ownership of which he
readily admits. No attempt was made to hide the body or the stick.
Footprints are found near by which seem to have been made by Fal-
coner. No attempt was made to obliterate them, although that would
have been the work of a few seconds. Then in Falconer's hall—la
plain sight, mind you—is found a coat on which, according to Cullea,
there are bloodstains. Perhaps they are. Does that look as if Fal-
coner did it?"
"Yes, it looks that way to me."
"Nonsense! Did you get it?"


"Yes," »aid Dan Daly; "and so will the jury."
"The very fact® that you think prove him guilty, prove him in-
nocent," exclaimed the exasperated district attorney. "To a man with
a shred of intelligence, it's as clear as that moon up there that this 1s
frame-up. Mr. Falconer has enemies-—political enemies, and, I
suppose some husbands too. One of them, who thought he was pretty
slever, did this. It wouldn't be a hard job to get hold of Falconer's
stick, coat and shoes, and plant evidence against him. But the man
who did this wasn't really smart. He laid it on too thick. He did
net forsee that nobody would believe that Falconer would do se
clumsy and obvious a job. We've got to find that man, chief." Dan
Daly shook his head.
"I ain't going to look for him," he said. "I ain't got the time te
fool with theories and such things. Facts is facts. I got facts enough
to hang Falconer. I don't want to do it, but I go to."
The district atttorney's temper had been slipping for some time,
and now it got away from him.
"Chief," he said, "you're an old fool. What's more, you're a lasy
eld fool. The real reason you won't see what actually happened is
because you think if you make out some sort of case against Falconer,
you won't have to do any more work. You know no more übout
psychology and criminology than a bull knows about algebra. The
ebvious—-thaf's all you can see." Old Dan Daly blinked.
"Young man," he said mildly, "I guess mebbe you're a little excited.
I been a policeman forty years and I've always found that when a
watch is stolen, and you find it in some other man's pocket, that r an
stole the watch. It didn't get there by no criminalology or physiology.
According to what evidence I've got, Mr .Falconer is the guilty party,
mo matter who or what he is."
"If you're going to be bull-headed about it, I suppose I can't stop
you," said the district attorney. "It's not my funeral. The case will
never come to trial. And don't forget this, chief: George Falconer is
A powerful man and he has a short way of dealing with people who get
la his way. He'll smash you as if you were a fly. I thing, maybe,
the town of Oldport could struggle along somehow if you lost your
Job, but could you?"
Dan Daly puckered his fat face and concentrated on this new idea.
"I guess you're right," said the chief of police. "Mr. Falconer is
A bad buss saw to monkey with, all right. If he ain't the guilty party,
he'll come down on me like aton of brick. Even if he is guilty, I
guess he'll have enough influence to have me thrown out on my ear."
"Then you're going to drop this line you're following—and loek
i or the real criminal?"


"Wait a bit," said Dan Daly. "I ain't said nothing. I was joet
©at loud. Say, Mr, Hoyt, if I lost my job, I could get a pension, could-
n't I?"
"There's no provision in the town charter for one.'
"But mebbe they could fix it to give me one."
"With Falconer against you? What a chance!"
"Golly," said Dan Daly, "that's sort of tough on me. Well, mebbe
I eould get a job as a night watchman."
"Do you mean to say you're going through with this?"
"I got to," said Dan Daly. "Facts is facts."
The district attorney threw up his hands.
T might just as well argue with a stone wall as with you," be
•aid. "You're facts aren't worth a nickel."
"I got something more than facts," said Dan Daly.
"What?"
"A hunch," said Dan Daly. "I guess mebbe that was the real
reason that made me think Falconer done it."
"What are you talking about?"
"Ye see, Mr, Hoyt, when I was poking around in the bushes near
the house, Mrs. Falconer came out and I heard what he said to her."
"So did I. All he said to her was to go back into the house. Any
man would have said the same thing under the circumstances."
"Yes, mebbe," said Dan Daly. "But he wouldn't have said it In
the same way. Mr. Hoyt, I'm sixty-three years old and I've seen a lot
ef folks in my time, and I know a thing or two about what's going on
inside 'em. Now I seen the look Falconer gave his wife, and I seen
the look she gave him, and I seen she was scared to death of him, and
I heard the way he spoke to her, and that's enough for me."
"Your intuition will make wonderful evidence in a court room,
ehief." If the case ever comes to trial, Falconer's lawyers will make
an ass of you—and they should."
"That ain't worrying me," said Dan Daly. "Lot of folks has made
made fun of me."
He turned from the district attorney and approached George
Palconer.
"Mr. Falconer."
"Well, Daly?"
"I'd like to ask you a couple of questions."
"Go ahead. But make them brief, please. I'd like to get baek
te bed."


"Mr. Falconer, it ain't because I want to that I am asking you this
—lt's because I have to."
"Well?"
Mr. Falconer, did you kill Edwin Bain?
For a second George Falconer did not answer. He appeared to
be trying to decide whether to be irritated or amused. He glanced
fuestioningly at the district attorney.
"Sorry, Mr. Falconer," said Hoyt, "but the chief has the right t©
handle this case in his own way. He can ask you any questions his
wisdom and experience suggest—and you can answer them or not,
as you see fit."
Then Mr. Falconer decided to be amused by the proceedings.
"Why, yes, I did it," he said. "How ever did you find out?"
Dan Daly was impervious to irony. \
"I'm sorry you done it, Mr. Falconer," he said, "but I glad you're
man enough to admit it. I guess there ain't nothing else for me to de
but ask you to put on your clothes and step down to the station house
with me."
Mr. Falconer was finding it hard to take the matter as k joke.
His voice was acidulous as he said, "Daly, I hope you realize the
seriousness of what you are doing, and the consequence it may entail."
"I do, all right, Mr. Falconer. It ain't no picnic for me neither.
But what can I do, considering the evidence against you?"
"What evidence?"
"Well, that's your stick, ain't it?"
"I've already said it was," said George Falconer carelessly.
"Well, then, Mr. Falconer, how did it get where I found it?"
"I haven't the faintest notion. I haven't used it for weekg. Last
time I remember seeing it, it was in my cane rack with my other
sticks."
"But," said Dan Daly earnestly, "a stick doesn't get up and walk
sut of a house and hit a man."
"Maybe it was black magic," said George F'alconer, with a side
glance at the district attorney. It's an Irish stick, you know. Perhaps
It's bewitched."
"Well," said Dan Daly, after digesting this suggestion, "that's
something you'd have to prove in court, Mr. Falconer. Now answer
me this please: You didn't like Edwin Bain, did you?"
"Bain and I were not friends," said George Falconer promptly.
"Was Bain in your house this evening?"
"He was."
"What was he doing there?"


I invited him t@ call ©ei me.
"Why?"
To talk over a private matter."
"What private matter?"
George Falconer hesitated; then he said, "I am going to answer
rear questions with complete frankness, In the interests of justice,
and to convince you I have nothing to conceal. My business with
Bam was to tell him I had heard rumours that he had been seeing tee
much of my wife. He assured me, and indeed convinced me, that
these rumours were based on idle gossip. I advised him to act ia
the future so there would not be the slightest ground for further
gossip."
"You mean you warned him he'd.better stay away from your wife."
1 on have an admirably direct way of puttings things, chief, I Mi
no* wain Mr. Bam, I merely suggested the danger of creating false
impressions, and he agreed with me." y
"You had a row with him, didn't you?'
"I'd hardly call it that."
"Words, then?"
"We spoke frankly to each other, if that is what you mean.'
"You were both mad?"
"No. Both Mr. Bain and myself kept our tempers."
What time did he leave the house?"
"At ten minutes past eleven."
"How are you sure of the time, Mr. Falconer?"
"I noticed it by the grandfather's clock in the front hall."
"Why were you in the front hall?"
"The servants had gone to bed, so I, myself, showed Mr. Bain tc
the door."
Dan Daly turned to the patrolman.
"Cuilen, hand me that coat."
The officer did so.
"Is this your coat, Mr. Falconer?" the chief asked.
"I believe it is."
"How do you explain this?"
Dan Daly pointed. By the light on the verandah, two dark spot*
wer© visible on the coat, George Falconer examined them.
"By Jove," he exclaimed, "they look like bloodstains!"
"They are," said Dan Daly. "How did they get there?"
"I have no idea. It's an old coat. I thought it was hanging fm


the hall for the past few weeks. It Is possible someone—borrowed 1A
I can't be sure."
"And how," continued Dan Daly, "do you explain the footprints f
found near the body before you came out?'
"I don't."
"It's yours, Mr. Falconer."
"You say it is, chief. I'll take your word for it. Of course the
fact that it was made with one of my shoes does not proye that my
foot was in the shoe."
"That's how footprints are generally made, Mr. Falconer. Well P
I'm sorry, but I'm afraid I must place you under arrest."
George Falconer had ceased to be amused. He was not angry,
but he was considerably annoyed, and he showed it as he addressed
the chief in sharp, cold tones.
"Daly, you seem to haye a low opinion of my intelligence."
"I ain't saying nothing about your intelligence, Mr. Falconer —
mot a thing, answered Dan Daly. "All I'm doing is going by the
evidence."
.. Mr. Falconer voice grew sharper, colder.
"So you think I'm fool enough to ask a man I didn't like to my
house and knock him on the head on my own verandah, leave my
stick, footprints and bloodstained coat where they'd be found, and ge
to bed and wait to be arrested!"
"I'm not saying anything against you personally, Mr. Falconer.
I just have to arrest you, that's all. The evidence makes me."
"Heavens above, Daly, use your head! Try to see beyond the
end of your nose. Give me credit for at least a grain of sense."
"Mr. Falconer, evidence is evidence," said Dan Daly regretfully.
"That's all I got to go by. Now please get dressed and come with me."
"This is an outrage!" stormed Mr. Falconer. He was angry now.
"And you're a blind fool. Hoyt, can't you do anything about this?"
"I'm afraid not, Mr. Falconer," the district attorney said. "I trie#
to convince the chief he was making a mistake. But you known the
ehief. He's got an idea he ought to arrest you, and the only way te
get an idea in his head or out of it is with dynamite. Nothing I can
"Very well, then," said George Falconer, stiff with rage. "TU
play the suspect for you to-night, Daly; but to-morrow will be a dif-
ferent story. Give me fifteen minutes to get dressed and telephone
my attorney."
"Take as long as you like, Mr. Falconer," said Dan Daly.
District Attorney Hoyt was in a deep blue funk. The case of the
•late against Falconer was coming up soon. The district attorney
knew he had to try for a conviction; that was his duty; but he did
net relish the task.
"You've wished a sweet job on me, chief," he said, as he was eo»
leering with Dan Daly in his office. "I've got to go into court an#


lac* A battery of the best lawyers in the country with a joke eaia
ril be lucky if the judge doesn't try to have me disbarred."
"We got evidence," said Dan Daly. "The stick, the footprint, the
eoat "
He said it in the tone of a man repeating something for the
twentieth time.
"The jury will laugh at such eyidence," predicted the dlstriet
attorney. "I've got just one chance in a thousand of getting a con*
viction —just one chance."
"What's that, Mr. Hoyt?" questioned Dan Daly.
"If I can possibily get a jury," said the district attorney bitterly,
"as dumb as my principal witness."
"But ain't I your principal witness?" asked Dan Daly.
"God help me, you are!" said the district attorney.
In the court room, at the trial, Dan Daly told his story. He pro-
duced the blackthorn stick, the bloodstained coat, a photograph of the
footprint. He testified that George Falconer had said that Edwin
Bain and he were enemies.
"That's our case," said the district attorney, and sat down with a
wry face. He surveyed the faces of the jurymen. A prize lot, he
thought. In selecting the jury, Mr. Hoyt had been guided by one
simple principle—he had picked the men who in appearance and man-
ner most reselmbled Dan Daly.
When the jury came in with its verdict, the two most surprised
men in the court were George Falconer and the district attorney—for
the verdict was guilty.
The gray morning of the ninth of January came for George Fal-
coner at last. In his cell he waited. In another hour they would
some for him. Well, he would stick it out. He would keep his nerve
to the end. He sat down on his bunk and muttered again and again:
"How could I have foreseen that anybody would be as abysmally
dumb as Daly? How could I have figured on such utter stupidity?
What an imbecile world this is, when fools can hang an intelligent
DUST TO DUST
He covered the ground, on warnings he frowned
And took many chances slim;
Until at last he was speeding so fast
That—well—now the ground covers him !
The boss and the clerk had gone out to lunch, leaving
the pretty little bookkeeper in charge of the store.
Enters a handsome young man. "Do you keep car
accessories here?" he asked.
The little bookkeeper smiled her sweetest. "Only me "
*' - replied.


DREAMS
From the earliest times, even in the Bible, dreams have
been regarded as worthy of the closest attention.
Thousands of cases are on record in which dream# have
come true.
For the dreamer, the laws of time and space are annihil-
ated—he can go whither he chooses—see those thing which
he desires to see.
The difficulty has always been to understand the meanings
of dreams. We have seen something very vividly. What
does it mean? A face has come before us which we havt
never seen before. Whose is that face.
The following interpretations which have been taken from
an old tome have been accepted by many as authentic:
To dream that you are crossing a bridge, means that you
will experience a change in your situation—that you will enter
new surroundings.
To dream that you have lost your hat, means that some-
one is trying to injure you and that you must be careful or hi
will succeed.
An oak tree is a sign of good fortune. To a young ma#
it means that he will marry a woman strong and reliable, a
worthy helpmate. To a girl it prophesises a healthy,strong
worthy husband.
A wedding is a sign of bad luck in marriage. Those who
dream are unlikely to enter the marriage state.
A violent wind-storm should warn you that you will be
called suddenly away from home.
A new parasol will indicate to a young lady that she i#
about to get a new lover. For a married woman, a broke®
parasol is very unlucky.
The girl who dreams that she is wearing a gorgeous neck-
lace may expect to be married shortly to a handsome and
wealthy young man.
To see a railway locomotive means that you will marry
a railway man at an early date.
If a young man dreams that his lady-love is wearing a
most beautiful lace costume, he may regard it as a warning
that she is very wasteful and extravagant.
To dream that a dog bites you is a warning that your best
friends will soon turn against you; if a dog barks at you it
only means a temporary misunderstanding.
Roses are one of the most favorable things of which you
can dream. They indicate prosperity, long life and happiness
to a man, that he will marry a most beautiful girl who will be
devoted to him and with whom he will have much happiness.


"To the i? ail General Insurance Company,
"Gentlemen, —Cease your lamentations at the prospect of
haying to pay out a few pounds, and let your sorrow be turned
*° J°Y> your wailings to chortles of happiness. I withdraw
my claims, and you can sleep sound of nights. For my god-
mother, Binns' aunt, and Micklethwait's father have all turned
out to be perfect ladies—or gentlemen—and have dubbed up
handsomely. We are,-in fact, overflowing with milk and
honey, and the world is a gay place again. At the same time
I point out that when your agent persuaded me to take out a
policy with you (more than two months ago), I gathered from
his description that you were one of those bright, generov
companies who paid out with a gay laugh, and rejoiced at thu
paying. But you aren't. Why, dash it, I know a man named
Isaac Morris—A Scotchman—who throws his.money about
more freely than you do. A gnat would starve 011 the odd-
ments that fall from your table, and as for compassion, well,
give me a boa-constrictor first. In short, lam disgusted with
you, and hereby bid you a long and final farewell. I shall not
pay any more premiums, and if your agents calls about it, I
shall dot him one on the proboscis.
Yours both in sorrow and anger,
ARCHIE RAMBLER."
SCARCITY OF COIN
In the early days of New South Whles, coin was very
scarce, so barter was resorted to. Entrance to certain parts
of the first theatre could paid either in cash.(lsd) or the
equivalent in flour, meat or spirit.
brotn about 1823 to 1826 the public accounts were kept in
dollars and cents, as the principle coin then in circulation was
the Spanish dollar, re-stamped by the Bank of England.
AN OPTIMIST
Gosh ! You had a ciose call! 1 hat certainly was an aw-
ful accident/' exclaimed the friend who had dropped in at the
hospital to call on the bandaged victim.
"Yes," he replied dreamily; "but thank goodness, I got
an eyeful of what I was looking at before the car hit that
telephone pole and I was knocked unconscious."
At Negro Headquarters l "Have you any'dependents?"
\es, boss. 'Parents?" No, boss, only de butcher, de
grocer and de saloon-keeper."


DIFFERENT POINTS OF VIEW
It is impossible to enjoy idling thoroughly unless one has
plenty to do. —Jerome K. Jerome.
Men in all ways are btter than they seem.—Swift.
Few are qualified to shine in company, but it is in most
men's power to be agreeable.—Emerson.
A cause is like champagne and high heels —one must be
prepared to suffer for it. —Arnold Bennett.
A man whose youth has no follies will in maturity have
no power.—Mortimer Collins.
The more men know, the more they deceive themselves.
—Rousseau.
To say what one thinks; that is, to tell the truth, is so
exceeding rare that one may almost call it a grace in man.—
Hilaire Belloc.
Half the failures in life arise from pulling in one's horst
as he is leaping.—J. C. Hare.
Every man should let alone another man's prejudices and
examine his own.—Locke.
BUSHRANGERS, 1854
I often admired the pluck and resourcefulness of colonial
boys, and I could recount many instances.
On one of my trips to Melbounrne from the fields with
gold, I heard of the robber who attacked a boy from the dig-
Icings, whom I knew to be only 14 years old. It was in a
onely part of the town at night, and when the fellow de-
manded "his money or his life," the boy whipped out a colt and
•hot the fellow in the arm, and he slunk oft at once.
CAUTION
"Enzed" revives old memories when he mentions an ap-
propriate verse on a Digger's grave. I noticed the same
verse on an Australian's grave in France. But some wag had
added a couple of lines that never failed to cause a smile, no
matter how "fed up" the reader happened to be. The verse
was as follows:
"Halt, comrade, halt as you pass by;
As you are now, so once was I,
As I am now, so you must be,
Prepare yourself to follow me."
And the wag's addition:
"To follow you, I'm not content,
Until I know which way you went."
"BXLLO."


LANGUAGE TESTS
On the road from Armentieres a Tommy subaltern cimi
•pon a crowd of tired Diggers around a small fire. He at
once pointed out that fires were not allowed, whereupon one
Digger remarked, "It was only a— — blackfellow's fire, any-
how." The Tommy officer, walking away, was heard to re-
mark, "I thought so, mad Anzacs, mad Diggers." This was
too much for the Diggers, who told the retreating Tommy
officer what they thought of him.
The Tommy Officer was greatly upset, and immediately
sought out the Brigadier, a burly specmen of Australian man-
hood, and noted throughout the A.I.F. for his abruptness and
versatile vocabulary. On confronting the Brigadier, he put
forth his complaint in his best style. The General listened
with an amused smile and then replied, "Is that all, well look
at me ; I am Brigadier-General R , and do you know what
they call me?—BIG 808, THE — ——R.F.C.
AIR RAID SECRETS
Until the war was over we got no definite information as
to damage to buildings or numbers of casualties. Now wc
know that amongst the dozens of buildings, damaged in Lon-
don, 14 banks suffered more or less severely, several members
being kil ed, besides an unknown number injured while on the
premiseln Long Lane, in one building 31 persons were
killed and 98 injured.
An old woman of 84 said she "had seen the front door go
past me up the front staircase," but she refused to leave her
home lor shelter, saying, "I'd sooner die among my pots and
pans."
A resident in a block of model buildings stayed where she
was, remarking, " We are quite safe here, because all here
are contrite.'' (She meant concrete.)
Another old woman, afraid to go to bed on possible raid
nights, arid looking longingly to the time when peace would
come, said, " I kn -JW what I shall do then. I shall take me
atockin's off. I haven't had 'em off for two years."
From a country newspaper"The births for the month
numbered seven, of which three were male, and three female.
(Presumably the seventh was a hermaphrodite.)
Binks : "You should be more careful to pull your blinds
down at night. Last night I saw you kissing your wife "
Jinks: "Ha, ha, ha! The joke,is on you. I wasn't at home
last night."


THE PADRE'S CHATS
Speaking of rapid growth, a Digger said he once planted
an orange pip, and the next day up came a tree. Another
capped this by saying that he once planted a dead tomcat, and
next day up came a sanitary inspector!
The Padre spoke from the top of a tank, and sought
drive home some lesson., "Now, boys, what is the motive
force of this tank?" "Petrol/' yelled a dozen voices. "Cor-
rect. An now ' But his words were drowned bv a hoarse
voice calling out, "Then there's no need for a gas-bag on top/*
The* Padre roared with the crowd.
"See that balloon up there cobber?" "Yes." "See the
little basket underneath ?" "Yes." "The basket is 'the Spec./
where the brains are—that's Tasmania/' "And the balloon is
Australia, I suppose." "Yes. That's where the gas is."
HE WHO FIGHTS AND RUNS—
A Digger in charge of some Gerpian prisoners mercifully
allowed them to rest a bit by the roadside.
A Colonel of another army passes, and remarks:—
"Now, my man, can't you hurry those prisoners up?"
"No, carn't you see they got blistered feet with chasing
your chaps?"
HIS PEOPLE
A negro approached the desk at the recruiting station, and
said: "Say, boss, I want to enlist." "In what?" "In de in-
fantry." "Why not the navy?'' "No, sah! By no means!
When I'se in de infantry, big shell busts, and dere I is. When
I'se on a ship, big shell busts, and den where is I?"
CANNY SCOT
An old (but still canny) Scotswoman was lured by friends
into a cafe. She developed a strong liking for the cream
cakes on the table, but seemed rather worried about something.
At last it came out.
'Hoo will they ken hoo mony to charge for?'' she inquired.
"Oh," she was told, "the waitress counts those that art
left."
"Then I'll no leave ony/' came the cmick reply.
And she didn't,


ALONE IN LONDON
It was a day of dense fog, and as I stood for a moment at
a corner I noticed a foreign-looking young fellow® hand a slip
©f paper to a policeman. The officer read it, and passed it
back to the man with a broad grin, then turned away.
The man moved past me, muttering in Spanish. Know-
ing the language, I hailed him, and he eagerly answered my
salute.
"What's the trouble, Fernando?" I asked.
"Well, it's this way, sir. My ship arrived this morning, and
I was taken to the boarding-house, whose name I copied down
©n this piece of paper, so that I should find my way back. I
am lost, and when I show the paper to anyone, they only laugh
at me."
"Show me the paper. I know Londres pretty well."
He passed me the slip, and I read: "Please wipe your boots
the doormat."
I had to smile too, and as I conducted Fernando back t©
his lodgings, I explained that his landlady hadn't intended the
notice to represent the name of her house.
I found that my new acquaintance had recently been a
bank clerk in Barcelona, but had taken too prominent a part
in Socialistic affears, so me found it healthier to leave Spain,
and was making his way to Chicago. He thanked me ful-
somely as we parted at the door of Mrs. "Please-wipe-your-
boots-on-the-doormat."
WITH SPIKES ON
What A.I.F. artillerymen did not know about infantry
guard mounting would fill a large volume. Remember in
France seeing an N.C.0., in charge of an armed guard, give
Ihe order "Examine arms," while bayonets were fixed.
The ordlery officers, in his innocence, gravely grabbed hold
®f each naked blade in turn, at the same time endeavouring
t© see down the barrel without poking his eye out.
"Bud, the Monk."
An American Y.M. man was telling me that at a Southern
recruiting station a negro was having a desperate job in get-
ting his men to turn and march correctly. "Right face—left
face, he would call, and regularly the squad would do just
the opposite. At last he called out in anguish: "It's a mighty
gfcod thing you-all is goin' in de cavalry. De hors'll know
which way to turn when you don't."


THE LEAVE KINO
Two days before embarking in 1915 all leave was stopped,
but "Bluey," who had met a bonzer tabbie the previous night,
was determined to get out. Glancing through the morning
paper, he noticed a paragraph about an unknown man being
found drowned in the river. "Stone the bleeding crows," said
"Blue," "I'm set like a jelly." Parading before the 0.C.,
"Bluey'' convinced that officer that the drowned man was his
cousin. He met his girl.
Nevt day he again paraded for leave, and the astonished
O.C exclaimed, "Good Heavens! Have you another relation
to identify?"
"No, sir," said "Bluey,"» "but they just telephoned from
home that my brother, who has been blind for three years,
has recovered his eyesight and wants to see me."—G.B.
CHICK! CHICK! CHECK!
There wouldn't be so many mis-spent cheques,
There wouldn't be so many auto wrecks,
There wouldn't be, there couldn't be the fool things done;
If all the little chickens, the pretty little chickens,
Went to bed—yes to bed—with the sun.
There wouldn't be so many sad regrets,
There wouldn't be so many mocking debts,
There wouldn't be, there couldn't be, the mischief done;
Without the little chickens, the pretty little chickens;
But there wouldn't be, there couldn't be, much fun.
Little Edward and his sister May had quarrelled. After
an early supper, mother endeavoured to re-establish friendly
relations, finally quoting to them the Bible verse, "Let not the
sun go down upon thy wrath."
Turning to Edward, she said: "Now, Edward, are yon
going to let the sun go £own on your wrath?"
Edward squirmed a little as he looked into her face
"Well, how can I stop it?" he asked.




--— —— ' • ' — —
9 i^jwSSB
■
" ' ''
I
, .
