

R-EM6lOt/£
f’7 ( . - -v;_
BOX J
RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE. 425
your Treafurer ; for particulars we refer you to the inclofed Bill of
Charges, by which you will perceive that the price of provisions at this
port has made our expences larger than we expeded when we treated with.
Captain Bifhop for our paftage*
Sydney* LNe<w South Wales), zji of September, 179 E,
Fathers, Brethren and Fellow-labourers, in the
Gofpei of our Lord Jefus Chrift,
IT hath pleafed Almighty God, who worketh all things after the
counfel of his own will, and dire£f s with confummate wifdom the affairs
cf the univerfe, to remove us, the underwritten with nine other Miftlonaries,
(as will appear by our public letter, to which we refer you for particulars)
from the Ifland of Otaheite to this Colony. This difpenfation of Divine
Providence would prove very afti ; 6five to us, were we not fupponed under
it by the fled fad perfuafion that all events are ordered and directed by Him 9
iS who hath determined the times before appointed and the bounds of our
habitationthat we and ad our interefts are continually in his bands ;
that all things (hall infallibly work together for our good and the further-
ance of his caufe and in tereft in the world : this perfuafion quiets our minds,
relieves our anxiety, and difpofes us to wait patiently the iffue of Provi-
dence with regard to our future operations. In the mean time permk us
to obferve, that this event has not fruftrated the object of your million to
Otaheite, (as feven of cur Brethren ftill remain there) but opened a door
for more exteniive ufefulnefs amongft our cornu rymen in this colony, whole
necejfities plead, and wbofe claims for a participation in your (i works of
faith and labours of love” me Jlronger than thole of any other nation. We
cannot as yetprefent you with an account of the foccefs of our labours fmee
our arrival here, but we can give you a detail of circumftances, which (we
think) you will cormder a ground, if not to believe, at leaft to hope that we
have not been brought here in vain, or for nought. Waving the recital of
circumftances which paved the way for our entrance into this colony, (as
you have a minute detail in our public letter) we proceed to mention thole
to which we allude. On our arrival here we were, informed that the Rev*
Mr. Jobnfon had been for fome time indifpofed, and not able to perform
the duties of his minifteriai function, an\i that there was but one other
minifter (a Mr, Madden, then redding at Paramatta) to attend all the
fettiements in the colony; we were much affedled at this information 5
c'onftdering it providential that we were brought here ; feeing that there
was much need for us in the place. We conceived it our duty to inform
Mr. Johnfon of our arrival, and make a tender of cur fervices in any part
of the colony he thought we might be uleful, whick we did the next morn-
ing by letter; to which we foon received a very friendly anfwer, informing
us that he would willingly do all in his power to encourage fuch perfons as
us in a colony where fin and iniquity did fo much abound, and requefted
us to vifit him as foon as convenient. This we accordingly did, and were
very kindly received by him and Mrs. Johnfon, who gave us and our wives
an invitation to their houfe and table till fuch time as a fuitable accom-
modation could be provided for us. The Rev. Mr. Marfden alfo treated us
with the like hofpitality and difeovered a readinefs to ferveus, The Gover-
nor likewife treated us with much refped, and gave us an invitation to dine
with him,which invitation we accepted, and took this opportunity to inform
him, that we would willingly officiate in the miniftry of the word in any
part of the colony. He told us he would confuk Mr. Johnfon and Mr,
Vol, VII. 3 O Marfden


426 RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Marfden on the fubjeft ; but on confideration they thought it would not bff
prudent from the delicacy of their fituation to admit us into the church, left
they fhould give offence ; but both they and the Governor told us, that we
were at liberty to open a place of woilhip in any part of the colony. More-
over the Governor made a proffer of a large room intended for a fchool,
which he faid we might fit up for a chapel ; this appeared to us the moft
proper fphere to move in, efpecially as Mr. Johnfon purpofed to return to
Europe by the next fhip, and the town of Sydney left deftitute of the means
of grace every other Sabbath ; but our finances being low we were at a lofs
how to fit up a decent place of worfhip. The arrival of the Cornwall,
Capt. Biigh, brought us letters, by which we were informed of your pro-
greis in the miffionary bufinefs, and that you gathered ftrength as you ad-
vanced. This information gladdened our hearts, and we felt a reviving
glow. The Captain advanced us property to the amount of 501. for the
purpofe of fitting up a chapel, for which we gave him a draft on Jofeph
Hardcaftle, Efq. Soon after Capt. Blyth’s departure, the diforderwith
which Mr. Johnfon had been long affli&ed took a favourable turn, and his
health began to be reeftablifhed, which induced him to relinquifh his in-
tention of going to Europe ; this rendered an additional place of worfhip
in Sydney not altogether fo neceffary, and we began to look about for a
place which flood more in need of our labours. Thedettlementon the north-
ern boundary and T oon Gabby being deftitute of the means of grace, ap-
peared to us a favourable opening. We have accordingly commenced our la-
bours in the former in three different places. Others have offered their houfes
to preach in ; and we have the fatisfadHcn to find a readinefs in the people
to hear the word of life. We have likewife opened an evening lecture at
Paramatta, in which place our hearers are defirous of having a chapel
ere£fed, as our prefent place of worfhip will not cotnain them; but we
think it prudent to wait a little before we expend the property received of
Capt. Biyth for that purpofe ; and if it fhould appear an iinnecefTary ex-
pence, we (hall hold the amount at your difpofal, as it is not our intention
to burden the Society with any additional charges on our account, or for
our own perfonal fupport, as we hope to be able to maintain ourfelves, tho*
it will be with fome difficulty and great application. Ourlabours in the mi-
siiftry will require great bodily exertion, by reafon of the diftance we have
to go to meet the people; but we fhall think ourfelves amply compenfated
for all our toils, fhould our efforts be crowned with luccels. It muft alfo
rejoice your hearts to find that though we are removed from the place of
our original deftination, it ha*h been fo overruled by the All-wife Difpofer
of events, as to terminate in the furtherance of your laudable and pious
defign in extending the knowledge of divine truth , and in all probability
lay a foundation for the fpread of the Gofpel among the numerous tribes
that inhabit this vaft Ifland, and who at prefent ar tfunk almofi into a level
with the brute creation. But if you fhould be able to tffeft your intended
million to the Hindoos, and think our fervices there will be more fubfer-
vient in promoting the defign of the Society than in this colony, we hold
ourfelves in readinefs to follow the leadings of Providence in this refpeft,
as we truft we have done in the late difpenfation towards us. Waiting your
commands, we have the honor to fubicri.be ourfelves,
Your unworthy Brethren, Fellow-labourers,
and Servants in the Lord,
JAMES FLEET COVER.
WILLIAM HENRY#
