

* . W
(3^
LE T T E R S
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ARTHUR KINLOCH, ESQ.






pilllliilliM
==: CVa >-y v %\\ \. ~s <1 77 \\ ** . 7 - / 1 =
I - 1 1 . »«hSL .., % V X > \rt \* V ,d> TORB.ESv JP •» , /*?sS»3r"~?® ... rf A r ~£« 1 ?
J -•</?? <;»*, IktttJ&'ffc 'i Vf"B % X Endeavour SuMfa%£ ( ,gSl < r.'} : j. T %. V.. t
1 I ■»«!>'* * = 4 'V *d' sh>, " nr ' If , ".y. "•»>, 5 y
i I .._-—"' -Bathurst 1. Dieia.-u*W' V a ij/' , vA-d' l,,erronv • I U llM'’’^''"' r ,» ,T' I -,—h
* &««**** XT L F s j|j|
*nr **** f I I ' QTJ e =
iB : ! |\ * e w /r I s v^|jx ß m
!g -- - ] -■ ■
COUNTIES i» ‘ •“ “, ' 1 «» S ’ r ~ I | A.'"£' A'teT&'i 'I =
= 11 WESTERN AUSTRALIA iJK & „ 4- 6 I n i. / WjrH >- ’ IF?: **"• , ) Aw Xf~k\\ *■
II Melbourne M I -1 *'* h * yV '* iA V
2 ciaidn 1,1
"" ,** \y~^\^* li * n * ht t I L r
£ ® r / -- ■
?sst /' I 'XT* *7 ■ / te
—' s H
j=3 COUNTIES IN COUNTIES IN COUNTIES IN
T=r= {g 1 V /iJ-\x »• A - S? SOUTH AUSTRALIA NEW SOUTH WALES C v ' I X.<° fj C VICTORIA =====
= 19 War // * ~ , ~ , „ r r ~ , f # . 12 I VS A ]
I on n-i 1 Stanley 1 March 26 Vernon jl Montcuglc O^ryum^ l Quicken a I \ V/J s^^l i '\a ,a \ J?^Zss3|fife > 9 /hjtuJn*
m life* 5 “/■* f 8 ;y“ »« « *!Wrs ■
ig?-, I&. ISs* »!ii “S ite Hi
■ ZiSOtim A lT^ r r« All 1 A S-AUoi, 5 (Wi,4 30 FMn.,„- 55 CloiwLm. >aV,pAaHI «J. 6 £» v »b>
25 llontcu/enet l\ lU K3> 1 ( ili\ll jl 71 ® ® f b f* % f \ ?“** I 4Xgk> .. 7Heyteshury S|
-3c 7 nmdtrmrsh 7 Stanley il (rower 0/ Murray D* 5 \< o ' >7 o A M r m, J^Siti V ' a -, .;S!,a—;
j 6 AW 8 ifcWZ 8 CluaJua 33 Gloucester 58 llnvfev- C>‘7// V_>^^m^fl/\/Wv r 0 Pohworth
_ . 9 Frame 3 Ward Howes 39 Buccleurk 10 Sot
(y.firck. jHjUnd-nslcmdUM* M Victoria, 10 Merivale % Brisbane M Wynyos-d
iH- I i> »r • D D a A „«• ma. > .11 Hurra il Kous oh n tig tv 61 J)ampler CMI,7-„ .it' 4 • ' s **Hf 19 w 1,. J
~" ; M. F.Port- F.Fomt— RJhver^Stv.Shoal _ rt _ ~ in d n on r- r rn a h j ,u^ 1 ' 0 , JJalnvus,te | - { ,
! s . \2 MacdoruuU u> Fuller ot Lincoln 06 Auc/datut Tuup-s jf? , %cntlf 13 Grant ! —j
== ffeiphts Srßrcadih.-artyiycn m yards. \i Sohe ÜBentinck 38 Jorlhlimberlaiul 63 Wellesley Stake. S T'nt AI x - 14 Bourke !^E?j
!== POPULATIOS 18615. l4 I’&ve 39 Durhairv 64 Beresford s ‘ Hum,.,.;, X,„ . djnmHw* . 15 Anglesey !
I- ' Sooth Wales 251.31 S 15 RielunonxL 40 Hunter 65 HtiAw . . heM 1 \ >,, ■ --.!. jg Evelyn" | 1 "j
1 == Mrtor^ a . '/rt'.wl l& Drake. 41 Phillip 06 Selwyn 17 Momington. B=^
= South Australia At.ow I 7 4 ZRaahurg 67 GotJbum .. ,- 18 Aw/
== West Australia U.oon 18 Clarence 43 Wellington 68 Ashhurnham. 19 Haddington. 1
r~ North Australia.. 19 Raleigh 44 Gordon ' 41# o/Fin-s 20 Dovro \ ""'"H j
I P- 20 Gresham 45 Cumberland llUcquari I
21 Hardinge 46 Cooh CSoreilSr * A^^°\u ofs 0 fs %*n ijNscwredhyV • 22 Ahinqer I - I
FuhUttud under the Supnintmdmee of the Society far the. 22 Dudley V Westmorland (wMT.sm.ui f*** 23 Conform** rf=i
-Tto J - " Diffusiou of r«efalßuwdedge. 23 Sondon 48 Bathurst abb \ nf’ehtns-.' 24 Howe
-E' I 34 Darling 49 Georguuia Bock A BA tiTfA»]M7S' A - § !
==] I 25 J/5/rt,/ W m- 50 King 7Wy l.ayv ” - -•-
.T.Jc.C."Walker Sculp. 1
London. Edward Stanford, 6 Charing Cross. 157


LETT E R S
FROM
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
(1853 to Feb. 1860.)
ARTHUR KINLOCH. ESQ.,
THBN CLERK OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF THAT COLONY.
fiction.
WITH A MAP OF AUSTRALIA, SHOWING THE
EXPLORATIONS UP TO JANUARY, 1860.
LONDON:
EDWARD STANFORD, 6, CHARING CROSS.
1861.


London:
F. Francii, Prints*, Cathbrinb Sirbit, Strand;


COLONEL P. L. MAC DOUG ALL,
COMMANDANT OP THE STAFF COLLEGE, SANDHURST,
THIS LITTLE BOOK IS INSCRIBED
A SINCERE AND GRATEFUL FRIEND.




CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTORY OBSERVATIONS ... 7
LETTER to Lieutenant-Governor of
Colony on Exploration . . . , .9
LETTER to Editor of “ South Australian Register,”
on the Constitutions of the Australian Colonies (and Road
Making) 13
Ditto Ditto . . .16
to Editor of “ Adelaide Times ” on Quartz
Crushing ...... 21
On a Militia in Australia . . . .24
FINAL OBSERVATIONS on subjects of a General Aus-
tralian Senate, and Making of Roads ... 25
LETTERS on Steam Navigation with Great Britain viA
Suez ....... 31 and 45
LETTER on Drainage and Water Supply of City of Adelaide,
addressed to the Governor-in-Chief of the Colony . 39
On the Search for Gold . . . .41
On the Order of the Fleece . . . 42
On the lonian Islands . . . .47
(Extract from) Regarding Steam Communication
via Panama, addressed to the Governor-General of
Australia . . • . . . . 49
On the Exploration of the Australian Continent,
addressed to the Chief Secretary of South Australia . 50
On South Australian Militia ... 52
APPENDIX. —Proposed Civil Service Retirement Act . 55


EEEATA.
The following Paragraph is omitted in the Pre-
liminary Observations, page 2, line 19.
“ With regard to Military Defence, a Naval Station, under
command of a Commodore, has been established at Sydney, —
and the Volunteer Movement has become general throughout
the Australian ”
“ The Track extending from Diemen’s Gulf, S. Latitude 12 deg.
and E. Longitude 132 deg. to the River in Queensland,
about 21 deg. South Latitude, and 147 deg. East Longitude,
is that of the unfortunate Leichardt, who perished in attempt-
ing to cross the Australian Continent from East to West a few
years ago.”
A. K.


INTRODUCTORY OBSERVATIONS.
The following letters were in great part written before
the change in the Constitution of the Province of
South Australia, and at a time when it was generally-
believed that a Legislature wholly elective, would not
conduce to the well-being of a Colony, dating only
from 1836.
Whether these anticipations have or have not been
realised, I would not now profess to say, but I may be
permitted to make mention of the fact, that the in-
auguration of a new Constitution in South Australia,
was to have been carried through by an Upper House,
either wholly or partially nominated by the Crown;
and that this proposed composition of the Local
Parliament did not eventually become law, was owing,
I believe, to the active efforts of the Colonial Press,
and to the energetic representations of one or two
individuals, which obtained from H.M.’s Government
a thoroughly Elective Colonial Legislature.
I am not aware what difficulties were experienced
by the adjoining province of Victoria, in founding their
present legislative structure; but in New South Wales,
where a House of Peers had been desired, if not de-
manded, a nominated Upper House still, I believe,
exists.
With regard to the letters on “ Steam Navigation,”
the object ‘pf the writer was, if possible, to suggest
any mode of regular Postal Transmission to and from
Great Britain. The scheme was not however adopted,


though possibly more feasible than that of Mr. Justice
Boothby, forwarded to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies.
The Postal difficulty consequently remains still im-
pregnable, although, from the length of time the
controversy has been going on, a double line should
now be established, viz :—via Suez, and via Panama.
The lelters on the “ Order of Merit,” “ The Adelaide
Water Works,” and “ Exploration ” appear to require
no lengthened notice.
It is in contemplation, the writer believes, to institute
an Indian Order, and doubtless when Australia displays
itself adapted for such an Institution, the honour will
be extended to that Continent.
The Adelaide Water Works are progressing at a
costly expenditure of £lOO,OOO and upwards; and the
Australian Continent has been well-nigh traversed by
Mr. J. McDougall Stuart.
It remains only to add, that the first series of these
letters, dedicated (but without permission) to the
Right Honourable the Secretary of State, were kindly
reviewed for me by His Excellency Sir H. E. E.
Young, and one of His Excellency’s notes has been
inserted in the present compilation.
A. X.
London, January , 1861.
NOTICE.
Mr. Stuart’s Chart and Journal not having been as yet pub-
lished, it has been impossible to give his route from South to
North Western Australia. The furthest point of his exploration
has, however, been marked S. Latitude 18 deg. 17 min., E. Longi-
tude 134 deg.


LETTERS ON SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Br ARTHUR KINLOCH, Esq.
(INTRODUCTORY.)
Adelaide, May 21 st, 1853.
Sir, Pending the result of an application to friends in Sydney,
on the subject of some employment which long-continued ill
health, and almost desperate circumstances, have rendered of the
utmost importance to my future welfare, I am induced to make
to your Excellency an offer, which, coming as it does from a
stranger to the land, may perhaps be deemed presumptuous, and
is not, at least under present circumstances, likely to meet with
approbation.
It is, to say that I am willing and ready, if provided with the
means and appliances to boot, to penetrate to the centre of this
vast continent, and, if necessary, to travel Australia in its entire
breadth.
Little conversant as I may be with the details of the obstacles
which have at various times opposed themselves to the efforts of
the many enterprising men who have earned an imperishable, if
not an enviable fame, by their endeavours to penetrate this con-
tinent, I am by no means ignorant of the difficulties which attend
enterprises of the kind. I think, however, that, setting aside the
minor impediments of hostile natives and rugged or marshy


ground, the difficulties of Australian exploration to European
discovery, resolve themselves into three, which are—
Ist. The scarcity of water.
2nd. The difficulty of transporting animal food sufficient for
the party.
3rd. The extent of scrub with which the face of this country is
said to be covered.
For the first of these evils I see but one remedy, or possibly
two, viz,, that of carrying, on the backs of horses, mules, or
camels, a sufficiency of water for many days’ consumption ; or the
digging wells of a depth sufficient, at proper seasons, to furnish a
supply of this indispensable commodity.
Second—A supply of meat for some days should be carried
with the expedition; and if cattle, sheep, or even goats, could be
driven with the celerity with which parties of the hind should
traverse desert ground, some of these animals should accompany
the line of march, and, at convenient distances of from 100 to 150
miles, one or more of them might be killed, dried, and stored.
Third— Scrub should rarely be entered in front, but rather
turned on the flanks, even if by so doing a detour of many hours,
or even days, were the consequence.
A party thus disposed should, I imagine, traverse Australia in
its entire breadth in from three to four months, and might be
composed somewhat as follows:
1 Leader.
1 Assistant Leader.
1 Draughtsman and Surveyor.
1 Assistant Draughtsman, Geologist, and Mineralogist.
1 Medical Gentleman, if possible acquainted with botany.
2 Privates, Royal Sappers and Miners,
2 Natives, or persons acquainted with their habits and
dialects.
4 Stockmen, or persons in charge of horses, &c.
2 Drivers.
1 Cook.
16 persons.
An expedition thus constituted would require with them about
thirty horses, some dogs, goats, and, if possible, sheep; and for
the conveyance of stores, &c., might be accompanied in their


passage through the country by two light carts and a van, being
prepared to place the conveniences thus disposed of on the backs
of their horses or mules. Possibly a small portable boat might
be requisite. In their progress, they would observe thoroughly
the nature of the country, its agricultural and pastoral capabilities,
its mineral qualities, and other particulars, reporting specially
to your Excellency upon the subject; and drawing up, when
without the boundaries of South Australia, a similar report for the
information of His Excellency the Governor-General of Australia.
Most humbly apologising for the application I have been in-
duced to make to your Excellency with reference to a matter
involving so heavy an expenditure, without perhaps any certainty
of commensurate advantages, even if successful,
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your Excellency’s most obedient humble servant,
ARTHUR KINLOCH,
Late Captain 36th Regt.
Sir H. E. F. Young, Lieutenant-Governor.
of South Australia.
Answered (May 25th) by his Excellency, to whom, by the kind-
ness of some friends in Adelaide, I had been introduced, to the
effect that he regretted that there was at present no intention of
further exploring this continent.




THE AUSTRALIAN QUESTION:*
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ SOUTH AUSTRALIAN REGISTER.”
This, Sir, I think, may now be termed the crisis at which
affairs have arrived in the four colonies styled “Australian,” and
which is, in fact, the trial of the experiment of self-government
by the colonists—an ignis fatuus —which, even if attainable in
its entire comprehensiveness, might perhaps prove as little satis-
factory as the Downing-street despotism, so often canvassed and
so much abused. Whether this libido regnandi is really the
spontaneous and actual desire of the people, or rather the offspring
of agitation and the Press, it matters little; for the spirit of
change is but a natural result of the course of things, and the
usual tendency of young communities, if not the disposition of
the whole civilized race.
Qui fit, Maecenas, ut nemo, quam sibi sortem
Sen ratio dederit seu fors objecerit, ilia
Contentus vivat, laudet diversa sequentes.
Moreover, when the agitation is harmless and not disloyal, it
appears to be of no moment whether newspapers are the organ
and the mouthpiece, or merely the instigators, of the popular
voice.
But is this tendency to reform directed to the right end? and
will the form of government laboured for, it would seem by the
public, be most conducive to the well-being of the majority of the
community ? Let us see what is the position of the colony more
immediately under our eye, and then endeavour to determine
what is the prospect before it.
South Australia possesses a fine soil, an increasing revenue, a
tolerable port adjacent to its capital, and vast internal resources
all which combined advantages may perhaps render it, at no very
distant day, a prosperous and highly flourishing State. At this
moment, however, its entire population cannot exceed 70,000
souls, the numbers of the inhabitants of a third-rate town in the
British Empire, which usually returns to the Imperial Parliament
one, or at most two, of the 656 members who compose the
British Senate. Yet this thinly populated province is about to
propose its representation, and to a certain extent, therefore, its
legislation, by two Houses of Representatives—the one, or Upper
House, consisting of 12 members; the other, or Lower House
* Published in the South Australian Hcgister of 26th July, 1853.


comprising no less than 36 members. Will not such machinery
be found too complicated, or too cumbersome, for the wheels of
Government ? And that objection met and disposed of, is it the
project most adapted for the future grandeur of the Australian
Empire ? lam not, perhaps, fully competent to decide a question
which might puzzle the oldest colonist equally with the wisest
man; but my opinion is, it is not. What, then, is the future of
these colonies? I humbly suggest it is this —That the several
provinces of South Australia, Victoria, Van Diemen’s Land, and
New South Wales, are destined, ere long, to form the component
parts of a great empire, the capital of which must be Sydney, or
some more central spot selected icith a view to the general
accommodation of the four provinces, and combining in itself
and its vicinity every advantage which a judicious selection of the
site of the capital of an immense territory should afford for the
seat of its Legislature, and the Senate of the combined provinces.
To such an idea it may at once be objected that, even if it
should be clearly demonstrated that a scheme of the kind would
prove beneficial to the several colonies interested, yet there are
local objections as regards South Australia and Van Diemen’s
Land, which must always render it disadvantageous for these
provinces to depute senators to represent their interests at so great
a distance from their homes, more especially in a country where
the internal communications, from the very nature of its soft and
receiving soil, must render long journeys, at almost any period of
the year, particularly uncomfortable, if not dangerous. I think
these difficulties, in the way of the amalgamation I mention, are
not insuperable ; and that, as in course of time the internal com-
munications of South Australia and the sister province become
improved by the introduction on the present highways of a firm
and stable substruction, or by the formation of new roads, there
will be no impedient on that score to the representation of these
provinces by six or eight Senators (as might be determined) in
the General Imperial Senate of Australia; and who, being first
(in part) elected as representatives by the people, either on the
present or with a more enlarged franchise, might afterwards be
nominated by the Crown, in the person of Her Majesty’s Governor
or Lieut.-Governor, to watch over and legislate for the interests
of the dependency entrusted to his rule.
As, however, the formation of great internal lines of communi-
cation in a country ill-adapted, by the very avocations of its
inhabitants, for railway traffic, might be looked upon as a matter
of very great difficulty and most dubious success, I shall proceed
to venture upon a few remarks, as to the mode in which, by the
assistance of the mother-country, and a pacific state of things,
this great undertaking might be effected even where the un-
paralleled consequences ensuing on the gold discoveries has caused
a want of labour perhaps unknown in any community of ancient
or modern times. But I shall first continue my subject by saying
that, to render it possible for the interests of South Australia to be
represented with convenience and advantage in a General Senate,


the construction of the following grandes routes , or high roads,
appear to me to be essentially necessary, viz.—
!• A direct line from the City of Adelaide to the Great Bend ot
the Murray, Wellington, or some convenient point in the vicinity
of the mouth of that river, which I shall presume will shortly be
navigated, to the vast advantage of all the South Australian
colonies.
2. A line of road from the Burra Mine, or the most populous
district of the northern portions of this province, to the junction
of the Murray River with the Darling, or its nearest point to that
district.
3. A line of road from the township of Albury* on the Murray,
in the direction of Sydney, to the site of the intended capital of
the Australian Empire, which I shall presume might be at a
distance of about 100 miles from the highest navigable point of
the river, which is, perhaps, twice that distance from the town of
Melbourne, and nearly 400 miles from Sydney. This, however,
would be for the other colony to construct.
I calculate these three combined lines at a rough estimate not to
exceed the distance of from 300 to 350 miles, whilst the two in
South Australia would not be more than 200 miles in length.
Supposing, then, the hypothesis I have started to be allowed, I
should now venture upon the suggestion which I have made re-
lative to the formation of these great highways, and which I
think, in the present prospect of affairs, and with the probable
results that may soon be expected from the improvements in the
quartz-crushing machinery, will be the only feasible method of
accomplishing the ends in view. Having, however, already ex-
ceeded the limits usually extended to correspondents, I shall, Sir,
with your permission, defer for a future day the details of the
scheme I have propounded for public consideration in the columns
of your intelligent journal.
Meanwhile, I subscribe myself your obedient servant,
CAIUS.
Adelaide, July 19, 1853.
Note ly His Excellency Sir H. E. F. Young, then Lieutenant-
Governor of South Australia.
“The most convenient place in the vicinity of the mouth of the
River Murray is the Goolwa, destined to be the “Crescent City’’
of the Australian Mississippi.
“ The intended Capital of the Australian Empire would be better
placed either at Melbourne, or in Encounter Bay, the sea-mouth
of the Murray, than anywhere inland, at the highest navigable
point of the River Murray.”
* A road f, rom Gundegai to Albury exists, but is represented as almost
impassable lor wheel carriages; moreover, a new direction mivblbe required
for this line as far as Goulburn.


THE AUSTRALIAN SENATE AND THE ROAD THERETO.*
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ SOUTH AUSTRALIAN REGISTER.”
Sir, —The subject of my last communication embraced two
matters apparently very discordant, and in no way connected with
each other, to wit—the constitution of a general Senate for the
Australian colonies, and the construction of roads throughout the
provinces, but more especially in South Australia. In some cases,
however, and this I would fain think is one, it may with pro-
priety be said that extremes meet ; and as, in military practice,
it is at times necessary to convene the members of its tribunals
from distant points, so I think it can, without contradiction be
asserted that, failing proper and agreeable communications be-
tween the Australian capitals, it would be impossible for the de-
liberations of the Patres Conscripti of the new Senate to take
place.
Premising, therefore, only a few remarks by way of advancing
the prospects, or of supporting the cause, of my proposed legisla-
tive amendment, I shall proceed to oifer some diffident sugges-
tions as to the means which, to a certain extent, I imagine would
supply the deficiency of that human labour, without which the
brightest and most practically useful schemes must prove futile
and abortive. ,
With reference then, to the three provinces remote from Sydney,
at present the nominal capital of Australia, my belief that the
existence of a general Senate, independent of and possessing
higher powers than the local Houses of Assembly sitting in
Adelaide, Melbourne, and Hobart Town, would prove beneficial,
originates in the idea that through this Upper House all measures
touching the general interests of the colonies f might there, with
scarcely an exception, obtain that sanction which at present is
attainable only by a reference to the home Legislature, and often
after considerable delay; and this, notwithstanding the increased
rapidity of communication .consequent upon steam navigation, or
even with the prospect of a still more speedy intercourse, at least
for Sydney, by way of Panama. I might add, as my private
opinion, that the amalgamation and intermixture of the several
deputies, chosen, I would presume, from the elite of the colonists
of the respective provinces, must produce an enlargement of ideas,
and consequently a wisdom of legislation, more beneficial to the
governed than the more confined circle of a local legislature would
probably give birth to.
* From the South Australian Register, of 9th August, 1853.
t At present I would only specify “ A general law with reference to the
Australian coinage,” and “ The assimilation of the Australian tariff,” which
I shall presume is to take place before long.


Upon this dictum, however, I would lay no stress. It is a
point for the consideration and sober sense of those interested, or
of those who choose to trouble themselves with the enquiries, and
it maybe the Utopian schemes of your anonymous correspondents.
The other portion of my subject I should now enter upon, but
that I find it requires a glance at the system of defence which
these colonies would require by sea and land, and the more im-
mediate but most unhesitating assertion that the military force
at present in Australia is, under any circumstances, by far too
small. It consists at this moment of three regiments only, of
which one is at Van Diemen’s Land, with 100 men detached to
Swan River, another divided between Melbourne and Sydney, and
the third at Sydney, with a detached company at Adelaide, and
perhaps some trifling outposts in the vicinity of head quarters.*
These troops, then, amount in all to perhaps 2,500 men; and
although the order and regularity which have for the most part
attended the unparalleled excitement of the gold fields have been
as wonderful as creditable, yet circumstances might occur, con-
nected with these sources of sudden wealth and consequent reck-
lessness, which would produce a commotion in civilized society
the local Governments could have no means to allay.
I would then say that the general military establishment of
these colonies should be increased by two regiments from England
or elsewhere,t not to say by the appearance of the British flag
upon these waters in the presence of one or two armed steamers.
Having gained this accession of strength from the Home Govern-
ment, it might be found that in a number of industrious and hard-
working communities the British soldier alone appeared to be
eating the bread of idleness, and that he really felt tired of the
irksome inaction which must, to a certain extent, be the lot of
those whose military career should doom them to pass some years
of their existence under the bright and healthy skies of this fair
but monotonous clime. Then it is I would propound to the
authorities, and propose to the soldier, to exchange his life of
wearisome inactivity for the healthful employment of useful
labour; and as the one must, I presume, be anxious for the ad-
vancement of the people over whom they have been set, and
desirous to add to their comfort and prosperity; and that the
other, for the labour I am about to suppose him engaged in,
would receive a substantial but well-earned return for his exer-
tions—l cannot but think it would confer a mutual benefit upon
all concerned, to bring that labour at once to bear where most the
general requirements should demand. And this 1 shall imagine,
at the present moment, would be the formation of good and
enduring roads.
The addition to the force of military I will presume is thus dis-
• I have made no deduction for any convict-guards at Norfolk Island or
elsewhere; nor have I the exact strength of each regiment, or of the Sap-
pers and Miners and Artillery, if, indeed, any of the latter corps are now
stationed in New South Wales,
t The Cape might now furnish these troops.


posed of:—One regiment ordered to Sydney; the other to relieve
the wing at present at Melbourne, and to detach a company to
Albury or its vicinity; whilst the relieved wing would proceed to
Adelaide, from whence a company of 60 men shonld be detached
for encampment, during the eight months of dry weather, at any
convenient point between the Burra and the Bend of the Murray.
The remaining wing of thjs regiment, now at Sydney, I would
advise to be in like manner encamped at some fitting point mid-
way between Melbourne and that city. Of the disposition of the
regiment at Van Diemen’s Land I am not at present prepared to
remark upon. Having thus by military authority and regulation
obtained the presence of adequate labour to accomplish the under-
takings suggested, and presuming that the soldiery would be willing
to take employment at the hands of the Government at a rate of pay,
I would fix at 2s. daily for the private, 3s. for the corporal, and 4s.
for the sergeant, with an allowance of 7s. to the officers.* I would
recommend that working dresses should be supplied at the colonial
expense to the parties thus engaged, to consist of Guernsey frocks,
strong boots, stout trousers, and rough hats. To prevent deser-
tion, I think particular instructions to the gold commissioners
might be given with effect, and furloughs occasionally granted to
soldiers to dig with regular licenses; or should that indulgence be
objected to, the presence at the diggings of two or three old sol-
diers or non-commissioned officers employed temporarily as
provosts might deter the evil disposed from such attempts. The
works I have specified already as appearing to me to demand
construction were, in South Australia, a road from the north of
the province, probably the Burr a to the Bend of the Murray, and one
from the city of Adelaide to the nearest point of that river, where it
is natural to suppose that, as the navigation progresses, the necessary
conveniences of jetties and landing-places will be formed. For
the materials to form the substratum, See., of the roads, I imagine
the Colonial Government should make provision, by contract-
ing for supplies of broken stone, which (should labour be deficient,
the prisoners unavailable, and wooden or asphalte pavement in-
applicable) might be brought as ballast from America or England.
The substance should consist of granite stone or limestone broken
into angular fragments, the largest of which should be capable of
being passed through a ring two and a-half inches in diameter;
whilst in the actual conslruction of the roads, where the soil is soft,
there should be a covering of three or four inches of clean gravel.t
For the foundation rough stones, easily procurable, should be
used to a depth of seven inches in the centre, diminishing to three
at the sides, and their interstices being filled with stone chips, the
* To the non-Australian trader these allowances may seem high; but
when it is considered that the daily labourer earns here 7*. a day, this
objection will cease.
f In many parts it may be necessary to lay a further foundation of brush-
wood under these stones. This I imagine would depend upon the soil. Side
drains also would be requisite, and might be sufficient with a well-con-
structed surface without cross-drains.


whole curve of the road would then form a convexity of about
four inches. The upper surface laid on over this should generally
form a coating of six inches in thickness, the centre of the road
receiving the hardest portion of the stone.
For these details some apology is required, as, wherever military
labour would be used, it would be essential to employ small par-
ties of the Royal Sappers and Miners, under the superintendence
of an engineer officer, connected or not with the Survey Depart-
ment of the colony. Moreover, as carts and horses would be
required on all these undertakings, I would suggest the necessity
of the services of some bombardiers of the Artillery, with a few
gunners and drivers under their charge.* With these dispositions,
I am of opinion that a first-rate road from the Burra (if that were
selected as the line) would soon be constructed by a body of soldiers
stationed midway between the two extremes, and furnishing one-
third of its strength daily to work in each direction.
The road from Adelaide, if to be formed by military labour, I
would recommend should be prosecuted in precisely the same
manner. Should it, however, be expedient to form a direct land
communication with Melbourne, I would propose another system
for adoption. And this, with the preface only that in all these
undertakings the preservation of military discipline and practice
must be adhered to, should be as follows :
The wing at Melbourne having to proceed to Adelaide, I would
cause them to march by land in two bodies, at considerable inter-
vals, each accompanied by officers or persons conversant with the
matter in question, viz., the formation of a road. Upon the ad-
vanced division, consisting probably of 120 men, I would entail
the duty of clearing the line of road previously marked out by
regular survey; to the succeeding party I would entrust the duty
of laying the foundation of the road: whilst the next division,
coming from Adelaide, should improve the construction of the
line ; and the fourth and last body should be able to complete the
formation; reserving, perhaps, the permanent construction of the
bridges it might be necessary to form on the route, and for which
materials would have been found by the colonial officers for a
future period. These several parties having been supplied with
tents, and marching leisurely, according as their work progressed,
might, I imagine, in a progress of eight months, construct a toler-
able road, previously surveyed; and a similar relief, carried on
twelve months afterwards, ought thoroughly to complete a road
to Melbourne, even were the distance to exceed my calculation of
400 miles, f
♦ I would allow two carts and three horses to every twenty-five men or
thereabouts.
t In this calculation there is an error, so to speak, implied, if not ex-
pressed. It is, that the force from Adelaide would only be 70 men—a body
perhaps too small to work effectually if divided. If so, a subsequent de-
tachment to the mouth of the Murray, near Wellington, could effect what
was wanted. But these details I would leave for further consideration and
more experienced heads, as also the decision of the question whether it
would do to leave a half-finished route through the wet season, when it


Should this vast labour be deemed inexpedient at present, or
for many years to come, I will only refer what I have said to the
construction of a road between Melbourne via Albury and Sydney;
in which case, the relieving bodies being much larger (each regi-
ment of 700 or 800 men), greater results might be derived, and a
convenient thoroughfare, I doubt not, speedily formed to the new
seat of the Legislative Government, which I have already pre-
sumed would lie between Sydney and Melbourne, and about 100
miles from Albury on the Murray.
Thus much for the actual system I propose to work upon in
securing an easy access to the Senatorial retreat, which I have
placed amidst the wild and picturesque scenery of the Australian
Alps; and which I confess I should expect to realise in course
of time, if not the dissipation, certainly the local attractions and
perhaps the gaieties of a Harrowgate, a Wiesbaden, or a Wash-
ington. Lest the novel plan of such gigantic undertakings by
military labour should seem strange, and, even if feasible, incon-
venient, I would add that the employment of the soldiery in the
construction of roads and other public works is by no means
uncommon in the Continental States of Europe, where it has in
some cases been the praiseworthy practice of the rulers to comme-
morate the labour of such enterprises by public inscriptions, in
conspicuous localities, expressive in brief terms of the nature of
the work, its extent, and the numbers of the corps by whom it has
been constructed.
Referring to more ancient times for the formation of lasting and
durable highways, we find that the most wonderful works of that
extraordinary people, the Romans, were those great roads whose
solidity has defied the effects of fifteen centuries. Speaking of the
cities that then studded the extent of the Roman Empire, and
which were estimated at the number of 1,197, the luminous
Gibbon observes, “ All these cities were connected with each other
and with the capital by the public highways, which, issuing from
the Forum of Rome, traversed Italy, pervaded the provinces, and
were terminated by the frontiers of the empire. If we carefully
trace the distance from the wall of Antoninus to Rome, and from
thence to Jerusalem, it will be found that the great chain of com-
munication, from the north-west to the south-east points of the
empire, was drawn out to the length of 4,080 Roman miles.*
The public roads were accurately divided by mile-stones, and ran
in a direct line from one city to another, with very little respect
for the obstacles either of nature or private property. Mountains
were perforated, and bold arches thrown over the broadest and
most rapid streams. The middle part of the road, raised into a
terrace which commanded the adjacent country, consisted of
might be entirely formed by portions gradually. In this supposition I
imagine the materials to have been furnished by the Local Government,
and deposited at convenient points, as, for instance, Adelaide, Wellington,
the Great Bend, Albury, Sydney, &c. This expense of carriage, moreover, I
have not united to my calculations on paper.
* 4,080 Roman miles were equal to 3,710 English.


several strata of sand, gravel, and cement, and was paved with
large stone, or, in some places near the capital, with granite.
Such was the solid construction of the Roman highways, whose
firmness has not entirely yielded to the effects of fifteen centuries.
They united the subjects of the most distant provinces, by an easy
and familiar intercourse; but their primary object had been to
facilitate the marches of the legions; nor was any country con-
sidered as completely subdued till it had been rendered, in all its
parts, pervious to the arms and authority of the conqueror.” At
this time the Roman empire measured 2,000 miles in breadth and
3,000 in length, and under the Emperor Claudius the population
was computed at 120,000,000 —“ the most numerous society that
has ever been united under the same system of government.”
CAIUS.
Adelaide, July 25th, 1853.
QUARTZ CRUSHING.*
TO THE EDITOR OP THE “ TIMES.”
My last letter on Australian matters concluded with the words
of the stately historian of ancient Rome. This I purpose to com-
mence with an extract from the Home News. The eloquence of
Gibbon may perhaps be wanting there, bnt the subject to the
present community will be not less interesting than the anatomy
of the great Roman frame, or the details of the arteries which
pervaded its vast system. It is in connection with the gold
discoveries in California and this continent, and the probable
results which will accrue from the cessation of gold-washing and
the introduction of quartz-crushing, under a general and organized
form. The writer, who appears to draw his matter from the New
Quarterly Review, after recording his opinion, and the belief of
the miners themselves, that quicksilver will soon be so abundant,
and the process of crushing so improved, that the matrix of the
ore itself will be ground and turned to immense profit, would at
once declare his conviction that the fall in the value of gold will
be “ immediate and tremendous,” but that he has not sufficient
authority whereon to rest his alarming speculation.
The great point of the enquiry is this, that if quartz-crushing
* Published in the Adelaide Times, of 9th August, 1853.


be successful, the supply is unfailing and illimitable, as its results,
it is feared, will be unparalleled.
The subject is thus continued by the Journal; —“The Nouveau
Monde has as much quartz as can be crushed in 40 years, at 300
tons a-day; the Carson’s Creek Company has no less a possession;
and the Agua Fria has now, we believe, a great deal more. We
have been told by Cornish miners who have returned from the
Californian washings, that they have traversed miles of quartz,
from every part of which gold was occasionally cropping out.
Assayists tell us that every morsel of this quartz carries within it
its burthen of gold, although no sparkle strikes the eye, and no
yellowness is visible in the grain. A specimen of the stone, ex-
hibited by the Nouveau Monde Company, has been assayed by
an eminent assayer, whose declaration is, that utterly worthless
as that stone appeared, it is yet so rich in gold that, if an average
of the mine from which it came, ‘ the engineer’s calculations of
productiveness may be quintupled.’ Such a fact as this is not to
be lightly got rid of. If the gold is there, it is beyond calculation.
‘ One gentleman, Mr. Baggs, asserts that his steam-stamps will
reduce to powder 20 tons per diem to each four-horse engine.
Mr, Clements, of the Nouveau Monde, states that his machinery
will enable him to crush 150 tons a-day.’ The estimates of the
Agua Fria cannot be less. Mr. Clements ‘ calculates that the
quartz he is quarrying will produce one pennyworth (not penny-
weight) of gold per pound ’ throughout, and that this ‘ will enable
him to export an annual million of gold,’ and ‘pay his shareholders
an annual 1,000 per cent.’ If this be so, not only would he
receive supplies to any extent of machinery and men, provided at
any cost by Panama; but the result we dread, and which it is to
the interest of the world should fail, would be realised. Gold
produced annually from inexhaustible quantities must speedily sink
in value, ‘by rapid gradations, if not by a single sudden fall.’
Happy then will it be for the world *if the whole interests of
civilized society be not revolutionized before the metal becomes so
depreciated that the supply will cease.’ ”
This is the more moderate view of the .natter. But what say
the Agua Fria and the Ave Maria Comp ny ?—“that quartz can
be made to produce a shilling’s-worth of gold to a pound of
weight! ” If this be fact, “ all the excitement we have heard ot
in San Francisco, Sydney, or Melbourne, will sink into insig-
nificance, compared with what we shall see raging at home.”
A few months must decide these questions. Meanwhile let us
turn to Australia, which, in the actual material, must be as rich
as California itself, and see how its interests would probably be
affected in regard to population and labour by the cessation of
gold-washing and the introduction of quartz-crushing. Looking
to the pamphlet of Monsieur Leon Faucher, on the demonetization
of the precious metals, I find that, in Australia, it was at first
supposed, after an analysis oi some ounces of quartz taken from
Mount Ophir, that the ton would yield more than £l,lOO sterling;
but these experiments made on so small a scale are of little value.


Nor is it likely that Australia, when the diggers are reduced to the
necessity of becoming quartz-miners, will show any superiority of
yield over California, where the richest mine, La Nevada, yielded
only 59 dollars, £l2 ss. 10d., and this from a vein of extraordinary
richness.
With regard to the increase of quicksilver, which appears so
necessary an agent in these extractions, it seems to be abundant
in California, and to have given rise to increased vigour in Mexican
mining; the Cinnabar Mines of New Almaden. near San
Francisco, were lately producing 400 kilogrammes a day.* This
produce, transported on the backs of mules, has been sold in
various parts, and given in Chili a fresh impulse to silver-working.
In Mexico the new workings have yielded a produce of 50 per
cent, of quicksilver. The price of silver has in consequence fallen,
and the recent economy in the cost of amalgamation must kindle
the spirit of fresh discovery. From these inferences, and from the
fact that gold mines are always argentiferous,! the author of the
work from which I derive my information predicts a fall of gold
to the value of silver, or that silver will be elevated to the standard
of gold. Whatever the result of such enquiries might be, I can-
not but think that, in an agricultural and pastoral country like
Australia, the pursuits of mining and digging in all its branches
must, by an enlightened Government, be ever regarded as
secondary objects to the grand and main pursuits of the com-
munity at large, viz., the cultivation of the soil and the production
of stock. These questions induce, I think, the subject of labour,
on which the proper prosecution of those ends mainly depend ;
and thus by a natural chain of reasoning we again return to the
direct point—how will A ustralia be affected by the cessation of
productive diggings, and the consequent want of employment
which will be the lot of unsuccessful or improvident diggers ; for
even should the organization of regular quartz-crushing companies
make large inroads upon the otherwise abundant labour thus
fortuitously placed at the disposal of the colonies, I think It cannot
bo denied or even doubted, that these provinces will receive a vast
accession of useful workmen by such results; nor will the quartz-
mining, however productive, be found to possess such charms for the
habituated digger as the less certain but more exciting occupation
of searching for gold. The majority, then, thrown out of employ-
ment, and soon likely to want for food, must look to the latter for
relief. Such has been the history of mining colonization from the
beginning. In the early days of conquest in South America, the
Spaniards began by abandoning all other pursuits than the search
of gold and silver; they ended, however, by building cities, form-
ing harbours, constructing churches, planting the land, and rearing
flocks. After the soldiers came the miners; after the miners came
the colonists; swords were turned into ploughshares, and as it
* The kilogramme is equal to about 2.6-10thSlb. troy..
t The proportion of silver in a nugget of gold is calculated at about one-
eighth iii California, one-tenth in Liberia, and one-fifth in New South Wales.
Thus in Australia, for every four kilogrammes of gold, there is one of silver


was in the 17th so it will be in the 19th century. Australia,
California, and perhaps the colder regions of the Altai, will be
covered with people; and though, perhaps, the spirit ot enterprize
and the thirst of discovery may occasionally reveal tracts of now
unknown riches, it is to be doubted that any future fields will equal
the wonders of the last two years. For the immediate benefit of
Australia, we should perhaps hope so—such, at least, is the opinion
of your correspondent,
JASON.
Adelaide , July 30 th, 1853.
IS A MILITIA AT PRESENT WANTED IN
AUSTRALIA ?
Adelaide, August 11 th, 1853.
In the prominent notice which Australia has recently obtained
from the mother-country, and which has been mainly owing to
the vast importance of the gold discoveries, the subject of its
defence has not been forgotten. A writer in the United Service
Journal, in particular, appears to have studied with some effect
the question of self protection, of which, he thinks, these colonies
are capable. I confess, myself, I look upon the matter as pre-
mature, and shall do so until I can believe that the disorganiza-
tion consequent upon the gold-fields has entirely subsided, and
the working members of the community have for the most part
resumed their ordinary pursuits. But if, as I expect, these
colonies shall, in ten years’ time, be in all material respects
(British interests naturally excepted) independent of the Home
Government, then 1 can conceive no better basis (as a ground-
work) for internal tranquility and external respect than the for-
mation of a militia, consisting of riflemen and artillery. The
former of these arms is well adapted to the nature of the country,
and might comprise, in each province, one mounted corps,* with
several (perhaps six) infantry battalions. The latter (the artillery)
would be chiefly intended to garrison the few but important
works which the possession of large commercial seaports must
indubitably call for.
The writer above referred to seems to think the militia of the
'* A mounted corps of 400 men would be the most extensive formation
that could be required in any one province, and that might be divided into
eight troops. In Van Diemen’s Land a smaller corps would answer. In
New South Wales two would perhaps be required, as also in Victoria. The
infantry battalions might be eacli 500 men.


Channel Islands to be a good model for imitation, and I have
always understood that they answered admirably the purposes
for which they were destined, and did prove themselves good
soldiers in the time of need. Of their personal appearance and
attention to their drill, I might in some degree, myself, be per-
mitted to speak, did I think the testimony were now needed; but
it is not, and I would only, therefore, add the suggestion that,
should this establishment be ever required, a few useful hints
might be taken from the militia of the United States, the Land-
wehr of Prussia, and the Rifle Corps of the Swiss Cantons.
With regard to the latter, I will only particularize the excellent
system of practice customary in some, if not all, of the cantons,
where, on given fete days, prizes are contended for by the most
skilful marksmen before the assembled population of the district,
and thus an emulation excited, which is said to render this
mountain people as skilful in the use of their weapons as in the
days when the steel-clad chivalry of Austria fell before the strong
arms and deadly shafts of these sturdy Switzers. I have said,
however, that I think the question of military self-defence is as
yet premature, and I do so because, should those provinces be
declared independent in the course of a few years, I am of
opinion that they would become, not the discarded, but the pro-
tected offspring of the Parent State; in which case regular
troops and armed steamers should be placed at the disposal of
the Australian governments, which might pay a yearly sum for
this protection until a regular colonial force should have been
established. Such, magna componcre parvis was the case with
the islands of the lonian Republic, which, by the treaty of Paris
in 1817, were declared a free and independent State, but placed
under the exclusive military protection of Great Britain, and
paid, or did recently pay, £35,000 a year for the military force
thus placed at their disposition.* Nor could there be any real
hardship in such a charge upon the revenue, as nearly the whole
of this money would be expended in Australia,
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
With respect to the great question I have propounded for con-
sideration, viz,, the Constitution of a General Senate, 1 think it
should be composed of not more than 40 members, nor less than
♦ Something similar occurs, I think, in the East Indies, where a great
portion of the Queen’s regiments receive pay as well as allowances at the
charge of the Company,


24, and that the President should be named by the Crown upon
the recommendation of the Governor-General, who should be
required to select the person in question from four candidates
submitted, one by each province, for the appointment. The
members of the Senate itself should, I conceive, be nominated by
the respective Governors of each colony, and one half of them
might be members of the House of Assembly originally elected
by the people. Thus, I think, the probability of conflicting
interests between the Great Council of the State and the Repre-
sentative Houses would be avoided. To the Governor-General
I would further concede the power of adding to the Senate as
many as eight members, to be selected by the Governors of the
four provinces. To give to the people the right of electing a
majority of the general Upper House would lead, I believe, to
endless bickering and strife between the officers of the General
and Local Governments and the popular members. To exclude
the people’s choice utterly from this Chamber would, on the other;
hand, be invidious, illiberal, and productive of no good result.
I am, therefore, clearly of opinion that the Senate should be in
part taken direct from the members of the Lower House, and
partly from the nominees of the Crown in the person of the
Governor or Lieutenant-Governor. In this way, I believe,
would all difficulties arising from aristocratic or democratic ten-
dencies be got rid of; for, without disputing the general rectitude
of the people’s intentions, or the ordinary wisdom of the choice—
vox populi. vox Dei —I am yet convinced that circumstances
might occur by which the most fitting member for a great
Council might be excluded from it by popular election; whilst,
for similar reasons, a person possessing no other qualification or
claim than a factitious or transitory popularity might be sum-
moned to the most important deliberations.
What should be the precise nature of the measures to be sub-
mitted to this Council it were at this moment difficult with pre-
cision to define. I am of opinion, however, that, as far as
possible, the deliberations of the Senate should be confined to
questions connected solely with the general interests of the pro-
vinces—and, with well-regulated colonial intercourse, how vast a
field would this comprise ! They could, moreover, determine all
matters connected with neighbouring colonies, or with foreign
powers, receiving merely the concurrence of the Governor-
General, as the Chief of the State, to these acts. If, however, it
should appear that inconvenience to the public service and un-
necesssary delays were the consequence of the transfer of provin-
cial business to the General Congress —(I use the term advisedly)
—then, I think, no possible objection could exist to the Session
of the senatorial members of each province as an Upper House
in the capitals of their own colony, where the subjects of finan-
cial and local questions might perhaps with more propriety be
discussed.
Whether the Right Honourable gentlemen composing this
general Senate should receive salaries from the Executive for


their duties may be doubted; but I am decidedly inclined to
think that their amor patrico and devotion to the public weal
would not be impaired by the receipt of some small remunera-
tion for their labours, and I might say their travels, as in some
cases the Members of this Council would be necessitated to
journey some hundred miles before they could reach the scene of
their deliberations. Under these circumstances, I would suggest
for future consideration, not that the Senators of Australia should
be the regularly paid servants of the Government, but that during
their presence in the general Congress of the State, which might
occupy a period, travelling included, of nearly three months,
these officials should receive a certain daily allowance,* say, three
or four guineas a day, and thus obtain some compensation for
considerable trouble, time, and labour.
Thus much for my humble ideas as to the future constitution
of the government of these provinces, residing in a general Senate,
with a local Legislature.
With reference to the other portion of my theme—the con-
struction of the roads throughout Australia it would seem that a
probable estimate of the expenses attendant on the scheme I have
propounded should have attended the details. I have considered
the subject, however, and have come to the conclusion that the
ordinary form of estimating road expenses, by cubic feet, &c.,
would be utterly impracticable in the present case, not to say in-
applicable, inasmuch as at the present price of labour, at least
£1,500 a mile would probably be the result. This is supposing
colonial labour were available.
Looking, however, to the feasibility of employing considerable
bodies of soldiers in such constructions, I find that the expenditure
under the head of Allowances to the Troops, Staff, &c., would be
something approaching to the following scale :
AllowancetosooSoldiers,at2s.aday,forl2months£lB,2so 10 0
„ 18 Officers, at 7s. „ „ 2,299 0 0
~ 25 Sergeants, at 4s. ~ ~ 1,825 0 0
~ 25 Corporals, at 3s. ~ ~ 1,368 15 0
~ 6 Bombardiers, Rl.Artilly,, at 3s. 6d. about 383 5 0
~ 25 Privates, Rl. Artillery, at 2s.lo£d. ~ 1,304 13 9
~ Sappers and Miners, Allowances, &c. ~ 500 0 0
(Or, say £1,000.)
~ 2 Officers of Artillery, at 7s. a day, about 255 0 0
~ 1 Commissariat Officer ~ 127 5 0
~ 1 Dep. Assist.Quartermastei’-Genl. atlOs. 185 0 0
Allowances—Total about
.26,498 8 9
Add extra allowance to Officer in command
185 0 0
£26,683 6
* As is, I believe, the case in the United States, where during' their
labours the Senators are paid eight dollars daily and travelling expenses.


Probable expense of Carriage of Light Baggage
for the Troops thus employed, say 6 Companies,
with 4 carts each £1,200 0 0
Probable expense of Carriage of Water (necessary
occasionally) by bullock-drays or carts, 6
Companies, each 1 cart* .... 800 0 0
Staff Carriage (hospital, regimental office,) &c.,
for the above . ...... 400 0 0
Carriage of Water and Light Baggage £2,400 0 0
It seems impossible to estimate with probability these expenses;
but as the regimental baggage would be forwarded by sea to the
place of destination, or the greater portion of it, and as water would
not always be required, I imagine the Commissariat would procure
carts built by contract, and hire or buy horses—the military
having charge of them as in the case of the carts used in the
construction of the works, and driven by artillerymen.
To estimate the expense of bullock-drays at a future period is also
attended with much difficulty. In the Caffre war it was put down,
I believe, by Sir Harry Smith at £50,000 for one year, but the
force employed was upwards of 9,000 men.
The account then stands thus—t
Allowances to Military for one year
Carriage ......
Add possible extraordinary expenses for allow-
ances, as Commissariat items, drivers, &c.
£26,683 8 9
2,400 0 0
600 0 0
£29,583 8 9
Supposing then, the roads to be traversed (it matters little
where) should be 400 miles in length, I shall put down
for the preliminary expenses attendant on its survey, in-
cluding the allowances to the staff employed, carts,
horses, &c., at £2,000
For the foundation of the road, the materials for which
cannot be procured by the soldiery, I shall suppose an
outlay of ........ 4,000
And for the gravel required, I shall add another . . 1,000
£7,000
making £5,000 for the supply of materials for this road, which I
shall presume deposited at convenient distances throughout the line
and broken ready for use; and not being able to approximate to the
* Meat I imagine could be obtained by attaching droves of cattle to the
line of march or by previous Commissariat arrangements; the expense,
therefore. I have not estimated, but 1 do not think, carriage excepted. it
need exceed the usual rate of rations. The same would be the case with
regard to the biscuit served out, unless flour were carried, when the troops
would be required to bake their own bread.
+ 1 have supposed one year for the duration of the labour, presuming the
flrst corps to take eight months in its march, the second four.
28


expense thereof, I shall put it down at £2,000, or about the labour
of 20 men daily for six months, with the expenses attendant on
cartage included. Should it be desirable to import stone, I see no
reason why the Home Government should not employ their
prisoners in breaking it, instead of piling shot, to the annoyance
of all connected with our military prison discipline. We shall
then have for the road expenses, £9,000, to which, being unable
to estimate military labour by the ordinary mode, I will add £5O
per mile for contingent expenses throughout, or
£20,000 0 0 making for the whole expense
Materials as before 9,000 0 0 on the road
£29,000 9 0 to which add the allowance
to the troops 29,583 0 9
£58,583 8 9 and the total will be under
£60,000, for which, if a road or roads to the length of 400 miles
could be constructed in any needful directions, I can only say the
experiment ought to be tried, whether the expenses are paid for by
one, two, or three provinces.
Finally, with regard to military labour of the nature above sup-
posed, it would, of course, be of a rough description and not in
appearance comparable with that of regular workmen. I think,
however, it would be as durable, though obtained at about
one-third of the rate paid to the ordinary labourers, and achieving
a result (if it can be obtained) at perhaps one-eighth of the cost of
construction, presuming £I,OOO per mile as the medium expense
of laying down a road of 400 miles. The proof, however, would
not be difficult, consisting merely in the selection of a mile of
road, say the North Terrace, or the South Terrace, or any other
line, and the employment of 12 or 18 soldiers (if the authorities
sanction it and the men are willing to work), under the superin-
tendence of a Civil Surveyor and a non-commissioned officer of
the Sappers and Miners. Then, if this experiment should prove
in a few months perfectly successful, I think the feasibility of my
scheme may be allowed. Doubtless there would be difficulties in
a long line which would not be encountered in so short a distance;
but, on the other hand, in that case there might be found facilities
which would not exist in the short space of one mile. For in-
stance, in a line of 100 or 400 miles, it is probable firm and level
plains might be met with, which would not immediately demand
the construction upon them of a macadamized highway, but
rather a railed space of great breadth, say one quarter of a mile,
so as not to concentrate the entire traffic on any one point, by
which means the other portions of the road already constructed
would become clogged by accumulations of mud, which would
render the monthly cleansing or scraping, that I imagine would
be required, possibly insufficient. That is, however, a matter for
the deliberation of those versed in such matters. For myself, I
confess my inability to decide the point. The great question ap-
pears to me the necessity of these roads, and when necessary, the


expensej £60,000, may be thought a large sum for a doubtful ad-
vantage, and that sum it would take, for I have not included in
my estimate the charges of Civil Surveyors, who should, I think,
assist in a matter of the kind. There would, moreover, be a sum
of £2,000 or thereabouts for clothing, a similar sum for tools and
repairs; all which, with contingencies, I place at £5,000. Then,
after the construction of a long line, small post-houses, caravan-
saries in miniature,* or at least huts, would be required; there-
fore I think that my estimate of £60,000 or £65,000 even, can-
not be looked upon as too high a charge.
But I have exceeded my limits, and shall therefore for the pre-
sent again subscribe myself
CAIUS.
POSTSCRIPT AND NOTE.
After a careful reflection upon and consideration of the seeming
impossibility which I have propounded for consideration, viz., the
construction of 400 miles of road, not including bridges, or the
supply and cartage of broken stone, for some £60,000 or £70,000,
I am induced to add to the estimate I have made the following
increase, viz:—
Hire or purchase of carts and horses for conveyance
of provisions and water, and stores for the troops £5,000
A further acquaintance with the interior of this country obliges
me also to be doubtful whether even two bodies of 500 men could
complete a line of the above extent in twelve months. An addi-
tional four months, therefore, added to the march of the second
body would increase the amount of expenditure about one-fifth,
or, say, £12,000, making a grand total of about £82,000. f
Adelaide, October 22nd, 1853.
* It is possible that toll-houses, let by Government at a nominal rent at
first, till traffic increases, and held under the tenure of an obligation to keep
in repair a certain number of miles of road, might be found a feasible mode
of procuring some degree of labour upon these new lines.
+ The foregoing Letters, originally published in South Australia, were
dedicated most respectfully (but without permission) to the Right Honour-
able the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
A. K.


LETTERS FROM SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
STEAM COMMUNICATION WITH GREAT BRITAIN
VIA THE RED SEA.
Adelaide, March 1 st, 1855.
Sir, —I have the honour to submit, for the consideration of
His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government, a
Prospectus which appears (marked A) in the newspaper of this
morning, of a Company for connecting the Postal Communication
of Australia with the East Indian line of steamers running to Suez
from Ceylon, Bombay, and China. I beg at the same time to
state, that should it meet with the approbation of the Govern-
ment, I purpose to enclose the same to the five Governments in-
terested, with the accompanying letter (1).
I have also respectfully to suggest to His Excellency that
I am induced to think that, for the furtherance of the ends in
view, a Provisional Committee of three members might at once
be formed in this City, for the purpose of corresponding with
similar bodies in the other Colonies; such Committee to consist
of a Member of the Legislature, the Colonial Treasurer, Auditor-
General, a Member of the Chamber of Commerce, the Master of
the Trinity Board, the Agent for the Peninsular and Oriental
Company, or any three of the individuals named, who might be
disposed to give their services towards an undertaking which is
apparently so much desired. At the same time, no expense need
be incurred until the concurrence of three of the Colonies speci-
fied should be obtained, and unless voluntary subscriptions should
be forthcoming for the object in question.
A notice might, however, with the sanction of the Government,
be published in the Daily Papers to the effect that persons
desirous of becoming shareholders to the amount of £IOO and
upwards in the proposed Company should give in their applica-
tions to the office of the South Australian Register, or such other


place as might be appointed ; such declaration, at the same time,
involving no risk to the parties applying, but merely giving an
insight into the probable demand for such shares as are stated in
the Prospectus,—the declaration in question being signed by the
applicants, and the notice in the Newspaper by a Member of the
Committee.
The Committee, it is also suggested, might give into the Go-
vernment their opinion of the propriety of contracting for the
hire of a swift steamer, for the immediate purpose of making ex-
periment of the proposed line via the Mauritius, its advantages
and disadvantages, and the probable expenditure that would be
incurred, together with the capabilities of Port Aden for a fixed
station.
The Pacific steamer, with another of a similar class, it is thought
might advantageously be hired for this purpose, until the Com-
pany (supposing it approved) should have purchased their own
steamers in England or Scotland, as proposed.
Trusting that His Excellency will not deem my communication
misplaced, and apologising for the length of my letter,
I have, &c.,
: (Signed) A. KINLOCH,
To the Hon. the Act. Col. Secretary.
(Enclosure 1.)
Adelaide, March B th, 1855.
Sir, —With the sanction of His Excellency the Officer Adminis-
tering the Government of this Colony, I have the honour to
submit to the Government of Victoria the Prospectus of a pro-
posed Company for connecting the Postal Communication of
Australasia with India and Great Britain,which is published in the
South Australian Register of this morning, and marked (A).
At the same time I am authorized to state that steps are being
taken to form a Provisional Committee in this Colony, for the
purpose of considering the merits of the scheme and corresponding
with any similar bodies which the adjoining Colonies may think
fit to appoint; such Committee deferring, until the concurrence
of two-thirds of the Colonies interested has been obtained, to incur
any expense beyond a notification in the papers for the purpose
of ascertaining the probable demand for an issue of shares of
£lOO and upwards to each applicant.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) A. KINLOCH.
The Hon. the Col. Sec., Victoria.


EXPENDITURE.
Cost of steamers from 1,500 to 1,800 tons burthen,
guaranteed to steam not less than 13 knots per
hour, to be purchased in England, if not
£180,000
advisable to build one at Hobart Town or Sydney
Iron or other stores for coal depbts and office at
Mauritius, King George’s Sound, Adelaide,
Melbourne, and New Zealand
30,000
Contingent sundries
6,000
£216,000
Prospectus (A).
To the Editor of the Register.
Sir, —Continuing the subject of the Postal Communication
with Great Britain via the Red Sea, to be conducted by an
Australian Company, touching at the Mauritius (Seychelles), I
proceed now to enter still more into the details of the matter, and
to give my reasons for believing that the affair might be con-
ducted with great advantage to these Colonies, and very
considerable profit to the holders of shares, and these I should
suggest might be issued at £2O or £25, payable at once, or by
instalments, first of £lO, afterwards, with due notice of further
calls, at £5 per share.
Taking, therefore, the outlines of Judge Boothby’s proposition
for my chief guidance, I proceed to specify the items of expen-
diture, and probable returns at a general average of about two-
thirds of the Judge’s calculations.
At the same time I would mention that I set very little value
upon estimates in general, regarding them rather as a means of
throwing light upon the general features of a scheme and after-
wards checking a too lavish expenditure, than as necessarily a
very correct statement of probable income or expenditure; I
therefore do not vouch for the correctness of mine.
APPROXIMATE YEARLY EXPENDITURE.
Captain, £600; three Officers, £800 £1,400
Surgeon, £300; Chief Engineer, £400 700
Second and Third Engineers, £500 600
12 Firemen at £9 per month 1,296
Crew of 48 Seamen, at £8 per month 4,608
18 Men and Boys, at £4 per month 864
£9,368
Yearly cost of Officers and Crews (three steamers) .. £28,104
is 2


Victualling Crew of eight Officers, at £B5 per annum,
and 78 Crew, at £3O, for three steamers £9,000
Victualling 60 First-class Passengers, at 4s.
per day, for an average of 23 days, will give
for one steamer £264
And 80 Second Class, ditto ditto 220
Or, for 36 Voyages, two to Aden and Melbourne
respectively every month, and one made by the
third steamer as a branch from Melbourne to
Launceston (George Town), New Zealand, Sydney,
and Melbourne (2) . 17,424
Stores for engine-room and general purposes,
estimated by the Judge at £BOO per voyage, I will
place at £3OO for one steamer every voyage, or
for 36 voyages 10,800
Coals, supposing they are burned exclusively, i.e.
unmixed with wood (proposed to be obtained in
Western Australia), and to cost £3 per ton,
whether English or Colonial, I estimate on a
calculation of the Australian Pacific Company for
their vessels of 1,600 tons burthen, and 300 horse
power, with a probable consumption of 20 tons per
• day, or 200 tons in 10 days, at 36 tons a day for
each steamer, which for three voyages, at 22 days
per "voyage, and at £3 per ton, will give the annual
amount of (error) *84,816
EXPENDITURE BROUGHT FORWARD.
Cost of three Steamers, Crews, &c 28,104
Victualling ditto 9,000
“ Passengers 17,424
General Stores 10,800
Coals (error) *84,816
Yearly Expenditure £150,144
Less error 8,362
The agency and management 1 propose to meet by a Committee
of three Directors at Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and Auckland,
with a Chairman at Melbourne, a Clerk at Launceston, and a
Board of Directors at the Mauritius, with a Clerk at the
Seychelles, and one also at King George’s Sound. Their salaries
might be something to the following effect:—
Mauritius. —Assistant-Secretary and Treasurer,£36o;
and Clerk, £l4O per annum £490
Seychelles Island. —One Clerk per annum 150
An error, but on the right side, the amount should be J 576,464.


\
King George's Sound. —One Clerk per annum 180
Two Workmen „ 150
Adelaide. —Assistant-Secretary and Treasurer, £400;
and Clerk, £l6O per annum 560
Melbourne. —Secretary, £7OO ; and Treasurer, £6OO 1,300
Chief Clerk 350
Two Clerks 400
Warehousemen and Porters 250
£2,300
Launceston. —One Clerk - • 180
Sydney. —Assistant-Secretary and Treasurer, £350;
and Clerk, £l7O 520
Warehousemen 150
Warehousemen
£670
Chairman ( Melbourne ) 500
Three Directors meeting monthly at Mauritius,
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and New Zealand,
and receiving two guineas each for their day’s at-
tendance (if advisable to pay them at all) for
superintending the affairs of the Company .... 360
Total cost of Management (estimated by His Honor
Judge Boothby at £7,200 for eight voyages).... £5,540
{New Zealand, omitted, say) 280
Forming a total sum for Agency and Management for
thirty-six voyages £5,820
Which if necessary can be increased to the Judge’s estimate.
ESTIMATE.
Total amount of annual cost brought forward £150,144
Agency 6,820
‘165,964
Add for Insurances (3) 15,000
Expences, Aden 800
Printing, Advertising, Sec 3,000
174,764
Contingencies • 5,000
Total Yearly Expenditure £179,76^


Probable Receipts for Passengers, Goods, Letters, News-
papers, and Parcels :
*6O First Class Passengers to Aden, at £5O,
(average passages) £3,000 0 0
60 Ditto returning 3,000 0 0
•80 Second Class ditto 2,800 0 0
80 Ditto returning 2,800 0 0
Freight of Gold, Goods, &c., say 350 tons at £5 1,750 0 0
Ditto return voyage, say 200 tons 1,000 0 0
70,000 Letters to Aden, at 2d 588 6 8
60,000 Newspapers at fd.. 187 10 0
Return Mails, say 500 0 0
1,200 Parcels, at 4s. (qy.) 120 0 0
Returning 100 0 0
One Voyage and Return 15,845 16 8
Yearly Receipts £190,150 0 0
Probable Receipts of third steamer running as a Branch
steamer to Launceston (George Town), New Zealand, Sydney,
and Melbourne, and on an average rate of passages as
follows: —
100 First Class Passengers, at £7 £8,400
100 Second Class ditto, at £6 6,000
Goods, Letters, Parcels, &c., say 3,000 each monthly
trip, or per annumf 36,000
50,400
Carried forward 190,150
Total Receipts £240,550
Add the Grants from Legislatures—
Melbourne (4) £36,000
Adelaide 6,000
Sydney 10,000
Tasmania 5,000
Western Australia 1,200
Mauritius (doubtful) 8,000
£69,200
Receipts brought forward 240,550
Annual Receipts 309,750
Deduct Expenditure - 179,764
Profits £129,986
* Or say 50 First and 60 Second Class Passengers, at £55 and £4O
respectively.
t This is, perhaps, in excess for a commencement.


Or more than 50 per cent, on Expended Capital of £216,000, the
only deductions from which would appear to be the preliminary
expenses of forming the proposed company, law expenses,
deductions from grants of legislatures, say in toto £20,000, and
annually £2,000.
Remarks.
Having premised that I do not vouch for the correctness of my
estimates, which I think of little importance as regards the feasi-
bility and success of the project in question, I purpose to make
but a very few remarks. And first as to cost of steamers. On
this head I find, in an excellent article which appeared in the
Sydney Empire of June 18th, 1853, that the estimated cost of a
steamer built in the best manner in London or Scotland, and
with the most perfect machinery now in use, could not be less than
£45,000 —I have allowed £60,000.
As to whether these boats might be built at Hobart Town or
Sydney, I have not enquired; but, the builders and machinery
coming from home, no doubt they could. I am not aware that
any one here would undertake to lay down the lines of vessels of
the above class.
The Australian Pacific Company calculated, it appears, to find
20 tons a day only for their steamers of 1,600 tons and 3GO
horse-power—l have allowed 36 ! Whether wood from King
George’s Sound might not be laid in, and used on short trips —
say Adelaide to the Sound, New Zealand to Sydney, and thence to
Melbourne, &c,, if mixed with coal, remains to be proved, but it
has not been calculated in these papers.
Salaries.
With regard to the salaries of the Staff, &c., employed in the
various ports at which the steamers would touch once a month
only, and for one, or at most two days, it seems almost unnecessary
to observe that, if too low, they can be increased when additional
steamers are placed on the line.
The title of Assistant Secretary and Treasurer has been pre-
ferred to that of Agent . as comprehending more fully the
description of the duty which would devolve upon the persons in
charge at the different stations ; but the name is quite immaterial.
With only two boats running between Melbourne and Aden, the
duties of the officials of the company would necessarily be of an
easy nature.
Coals.
In the case of the dep6t at King George’s Sound, if wood was
required to be taken in as well as coals, some steps would be taken
to obtain regular labour; if not, some of the prisoners could
doubtless be employed.


Melbourne to George Town
... 16 hrs. say 210 mis. (qy.)
Detention
... 6
George Town to New Zealand...,
„ 1700 „ (Auckland)
Detention
... 16
New Zealand to Sydney
99
Detention
Sydney to Melbourne
... 60
99
Employment of the Third Steamer.
In the event of accident to one of the Aden steamers, the third
boat would replace the disabled one, its place being taken by a
contract vessel.
N.B. —The voyage of the third steamer from Melbourne, via
George Town and New Zealand to Sydney and back, at the average
of 13 knots per hour, might probably be accomplished as
follows:
362 or about 15 days.
In the event of Sydney or New Zealand entering into other
arrangements for the conveyance of their mails, the profits of such
a Company as that specified in the foregoing sketch could not of
course be so great.
In this case also it would be necessary to make the steamers call
at Hobart Town as well as George Town, or, at any rate, at some
intermediate harbour, as for instance, Port Macquarie.
I am, &c.,
A. KINLOCH.
Adelaide, March 6, 1855.
Notes.
(1.) I might support this opinion by what I have read, I believe,
of the Caledonian Canal, that it cost ten times the original
estimate, and will never pay one-tenth of that.
(2.) I have supposed the voyage of the third steamer to occupy
22 days as the others, but it should never exceed 17 days.
(3.) I am unable to give any certain idea of what this item
should be. (Probably sor 6 per cent, only.)
(4.) £3,000 per month was voted by the Melbourne Legislature,
for the bi-monthly mail, brought overland in 65 days.
Erratum —The distance of New Zealand from the Continent of
New Holland or the Island of Tasmania, appears by the map to
be nearer 1,700 than 1,500 miles, and this will {should) necessitate
an increase in the average rate of passages to and from Melbourne,
George Town, Auckland, and Sydney. In place, therefore, of 100
first class passengers at £7, and 100 second class at £5, I would
read 100 first class passengers at £8 10s., and 100 second class at
£5 10s., thus making an addition to receipts of £2,400 per


annum. The voyage would, however, occupy one (or two) days
longer.
N.B.—There appears to be an error in the amount for Coals,
but the estimate being only approximate, it in no way affects the
merits or the probable profits of the scheme.
DRAINAGE AND WATER SUPPLY OF THE CITY OF
ADELAIDE.
Sir, —Although the Water Supply and Drainage of the City of
Adelaide are now before the Council, in the very comprehensive
report drawn up by the Hon. Captain Freeling and Messrs.
Hamilton and Hanson, yet your Excellency will not, perhaps,
deem me intrusive in venturing a few remarks, with a view to the
furtherance of any temporary scheme, which, as in the case of
the Torrens Bridge, may in the interim be thought advisable.
In doing so, however, I must respectfully premise that I have
no further acquaintance with the subject than that acquired whilst
acting as Resident of the Island of Ithaca, in the Mediterranean,
when it became my duty to urge upon the General Government
of the lonian States, the great advantages that would accrue to
the Island, and its chief town Yathi, by the introduction of a good
supply of water. And this, I would observe, was to be brought
from a spring distant from the town about three quarters of a
mile, and elevated above the sea about, I think, 1,300 or 1,500
feet, and to flow into three fountains, to be constructed in the
more open portions of the little capital Yathi.
The project had been before submitted, and mine was a modifi-
cation only of those which preceding Residents had advocated.
There was, therefore, but little novelty in the scheme itself,
beyond some alteration in the mode of raising a sinking fund by
a tax on the water and shipping supplying themselves from this
source.
In one point, however, material as regards expense, I happened
to be original, viz., in a proposal for cylinders of tile as con-
ductors of the water from the mountain, a suggestion recommended
to me by Major Chapman* of the Royal Engineers, who happened
to be then in the Residency, and he thought these pipes might
possibly be constructed in the Islands. The project was, however,
deemed at the time too costly.
In the City of Adelaide, with a considerable population and
* Then Captain, and now Colonel Chapman, R.K.


abundant funds, there might be no necessity for adopting such
means for an aqueduct And, therefore, if I might venture an
opinion at all, I would put it to the Government whether tanks
similar to those in use in Hindostan, and one-fourth of the size*
or (say 25 to 30 yards square) might not be constructed; and these
to be filled in the rainy season, and afterwards become a portion
of the more comprehensive system of Waterworks adopted in the
Squares and Park Lands, as recommended by the Surveyor
General and his Committee.
If the periodical rains should be clearly insufficient to fill these
tanks, perhaps conductors (conduits) might be laid on from the
higher grounds, or even from North Adelaide, near which large
pools {ponds) of water may often in the winter be seen; whilst
the city might assist the filling of these reservoirs by a weekly or
monthly supply from water-carts.
Finally, if a very grand scheme of Waterworks were con-
templated, and adapted to the Botanical Gardens, I have seen
none to equal those at Nismes, in the south of France, of
which, doubtless, plans are procurable in this Colony.f
They were constructed by Louis the Fifteenth, on a memorial
from the Province (or Department) of Gard, or the City itself.
With reference to any effectual system of sewerage, it is with
great diffidence I venture to observe that a very good plan is
adopted by the French Police (Gendarmerie), who, on
are empowered to levy a fine on all houses, the fronts of which
have not daily been cleared of all refuse. Perhaps, therefore, before
the establishment of a complete system of sewerage, by the aid of
pits and some deodorizing process, this regulation might be brought
once a fortnight into play, to the entire annihilation of the many
eyesores which deface and disfigure the environs of Adelaide.
These remarks I beg, in conclusion, respectfully to observe, are
addressed only for your Excellency’s private consideration.
To have inserted them in the newspapers might not have met
with your Excellency’s approbation, and would probably have
been quite useless. Indeed, I have been surprised at the little
benefit which here results from the use of the Press in public
undertakings.
In saying this I allude more particularly to the magnificent
scheme originally propounded by Judge Boothby, and modified
by myself, than which (I say it, for I believe it) none was ever
propounded more calculated to advance the prosperity of any
country.
Trusting your Excellency will forgive my having stepped for
* I am not aware of the precise dimensions of the tanks in the East
Indies, hut no doubt, at a very trifling expense, the size and l> aTE (probablb
or otherwise) of nearly every tank in Asia could be obtained—a sug-
gestion, by the by, worthy the attention of the antiquary, the student, the
artist, or the sportsman.
+ See “ Lc Magasin Pittoresque,” de M. E. Charton, for a sketch of these
Water Works.
j Perhaps rather “on personal investigation and proof of the fact.”


a moment out of the routine of office work in the busiest moments
of my leisure hours, I beg to remain, with due respect,
Sir, &c.,
(Signed) ARTHUR KINLOGH,
Clerk of Executive Council.
To His Excellency,
Sir R. G. Mac Donnell, C. 8., Governor-in-Chief.
Adelaide, January 21st, 1856.
SEARCH FOR GOLD.*
To the Editor, Adelaide Times.
Sir, — In furtherance of the intended exploration of the in-
terior of this Colony, with a view to the discovery of a gold field,
I would suggest that a Colony should be despatched to the
neighbourhood of the Gawler range, there to form a settlement,
under the supervision of any competent persons, and always pro-
vided our “ Celestial ” friends are willing to accommodate them-
selves to circumstances, and obey orders. The funds for the pur-
pose might be procured, I imagine, from the G overnment, if they
sanction the move, or an association of persons might subscribe
their £lOO, £2OO, or £5OO, to form a settlement, for the purpose
of cultivating land, cutting wood, searching for coal, or any other
useful and profitable work which the poor thinly-clad consign-
ment of Chinese might, if willing, be competent to perform. Port
Lincolnf would naturally derive the principal benefit from thisestab-
lishment, from which it might be distant about 100 miles, more or
less; but that benefit would naturally create corresponding action
here in the way of supplies, and would, ere long, be the cause of
a Steam Company being formed for trading in the Gulf. The
principal point would be on funds being found—first, to get good
people—Chinese, I suppose; secondly, to get a Superintendent
and Assistants; thirdly, to find a person ready to build a store, or
set up a canvas one; fourthly, a Surveyor would be required,
with one or two helpmates; also three or four persons to act as
interpreters.
* Written on the occasion of an unusual influx of Chinese into the province.
t Port Lincoln is said to be the best harbour in South Australia, and
looking to the tract of country lying westward of it, should some day be an
important place. It would then require a Lieutenant-Governor—a func-
tionary who should also reside at Port Elliot, or on the Murray Biver. A
Besident Commissioner would hardly be applicable, as these officers should
not be altogether stationary, but exercise an active supervision over the
large territories which form, as it were, the wings of the Province.


The establishment of such a Colony would require some rules
for its guidance, and precedents are not abundant. The late Sir
Charles Napier founded a Colony of Maltese in Cephalonia, which
for a time prospered, but afterwards completely failed. The
reason does not clearly appear, though that eccentric, distinguished,
and eminently able man, accused the government of having
thrown obstacles in the way of the advancement of this settlement,
which in the teeming brain of the founder, would have taught
the Cephaloniates how to grow rich, by covering their valleys with
fruit and grain, and stocking their farms with cattle. “ But Adam
(Sir Frederick,* not our respected progenitor) “ passed over the
Colony like a destroyer,” and in spite of Sir Charles' wrath, the
settlement was abandoned.
Adverting, however, to the present suggestion, some details and
statistics might be found in the account of this Colony in Napier’s
work on the lonian Islands, said to be in that mysterious bank of
deposit—the Mechanics’ Institute of this town. Any one, there-
fore. disposed to indulge in speculative or philanthropic views,
would perhaps benefit his fellow citizens by hunting up this work,
and enlightening us on the subjects of the theory and practice of
colonization.
I subscribe myself,
Adelaide, 1856. EN AYANT.
THE ORDER OF THE FLEECE.
Nature appears to have denied to South Australia the possession
of a golden soil; but, as the Alchymist endeavours to profit by
the wealth he seeks but does not possess, might not, I would ask,
this Colony endeavour to derive from the wealth around her that
richness of conception and ideas which may compensate in some
degree for the dearth of the metal itself.
South Australia is a country of great extent, general fertility, and
some internal resources, and forms one of the nations of that fifth
quarter of the globe, which we call Austral or Southern Asia. It
has now attained to considerable prosperity, and wants but the
skilful employment of capital and enterprise to extend still further
in wealth and commerce. In the remote parts of the province—
in the North and at the North-west Boundary—are thousands
and thousands f of acres of land as yet unseen by man, and which
must, in the ordinary course of progression and settlement, be yet
uutenanted for many, many years.
* Lieutenant-General Sir Frederick Adam, Lord High Commissioner of
the lonian Islands, when Sir 0. Napier was Kesident ol Cephalonia.
t Qy. “ Millions and Millions.”


I would invite the attention of the Government to the explora-
tion at once of these distant regions; and following out the un-
derstood principle in all communities of rewards and encourage-
ment, in contradistinction to punishments and correction, 1 would
hold out to the explorer of one or two hundred miles from any
settled district, on verified proof of his enterprise, large tracts of
land as a gift to himself and his heirs ; such grant to be not less
than 500 or 1,000, or more than 2,000 to 3,000 acres.* Possess-
ing this estate in a distant region, and one which must for a length
of time be unavailing for human labour and existence, I would
further confer upon its owner (if otherwise deserving) some title
with the land, illustrative briefly of the nature of his grant and
the cause of the donation, and perhaps conveying a degree of
authority which, in the event of the formation of a distant settle-
ment, might prove useful to the “ lord of the manor,” and benefi-
cial to his followers.
Various titles exist in various lands, all more or less applicable
to such an end; Scotland, Switzerland, Austria, Holland, might
each be applied to for authority in such a case, but possibly the
institutions of our own land might with more propriety be adhered
to. With a full recollection, therefore, of the laugh that was
raised against the Sydney pretension to a Botany Bay Peerage, I
would suggest that an Order should be established in South
Australia, to consist of Knights and Companions, who should, as
is the case with the Maltese Order of St. Michael and St. George,
be eligible for such distinction under certain conditions.
Patron :—The Queen, or Prince Albert.
Senior Member :—The Governor for the time being.
Six Knights :
Viz. ; —Four Members of Executive Council; President of
Upper House; Speaker of Assembly.
(It is presumed the Clergy [qy. the Judicial Bench] are not
distinguished by any earthly honours.)
Companions :
All former Members of Executive Council.
The Mayor of Adelaide, and all former Mayors. (Qy.)
All former Speakers of Legislative Council.
Honorary Knights:
Governor Sir John Hindmarsh.
Colonel Gawler.
Colonel Robe.
Governor Sir George Grey.
Governor Sir Henry Young.
Captain Sturt.
Honorary Members, (Companions):
Lieutenant-Governor Eyre,
* If for pastoral purposes this would be insufficient.


Any additional Member to be elected by the whole Order, sub-
ject to the approval of the Governor (as Senior Member) and
confirmation by the Queen.
With respect to the selection of Knights, the Governor-in-Chief
would, of necessity, be the head of the Order in this country; and
the Members of the Executive Council, being next in precedence,
would naturally follow. Moreover, these individuals would, I
think, be the most fitting, not because the Government service in
this Colony is the best selected and the worst paid of any in the
Australian Provinces, but because the unrequited labours of these
gentlemen are very severe. Nearly every Act of any importance,
and multitudes of questions of trivial or no importance, have
received their attention, quite irrespectively of the duties of their
own department.
Official employment of this kind should not be unrequited. The
munificence or the wealth of other Governments —the East Indies
for example—liberally remunerates their Councillors. In Calcutta,
the Senior Member of Supreme Council receives, or did receive, at
least £B,OOO per annum, and the other members in proportion.
A reason, then, is shown for some other distinction besides the
temporary prefix of “ Honorable ” on occasions applied to all
Members of the Legislature. To the Speakers of the Houses of
Parliament, as Knights of the Order, no objection could possibly
be made. From the position they hold they must, of necessity, be
persons of high intellectual attainments and have influence in the
community. It may not be necessary here to touch upon the
other and Honorary Members, further than to say, that the com-
pliment to former Governors would be appreciated; and that, to
confer the decoration on men who have distinguished themselves
like Eyre, Sturt, and Cadell,* would add to rather than diminish
the lustre of the Order.
Should this institution then, be decided on as one likely to
create an emulation for distinction of any kind throughout the
Colony, in Great Britain, or in Australia generally, the Council
should show its approbation thereof by voting an endowment of
some 100,000 acres as the nucleus of the Order, and to reward
its Members. A medal should then be struck, after mature
deliberation as to its design and decorations, and Delegates should
be appointed to obtain the sanction of the Queen to the proper
constitution of the Order.
Doubtless they would encounter opposition and even ridicule in
their task, but their object being a good one, failure should throw
no discredit upon them. Prudence would, at the same time,
suggest that every means should be taken to render the institution
worthy of enrolment amongst the other Orders of Europe; and
to this end, besides the very careful selection of the Candidates
• Since this was written another enterprising- navigator, Mr. W, Hand all,
one of the earliest Murray Explorers, has added another 2,000 miles to the
inland navigation of Australia, by the ascent of the Darling, a tributary of
the Murray.


for a Golden Ball, the insignia of its decorations should not only
be handsome and tasteful, but splendid and even gorgeous.
The Order might be termed—
“ The Order of the Fleece.”
“The Golden Fleece (Australian).”*
I subscribe myself,
Z.
Adelaide, June 16, 1856.
STEAM POSTAL COMMUNICATION.
(2nd Letter.)
To the Editor of the Adelaide Times.
Sir, —The question of Steam Navigation is once again upon the
tapis, as indeed I always thought it would be. The Treasury
Minute is far from satisfactory; not, in my opinion, because
nothing has been done with regard to dropping the Adelaide
Mails, but because the shortest route has not been insisted upon.
In the first place, with respect to the steamer calling first at a
South Australian port,—with the map before me, I perceive, that
unless a steam vessel purposely alters her course she has no
business within 150 miles of Kangaroo Island, the most Southern
available part of this Colony, and that, therefore, the direct course
to Melbourne would be the best arrangement for the present.
As to the detention of His Excellency last year, and the Mails
this year, no one will pretend to say these two instances form any
criterion by which to judge of our usual regularity of intercourse
with the adjoining province.
My own conviction is, that the delay in the English Mails going
to Melbourne first would be five days at the most (qy. four)
that is to say one day and a-half going from the longitude of
Kangaroo Island, twenty-four hours (or say twelve) detention in
Melbourne, and two days and a-half coming up from thence.
No doubt this is considerable, but unless you provide accommo-
dation for large steamers, you cannot expect them to visit your
ports. With regard to the more important question of the route
to the Red Sea, I can see no object in the steamer calling at
Singapore or Ceylon, unless some increased commerce is thereby
to be gained; otherwise, they should go direct to Aden; and I
do not see that it is a matter of much consequence whether Diego
Garcia (Chagos Archipelago), or the Seychelles should be the
intermediate port. The first island is a good deal more direct—
say 800 miles (nearer than the Mauritius)—but the Seychelles
have a more direct communication with that Island. Perhaps it
should be left to naval men to decide in reference to the greater
* It appears that some intention now exists of creating an Indian Order.


conveniences which either of these spots are able to offer for
steamers coaling.
My scheme for a Company to take up the whole Australian
Postal Communication with Great Britain is enclosed. I do not
see any possibility of its now being carried out, great as the gains
should be.
The Colonies would not pull together, and a sufficient degree of
commercial enterprise is wanting here. There was an error in
the Estimates which the Register should have pointed out, an
editor being an auditor in some respects for what he publishes.
But the profits would not have been lessened by this, and there
was, moreover, a very ample margin left in the profits generally,
and in intercolonial traffic for a much larger deficit.* Moreover
gold is generally found with quartz.
I have now condensed the matter very much, as it is hardly
necessary to go into details again when the project is taken up in
England by the Post Office authorities.
Prospectus of a Scheme for Steam Postal Company to Aden,
touching at the Seychelles Islands, or Diego Garcia.
Funds to be raised by the issue of Shares at £2O or £25, pay-
able in instalments of £5 and £lO.
General Expenditure about two-thirds of the Estimate of Mr.
Justice Boothby.
Three Steamers of 1,500 tons, to steam 13 knots per
hour £lBO,OOO
Sundries 6,000
General Stores 30,000
Outlay £216,000
Expenditure for Crew 28,000
Victualling ditto 9,000
„ Passengers 11,616
~ Branch Steamer 5,850
Stores, &c 7,200
~ Branch Steamer 2,500
Coals 76,464
£140,630
Agency met by Directors in each Colony,, and Staff.. 5,820
Insurances 15,000
Advertising and Printing 3,000
Contingencies 3,000
Annual Expenditure £167,450
Probable Receipts of the two Steamers running be-
tween Aden and Melbourne 190,150
Ditto of Branch Steamer 50,000
Total £240,150
* It was the contrary.


Add grants of Legislatures (Mauritius not included) £61,206
Grand Total 301,350
VJII dlltl 1 Uldi •••••*•••%••• »•••• tMJI
Deduct Expenditure 167,450
Profits* £133,900
Or more than 50 per cent, on Expended Capital of .. £216,000
R. N.
Adelaide, June 19, 1856.
THE lONIAN ISLANDS.
To the Editor of the Register.
Sir, —In your generally instructive article of yesterday, on the
present condition of the petty Republic which the Treaty of Paris
converted into an independent State under the military protection
of Great Britain, you state that the British Lord High Commis-
sioner governs as President of the Senate. This I believe to be
an error. Certainly seven or eight years ago the President of the
lonian States was an lonian styled “ His Highness,” and
enjoying some £l,OOO per annum (perhaps more) to keep up his
dignity at Corfu. Count Roma was then, I believe, his name;
and an acquaintance of mine, as I am informed, is married to his
daughter.
To revert, however, to the body of the Senate. I find in a little
pamphlet, which I wrote on Santa Maura a few years ago, and
which forms part of a brief general history of the lonian Islands,
as yet unpublished, the following sketch of the lonian Constitution
as it then existed:—
“ The government of the lonian states may be termed an aris-
tocratic republic. Since the year 1817, the date of the present
Constitution, it has been vested in a Lord High Commissioner,
representing the protecting sovereign of the Islands, which, by the
Treaty of Paris in 1815, were declared a free and independent
state, but by a law of anomaly placed under the immediate and
exclusive protection and military command of Great Britain. The
executive resides in a Senate of six members, including the
President, who is named by the British Crown on the recoirt-
* From which it appears should be deducted Wear and Tear, Deprecia-
tion and Loss of Interest—about 15 to 18 per cent.; but on the other hand
the coals may be reduced from £3 per ton to 455., the estimate of the P. &
O. Company. See Parliamentary Paper, “ Singapore and Sydney Steam
Communication. ”


mendation of the Lord High Commissioner. The Legislative
Assembly consisted, with the President, of 40 members, of whom
11 were chosen by the Lord High Commissioner, and formed the
Primary Council (since abolished); the remaining 29 were elected
from a double list of 58, which had first undergone the super-
vision of the Lord High Commissioner, or his Secretary, and was
in proportion to the size, population, and importance of the
different islands—Corfu, Cephalonia, and Zante thus returning
seven each, Santa Maura four, and the three lesser islands one or
two each. The Legislative Assembly, jointly with the Senate, was
designated the lonian Parliament, elected its own officers, fixed
the amount of supplies, and originated new laws. The Senate
had a veto on the proceedings of the Assembly, but its chief
business was to regulate affairs during the recess of the Legislative
body, and to decide matters submitted to it by the General
Government, subject to the approval of the Lord High
Commissioner.”
There is, I believe, no very complete history of the lonian
Islands of the present day; but the works of Hr. Davy, Jervis on
Corfu, and Napier on Cephalonia, convey truthful pictures of the
different islands as they were when those books were written. A
pamphlet also may be mentioned, with the author of which I was
acquainted, and who, himself a warm Philhellenist, declares the
inhabitants of some of the islands would prefer a bad Greek
government to English rule, however good. It is dedicated to Mr.
Gladstone, now at Corfu, and the writer, though possibly not
desirous of encouraging disturbance, may perhaps as an Irishman
have a natural weakness in favour of agitation.
As regards the military importance of Corfu, the fortifications
are no doubt strong, but as to defending the entrance of the
Adriatic I am a little sceptical. The north-west point of Corfu
is 00 or 70 miles from Italy—Otranto, I believe; and although a
cruiser or two might defend this narrow sea in moderately calm
and clear weather (not always to be found in the Mediterranean),
I must confess my doubts that the fortresses of Corfu and Vido
on the other side of the island, and commanding in some degree
the passage between Albania and the Isle, would much facilitate
the naval operations referred to.
Dunkirk is some 30 or 40 miles from Dover, Dieppe near 60
from Brighton, and Havre more than 100 miles from Southampton;
but I have yet to learn that the fortifications of these towns (how-
ever strong they might be made) could interfere with the passage
of the Channel, though doubtless they might hold an enemy’s
fleet or vessels, and the passage of the Straits of Dover might, in
clear weather, be deemed a nice or dangerous operation.
There is a French work on the fortifications of Corfu, by a
Colonel La Ferriere, which I happened to see at Marseilles, but
could not afterwards procure. It probably related, however, only
to the old Venetian lines, which were of great extent, and required
10,000 men to man them.
These we (the British Engineers) were attempting partially to


destroy in 1847-48, and so far as I, a spectator, could judge, very
poor work was made of the attempt.
In my own opinion Cerigo, the ancient Cythera, is by position
of more or as much importance as Corfu; but the island, the only
one of the seven I have not visited, is said to be hopelessly barren,
and it possesses no harbour.
I do not know if these remarks are worthy of insertion in your
journal, for which, indeed they are somewhat lengthy; but, as an
ex-Provisional Resident of Ithaca, I feel bound to say something
for the islanders, who are an inoffensive and in some respects,
though ( perhaps ) in an inferior way, a talented race. The Greeks
of Continental Greece are likewise as generally good subjects as
long misgovernment would lead one to expect; and if somewhat
aspiring, and tant soit peu intrigant, are still “much the same
sort of canaille as in the days of Themistocles.”
At Constantinople they are reckoned perhaps the most rising of
the subjects or citizens of the Porte, and do not, I believe, bear
out the character for commercial bad faith which your article of
yesterday would wish to ascribe to them.
On this point I should, however, refer you to Murray, who,
notwithstanding the Graecia Mendax reputation which some still
bestow upon them, is inclined to give them a high name for strict
attention to their obligations in mercantile transactions.
What character they now bear in this respect at Calcutta,
Trieste, Marseilles, or Manchester, I know not.
With apologies for so long a communication, I beg to subscribe
myself,
Sir, &c.,
ARTHUR KINLOCH.
Adelaide, April 21th, 1859.
Postscriptum. —Napoleon I. proposed or intended to arrange
the lonian States in three departments, viz.:—Department of
Corcyra; chief town, Corfu. 2nd. Department of Ithaca; chief
town, Argostoli. 3rd. Department of the JEgcan (of the Morea
would have been still better perhaps); chief town, Zante. It
was I think a fine conception, and might be tried now—at least
partially.
A. K.
Adelaide, May 23, 1859.
EXTRACT FROM A LETTER
Written with a view to its consideration by His Excellency Sir
W. T. Denison, Governor-General, with reference to the foregoing
schemes for steam communication (pages 31 and 45 ), and under
49


the idea that a second route via Panama sooner or later (not as a
postal means of communication only, but as a measure of inevit-
able and obvious state policy) must be adopted :
March, 1859.
“ The ideas and proceedings thus propounded did not meet
with the approbation of the local government of South Australia;
and perhaps my belief that the time had then arrived for the estab-
lishment of a mercantile steam fleet, under the presidency of Sir
Charles Hotham, and to rival the Austrian Lloyd’s Company,
which 10 years ago possessed upwards of 30 steamers,* was not
sufficiently manifested to obtain for my project the consideration
it might have received, and which, with modifications, I believe
it deserved. I moreover miscalculated, or rather perhaps I mis-
understood, the duties of local governments under British Insti-
tutions in relation to a scheme which would have been better
launched upon the world by a private company or an association
of commercial individuals,” &c.
THE EXPLORATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN CONTINENT.
Adelaide, July 25, 1859.
Sir, —Adverting to a Reward offered, I believe, by the House
of Assembly of the Province to whosoever shall cross the Conti-
nent of Australia within certain limits, and likewise to a proposi-
tion which I made to His Excellency Sir H. E F. Young some years
ago. (Pamphlet, May, 1853, Private Secretary's Office.) I now
beg respectfully to state that, with the sanction of His Excellency
the Governor-in-Chief, I am prepared to undertake the enterprise
in question on certain conditions —and always provided, no com-
petent person can otherwise be found—that due arrangement is
made for the performance of my official duties, and finally that
my state of health should admit —which at present it would not
of my carrying out my proposed offer.
The conditions upon which only, I should be willing to peril
my life, and undergo privations or hardships impossible to
describe, if not actually experienced, being somewhat different
* The Austrian Lloyd’s Hand-Book for 1850 gives 31 steamers as the
number of their flotilla; but of these two, the “ Imperatore” and “ Impera-
trice,” had only been ordeked to be BUILT. There was, however, an
Austrian Lloyd’s steamer, the “ Imperatore,” in 1847, which assisted H.M.s
steamer “ Spitfire” when ashore off Ithaca—the Captain receiving the
thanks of the Lords of the Admiralty, with tho present of a gold watch.
I believe this Company have now more than 40 steamers.
50


from those which I originally laid down for myself, when I for-
merly offered my services to the Colony, and probably somewhat
at variance with the ideas of the Legislative Body on the subject.
I shall now proceed to state them as follows:
Ist, That should I become the leader of an enterprise, such as
now referred to, the reward of £l,OOO should be doubled; and
further that the Government should incur the whole preparatory
expense for the fitting out of the expedition, to an amount not
exceeding £750 \ and likewise the cost of transporting my stores
and party to any part of South Australia which I might select as
my point de depart, or starting point.
2nd. That during my absence 1 should receive twelve months
half-pay, or leave of absence for that period, and power to draw
on the Government for £3oi) to cover the expences of the return
of myself and party to South Australia.
3rd. That I should have the sole selection of the individuals
composing the expedition.
4th. That in. the event of any other party from this Colony
reaching the North or North-western Coast of Australia within a
defined period, a proportion of the Government Reward should be
assigned to the leader thereof, say one-third of the gross sum,
voted, or made up. And in the event of a third party reaching
the desired point, the expences of that expedition, to a certain
amount, say £250 or £3OO, should be defrayed by the Colony, (qy.)
sth. That the Government should forward, through His Excel-
lency The Governor-in-Chief, an earnest solicitation (in Duplicate)
to the Governor of West Australia, for the despatch of a vessel to
some specified point of North-west Australia for the purpose of
conveying to Perth or Swan River the South Australian Expedi-
tion and stores. Such vessel to remain at least two months off the
indicated coast—occasionally touching at some specified port.
6th. That similar applications be made to the Naval Officer
Commanding in Sydney—also to the Dutch Authorities in Batavia —
if any aid could be expected from the latter.
7th. That on official notification and special report of my
Expedition having reached the North-western coast, His Excel-
lency the Governor-in-Chief should recommend to H.M.’s
Government to bestow upon me a grant of 100 square miles of
land along any portion of the seaboard of West Australia, which
I might select between the 20th and 30th degree of South
Latitude, such grant to be not nearer than 150 miles to the
Settled Portions of Western Australia.
Having thus stated the only conditions on which I could un-
dertake to traverse the Australian Continent, it remains for me but
to add, that beyond the acquisition of the reward, which would
yet be totally inadequate to the purpose of procuring even the
meagre subsistence which enfeebled energies might afterwards
require, and the trifling degree of credit or reputation which
might attach to the successful Exploration of the Australian
interior, there is really no inducement for any person not totally
degoeuvrt to undertake the Expedition. Aloreover, as to any


fame to be acquired, it may be observed, how little that fame
could boar comparison with the laurels which have been earned
by many of the African Travellers. As for instance, Bruce, Park,
Denham, Clapperton, Barth, Overweg, Richardson, Living-
stone, and others, of whom some, if not all of them, fell victims
to the perils they cheerfully undertook to brave.
Having thus stated my ideas of the Expedition proposed, and
also respectfully notified the terms on which only (health and
official duties also admitting), I could attempt to enter upon such
a task,
I have now respectfully to subscribe myself, Sir,
Your most Obedient Servant,
ARTHUR KINLOCH.
Clerk of Executive Council, S.A.
The Honourable,
W. Younghusband, M. L. C.,
Chief Secretary.
MILITIA FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
To the Editor of the Advertiser.
Sir, — Although I am not myself of opinion that the great naval
armaments of France —reported as now progressing—are intended
for the immediate subjugation of Great Britain, and although I
do not myself perceive the urgent necessity of the military pre-
parations of England herself, I am yet fully persuaded that this
colony, with possibly other British colonies, is very ill prepared to
resist actual invasion.
Believing, therefore, that whether the military force stationed
here, be increased within a few months or not, a militia will still
be required for South Australia, I now beg to offer for the con-
sideration of the Government and the country, a few suggestions
or remarks; and Ido so with a view to render more simple the
enrolment or organisation of the reserve force in question,—
having only to add that if my views possess no other merit, they
have at least the advantage of brevity over the Militia Act of
1854.
1, A militia force, or the nucleus or groundwork thereof, is
essential in South Australia, and will hereafter be found yet more
necessary.
2. For the formation thereof, a certain quota of the inhabitants
of six or seven of the southern counties of the province should be
52


enrolled as liable to serve, when expediency or emergency demand
the training or services of an armed militia force.
3. Lists (muster rolls) of such persons should be furnished by
the local commandant of militia (who should be gazetted a field
officer) in each county, to the staff officer (adjutant-geneneral or
brigade-major of militia), who might be appointed to conduct the
correspondence and superintend the formation of battalions of
militia.
4. The number of militiamen in each county to constitute a
depot battalion should not exceed 450 nor be less than 250, except
in the city of Adelaide, where four depot battalions should be
formed, one being mounted.
5. For the purpose of receiving, storing and issuing arms,
clothing, &c., to the different battalions, when called out for
training or otherwise, a colonial quartermaster should be
appointed, who with the adjutant-general or brigade-major should
alone receive pay as a permanent staff officer, such pay being-
equal to the half-pay af officers of similar rank in the Queen’s
service, with a special allowance during the training of the
militia.
6. When expedient to call out the depot battalions for exercise
and training; the days of such training should not exceed 28 days
in the first year, and 21 days in succeeding years; two * of such
days aforesaid being devoted to practice with blank ammunition,
and tioo* with service ammunition.
7. The pay issued to the militia when training should be—for
field officers, £1 ; captains, 155.; subalterns, 10s.; non-com-
missioned officers, 75.; Privates, 45.; and the hours of training
exercise be five a day.
8. The mounted corps in Adelaide should not (unless expedient
to add a half troop of horse artillery) exceed in numbers the full
complement of two troops of regular cavalry, or say 120 men;
and foragef should be issued for one horse to each man, and for
two horses to the seijeant-major and officers of such troops during
the periods of training.
9. This mounted corps should be armed with double-barrelled
short rifle guns, or carbines, revolvers, and long-pointed swords.
13. In case of actual invasion, the militia, which would then
(unless regulated by a colonial Act of Parliament) be subject to
the Mutiny Act and Articles of War, should be placed under the
sole command of the officer commanding Tl.M.’s land forces, who
should then receive the rank and pay of colonel-commandant —
a special allowance being granted to him and the adjutant-
inspector of volunteers, for acting as inspecting field-officer and
assistant inspecting field-officer of militia during the training of
the militia.
* Query (six).
t Or allowance in lieu thereof.


Concluding remarks with regard to the numbers of any
militia established and organized in South Australia ;
A state of actual invasion, and one of exemption from even the
fear or expectation of hostilities, are so totally different, that no
comparison can be drawn between them, even for the purpose of
serving either as precedent or guide for the computation of the
numbers of any armed force which a country larger than France,
and accessible to invasion on at least 100 miles of coast, would
require.
Nevertheless, as it is improbable that a great military power
.would attack a large British colony (though its very weakness
might tempt invasion rather than its wealthier neighbours),
without adequate resources, and a well-appointed expedition, I
will infer fhat this colony should have available, on emergency, an
armed force of 5,000 men of all arms, such force having been so
enrolled and levied, that it could be in the field 24 hours after
issue of the proclamation calling it forth.
The defence of outports, such as Ports Lincoln and Robe, must
be left to H.M’s navy, and some local coast guard or volunteer
rifle corps established, or hereafter to be established ; whilst, if
necessary, to secure Port Elliot and Glenelg from a privateering
attack, which might prove successful and destructive in three or
four hours, similar measures must be adopted in conjunction with
militia organization.
I am, Sir, &c.,
ARTHUR KINLOCH.
Adelaide, January 24:th, 18G1),
54


APPENDIX.
CIVIL SERVICE RETIREMENT ACT, PROPOSED BY
MR. A. KINLOCH,
Preamble for Civil Service Retirement Bill.
Whereas it is expedient to make provision for the retirement of
officers, clerks, and others in the Civil Service of this colony, by
a deduction from the salaries of the said officers, clerks, and
others; and at the same time render more accessible to persons
duly qualified the preferments of the Government service—Be it
therefore enacted by the Governor-in-Chief of the said province
of South Australia, with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council and House of Assembly of the said province, in the pre-
sent Parliament assembled, as follows;
Treasurer to deduct 3 per cent, from salaries under £l5O,
and 5 per cent, on salaries of £l5O and upwards.
1. From and after the Ist day of January next, the Treasurer
of the said province (of South Australia) shall deduct from the
fixed salary of every officer, clerk, or other person, who may be
receiving the sum of one hundred and twenty-five pounds (£125)
per annum (and less than £150) from the said Government, the
sum of three pounds per centum, and from every officer, clerk, or
other person who may be in receipt of salary from the said Go-
vernment, of the amount of one hundred and fifty pounds (£160)
and upwards, the sum of five pounds per centum.


Treasurer to record deductions for Civil Service, and to
submit account for audit.
2. The Treasurer of the said colony shall duly record the par-
ticulars of all such deductions in a book for that purpose, and
shall submit the account of the said Civil Service Retiring Fund
for audit to the Audit Office at stated periods, as fixed by the
Governor-in-Chief and Executive Council of the said province of
South Australia.
Treasurer to invest deductions in South Australian or other
securities.
3. The Treasurer of the said province shall, in like manner, be
required and authorised to invest the amount accruing from the
deductions towards the Civil Service Retiring Fund, in South
Australian Securities, or other investments, to be fixed by the
Governor-in-Chief of the said colony with the advice and consent
of the Executive Council of the province.
Treasurer to pay Retiring Allowances when notified by due
authority.
4. The Treasurer of the said colony shall pay to the officers or
others entitled to retiring allowances, as notified to the said
Treasurer by the Chief Secretary, on the authority of the Go-
vernor-in-Chief of the said province, whatever retiring allowance
they may be entitled to under the provisions of this Act, as speci-
fied in the Schedule hereunto annexed.
Amount of retiring allowances —how computed.
5. And for computing the amount due to any officer or other
person entitled to receive any annual retiring allowance, the first
day of payment shall be precisely one month from the approval"
by proper authority of the retirement of any such officer under
this Act.
Officers dismissed not entitled to retiring allowance—may
receive back deductions.
6. No officer, clerk, or other person dismissed from the service
of the Government of the said province, or resigning with intent
to avoid such dismissal, shall be entitled to any retiring al-
lowance from the fund before specified; Provided always, that
it shall be lawful for the Governor-in-Chief of the said province,


with the advice and consent of the Executive Council, to authorise
such person or persons to receive back the deductions made from
his salary since the coming into force of this Act.
Doubts how determined as to claim to, or amount of
retirement.
7 Any doubt which may arise as to the claim to, or amount of,
retiring allowance to which any officer or other person may, under
the provisions of this Act, conceive himself entitled, shall be
settled by a Board to be nominated by the Governor, consisting
of the Treasurer (or Assistant Treasurer), the Auditor-General,
and such other person as shall be appointed by the Governor,
with the advice and consent of the Executive Council. And pro-
vided always, it shall be lawful for any such person to appeal
therefrom to the Governor-iu-Chief and Executive Council.
Original grant from Legislature to be repaid in 13 years.
Schedule. Exceptions.
8. And whereas the fund thus created would greatly exceed the
amount and proceeds of the grant originally made for retirement
from the Civil Service by the Legislative Council in 1854, and
will be increased in some degree by every retirement, be it there-
fore enacted that within six years of the coming into force of this
Act, one moiety of the said grant (£5,000) shall be repaid to the
general revenue of the colony aforesaid, and that the remaining
moiety (£5,000) shall be likewise repaid within seven years of
the first repayment of £5,000. Provided always that the pensions
now chargeable against such grant aforesaid shall be paid there-
from, or from the general revenue, and shall not now be made
chargeable to the Civil Service Retiring Fund herein specified.
Five retirements only in three years. (Query, one annually.)
Interval to elapse. Those incapacitated from sickness may
retire on allowance from revenue.
9. And whereas any unusual number of retirements, from
causes difficult now to foresee, might impoverish greatly the fund
now contemplated, be it therefore enacted, that no retirements
exceeding in the aggregate five within three years shall be allowed,
and that after any two retirements in one year, an interval of one
year shall elapse before any further retirement be granted Pro-
vided always, that any officer or other person incapacitated from


sickness, or otherwise, as duly certified by medical authority, may,
notwithstanding, be allowed to retire from the service of the said
colony, receiving such provision as may be awarded by Her
Majesty’s Colonial Government, or the Houses of Parliament in
South Australia.
Grant of money or land may be made by Governor, with
authority of Parliament, in lieu of retiring allowance.
10. Finally, be it enacted that it shall be lawful under special
circumstances for the Governor-in-Chief of the said province (S.
A.), with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
House of Assembly, in Parliament assembled, to authorise the
payment of a grant of money in lieu of retiring allowance to
such persons as may be entitled to receive the retiring allowance
under this Act, or to commute such grant of money to a grant
from the lands of the Crown in the said province of South
Australia, and always provided the commutation in question of any
retiring allowance shall be solicited by the officer, clerk, or other
person entitled to receive retiring allowance under this Act.
A. K.
February, 1860.
FINIS.


0081
•
’ : >m - a&taea y{» j rt9d 1 >
. .! .•! ) t« c ]t I<> ail* io JaeauaavoO luinoJoO a'ytesja '*•
■>o lifci ■!( yam bxusl k> pnom to ja,.'
n v „ir to Mil ai to. yihoifc. «
■ - b-;a ioWci *f Hada *i larfi betoaua Ji ad ,yll«tfi Oi
■
&> >■'• «** t * twe* iaoirudltu ! ;i ,yldxii92BA Jo aawoll
• ■ -a • .■■ < ”' ‘ i ■ ' /tii n ax, uni ••■■■)
1 .eon vc a ifj li iwotO odJ to -iitiifil aili u.o
jo ,jhol9 t T tfi xlt baJbilbs ecf Ifsifa aanswoUe v-• ile*
. r.d} -)0‘ m.wulla 'jv uJai avianai oJ balJiJna


