

P&x W PPirrs
H . Cl P V^CK/Wv
?**s> ***&
‘ Cp
s>h-
FIJI DISTEICT.
LETTER to The Rev. S. RABONE, General Secretary of Wes-
leyan Missions in Australasia and Polynesia— from The
Rey. JAMES CALYERT.
Sydney, August 9th, 1865.
My dear Brother Rabone, — Having just arrived by the “ Wesley,”
on our way to England, I give you my last statement with reference to
the work I have left behind :
GOVERNMENT FORMED.
In January last, the Tongans took pos-
session of some Fijian islands—which they
claimed by conquest, and by cession from
the owners. The Yunivalu of Bau protest-
ed against Tongans holding lands in Fiji.
Captain Jones, H. M. Consul advised a
meeting of chiefs from all parts of the
group, and, by the request of the Yunivalu,
summoned them. On the Bth and 9th of
May, the public meeting was held at
Ovalau —over which the Consul presided.
It was resolved that one chief each from
Bau, Eewa, Thakaundrovy, Bua, Ma-
thuata, Nanduri and Lakemba, should be a
responsible Government, and should repre-
sent all Fiji. A 1 destructive war of ten
years’ continuance on the Mathuata coast,
was ended at this meeting —at which all
the parties were present —and peace, likely
to be permanent, was cheerfully agreed
upon. At this meeting, one from each
side was allowed to vote. As soon as a
king of Mathuata is appointed, he will
represent Nanduri also. It may be found
that some parts of Fiji will not be easily
represented by any of those who are
joined in the present Constitution, but will
have to send a member. The entire group
is to be represented; and as it is not
practicable for all to be subject to one
head, the responsibility and direction of
all Fiji, is to be placed under as few
leaders as may be.
They unanimously and cordially agreed
to form a government —have the same
general laws —meet annually to make and
alter laws—elect a president for the year,
who shall have a small allowance from
each state, and whose commands shall bo
obeyed—have one flag—not to commence
any war without the consent of the general
assembly —and each state to be self-sup-
porting, and to manage its own internal
affairs. The meeting was most harmonious
—far beyond the most sanguine expecta-
tions. The Yunivalu of Bau was unani-
mously chosen President.
0)i the second day, many of the Tongan
laws which are applicable to Fiji, were
adopted. It was also resolved that bound-
aries of the respective territories should
be defined, and that taking property by
force should fee abolished. Several matters
were suggested for consideration during
the year.
All went off remarkably well, and
affords promise of “unity, justice and
progress ” in this divided and large group
of islands. It is felt by the natives them-
selves,. as well as by the Consuls, traders
and planters, that the present state of Fiji
demands a settled and strong government.
The export of cotton, and coffee, and


wool, will now be added to the usual
produce of oil, beche-le-mer, and tortoise-
shell : and other tropical productions may
be introduced.
The Tongan Governor, Maafu, who had
been invited by the Consul, was absent:
but he arrived before the chiefs had
separated, and had friendly intercourse
with them. The lands taken by the
Tongans were left with them. Maafu
appeared to rejoice in the concord that
prevailed among the chiefs. He was
directed to withdraw Tongans from other
parts of Fiji where they are settled, and
not to oppress the people he governs, but
do his utmost for their improvement and
advancement. When I left Fiji, Maafu
and his wife were at Bau, to celebrate the
marriage of the chief’s daughter, with a
young chief from Lakemba.
DISTRICT MEETING.
Our District Meeting occupied us fully
for six days. We examined six native
missionaries for recommendation to be
received into full connexion; and eight to
be now received on trial. Their religious
experience was very clear, and their
examination satisfactory, except in the
case of one, who goes to our District
Theological Institution. As the native
missionaries are in future to -take part in
the District Meetings, when matters
relating to them are under consideration,
we allowed two on the spot who are in
full connexion to join with us in the
examination. By bringing the principal
native agents into all the working of
Methodism, it is hoped they will gain a
training and qualification for the efficient
management of the work, when the num-
ber of foreign missionaries shall be lessened.
Our meeting was happy and profitable.
The religious services were means of grace.
The work prospers, and besides the num-
bers at Botumah, we report an increase
of 70 catechists, 72 local preachers, 338
class-leaders, 2,749 members, and 4,950
attendants on public worship. We thank
God, and take courage. Our Circuit and
Institution Beports this year are beyond
the average for interest, and will stimulate
and encourage in the good work those
who love the cause of Christ.
TRAINED SCHOOL-MASTER REQUIRED.
The District Meeting earnestly entreats
that Fiji may have at once a Trained
Schoolmaster, to train native school-
masters, who are now absolutely and most
urgently required throughout the group.
JUBILEE SCHOONER.
The Superintendence and oversight of
so many agents, and members and hearers
on so many islands, situated so widely
apart, demands a vast amount of sailing.
For some years this branch of our work
has been attended to by two schooners.
Both will soon require a considerable out-
lay for coppering and repairs. It is found
that each, in the management, is a heavy
tax upon a missionary’s time, and, in
order to lessen expense of sailing, they
have not been efficiently manned —en-
dangering life. For these and other con-
siderations, the brethren unanimously and
earnestly beg for a new schooner, of from
25 to 30 tons, to be well-manned, and
constantly employed ; and they will sell
the two in Fiji, and remit the proceeds
towards the expense of a suitable one to
be built in Sydney. They suggest that
The Jubilee schooner be built at once, and
be sent down at the same time as the
Wesley next year. In appropriating the
Jubilee Fund, we thus supply a mission
object for some of the contributions, which
will commend itself to numerous friends
who are ardently attached to the mission-
ary enterprise.
PACKING FOR DEPARTURE.
With Mr. and Mrs. Moore and four
children, and all the missionaries, our
house was full during the District Meeting.
After the meeting, we had extra exertion
in preparing to leave, though we had
previously packed what we could. Mrs.
Calvert had to pack for Kandavu, and I
for a voyage to Botumah —also some things
for England, and some for Sydney. She
got through all her labours with ease, and
was well and strong throughout and got
off to Kandavu on the Ist June. Early
next morning, my house was ready for the
reception of Captain Jones, who had to
vacate Mount Vernon, before Mr. and
Mrs. Moore could take possession. I also
got all my goods on board the Wesley ;
and after I put my cabin a little in order,
I was thankful for a rest on board ship.
LAKEMBA.
On the 3rd June, I left Ovalau in the
Wesley —and we anchored behind the reef
at the lee of Lakemba. We hastened on
shore, and got the six tuns of oil ready as
fast as possible, and down to the ship.


The next morning at seven I preached
my farewell to my old Lakemba friends ;
and on that day bade good-bye to the
king. The wooden-chapel is not finished,
but will be a neat and large building, and
very easy to preach in. The people have
been too heavily taxed and too hard
worked in this circuit, in providing pay-
ment in oil for the new chapel and a new
cutter, and they have suffered loss in their
souls: and nothing can compensate for
spiritual loss.
EOTUMAH.
On the Bth we sailed, and on Sunday the
11th we anchored at Rotumah. Before
we anchored at Oinafa we were boarded
by my importunate friend, Tavo, who
longed to have the msssionary at his
town. He had become lotu, with all his
people, and had built a large chapel, with
wooden-sides and windows, and was most
desirous that a second missionary should
“ come and live with him.” I landed, and
walked to the mission station, a long two
miles on a sandy road. Mr. Fletcher was
from home preaching. Service having
commenced, I heard a Fijian preach
who had not been ten months on the
island. At the conclusion of the service,
I asked him to interpret for me to the
large congregation; hut not having been
accustomed to such work, he felt awkward,
and had to slay he could not manage it.
But Mrs. Fletcher, who was present with
her four children, stood up, and kindly
offered to relieve him and help me: so I
again had the pleasure of addressing my
Rotuman friends through a very ready
interpreter. From the chapel, we went to
the very, large mission-house, which the
natives had built—74 feet by 40 and
very high, by far the largest house on
the island. The people must have had a
mind to work, in putting up such a
dwelling for God’s servant. It was very
pleasing to observe the improved appear-
ance of the people as I passed along,
being much cleaner than when I was here
fifteen months ago.
I took with me six or eight months’
letters from England and the colonies.
They just peeped into a few, and found
that all were well at home. After tea,
Mr. F. sent to some white men living
near, and I preached at seven in English.
My welcome was most hearty. In their
very lonely position, it was manifest that
their spirits would have been depressed
had I not fulfilled my promise and their
expectation. Brethren and sisters, pray
for all missionaries and their families, and
their work —especially for those who are
in solitary places, and for those who need
special interposition and blessing from God.
Oh ! what a support and comfort and en-
couragement to the missionary and his
wife to know and “ feel that they are being
prayed for.”
Mr. Fletcher has done remarkably well
in the language and in the work. He has
had to tug hard : but he has done work at
home, built a study, and got his house
moderately comfortable, made good pro-
gress in the language, and visited the
people round the island, and helped the
teachers. Tavo, on being asked, said —
“ Mr. Fletcher too much savey (wise) in
Rotuma language. He speak all same as
Rotuma man.” And Mrs. F. greatly
commends her training at the mission in
New Zealand, cheerfully allowing her
husband to go forth from home for a week
together, managing all her household work
with little help, and daily manifesting a
quiet and admirable spirit. On Thursdays
she has a large school of girls for three
hours, and on Fridays she gives the same
time to the female class-leaders from
different towns.
The Rotumans are very wide awake, and
somewhat difficult to manage, and withal
off-hand and disrespectful, not having
benefited by their intercourse with ships
and sailors. Many of them can speak bro-
ken English, and they ask very high
prices for vegetables. Mr. F. found that
yams, taro, cocoa-nuts, etc., cost very heavy
prices if purchased ; and he wisely adopted
the easier and cheaper plan of desiring the
Christian natives to supply him in love with
the produce of the islands. This he finds to
answer well, and the daily wants of his
small establishment are nicely met, some-
times just in time. The clothes’ washing
difficulty is got over by one family taking
the task, in love, for one month, so that all
is easily though not very well done, and
all the females in that town are taught
how to wash. And a Rotuman milks and
manages the cow, a Fijian cooks and
superintends the kitchen, one woman
comes to sweep and wash the bed-room
and sitting-room, as far as the pantry door,
and another comes to wash and dress
the children, and another, I think, to
look after baby for a little time. So that,
in this very difficult place, all is managed


or borne, and things are going on smooth-
ly. It’s half the battle of life, to take
things quietly as they come—and make
the best of everything. Phil. iv. 6. 7.
The chief Marof of Noatau has built
himself a very good house since I was here ;
and desires me to send him a sofa and six
chairs by the Wesley next year, and he
will pay for them in oil. His brother
Yarea is a very pleasant looking man. A
captain who lately took him to Sydney
speaks in high terms of his conduct through-
out the voyage, and during his stay in
Sydney. He did not smoke or drink, or
act unbecomingly in anything. A long
voyage affords an admirable opportunity
for forming a very correct notion of a
man’s real character. I visited the king,
and was sorry to find him still a heathen.
He kindly gave me a splendid mat. On
asking him if I could help him in any way,
he said he should be obliged to me, if I
could spare him a chair. He was very
cheerful, and said any could lotu that de-
sired. I sent him a chair, a Fijian bowl,
and a slate and pencil, advising him to
ask for a teacher and learn to write. I
was much encouraged to leave good advice
behind me; as I found that many local
preachers had given up the useless and
injurious practice of smoking soon after I
left last time, and the chief had stopped
the dancing at a house near the chapel,
after I complained about it. Duties and
labour are ours : the good results we may
safely leave with God.
As there are houses near the mission
house, on each side, Mr. Fletcher thought
it best not to put up .the wooden house in
a position exposed to so much danger from
fire. We asked Marof for a plot clear of
houses; which he at once obtained from
the owners, and gave to the mission by a
Deed of Gift which we had executed, and
which I brought to Fiji and deposited in the
iron chest given by Mr. Chubb. The land
is 60 fathoms square.
The Society has increased about 200
this year. Our people now outnumber
the heathen and papists. More books are
much wanted, and God’s special blessing
is absolutely required, to effect a gracious
change in the hearts of the people. I
bring with me some elementary books, to
pass through the press in Sydney; and
Mr. Fletcher will soon be able to forward
some portions of the Scriptures, which
we hope the Bible Society in Sydney will
print.
It was quite evident that a missionary
was not there too soon as his judgment
and labours were absolutely required to
set things in order, and manage the work :
but Mr. 11,I 1 , is of opinion that the difficul-
ties would have been very much greater
in time past had a missionary been present.
The work of the kingdom has gone on
without observation or show. The still
small voice has produced amazing effects
so that the lotu has now got good hold, by
the continued and faithful labours and
prayers of men from among themselves,
with whom was connected a power not
suspected as likely to conquer their super-
stitions and purposes, but which is now
found to have gained an influence that
preponderates. And just at this point the
missionary comes in when most needed,
his path being smoothed by the achieve-
ments already made. I trust all will go
on well, and that the remaining half of
the people will soon become worshippers
of Jehovah.
From the number and healthy appear-
ance of the children in Rotumah, I judge
the population to be on the increase,
which is, I fear, a rare thing in the
South Seas. The Rotumans, when right
in their souls, are likely to go forth as
evangelists to other islands in regions
beyond. I met my old servant, Kaitu, a
Rotuman, who took the Gospel to Nuku-
fetau, one of De Peyster’s group, situate
near the line. All the people are lotu
through this instrumentality. He had
lately come to Rotumah with four Nuku-
fetauans in search of a teacher and books.
EETUEN TO FIJI. —WAIKIKI.
Having made all haste to get the- goods
landed, we left on the 14th. We brought
with us Captain Hovill and his crew.
Their vessel the Star of Eve, had dragged
her anchor and become a complete wreck
at Rotumah. She belongs to the same
owner as the All Serene and Margaret
Thompson both wrecked. We boi’e
away for the south of Fiji. On the
17th, we entered the group. When near
the island of Kioa, where the Wesley had to
anchor for oil, Captain Welch gave me a
large boat, and I went towards Wairiki,
on the island of Taviune, where I spent
the Sabbath and preached twice. Only 60
attended the service, as nearly all have
become papists by order from the much-
dreaded chiefs. On my arrival, I called
upon the king, and visited him again


after the morning service, and in conver-
sation rehearsed to him and his attendants
most of my sermon. He entered heartily
into it, and helped me with an appropriate
illustration. I called upon several papists,
and reminded them of our claim upon
them, by the labours of most devoted
men—Hunt, Lyth, Cross, Williams, and
Hazlewood, and urged them to cease from
the anger through which alone they had
left us and attached themselves to popery.
I visited a noted warrior, the chief of
Tuniloa, who resides on a hill, and left
with him a parting word. The king’s
sister was much ashamed, and she and
many others are evidently very desirous
to get back to the good pasture. The two
priests residing here have at last got a
tolerable house built, but have not yet
been able to induce the king and their
numerous followers to build them a chapel.
The king promised me that our chapel
should soon be repaired.
NOBLE CONTEIBETION.
On Monday I went to Fawn Harbour,
where our head native missionary resides.
The people in this circuit have contributed
four tuns of oil towards the mission fund
and for Testaments. I preached, and
visited the school, which is well managed.
VOYAGE TO OVALAIT AND BALT.
The mission schooner having run over
for the oil, I went in her to Ovalau, where
I arrived early on Monday the 26th. We
sent to Bau, desiring Mr. Langham to
arrange for the ordination on Thursday.
I purchased 30 sheets of corrugated iron
for Mr. Fletcher, as it answers admirably
for rain water as well as for covering for
houses. Mr. Hennings paid me £5 as his
subscription. I was very busy all the day;
and, on the following morning Mr. Moore
and I left for Bau in his boat. Having
no sail, the four natives had to pull all the
way —not less than 25 miles. We called
at a mission island half way ; and ordered
a pot of bananas to be cooked by the two
men in charge, setting our own men to
catch a fowl for us two. They wisely
chased the poor fowls until they caught
three—thus showing themselves sharp fel-
lows. It was dark before we could reach
Bau. I called for a canoe that was sailing
past, and asked for a psssage. Mr. Moore
said he would stick to the boat; but, when
he saw that he would be long behind me,
he also embarked, and we were soon on
shore.
VEWA MISSIONAEY MEETING.
Next day we went to the Yewa mission-
ary meeting. The Yewans have done
much good in Fiji; hut now they are few
and feeble. The chief is of rank, his
mother having being a Bauan, and he is in
earnest to get and do good. This island is
surrounded by people, and answers well
for our work in this populous and extensive
district.
OEDINATION SEEVICE.
On the 29th Daniel Afu and Joseph
Nokilevu,' a Tongan and Fijian, having
been faithful during their four years of
trial, were ordained. They made a noble
statement. The six missionaries present
with Joel Bulu ordained by the imposition
of hands, and I spoke from the first portion
of Scripture read on the occasion. I ad-
ministered the sacrament to the newly
ordained men, to the missionaries and
their wives, who were joined by the
king and queen, and their eldest daugh-
ter, who is a very good woman and a class-
leader, and by the wife of a devoted native
missionary. It was a time of refreshing.
TWO MISSIONAEY MEETINGS AT BAU.
Next day we had the Bau missionary
meeting. 320 gallons of oil, and £3 10s.
were contributed. As many were absent,
some on a war expedition to Ba, where a
teacher and five persons have been killed
and eaten—the teacher being chosen as the
repast of the chief who killed them—
another meeting is to be held on their
arrival that they may share in the duty
and privilege of giving to the cause.
EEWA AND MISSION TO INTEEIOE.
On Sabbath the 2nd of July I preached
my farewell sermon at Bau. On the 4th
I went to Eewa. On the sth to the new
station up the river, occupied by Mr.
Baker, who after pioneering and faithful
services in other parts, is our missionary to
the interior. All were busy at this site on
the hill. I trust many heathen will soon
hear words of salvation, and that the work
of Christ will spread and prosper. On
our return I addressed a large congrega-
tion from various parts of this very large
circuit and Rowans, most being native
missionaries, teachers and local preachers.
Next I called upon Mr. Storck, a Ger-
man, who has six acres of very thriving
coffee planted, and has long cultivated
cotton. I obtained from him several kinds
of Fijian birds which I had desired him to


stuff for Mr. Gurney, of Norwich. He
gave me four fine cobs of Indian corn.
In the afternoon I went on board the
Wesley —she having anchored at Lauthula,
7 miles from Eewa, at eleven in the fore-
noon. On reaching the Wesley, we found
that Mr. Carey, by good management, and
the surprising energy of his teachers and
converts, had got all their six tuns of oil
on board. On the following morning, we
were off at ten —the Wesley not having
been twenty-four hours at anchor. On
the Bth, I met Mrs. Calvert quite well at
Kandavu, and found that Mrs. White had
been confined four days, and she and her
son were doing well.
KANDAVU.
On Sunday morning I preached in
native. In the afternoon, Mr. Nettleton
preached in English, in Mr. White’s house,
to us and the people from the Wesley.
The sermon was remarkably good, on
Capernaum’s great sin and corresponding
curse, and I have good hope that the
word preached will result in lasting good.
On the 11th Mrs. Calvert and I went to
the Richmond 'Theological Institution to
pay our last visit to Mr. and Mrs.
Nettleton, and to bid farewell to the
students. The students’ wives brought us
presents of fowls, turkeys and mats —and
two living turtles were given to us. There
will be the full number of forty-two
students this year. In the afternoon, I
addressed them. We had a gracious
visit from on high. The appearance of
the students, and that of their wives and
children, was very satisfactory. One young
man has expressed a wish to remain three or
four years ; and all appreciate and improve
the great privilege here afforded. Some
of those who left this year have been
remaining some weeks at Ovalau. Mrs.
Moore availed herself of the services of
the wives in washing, etc., and writes of
their great improvement. The cotton
plantations are doing well, and will
greatly lessen the expenses. Only half
the usual grant is asked for this year.
On Wednesday morning, I preached to
the teachers and stewards from the various
parts of Kandavu. Mr. White and I
visited a chief of rank and influence, who
has long been a papist; but who lately, in
his affliction joined us. He reminded me
that I had in a former interview, advised
him to pray earnestly in secret to the
Lord. He appears quite decided, and
his loss is much felt by the priests. In
the afternoon, I baptized Mr. and Mrs.
White’s third child, and gave an address.
On Thursday morning I found that I
had overtaxed my strength, by excitement,
want of sleep, and labour; and I felt unfit
to administer the Sacrament at dawn of
day to the teachers and local preachers,
previous to our departure. My head was
swimming. I had a hot bath, about 96
degrees, in which I laid for some time;
and then washed over with a bucket of
cold water. This afforded me perfect
relief, as it has done on former occasions
under similar circumstances. I then joined
Mr. White and the two native missionaries
in full connexion, and we administered to
127 labourers. I gave a short address.
We felt it good to be there. Many were
absent. It was found that they had been
left to take special charge of our societies,
as French priests have lately settled down
on the island, and require watching. In
prayer, Joel Nau said very emphatically,
no matter how bad man is, Christ can
save him.
Two turtles, ducks, fowls, native cloth,
cotton, spears, clubs, were presented to
Mrs. Calvert and myself, accompanied by
chants prepared for the occasion, referring
to our having twice laboured in Fiji, and
asking us still to do what we could to help
forward the work.
After the service, pigs, bananas, sugar-
cane, yams, fowls, etc., etc., were taken on
board. The Wesley's boats were hoisted
on deck, and all was ready for sea : but a
calm afforded us a little rest. Here as
well as everywhere else the missionaries
greatly facilitated the movements of the
Wesley , by getting the oil on board with
despatch.
DEPASTURE FROM FIJI.
Before sunrise next morning, the sailors
were singing merrily at the windlass, and
the Wesley's bell rang for us. We here
went through our severest pang in parting.
Our wives had a hard struggle: and
each of us shed many tears, and off-
ered earnest prayers on behalf of each
other. Our best and most faithful ser-
vant who has been with us since our
arrival, was with us to the last, and was
overpowered with distress. On the 14th
July we left Fiji, two months and five
days after the arrival of the Wesley ,
during which time we have been to
Eotumah and back ; and the Wesley was


nine days at Kioa to take in oil on freight,
for which she will earn upwards of £IOO.
These hare been four happy and busy
years. We feel that we did right in coming
back for another term of service; and
though we are persuaded that it is right
for us now to leave, to take charge of our be-
loved children, who have been treated with
extreme kindness by numerous friends
during the whole period of our absence from
them, yet we have pain and sorrow in
parting with brethren and sisters and con-
verts, and the work we love so much.
THE “ WESLEY ” AND CAPTAIN WELCH.
The “ Wesley” is in first-rate condition
and does her work admirably well. Cap-
tain Welch is most attentive to his
duties, and careful without being timid. It
is well to have a man in charge who has
a hearty interest in missions, and it is a
pleasure to sail with him. Everything on
board is comfortable. He is well backed
up by his mate, and an efficient crew.
THANKS TO THE GENERAL SECRETARY.
Accept my best thanks for your corres-
pondence, and for your prompt and kind
attention to all our wants. We found our
goods by the “ Wesley ” were all right;
and all in our District readily express their
feeling of satisfaction at your appointment
as General Secretary—as they find in you
the same sympathy and hearty co-operation
which characterized your predecessor. I
trust you will long be spared, and have
health to fulfil all the duties connected
with your office, and that you will have
great comfort, blessing and success.
THE AUSTRALASIAN CONNEXION CAN MAN-
AGE THE WORK IT HAS UNDERTAKEN.
For some years a full supply of foreign
labourers must be given to Fiji, as well as
to the Friendly Islands. The work so
auspiciously commenced 30 years ago, and
vigorously carried on to the present, must
not be retarded or damaged. A success-
ful experiment, proving that the gospel
and divine grace are still the same, is affor-
ded by what has been effected by small
instrumentality in the South Seas. The
churches in England, the Colonies, and else-
where, have been greatly benefited by the
earnest prayers, liberality, sacrifices and
labours made specially on behalf of the
South Seas ; and Christians are stimulated
and encouraged by these glorious results
to make special effort in full confidence for
all our fallen race. Had the islands of the
sea been left to England, now that the
myriads of large and populous countries
demand special attention, Fiji might have
been neglected. But Divine Providence
has placed the work under the Australasian
Methodist Church, where the missionary
spirit and responsibility are necessary for its
own well-being; and the friends there
nobly engaged, when these missions were
entrusted .to their care, that “ the missions
undertaken by the Australian Connexion
shall not in any respect suffer, but by aug-
mented contributions in the Colonies, shall
be maintained in all their extent and effici-
ency.As yet, the demands have been so
pressingly urgent in the home work, that
you have not done all that was purposed and
promised; but we gratefully remember
and acknowledge Australian liberality in
means and men, promptly and nobly ren-
dered when it was voluntary on your part,
and when the Colonies required all the means
and all the men they could raise as much
as they now require them. And now that
they are pledged and responsible, the
case only need be known and felt properly,
and the case will be amply met, and
England will shortly be entirely relieved
from the work which the Colonies can
well manage alone if they will. And it
will do your churches a great deal of good,
to be large-hearted and liberal for the
world, as well as for your own circuits,
allowing missions to have a prominent
place in your prayers, and gifts, and plead-
ings.
I bid you farewell, praying that great
prosperity may be granted to the Austra-
lasian Connexion in every branch of its
home and foreign work. My wife and I
are very desirous to go on at once; but, as
the English winter is at hand, we will not
venture, but comply with the wishes of
yourself and others, and tarry in the
Colonies until your next Conference, so
that we may land at the best season at
home —where, as long as I am spared, I
shall always have deepest interest in the
Fijian work.
I am, my dear Brother,
Affectionately yours,
JAMES CALVERT.


