









LETTERS
FROM
JAMES EARL OF PERTH,
LORD CHANCELLOR OF SCOTLAND, &c.
TO HIS SISTER,
THE COUNTESS OF ERROLL,
AND OTHER MEMBERS OF HIS FAMILY.
EDITED BY
WILLIAM JERDAN, M.R.S.L.,
AND CORR. MEM. OF THE REAL ACADEMIA DE LA HISTORIA OF SPAIN.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE CAMDEN SOCIETY,
BY JOHN BOWYER NICHOLS AND SON, PARLIAMENT STREET.
M.DCCC.XLV.


[no. XXXIII.]


COUNCIL
OF
THE CAMDEN SOCIETY,
FOR THE YEAR 1845.
President ,
THE RIGHT HON. LORD BRAYBROOKE, F.S.A.
THOMAS AMYOT, ESQ. F.R.S., Treas. S.A. Director.
JOHN PAYNE COLLIER, ESQ. F.S.A. Treasurer.
C. PURTON COOPER, ESQ. Q.C., D.C.L., F.R.S., F.S.A.
BOLTON CORNEY, ESQ.
T. CROFTON CROKER, ESQ. F.S.A., M.R.I.A.
SIR HENRY ELLIS, K.H., F.R.S., Sec. S.A.
THE REV. JOSEPH HUNTER, F.S.A.
PETER LEVESQUE, ESQ. F.S.A.
SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H., F.R.S., F.S.A.
THOMAS JOSEPH PETTIGREW, ESQ. F.R.S., F.S.A.
THOMAS STAPLETON, ESQ. F.S.A.
WILLIAM J. THOMS, ESQ. F.S.A., Secretary.
SIR HARRY VERNEY, BART.
ALBERT WAY, ESQ. M.A., DIR. S.A.
THOMAS WRIGHT, ESQ. M.A., F.S.A.


The Council of the Camden Society desire it to be under-
stood that they are not answerable for any opinions or observa-
tions that may appear in the publications; the Editors
of the several Works being alone responsible for the same.


TO THE
LADY WILLOUGHBY DE ERESBY.
Dear lady Willoughby,
Indebted to your kindness for the MS. from which
the following volume is printed, I cannot withstand the
inclination to inscribe it with your name; and the more
especially as it affords me an opportunity to state how
much the task of editing has been rendered a pleasure by
grateful recollections of the beautiful country perilled
and lost by your ancestors in what they deemed a sacred
cause, and justly and happily restored to their de-
scendants. That your ladyship and your children’s chil-
dren, to the latest posterity, may continue to enjoy this
noble possession is not mine alone, but the fervent and
heartfelt wish of all who have had the good fortune to
partake of the refined hospitalities of Drummond Castle;
and, whilst delighting in its social and intellectual inter-
course, to revel in those glorious Highland sports which,


with health and excitement in their train, give a zest to
life it would be difficult to surpass within the sphere of
humanity.
Deeply are my thanks due for receptions of this kind,
never more powerfully to be felt than, when relieving
literary labours, they seemed as if, in the words of Shak-
speare, they would make “ nature immortal.” Will you,
dear Lady Willoughby, accept them from the heart of
your ladyship’s obliged and faithful servant,
W. JERDAN.


INTRODUCTION.
Of the line and clan Drummond, it would be beyond
the purpose of a few introductory remarks like the pre-
sent to enter into a long genealogical history. Suffice it
to say, that tradition carries them far back, and that they
figure among the dim scenes of Scottish story, where even
the most prominent images are seen in a very shadowy
and uncertain light: for their founder, a Hungarian
leader, came in with Edgar Atheling; and the De Dromonds
of Cargill and Stobhall were the ancestors of those en-
nobled by the title of Perth. But, without endeavouring
to illuminate these darkling times, well may it suffice to
satisfy the utmost ambition for ancient descent, the glory
of race, and the pride of birth, to go back five hundred
years, and find that King Robert the Third, son of the
High Steward of Scotland, the first of that royal house
and the successor of the Bruce, married the Lady Anna-
bels Drummond, daughter of Sir John Drummond of


Stobhall;* that they held, together, the Earldom of Atholl
during the life of his father, by a charter dated in 1357 ;
that in 1390 he succeeded to the throne; and that James I.
was their offspring.
Thus royally allied, the subsequent intermarriages of
the Drummond chiefs and their families connected them,
in the closest ties, with most of the greatest earls and
barons of the land.
Of all the devoted adherents to the dynasty of the
Stuarts, none can claim a more distinguished rank than
the house of Drummond. Their fidelity ran in their
blood, and was part of their nature, from the royal union
of their exalted predecessor to the last ruin of the hopes
of her unfortunate descendants. For adhering to the
Martyr, King Charles the First, a fine of five thousand
pounds was levied by Cromwell on the loyal lord of Stob-
hall; and what his successors endured in the same cause,
generation after generation, for more than a hundred
years, is told in a series of chivalrous adventures, and
bravely-borne sufferings, which do honour to human con-
stancy, and reflect undying lustre on the immovable
truth and pure attachment of the men, who thus risked
all that could be dear to men for what they held to be
the right.
Nor is it a difficult thing to account for the unbounded
love bestowed upon, and the mighty sacrifices made for
* An estate belonging to Lord and Lady Willoughby de Eresby.—Ed.


the hapless race of Stuart. Their unprovoked misfor-
tunes, like the infliction of Fate in Greek Tragedy, natu-
rally excited the sympathies of the feeling and the good,
and the rainbow of their sad destiny only shone the
brighter in the eyes of their adherents as it was reflected
from clouds of overwhelming sorrow and unavailing tears.
And who shall deny that their excellent accomplishments
and qualities, and being intellectually in advance of the
stormy and unsettled times in which they lived and
reigned, deserved for them such utter devotedness as the
Drummond, and many of their compeers, displayed.
Worthless men and bad rulers never won the affections
of mankind to dare forfeiture, exile, poverty, and death
itself, for them.
Political authors and partisans may argue as they please
upon the subject, but three centuries of wrong and blood
must ever raise a strong emotion in the heart when a
kingly Stuart is named. And again, let us ask what
should impeach this sentiment ? their personal conduct,
their government, their extreme follies, their offences,
or their crimes ? James the First was a glorious prince,
the idol of his people, murdered by the barbarous nobles
whose oppressions he restrained; James the Second was
a minor, left to be torn to pieces by the factions that had
destroyed his father, till he mastered them by his genius
and overthrew the feudal system in Scotland, and was
becoming the greatest potentate of his time, when acci-
dently killed at the siege of Roxburghe Castle. James the
camd. soc. b


Third delighted in architecture, music, and the fine arts,
and his minions (as his masons, musicians, and painters
were called by his rude and turbulent aristocracy), who
ministered to these pursuits, were persecuted to the death,
and the king himself ultimately slain by rebellion. James
the Fourth, his son, the brave, magnificent, and generous,
adored by all ranks, fell on the fatal field of Flodden.
James the Fifth was a year old when he succeeded
his father, (a delightful poet too, as the first of his name
had been,) was disgracefully betrayed by conspirators
who had made his life a torture, and either died of grief or
was poisoned at the age of twenty-six. His daughter
Mary, the lovely queen, whose tragic tale is almost an
epitome of the woes of all her race, has within the last few
years had her memory rescued from obloquy by research
into authentic history, and the mountain of calumnies
which have been heaped upon her and the Stuart name,
by treacherous and violent enemies, has, at least in her
case, the most false and infamous of them all, been swept
from credence in English and Scottish records. James
the Sixth of Scotland, and the First of England, was
“ a pedant; ” so have adverse historians represented
him; but blessed is the country of whose monarch
nothing worse can be said than that he was pedantic.
The long peace he preserved for the United Kingdom,
produced that idleness of ease, and provocation to inter-
nal intrigue, which finally doomed his amiable and virtu-
ous son, the First Charles, to the scatfold.
Charles the Second was restored after years of exile,


and was probably no better than the period in which
he flourished, and as dissolute as the manners of the
Continent, and the reaction in England from extreme
hypocrisy, were likely to make him; but he was a good-
natured and kind-hearted king. His brother, James, lost
three crowns for the religious faith he professed; the
valiant English Admiral was a bigo't, and a combination
of factions destitute of any principle prevailed against him
and overthrew his throne.
Such were the Stuarts, and such their calamitous
course. Were they faultless ? No ! Were they inferior
to or more vicious than their contemporary sovereigns in
the civilized world ? Certainly the reverse! Who couples
with the name of any one of them the epithets cruel,
savage, barbarous, perfidious, blood-thirsty, or tyrannical ?
None! Adversaries inspired by religious differences and
conflicting politics have endeavoured to point out weak-
nesses and errors in the characters of some of them,
and prove that they were—fallible human beings; but
the glance we have cast hurriedly over their melancholy
fates, varieties of premature and appalling deaths, by
assassination, by rebellion, by war, or by the executioner’s
axe, will demonstrate that they were indeed more sinned
against than sinning, and admit us to the understanding
of the grounds upon which they were almost adored by
the thousands and tens of thousands who were ready to
lay down their lives, and did die for them in many a gory
bed, and in many an ignominious and more horrible
sacrifice.


We are not contending for the abstract of the right or
the wrong, but explaining the natural spring and origin
of that spirit, the lavish and inextinguishable outpouring
of which glorified the name of Drummond, and of every
Jacobite* whom a true sense of patriotism and loyalty led
to risk their all of fortune and property, to peril every
domestic tie and happiness, and conquer or perish with the
king of their hearts and choice, and unalterable allegiance.
The principle is not to be tested by success or defeat,
or by the difference of pretensions or revolutions; it
is One unassailable in its purity whithersoever directed,
and divine in its stedfastness wheresoever bestowed.
Of the noblest illustrators of this principle, the three
Thanes of Perth, who took prominent parts in the falling
fortunes of the Stuarts, were splendid examples. They
fearlessly and chivalrously set their all upon the cast,
even when most desperate, and they died—banished —in
a foreign clime, within the space of thirty years.
James the fourth Earl, son of James the third of that
title and Lady Anne Gordon, eldest daughter of George
second Marquess of Huntly, was born in 1648. He went
through a course of philosophy at the university of St.
Andrew’s, and afterwards visited France. He was served
* In this sense we shall be fully understood when we say that the same
principle which made the Cavalier and Jacobite enthusiastic royalists, to a
degree far above the feeling of altered times (when sovereigns are viewed
with more utilitarian calculation and philosophizing scrutiny), would consti-
tute the most loyal adherents to the throne of another dynasty, when settled
and acknowledged by constitutional succession.


heir to his father in 1675 ; was sworn a privy councillor
in 1678; and, having joined the opposition to the Duke
of Lauderdale, was, on his fall, constituted Justice-General
of Scotland in May, 1682. In 1684 he was promoted to
the high office of Chancellor of Scotland, and appointed
Sheriff principal of the county of Edinburgh. On the
accession of James 11. he declared himself to be a Roman
Catholic. His correspondence in this volume shows the
sincerity of his conversion, and the zeal with which he
laboured to impress his opinions upon his nearest and
dearest relatives. Macky has drawn his character as
“ passionately proud; ” adding that he “ told a story very
prettily; was of a middle stature, with a quick look, and
brown complexion.”
The portion of his life described in the following
letters, is, we think, curious and characteristic.
Having resided two years at Rome, he was recalled to
St. Germain’s by King James, who created him Duke of
Perth, and Knight of the Garter, and appointed him First
Lord of the Bedchamber, Chamberlain to the Queen, and
Governor to the Prince of Wales. In possession of the
highest marks of royal favour and gratitude, he died there
on the 11th of March, 1716, in the 68th year of his age.
There is a portrait of him in Drummond Castle, painted
by Sentlirre in 1714, and having all the appearance of a
hearty old man.
There is also at Drummond Castle a splendid edition
of Roman Classics, Virgil, Horace, &c., presented to him
in a complimentary (i ex dono ” of Louis XIV., and with


his Majesty’s cypher L surmounted by a double French
crown emblazoned on the vellum, which is also richly
adorned with fleurs delis.
He married three times; first, in 1670, Lady Jane
Douglas, a daughter of William first Marquess of Dou-
glas, by whom he had James Lord Drummond, (who suc-
ceeded to the dignity of Duke of Perth conferred by the
monarch of St. Germain’s,) and two daughters, Mary
Countess Marischall and Lady Anne, both frequently
mentioned in this volume.
His second wife was Lilias, Countess dowager of Tulli-
bardine, and daughter of Sir James Drummond, of Ma-
chany, by whom he had John, afterwards styled Duke of
Perth from 1747 to 1757, and three other children who
died young.
His third wife, and the companion of his exile, was his
cousin Lady Mary Gordon, * by whom he had Edward,
who, after the death of his brother John in 1757, assumed
the title of Duke of Perth, and died at Paris in 1760;
Lord William Drummond, who died young at St. Ger-
main’s, and Lady Theresa, who entered a nunnery.
James his son, as Lord Drummond, was attainted for
the rebellion of Fifteen; from which he escaped, with the
Earls of Melfort and Mar, and the Chevalier, from Mont
rose in February, and reached Gravelines in five days •
but he had taken care to dispone or make over his’
estates to his infant son James, born in 1713, whose
* See note at p. 59.


mother was Lady Jean, only daughter of George first
Duke of Gordon, who lived to an extreme old age, and
died at Stobhall in 1773. After the battle of Sheriff-
muir, her brother, Lord Huntly, rode to her at Drum-
mond Castle to convey the dubious intelligence of that
fight to her and her baby boy. Her husband assumed
the title of Duke, conferred upon his father, and died
at Paris in 1730.
James, the child alluded to, through whom the estates
were saved, took the ducal title, and the Marquess of
Tweeddale, Secretary of State to George 11. at a later date,
styles him in his despatches, “ commonly called the Duke
of Perth.” He and his brother, Lord John Drummond,*
were two of the seven persons who in 1740 signed the
Association to venture lives and fortunes to restore the
Stuarts; and in fulfilment of this vow he shared in all
the perils of Forty-five, and died of the fatigues and vex-
ations he had undergone at sea in his attempt to escape,
in 1746, aged 33, without issue.
Other needful particulars of the pedigree are appended
in our notes, and we will only add to this (we hope not
* Lord John was in the French service, and raised the royal Scotch
regiment for that crown. He landed at Montrose in 1745, and followed
the standard of his clan. Since this volume was in the press we have
received from a literary antiquary, engaged in similar researches, the fol-
lowing curious intelligence respecting the Keith family. He states that “he
has in his possession a MS. of Marshal Keith’s correspondence with Lord
John Drummond at the time the latter was in Spain, in which, amongst
other matters, the writer gives an account of the Empress Catherine’s
proposal to marry him.”— Ed.


tedious) preface a singular anecdote, demonstrative of the
intensity of Jacobite feelings long after its hopes had
vanished, and sound policy, justice, and mercy, had re-
conciled it to the reigning dynasty of Hanover. When
a considerable portion of the Drummond estates were
restored to the heir (no poor boon, though burthened,
dilapidated, lopped, and impoverished), he found upon
them four settlements of cottages in which the soldiery
had been located after the battle of Culloden to keep down
the rebels. There were thirty at Ballibeg, near Drum-
mond Castle, another division at Callander, a third at
Auchterarder, and a fourth at Stobhall. When the occu-
pants of Ballibeg died off, it is a singular fact (as it was
a singular enjoyment) that by the formation of a fine
sheet of water every trace of their residence was obliter-
ated. There is now the beautiful lake, gleaming with
fish and haunted by the wild birds of the Highlands ;
and we believe the deepest diver of them all could not
discover one stone upon another of the cottages which
held the Jacobites in awe a hundred years ago.
Lo ! the change. Here, on this very spot, our youthful
and gracious Queen Victoria, with her accomplished and
beloved consort, Prince Albert, passed a pleasant time in
her visit to Scotland, but a few short months since j
entertained by her own hereditary Lord High Chamber-
lain, Lord Willoughby de Eresby, and the loyal, hospi-
table, and worthily most popular descendants of the
Stuart-devoted House of Drummond !


LETTERS
FROM
JAMES EARL OF PERTH.
Sterling Castle, 29th Dec. 1688,
My Dearest Sister,*
I cannot express how much your most obligeing letter of the
26 th inst. was refreshing to me in this my present condition, which
that you may the better know, I will inform you of what happened
since my Lord Erroll parted from me.
Upon Tuesday was seven-night, Blairf came from Edinburgh
and told me that the K— [King James ll.] was gone into
France, &c., and that if I did not immediately gett away I was a
gone man. That he had provided a ship which would be ready
to saill next night by 5 o’clock at night from Bruntisland, and
bid me make all haste to that place, for the snow on the
Ochells was deep, and if I rode in day-light I could not
escape; and haveing said this away he went towards Bruntis-
land, and left my wife and me to disguise ourselves the best
we could, which indeed she did so well that I could not
CAMO. SOC.
B
* To this sister (Lady Anna Drummond, Countess of Errol, to whom these letters are
addressed,) the Chancellor sent for safe keeping some heir-looms of rare value, which,
with a list of them, are still preserved at Drummond Castle. They are described as a
basin and ewer, two chalices, and a salt-cellar, presented to the chief of her race by
Annabella Drummond, Queen of Robert 111. and mother of James I. Also a pearl
necklace, of pearls from the river Tay, worn by Lady Anne Gordon, who married a Drum-
mond, and whose portrait remains, painted with this remarkable native ornament round
her neck.—Ed.
t Blair Drummond, his factor, and ancestor of the present family of that ilk.— Ed.


have known her, but I could find no raeanes to keep myself from
being known to every body ; she went one way and I another from
Drummond* about 6 o’clock at night. She w r ent only to Dunning.f
But I went over the hills through heaps of snow, at a place where
never one crossed before, and gott before day two miles beyond
Kinross, where my master, Mr. David Drummond, whose cloak
bag I carried, was, and I staid untill one a’clock afternoon next
day, which was Wednesday, and then through unfrequented ways
we gott to Bruntisland about 5 a’clock at night, but to our ruine
(tho’ my wife was already before us and nothing on our part
hindred,) we wanted two men of our ship’s company, and so not
only were forced to lye in a common inn that night, but to go over
to Leith road and lye 5 hours untill our master went ashoar and
took up two men and brought aboard; so about one a’clock after-
noon we came under sail and with an easie gale made towards the
mouth of the Firth. My wife was known to nobody, nor did any
suspect her with us: But two fellows who lay in a bed in a room
without that in which 1 lay at Bruntisland knew me, and one of
them run to Kirkaldy about 10 a’clock, before ever we gott out of
Leith road, and told I was aboard of such a ship with four horse-
load of money with me; that the councell would give 1000 lib.
to any who would apprehend me, &c. and sett all the town in an
an allarm. And one Baily Boswel (who owed many obligations
to our brother) animated the people so both by expressions and
example that 25 of the desperatest fellows of the place followed
him to man a passage boat (an excellent sayler) to pursue us, who
dreamed no danger save from storm or Dunkerkers.
Boswel’s wife, fearing we had some with us to defend us, waded
into the water and took back her husband; so one Wilson, a
notorious thief who had been 15 years a Buccaneer (if you have
* Drummond Castle, in Perthshire, the residence of the Chiefs of the Clan Drummond ;
and now the seat of Lord and Lady Willoughby de Eresby ; the latter of whom is the re-
presentative of that faithful and gallant race.—Ed.
’(' A small village at the foot of the Ocliell chain of mountains. —Ed.


yet heard of that infamous sort of men), headed the rabble, and
with saills and oars (for now it was almost quite calm) they fol-
lowed us untill near night that they overtook us. Dr. Nicolson
(who only accompanyed us) began to dread that the boat meant us
no good, as soon as ever he saw her, but I did not. However
when she came near the master hid my wife and me.
They came aboard like so many furys and asked for me; they
searched long and had it not been for the falshood of one of our
men they had gone off again; but one of our people betrayed me,
and so they broke open the place where we were hid with hatchets:
my wife would have fain gott out first to have exposed herself to
their fury, but I pulled her back, and then they pulled me out,
threw off my hat and periwig, and clapt their bayonets to my
breast, for a great while keeping me in the expectation of being
murdered. I cryed to them (for they were all clamorous at once)
to save my life, which at last they said they would do, but they
pulled us up out of the cabine, and so soon as my wife could gett
on her cloaths (for she was in men’s disguise) they forced us into
the boat. By this time it was night and we within 3 miles of the
Bass, so that to have sailed two hours sooner had preserved us.
They begun to smoak tobacco, and speak filthy language beside my
wife, so soon as ever we were into the boat, and used us with all
the barbarity Turks could have done, keeping my wife five hours
without any shoes, or any thing on her head. And having rode
24 miles the day before, being with child, you may judge if the
condition she is now in be not bad enough. They had not sailed
and rowed many hours from the ship (into the which they had left
11 of their men to bring her back) when they heard a musket
shot from her, and took it for a sign to go back; wee must go and
see how all went with their comerads; and back we did goe, and
found they had gained our skipper to play the rogue to us, for he
pretended they had stolen the stock-purse of the ship with 1 OOlb.
in it, and there we must all be searched. One fellow moved, That
if I had any gold or money I would give it them to keep for me;


seeing at Kirkaldy the rabble would robb me undoubtedly: I told
them that if they came with a warrand to take me, I was to yield
to the terms of it, if not, and that they would use violence, I must
submitt: But I saw no colour they had to ask any money: how-
ever, finding they would search and haveing what I had no mind
to loose, I resolved to give them six-score guineas I had in a bag,
provideing they would be answerable to me for it, and I my-self
choosed one to give it to. All night we were whiles in the boat,
whiles in the ship; and about 9 a’clock on friday they put us ashoar
at the peer of Kirkaldy, exposed to the mockery and hatred of the
people. The Baillys came and mett me, and denyed that any of
them or the substantial! people in the town either had authorized
or did approve of the matter ; then I pleaded to be sett aboard of
our ship that I might be gone, but they (haveing really edged on
the people to take me) pretended they durst not do that without
a warrand from the Councell, and in a solemn procession they
carried me to an inn, accompanyed with the whole rabble of that
place, the better sort being in the windows. At the inn they would
not let me send away some letters I had wrote the night before in
the ship, untill the rabble had them read to them : And the Bailies
(Louden and Crawford, men who held their places of me,) told me
that only Baily Boswel had interest with the people, and so all ap-
plication must be made to him. We had not been half a quarter of
an hour in the inn, when the Baillies called for my gold, which the
Buccaneer produced, haveing first taken the half of itj next the gold
must be deposited into the hands of Baily Boswel (the tribune of the
people) to be theirs if the Councell so ordered it, and in the next
place £IOO sterling which I had in money aboard was to be put
in that Baily’s hand like wages; or else I w r as to be cut in collops
(for so the rabble swore when they drew their swords about the
house to that end). I his being done likewise, their next desire was
that I should he immediately carryed to their tolbooth, for the
inn was too good for me; which was immediately done, and then
we called to gett a little meat, for we had watched and fasted long.


Before the meat was gott ready, they sent over two of their
number to Edinburgh to gett the Councell to aprove of what
was done, and they were not gone an hour, when the people
begune to fancy that some people might rescue me and burn
their town, and all the town got into a tumult to have me
immediately sent to Edinburgh (tho’ the tyde did not serve,
and tho’ they knew that at Edinburgh I had been torn to
pieces, for there they believed that Joliny Wallace was com-
manded by me to tire upon the people and to shoot grois and
shott.) With much difficulty this was averted, and on Saturday we
gott an account of the Councells approveing of my being appre-
hended, and that the Earl of Mar had gott orders to carry me
prisoner thither. On Saturday night Earl Mar * came and intended
to have carryed me away on Sunday : but (upon what design God
only knows) one made a story, about 10 a'clock on Sunday, as if
Pitkellony had gott together 500 men, and came down to Kirkaldy,
spareing neither sex nor age, burning and slaying: so the whole
people left houses and churches, the streets were filled with noys
and clamour, women wringing their hands, and men curseing the
day that their town ever medled with me. But at last it turned
to fury and they began t° call for cords to dragg me down the
t° booth stairs by the neck; and thus matters continued until they
sent people six or seven miles off, to try the verity of the cause of
t lem fear. The hole we lay into was cold, strait, and ill aired.
Ihe bed so bad we could not lye on it, and a continual clamour
about the prison, yet here we stayed munday all day too (and the
wind comeing easterly). We were put aboard our boats, with
above 100 men for our guard (my takers being always next me lest
I should escape) about 10 a clock on Christmass day, and in 5 or
6 hours time we got up to Aloa, where a guard from Sterline mett
ie Lari of Mar died in the following year. He had disapproved of the measures of
ing James and gone abroad; but after his return and adherence to King William he
joinec the disaffected party, and was arrested and confined in Edinburgh, where he died
at the early age of thirty-nine.— Ed.


us. In all the matter Earl Mar was most kind to me, but at Kirk-
aldy the rabble mastered him so that he durst not speak. You
may possibly wonder how the Councell wold homologate the rab-
ble’s deed in takeing of me, and how I haveing the King s com-
mission should be made the Councell’s prisoner, which is no
Councell if I be not at their head, but this will clear it-self in
time, and all these mysterious things came plainly to the view of
the world. Here I have a centinell at my door all night, and with
an officer lam allowed to go about the house. My room has no
prospect from it save that narrow court called the Lyons den, * and
the place is most inconvenient to live into. But after all, my
dearest Sister, let me tell you that (except while the daggers were
at my breast that I was somewhat confused,) I have not one less
contented thought than I had while Scotland was at my beck, nay
I am exceedingly more satisfied, for now I am under the Great
Phisitian’s hand, and I can say with joy to Him, Burn, cutt, ad-
minister bitter things, provided all my sufferings be here 5 yet, Lord,
let me dye in the agony of sufferings, amidst tortures and disgrace,
provided it can either advance thy honour, the great interest of
thy holy Church, or the salvation of my own soul or that of any
other. I confess many friends of whom I had far other thoughts
have left me. My own tennants have presumed with Comrie at
their head f to enter my house and domineer there over my children
and servants. My enemies (who are such without any cause)
* A gloomy enough precinct of this beautifully situated and picturesque fortress.—Ed.
*f* Comrie, as is customary in Scotland, so called after the name of his estate. It is now
the property of Sir David Dundas ; and, such is the mutability of fortune, the lineal repre-
sentative of this old family is now landlord of the inn of the village of Comrie, (so famous
in modern science for its earthquakes,) where he shows the claymore with which his ances-
tor fought at Culloden as standard-bearer to the Duke of Perth ; who, in vain, gave the
rallying shout of “ Claymore ! ” to the Macdonalds on the left wing, to urge them into the
charge, and told them it was in their power to make tluit wing the right (their previous
accustomed post of honour) for ever after, and he himself would adopt their name if they
were victorious. Nothing could move the sullen clan from their resentment at the unwise
change of disposition ; they remained passive, and the battle was lost. —Ed.


insult over me. The rabble curse and would tear me to pieces.
The grief of a few friends melts my heart; the prospect of
aproaching death cannot but be uneasy to flesh and blood : But
in all this I have a clear concience, an innocence unspotted in
all my administration, an excellent religion, a good cause, and
an infinitely merciful God, so that on Him I do relye and will do
so as long as I live, that I may be His to all eternity.
It is very like that the liberty of writeing to any body may be
very soon taken from me, so I beseech you to send this letter
either to my son or our brother, * but do it by a sure occasion and
keep a copy of it; what else I have to say I will put into another
letter. I earnestly pray God to bring you to the light of his truth,
and make your Lord and you and your children every way happy.
Adieu.
LETTER II.
Sterling Castle , last night of the year , 1688.
My Dearest dear Brother,f
Being now into hands who are very cruel to me, and so severely
rigorous that I know not how soon the liberty of writing to my
friends may be taken from me, and I finding things likely to run
so high as to me that I nave reason to expect my life will not be
long, being desirous you should not be altogether ignorant of
my condition, this way of writeing a letter, to be left with our
sister untill she can find a sure hand to convey it unto you, ap-
pears to me the best for your information. I leave it to her to
inform you of my haveing been forbid by my fellow-ministers of
State to be any more present in Councell, or any other Catholique
* John Earl of Melfort, who had effected his escape to France and joined the King there.
Of him and his descendants, more elsewhere.— Ed.
t The Earl of Melfort: see the preceding note.— Ed.


more than I, and how the M. of Ath. [Atholl] had left off to come to
Councell for severall meetings before, how the tumults begane and I
was forced to leave Edinburgh, how they burnt all that was in the
chappell and abbay church, and robb’d my lodgings, how my
pensions for which I had served were stopt the very day the
tumults grew high : What probabilities there are that the rabble
were sett on by designing men, and how I left Drumond, went
to sea, was taken by the men of Kirkaldie, robbed of my gold and
mony, put into the tollbooth, made a mocking-stock of to that
people by one Baily Boswel, who probably was supported under-
hand by Baily Crawford and Baily Louden, had a report sett
amongst the people against me as if my men had been a’come-
ing to burn Kirkaldy, and a tumult raised there, in which the
Earl of Mar, who was sent by the Councell (who acted by an
authority unintelligible as yet, though well understood by me,)
to make me their prisoner, heard the people call for ropes to
dragg me down the stair of the tollbooth by the neck and then
hang me; how I was carried by sea to Aloa and thence hither,
where I now am. In all which toils and barbarous treatment
my wife, though with child, bore her part chearfully, and with a
more than humane courage; all this I leave to be explained
at length by my Sister, to whom I wrote it at large. But
my business now is to let you see what I further expect and
how it pleases God to support me. Ido confess that in the tumults
and dureing my stay at Drummond (when my own tennents and
such as lived by my bread rose up against me to betray me
and raise the country upon me; but why should this seem
strange when our dear master has been worse used and our God
infinitely worse ?) the terrors of death gott hold on me and my
soul was melted within me. It pleased God to permitt me to be
in great anxiety, I saw no way to escape, no reasonable body to
treat with, my children exposed to danger and want, my wife
afflicted beyond measure, and my own life was too sweet to me;
* Drummond Castle.—En.


I prayed, I confest, I communicated, hut still the apprehension
stuck close to me, many things concurred to make me melancholy.
Every thing that was designed to do me good turn’d to my hurt,
and death was wherever I turned my eye: But so soon as I took
the resolution of trying to go beyond sea all those idle fears
evanished, and I resigned all into the hands of God, and with my
faithful companion in all my troubles, and good Dr. Nicolson, I
sett forward towards Burntisland, gave 'them a certain hour for
our meeting, and by different ways in the night, the snow being
to our horses’ bellies, w r e went to the place. But our ship not
being ready we were discovered and pursued and taken at a little
distance from the Bass, and with all possible barbarity. How-
ever, excepting the while that the swords were over my head, and
the poignards at my breast, I found no kind of trouble, but rather
joy in all my sufferings, and that does so encrease that I thank
God that I feell a composure much greater and a more solid joy
in this restraint, in the which a centinell stands at my door from
9 at night untill the same hour in the morning, who would not
the other night permitt me to call for help to my wife, though she
was like to dye of a violent colique. I thank God then, that I
am in an entire peace, at present, waiting untill matters proceed
so farr as that a way may be settled for my tryall and death, for
the which I look with all certainty. Many have left me who pro-
fessed they never would, and to say true few have stuck by me.
Every body that observed my proceedings commends me, and
admire how the Councell without casting off the King’s authority
should committ me to prison. The daily lyes that are made in-
cense the people against me, so that excepting in a prison such as
this I could not be secure. You are said to be lurking in Scot-
land, and that hurts me; for whiles you are said to be in one
place at the head of Popish armies, w T hiles annoyance and all falls
on me. En fin my whole joy and peace is in God, and my only
anxiety is about my last moment. May my gracious God fill my
soul with that ardent charity which becomes one who dyes for his
CAMD. SOC. C


truth, in that moment when I lay down my neck to be cut off,
and I ask no more ! May my soul then be so united to my blessed
.Lord as that, in its first entrie into its eternal state, it may find it-
self in him, inebriated with his love, and ravished with the joys of
is salvation ! And do you engage people to pray for a soul which
you know loves you. My death is welcome. Endeavour to com-
fort my wife, and assist her in her pious design. Strive to gett
my children educated catholiques, and may the great God bless
you and all yours, especially my lady Melford. My joy was great
when I heard you was gone to France. I thought to have
seen you there, but our Lord saw it not good for me. Conclude
that 1 dye lovemg you and praying for you.
Adieu.
LETTER III.
Sterling Castle , 13th January. 1689.
My Dearest Sister,
If all my letters since my imprisonment had come to your
hands, you had not complained of being ignorant of my circum-
stances, for I had wrote a letter of three sheets of paper to inform
you of all that had fallen out to me, that you might be fully
instructed (m case their violence proceeded to take away my life)
how to satisfie our brother of all he might be desirous to know
concerning me. He is well and safe now with the King. I have
sent you the copy of his Majesties reasons for his going into
Jr ranee (which is a very moveing paper, at least to me it appears
to be such) though I know you must have seen it already. I pray
God preserve his Majestie and his Queen and son, for they are
hardly dealt by. You cannot imagine how hardly I have been dealt
by in my poor conection, which is not to be compared with our most
excellent prince. However it is a joy to me to thinke that he is
sate, whatever hazard threatens me. Your letter is so full of


kindness, I cannot tell what to return to it, and your reflections on
the manner of our designed going out of this kingdom. But the
whole of that matter had been sufficiently approved of, if our
skipper had not wanted two of his ship’s company, for if we had
had them wee had been an 100 miles off before any had heard of
us. And as the wind lasted wee had been in Ostend in less than
50 hours: But our Lord saw it better every way that this should
fall out, and I already feel the great advantage of all this matter,
for the which Ido with joy give thanks to the divine goodness. If
they think fitt to put me to tryall, it must be for being and
acting in my own concerns a catholique, for in all that concerns
the publique, the whole Councell and Session must come under
the same condemnation with me. But I hear they are lyke the
catt who loves fish but not to wett her feet, for though they would
fain cutt off my head, they would have so fair a pretext for it as
might not impinge upon religion, nor be common to those who
were joined with me in the government. Now, if they bring me
to my tryall, you must come over wnth your dear lord to employ
your best endeavours to do me kindness ; but if any colour of
justice be observed in their procedure, and not fear, (for Oates*
and Bedlows can swear any mortal dead,) or if they take me only
upon my religion, for that is so odious it will hardly be ventured
on. But if they should, you may judge of the joy it must bring
to a catholique. Let your lord look to the elections that are to
be made for this Convention, for much will depend upon who are
to be my judges, seeing no man (not our Blessed Lord) has
escaped the clamour of an incensed multitude and of partiale pre-
judicated judges.
To escape out of their hands is impossible, and few, however
much obliged, stick by me now. Even James Smith who had
starved had it not been for me, and to whom I had gott a gifte,
which I believe may yield him 1200—, as I have too good
grounds to believe, has played the rogue and pretended he saw
* Titus Oates and his fellow conspirator, whose doings seem to have haunted the Chan-
cellor, as he alludes to them several times in the course of these letters.—Ed.


papers by me, which God knows I never had. But I have not
yett had one uneasie thought upon all these matters. lam in
great quiet and peace, and I have not a wish but that the will of
God be done in all that relates to me. Blessed are they who
suffer for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Either we must believe or not, and if we do, I have some reasons
to be fully satisfied, for I have injured no man, and I suffer for
God, and with my lawful and most deserving Prince, who both by
his birth is my sovereign, and by his merite deserves it. IPs
true that these Nations have cast off his government, but it is not
for his injustice, but for their own satisfactions, in this distracted
humour they are gott into, and they may even in this life see
their error when they cannot help it. But wisdom is justified of
her children. I gett no newes save from the common Letter, all
correspondence with my friends being quite interrupted. So soon
as our Lords are returned from London, I suppose I will be either
disposed of to the better or to the worse (which wil be my gam).
In the meantime I pray God dailly (and if I should say hourly it
were no lye) for your and your Lord’s conversion to the catholique
faith, which is never so lovely as when suffered for, and which is
able only to carry you to a happy eternity.
And who can dwell with everlasting burnings ? Would to God
that all prejudice and biass were concord and *****
your mind and that you saw death as it really is *****
the prospect of death. O death, (says one,) how unbyassed are
thy councells! You would then bless the hour that ever you
were born, and rejoice in time, for what you would hope for to
eternity. All other hopes are presumptions, and must end in
despair. Only here is peace and joy, and all that’s sweet, if wee
persevere, for only to such as persevere is the crown given. I
thank God for your health and that of your children. May our
Lord bless all of you ! Write sometimes to me. Remember that
I told you once, that if my life and * * * * I could
not mind you to think of what is necessary for your salvation, it
might be my death might work that effect. God grant it may !


My dearest Sister, while I live I will honour and love you and pray
for you to my gracious Lord, to whose most holy protection I re-
commend you.
[The Chancellor was detained a prisoner in Stirling Castle from the period of his capture
till, by warrants of the Privy Council of dates 28th June and 4th August, 1693, he was
allowed to be liberated on giving bond to leave the kingdom, under a penalty of 5,000£.
His subsequent travels are recorded under his own hand in the following unaffected and
singularly descriptive and characteristic letters.]
LETTER IV.
Rotterdam, Zird Nov. 1693.
My dearest Sister,
Being to go to Antwerp to-morrow, and the Scotish fleet being
to saill within a week, and finding that I gett no letters from
Scotland since I left it, I chuse this conveyance as far the more
sure, though it may prove more slow than the post. At my arrivall
I wrote a letter to serve for the friends I left at Fetteresso,* and
for you too; I cannot tell if it got through. In it I told you what
dangers we had escapt in a storm, which all in this country say
was by far the greatest they have seen these 18 years past.
Now I have spent 6 weeks in seeing this province and the town of
Uteright,t and you may easily imagine it has been a pleasant enough
time to me, for in every place we gott Church-men, who proved
very obligeing, and who gott us the occasion of seeing whatever
c 3
* Fetteresso, the principal seat of the Earl Marischall, where twenty years later, in
1715, the Chevalier was met by that nobleman, the Earl of Mar, and a following of thirty
other nobles, chiefs of clans, and highland gentlemen, from their head quarters at Perth,
when he reached Scotland after the battles of Sheriffmuir and Preston Ed.
f Utrecht.


was curious, as Catholicks here have all the liberty they can wish
for. Only they being of the best quality and haveing largest pos-
sessions suffer most by taxes, and have no share in the govern-
ment: but they have organs and musick in their chappells.
Liveing here is excessive dear; and as to strangers, there are some
things as to accommodation uneasy enough. We leave this place
to-morrow, haveing already hyred our yaucht. It will cost us
three dayes sailing, though the wind should favour us, for the
nights are long, and all nights the yauchts lye at anchor, seeing we
saill over flats and overflowed countrys where the steeples are
jet standing out of the water. If it please God we gett safe to
Antwerp, and time enough to overtake the Scotish fleet by our
letters, I will write again.
My wife is recovered, and I am as I use to be or rather better.
Wee have no news here. A frosty winter may afford enough. All
the expectation is whether the English Parliament can or will
afford the vast sums necessary for the present exigencies of the
Confederacy; for all is at stake and much depends upon their
behaviour.
We hear that our friends are well besouth our hand. The loss
of my Lady Enroll* of Maxwell, and Wachap, is very consider-
able. Mrs. Ogelvy dyed before my Lady Erroll.
Blair’s son + is pretty well recovered. My Lord WintownJ and
the Archbishop of Glasgow § came hither with me. We found the
Earl of Wintown at Amsterdam and the Archbishop at Lyden.
* Lady Katharine Carnegie, younger daughter of James second Earl o Southesk, and
widow of Gilbert tenth Earl of Erroll, who died in 1674.- Ed.
t The son of Blair Drummond. See page 1. Ed.
J George fourth Earl of Wintoun, who succeeded his father in 1650. He had served
m a military capacity at Bothwell-brig and other memorable occasions j and was with
James Duke of York when his ship was lost, on her voyage to Scotland, in May 1682. He
died in 1704, and his son George forfeited the peerage for his share in the rebellion in 1715
—Ed.
§ John Paterson, translated from the see of Edinburgh to that of Glasgow in 1687, and
deprived at the Revolution. —Ed.


You see I write you chatters for want of better news. You may
send to Strowen Murry for the book I told you of; he promised
to gett it and give it to Mr. David Drummond, Advocate, at
Edinburgh. I write this letter both to your dear Lord and for
you. Let him find here the tender of my most humble service and
cordiall affectionate duty. God bless jou both and all your dear
family, Conbe and Scally [«c.] I long to hear of my friends, for Pm
quite ignorant at present. God send me good news of Mr.
James* If you hear not from me by the post, conclude it is the
government, and not I who occasion it, for I shall write as often
as needful; and I hope you will believe that my most tender
affection and esteem will never faill you. I believe Dr. Living-
ston may probably be in Scotland shortly; if he be he’ll tell you
all that relates to me. Now, my dear Sister, remember me, and
conclude that your Lord and you have an absolute command over
me. My wife is a most humble servant to my Lord and you. Any
letter you direct to me must be sent to Mr. David Drummond,
Advocate, at Edinburgh.
Adieu,
my dearest sister.
There is a bookseller in this town, a genteell well bred man,
who keeps his coach, &c. He’s both very learned and a mighty
virtuoso; he is causing make a Dictionaire Historique like that
of Moreri’s, but it will be incomparibly finer. One Monsieur
Bailef works hard to have it fine and true: this M r . Baile is a
most knowing man; both he and Leers, who is the bookseller, are
my friends, and would fain oblige me by giveing an account of my
family and those of my nearest relations. I hope you will give me
a short one of my Lord Errolfs, and get my Lord Keith J to do as
C 4
* Her second son, the Hon. James Hay.—Ed.
•f* Peter Bayle, the author of the celebrated Biographical, Historical, and Critical
Dictionary which bears his name. He was at this period in his prime of life, about forty-
six years of age, and died in 1706.—Ed.
+ The writer’s son-in-law, William, eldest son of the Earl Marischall. (Seep. 23.)—Ed.


much for his, and it will enrich the book and do us no dishonour.
Pray let this be done and sent over with the first Scotish fleet,
directed for me, either by Mr. Thomas Graham factor, or by Mr.
Panton, by them to be given to D r . Carny in the West Wagen
street at Rotterdam. Faill not in this.
LETTER V.
Antwerp, 30 th March, 94.
Dearest Sister,
Yours of 11th February came last Sunday; it gave me *
I gott of my friends since I came from home * *
children’s perfect recovery and * * * *
filled me with conten *****
had passed so * * * * * *
hope and that ******
Dr. Livi[ngston] *****
and *******
*******
***** [excepting her]
acquaintance with the Dutchess of Arschote * (who is Princess of
Arenberg), a most excellent lady, my wife has not one acquaintance
except religious women. I have got friends now among the
cloysters : men of great learning and excellent parts, and such as
have given me another notion of Christian perfection than ever I
had before ; and what King Charles the Second said when askt the
difference betwixt the Catholic and Protestant religion, That the
one was in jest and the other in earnest, comes very often in my
mind, for here people labour in good earnest for heaven, as if they
* Aerschot, a town in South Brabant, nine miles from Louvaine. —Ed.


believed it did suffer violence, and their humility shows how afraid
they are to lose their hold ; they live every moment mindful of the
last, which is to decide betwixt their bad or good state, and fearing
to miscarry they do work out their salvation with fear and trem-
bling. From 6in the morning to 8 at night one may be either
offering the Holy Sacrifice in conjunction with the priests of God,
or singing the praise of the Almighty God at the Saluts,* or hear-
ing exhortations, or performing some service to God in publick,
all this in time of so many socialities or confraternities *
join to do God some particular service to honour him *
* * for us, and so many excellent waves there
* * * our Lord on men’s souls that *
* * * senseless country who *
* * * * interested men *
***** and unfixtness
****** the devil’s
how earnest people of all orders were to let us see their concerns.
For me, I have been better than at home. We are now in midle of
Passion week. Holy week comes next; and after Easter we resolve,
for my wife’s health, to go to Aix la Chapelle, to drink those famous
waters. Spaa is near to Aix: but at present the ways to it are
dangerous, for lately the Bishopp and Prince of Liege dyed sud-
denly of an apoplexy, the Holland Gazette said, mal apropos pour les
Alliez. The Allies had 15,000 men in the town before; since that
they have clapt in 15,000 more; so they have an army in it: this
lying in the way to Aix renders the road full of murdering rogues.
But the election is now to be the 20th April, and then the troops
will remove. There are four pretenders, some say five : the Card,
de Bullion, who is best beloved both by the chapter and town; the
CAMD. SOC.
D
* An evening service, so called from the Roman Catholic hymn sung before the host,
“ 0 Salutaris Ilostia / ” —Ed.


Elector of Colloign, suported by his brother, the Due of Baviere; the
Great Master of the Teutoniq order, suported by his brother in law
the Emperor; the Dean, whose name is Mean, a man of no quality
but of parts, suported by the Hollanders and their Statholder ; and
some say Cardinal Furstanburg: so there are two French, viz. the
Cardinals, and 3 Allies. They say the 3 Allies concur in the Elector
of Colloign, and the 2 French in Bullion; who carries it is yet very
uncertain : but most people believe it will be Colloign, for the Con-
federates dare not vex the Duke of Baviere.* Other news at present
this country affords none. If in any thing my wife and I could
serve you here, it would be a favour to us to receive your com-
mands. Give our service to your dear Lord, to Lord Hay f and all
the children, and my blessing to Anne. Let me know if she is much
markt, and how her sister Keith has escapt and all your own babies.
Many in this town trade with France; so it is known how all our
friends there are, altho’ we dare not correspond with them. A
Fleemish cavallier, who lately arrived, says he saw my son dance
before both courts a Versailles on Shrove Tuesday’s night with
great approbation. All our other friends are well and chearfull, as are
all your nephews at Doway. My Lord Aboyn the Jesuite J came
and saw us here and stayed a week; he’s a most sweet youth, and
* The death of the Bishop of Liege, as Rapin notices, afforded the French a good op-
portunity for embroiling the affairs of the confederates. Their strong effort was to get
the Cardinal of Bouillon advanced to the principality, as a prelude to forcing their offered
terms of peace upon the Allies. The Chapter of Liege, however, chose the Elector of
Cologne, and the rest the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, to be their prince and
bishop. This double election was likely to create much trouble, for the Grand Master
being so nearly related to the Emperor, and the Elector, his competitor, brother to the
Elector of Bavaria, whose interest was supported by his Britannic Majesty and the States of
Holland, a clash of great interests was imminent. The Grand Master fortunately died
before the decision of the see of Rome could be received, and the Elector of Cologne suc-
ceeded soon after, peacefully, to the bishopric and principality.— Ed.
f The eldest son of the Earl and Countess of Erroll.— Ed.
$ Charles the 2nd Earl, affectionately called the Jesuite, but who nevertheless abjured
“ Papestry,” and in 1698 was allowed to take his place in Parliament, declaring he had
joined the true Protestant communion !— Ed.


humble like the dust of the street; fr. Jas. Innes came with him.
I wish that Charles Fleeming’s* friends would send him £IOO ster-
ling to pay his pension in the College, and mony to carry him
home, for he loses time there. Pray acquaint his friends with this.
Let me always have full and frequent accounts both of your own
family and all my children, and of all things you judge proper ;an
believe me to you and all yours a most intirely affectionate and
obedient servant.
Adieu.
LETTER VI.
Antwerp , 25 th April , 1694, 11 a clock at night.
Dear Sister,
Since your last, in which you mentioned your mistake of the
children's haveing the small pox, I have not wrote to you, for my
last was of the 30th March. Your love to me is a pleasure I value
infinitely. Believe that none liveing can love you and your dear
Lord better than I do, nor so well neither, for none knows your
merite so well. We are just going to Bruxelles within an hour, so
we watch this night; but I would not go further from you without
saluting you. I am glad your dear family has escaped the small pox
so hapily; give my service to your Lord and all yours, and reckon
upon my poor service and good wishes. Let me know if you rea
Papinf with attention, and tell me your thoughts of him. My
* John 3d Earl of Wigton married Lady Jane Drummond, daughter o tie secon<
Earl of Perth. Their youngest son was named Charles; but the Charles above-men rone
is apparently his nephew, the younger son of William sth Earl of Wigton, am w io s
ceeded his brother John, as seventh Earl, in 1744. Ed.
•f* Isaac Papin, some time a minister of the Church of England, but reconci ct
of Rome, and the author of several shrewd and able polemical treatises, and precisely such
works as the writer, a similar convert from Protestantism, would be likely to recommend


wife !s your servant and a servant to all yours. She has gott a
wth her It °'M P p S °" ° f S ° mU ° h merite that we are charmed
ArschoteZel ° f Arenber S (who is Duchess of
Arschote here) She lost her lord at the battle of Blanquement*
80 and h°' Jl e IS ° n]y 23 years 0f age ’ but wise enough to be
80 and beaut,full as at 15; « fin, a most accomplished princess
and one who has a vast deal of goodness for us. My wife has
ma e er in love with you and my daughter Mary. Give my
and Ind °1 (I"'"'"’ We lla ' C ,"° news ’ all being quiet here as yet,
Snain rtf « 10 S reat effort is like to be towards Germany and
tool ( f, baroy be not 80 wise as t 0 make peace, he may suffer
too). I have no more room but to bid you most tenderlv
Adieu.
LETTER VII.
Dear Sister, 5M 1694 '
y ° U ‘ he 25th ° f laSt moneth > 1 oannot leave
place without taking leave of you, although mv adieu will be
ong of reaching you. If I could express my affection for you and
all your dear family you would be convinced that never brother
ever I b»'"iT 7' th l1 m ° re But words are but wind. If
ZhJ b t o' 61 7 convlnce J’ou of my faithfull service by more
substantial! proofs. Give my most humble service to dear Lord
Lord Hay, Lady Mary, Mr. James, and all your bopefu
babies. I cannot but still hope that God will give you I „
to his sister, for whoso change of faith he was earnest and urgent In 1687 P • , ,
pubhshed, “Of the Toleration of the Protestants and mT' 687 Papm had
there was a new edition in 1692.-Ed ° f the Church >”
Where Prince Lewis of Baden, in August, 1691, attacked and routed the Turks.-Eo.


the light of the true faith; all lyes in your will, which I pray our
Lord to bend to a sweet complyance with his divine call, and
then you will be as happy as I wish you, which is not a litle
felicity.
For news we have none, but we have just now received an
account of a very strange thing happened at Prague, the chief town
of Bohemia, within these 6 weeks. The Prince of Nassau, who is
Governor of Mastreicht, his son writes it to his father, as many
merchants and religious men have done to their correspond-
ents ; it is thus :
There was a Jew who had a very pretty sweet-natured witty
child to his son, of about 8 years old; he used to be playing with
Christian boys, who it seems were zealous enough to be endeavour-
ing to gett him made Christian, and at last gott the boy to go to the
Catechism with them at the Jesuits. He continued to go thus 3
whole years, untill he came to be well instructed, and then he beged
to be baptized, and ever after he carryed his chaplet in his hand
to prayers, kissing his cross and triumphing in his being a Catho-
lick. His father strove to gett him perverted, and begun to be
harsh with him; the father who was his confessor, fearing they
would be too cruel to the child, gott the Archbishop to remove
him from his father; but the father disembled his rage against
his son so well that they let the boy return to him. So soon as
they gott him, he put him to bread and water, and twice a week he
scourged him to that degree of cruelty that he bathed him in his
own blood. But the poor child never uttered a word, but that he
thanked our Lord he was a Catholick. His father, seeing he could
not prevaill, took another Jew with him, and entered the cave or
cellar where he had allways kept the child prisoner, and told him
he was come to make his last essay to recover him to the religion
of his fathers ; if he would yield he should be made so rich that
his life should be as pleasant as he pleased, but if not he would
dye. The child said he was most willing to render up a life to Al-
mighty God which he had only to use for his glory in what man-


ner he pleased to call for it. That to shed his blood for his dear
Lord, who had shed his precious blood for him, was the death he
had ever wished. That he accepted of it from his own father’s
hand as a favour, and that far greater than that of giveing him a
temporal life ; he was only sorry that the parricide must suffer for
so great a crime. The father then and that cruell assistant threw
own the child on his back. The father put his knees upon his
breast and the other turned about his head to break his neck,
while he cryed out, Jesus, Maria, sweet Jesus receive my soul, and
accept my thanks for your dearest favours. They buried him in
the cave. Six weeks after, when the child was missed, the Chris-
tians began to enquire after him. The father said he was dead
and buried as the Jews use to bury their dead. I forgott to tell
you that they had bruised his head too, that his brains had come
out in several places.
The magistrates would needs raise the body, so the Jew must
needs shew where it was; whieh he did. They found the body as
fresh as if asleep; it bled, the brains were sweet, neither stink
nor corruption, nor the blood so much as congealed in his veins
file father was immediately put in prison. The boy exposed three
days in the cathedral. The father told all that had passed, and
said that the accursed boy vexed him so with his chaplet, and the
hated names of Jesus and Mary, that had he been the whole world
in one person he had killed him. The Archbishop, magistrates, and
great many people of quality, clad in red garments, went to the
church, where the concourse was incredible. They sung a mass of
thanksgiving instead of one for the dead, and carryed the body of
lehoiy chdd to its buriall under a cloath of red velvet fringed
W ' S ° d ’ and S lorlfie<l God who had supported the litle martyre
in his passion The Prince of Nassau says he was so hapy as to
kiss Ins dear litle hand, which was as soft as if he had been alive
and his face had a sweetness in it which charmed him.
The relation is sent to Rome; what will be done upon it we
know not; but I would not scruple to beg the Blessed saint’s in-


tercession. His father found a way to strangle himself in prison,
and was found in such a posture that it is not doubted but that
he who instigated him to committ the villany, helped him to his
reward. The story makes much noise here, and I hope it may
edifie you. Communicate it to my daughter Mareschall and to
Anne, to both whom I give my blessing. Tell the whole house
of Mareschall I’m their faithful servant. My Lord Mareschall’s
death was in the Bruxelles Gazette yesterday. Tell my daughter *
I’ll write her from A.ix by first occasion. My wife gives to you
and all yours and to all at Jenny’s her faithful service. The
weather here is excessive hott and dry, and pestilential fevers are
very frequent. Troops arrive daily from England; but I find at
Bruxelles they look for no great matters this campaign.
Adieu.
LETTER VIII.
Aix la Chap tile, 14th 15 th May, 1694.
My dearest Sister,
Seeing I know that nothing can please you better than to have
an exact account of all the adventures of a brother you love so
well, and seeing I can have no greater pleasure than to converse
with you, I*ll give you account of every step we make. Wee left
Antwerp the Bth instant, about 8 in the morning, and came
through a delightfull country to Herentalls to dinner, and from that
to Gheel to bed; this place is famous for the martyrdome of a
Prince of daughter, called St. Dympna,f who would not
* George eighth Earl Marischal, dying in 1694, was succeeded hy his son William, who
had married Lady Mary Drummond, eldest daughter of the Earl of Perth.— Ed.
+ This legend is pleasantly recited in Mr. Dudley Costello’s late publication on the
Meuse.— Ed.


yield to her father’s incestuous designs, but became a Christian, fled
to this place, was pursued by her father and murdered, together with
her confessor. Many mad people recover here, and other mira-
cles are wrought. There is a parish church, and this colledgiall
one of the Saint, served by a dean and 8 chanoins. Wee resolved
to come through the Campain, a wild country belonging to the
bishoprick of Liege, to shun robing, and meeting with French
partys ; and indeed a wilder country cannot be, except for hills, for
the moors are barren and perfectly uninhabited ; we went 4 hours
at one time without meeting any house. We dined at a litle village,
where we got sad fare, but we saw a marriage which gave us some
diversion. The bryde was very much aviced *as ever I saw. The
brydegroom a lusty young fellow. She, with all her chief maids,
had black taffita aprons; they had neither pype nor fidle, but
abundance of the whitest beer I ever saw; a kind of pap, like
sowens f, with milk : rice, and milk, and eggs, as thick as a tancy % ;
stewed veal with currens for the chief folks, and some roisted beef
with butter and bread; and this made up the whole feast.
I thought they had no danceing out of regard to Sunday; but the
parish priest was as strick as any whig in Galloway; for, under
pain of excommunication, he would have no dancing in his juris-
diction. My wife called for the bryde, as I did for the bryde-
groom, and made them and their chief folks take a glass of our sack,
which pleased them most exceedingly. That night we came through
a barren heath to a pitifull village called Saint Tron; in the way
there was a small village, where a pretty well clad man came with
a can of excellent beer, and offered us a drink; I fancyed it was
to sell, and so took a litle of it; he urged our man, who drove the
* Avised, full of life. Li vis a pou d’amis, li mors n’en a nus. Old Proverb.-— Ed.
+ A kind of furmity.—Ed.
X Tanaceti Succus (says good old Minshew, folio 1617,) cum ouolutei in patella frixus
cum butyro, lumbricis aduersatur, fried with butter and the yolkes of egges
in a panne, is good to eat against worme in the belly,— Ed.


Berline (we went into) to drink, and when we offered him money
he laughed at us, and was so frank that nothing could be more. He
told us in very good French that since the death of the grand
maitre 3 chanoins of Liege were dead; he seemed to lyke the grand
maitre better than the Bishop of Colloign; he told us too that the
disease that reigned at Liege cutt off about 300 a day, and that
they begun to fear it would turn a pest ;* but that Mastricht was
free. That night we lay in a most pitifull house upon straw, and
had not one with us gott a hen (by good luck) we had fasted : but
Mary Achmuty made us a litle broth, and we lay till the under
pastor called us to mass. Next day we dined at as sad a place,
where we could gett nothing but eggs which were very bad, and
but 30r4 of them; the French, to whome they pay contribution,
haveing taken all their henns last year. We were now gott
within 4 hours of Mastricht, and so we cared the less: we arrived
about 5 at night, and (that I might see the town) we stayed there.
I deferred seeing the great church untill next morning, resolveing
to hear mass there : so I went about to other places. It proved to
be their chief fair: and then there is so entire a freedom that no
body can be arreasted. The chief thing I saw was a miraculous
crucifix in a monestry of Augustine nuns. It seems a very vir-
tuous man had vowed to go to visite the Saint Sepulchre; at his
return he gave chaplets and litle reliques he had brought to all
his family; one poor girl, his youngest child, was abroad at mass
when he made his distribution. At her return she beged her
papa to give her some litle token of devotion too. Alas, child,
said he, all’s gone save one walnut which I brought from Mount
Olivet. C’est assez pour moy, dit elle , and away she runs to the
garden and plants it, praying God it might grow to be a mark of
his favour to her; it grew to be a tree, and she became a nun in
this monastry; at last the thunder broke the tree, and in the heart
of it was found this crucifix, larger than a boy of about 13 years
of age. The good nuns were reduced to a very few by a kind of
plague last year; they took us into their house (for this order can
CAMD. SOC. E


do that), and to their garden; which (within a town) is large.
alking there, who should I see enter but my Lord Balcarras *
and so we gott home to our lodging, and talked and supped
together. Next day I went to the great church, which is a very
antient building. The town is all Catholick, save for a few Hol-
landers and the garrison. They have two churches for their meet-
ings, but there are all sorts of religious orders in the town; it
stands low, environed with hills, seated on the banks of the
Meuse, is prodigiously strong, and famous enough, as you know.
Next day we dined at a place called Gallop [Gulpen], where a French
party were within a legue of us; here we met with two servants of
the grand maitre, who were going to Dusseldorp, to his brother,
I think to carry him an account of the design Mean the Dean f had
to chuse, with his party, the grand maitre’s brother the Bishop
of Breslaw to be Bishop of Liege: but, although they continue
very stiff in their design to keep out Pope Clement, he is like to be
the man; that is, his election stands fairest to be approved. We
had thunder and rain in our way hither, which was only 4 hours
but the tempest was soon over; here we found an old great
town full of cloysters. Charlemaigne loved it above all his other
dominions, for it is environed with woods and hills for hunting.
The fountains people drink for health are hott, and smoke ter-
ribly ; when the cock is turned the water stinks terribly of rot
ten eggs, of which it tastes too. My wife and I begune today, and
it purges much. It is pleasant to see the ladys go into their re-
tiring places and leave their doors open and talk with one another
rankly; it is true the men and they go not to the very same lodge,
i Ut wv hea L a 1 that Can be heard 5 and indeed necessity has no
law. What effects the waters will have with us I cannot tell, but
and aftf 1 ’ f- the author of a ™moir on the Revolution of 1688,
and afterward 3 engaged in the Rebellion of 1715, from the consequences of which he was
saved by the interest of his friend the Duke of Marlborough.— Ed
t See page 16.


now it is about noon they have given off to work, and I never
was so hungry. Sir Dick’s necessity will oblige me to drink
yours and your family’s and the whole house of Innerugy’s healths
in very good over-Moselle wine. And so far you have the history
of our journey. Send it to my daughter, and believe that to your
family and Earl Marischall’s I’m just what you would have me,
with all duty and respect. Adieu.
15 th day.
We have here a garrison of 3000 men; yet the town pays
24,000 crowns cpntribution to the garrison of Luxemburgh.
Adieu.
LETTER IX.
Anvers, 17 th June, 1694.
My dearest dear Sister,
I think I gave you a full account in my last of all our varitys
about Aix; this shall give you an account of our return. While
we were there my wife gott acquainted which Countesse de Man-
derstate Gerolstine, one of a family which had been formerly
sovereigns of all the * * * *, as to her husband, and
herself a Countesse of the family of Coningseck; her brother
was Vice-Chancellor of the empire, and the ablest minister the
Emperor had; he dyed lately. This good old lady did my wife
all the civil things she could possibly think of, and carried her to
Boursebe (a monastry of nuns, all ladys, who live at their ease, and
keep 3 or 4 coaches for their conveniency), and to all the walks about
town; and general Lybie [de Lippe ?] (who commands the Elector
Palatine’s troops) and his lady were very obligeing. We left Aix on
Munday, and came to Mastricht, where a baron, a young gentle-
man who is of great quality, and has learnt English by his own
industry without a master, would fain have had us lye at his


house, which is a very noble one, but we excused our selves. I
could see by him he intends to leave all and turn Capuchine; he
left me late at night with tears in his eyes. Next day we dined
at Tongres, where a Madam of Antwerp (who generally are of
no quality, proud, rich, and uneasy to please,) dined with us in
our inn, as she was upon her way to Antwerp from the waters;
nothing could please her, and my wife and she had almost fallen
out about the Duchess of Arenberg, who was not it seems so
much in the wife s favour as my wife would have wished.
We came at night to Saint Tron, which (as Tongres, Tirlemont,
and generally all that country do) pays contribution to the French.
Next day we came to Tirlemont to dinner, haveing come betwixt
Lieve [LeweJ and Landen,* over the field where the battle was
fought last year. The ground that’s cultivated has two stalks of that
popie which you call cock-poses for one of grain ; and where it is
¥ n g untilled a scarlet sheet is not of a deeper dye nor seems more
smooth than all the ground is with those flowers, as if last year’s
blood had taken root and appeared this year in flowers. There we
could see heads and bones of limbs, skellets [skeletons] of horses,
old hatts, shoes, holsters, sadles, &c. here and there over the field.
The river Geet is so pitifull a brook that with a running leap
one would think to leap it, but it is so deep that except by
brydges no horse can cross it; and there too it was encreased with
rain: we past it at Neer-haspen, below near Landen, where it seems
there had been a huge slaughter that morning. We drove very
slowly, and took a guide who had been so curious as to be in the
battle, which he says has satisfied his curiosity sufficiently, for he
went to see sport, and had almost payed for it in earnest. We
gott to Tirlemont before 11 o’clock, where there are the greatest
number of fine churches for so very small a place that ever I saw in
* The battle of Landen, where King William braved the French attack, 29th July,
1(593, and was defeated with the loss of 7,000 men ; but so crippled the enemy as to
preclude the idea of pursuit.—Ed.


all my life. One chapell is served by chanoins who are only clerks;
they may marry and keep their prebendaries [prebends]. They
hyre chaplains who are priests to serve: the Dean and one more
is a priest; all the rest are not: it was founded by a Countess 600
years agoe. After dinner, when I was going out to see when we
would be ready to part, a tall black man (like Oates’ Don John)
accosted me with a great bow. Monseigneur (sayes he), votre Excel-
lence voyra quelque chose de beau si elle vouloit seulement prendre
la peine d'aller au Capucins, ouj’auray I’honneur de Vaccompagner.
I was surprised at that place to be treated so. I asked him who
he was to whom I owed the favour of so civil an invitation; he
told he was the King of Spain’s subject, overseer of the customs
there; that the comptoire w T hich had formerly been at Mons was
now brought to Tirlemont. Whether in looking to our trunks he
had seen any marks of the order I carry I cannot tell; but I’m
sure he made them be opened only for fashion’s sake, for he
touched no kind of thing ; however he still treated me en Mon-
seigneur, although I told him no such thing was due to me. He
carryed me to the Capucins, where I saw what I told them was
the Versailles of the Capucins, for the church was neat, well
adorned, and well lighted, the house very clean and sweet, though
poor, as became their order. But 2or 3 lay brothers who under-
stood gardenry had made their garden (which is very large) one
of the noblest things one could see. The long walks with heges
cutt like velvet, higher than two storvs of any house in Scotland,
were so pleasant, and nightingales every where affording us
musick, that it looked like a litle paradise, and litle chapells in
grottos adorned with doleful pictures of our Lord’s dolourous
passion excited our devotion. I was very sorry my wife could
not enter the place. He showed me a laborinth, a large fountain
in the midst of it, where the Duke of Luxemburg had brakefasted
two days after the Battle of Landen, and said, s’ill auroit. pleu au
bon Dieu que le retablissement du bon Roy Jacques auroit ete le
fruit de cette victoire, on auroit eu plus de consolation. I seemed to


have no great concern in victories. That night we past within a
bow-shot of the abbay of Park, where the head quarter of the
Confederate army uses to be. It is almost at the very gate of
Lovain. When we gott into the town we were at 40 cabaretts to
gett lodging (it was the eve of Corpus Christi), and could not find
where to cover our heads. (The army lay at Bathlem [Berthem], a
quarter of an hour off, the other side next Bruxels, which filled the
town with officers.) We stoped near one of the doors of the great
church at a great cabaret door, to intreate were it but a stable to
have some shelter, when a woman with a maid following her came to
the Berline side (this is a kind of traveling coach used here), and
addressing herself to me she said, Mon dieu } Monsieur , que je suis
fachee de ce que vous ne povez pas trouver de cabarete ou loger:
voulez vous et Mademoiselle votre femme venir chez moy ? vous
serrez le tres bien venu ; je ne tiene pas maison publick, mais je
ne puis pas m’empecher de vous tirer de la misere ou je vous voy,
car ilfaut que vous couchiez dans les rues si l’on nevous accomode
pas dans quelque maison particulare. I gave her thanks, and ac-
cepted of her most obligeing offer, and seeing her in a faille (which
is a great scarf of tafita for the best that use them, and of worsted
for others, as indeed hers was), I expected no good lodging; but
when we came in I found the entry full of pictures. She carried
us into a room handsomely drest and very large and well propor-
tioned. It was now quite dark. She called for lights, and when I
saw all I began to think it must be some painter. But it proved
to be one of the best Advocates in town, who when he gott my
story from the English fathers (for here are both Benedictines
and Dominicans), he wept for joy to think he had had the good
luck (as he esteemed it) to be usefull to one who he believed had
suffered somewhat for God. I confess it was a charity one will
hardly find in a country where to lodge strangers is not a part of
religion, as it is here; we might have been a troop of gypsies for
her, and she said, “ I judged you English and Protestants, but that
does not cooll charity, in as far as God gives us grace to see


when to exercise it.” She made a very good dinner for us, but we
were forced to let our servants eat it, for the English Augustine
Nuns (who are 53 in community) made us dine with their chap-
lain, which is all they could do. They are all women of quality.
With them we kept the feast of Corpus Christi, and just as we
were going to dinner I heard one speaking broad Scotch in the
next room. I went to see who it was, and it proved a Dundee
man, a soldier, who came to enquire for a man who he supposed
lived at Lovain, for he said to Father Confessor, “ Pray, Sir, kenn
ye Willie Brown, my friend ? he’s a Dundee-man and my cousine.
The good father told him he didnot, and added that the monastry
was no fitt place for soldiers, except when they came to reconcile
themselves to God and participate of the sacred mysteries. After
that came in an old Irish Doctor, who had been 11 times rector
of the university; a rich easy man, who values not the King of
Spain or his own master a rush. He intended to have invited me
to his dinner, which generally is the best in Lovain, but we were
already at table. After dinner we parted, and came through the
Confederates’ camp; the army was not all gathered, yet it made a
pretty enough show. We came at night to Malines, where we had a
noble friend, the Countesse of Rupelmonde, cousine german to
the late Due of Arenberg, and the,best friend his widow the Dutches
has; it was late, so we did not see her that night. We stayed at
Lovain, hopeing to have seen the procession, which is the solemnest
of all the year. But they durst not expose our Lord’s body to the
insolence of so many soldiers of a different religion, which heartily
vexes the citizens. Next morning we went to see an abbay of
Norbertines* (They wear all white, and furnish many parishes with
pastors, haveing the presentation of many churches : they wear in
their parishes quite another habit from what they wear in the
* An order better known as that of Premontre, from its local cradle in France, founded
by St. Norbert, who died bishop of Magdeburg in 1134. The rule is that of the Augus-
tinian Canons regular, but was rendered more strict by St. Norbert, and made applicable
to ascetics of both sexes. Ed.


abbay, for here they wear cornered caps and camailles like bishops,
but that it’s white instead of violet, but there they wear cloaks and*
hatts, which makes the English take them for millers.) It is a new
building, very sumptuous, and the church of a particular form, well
lighted and very glorious. Countess Rupelmonde had gott notice of
us, and had run from church to find us; we went home to her house,
and she told us that to divert us untill dinner was ready she would
carry us to the cathedrall, to the Jesuits, to a rich church of Nor-
bertme nuns (who by the bye allow their chaplain £5OO sterling a
year), and to all the other places worth seeing, which she did ; and
here we saw a procession which had been delayed to this day. She
prevailed with the dean of the cathedrall to show us Saint Rom-
uald’s body. He is the patron of the great church, apostle of that
town, and first Pop [Pope or Bishop]; he lived 900 years since. He
undertook the wall-work of building the cathedral, and payed his
masons every Saturday night. The villains, finding they were punc-
tually paid, imagined the good Bishop to be vastly rich : so one
Munday morning they resolved to murder him as he came early to
oversee the workmen. They have a kind of thing shaped like a
how [hoe] with a long shaft, with which they make the lyme in these
countrys; with these they killed the Saint, and searching for his
treasure they found 4 Dutch scillings, which makes about 2s. Ad.
English money. The picture of this is done so very finely (as to
the design) in the Beguins church that I’m tempted to take a
copy of it, for confusion, fear, astonishment, and surprise of their
disappointment appear in the fellows’ looks. We dined with the
Countess, and after dinner we came hither, where in the way we
met 2 or 3 Scots regiments, to whom I wished all the felicity they
deserved. This is an account of our voyage.
Yo’ll have heard before now that the King has thought fitt to lay
aside E. Melfort,* but with all the expressions of goodness for him
* John Earl of Melfort, the second son of James the third Earl of Perth, like his elder
brother the Chancellor, adhered zealously to James 11. He was Deputy Governor of


imaginable; he had so many enemies that it was not possible to hold
out any longer. Just now an express from the Duke of Baviere to
our Bishop orders prayers to be said and our Lord’s body to bo
exposed for the success of the King of Spain’s arms, they being
every moment expecting to engage the French. The Dauphine
past the Sambre on Saturday, that is five days ago, and now the
armys are hard by one another; whether the Allies be as willing
to fight as is said I cannot tell, but we are told they are casting up
works and entrenching their camp. Every body here are impa-
tiently longing to hear news, and the boat from Bruxells is looked
for with great earnestness by most people; both armies are very
much stronger than they have been since the warr. My wife
gives you her most affectionate faithfull service, as both of us do
to Earl Erroll. Earl Marischall’s resolution of leaveing his house
surprised me exceedingly, and seems to me to be a rash, unadvised
action. I pray God he do not repent him of it. Tell Sir William
CAMD. SOC.
F
Edinburgh Castle, 1680, and Secretary of State, 1684. He was created Viscount Melfort
in Argyllshire, (a part of the Duke of Argyll’s forfeited estate,) and Lord Drummond, of
Gilestoun, in 1685 ; and in 1686 the higher honours were conferred upon him of Earl
of Melfort, Viscount of Forth, and Lord Drummond of Riccartoun. The patent, dated
August 12th, conveys the peerage to the heirs male of his second marriage, passing over
his two sons by his first wife of the family of Lundin, who were stanch Protestants, whereas
the Earl was a bigoted convert to the Romish faith. This disposition was the cause of
conflicting claims. James Drummond, of Lundin, the grandson of the first marriage, assumed
the title of Earl of Perth in 1766, and his son James, the father of the present Lady Wil-
loughby de Eresby, was created a British peer by the title of Lord Perth in 1797, which
dignity became extinct on his death in 1809. The second family, to whom Lord Melfort
bequeathed his estates, as Roman Catholics, were the children of Euphemia Wallace,
daughter of Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie, a Lord of Session. The Lady was counte-
nanced by Louis XIV., and kept a fashionable faro-table in Paris, where she lived to be
ninety years old. Lord Melfort accompanied King James to Ireland, and in 1690 was
created Duke of Melfort. He was attainted and outlawed in 1694-5, and died at St.
Germain’s in 1714. He was one of the handsomest men of his time, and his dancing was
considered the finest which the Court could exhibit: and dancing in these days was
esteemed a great accomplishment. His heir, John Duke of Melfort, died in 1752, and
was succeeded by a son, Thomas, whose son Charles-Edward (we believe) claimed
the Perth title about forty years ago, which led to a law-suit with his brother Maurice,
who disputed his right on the ground of birth before marriage.— Ed.


Keith (whose Scot I am and to all his family) that I hope he will
be carefull of my Lord’s concerns in his absence. I hear that
the Government with you are proceeding to forefault people for
being in France. Send me an account of all that’s going. You
see if I forgett you. My 3 last were of 6th, 12th, and 25th May.
Give my service to all your family. I’m sorry for the accident you
tell me happened to dear Mr. James; I pray God to recover him.
Adieu.
I forgott to tell you the masons of Malines dare not make their
lyme with the ordinary instruments [the hoes], because they killed
the Saint with one; so they, and they only, use shovels for that
use. Give my service to the Countesse of Marischall and all
other friends.
LETTER X.
Antwerpe, Ist July , 1694.
My dearest Sister,
It is now a great while since I had any letter from you, and the
retiredness of this place affords no matter for a letter, except, what
never will faill you, my kindness, suply it. My last was of 25th
May; it, with those of 25th Aprill, 6th and 12th May, gave you a
very compleat account of our travels to Aix, and of our return;
and if all mine be come safe to your hand you will not complain of
my silence. This goes by my Lord Haddo,* who is a very solid
young gentleman; and who will one day make an able man if he
getts good breeding. I have showed him all the varieties of this
place, and he could not have a better occasion; for his religion
and being a stranger are great stops to this rustic country. He
will tell you that the Armies are vastly numerous; the Con-
federates being about 90,000 and the French 145,000 men ; what
will be done God only knows. The Confederates are intrenched,
and it is feared the French may besiege some place; Liege and
* Heir apparent of the first Earl of Aberdeen.—Ed.


Mastricht are most in danger, for the French are betwixt the Con-
federates and those places.
We hear little from Germany. De Lorge is twice Prince Lewis’s
number, and in Spain all goes with the French to their wish. The
Turks talk much of their force, but they do nothing, and Savoy
never sees a campaign untill that of Spain be ended. This is at
present the state of our affaires on this side of the water; you know
best what’s at sea, and how the descent has succeeded upon France.
I was surprised when I heard that Earl Marischall was gone from
home; now my wife has a letter from my daughter dated from
London, but only tells us of their being there, and promises a
further account by next occasion; I confess I think the journey
was not to be rashly undertaken.
Earl Balcarras going from Aix was fallen upon by thieves,
stript, robbed, and almost killed; but I’m in the wrong, it was
not thieves but a party of the garison of Liege or Mastricht.
Our brother* had got such a tempest raised against him as he
could not weather, so he’s retired; he has gott enough if his master
be ever restored, and at present all his pensions are continued.
He goes to the waters of Bourbon, and after that it’s said he
goes for Italy.
My wife gives my lord and you her most faithfull affectionate
service, as I cordially do, and to all your dear family. I wish I
could testify my gratitude to you and yours. Adieu; forgive me
to send this note to Annie.
Send me a copy of the receipt for a green shirt for the rickets,
and of my Lady Halket’s green oyntment with the spices and sweet
herbs; there’s 2 or 3 goose-dungs in it. Send me that of the
Balagane salve; Lady Machany f will give it you; but want for
nothing to send me all of them you have by you.
* The Earl of Melfort.—Ed.
f Lady Machany was the wife of Sir John Drummond of Machany, brother to Lillias
Countess of Perth and Tullibardine (the writer’s second wife), namely, Margaret, daughter
of Sir William Stewart of Innernytie, second son of Sir William Stewart of Grandtully,
(Wood’s Douglas, ii. 553.) —Ed.


Let Dr. Murray be desired to send me a copy of his receipts for
vapours, both that which was strong and the other which was so
well tested ; let these come with the first ships, for most letters
adrest to me by post miscarry, so civill are the moderate Govern-
ment to me.
LETTER XI.
My dearest Sister, B™ells, 21* July, m*.
1 have not heard from you a great while, which troubles me, nor
has my daughter Marischall wrote ever since she arrived at Lon-
don. We have been here these 15 days; but on Tuesday we go
to Antwerp, and from that to Holland : for sickness is so frequent
here that men die in multitudes. Only I hear of no great mor-
tality in the armys. My Lady Betty Tarbot *is here, the Master
eing at the camp, which has made few movements these days
past. This day we are told detachments from the Rhyn and from
Normandy are come up to Monseigneur’s army, so that the Confe-
derates are like to retire. The harvest in France is now gathered
in, and corn is so plentiful that they never had so much in any one
year since man can remember; they will have as great a vintage if
it be but free from rain : here the crops are admirable too, and fruits
are so every where that the trees break with the load. I have o- o tt
two letters telling me my son is to be forefaulted. I wonder at it & for
seeing he was but a child under Earl Melfort’s care, and never gott
the letter I was permitted to write to him (for it never came to his
hands, as he made a Flanders merchant tell me seriously), and all
commerce by letters being forbid to us, how could it be imagined
he could come home ? but I believe the ruine of my family is the
design. But they can gett that no farther carryed on than God
Almighty will permitt. I expect the worst they can do, and yet
Lady Betty was the wife of John master of Tarbat, afterwards second Earl of Cromarty
She WaB the on h daughter of Charles Gordon, first Earl of Aboyne.-En.


am not without hopes to have my family subsist when some of
theirs are low enough.
Pm sorry poor Anne * has been so very ill; God will reward your
care of her. Let me know how Mr. James does, and give my humble
service to all friends, especially my dear Lord Erroll, Lord Hay,
Lady Mary, and all your dear children. .
I should have told you that, if it be my son’s return the Govern-
ment desires, he only wants a pass, security from prison and oaths,
and you shall have him what time you please.
Adieu.
Bruocells , 3rd Aug.
You would wonder to see the uncertainty people here are in, as to
the accounts of the armys, which, though at 8 or 9 hours distance,
are as little known as to their strength as if they were in Hungary.
One day we have the French 30,000 men stronger than the Confe-
derates, next day we have the Confederates 12,000 foot stronger
than they, though both agree that the French are much stronger in
horse. But in all appearance the French will not fight but where
their horse may be of use to them, and the Confederates have no
mind to that by no meanes. The dispute is who shall decamp first,
which 5 days now will discover, for all our great men write to their
Ladys that in so long time they will be quite out of forrage, and
must return towards Lovain, which is within 6 or 7 hours.
Antwerp , sth Aug. 1694.
I have twice mist the occasion of sending this letter. I have
nothing to add to it but to tel you that my son wants only a pass,
otherwise he had undoubtedly made hast to Scotland. If it be not
to destroy the family that the Government are takeing advantage,
this would satisfy, and a pass would be sent: but what should I
expect at this time ? I saw a letter last night from Wurtzburg in
Franconia from a very good hand. He says that Marischall de
* The writer’s daughter Lady Anne Drummond, who was resident with her aunt the
Countess of Erroll. —Ed.


Lorges has so ordered matters that he ’ll send off all the detach-
ments he designs for these countryes and for Italy, and not suffer
Prince Lewis de Bade to pass the Rhyne; so (sayes he) all fruites
we can hope to reap of this campaign is to save our corns upon our
own side of the river. The Emperiall army in Hungary is not
above 16,000 men, and if the Turks were not so divided as they are
all were lost on that side. He says they had news there the 20th
July that their neighbour the Duke of Saxe (who lately succeeded
to his brother) is gone mad, that he killed one of his chief coun-
cellours at the very councell board, and that all is ascribed to
witchcraft; so that they have seized upon the late Duke*s mistress’s
sister, and used her after a most terrible manner. This is all the
new s we have, save that the English have done much hurt to Dieppe,*
but were beat off from Havre de Grace. My service to my lord
and all your family.
After a great heat we have had the weather now these 10 dayes
9.s cold as in the end of October, which will make many sick.
LETTER XII.
Ghent , 9th Aug. 1694.
My dearest Sister,
I have not heard from you since you gott mine from Antwerp
after my return from Aix la Chapelle, so that you want an account
of our adventures in our return (if that letter is not come to your
hands). Since that time we have stayed at Antwerp, where we are
free from soldiers, for that town does not receive any garrison. Once
we went to Hooghstrate, a fine bourg belonging to my Lady
A \ y the En S lish fleet under Lord Berkeley, July 12th, and dreadfully
ere y 1100 bombs and carcases. The place was in ruins, and the inhabitants, as
we as two regiments of Bretagne sent to aid them, fled in such confusion, that had it been
known the assailants might have landed and possessed or sacked it.— Ed


Rhinegrave, to visite a monastry of Carmelite Nuns, all English
(for the foundation is for that nation) except two, whereof
Madam la Rhinegrave’s daughter is one. Madam la Rhinegrave
founded it herself, for she loves the English, and in all probability
will end her days in the convent they have at Antwerp. The
Countie of Hoogstrate fell to her upon- her brother’s death; he
was mad. She has 3 sons, the Rhinegrave, the Compte de Salines,
the Compte Sauvage, and 3 daughters. The eldest is the nun,
the second Countess de Broway Spinola, and the third Marquiese
d’Aisne. We found the nuns at Hooghstrate most obligeing.
We have leave from the superior the Bishop of Antwerp to go
into their house, where they treated us most nobly, and made
us lye in the father confessor’s lodgings; so we dined and supt
the first day with them, and dyned the second day before we parted.
My Lady Rhinegrave’s daughter is subprioress; she speaks English
perfectly well (as all are English here). They are really a family of
saints; every where in their house you see a cleanly sweet po-
verty, you hear no discourse but of God, you can see cheerful-
ness and content in every face, and there is such an entire
unity in their house that they are just one soul and one spirite,
and certainly it is God’s spirit that conducts them in that sweet
peace and joy which reigns among them; and yet this house is
but one of three of that order and nation in these parts, and
every house is as good as the other, striveing which shall raise
up the mainest saints for God’s greater glory and their own
advancement in the way of perfection. After the litle journey
of Hooghstrate we continued at Antwerp untill the 16th July,
that we went to Bruxelles upon the account of a festivall upon
occasion of a consecrated Hostie, which about 500 years ago was
stolen by a Jew and prophaned by him and his wicked com-
panions, as he who is contained under the species of bread was
used formerly by their forefathers; at last one of them struck a
dagger into it, and the blood issued forth in such abundance as
filled the whole floor. Some of them on sight of this miracle were


converted, and others, imputeing the thing to witchcraft, continued
obstinate, and were burnt. This Hostie* is carryed about the
streets in procession : and really it is very fine to see the solemnity.
Att Bruxelles we waited for the second time on our old great-aunt
Mademoiselle (BArgile, who is near 80 years old. She was daughter
to the old Earl the Marquises father, one of four religieuses,
their fifth sister haveing been mother to this Lord Rollo.f She
speaks no English, is a good soul as lives, and in esteem with all the
great folks at Bruxelles. She had another sister, a chanoinesse
religieuse of Saint Augustine, Lady Victoria, a very fine lady. She
herself is a most excellent musician, and though her voice faills much
she sings true still, and plays finely on many instruments, but chiefly
the organ. She composed a song for my wife, and made words and
all, which shoes she is not quite broke; her name is Isabell. Her
other sister at Bruxelles was in the Abbay of English Benedictines;
Lady Barbara was her name ; both she and Lady Victoria are dead
lately. Att Bruxelles my wife and I became acquainted with
most of the great ladys (for all the men were at the camp)
by the Dutchess of Arenberg’s meanes, who, were she our sister,
could not carry to us with more affection. She is one of the
most beautifull and every way accomplished ladys I ever saw,
* This legend has been very popular at Bruxelles ever since the 15th century, and is
we believe still, or was till very lately, commemorated there at certain epochs; on which
occasions the nave of the church of St. Gudule is richly decorated with tapestry repre-
senting the principal events of the legend. A history of the miraculous hostie was pub-
lished in 1605 by a canon of St. Gudule, with engravings by Adrian Collaert, in which
it is stated that the miracle took place in the year 1373, at Bruxelles. But, according
to a MS. recently found in Trin. Coll. Dublin, temp. Edw. IV. containing a curious
Miracle-play, founded on this legend, and entitled the play of the Blessed Sacrament,
or the conversion of Sir Jonathas the Jew, “the miracle was wrought in the forest of
Arragon, in the famous city of Araclea, in the year of our Lord God, 1461.” Ed.
f Lady Mary Campbell, daughter of Archibald seventh Earl of Argyll by his second
wife Anne, daughter of Sir William Cornwallis, of Brome, co. Suffolk, was the second
wife of James second Lord Rollo. Her sisters, the four vcligicuses above mentioned, are
not noticed in Douglas’s Peerage of Scotland. Her brother of the whole blood, James
Campbell, was created Earl of Irvine. —Ed.


except our Queen, who deserves the preference for her merite
of all I have known. Last week we came from Bruxelles to
Antwerp, and now we are here in our way to Holland, where I
design to pass over 20 days or a month.
LETTER XIII.
Rotterdam , Ist Sept. 1694.
My dearest Sister,
Although all that I told you of Aix may be found in books, and a
great deal more, yet I’m sorry you have lost so many of my letters,
for you want two at least. Lett me know if you gott that in which
I told you of our voyage from Aix to Antwerp. Your nephew *is
in the King of Spain’s dominions. I have not yet seen him. Igo to-
morrow (if wind and weather serve) to Antwerp to have that great
pleasure, although I am afraid it will be but short-lived, for I appre-
hend he may be troubled, although he came in imagineing that the
citation had an indemnity in it. But God, who is all-sufficient, can
extricate us; and upon his goodness is my entire relyance.
It seems the Confederates last week designed to take possession
of the Pont d’Esperies; for that end they feigned to march towards
St. Tron, but immediately returned to their camp; next day they
made as if they designed for Fleurus. The French (although their
forragers were on the other side of the Meuse) gott in order to give
them battle; but it seems that was not their design, for they
marched straight to Flanders, hopeing by gaining this pass to be-
come masters of all the country about, as well as of Courtray,
Dixmude, Furnes, &c. to secure a winter quarter for their troops;
but, although the French at first mistook their design, marched
into the country entre Sambre et Meuse , and consequently
crossed the Sambre in their view almost, and lost a day’s march,
CAMD. SOC.
G
* Lord Drummond: see p. 47. —Ed.


yet they recovered all, makeing the longest march ever was heard
of, viz. 32 leagues, without stopeing, marching night and day
untill they secured the pass and the country it covers, so that the
only design they seem to have had is broke by this dilligence
of the French; Monseigneur gave 500 Lewis d’ors to thebatalions
which came up first.
I have three of yours lately; two speak of poor Annie’s illness.
I give her my blessing, and rejoice greatly at her recovery.
God will reward your care of her. I rejoice that my dear nephew
James is like to recover. Give my dutifull respects to my dear
Lord Erroll, my service to dear Lord Hay, and all the bairns. You
rejoyce me much by telling me how you all do. Our brother
has left many and great enemies behind him; he has not been
too kind to me, but I’ll never faill him. Continue to be
kind to yours, &c. My wife is yours and Lord Erroll’s faithfull
servant.
Antwerp , Sept. 1 7th, 1694.
I was interrupted at Ghent, and since that time I have been in
a continuall hurry; but I’ll begine where I left. Next day we went
by the tract-scout * (a boat drawn by two horses which carries 60
or 70 persons conveniently) to Brugges. The canall is made by
art, that is, it is a cutt way through the country filled with water
from some litle brooks; it is eight leagues, as I guess. Att
Brugges (which is as melancholy a town as Ghent is chearfull,) we
went and saw the Augustine English Nuns, and particularly my
Lady Anna Howard, half-sister to the Duchess of Gordon,t for
whom we had a letter from her sister, my Lady Catherine, who is
a most virtuous Benedictine Nun at Ghent. But before I talk of
Brugges I will tell you our adventures at Ghent (which I had
* Trek-schuyt.—Ed.
+ Lady Elizabeth Howard, daughter of Henry sixth Duke of Norfolk, married in Oct.
1676 to George first Duke of Gordon, the brother of the Countess of Perth. Her Grace
retiring to a convent in Flanders, the Duke issued a process of adherence, 1697. She died
in 1732, and was buried in Elgin cathedral. (Wood’s Douglas.)— Ed.


thought I had done before). Ghent is a vast city, where the Lis,
the Scheld, and other rivers meet; it is well built, chearfull, and
full of good company. Charles the Fifth was born here, and his
statue of brass guilt, standing on foot upon a high pillar, adorns the
great markate-place. The cathedrall is a noble church, and many
monastries and other churches make the -town look most great
and magnificent at a distance. There is an abbay of English
Benedictine Nuns in this town. My Lady Abbess is one of the
wonderfullest old women I ever saw; she is 85 years of age, and
neither by her face, her walking, her discourse, nor her writeing,
could any one judge her to be above 55. She was most obliging,
and my Lady Catherine Howard (a lady of excellent parts and
admirable virtue) was so exceedingly obligeing too that it is not
to be exprest. The English Jesuits have a college here too; the
principall is Lieutenant-Collonel Midletown, who layed down his
employment under the King because the King was Catholique, and
by his own search it pleased God to give him the knowledge of
the truth, and so he became Catholique and religious, and is a
worthy good man.
At Bruges we went and waited on my Lady Anna Howard,
who is a most excellent lady; at their house we heard Compline
sung in musick very finely (for they have excellent musicians
amongst them); and the nuns treated us at their grate with a fine
collation of milks, fruits, and sweetmeats; within sat the presiding
Mother, Lady Catherine Howard, and Lady Lucy Herbert,*
daughter to the Duke of Powis, and talked with us while we eat;
Lady Lucy is a most excellent religieuse. Likewise we went and
saw the Clarisses, English Nuns + of the third order of St. Francis.
* Lady Lucy Herbert was a cousin-german of the ladies Catharme and Anna Howard
bv their mothers, who were both daughters of Edward Somerset, Marquess of Worcester.
William Earl of Powis, created a Duke by James 11. after his abdication, married the Lady-
Elizabeth Somerset, and the Duke of Norfolk married the Lady Anne Somerset.-En
f See the Abbe Mann’s account of the English monasteries on the Continent, in the
Archacologia, vol. xiii.—En.


They are called rich Clarisses, because the poor Clarisses are of a
far more rigid order, and indeed one of the most austere of the
Church of God; these are far more mitigated, and they gave us
an entertainment of musick too, that is, they sung a hymn and a
motette, (although it was not an hour of prayer,) with the organ,
violes, and violines, and voices. One Mrs. Smith, daughter to a
Scotsman, sung the best of any woman I have heard in these
countries. In their chappell is the heart of the late Duke of
Norfolk,* in an urn of porphory, with a noble inscription upon
it. Everywhere the English does us all the honour they
can. We stayed only a day and a half at Bruges, and went bv
tract-scout, upon a canall to Sluys (the first town that way that
belongs to Holland), to take our leave of the Catholick part of
Flanders. We went and heard mass at a litle fort which belongs
to the Spaniards, about a litle English mile from Sluys, where the
tract-scout stoped (for it goes no further, and passengers must foot
it to Sluys). My wife walked it bravely, and, seeing we could gett
no dinner at Sluys, we resolved to fast till we came to Flushing,
in Walkeren (Blair’s famous island); so we crossed a litle ferry, near
half as broad as the Queen’s Ferry, in an open boat; it blew furious-
ly, but we gott safe over, and took the only voytair [voiture] the
island afforded, which is an open cart. The land is called Cad-
sandt, where Cassander,f who would have reconciled Catholicks and
Protestants, was born. Our cart carryed us the nine miles (which
is the length of the island) in two hours’ time; but it rained, with
thunder and lightening, one-half of the way. We had a ferry of
open sea (for the ocean branches in towards Flanders, betwixt
* The Duke of Norfolk died in Arundel-street, Westminster, Jan. 16, 1683-4, and was
buried at Arundel, in Sussex.— Ed.
+ George Cassander was with Erasmus and Melancthon one of the most amiable and
reasonable men of his day. He was assailed by both parties for wishing to unite them in
Christian charity and mutual forbearance. His book Be officio viri pii in hoc dimdio
reliyionis brought Calvin about his ears, while Hessels attacked him in flank and Cenalis
in the rear. He died in 1566.— Ed.


Cadsandt and Walkeren), as large as Bruntisland Ferry,* to gett
to Flushing; but yet we gott over pretty well and very hungry to
Flushing about six o’clock at night. Our inn we were directed to
was a good one, but we could gett nobody could speake French,
and none of us have Dutch as yet; at last the goodman’s son came
home, but such a lump I never saw; he was about Andrew
Drummond’s height, twice as big as Humbie, and a head like a tur-
neep for litleness. He says he is 20 years of age, has been bred at
Bordeaux, and was very sparkish in his black suite, which is a Dutch
gallantry for a vear. [&ic.] Next day (as it had proved all night)
it blew furiously with thunder, rain, and great lightening. I went
and saw the whole town in the forenoon, so soon as it grew fair;
there is a new dock made there, the finest imaginable, it can hold
120 men of war. In the evening we went through the worst part
of the island to a brave city, Midleburgh; near it the country is
like a garden. There we stayed two days, and found here a Catholick
chappell. On Sundays afternoon we went to Camphire, where
one William Gordon, a young man who has married a rich hand-
some Dutch lass, carried us to his house, and lodged and enter-
tained us most nobly ; his wife is the genteelest best bred Dutch
woman I ever saw. Next day he carryed us round the island to
Domburgh, a fine village, where he treated us at dinner, and then
showed us West Capped, where the dyke is that preserves the
country from the sea. It is odd to see how securely they dwell
when there is so small a business betwixt them and destruction.
The work is great; but what can resist an enraged sea, or a de-
luded multitude ? After this day’s pleasant promenade (for in
our return we saw a most admirable garden of a Radtsheer,f or one
of their States Generali, at a place called Poppingdoun,) we took
the scout for Zurickzee, a town in an island not far off; but it
took us too much time (the weather being calm) to suffer us to go
any farther, so we stayed at this town from 3 afternoon to next
* The ferry from Leith to Kinghorn, in Fifeshire. —Ed. + A Councillor.— Ed.


morning. It proved mighty hott; but yet we walked about all the
town, which is large and pleasant. Next morning in open cart we
went 3 hours to a place where once stood a town called Bomenee
[Bommenede], near Brewerhaven, where we overtook the Burgo-
master of Zurickzee going to Rotterdame. Our way lay by
Helvoet Sluys; we were to go betwixt Goree and Somerdyke,
but a dead calm overtook us about a musket shot from the
shore, and we lay 3 hours for the tide ; at last the tyde
came, but a contrary gale sprung up, and we turned up to gett
through the flatts betwixt the islands. But all would not do;
we came a’ground on the Halls, and, the heat encreasing, and
the clouds gathering, we would gladly have been a’shore to
lye in a booar’s house. Our skipper told us there was but an
open cart to carry us to Sommerdyke, and we would be better
aboard; but the Burgomaster, with a cousine of his and another
man, who spoke English, with their wives, waded through the
sleek and salt water near half a mile, took a cart and were wett
to the skin; for such thunder and lightening I never saw. We
sent our honest young man, captain of a ship, one Gordon,
a’shore to gett us some meat (for we were made believe we would
be only 3 hours on the water, and now it was about 7 a’clock at
night, and both my wife and I fasting). He gott a piece of an old
ham, two dozen of hard eggs, and some brown bread and beer;
and in my life did I never eat meat that relished better than that
ham did to me. My wife eat heartily too; and in the storm of
thunder and fire we spent the evening, and lay still untill 12
a’clock, that we sett saill and arrived at Helvoetsluys about 3 in the
morning. We gott into an English house (one Howie’s, he says he
is cousine german to the Earl of Buchan, a very honest man).
Next day we came to the Briel by wagon, for it lyes in the same
island; Helvoet is a place where lyes many of the States men of
warr, and here the English packet boat goes off and comes on. It
is but one row of houses on each side of the harbour, but they are
very prettily built; the Briel is a pretty large but unwholesome


place, bravely fortified. We stayed there untill next day about 12
a’clock; my wife walked round the walls, which lam perswaded
is 3 English miles. Next day in a hudge storm of wind we went
up to Rotterdam, 3 hours up the river, and found letters by which
we learned that your nephew designed to be at Ghent the 23d
of August, if I pleased; this uncertainty made us bid him come on,
if he got a pass, and we went to the Hague. Lord Bellendine* an
his spouse, my Lady Dundee and Kilsyeth, took an ague. We
gott an account of your nephew's comeing on, and took a yaucht,
and arrived here last week, where we found the gentleman + m good
health. You may judge of our meeting after so long an absence ;
he is a tall, well-shaped, and a very worthy youth, and has been
the happiest youth in a governor of any breathing; my wife is fond
of him as if he were her’s; and now he waits only for a pass to
go home.
If you have gott all my letters you have almost a diary of my
life, especially when I stirr abroad; and it is a task nothing but
the love and esteem I have for you, dearest sister, could make me
put to my-self; but I take so much pleasure to do any thing that
may be in the least acceptable to her, that it is easie to me to go
about any such task. I wish all your friends were proportionally
kind ; but you are not the only person has ground to complain, as
your ? nephew will tell you; some people’s ambition and avarice
has no bounds; God help poor mankind when they propose any
end to themselves but the glory of God and their own perfection!
Would to God you knew the true sentiments of Christianity, you
* John Ker, fourth son of William second Earl of Roxburghe, succeeded his cousin
as Lord Bellenden in 1671, and died in 1707. His spouse was Mary Counts dowager of
Dalhousie, second daughter of Henry Moore, first Earl of Drogheda The Earl of Perth
seems to have confused this lady with Jean widow of the celebrated John Graham of C -
verhouse, Viscount Dundee, killed at the battle of Killicranky in 1689; and who having
married secondly William Livingston, third Viscount of Kilsyth, ato.acqumrf that title
She was the third daughter of William Lord Cochrane, eldest son of W illiam first Earl of
Dundonald. —Ed. _
+ James Lord Drummond, the writer’s son, by his first wife.—Ed.


would excell all I know of your sex and quality; but this must be
obtained of God and not of you. I am your Lord’s faithfull
servant, as I am to Lord Hay, Lady Mary, and all your family.
God give Mr. James health.
Adieu.
LETTER XIV.
Nemigen, 28 th Nov. 1694.
My dearest dear Sister,
It is now near a moneth since I left Antwerp in order to my
Roman journey. I wrote to you from Rotterdam, where I was
to settle my correspondence. I left that place on Munday the
29th new stile, and was that night at Utricht, where I stayed only
one day. We left our servants and bagage to come by water
hither to meet us; for, as you will see in the map, the Rhine divides
itself at Skinkin Scans, [Schenck,] and one part of it, which
still retains the name, goes to Huichine, [Heussen,] and so to
Utricht, &c.; the other, which passes by here, is called the
Waal, and goes to join the Meuse, near Dordrucht; but by
ill luck for us the wind got into the east that very day our
goods should have come up hither, so that we have been
lyen here these six days, and may do six more, if by good
fortune our folks get not some wagon to hyre. You may imagine
the trouble it is to us to lye in this hole, where, except three
Bruxelles gentlemen, no body is to be conversed with. We
are ill lodged even in the best tavern in town, and weary enough.
If the Plenepotentiaries at the treaty had been no better accom-
modated they had sooner come to an agreement, except that their
honour had made them preferr their countries interest to their
private ease. In this our solitude your dear letter of the 30th


October found me, and was a very welcome entertainment to me.
No body gives me so full and particular account of our country as
you do ; continue it, I beseech you, and lett any of your friends
find a way to direct a letter from you once a moneth at least, by
Father Lessly, Rector of the Scots College at Rome. I hope my
son, who is now at London, will return to Scotland with Earl
Marischall, for my daughter* writes she hopes to be ready for a
journey against Christmass, and then he must have help from all
his friends in order to keep himself from the evil designs of his
enemies. You do me a great favour to lett me know all the news
of our own country, particularly of friends and relations, and
especially of your own family; and you do us a most singular
favour by enquireing after our children at Banff, for no body does
so much as mention them except yourself. I am sorry for the
poor old Bishop,t and far more for his soul than for his life. lam
sure that it wants but consideration and good will to make all the
world Catholicks. There is no one liveing gives me so many sad
thoughts about that business as you do. Would to God you would
read King Charles’ papers, the Bishop of Meaux’s Expositions of
the Conference with Monsieur Claude, and Monsieur 1 apin s X
Tollerence des Protestants. The hereticall papers daily emitted in
England, full of wit and eloquence, but void of the true spirit of
Christianity, do so amuse such as are disposed to cheat themselves,
and who would fain be supported in their mistakes, that it is no
wonder one bred up with prejudices should be long of determin-
ing. But a good honest heart, full of God’s grace and desirous to
please him and be saved, would soon penetrate into the diabolical 1
secrets of their devices and cheating sophisms, and escape from
the snare into the arms of a mother who is still ready to embrace
her returning children. I doubt not but your reading with that
impartiality you may learn to put on the formost papers would do
CAMD. SOC.
II
* The Countess Marischall. —Ed.
f Probably James Drummond, Bishop of Brechin, who died in 1G95. Ed.
$ See Note, page 20.


you infinite good. I cannot tell if Dr. Livingston gave you Mon-
sieur Papin’s book ; it is called the Tollerence des Protestants; if he
did not, my son has it and will lend it you.
One who were curious in matters of antiquity would find exer-
cise in this town, for the Romans had a camp very near it, where
infinite numbers of meddals, Roman locks and keys, urns, inscrip-
tions, lachrimatories, idols, buttons, buckles, &c. are daily found.
One Smetius, a minister of this town, has a very large colection,
made by his father and by himself; it is a pity he should be such
a blockhead as neither to know the value of what he possesses,
nor to be able to give any satisfaction to strangers who see his
rarities. He has a great collection of modern meddals too, and
some very dishonourable for Britain. I saw all, and heard my
master very scurvily used, for the man thought me of his own stamp;
but his tongue will do no great hurt, for he is a very stupid fellow.
You say you knownot where our brother* is; he is nowatOrleance
[Orleans]. The court could bear him no longer; the King was
most unwilling to part with him, which my Lady Melfort t observ-
ing, she puft up her lord to ask every thing could be asked, that it
might apear (as they pretended) that the King would let no body
suffer for him unrewarded. The history of all you will gett from
your nephew: if it had not been by help of friends, one of your
servants had been sore run down by the bargain; and as yet I
cannot well tell how far matters have gone before wee begune to
suspect foull play. You may easily imagine how much this pre-
cedure has been a disapointment to me; but God’s will be done !
As to my journey, my greatest difficulty is my wife’s unwilling-
ness to it. She was very good friends with all the ladys of
the first quality in Brabant. The Princesse of Vaudmont has
represented Italy as so melancholy a country that the difference
appears very dismall; but I hope God will provide for all. I
w ould fain pass Christmass with Abbot Cook, who lived with me
at Stobhall, but I fear I shall not reach his monastrie.]:
* The Earl of Melfort. + See note in p. 33. + At Wurtzburg : see p. 91.


This town stands upon the bank of the Waal, but well fortified ;
the east end of it is much higher than the west. From it there is a
litle tower called the Belvidere, one sees the rich country of the Bet-
tuwe like a garden to the north. The Bettuweis the country which
lyes betwixt the branches of the Rhine: viz. 1 hat called the
Rhine, and that other called the Waal. * The Waal here is near
thrice as big as Tay, at Perth, very rapid. The town is suposed
to be the Urbs Batavorum of Cmsar. It is not pleasant 5 only it
has a pretty market-place, and at the Belvidere a grove of trees,
which, in summer, must needs be very delightfull; near it stands
the castle, said to be built by Csesar, a vile antient hole. The one-
half of the town at least is Catholick, but the Huguenots have the
churches. To-morrow is St. Andrew’s Eve here, which we kept
nine days since at Rotterdam.
My wife is not very well; yet she will not stay behind in the
journey. She says you have reason to make one letter serve us
both, and she begs that this from me may pass with you for an
answer from both. I would write often to the Earl of Erroll, but
I still tell you what I say to one I say to both, that is, that on
earth you have not a more faithfull and affectionate servant to you
both than I am. If you will keep my letters untill we meet, I
will send you full relations of what I see wherever I pass, and if I
do not send them by the post you shall have them some other
way. My wife gives her faithfull service to your ladyship and my
lord, as I do to my Lord Hay, Lady Mary, and all the dear babies.
I pray God to recover dear Mr. James.
My daughter Marischall writes that her son, Lord Keith, looks
like a spright for smallness and litleness; God bless the dear
babies and give them health, and for their height it is no great
matter. lam sorry Anne should be so often ill; give liei my
blessing. Adieu ! my dearest Sister.


LETTER XV.
TO THE COUNTESS MARISCHALL.
Venice , 18 th Feb. 1695.
My dearest Child,
1 received a letter from your brother last post without any date
put to it, and seeing he said nothing either of my Lord Marischall
or you, I conclude that both of you were well when he wrote it;
but I am troubled I should not hear more frequently from your
self, for you know how tenderly I love you and how much lam
concerned in all that relates to you. I long to hear of your return
to Scotland; for every body that loves my lord wishes him at
home. I have been here a fortnight, and I think I shall be here
fifteen or twenty days longer, although I do not very much like
the place, for this puddling in a tubb continually is no charme to
me; yet being here I resolve to see what is curious before Igo
away. My wife is very much out of order; the pain in her stomach
has recurred, though not so violently as before the voyage we
made to Aix la Chapelle, yet severe enough to make her very un-
easy ; but if Lent were over and we got once to the terra firma I
hope she will be better; I fancy as soon as she can write she will
give you a description of a Venetian ball. The grand dance is to
walk about (with or without musick is all one) for three or four
hours, every gallant with a lady, and this procession ends with an
English country dance; then they dance, four together, a dance
which I cannot remember how it is called, I think it is a Riga-
doun, but it is to a Minuete; and then comes the French dances,
as awkwardly as can be; and last of all, about six in the morning,
they dance torlanos to such tunes as would go very well on a
bagpipe, and they dance just as our Highlanders do, only the
woman have a way of showing and shaking their feet which is


pretty enough, and, to say true, this is the most naturall part and the
best performed of the solemnity ; but my wife will give you a fuller
account of this matter. Some churches, severall cloisters, many
pictures and statues, are admirably fine here, and in short it looks
as much odder than any town in Holland than Holland does from
other countries. I have no time to write this night to my sister ;
but if you would send her this letter to let her see that I do re-
member her with all imaginable esteem and affection you will do
me a kindness, and let this give Earl Erroll my most humble ser-
vice ; likewise tell me how your brother passes his time at London,
and give my most affectionate service to Earl Marischall. God
bless both him, and you, and your children. Adieu ! my dearest.
My wife gives your lord and you her service; no body can love
their friends better than she does you, your brother, and Earl
Marischall.
LETTER XVI.
TO THE COUNTESS OF ERROLL.
Venice , 25 th Feb. IGDS.
My dearest Sister,
You maybe almost tempted to believe I have forgott you, seeing
my silence may appear too long since I begun my journy; but
when you consider what a country Germany is, how many long
days’ journeys we have made, and found no accommodation fitt
for the meanest sort of people at night, and what inconveniency
attends the hurry of such a life as ours has been, you will not
blame me. I had made notes as we came through in the seve-
rall countries in our way, to write you long letters; but Blaire
haveing recalled his son (who only waits for mony to carry him


back), he will give you either by word, if he goes to Scotland, or
by writing, if he stays at Utricht, an account of our voyage. The
Rhine runns through very great hills from near Bonne to Bingen,
which was three long days’ sailling to us, and you never saw
castles hanging in the air upon points or rocks, and odd situa-
tions of houses, strange shapes of hills, and villages lying in cricks
where there is but just as much bounds as to build them on, forts
where one would scarce believe one could carry materialls to the
hill top, and woods and vineyards where there is no appearance
of earth to nourish them, painted, or in taille douce, that is not
here outdone on the banks of this great river. We left the
Rhine at Mayence. We past through Frankfort, Wurtzbourg,
Ratisbon, Munich, Inspruck, and Trent in our way hither, and
saw enough of curious things to have one thing beat out another
out of our heads ; for who can remember what is seen in so short a
time ? * We arrived here about three weeks ago. The Carnavall
took up ten days of it, where we saw what in Scotland would be
thought downright madness; everybody is in mask, a thing of
tafeta, called a bahul,f is put on the head, which covers one’s face
to the nose. The upper part is covered by people of quality with
a white mask like what the ladys used to tye on with a chin-
cloak long ago. The bahul hangs down about the shoulders a hand-
breadth below the top of the shoulder. A Venetian nobleman’s
gown, an Armenian long garment furred, a vest called a Hon-
grois, which reaches to the knee, furred, or a plain scarlet, is what
grave people wear; others are cloathed as they please, some like
doctors of law, others with peacocks’ trains and hatts as broad as
six hatts, others as harlequins, ladys as country girls, and some
as oddly as one’s wildest dreams could represent them; en Jin,
no extravagant conceipt can outdo what one sees on St. Mark’s
* Not a bad hint for many tourists, who have published a thousand volumes since this
wholesome truth was penned.—Ed.
+ The Spanish baliul is a covering of skin over a vessel, and we presume applied to
this head covering. It also occurs in the Bas Breton.—Ed.


Place. Sometimes a company of noblemen and ladys dress
themselves up like country people and dance torlanos in the open
place, which is the frolick I saw that I like the best, for they
dance scurvily when they pretend to French or English dances
(for here they dance country dances at all their balls). A torlano
is somewhat like the way our Highlandefs dance, but the women
do it much more prettily than the men. Sometimes you shall
see a young pair of eyes with a huge nose and a vast beard play-
ing on a guitar and acting like a mountebank. On one hand you
shall hear a dispute in physick, turning all into ridiculous ; on the
other one, on a subject of law; some dialogues of mere witt, and
things said that are surprizing enough. But on the whole matter
St. Mark’s Place is like a throng of foolls. On Shrove Thursday
a bull is beheaded by a butcher chosen by his fellows for that
feat, and if he does it well in presence of the Doge and all the
Senate is treated in senerissimo, feasted, and has the best
musick at supper that can be. He I saw do it did it cleverly at
one blow, and did not seem to strain neither. The Doge’s guards
conducted him to and from the place, and a firework is sett on
fire in fair daylight. A fellow is drawn up on a flying rope, such
as mountebanks use, in a ship about the bigness of a gondola
(which is a very long small boat), and all the way he fires gunns
and throws grenads amongst the people, but they are only paper
ones. Then he flyes down from the top of St. Mark’s steple,
where he had left his gondola. This steeple is disjointed from
the church 70 or 80 paces. And thus they divert the people
here to amuse them and keep them from frameing conceits of
government and religion, such as our giddy people frame to
themselves and make themselves the scorn and reproach of man-
kind ; for now all goes under the name of English, and we are
said to be so changeable and foolish that nothing from our parts
seem strange. Beheading, dethroneing, and banishing of kings
being but children’s play with us.
Here are rich churches, a city of pallaces, and instead of streets


alleys of water; gondolas are our coaches, and, although they
be all covered with only black cloath, yet no coach in Europe
has finer glasses than they have, so that you go in a box of
christall through the town. The canalls are generally very nar-
row, only the Canall Grande is like a river; it has only one
bridge, that of Rialto, which is of white marble, and the widest
arch in Europe; Don *is a bauble compared with it. St. Mark’s is
a building after the Greek mode; it has six cupolas. The church
is low and dark; but the pictures in the roof, the floor, the front
without, &c. are all mosaick, and so lovely that I never weary
to look at them; the ground is gold, the figures all in their
naturall collors, made of pieces of stone indented, and so disposed
that no pencill can outdo them. The place, as you may see it in
many pictures and books, is thus
The church is where
the three strokes are ; the water, (which is very wide,) is where the
two points are, the two pillars, St. Theodore on one and St.
Mark’s lion on the other; the Librarie is next you, and St.
Markus pallace, the Doge’s residence, over against it; the one
point in the corner is St. Mark’s steeple. The other place is the
finest in Europe; it is where the Procurators of St. Mark live;
it is like the largest court of the finest pallace in Europe, and
very large it is; a gallery upon pillars goes quite round, where
eight or ten may walk abreast, and all is uniform. Here are pic-
tures innumerable and inestimable, some admirable churches, and
many noble edifices. I have not yet seen the Arsenall, when I
see it I will tell you my thoughts of it. Pray gett Lassells,f for
none else is worth your while, and I shall direct you to him in all
* The author doubtless refers to a bridge on the Don in Aberdeenshire, which has a
celebrated and picturesque ancient arch.— Ed.
T A Voyage through Italy ; with the Characters of the People, and a Description of the
Chief Towns. By Richard Lassels. Paris, 1670, and London, in two parts, Bvo. 1670,
1686, 1689.— Ed.


I see, and if I observe what he did not I will tell you. If you see
Misson* do not beleive one word he says, for he is the most
infamous lyar in nature.
When the Pope + heard of the Princesse of Orange’s % death he
said —“ Honora Patrem tuum et Matrem tuam ut sis longevus
super terram. Sometimes, ’ said he, u God perfects a happy soul
and makes it fitt to enjoy his blessed vision in a very short time,
but then he shortens the pilgrimage to receive home his longing
child into his own embraces ; but these are miracles. A long life
is a benediction to a Catholick, that he may live to God when he
has outlived his more violent passions, of the which ambition is
none of the least dangerous; to a heretick it proves a double
advantage, for they have the more leisure to think of truth with
impartiality, and if they be so unhappy as to mistake in their
choice their punishment is so long prolonged.§ But that unlucky
princess, said he, is pluckt away in the midst of her ambitious
thoughts, in the height of her prosperous enjoyment of her good
religious father’s kingdoms, and in an absolute impenitence foi
her crimes.” Such a discourse does not resemble Anti-Christ, and
I have it from good hands.
This morning, at 6 a’clock, here happened an earthquake
which lasted about three minutes. Our house stood it out, so
that, except our bed shook like to throw us out of it, and that
the doors and windows made a noise that lookt as if heaven and
earth had been going together, we had no hurt. Many chimneys
were thrown down, and I hear of three people killed by then
falling in upon people’s beds; but we fear that where the land is
CAMD. SOC.
1
* A New Voyage in Italy, by Francois Maximilien Misson, a work of which there were
several English editions. —Ed.
f Innocent XII.: see note in p. 79.
+ Queen Mary, whose royal title is not acknowledged by the Chancellor of James 11.
She died 28 Dec. 1694, aged 33.
§ Id est, delayed ; and one might think no very great consolation, with eternity before
them.—Ed.


more solid more hurt may be done. I beseech you gett Lassells,
for it will save me a labour, seeing I can direct you to him many
times, and so spare half a letter. Give my most humble service
to your dear Lord, and to all your noble family, and believe that
to his Lordship, to you, and to all yours, none can be more
faithfull servants than my wife and I.
Adieu,
LETTER XVII.
my dearest Sister.
Venice, 4th Mars, 1695.
My dearest Sister,
I have stayed here a week longer than I expected, for the
weather has been so very bad there is no traveling; indeed I have
never seen it so cold in Scotland in the beginning of March as it
is just now here. To-morrow and Munday I ’ll employ in seeing
the litle and great Arsenalls and Murano,* and then I have done
with Venice. But, although lam makeing all possible hast to see
if possibly I can be at Rome against Holy Thursday, yet I fear
(seeing I go by Modena) I can hardly gett it done. I have had a
great cold ever since I came here, but it is renewed since the
earthquake, for before that I was beginning to be better; but
since that the weather became colder, and I had occasion to be
abroad somewhat late one night, and now I am troubled with a
great cough. This day the Doge, the Senate, and all the nobles,
have been at a very solemn procession in the place of St. Mark, to
give God thanks for this city’s haveing received so litle damage
from so dreadfull an earthquake as that of the 26th of February
* A village near Venice on the island called San Christoforo di Murano, and the great
.cemetery of the city.—En.


proved to be. The prayers of 40 hours had preceeded. A jesuite
preached an excellent sermon at the beginning of the devotion,
and a Capucine one to-day just before the procession. . I pitied
the good old Doge * (who is quite lame) to see him hopping about
St. Mark’s place, yet he gott through with it very well; indeed
we had all of us good occasion to thank God we escaped so well,
for the Carmelites’ church in Padua and three cathedrals in the
Venetian state, besides many houses, are fallen, and more than a
thousand people killed. Treviso and its country, all up the river
Brenta, have suffered the most; we have not heard what has
happened at a greater distance, but we fear it may have done harm
everv where. Our last letters from Rome tell us that the Du e
of Hanover + has reconciled himself to the Catholick Churc .
This is all our Italian news; I wish I had the same news from
Scotland of a friend of mine.
So soon as I arrive at Rome you shall hear of me ; meanwhile
give my wife’s and my humble service to Earl Erroll, Lord Hay,
Lady Mary, my dear godson, &c., and accept of my wife’s, which
by me she offers you. Her writing to her poor sister Dunfermline ;J
takes her up this night; next occasion she will write. We hear
* Silvestro Valiere, elected in 1694 ; died 5 July, 1700. His wife, Elizabeth Quir.m,
was also crowned as Duchess in 1694, her last predecessor in that dignity having been
Maria Grimani, in 1596. She died in 1709, aged 80.-Ed , ... .
+ Maximilian-William, third son of Ernest Augustus Duke of Hanover and brother
King George the First, ported .he Protest,-, fnith tor the ehureh of Borne, become,
Field Marshal in the Imperial service, and died at Vienna in 1 / 26. D.
t James Seton, fourth Earl of Dunfermline, married Lady Jean Gordon, third daughter
of Lewis third Marquess of Huntly, and sister to George first Duke of Gordon and to
Countess of Perth. This passage affords the information which is deficient eisewhere by
determining which of the Earl of Perth’s three wives was the lady wife
letters • for the dates of his second and third marriages are not recorded. His third w
was Lady Mary, second daughter of Lewis third Marquessof Huntly and widow of Adam
Urquliart of Meldrum, who died in 1684. She died at St. Germain’s, m March 1726,
aged 80.— Ed.


seldom of our friends now, but we must accustome our selves to
be strangers to our own country.* God preserve you and yours.
Adieu!
Murano is where the fine glass is made.
LETTER XVIII.
Venice, 28 th March, 1695.
My dearest Sister,
I believe that all my friends every where will think me lost, for
it is above a fortnight that I expected to be at Rome; but the ways
of Lumbardy are so very deep still that there is no travelling, for
this last winter the water of the Brenta overflowed its banks; and
the rains that have fallen ever since the earthquake, of the which
I gave you an account in my last, has made the roads very dirty.
About a fortnight ago I went to Padua in order to proceed in my
journey, but I could not; so I resolved to stay untill the 6th of
April, (which is the Tuesday after Easter,) and, liaveing kept Lent,
and fish being uneasie to be had, (except drest with oyl, which I
cannot eat warm,) I thought it best to leave off thoughts of
traveling until 1 Lent was over.
The Earl of Kildare t (whose first lady was neice to the late Duke
of Lenox) stays at Padua, and would needs have us his guests
during the 8 days we stayed there, and indeed he entertained us
nobly. The Cardinall Barbarigo, + who is bishop there, and one of
the most holy bishops now liveing, (as one may judge when Dr.
* A touching expression from a “ banished Lord.”—Ed.
f John Fitz Gerald 18th Earl of Kildare married first Mary O’Brien, eldest daughter of
Henry Ibrachan (son of Henry Earl of Thomond) by Lady Catharine Stuart, daughter of
George Lord d’Aubigny, and afterwards the wife of Sir Joseph Williamson.'—Ed.
+ Cardinal Barbarigo, of a noble Venetian family, born in 1626; died in 1697.—Ed.


Burnet, with all his spite, cannot find a ground to abuse him),
sent his coaches to attend us dureing our stay there, and was as
obligeing as possible in all things to us. Padua lyes 25 miles dis-
tant from Venice; two or three miles we go through the Laguna
before we gett to land, and then we are drawn by horses, as in
Holland, through canalls, &c. which are drawn from the river
Brenta; some part of the way we go on the river itself, but the
waters carry us into the fosse of the city. It is a huge, great, ill-
peopled town. The university is quite decayed, so there is litle
to be seen, except the finest church in Italy, next to St. Peter s,
which is that of St. Justina, belonging to a monastry of Benedic-
tines, worth about 30,000/. sterling, a stately piece and nobly
adorned ; but the church is incomparable, the fine things done in
stone (not after the mosaick, which is all in litle bits, but by an
art which represents things as some tables from London are done,
but vastly finer,) that surprises one; as on a tombe, now made
an altar, which I took for St. Pachomius,* but it is not: you
see a miter, a crosier, a cross, the instruments of the saint s mar-
tyrdom, &c. so done that one would swear it were newly painted,
and is all stone, that is, jasper, porphirie, lapis lazuli, alabaster,
Turkey stones, &c. and now all the alters of that vast church are
done. That of the Blessed Sacrament (which is on the right hand
as you enter) has the history of the Last Supper so done. But
Lassells will tell you enough of this church, although it was far
from what it now is when he saw it, for I believe 50,000/. sterling
has been bestowed on it since. The cathedrall is very mean, suit-
able to the humble mind of the holy bishop Cardinall Barbarigo.
But the Santo (which is St. Antonio’s church, called il Santo par
excellence) is a rich thing; the church is very regular without in
its cupolas and towers, but dark within. The chappell of the
saint, where his body reposes, is admirably adorned with sculp-
* A saint of great austerity, who retired into the great desert of Syria, and endured the
most incredible mortifications. —Ed.


tures of white marble. The history of the saint’s life is here
seen in admirable figures. A man of quality, who stabbed his
wife, is in all the fury of a madman ; she has gott one stroke and
falls, he has her by the breast with his hand lifted to give a second,
which is held back by an old man, who has such a concern in his
look one would think he lives. The lady is quite fainted away;
a servant supports her who looks almost as dead as she; and
amongst other figures in this piece an old woman looking sorrow-
fully in at the door is most naturally [done]. But in another piece
wdiere the saint is raiseing a young man from the dead, there is an old
woman like as she had no teeth, her chin and nose are so near to
one another, who is so very well done, that in my esteem it is the
finest thing I ever saw, except the antiques in the librarie in this
city. The saint’s tomb sends forth so sweet an odure and so par-
ticular (for it resembles nothing I ever smelt to before) that I was
surprised at it; his tongue and nether jaws are yet entire ; I saw
them with great pleasure. St. Bonaventure, when generall of the
order he was of (which is that of the Franciscans), opened his grave
and found the tongue entire, and placed it where it now is. In the
treasure of this church (which is very rich) they have a glass with
a ring of gold about its brims, with the history of it wrote upon it,
which was this:—A heretick, when St. Antonio died, hearing many
who were at dinner with him magnifying the saint’s miracles and
thanking God for him, haveing the glass in his hand, said that it
was impossible that the saint could have done all these miracles
as it was for that glass to be thrown from the window upon the
street, break the stones, and continue whole; and with that goes
to the window and threw out the glass, which broke the stones, and
is as yet entire ; the attestations are most authentick of this mira-
cle. In the cloyster, which is joined to this church, I found the
Duke of Northfolk’s bowels,* w r ith a litle marble stone upon them.
* The person meant is no doubt Philip Earl of Arundel, who died at Padua, Oct. 4,
1646. His body was brought to England, and buried at Arundel. He was created Earl
of Norfolk in 1644 ; but not restored to the dukedom.— Ed.


Except Antonio’s tomb I found litle else to be seen, only the Great
Hall with a stone in it, which was Titus Livius’s grave-stone for
him and his family. There is a litle hill at the end of the Euga-
nean mountains, called Monte Selice (although I saw no flint on
it, as the name would make one expect). We went by water to it;
it is about 14 miles off through a pleasant plain. The canall is
bordered with noble pallaces here and there, as all the way betwixt
Venice and Padua is. Upon this hill are seven chappells prettily
adorned; there are severall pallaces as you go up winding, and a
fine litle town at the bottome of the hill; the cypress trees, almost
as tall as our firrs, adorn the hill admirably, and all the rest is
covered with vineyards, which yield the best grapes in this part
of Italy. My wife went up as far as the chappells carryed her,
but the steep place of the mountain she did not venture on. We
went up a scale stair bordered on both hands with cypress trees
full of their apples (which resemble firr, only they are much more
round, and in every fold have 3or 4 seeds without wings); when
the stair ends we go through vines untill we reach the top, which
is the ruins of an old castle; from thence to all hands, except the
end of the Euganean hills, you see as far as your eye can reach,
Venice 40 miles to the east, Vicenza to the west, Este to the foot
of the Euganean Mountains, the Alps beyond that, as white as at
Christmass; to the south as far as you can stretch your sight, and
this one of the most delightfull richest countrys in the world ; in
our return we saw the pallace of the Obizzi, who say their prede-
cessor was made knight of the garter by Edward the 3d of Eng-
land for takeing the King of the Scots, David Bruce, prisoner, at
the battle of Durham * This story, with many others, is admir-
ably well done on the plaster walls of the chambers (which indeed,
in my opinion, are the richest walls in the world, for they are all
* This story must be mistaken, if not entirely fictitious, as there was no knight of the
garter of the Obizzi family, and the person who really took David King of Scots prisoner
is recorded to have been John Copland, of Northumberland. (See Lingard’s History of
England.)—Ed.


painted by Paulo Veronese, whose work charms me). At our re-
turn we had a compliment from the good Cardinally who was ill at
this time, though he admitted me to see him; but now being able
to rise he allowed my wife, contrary to his custome, for he admits
no women to his house, to visite him; he understands French, and
I was interpreter to my wife in letting her know what the Car-
dinall said, for so far do I understand Italian, although I cannot
speak it. He was very obligeing to her, and made a marquise
who is his maitre d’hotelle have a collation ready for her when she
went. She went to see the refectory where he dines, for all his
family dines with him as in a convent, and scripture is read when
they eat. We are all upon all occasions so much obliged to Mr.
l’Abbe Leith, (who is Maestro de Camera to his Eminence and
Bibliothecary of St. Mark’s, a man of great parts and esteem here,
and one who is over all the cardinalls, gentlemen, and officers, as
their master, and who here has the affection and esteem of all the
nobles,) that I do not know what to say to express my sense of it;
he went with us to Padua, returned with us, and is punctually
twice a day with us. Next day after we had taken leave of the
Cardinal, we went to the Carmelites’ church, which the late earth-
quake had thrown down; it is a sad spectacle, but it did no great
hurt, only killed two old people and hurt a third; it happened
about a quarter before six a’clock (as we count) as near as I can
guess ; they were saying first mass at the high altar. So soon as
the huge goads of iron which cross the church began to crack, the
people fled to the altar and were saved; for it pleased God that
all within the raills stood. The lay brother who served mass
prayed the priest (who was much astonished) to proceede and
offer up the most holy sacrifice in thanksgiveing for their deliver-
ance, which he did. Thus you have an account of this litle pro-
menade. Here we are in the Holy week, and I must needs say I
am charmed beyond expression with the voice of a woman who
sings at the Hospitalletto. She is called the Vicentina, from the


country. She is (as they say) very ugly, but I did not believe
any human voice could have been so sweet, and could have been
made to perform such things, for she will hang upon a note longer
than one could believe one’s breath could hold out, and that with
so sweet a turning and variety of graces, that one is charmed
beyond what can be said, nor is it possible for any who has not
heard it to frame an idea of it; and truly lam now fully con-
vinced that painting, sculpture, and musique never crossed the Alps.
I go from hence next week sore against my wife s will, for she
loves Venice, which I wonder at, for as I told you in my last we
are padling in a tubb constantly, except the Rialto canall, which
is called the Canall Grande. That branch of the sea which divides
the Giudecca* from the rest of the city, and the large open betwixt
St. Markus Piazzetta, or litle place, and St. George s, where the
ships, marsihans,t and poetas J lye, all the other canalls are very
narrow, and the water stinks saddly in them. My wife continues
pretty well ever since she was at Aix, and except that I find a litle
alteration with keeping Lent somewhat strictly I am well likewise.
We give our service to dear Lord Lrroll, Lord Ilay, Lady Mary,
&C.
I offer you dailly to God, that he would convert you, that you
who see so far in all things else may at last see the unreasonable-
ness of being a Protestant; pray read Mr. Papin. Adieu.
Give my wife’s and my blessing to poor Anny.
Abbe Leith swears Burnet is the damn’dest lying rogue in the
whole world. I give it you as the Abbot’s own words, who speaks
broad Scots, excellent French, and Italian like a Roman,
CAMD. SOC.
K
* Tho Jews’ quarter.-—Ed.
■f- Marsigliana, a kind of Venetian ship. Altieri Did, Ed.
+ Peotta, a gondola with ten oars.—Ed.


LETTER XIX.
Boloigna, 23d April, 1695.
My dearest Sister,
I fancy you will begine to think that the earthquake has so
shaken our bodys that we dare not venture to hasten forward
towards Rome; but it is not that that retards us, but a violent
cold I gott upon the Po as I came from Ferrara to Modena,
which hangs so upon me that I cannot as yet gett rid of it; but
enough of this. If you have Lassells by you you may save me
the trouble of a long letter; I shall only direct you to him,
and that will suffice for it is a book easie to be had. From
Venice to Ferrara cost us two days; the first night we laye upon
our Bouricello, which is a boat which has two pretty large rooms
(for a boat, at least), one far more fine and large than the other.
I fancy it was here I catched cold. Next night we lay in a base
inn on the south side of the river. The Po is like a litle sea;
it was the second day before we entered into it, it was full of rain
and melted snow, otherways it had not apeared so very big; but
certainly it is a noble river. We came to Ferrara on a Friday,
and stayed all Saturday and a good part of Sunday. We saw
severall fine churches, the outside of the Legate’s pallace, and
that called the Diamond one. The noble cloisture of the Car-
thusians, founded by Due Sforza,* who lies in the great court in a
tomb erected for him; and, when we had seen all worth seeing,
on Sunday afternoon we went to our Bouricello to go to Modena,
in two days and an half. We were not above one day’s sailling (if
being drawn by horses can be called sailling) upon the Po ; other
rivers and canalls carried us to Finale di Modena (the first town of
that Dukedome we came at) ;f here a good honest old priest came
and told us he was appointed by the Due to see that strangers of
* A branch of the Pallavicini family.—Ed.
t Called however the last, Finnic from being the last on the eastern side of the domi-
nions of Modena.—Ed,


quality were well used, he offered us his own house, he provided
us with some bed cloaths, &c. he carryed us to walk about the
town, he took us to the convent of the Minims (for it hapened to
be St. Francis of Paul’s day), and thence to the Capucens, who
used us most courtly, and showed us with all respect imaginable a
tabernacle made of wood but excellently earved, and severall very
pretty statues on it of excellent workmanship, all of equall bigness,
and none above a foot long. Next morning, when we could gett
no horses to draw our boat, he gott us oxen which did as well.
We came to a litle place called Bonport at night, where our host
told us a pleasant story of four of his German guests. He says
they fell to drinking one day at his house, and in 8 hours’ time
they four drunk 104 bottles of strong wine (now it was not the
ordinary bottle but a pott, that held at least a Scots pint) j* he says
that indeed he carryed them off like swine (which was the name
he gave them).
Rome , 19 May, 1695.
Company interrupted me at Boloigna, so that untill now I could
not begine again to continue (then) where I broke off. We
arrived at Modena the evening after. The town stands in the
plain, that is, in that vast low country called Lombardy; it is near
to the Appenine hills, that is, within three miles of them; it is
said to be near 5 Italian miles of circuite, but I do not believe it
is so much. The Marquis de’ Giraldini, first gentleman of the
bedchamber to the Duke, was most obligeing to us. My wife fell
ill here, and Mad. la Marquise de’ Giraldini waited on her as if
she had been her woman. The Duke’s pallace when finished will
be a very noble structure, but it will not be finished very soon j
he has a noble collection of admirable pictures, and in a long
gallery many more curiosities of nature and art. The Duke was
very obligeing to me, but the Germans are quartered in his
country, and some other reasons made him somewhat less
forward than he would have been. Here are very fine churches; the
Cathedrall is little and somewhat dark jit is very antient. In the
* An English quart,'—Ed.


church of the Servi* (of the Augustine order) there are altars of
all the saints of the house of Este, and they are not a few. The
Duke made the Marquis de’ Giraldini invite us every night to his
house, and there was all the Duke’s best musick (IFaciJ, so famous
in England, and much so here, although he be very unwilling to
sing, and so very proud that he has refused Princes sometimes,
yet sung as much as we would; and one Lovigi (who, although
scarce 16 years old, has a most sweet voice) sung too. Eunuchs
swarm all over Italy, but here they are (in proportion) very
numerous in comparison of other places; and, to say true, were it
not a sin to make them, their voices are very charming. From
that we came through a most delightful country, to Boloigna, 20
Italian miles. Monsieur le Quaranta Doria (who with his lady, now
Countess of Almond, who stays with the Queen at St. Germain’s,
and was at Edinburgh when the Queen was there,) was most
obligeing to us, and dureing our 7 or 8 days’ stay there furnisht
us with coaches, and had us every night to a meeting of ladys
and cavalliers, where we had admirable musique,—La Migniata, a
woman; Pestochino, an Eunuch ; a goldsmith, who is, for method,
the greatest master in Italy; and severall others, who sung and
played on musicall instruments to admiration. While we were here
the Landgrave of Hesse’s eldest son came to Boloigna, and lodged
in the house where we lay ; he became so very good friends with
me that I had all the pleasure imaginable to waite on his highness.
He is a most hopefull Prince, and, had he a better religion, he
wants no accomplishment; he is 19 years of age, but very forwards,
and very humble and affable. In this town the monastries all are
most sumptuous pallaces ; those of the Servi, the Augustines, and
above all the Dominicans are admirably fine, so are the Fran-
ciscans, and the Chanoin regulars. In that last is a masterpiece of
Michael Angelo’s, a St. Cecilia. Everything in this place is
admirable. In the Dominicans’ church lyes the body of their
Patriarch Dominick in an admirable tomb, now an altar, all full of
* So called from their styling themselves Servi di Maria, or particular devotees of the
Virgin. Fra Paulo belonged to this order.—Ed.


the history of this saint’s miracles in bas relief in marble; there is
a litle door in the back of the altar where people go in and kneell
upon the saint’s body while they say their prayers, but the body
as was the antient way of burying, lyes deep in the ground.
Here are 3 or 4 admirable pictures; one of a St. Hyacinth,
and another of St. Dominick, throwing the orthodox and the
hereticall books in the fire, to let see that God had asured him
the hereticall books would burn and the others not. The library,
the cloisters, the cellars, en fin all the house, is extraordinary mag-
nificent ; but, if one should enter upon a description of all that is
fine in the severall monastrys of Boloigna, it must take up a whole
book. There is a miraculous image of our Lady in a monastry
five miles off. They have carryed on a vaulted way, open to the
left hand, and suported with pillars and painted to the right; it is
carried on already more than half way to the monastrie, and they
are still working at it; it is a prodigious work, and will be very
fine when finished. Without the town stands a monastry of
Olivetan Monks (they are a branch of St. Bennet’s order, but
wear white). Mr. Lassells gives a full account of it. Ihe prospect
from it (for it stands upon the hill, and here begine the Appe-
nines to rise gently) ; the collines are full of wine, and that sup-
ported by white mulberries for the silk worms, and corn or grass
growing, makes a vastly rich and glorious country. The prospect,
I say, from it is admirable; one sees Ferrara to the sea near to
Modena, and every where you see a pointe de vue; the fields
richly covered with corn, oyl, and silk, and every tree (except the
olives) full of wine; the houses thick and all white; so that
Lassells says, to him the plain country lookt like a vast sea
covered with ships, for the houses lookt all like sails. In
Boloigna is a steeple that hangs to one side as if it wold fall.* In
St. Prospero’s church Cassini + has made a noble meridionall line,
* John Dominic Cassini, the famous astronomer, the first resident in the Royal observa-
tory of Paris; who discovered four satellites of Saturn, and died in 1712. Ed.
+ This is the well known Tom degli AsindU, celebrated in Dante’s Divina Commedia.
Ep.


which is markt by a hole in the rooff ; by good luck it goes slant-
ing betwixt two pillars and touches neither, although it passes
very near to both. The Cardinal Legate Durazzo* showed a great
desire to see me, so I went and payed my duty to him. He has
been Nuncio in many courts of Europe before he was Cardinall;
he is a great lawyer and a scollar, more than ordinary ; he askt me
many questions of Oateses plott, of the late revolution of the
religion of England, of the many sects in Brittain and Holland,
and seemed very well satisfied with our long conversation. Car-
dinals in Italy are very great men, so it passes for a rule of cere-
mony here not to go away untill they please to show some desire
one should go, but being to go out of town that day I took the
liberty to take leave after near two hours’ conversation. The
Legat accompanyed me with all his court to the Guard Hall, and
his Maestro de Camera to the top of the great stairs, and all the
other gentlemen to the coach ; imediately after he sent an Embas-
ciata to have returned the visite, but we were parting. The Prince
of Hesse would have led my wife to her coach, but I would by no
meanes consent to it. We parted from Bologna, and we went
to Imola; there is nothing save the Cathedrall to be seen, and
nothing rare in it. Next morning we past the Rubicon ; I made
our voiturino advertize me when we came near to it. There is a
pillar about two pair of butts from the end of the bridge; on the
syde next the highway is an inscription what Pope built the
bridge, or some such thing, but on the other side from the way is
the decree of the Senate, declareing that any officer or soldier that
durst pass the river (which is a very pityfull one) guilty of high
treason, but this did not stop Caesar; f the decree is excellent
Latine. I am not sure (though) if it was this day we past the
Rubicon, but that I shall rectify afterwards; we past through
* Of a noble and ancient family in Genoa ; made Cardinal by Pope Innocent XI. in
1686.— Ed.
t The question of the identity of this river, with its famous Caesarian quotation, Jacta
est alea, is, notwithstanding this inscription, and the u Voiturino’s” conviction, not quite
established,—Ed.


Cesena, Forli, Castelbolognese, and severall other towns, which
are Bishops’ seats, until we came to Rimini (famous for that
pityfull cavall of the Protestants concerning the councill held
there). The weather which from cold and rainy became very
hott when we were at Bologna, so that I was forced in one day to
put off a thick quilted vest and a flannell waistcoat (here for the
first time I found the heat very troublesome). Here I saw an
antient triumphall arch; a little giuglio or needle of porphory
near to it, of the which nobody could give us any account; the
cathedrall, a pretty church, but nothing extaordinary; a bridge
built over the river, that is, at the end of the town by the which
we entered, built by Julius or Augustus Caesar, with an inscription
telling so much, very entire on one hand and quite broken on the
other. A litle chapell in the midle of the marcat-place, where St.
Bonaventure made the ass leave his corn (to confound an here-
tique who denyed our Lord’s presence in the Euchariste,) to adore
the blessed Sacrament, and as another dumb ass reproved the
madness of a prophet so this by an action far above its capacity
did the obstinacy of an heretick; from this we went to Gatholica,
where the Bishops who stood firm against the Emperor’s violence
retired and gave that honourable name to a very pitiful place.
We had great pleasure to go along by the sea-side most of the
way. Above this little place stands a castle, which belonged to
the Dukes of Urbino, and next day we saw many more, for the
way was up hill and down hill next morning for severall miles,
and every hill almost has castles or villages on their tops; but near
to Pesaro nothing can be more pleasant than the country is,
except the valey of Fuligno (of the which afterwards); from
thence we went to Fano, there is a triumphall arch,* and without
the town an aquiduc in our way to the sea (for we kept by the sea
for near two days together or more, and it was smooth as a look-
ing glass, and very pleasant, for we had no so excessive heat as in
* Erected in honour of Augustus, who planted a colony there.— Ed.


the inland road). Senegalia, where we came att night, is a litle
compact town, fortified; it is the Pope’s, for all from midway
betwixt Modena and Bologna belongs to the Pope; this litle forti-
fied town has no garrison to speak of. From it we went next
day to the hill above Ancona; to dinner; they call the place
L’Hostaria del Olmo from an huge elm that stands by a litle
chappell over against the Inn. It was so hott I did not go into
the town, but it lay before us as in a map; from thence we went
at night to Loretto. It is on the top of a rocky hill, as most
towns and villages in that country are; it is no pleasant town;
the marcat-place is pretty; it is fortified enough to hold out
against any pirates that would adventure to rob the rich treasury.
As for it* (be the story true or false) one cannot be in the holy house
but, if he pleases, he may reap a vast advantage; for, as in all
meditation, to begine with fixeing one’s thoughts on the presence
of God is necessary ; and here, as is piously believed, our Lord took
our nature while the angell said the first “Hail, Mary.” Next the
circumstances of what one is to meditate upon are to be most
minutely considered; and as one talks of a battell, any great
event, &c. with much more lively ideas of it when upon the field
or place where it happened, so here one is carried to reflect how
that blessed creature was employed in the deepest contem-
plation when she was surprized with that celestiall invitation from
her heavenly Guest. Here one cannot but admire the humility of
God and his blessed mother, the joy of the angell and all his
invisible celestiall companions, to see the whole begune which was
to be the meanes of filling the vacant places left by their apostate
fellow angells; and here one is led to all those vast extents of
reflection that comes from the remembrance of the thing; the
judgment is astonished at every circumstance, the affections of
* The Santissima casa, the house of the Virgin Mary in Nazareth, conveyed by angels to
Tersato in Dalmatia, and thence, in 1294, to Loretto. It is strange, considering his usual
credulity, that the author should doubt this miracle, —Ed,


sorrow for haveing occasioned so terrible sufferings to so good a
God, giving so just ground of the greatest of griefs to his blessed
mother, and for haveing been so litle true to that rationall soul
which is so dear to him, and would (if we would do our parts)
guide us towards our chief good, &c. of love of so infinitely an
amiable Lord, and of desire to be all his, and all that can e
towards our wishing to be one with him in will, &c. are strangely
carried, and good resolutions are so strong that one is not apt to
forgett them. Here we did our devotions in communicateing on
Saturday; and on Sunday (being St. Philip and St. James,) I
communicated again, and I dare say it was with great delight to
my soul: God only knows if it was sincere, or if I cheated my-
self. As for the fineness of the house of marble, which covers
the outside of the Holy House, how admirably it is wrought in
bas-relief by the best masters; and how the house itself (which
you see within plain and pure, like our blessed Lady’s condition /
stands without any foundation or support (for the marble house
without, it is half a yard distant from it); and what vast riches are
in the treasurie ; all that Lassells says for it, or I can say, is short of
the thing. We came to dinner from Loretto to Macerata, where
the Great Duke of Tuscany was in his way to Loretto. He was
carrying vast presents to it; by the bye, our Queen’s is the richest
there as yet, and will be so a great while, as I beleive. His son
was five years married without haveing any child; his second son
has a rupture, as is said; this made that the line was like to faill
absolutely. The old Duke (a most devote, saintly man) made a
vow to go in pilgrimage to Loretto, if through the Blessed Vir-
gin’s intercession and prayers he could obtain an heir; he is
now for ten days at Loretto, quite retired from all company, where
he makes his spirituall exercises like the meanest hermit in the
Church of God, to the great edification of all Italy; his second
son and he swept the Holy House upon their knees. In the
evening before we came to our lodging (which was among the hills
just before we came to the Apenines, which in the way from Lo-
CAMD. SOC.


retto to Rome are near as high as the Alps,) we came to a city called
Tolentino ; here we stoptto see St. Nicholas Tolentinus (an Augus-
tine frier) his reliques; his two arms are in christal cases. Every
30 or 40 years they bleed fresh, and the blood is plainly seen; there
are two locks upon the huge iron chest in the which they lye; one
is kept by the prior and another by the magistrates. Two magis-
trates must bring the key when they are showed, and they have
with them trumpets and many officers : a hymn is sung and thanks
given to God for the grace bestowed on the saint, and the glory
he now enjoys; we saw them fully, and the blood is ardent. Ex-
cept high hills we saw nothing remarkable untill we came to
within 3 or 4 miles of Fuligno; there we began to see about us,
and all the hills were covered with mirtles, laurell, bays, lavender,
cotton, hysop, pennyroyal, suthernwood ; and from a vast height,
by a small village where the litle river (the course of which we had
followed, through the hills, since we past the top of the Souma,
makes a great many milns go) we saw the plain of Fuligno: it
lookt like a bason of flowers and greens, for the hills seem to
surround it; one’s fancy cannot exceed the beauty of this delight-
full valley, and no spot of ground can be more rich; the trees
sett regularly, full of vines and silk, the ground filled either with
clover in flower or wheat, the river Clytumnus of the antients and
hrooks windeing through the valley and enriching it; towns, vil-
lages, and houses of pleasure scattered up and down the neigh-
bouring hills, at or near the foot of them ; the hills half up to the
top, full of vast forrests of olive trees, which yield incredible
quantitys of olives, and all things so fresh, either green or full of
flowers (for here are cherry trees, apples and pears, and a sort of
tree where mulberries are not grown, which bears a white flower like
elder, but much bigger), that no description in a romance comes
near to the verity here. From this town (for we stayed in this
country a whole day) we went off at the right hand to Assizi, fa-
mous for the great St. Francis, the father guardian of the great
monastry of Conventualls, who are the most easie (that is the least


reformed) of St. Francis’ order. They were obligeing to my wife
and me, and showed us those reliques which they only possess.
Their church is (it may be) the only one in Europe which is 3
storys high. The middlemost is that which they make use of; it is
but low as to the vault and somewhat dark, but full of very
authentick reliques. St. Francis’ body is in the lowest, but by
order of a pope 300 years ago kept shut up. That pope they say
went down to the low church to kiss the saint’s foot (who is said
to be standing in a nitch of the wall, upright, without suport, with
his eyes elevated towards heaven, haveing his naturall colour and
the miraculous stigmata (or wounds of our Saviour) fresh and
bloody in his body. The saint drew back his foot when the pope
would have kisst it, and he ordained the place to be walled up
untill by some revelation God should declare it to be his will.
The annalls of their house say that a bishop of Corsica haveing a
great veneration for the saint would needs go down and brake
open the church to see the body, which he did and returned blind ;
but upon his repentance, and a fortnight’s penance performed for
him by all the community, he is said to have recovered and to have
directed a painter to draw the saint as he saw him. From this
we went down into the plain (for Assizi stands on a high rock).
We had heard of a place called Madonna del Angelo of great devo-
tion, and we went to it, not knowing what it was. It was the
famous place where the saint had long lived and where he dyed.
It is a noble monastry of Recolects, a strict branch of the order.
The famous chappell of the Portiuncula stands (as the Casa
Sancta does in Loretto) in the very midle of the cross of the
church. It was a neglected chappell of the Benedictines, which
Saint Francis begged to be his hermitage before he founded his
order: here it is said he had the frequent visions and discourses
with our Lord, and here it was our Lord sent him that message
to Rome which procured all the privileges to his order: here in
this monastry is that garden which before was a place full of thorns
amongst the which Saint Francis rolled himself when he was in a


violent temptation, and they say they turned to that rose without
prickles which is now very universal, and which here is showed in
the garden as they say the saint left it. Assizi is only 7 Italian
miles from Fuligno; Madonna del Angelo is as far, but much
better way. In our way from this place to Fuligno we stopt at
Riva Forta, a monastry of the Conventualls, the first founded of
their order by the saint himself: here at the very entry of the
church we go down to a chappell half under ground, which was
the saint’s chamber; his bed is as he left it, a rough stone so
short he could not streatch down his legs; a round piece of coarse
marble is his pillow, and near it, wrote in Italian, that seeing our
Lord himself had not whereon to lay his blessed head, why should
his followers search for ease ? From Fuligno to Spoletto is 15 or
1 6 miles, still by the side of this paradise ; but Spoletto stands on
the beginning of the hills which lead to Forli high enough to
weary me in my seeing the cathedrall, aqueduct, &c. In our way
we saw a neat old litle chappell, now much neglected, of white
marble, which some will have to have been the temple dedicated to
the god of the river Clytumnus. A litle beyond it is the source
of that river called (as I suppose) Aqua Sancta; it flows out of
four orifices in a rock low down, where we cross it, and each
orifice is a huge big spring. Strangers observe it as a rarity. At
Spoletto I took Blair with me, and from the post-house beyond
the town I went back and saw the cathedrall, which is on the out-
side of the portall of most antient mosaique work, the ground gold
and the figures pretty lively; our Lord is as in judgment sitting on
a throne, our Lady at his right hand, Saint John the Baptist at his
left, and many other figures ; the floor is (though far less fine) yet
somewhat like that of San Marco at Venice. The aqueduct carrys a
river from one river to another, on the which the town stands; it
enters the town near to the high castle above the cathedral, in a
large basson of marble ; indeed it comes with force enough. Blair
and I crossed upon the aqueduct betwixt the hills. It is a prodigious
look to the river below which runs among the hills, and which this.


fabrick crosses; we dimmed down the hill on the other side, and
by litle foot-roads reacht our hostaria. Next morning we went
over terrible high hills to Terni; here we stopped to dine, and
my wife stayed all night that I might take horse and see the fa-
mous cascala, or fall of a considerable river (as great at least as
Earne* at Innerpeffrie) which tumbles from a rock of a vast height;
it is 4 miles from Terni up the hills, which are rugged enough;
before the water comes to the leap, it is all broke by the rocks;
when it goes over (all white like froth) it flyes into a kind of mist
and water mixt; it breaks against the rock at bottom so violently
that it flyes up into a cloud of smoak, in the which you see three
distinct rainbows together, and this rises at least as high above the
top of the rock as the rock is deep, which is prodigious. I stood
a large half-hour to observe it, and really it is a very odd sight to
observe it narrowly. There is a pretty plain up another river in
sight of it with a litle town in it, but no place in the Highlands of
Scotland is wilder than all through the Appenine Hills, onely the
valleys are fruitefull and sweet, and the hills (how rocky soever)
coverd with olives, almonds, myrtles, laurells, and sweet herbs.
From Terni we went to Narni, another bishop’s seat, next morn-
ing; it stands on the side of a high ugly hill; but the 8 miles
betwixt Terni and it put me in mind of Fuligno. We dyned at
Otriculi, a place famous for the martyredome of many primitive
Christians, especially Saint Victor, a soldier, whose martyrdom
you have often seen in taille-douce. The bodys of thousands of
martyres stand or lye in or about this church. The town (for this
is only the castle which now stands) was ruined by Attila; the
vestiges of it stand yet, and you can see the old towers of the wall
here and there, which show the city to have been a great one.
That night we lay at Citta Castellana, which (by the inscription
on the bridge, by the which they tell that here their Vejentanes
* A beautiful waterfall in Perthshire, and one of the charming sights of the pastoral
Stratherne, environed by its Highland mountains.— Ed.


killed 300 Fabij) would seem to have been the city of the Vejentes.
From this to Rome we saw nothing but wild uncultivated collines
untill we came to Ponte Molo, or Milvius’s Bridge, within two
miles of Rome; here Monseigneur Caprara (cousin-german to
the generall in Hungary) sent us his coach. To tell you all that
has befallen us here must be the subject of another letter, this
being long enough already. I send this by Blair, it being too big
for the post. I wrote to you the other day, so I have litle to add;
my wife, I supose, writes by the same occasion. Here there is a
great deal of talk of peace. The Emperor needs it very much, for
the Turks are prodigiously strong, both by sea and land, which
makes the Venetians and the Emperor both very uneasy. As for
myself, I thank God I keep health very well, so does my wife; but
heat is troublesome. I hear so seldome from you, I am in pain
enough ; people cannot look for all kinds of happiness in this life.
God Almighty put you into the road to the felicitys of a better, and
grant me perseverance, and as good a practice as I have a sound
faith.
LETTER XX.
Rome, 11 th June, 1695.
My dearest Sister,
Madam, I have not had a letter of yours these many weeks, that
is for some moneths, but Mrs. Mary Baird tells me that my
daughter Marischall * was to be brought to bed about the end of
* The Countess Marischall perhaps gave birth this year to her eldest daughter Mary,
afterwards Countess of Wigtoun. It was on the exact anniversary of this letter, the 11th
June 1696, that her second son James was born, afterwards distinguished as the Marshal
Keith in the service of the great Frederick of Prussia, and who, after having fought at
Sheriffmuir in 1715, died gloriously at the battle of Hochkirchen in 1758. His elder
brother George the tenth Earl Marischall, also, after the Fifteen, entered the Prussian


May, which is with you yesterday, and you about two moneths
after ; God preserve you both. She gave me good news of my dear
Godson, master James.* I hope now he is quite recovered, and all
your other children well. If you have gott all my letters you have
the history of my journey. I have one long one to send which
shall go by young Blair, who parts about -three weeks hence. My
wife and I keep health very well. The weather is not yet exces-
sive hott, this year being much cooler than usuall, and we live
very high. I long to hear of my daughter and of you ;I do not
write her by this occasion, so you may let her know we are well
and at her lord’s service. Give my kindest service to my Lord
Erroll, and to all your dear babies, and my wife’s too, and our
blessing to Anny, who they say is sickly. The Popef is very kind
to me; he’s a worthy good old man; he’s of great quality, and
has much the manner of it; he’s now 80 years and 4 moneths,
yet very vigorous. Cardinal Janson Jis most obligeing. The news
we have here came from Germany, Holland, I ranee, England, tc.
so you have them as soon as wee, though not so true for the most
part
Adieu,
my dearest Sister.
service ; was Ambassador-Extraordinary both to the Courts of France and Spain ; was
made aKnight of the Black Eagle, and Governor of the State of Neufchatel, which pro-
duced him a sufficient revenue in his old age. Rousseau mentions him with encomiums,
and relates some entertaining anecdotes of his eccentricity. He was pardoned by the
English government, and visited this country in 1760. He returned to Berlin, and died
in 1778. The Lady Willoughby de Eresby is, through her mother (the sister of Admiral
Lord Keith) descended fom the Countess of Wigtoun, mentioned at the beginning of this
note, and so from the writer of the present correspondence, as well as in the paternal line
from his brother the Earl of Melfort.— Ed.
* The Hon. Janies Hay, second son of the Countess of Erroll.— Ed.
f Innocent XII. (Antonio Pignatelli) according to Moreri, of a very noble family of
Naples, born in 1615, elected Pope in 1691, and conducting himself in that elevated sta-
tion as a true Father of the Church, without predilections or partialities, and knowing only
the Poor as his relations. He died, blessed by all, in 1700. Ed.
+ Toussaint de Forbin de Janson, Bishop of Marseilles and afterwards of Beauvais,
made a Cardinal in 1690, and Great Almoner of France in 1706. He was distinguished
for his State services in the reign of Louis XIV. and died in 1713. Ed.


LETTER XXI.
Rome, 30 th June, 1695.
My dearest Sister,
Since my last from Venice I wrote you a long letter, which I
could not send, and a litle one which I sent about a moneth agoe,
in which I told you that we had made a pretty long voyage
(although to us it seems nothing) from Venice to Rome by Loretto.
The hott weather came upon us at Bologna ; but it was nothing to
what we feell now; here we are in a great city which lyes for the
most part low upon the river, and some wings of it upon riseing
grounds called hills ; but they could not merite that name with
us. The place is but poor ; but for churches, pallaces, fountains,
and publick places, it has no compainion. Saint Peter’s exceeds
the idea one can frame of it, although (as all men observe) the vast-
ness of the fabrick, far less the beauty of it, is not so perceptable
at first sight, nor at first 20 sights neither; last night it was illu-
minated, and the night before likewise, and I never saw any thing so
stately. The Pope, when I was to pay my duty to him, was very,
very kind ; he made me enter his chamber with sword, hatt, and
gloves, a thing never almost practised but to princes, and after
haveing discoursed with me by an interpreter for near an hour he
gave me a chaplett * for myself and one for my wife. Some days
after he sent me a present of wine, souger, and wax lights, and
yesterday another of cheese, the finest in Italy, and excellent wine.
All the cardinals I have seen are most obligeing, and a cardinal in
Rome setts up upon the foot of being a king. The day before
yesterday I saw the Hackney f presented by the constable Collonna,
in name of the King of Spain, for the kingdome of Naples. The
Pope is carryed in a chair by 8 men ; he had a mitre like an ordi-
nary bishop of plain cloath of gold, and was in pontificall habit.
The ambassador spoke to him kneeling, and after the Pope had
* t. e. a rosary, or beads.—Ed.
•f- Haquenay, a white horse.—Ed.


answered him he gave the benediction to the King of Spain ; he
is a very handsome old man as ever I saw; and when he was
carryed from the Vatican to Monte Cavallo (whither he returned
immediately after the ceremony) he went in an ordinary crimson
velvet sedan, and putt on a red liatt like a cardinal, but had the
white callot under it, and the white garment, a kind of goune with
a short crimson velvet camaile, or short cloak, to his elbow. That
night and last night, which was Saint Peter’s Day, the girandola,
or curious fire-work upon the top of Castle Saint Angelo was fired,
and it is a very pretty thing to see. It is now 10 a’ clock at night
with you, that is, two hours and a half in the night here, and the
heat is such I am all in a sweat while lam writing to you. My
wife has better health than usual, but indeed the heat is trouble-
some ; and what is some relief where one getts good, the fruite
here is not very extraordinary, apri cocks, mulberries, almonds, a
kind of sower cherries (which indeed is the best fruite at present)
are the fruites in season, strawberries and other cherries being
quite past; mellons and figgs succeed, and they say they are ex-
cellent ; here is very litle cows’ milk, but goats’ in abundance. I
have apallace near the Porta Pinciano, on an hill, and so somewhat
colder than the rest of the town, but still hott enough to roast me
sufficiently. If one should enter upon a particular account of the
pictures, antiquities, churches, villas, statues, fountains, See. here,
10 volumes would not suffice. Then the musick (which surpasses
imagination), and the different ceremonies and comotions in
churches; the different rites of the different sorts of Christians,
who all hold the same doctrine and unity, is very edifying. To see
all nations praise our Lord is a great joy to me, and a confirma-
tion of the Catholique faith from China (where there are upwards
already of 4,000,000 of Christians) to Ireland, and from Ireland to
China, east and west round the globe : you have here Catholicks,
Grecians, Turks, Syrians, Armenians, Tartars, Scithians, Persians,
Maronites, Indians, Siamois, those of Tonquin, Cochin China and
China, and from Scotland to the Cape of Good Hope the other
CAMD. SOC. M


way, so that you see here a college of Blacks, and amongst them
most virtuous, excellent ecclesiastiques. I am acquainted with a
missionary of China, a Frenchman, a most apostolicall person;
he is to return, and therefore lets his beard grow, which is down
to the middle of his breast; he tells me things that are very edify-
ing and divertive at once. Two storys I must tell you; one, of
the way the Hollanders gott the English driven away from Japan ;
the other, how they excused the Governor of the East India Com-
pany at the Mogul’s court.
As to Japan, you have heard how they gott the Christian
religion rooted out of their unworthy settlement, shunning to
answer what was asked, and answering that they were Hollanders.
They taught the Japanese to try the Portuguise with makeing
them tread upon a crucifix; this they would not do, and so they
were all driven out. The English within these few years thought
that to tread upon a crucifix should not interrupt their trade; so
to the best port in Japan did they saill with either five or seven
good ships. So soon as the Hollanders saw them, they sett folk
to work aboard their ships and made some thousand of litle
wooden crosses, these they put into many litle boxes and put
them into the river where the tyde runs very violently up to the
town; the Japanese seeing these boxes full of crosses, and finding
in each box a litle note bidding them to be ready for they should
have help by and by, were surprized, fearing lest there might be
many Christians yet disguised in their country, immediately they
manned boats and went aboard the Hollanders who lay farthest
up in the river. The Hollanders said they had no regard to
cross nor crucifix, but bid them look to the flags of the ships of
that other nation which were indeed lovers of the cross. Im-
mediately underhand they advertised the English to fly, and they
upon the very first appearance of searchers cutt their cables and
put to sea, leaveing that rich trafick to the Hollanders. The
other story was, that a few years agoe the English did a very
foolish tiling, that drew the Great Mogul into a war against


them, by the which they were brought so low that they might
have peace or be undone, they employed the Hollanders who are
very powerful in India to interpose for them. The Mogul]l his
chief minister would not hear them without a present of three
thousand guineas, and that the Governor of Mosambique (I think
it was) should come to ask mercy with his hand tyed with a
ribbon in name of all the Company, and pay a prodigious sum, &c.
While this Governor is on his knees with his hands tyed, pro-
testing that chains (of the which this ribbon was the symboll) was
too good for him and all his nation, the Hollanders said it was
true the English had erred, but that now he and his country
would answer for them, for they had given England a King who
was their servant, and they would see to keep them in good order.
Except the news from Turkey, you have all that is passing in
Europe sooner than we. The Venetians are hard put to it m the
Morea; the Grand Seignieur comes out himself very strong. e
is a just and generous prince, and highly esteeme ojy 13 '
iects. The Grand Visier would have diswaded him to go
war, and alleadged it would be an infinite expence. He said his
predicessors conquered with good armys and bad equipages; and
wanted only ’good horse. Another
a small city forty miles off; but the people had fled, and lyen m
the fields upon a small shake that happened the night before, u
the all thrown down, and two thousand inhabitants
put to their shifts. The thunder fell last week in 8
church at Loretto, but did no harm, only had a mos
people with the sulphurous stink.
Russell * has been in these seas these twenty days, but has not as
yet attempted any thing. You see I write you all that s passing,
Ind every moneth I will write to you punctually, and so
no more now, hut my most humble service to your dear lord, .
* Admiral Edward Russell, Earl of Orford, who negotiated with the Stadtholder to
dethrone James II. — Ed.


my best and tenderest wishes for all the dear babies. Give my
blessing to Anny; Pm very sorry to hear she is still tender.
May our Lord grant her patience now, and health when he sees it
most fitting. I hope you will advertize me when you are brought
to bed; God grant you a safe delivery and a comfortable.
Adieu,
my dearest Sister.
LETTER XXII.
TO THE EARL OF ERROLL.
Rome, \Oth July 1695.
My dear Lord,
When I write to my sister, I intend it both for your Lordship
and her, otherwayes I would write very often; but upon the one
part I hope your goodness secures me from being either unmind-
full of, or ingrate towards you, and on the other, except to repeat
expressions of kindness, there is nothing to be said from hence,
for although there be more news in Rome than in any other place
of the world, yet the truth is not very early known here, and dif-
ferent factions disguise matters exceedingly. I heartily thank
your Lordship for letting your house be troubled with my daugh-
ter Annie. If I live, I will strive to let your Lordship see that I
will endeavour to deserve that goodness you have for me. I hope
my son has been with you before this time. Pray give him good
advice. My wife gives your Lordship her humble service, and
I am, my dear lord,
your lordship’s most humble and obedient
servant and brother, Perth.


LETTER XXIII.
TO THE COUNTESS OF ERROLL.
My dearest Sister, Atom* 2nd Novr. 1695.
I have been very near death since my last letter, and I am so
litle recovered that I cannot tell what to say of my health as yet.
It is vapours from my stomach and spleen; but my stomach is
become so weak and my blood so spoiled, that it is not likely
shall long hold out against such a complication of diseases. y
last sickness took me in the night with such a giddiness and sic -
ness at my heart, that I could not have lived a quarter of an hour
had it lasted. I offered to sitt up, but it threw me down with
that violence that my wife was frighted sufficiently, but I did not
lose my senses, and the violence lasted not long; but ever since
the giddiness continues, and all I eat becomes sour on my stomach.
I am here, thirteen short miles from Rome. The weather has
been these eight days past all day like our weather in t e
end of June, not a cloud to be seen; the weather somewhat too
hott, but still supportable; and this country is a very paradise.
All those who have the meanes to do it, leave Rome for twenty
days this time of the year. Here is the town which once disputed
the sovereignty with Rome, and which furnished the famous
Curatij, who were killed by the Roman Horatij, and with then
lives lost their country’s liberty. Their tomb, a huge pyle o
cutt stone, with five pyramids upon it, stands at the east end o
the city, which now is litle better than Falkirk for greatness, but
the houses are very considerable. Here is Ascanius monument,
like an old tower, very small at the point; and upon t e ver> op
of it (which is high like a litle steeple) grows bushes of evergreen
oak (a tree with leaves much smaller and greener than the sweet
bay, but somewhat like it, and big as our greatest oaks).


Cardinall Ottoboni* lives here at one of his abbeys; he is young,
not much above twenty-four years, loves pleasure, is a Knight of
Malta, and not at all in holy orders, so he makes a noble figure;
he has the best musique in the world, and is glad when strangers
go to his house to take the pleasure of his diversions. Yesterday,
lie and the prince his father did my wife and me the honour to
come and see us, and he invited us to partake of the pleasure of
musique and opera when we pleased; he has one who is known
by the severall names of le Bollognese Archangeolo (for his name
is Michael or Corelli), + a fidler, but who waits on him as a
gentleman here; the best player on the fidle that ever was, and
the greatest master for composeing; he with one he has bred,
who plays litle worse than he, and three eunuchs with the others
to compleat the company, sing and play every night at the Cardi-
nally, and certainly nothing can be finer. Here we have walks, fine
gardens, noble pallaces, and good company, but my want of health
makes all pleasures indifferent to me. Sometimes Igo and walk
at the Capucins, who have a reall paradise for their garden. It
is on a high hill above the town, which breaks off at the back of
the first plot of their garden, and runs down to a round lake eight
miles in compass; the way down is steep, but all covered with
wood. The ridge of the rocky hill, which goes half round the lake,
is narrow, yet a noble walk of trees carrys you a mile off, to Castle
Gandolpho, a noble house of the Pope’s. On your right hand
you have the lake, on your left the villa of Cardinali Barbarini, a
most delicious place, full of stately walks; and the prospect to-
wards the sea, towards Rome, and the plain country betwixt - the hills
and the sea, is incomparable. On the north side of the lake (for
* Pietro Ottoboni, born 15 July 1667, was made a Cardinal on the 7th of November
1689, by Pope Alexander VIII. his grand-uncle, being only 22 years old. He was Vice-
Chancellor of the Church and Secretary of State. Louis XIV. appointed him Protector
of the affairs of France, and gave him in 1713 the abbeys of Marclnennes and Montieran-
der, and in 1716 also that of St. Paul of Verdun.—Ed.
+ The famous Bolognese musician and whose solos are the standard exercises
for young violinists to the present time,—Ed#


this is on the south) is a huge mountain covered with wood, the
foot of it for a mile up all vineyards, and some castles of noble-
men, and one convent of friers Recolects, and in the most rugged
part of the desart, towards the lake, an hermitage built by a
French nobleman, who lived and dyed there in reputation of sanc-
tity. From the Capucins you see all this, Rome, the vast Gam-
pagnia, and the sea for many miles. You see Gensano, famous
as the town for good wines; Laricia, with a rich field below it, sup-
posed to have been antiently a lake ; the lake of which is
large, almost like that of Albano, is called the looking-glass of
Diana, for here she punished Acteon for haveing presumed to
have disturbed her private retreate; and besides all this, you see
the isles of Pouzzo,* famous for a French captain haveing obliged
the Viceroy of Naples to send a whole squadron of galleys to force
him from it this year. The Capucins of Gansano have a delicate
seat above that place too. This is an hilly country; and all the
fine places are on high hills; but the great mountains lye above
us, and all the vineyards lean towards the sea, which lyes south-
west from us. The Princess Palavicini, grand-neice to Innocent
the Tenth, of the house of Pamphili, is as kind to my wife as if
she were her sister; she has been twice married, but both hus-
bands lived not three years with her; and the last who lived
longest was ill all the while he lived almost. They would have
had her marry again, for she was very young; but she told them
she would not dispute with him who disposed of all thinges as he
saw best; God saw the state unfitt for her, and therefore he im-
bittered it to her. Thus she lives a widow, is very rich, has a
vast deal of witt, but more goodness; and both to my wife and
me she is good to a degree that cannot be expressed. She sees
we cannot keep a coach and six horses, and she carrys us every-
where. My head can hold out no longer. I shall end my letter
to-morrow.
* The only island visible from the spot is the small one off the promontory of Circe at
Terracina.— Ed,


3 November.
This morning the Princess Pallavicini carryed us to mass, and
after that to a vineyard where the Princess Savelli was makeing
her vintage. We had an handsome dinner although we surprised
the Princess; and the young lasses who were there, per mozzi-
care, that is to gather the grapes, played on the tambour de
sasque, and sung songs how when they went out early the dew
wett their pettycoats, how they sung and talkt with their sweet-
hearts while they cutt the stalks of the rasins, and how their
mistress had provided a good brakefast, &c. and every verse ended
with a Viva il Compare et viva la Comare , that is, may our good-
man and good wife prosper. At night we went altogether to the
Princess Savelli’s house, where the Cardinal sent his musique, and
we had two other women who sung to admiration, and the Cardi-
nal came himself and took a part of his own musique, and indeed
nothing can be finer; but I forgott to tell you that after dinner
we went altogether, the two Princesses and my wife and I in one
coach, and three coaches more, to the convent on the north side of
the lake. It is very much higher than the Capucins, and overlooks
all the Campagnia; its prospect is yet larger than that from the
Capucins. The way to it is cutt out of the hill, so that we go half
round the lake by a walk like the terrass walk of a garden, and
the lake being smooth like a looking-glass, and all enclosed with
wood and vineyards, you may judge what a prospect it afforded.
At the convent we saw a work done by a lay brother, who lives in
that house, which, though only painted, cheated all the ladys who
took it for a rich embroidery, not at a distance only, but when
they had it close by them. Wee returned another way, and full
as pleasant, through the forrest, for the ladys were frighted with
the precipice under us as we went. Had I health, I would think
this a very sweet place; but want of health (especially when the
disease attacks the head) renders all things very litle pleasant.
This morning we have gott news that the Turks have not prose-
cuted their victory, but have retired and not entered Transylvania;


and this is all our news. My wife will write to you from Rome
within a fourtnight. I hear very seldom from Scotland ; my last
letter was from Mr. David Drummond, advocate; it was in a
packet-boat that was taken by a Dunkirker. The packet was
cast into the sea, but gott up again; and a merchant in Rome
had my letter directed to him by those who had care to visite
the pacquet at Paris; so I gott it out of the sea. I was glad
to hear of your family’s being well, God continue it. I had
likewise an account of Earl Marischall’s family, that was very
acceptable to me. When I write to my daughter or to the Earl
Marischall, I bid them send you their letters, and I beseech you
to do so to them too, so by this meanes you will all hear the more
often. Send word to all my children that I give them my
blessing, as I do my service to the Earl of Erroll, and all your
family. Tell my eldest son to be merry, for a pound of care will
not pay an ounce of debt. I hear he is melancholly; it will aflict
me much if it continue. I hear Anny is somewhat recovered;
I am glad of it, as I am of my dear godson’s recovery. God
make him a good man! I am sure I weary you, but I write sel-
dome, and you know the Scots proverb.* My wife is servant to
you and to all to whom these presents may concern, as I likewise
am,
Adieu,
my dearest, dear Sister.
LETTER XXIV.
FROM JAMES DRUMMOND TO THE COUNTESS OF ERROLL.
[This letter, which has been preserved with those of the Earl of Perth, was written by
his young kinsman and companion, the son of his factor Blair Drummond, who had left
him at Rome, as mentioned in p. 79. — Ed.]
Utricht, 4th Nov. 1695, O. S.
May it please your Ladyship,
When I left the Chancelor he ordered me, whenever I should
CAMD. SOC.
N
* i. e. No news is good news.—Ed.


come to this country, to write your ladyship how his lordship and
my lady were ; and in case his lordship should not have the time,
to give your ladyship a short account of their journy to Rome.
Your ladyship may believe I should have obeyed ere now, but
the unlucky accident of my Lady Dundee, and her child’s death,*
put us so much out of order here, that it has been impossible.
My Lord Chancelor was obliged, for severall reasons, to begine his
journy last year in a very unfavourable season, the beginning of
December, and through Germany, two things that would have
discouraged any woman save my Lady Perth, who really accom-
dates herself so very well to all countrys and circumstances that
one would think she had studied all the different ways of liveing
that fortune and ill-natured people have obliged her to. My lord
went first to Dusseldorp, where the Elector palatine t has his resi-
dence ever since the war; but Compt Hamilton, a nephew I
think of my Lady Lucy’s, who has been for many years past
minister at that court, being then upon an embassy in Sweed-
land, his lordship did not go to the court. At Coloigne Mon-
seigneur Doria, the Pope’s Nuncio, whom I suppose your ladyship
has seen in Scotland with the King, showed my lord all possible
civility. My lady knew some ladys of quality she had seen in
Brabant before. From Coloigne my lord went up the Rhine in a
boat to Mayence, and from that by land to Frankfort, which
being altogether a merchant-town, my lord made no stay in it.
Three days’ journy from that is Wurtzburgh, a bishop’s seat, who
is a prince of the empyre and Duke of Francony. Here my lord
(and by dispense) my lady lodged at a convent of Scots Benedic-
* Lady Dundee has been already noticed in p. 47. Of the circumstances of her death
a tradition only is recorded, as follows: “In 1795 a leaden coffin in the church of Kil-
syth was opened, containing the bodies of a lady, supposed to be the first wife of Lord Kil-
syth, and his infant son, in perfect preservation. The lady bore evident marks of a violent
death, and it is said was killed by the fall of a house in Holland.” Douglas’s Peerage of
Scotland, by Wood, ii. 38.—Ed.
t John William Joseph Duke of Newburg, and Elector Palatine.— Ed.


tine Monks, of which father Cook, once my lord’s chaplaine, is
lord abbot. The bishop was extremely kind. I had the honour
to dine with my lord at his table. He shortened dinner about
two hours upon my lord’s account, which my lord afterwards un-
derstood to be an extraordinary compliment, since it cutt off some
dozens of healths that must necessarily Have been drunk in that
time. He would have treated my lord at the last town of his
dominions as we continued the journy; but his lordship refused
it; so there were presents of wine and other things sent. Nurem-
berg is only a town of trade. At Ratisbone there is another
Scots convent of the same order, where we lodged and were well
entertained, and the suffrigan bishop, who is of the house of
Bavaria, was very kind. At Munich my lord went and saw the
young electorall Prince of Bavaria* The people about him (who
were not many, he being but a child of about five years of age)
were very obliginge to my lord. At Inspruke, where the Queen
Dutchess of Polland and her sons, the four young princes of Lor-
rain,f have their court allowed by the Emperor, we stayed a good
many days upon my Lord Carlingford’s account, an Irish noble-
man, t governor to the Duke and his brothers. My lord and lady
were allways at the court, eat allways at my Lord Carlingford’s,
and had all the divertisements and good reception that could be
expected in so mountainous a place and small a court. Venice is
* Joseph-Ferdinand, born at Vienna in 1692, and therefore only three years old at
this date. His mother was the Archduchess Mary Antonia, and he was regarded as heir
presumptive of Spain ; but he died at Brussels in 1699.—Ed.
+ Eleonora-Mary, daughter of the Emperor Ferdinand 111 was married first-to
Michael, King of Poland, who died in 1673 ; and secondly fc, Charles-Leopdd Duke
Lorraine. By the latter she had issue the sons mentioned by the Earl of Perth
Leopold was afterwards Duke of Lorraine, and Charles Archbishop of T «ers -E D
± Francis Taaffe, third Earl of Carlingford, succeeded to that dignity on the death ■
brother Nicholas at the battle of the Boyne in 1690. He had been educated at Olmutz
in Germany, where having greatly distinguished himself lie was selected to superinten
Z LoJL .f .he children of .he Duke of LomUne. He no, made , Chmntarhnn ...d
Marshal of the Empire, and knight of the Golden Fleece. He died in 1704. Ld.


seven days’ journy from this, all through the Alps, save the last.
There are severall small towns in the road, such as Brixen, Bal-
gano, and the famous Trent, to all which my lord had recomenda-
tions to see all that was curious, as we alwayes did most exactly in
all the journey. About a day’s journy beyond Trent the snow
falling from the hills stopped us some time ; however we came in
time to the carnavall at Venice, where my lord stayed much longer
than he expected. My lord went once to Padua, where he stayed
at my Lord Kildare’s, an Irish nobleman’s house, and saw the
Bishop Cardin all Barberigo, famous for his exemplary good life,
with whom my lord corresponds ever since: but finding the
ways very bad he returned and stayed the holy week at Venice.
In Aprile my lord went to Ferrara, and so to Modena. I know
my lord has given your ladyship an account of his reception there
himself. From that we went to Bologna. My lord saw Cardinall
Durazzo, the Legat, the Marquis Doria, brother to the Nuntio at
Coloign, with a great many more of the best people there; they
took care to divert my lord and lady with musick and entertain-
ments in abundance. From Bologna we went to Rome without
stopping any where, save two days at Loretto for devotions., I
need not trouble your ladyship how my lord lives at Rome, which
is as privately as possibly he can; every body is ready to give
him more respect than he desires; but they know his quality, and
must soon distinguish his extraordinary merite. He had twice
audience of the Pope before I came from Rome. I had the honour
to wait upon his lordship at both. The first, the Pope gave him
a chappelet of lapis lazzuli and gold for himself, and another for
his lady, and since has sent severall presents of wine and other
things. About the time I left Rome a great many ladys of qua-
lity, being returned from their country houses, came to see my
lady, but their visits are performed with so much ceremony that
they are rather troublesome than diverting; yet some of them are
more free, and my lord likes Rome so well that I doubt they


shall not remove in haste. I hope your ladyship will pardon this
tedious letter, when you remember it’s wrote in obedience to my
Lord Chancelor’s commands, by one who shall be allways proud of
any occasion of owning himself,
May it please your ladyship,
Your ladyship’s most obedient servant,
J. Drummond.
LETTER XXV.
THE EARL OF PERTH TO THE COUNTESS OF ERROLL.
Rome , 9th Dec. 1695.
My dear Sister,
It would take more time than I have to allow this post to tell
you what indispositions I have lyne under this autumn to hinder
me from writeing as I used to do; for I have had such giddyness
in my head as had almost killed me; and, to tell you my senti-
ments freely of the state I am in at present, you may believe that,
in probability, you may lose a very affectionate servant sooner
than you would wish, but as long as I live I will not faill to love
and pray for you, and had I hopes of your conversion before I
dye it would be a great joy to me; meanwhile we are bound to
submitt to the will of God, and sacrifice our own inclinations to
the dispositions of that sovereign wisdome in him which cannot
err, and which being the same with his infinite goodness, designs
all for the best, if we were happy enough to follow where his grace
leads us. We went out to the country fourteen miles off, to
Albano, and stayed a whole moneth, and (if I had had health to
enjoy it) nothing could be more pleasant. Betwixt Frescati and
Veletri it is a perfect paradise about the foot of a great hill


fourteen miles, where, to begine at Frescati, (where there is a
Monte Portro, Monte Dragone, Dragonano, Belvidere, Villa Ludo-
vise, Monte Alto,) we have Grotta Ferrara, Marno, Castell Gan-
dulpho, Albano, Laricia, Gensano, Citta Lavinea, in the way or
litle out of it to Veletri, and all these places have their different
kinds of situations and advantages to diversify the pleasures one
has in going about to see them. Out of the way (but where
people go to) there is Nemi, the lake of which is called Diana’s
Looking-glass, where poor Acteon was paved off for being too
saucy; and Pallasuola, on the other side of the lake of Albano, in
the way to which is a French hermitage, the wildest seat in the
world, but pleasant as any solitude that stands in the face of a
rock can be. The two lakes stand in the hollow of the mountains,
so that the descent is steep and full of wood, and the way the
water goes out is underground from the one cutt by art, and the
other conveyance is naturall and imperceptible: but how they
have cutt under the hill is the wonder, for it is higher than Turloim,*
and all rock. We gott of new acquaintances Cardinal Ottaboni,
Maldachini, the Prince and Princesse Savelli, Princess Palava-
cini, the Prince and Princesse Pamphili, and many other people
of quality. I am a servant to my lord, Lord Hay, and to all the
family. My paper faills ; lam your own. Adieu.
My wife is servant to all of you.
LETTER XXVI.
Naples , 18 th January , 1696.
My dearest, dear Sister,
If you have gott all my letters you have a collection of memoirs
for composeing lyke . ... ’s travels,t for I have wrote to
* A conspicuous hill near Drummond Castle ; a spur of the great Grampian chain
on the southern bank of the Earn. —Ed.
*t* Lost in the MS,—Ed.


you from all the chief towns where I have been, and I do because
I know you take pleasure in such things, especially comeing from
the hand of a brother, who loves you according to the obligation
of a relation and the duty of a friend, and honors you as one who
knows your merite. Haveing but few weeks to stay at Rome, (by
reason of an accident, of the which you shall be informed after-
wards,) I resolved once in my life to see this famous, delitious
place. It is five easy days’ journy from Rome. It had rained
both here and at Rome for five weeks without intermission, and
the day before I left Rome it cleared up. Strangers who come to
see the place employ only fifteen days; five to come, five to go,
and five to stay; but I stayed seven days, two of which are for
being abroad as is usuall, one to Vesuvius, and one for Pausi-
lipo, Puzzuolo, Baya, the Solphatara, &c. which is call’d to go to
Puzzuolo. At my arrivall I presented a letter to the Father Rec-
tor of the Jesuits, from their generall, (a good old man, who loves
me heartily,) and it was impossible to gett out of his house, for he
was so very earnest that my stay was a mere force; so in the col-
lege do I lye, serv’d and treated like a king, and used with a cha-
rity that looks like what we read of in the Acts of the Apostles,
for every one, from the highest to the lowest, are emulous who
shall serve me most. They gett coaches for me to go abroad to
see the town and country; they go with me, they treat me abroad,
at either a house of theirs, or they borrow a friend’s house, and
treat me there; enfin, they exceed all things that can be imagined
in their civility and charity towards me. I have been here but
three days; one I spent in seeing of Chartreux, their monastry,
one of the finest in the world; read Lassells, and save me pains,
only I shall add that when he says the Chartreux have the richest
sacrista he ever saw, he must acknowledge he never saw that of
the Jesuits’ profess’d house in the town, nor that of the Annun-
tiata, which, indeed, do surprize one for the quantity and work-
manshipp of plate, for here they work flowers of silver and gold
so fine that it is somewhat particular to see them. Yesterday, the


feast of Saint Antonio, the abbot (St. Paul, the first hermite con-
temporarie,) begun the carnavall here with a Spaffagio or Corso,
where all the great folks in the town went in the street that leads
to St. Antoine’s Church to walk in their coaches; all the chief
magistrates went; their officers, alguazils, and sbirri, were on
horse-back, in Spanish cloaths; the Viceroy, with all his court
and guard, on horse-back and a’ foot, with the Swizzers in their
liveries, and all the Spanish troops in the publick places where his
Excellency was to go through. It is the greatest solemnity they
have; so I had a full view of all the noblemen and ladys in town.
The Viceroy had notice of my comeing, and made me a great bow
as I stopt when his coach past; so did the Duke of Cantelmo, who
pretends to be come of King Donald the Third of Scotland.
This day we spent at Puzzuolo. The Grotto of Pausilipo is
much higher in the roof at the side next the city than Lassells de-
scribes it, and far from so dark, for we saw very well all the way
this morning all through it. It is a prodigious work, but that of
Sybil’s Cave, if it reached from the Lacus Avernus to Cuma, has
been greater, (but earth has filled up the passage in less than a
quarter of a mile from where they entered,) for they say it led to
Cuma. Her cell and bath is curious; en Jin , all here looks like
enchantment, for this day has been clear, so that no cloud was to
be seen, and the sun hott, as with us in June. At dinner we eate
artichoks, young pease, and all kinds of such garden things. At
the Solphatara, where it boyls and smoaks most, you hear a noise
like the boyling of a hundred salt-panns all together, and all the
country looks green like May, only the elms and poplars, which
support the vines, are without leaves; but the hedges are all law-
rell, bays, laurestinus, oleastre, mertles, (whose leaves are sweeter
than any other green,) and many other greens I do not know. In
the great gardens of orange trees (which here grow in and about
the kaill-yards) the fruite is very yeallow, and no painted trees are
half so beautifull. All the hills are full of olives, whose faint
green setts off the oranges and lemmons, and, generally, the


almonds are in the flower, so that this country looks like a para-
dice. From my window I see Monte Vesuvius, fumeing from its
top like a vast kettle, and the sea at its foot, ready to receive and
quench the burning river he spues out when he grows huffy,
with too great an overcharge of liquor in his gutts. In the great
eruption of ’3 l St. Gennaro apear’d visibly in the air, (when the
flame seemed already in the city,) and with his pasturall robe bore
back the fire, and saved the city; and this is so attested that the
wisest here are satisfied it is true; but I hope to see his blood, and
then I shall say more.
Rome, Ist February.
I was interrupted here when at Naples, and now upon this same
dirty paper I pursue my story. The day after we had been to
Puzzuolo I went to a monastry of nuns, where I saw the Duca del
Popolo, and the Cardinall Canselmo’s sister, who was rejoiced to
see me. Next day we went to Monte Vesuvio, a terrible place;
never was sweeter weather, but far too much heat in the day-time.
But at the top of the first brims of the huge kettle, which is four
miles in circuit, we had our shoes almost burnt with the heat of
the burning mountain, and the wind so stiff and cold that it cutt
our faces like the worst frost winds with you. Out of this vast
kettle, which smoaks in many places like so many furnaces, there
is a new hill gott up; and since the last eruption, which was
twenty moneths ago, when a river of fire, about the breadth of
Earne at Inverpeffry,* run down, glowing like iron in a smithes
forge, five or six miles from the hill, this mountain is grown
half as high again as it was. This is the great chimny of the
burning hill. It is near a quarter of a mile in compass, if not
more, and sometimes sends out so vast a quantity of smoak it is
admirable; and one day when I was there it smoak’d so that they
all thought it would have grown angry in good earnest, but it did
CAMD. SOC.
0
* In Perthshire, and not far from Drummond Castle. Though now an insignificant
place, it was probably dignified by being one of the few towns in Scotland where royal
money was minted in ancient times.


not, and next day had scarce any smoak at all. When we had
come down from the hill a mile and a half we gott amongst the
vineyards. Here grow the Lachrima Christi so famous, and an-
other most dilitious wine, but not so wholesome, call’d Malatesta,
because it affects the head, and the Grseco, which, were it in
Buchan, would make your blades lick their lips at it. This Janu-
ary is the pleasantest they have had in man’s memory, and really
I never saw a May in Brittain so hott and sweet; but when I re-
turned to Rome I was surprized to hear them say they had had so
cold weather as they have had ever since I parted; yet it has been
clear, without a cloud. At our comeing down from the mountain
it was so calm, notwithstanding of what we had suffered on the
hill of cold and wind, that we were forced to putt off our upper
coats. I write you the rest upon another paper, for I must lead
you to St. Gennaro’s church.
The twentieth of January we were invited to goe see Saint Gen-
naro’s church, and the reliques were to be showed me, a favour
none under sovereign princes has had these many years. They
are keept in a large place in the wall (such as we call boules,*) with
an iron door to it plated over with silver; it has two strong locks,
one key is kept by the cardinal-archbishop, and the other by the
senate, (which is composed of six seggie, or seats, for so they call
the councells,) five of nobility, and one of the commons, who
chuse two elects. Every seggie or chamber chooses two depu-
ties ; one of the two governs and the other rests by turns ; so there
are six deputys, one for every seggie, who vote in all affairs, and
without them the Vice-Roy cannot impose a tax, &c. Every one
of the six ruleing governors of the senate (or the deputies of the
seggie) has a key to the great iron chest where the key of the
armoire of the relicks lyes ; so that all the six must agree to let
them be seen, except the two ordinary times in the year when
they stand exposed eight days, and the senate and bishop must
both agree, for without both concurr only one lock can be opened.
* Recesses, or closets.—Ed,


They had got the bishop’s consent for me, but how to gett all the
deputies of the nobility and the elect of the people to concurr was
the difficulty; however, my friends gott the deputies to resolve to
meet; three mett, but one said, “ I have a friend a dying, upon
whom depends my fortune ; he has called me at such an hour, it is
now so near approaching that I hope the sfranger prince (for so they
call all the peers of Brittain) will forgive me if Igo away.” They
who were there begged him to stay but a moment (for they must
be altogether) but he could not delay. So going down he mett the
other three deputies below, and said that he saw God and his
saint had a mind I should see the miracle, and so he returned,
and I gott an invitation to go to church. The relicks are exposed
in a noble chapell upon the Epistle side of the church, lyned with
marble, the cupola richly painted, as is all that is not marble of
the walls. Ten curious statues of saints, patrons of the town,
done at full length, bigger than the naturall, of coppar, stand round
the chappell high from the floors, and statues, to the knees of sil-
ver, just as big, of the same saints, stand below them. Ihe face of
the altar is of massy silver cutt in statues of mezzo-relievo, or
rising quite out from the front, with the history of Cardinal Car-
raffo’s bringing back the saint’s head to Naples. The musick was
excellent, and all the dukes and princes who were deputies must
be present. They placed me in the first place, gave me that title
they gave the Vice-Roy (Excelenza), and used me with all possible
respect. The first thing was done was, the archbishop-cardinal,
his viccar general, in presence of a nottary and witnesses, opened
his lock; then the Duca de Fiumaria, in name of all the princes
present, opened the city’s lock, and the old thesaurer of the church
(a man past eighty) stept up upon a ladder covered with crimson
velvet, and made like a staire, and first took out the Saint s head,
put a rich mitre upon it, an archbishop’s mantle about the shoul-
ders of the statue (for the head is in the statue of the saint), and
a rich collar of diamonds with a large cross about its neck. Then
he went back and took out the blood, after haveing placed the head


upon the Gospele side of the altar. It is in a glass, flatt and
round like the old-fashioned vinegar-glasses that were double, but it
is but single. The blood was just like a piece of pitch clotted and
hard in the glass. They brought us the glass to look upon, to
kiss, and to consider before it was brought near unto the head.
I hen they placed it upon the other end of the altar, called the
Epistle side, and placed it in a rich chasse of silver gilt, putting the
glass so in the middle as that we could see through it, and then
begun the first mass; at the end the old thesaurer came, took out
the glass, moved it to and fro, but no liquifaction; thus we past
the second likeways, only the thesaurer sent the abbat Pignatelli,
the Pope s nearest cousin, to me to bid me take courage, for he saw
I begun to be somewhat troubled, not so much for my own dis-
appointment (for I thank God that, did our Lord speak to me, I
would not believe the truth of the Catholic religion more firmly
than I do), but because the miracle never faills but some grievous
affliction comes upon the city and kingdom, and I began to reflect
that I haveing procured the favour of seeing the relicks and the
miracle failling they might be offended at me, though very
unjustly. After the third mass no change appeared but that which
had made the thesaurer send me word to take courage, viz.
the blood begune to grow of a true sanguine collour; but
when the nobles and all the people saw the fourth mass past
the Gospell and no change, you would have heard nothing but
weeping and lamenting, and all crying, Mercy, good Lord ! pitty
your poor supplicants, holy Saint Gennaro, our glorious patron !
pray for us that our blessed Saviour would not be angry with us !
It would have moved a heart of stone to have seen the counte-
nances of all, both clergy and people, such a consternation ap-
peared as if they had all been already undone. For my part, at
sea, at receiving the blessed Sacrament in my sickness when I
thought to expire, I never prayed with more fervency than I did
to obtain of our Lord the favour of the blood’s liquidation, and
God is witness that I prayed that our Lord would give me this


argument towards the conversion of my poor Sister; that I
might say I had seen a miracle, which her teachers say are
ceased. The fourth mass ended without our haveing the consola-
tion we were praying for, and then all begun to be in despair of
succeeding, except a very few, who still continued praying
with all imaginary fervour. You may judge that sitting three
and a half hours on the cold marble had made my knees pretty
sore; but I declare I felt no exterior pain, so fixed were my
thoughts upon the desire of being heard in my prayers. About
the elevation in time of the fifth mass the old thesaurer, who was
at some distance looking upon the glass, cry’d out, Gloria Patri et
Filio et Spiritui Sancto, and run to the glass, and brought it to
me. The blood had liquified so naturally as to the color and con-
sistency that no blood from a vein could appear more lively. I
took the relick in my arms, and with tears of joy kissed it a thou-
sand times, and gave God thanks for the favour with all the fervor
that a heart longing with expectation, and full of pleasure for
being heard, could offer up ; and, indeed, if I could as clearly de-
scribe to you what I felt, as I am sure that it was somewhat more
than ordinary, I needed no other argument to make you fly into
the bosome of our dearest mother, the Church, which teaches us
(what I saw) that God is wonderfull in his saints. The whole
people called out to heaven with acclamations of praise to God,
who had taken pitty of them ; and they were so pleased with me
for haveing said betwixt the masses that I was only grieved for
the city, and not troubled at my not being so privileged as to see
the miracle, that the very commonest sort of the people smiled to
me as I passed along the streets. I heard the sixth mass in
thanksgiveing. And now I have described to you one of the
hapiest forenoons of my life, the reflection of the which I hope
shall never leave me, and I hope it may one day be a morning of
benediction to you too; but this must be God’s work. The Pri-
cipe Palo, a man of principal quality, came to me at the end of the
sixth mass, and, in name of all the nobility, gave me the saint’s


picture, stamp’d on satine, and a silver lace about it. It is an ad-
mirable thing to see blood, shed upwards of one thousand three
hundred years ago, liquify at the approach to the head. The
Roman lady, who had gathered it from off the ground with a
sponge, had in squeesing of it into the glass lett a bitt of straw fall
in too, which one sees in the blood to this very day.
From this I went and visited other churches, which here are far
more rich in plate than any where else where I have been, espe-
cially the Annunciata, a Collegiate, a School, and an Hospitall for
Foundlings, for young people, for old men and women, and for
the sick altogether. But it is so rich, and people are so well lookt
to that many gentlemen go in to dye there, being better attended
than they could be at home. The plate and embroidery of that
church is incredible. Cardinal Filomarini’s tomb in the Thea-
tins’ church is excellent for the mosaique work, so fine that four
pictures, viz. his own, his brother’s, and two others, look as fine as
if done by the ablest painter in Italy with a pencell. I never saw
any near so fine but that of Paul the Fifth in Borgesi’s Pallace.
The mole here is very fine, and a noble lantern to guide ships into
the harbour; enfin , Naples exceeds all the places I have seen in
very many things, and yields to none save in a very few.
The good fathers, who were so very kind to me, sent two (who
I used to call my guardian angells,) with me to Capua, (and here
I was to dyne in my return half a day*s journy from Naples,)
feasted me in their college there, and left me with tears in their
eyes. At Capua they told me they had two rarities here; one,
che il pesche qui a preso il Sabbato si mangia il Venerdi ; that is,
the fish taken in the Saturday is eat on the Friday new haled.
The riddle lyes in the name of a small river, that falls into the
Volturnus at the town, which river is called Sabbato: the other,
che la Caldura e pui grande nel inverno che nel estate; the heat
is greater in winter than in summer. They have another river
they call Caldura, or Heat; and this makes the other riddle. The
good weather never left me in all the voyage, and untill I came


within seventy miles of Rome the heat was importune. But that
morning I left Piperno I found a cold north wind from the hills,
that smelt of snow; but so soon we gott to the foot of those
mountains call’d the Montani del Core we felt it no more. Out
of these hills are a many great springs, like rivers. One huge one,
which forms a kind of litle lake, or at least a great pond, hard by
its source, so stinking of sulphure that Aix la Chapelle is sweet
to it; yet Ido not hear they use it for any medicinall use. And
now r lam returned to Rome; so much for this litle excursion.
LETTER XXVII.
Rome, \Qth March, 1696.
My dearest, dear Sister,
Within three days I leave Rome; wherever I go you may be
sure I carry a heart full of true affection to you; so soon as I can
write to you I will do itj but if Ido not very soon you will judge
it more for your sake than mine. Advise your nephew to be ex-
ceeding wary what he does, for all depends on that. God reward
you for your great kindness to Annie ! Continue to love and give
advice to Mary; I have not heard from her or you these three
moneths. My health is very bad. My wife has gott many friends
and acquaintances, the best in Rome, and they all treat her on an
equality with themselves, that is, as a princess ; and the Dutchess
of Bracciano, Chief of the Ursini, and who is the first prince in
Rome, receives her embasciata, gives her Excellence, and the right
hand in her own house, which is all she does to any princess in
Italy who is not a sovereign. So we have gained one privilege to
the peers of Britain which they never had practized before with-
out haveing some character; and now they have but to keep it, for


it is fully established in their favours; and all the Cardinals we
have received visits from, which are not a few, have given me
quality with any prince here. My health is very bad, so that
partly for that cause I change air. Although, strugle with sick-
ness and death as I please, I do not expect to live long. Our
brother is at Rowen ; you shall be judge who is in the wrong
when you hear how he is angry at me; but not dareing to corre-
spond with him I cannot fully clear him; but lam persuaded I
am not in the wrong. Father Mar is here, and does us all the
service he can; he has brought hither a picture of the Prince of
Wales, which they say is like, and I really believe it, for one sees
of the King and of the Queen both in it; he is wonderfully hand-
some. The good Pope kist it, and said he would fain hope to see
the restoration of that angel to his just right.
Pray continue to love me. Give my humble affectionate service
to your dear lord, and to all your children. My wife is very
bussie packing up, beggs your pardon, and gives you her service.
Adieu, my dearest, dear Sister, a thousand times.
LETTER XXVIII.
Leghorn, 26th March, 1696.
My dearest, dear Sister,
I was very sorry, in takeing leave of his Holyness, that I could
not ask his benediction for my dearest Sister and her family.
However, I did what I could, and shall, it may be, give you an
account of it afterwards. All our friends parted with us with
much sorrow. The Princess Pallavicini cryed like a child when
she took leave of my wife; so did many others who I thought had
been incapable of so tender an expression of their sentiments. En
Jin, we came off with some reputation, and left no body offended at


us that I know of. In our way to Florence, which we made in three
days* traveling, and one we stayed at Sienna, we had good weather
to the very last stage, where the rain overtook us. The Cathe-
drall Church of Sienna is the finest of its kind I ever saw; it is
pollished marble within and without; black and white are the
collours of the town, and the church is built so ; the floor is the
finest in the world, a rare kind of mosaique; it is covered withboards,
but they uncovered it all to me. Florence answered the character
all travellers give of it; and the Thesaury is a wonderful heap of
curiosity and riches. The Grand Duke was at Pisa, sixteen miles
off. I took Lucca in the way; all as we went some man of the
first quality took care to guide me to see all that was to be seen,
and seventeen or eighteen ladys went about with my wife; and,
although it was Lent, they made balls, &c. for our entertainment.
At Lucca, one who had been Prince,* (that is Gonfalloniero,) and
was to be so just now, went about the city with me; he is a very
worthy man, well bred, and well loved by his fellow nobles. At
Pisa the Great Duke sent one of his chief nobility to go with me
every where, and the Great Princesse, his daughter-in-law, sent a
lady to wait upon my wife. At our audience we were treated with
all the honour imaginable, and his highness gave me a galley to
transport me to Genoa, &c. In this town we wait a calm sea (for
galleys here are called lc Dcnfnozallc dc Id because they can-
not go out in bad weather). I pitty the poor slaves, although
here they are pretty well treated. This is a very pretty litle town
and a very noble harbour. Many English are here, but none save
one dares come near me. Yesterday an honest sea-captain drunk
to the health I likt best, and fvred his guns, but did not come to
me, but within calling, when I was in the Mole. Now, I shall add
no more, only let not my friends condemn me rashly. Hear all
and judge what a faithfull servant should do, and then let them
say what they please. My blessing to my children. Tell James
CAMD. SOC.
p
* Signore Sesti: see p. 107.


what I have said. Give my service to your dear lord, and to all
yours, to Earl Marischall and his, &c. Adieu. If you do not hear
from me very soon again, do not impute it to unkindness. You
will soon know the reason. Once more, my dearest Sister,
Adieu.
LETTER XXIX.
Leghorn, Ist April, 1696.
My dearest Sister,
It is now near a moneth since I left Rome (as I think I told
you in my last I designed to do); we left many friends there, who
showed more concern at our parting than I could have beleived
we should. It had proved such a winter that we could scarce
hope for good weather for our journy, for I think we had had
36 or 38 days of weather that looked far liker to a mild sweet
spring than winter. But as we say in Scotland, and as the Italians
say here, winter never robbs in heaven, called, e gelo non vestano
mai in celo, heat and frost never dwell still in heaven. We have
had cold winds and great rains ever since we left Rome, and all
the mountains of Tuscany and about it were full of snow. In our
way from Rome to Siena we saw nothing worth writing you an
account of.
At Siena the great church is one of the finest in Italy. The
arms of the town is a shield with one half (the upper part) white
and the lower black, so they have built the church without and
within of black and white polished marble. It looks most exqui-
sitely fine, and for the rest read Lassells; only I saw all the floor
uncovered, and it is the curiousest piece of mosaique imaginable,
and of a new kind, for the pieces that compose it are all very
great, and they have only white, dark, and gray marble; but the


lights and sheadows are done so as to please the eye very much.
There is a jubbe of white marble for reading the Gospell on, in
time of high mass, of excellent basso-relievo. In the library (so
famous for the painting) they have church books done by the
antient monks, admirable for the miniatures in them. I saw St.
Catharine of Siena’s house, chamber, and'bed; it is of hard stone,
and a litle riseing of brick for the pillow, and here she always
slept without any cloaths save her ordinary habit. I saw the head
of St. Galgana, who dyed 400 years ago, and his colour is fresh
and lively as if he had dyed but yesterday, or rather as if he were
not dead, for he has red in his face still. Except some few
churches they have little else worthy of seeing. At Florence,
which is within 18 or 20 miles, we found that the Great Duke was
at Pisa and Great Prince at Venice, and the Cardinal, brother to
the Great Duke, was at Siena. We stayed five days, and saw all the
fine things you have in Lassells, and the Duke’s fine still-house or
laboratory which he did not see, as likewise a tomb for St. Francis
Xavier, which is to go to India j it is of copper gilt, and of a
workmanship that nothing can exceed; it stands now in the fine
chappell of St. Laurence, so famous all the world over. I went
up to the fine marble steeple (to the which Charles the sth would
have made a casement) and saw the town and country, which is
both rich and pleasant; but in the town the paper in their windows
instead of glass looks but scurvily. The Great Duke had left one
of his chief Marquises to show us every thing, and every night
they made a ball that my wife might see all the ladys in town, and
there were five or six who never left her. From Florence we
came to Lucca, where one Seigneur Sesti, who had been 10 times
Hutien and once Gonfaloniero, and was just then to be it a second
time (it is the supream magistrate and lasts only two moneths,)
came to us as soon as ever we arrived and brought his eldest son,
his son in law, his brother in law, his lady, and his married
daughter to wait upon us and guide us through their city. They
showed us all that was to be seen, and next morning 18 or 20 of


the chief of the nobility’s wives came and carryed my wife to a
mass (in musick) at a nunery of ladys, who sang and played them-
selves very finely. From that we came to Pisa. T. he church
doors are of excellent workmanship. The Campo Sarrcto is sur-
rounded with a cloyster of excellent painting, and the baptistary is
very noble; it is a building separated from the church upon the
west end, and the Campo Sancto is of one syde. The falling tower
is at the east end; it is a huge tower of white polished marble,
with rows of pillars up to the top ; it is a wonder how it stands.
The Great Duke was most obligeing, and said that if he did not
use me with more respect it was my own fault, because I would
not receive it. He told me that he had a galley ready for me to
go or stay where I pleased ; so after two days* stay there we came
hither in a wind that had like to have blown over our calliches ;
it was on Saturday, the 24th March, we arrived, and here we lye
weary, the wind being too strong for a galley, but we hope to part
to-morrow. I weary very much here. My wife is your servant,
and I am as I ought to be to you, to my lord, and to all the
bairns. Adieu.
Now (except Genoa) you have had some account of all I have
seen in Italy. If it please God I arrive safe there, you may pos-
sibly have another letter; but after that (except you command it)
you will not hear so frequently.*
Adieu.
FINIS.
* From the close of this letter, and an expression at the close of the preceding, it is
probable that the Earl was contemplating to join the court of his exiled Master, whence
correspondence to England would be attended with increased difficulty. —Ed.


INDEX.
Aboyne, Charles earl of 18
Achmuty, Mary 25
Aerschot, duchess of 16, 20, 28, 31, 40.
d’Aisne, marquis of 39
Aix la Chapelle 26
Albano, 85, 94
Almond, Countess of 68
Antwerp, 38
Arenburg, princess of 16, 20, 28, 31, 40
d’Argile, mademoiselle 40
Arundel, Philip earl of, his bowels buried
at Padua 62
Assizi 74
Atholl, marquess of 8
Baden, prince Louis of 35, 38
Bahul, the Spanish 54
Baird, Mary 78
Balcarres, Colin earl of 26, 35
Barbarigo, cardinal 60, 61, 64, 92
Bavaria, electoral prince of 91
Bayle, the earl of Perth contributes to his
Dictionary 15
Bellenden, lord 47
Berthem 30
Blanquement, battle of 20
Bologna 68, 92
Bouillon, cardinal 17, 18
Boursebe 27
Bracciano, duchess of 103
Brill, the 46
Broway Spinola, countess of 39
Bruges, 42, 43
Bruxelles, 39
Burnet, bishop 60, 65
Campbell, ladies Barbara, Isabell, Mary,
and Victoria 40
Camphire 45
Cantelmo, duke of 96
Caprara, monseigneur 78
Capua 102
Carlingford, Francis earl of 91
Carnival at Venice 54
Carny, Dr. 16
Cassander 44
Cassini the astronomer 69
Charles 11. his distinction of the Catholic
and Protestant religion 16
Citta Castellana 77
Cologne 90
Cologne, elector of, chosen bishop of
Liege 18
Colonna, the constable 80
Coningseck 27
Comrie 6
Cook, abbot of a monastery at Wurtzburg
50, 91
Corelli 86
Dick, sir William 27
Dieppe, bombarded by the English 38
Doria, marquis 68, 92
the Nuntio 90
Drummond castle, relics at 1
Drummonds, early history of vii
Drummond, Andrew 43
-— lady Anne, 37, 42, 51, 84
. . David 2, 15, 89
James lord (afterwards se-
cond duke of Perth), at Versailles 18 ;


like to be “ forefaulted” 36; in the
Spanish Netherlands 41 ; meets his
father at Antwerp 47 ; returns to Scot-
land 49 ; in London 53 ; he is melan-
choly 89 ; his subsequent history xiv
Drummond, James, of Blair 1
James, son of Blair, accom-
panies the earl of Perth abroad 14 ;
leaves the earl of Perth at Rome 79 ;
letter from him to the countess of Er-
roll 89
lord John xv
Dundee and Kilsyth, lady 47 ; her death
90
Dunfermline, Jean lady 59
Durazzo, cardinal 70
Dusseldorp 90
Dympna, saint, legend of 23
Earthquake at Venice 57, 58 ; another 83
Elector Palatine 90
Erroll, John earl of 1; letter of the earl of
Perth to 84
Anne countess of 1
Katharine countess of, death of
14
Fano 71
Ferrara 66
Feteresso 13
Finale di Modena 66
Fiumaria, duke of 99
Flanders, war in 41
Fleming, Charles 19
Florence, 107
Flushing 44
Francis, saint, preservation of his body 75
Frankfort 91
Foligno 74
Furstenburg, cardinal 18
Gennaro, saint, visit to his church and
relics 98
German drinking 67
Gheel 23
Ghent 43
de’ Giraldini, marquis 67, 68
Glasgow, archbishop of 14
Gordon, Elizabeth duchess of 42
Gordon, William 45
Haddo, lord 34
Hamilton, count 90
Hanover, duke of 59
Hay, Hon. James 15, 18 ; accident to 34
godson to the earl of Perth 79 et passim
Helvoetsluys 46
Herbert, lady Lucy 43
Hesse, the prince of 68, 70
Hooghstraat 38
Howard, lady Anna 42, 43
lady Catharine 42, 43
Innes, father James 19
Innocent XII. Pope, note upon, 19 ;
his reflections on Queen Mary 57 ; his
attentions to the earl of Perth 79, 80,
92, 104 ; his behaviour to the prince
of Wales’s picture 104
Innspruck 91
Janson, cardinal 79
Japan, conduct attributed to the Hol-
landers in 82
Jew boy convert, story of 21
Keith, lord —see Marischatl
Keith, marshal 78 note; correspondence
with lord John Drummond xv
Kildare, John earl of 60, 92
Kirkaldy, the men of, prevent the earl of
Perth’s escape 2, 8


Landen 28 ; battle of 28, 39
Lassells, Richard, his voyage through
Italy 56, 66, 95
Leers the bookseller 15
Leghorn 105
Leith, the abbe 64, 65
Lessly, father 49
Liege 24, 25
prince bishop of 17, 18
de Lippe, general 27
Livingston, Dr. 15, 16, 50
Loretto 72, 75
Lorges, marshal 35, 38
Lorraine, duke of 91
Louvaine 30
Lovigi, a singer 68
Lucca 105
Luxemburgh, 27
Machany, lady 35
Maestricht 25, 27
Malines 31, 34
de Manderstaat Gorolstein, countess 27
Marischall, George Bth earl, death of 23
William 9th earl 23 note,
49, 33, 35
Mary countess 23, 49, 78
— George 10th earl (lord Keith)
51
Mar, the earl of 5, 6
Mar, father 104
Mary 11. queen, her death 5 1
Mary, queen of James 11. 41, 68, 73
Mean, dean of Liege 18, 26
Middleburg 45
Midletown, lieut.-colonel 43
Melfort, John earl of (afterwards duke,
and brother to the earl of Perth), let-
ter to 7 ; escapes to king James 11. 10 ;
dismissed by James 32, 35, 50 ; biog.
note on, 32 ; living at Rouen 104
Melfort, lady 10, 33, 50
Misson, F. M. his voyage in Italy 57
Modena 66, 67
Munich 91
Murray, Strowen 15
Dr. 36
Murano 58, 60
Naples 95,102
Nami 77
Nassau, prince of 21, 22
Nicolson, Dr. 3, 9
Nemi, lake of 87, 94
Newhurg, duke of 90
Nimeguen 48 ; described 51
Norbertines 31 note
Norfolk, Henry sixth duke of, 42 note ;
his heart buried at Bruges 44
Nuns, English, at Louvaine 31 ; at
Hoogstraat 39 ; at Bruxelles 40 ; at
Bruges 42, 43 ; at Ghent 43
Nuremburg 91
Obizzi, family of 63
Ogelvy, Mrs. 14
Orange, princess of 57
Ottoboni, cardinal 86, 94
Otriculi 77
Padua 60, 92
Palavicini, the princess 87, 94, 104
Palo, prince 101
Pamphili, prince 94
Park, abbey of 30
Paterson, bp. John 14
Pausilipo, grotto 96
Papin, Isaac 19, 49, 50, 65
Perth, James fourth Earl of, and
first Duke (the Writer of the Let-
ters), his early history xii; character
by Macky xiii; marriages xiv ; his at-


tempted escape from Edinburgh 1 ; his
liberation 13 ; his subsequent travels
13 —108 ; his children at Douay 18 ;
others at Banff 49 ; his reception by the
pope 80,92 ; his parting audience 104 ;
his posterity xiv, et seq.
Perth, James second duke of—see Drum-
mond
James third duke of xv
Mary countess of xiv, 59 note, 90
Pignatelli (Pope Innocent XII.), 99
- abbot 100
Pisa 105, 108
Pitkellony 5
Poland, queen of 91
Ponte Molle 78
Poppingdoun 45
Prague, treatment of a Jew boy at 21
Ratisbon 91
Rhine, the 54
Rhinegrave, the lady 39
Rimini 71
Riva Forta 76
Rollo, lord 40
Rome 80
Roman antiquities, collected by Smetius
at Nimeguen 50
Romuald, saint, relics of 32
Rubicon, the 70
Rupelmonde, countess of 31
Russell, admiral 83
St. Tron 24, 28
Salines, count of 39
Saluts 17
Savelli, the princess 88, 94
Sauvage, count 39
Saxe, duke of 38
“ Scot,” complimentary use of the word 34
Senegalia 72
Servi, a monastic order 68
Sesti, signore 105, 107
Sienna 105, 106
Sluys 44
Smetius, his collection of Roman anti-
quities 50
Smith, Mrs. at Bruges 44
Solfaterra 96
Spoletto 76
Stirling castle, Earl of Perth imprisoned
at 1, 7,10, 13
Tarbat, lady Betty 36
Temi 77
Tirlemont 28, 29
Tolentino 74
Tongres 28
Turkey, news from 75, 83, 88
Tuscany, the grand duke of 73
Utrecht 13
Valiere, Silvestro, doge of Venice 59
Vaudmont, princess of 50
Venice 52, 54, 64
Vesuvius 97
Walcheren 44
Wales, James prince of, the Pope’s be-
haviour towards his picture 104
Wedding in Liege 24
Wigton, John earl of 19
Mary countess of 78
Wintoun, earl of 14
Wurtzburgh 90
J. B. Nichols and Son, 25, Parliament Street, Westminster.








