

18 51.
HOBART TOWN ADVERTISER OFFICE,




LETT E R S
DION.
“ Read, not to believe and take for granted, nor to find talk and discourse, but to
weigh and consider.”—Lohd Bacon.
HOBART TOWN ADVERTISER OFFICE.
1851.


♦


DEDICATION*.
TO THE PEOPLE OE VAN PIEMEN’S LAND
I TAKE THE LIBERTY OF
DEDICATING THESE LETTERS.
Their chief merits consist in the irrefutable character of the
facts they will he found to contain. At this particular
juncture of our history—when we are invited to follow the
example of the ruined Colonies of the West Indies, and to
reject the existing means at our disposal for supplying the
demand of the colonists for labour, without taking any pre-
cautions, and in the absence of any feasible plan to provide
for their future wants —when the majority of those, who have
offered their services as our Representatives in the New Coun-
cil, are men who stand pledged to pursue a policy based upon
conclusions I have proved beyond the power of contradiction
to have been drawn from false premises—when some of the most
prominent amongst the candidates for popular suffrages have
publicly identified themselves with the expression of sentiments
which if not fiendish, most assuredly are not human, much


less Christian—when the foremost of our merchants, and the
most conspicuous and active amongst the Candidates for the
representation of 23,000 British subjects, scruples not to lend
the sanction of his name to an act of despotic aggression
upon the most sacred and revered of all British Institutions,
namely, the Liberty of the Press ; a true and accurate know-
ledge of our social, material and moral condition, although
it may not be sufficient to save us from becoming the voluntary
victims of uncalculating passion, will enable us to estimate
correctly the consequences of our own acts. To furnish this
knowledge the letters of “Dion” were penned, and the
selections from them, contained in this Pamphlet re-
published. "Whether success or not has crowned the efforts
of their author, the task of deciding is left to that tribunal
before which they appear —the public.
It may perhaps be expected that I should here state the
principal circumstances which induced me to conclude, that
the people of Van Diemen’s Land required to have their
attention drawn to the facts contained in the Letters of
u Dion.” To meet any expectation upon this subject, I shall
state concisely the progress of that system of ratiocination
which led me to form the conclusion.
The remarkable difference that exists between the actual
and the reported condition of the material and moral interests
of this country never fails to excite the surprise as well as
the suspicions of every stranger landing on the shores of
Van Diemen’s Land; —aland disfigured by the crumbling
ruins of once prosperous cities, and the dismantled remnants


of “ country seats,” swarming with some 50 or 60,000
“ monsters in human shape”—a country where the ever-
husy knife of the cut-throat, and the avenging rope of the
hangman, know hut little intermission in their barbarous
functions —where white cannibals make their repasts pff
human victims and carry about them in bags whatever remains
as a provision for subsequent wants —where the orgies of Hell
arc unceasingly performed, with the only difference in favour
of this place consisting in the circumscribed limits of the
theatre of action—where every “ material” interest was over-
whelmed in ruin, and the “ moral” element of society
entirely obliterated. Such is the nature of the country and
such is the character of its people as estimated by every
stranger wdio visits Van Diemen’s Land, without an oppoi*-
tunity of studying any other data but such as are furnished
in the writings and speeches of those persons who have usurped
the title of “ Tasmanian Patriots !” How great must be the
surprize of the stranger upon landing at either of our ports,
to behold rising around him beautifully laid out, and sub-
stantially-built cities, the growth of less than half a century
—the harbours crowded with shipping—the blocks of store
and warehouses the magnificent shops the capacious
wharves —the streets busy with the hum of striving industry,
and all the outward signs of thriving opulence ? When he
enquires into the extent of our export and import trades—
when his eyes are every moment dazzled with the splendour
of the equipages of our merchants and gentry —when the
opulence of our mercantile and trading classes become mani-
fested in their appearance and superior mode of living,—


surely he must feel convinced that those who have represented
the “ material” condition of the country as being ruined, are
persons whose authority deserves neither heed nor attention.
And when he enumerates the number of our religious,
charitable, literary, and scientific institutions, and marks the
general good conduct and orderly behaviour of the people,
his mind cannot help yielding to conviction that if the duties
of our public censors have, as they affirm, become disagreeable,
but necessary, inasmuch as the depravity of the people oblige
them to indulge in obscene reprobations, much of the im-
morality and wickedness they denounce so vehemently exist
only in their over-heated imaginations.
When, too, the position as well as elements of our
trading and agricultural classes are regarded, —when it is
ascertained that the vast majority of the hard-working
farmers and tillers of the soil, who form the pioneers of that
civilization for which a triumph amongst our “ green old
woods” is assuredly decreed, have belonged to that
expatriated class whose feelings are perpetually outraged by
the denunciations of men enriched by the temporary
forfeitures of their rights as citizens —when the very bone
and sinew of the community are formed by elements drawn
from the prison ships, and what in their present renovated
state would do no dishonour to any country in the world—
how could any reflecting, impartial, or humane person join
in that inhuman outcry against unfortunate fellow-creatures,
and which must act on the sensibilities of a most important
section of the community like an alarm bell, ever and
torturingly awakening in their souls the unpleasant


reminiscences of by-gone misfortune! Considerations such
as these, first induced me to turn my thoughts to the careful
contemplation of the various subjects, I have treated in the
letters of “ Dion,” and the more I reflected on their matter,
the more convinced I became, that were the promoters of the
League to obtain a triumph for their crude and undefined
schemes, that the “material” interests of Van Diemen’s
Land would be narrowed to a small circle of flock-masters,
comparatively independent of labour; and the “ moral”
interests of a people now numbering over 70,000, to about
10,000 nomadic owners and tenders of sheep ! I saw that
the cry of “ the Australias are one” was a mere delusion —
a pleasing but baseless fiction, so long as the natural
resources of the neighbouring colonies present attractions
so much superior to those of Van Diemen’s Land—to the
employers of labour. I knew from a careful study of the
resources and circumstances of this country, when compared
to those of the other Australian Colonies, that we should
never be able to compete as agriculturists with the farmers
of the unwooded prairies of Victoria, and that the first
result of adopting, and pursuing to a successful issue, the
wild and insane policy of the League, would be to throw into
Continental Australia every labourer, farmer, and owner of
capital, in this country, with the exception of those connected
with the breeding of sheep and the growth of wool. To draw
public attention to the inevitable consequences of the public
policy of public men, and to demonstrate the folly of tearing
up the very roots of society in the absence of any feasible
plan for replacing them, are not illigitimate subjects for any


citizens of a state to deal with ; and I trust that no presumed
obscurity as to the position of the writer, nor any mis-
conceived estimate of his motives, will prevent all classes in
Yan Diemen’s Land from weighing well, and giving due
consideration to the facts so well established in the following
pages! Let it be remembered, that their accuracy has
never been questioned, nor the argument deduced from them
ever answered; and that the only mode adopted by hostile
commentators to impair their effects on the public mind, is
one so low and unbecoming, as to fail in even exciting the
contempt of
DION.


LETTER I.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ADVERTISER.
Hobart Town , June 13, 1851.
SIR,
Since the first settlement of the Colony up to the
present time, a period has never occurred in its history
fraught with so many incidents ; and which, according to the
uses we apply them, are more capable of influencing either
for good or evil its future destinies. At the present moment
it is impossible to calculate with any degree of accuracy
the ultimate effects upon Van Diemen’s Land of the Gold
Fields of Australia Proper. But in the absence of all
well defined views as to the future, it may be reasonably
expected that our participation in any of the benefits
which are likely to result from the discovery, will be in
proportion to the wisdom with which we discharge our
duties as citizens at this important juncture, and com-
mensurate with the extent of our deviation from the beaten
track which for years we have trodden, while pursuing an
e sentially demoralising system of political warfare.
No impartial person who studies the history of our
political and social struggles, even up to the present day,
can come to any other conclusion, but that our progress
to a great extent has been impeded—our rights as citizens
withheld—and our social ills perpetuated, mainly through
our oion folly. We are, no doubt, naturally enough
unwilling to acknowledge this ; but, that such is the plain
state of the case, past as well as present experience
proves. Our system of public policy is made up of con-
tradictions between “ professed principles” and “ practical
acts.” We have, for instance, been accustomed to urge
our “ principles ” upon the attention of the Home Govern-
ment, and to claim for them that consideration and
influence which they would have naturally commanded
B


for any cause supported by their truth and justice ; but at
the same time we always left it in the power of our oppo-
nents to prove by their “ acts 1 ’ that we neither valued
truth nor permitted justice to influence our own conduct.
These contradictions between inordinate professions of
attachment to the“ precepts” of virtue, and the “ practices'’
which have ever received the support, and which even now
pass current through the sanction of our political ethics, are
in many ways placed prominently before the world. They
are seen in the depraved condition of a large portion of
our press —in the organised system of slander, for which
every reputation, no matter how unblemished or pure, is
considered legitimate prey —in the characters of many of
those persons who are objects of the support, and depo-
sitories of the confidence of a large portion of the public ;
and thev figure in characters visible to the whole world,
w o 7
upon the face of that confederacy, which boasts of em-
bracing within its limits, all the wealth, intelligence, and
patriotism of the Australian community.
We cannot, so long as we permit our “ practices” to
bear so contradictory a relation to our “ professions,”
wonder on account of the little attention paid to our
petitions—or that the statements that we urge in their
support, fail to excite suspicion. We encourage by
large rewards itinerant disseminators of foul slanders upon
the character of our own community ; and by doing so
we exhibit, in the reckless contempt of truth indulged in
by such persons, the very minute portion of respect we
ourselves entertain for that virtue. These men are the
standards by which we are judged as a body—so we must
not feel surprised, when we are informed that anything we
assert for a “ fact” is generally taken to be the reverse.
When, for instance, the British Minister reads the
Prospectus of the Australasian League, he learns that its
fundamental principle is that of “ moral force/’ and,


“ that for the Abolition of Transportation none other than
‘ moral means’ are permuted to be used.” It will not, I
suppose, be contended that falsehood and slander are
included as weapons to be found in the catalogue of any
“ moral” armoury; yet, up to the present moment they
are the only means which appear to have been
used by the Delegates and acting members of a
body said to represent all the “ religion and morality”
of the Colonists. Their speeches and practices are
calculated to produce a conviction on the mind of any
rational being that our ideas of “ morality” correspond
with other people’s notions of “ vice.”
The Honorary Secretary to the League is a person
called Mr. Gilbert Wright. At a meeting, held at Para-
matta, the industrious and prospering people of Van
Diemen's Land were described in the most opprobious
terms by this Mr. Wright, who illustrated his knowledge
of the country he was vitupeiating by stating “ that the
prison population of Van Diemen’s Land was daily in-
creasing in a frightful ratio: crime was heaped upon
crime, and vice upon vice.”
Mr. W. P. Weston on the same occasion informed
every nation of the earth to which the wings of the press
can bear bis denunciations —“ that the corruption existing
in Van Diemen’s Land was of a nature which was untit
to name ’ —that it was ‘‘ so frightful as to call down the
signal vengeance of the Almighty, and cause him utterly
to destroy that ill fated island from the face of the
earth,”
The Rev. John West, at the same place and meeting,
drew an affecting picture of his own sad fate, and in
which the most telling feature wis—“ his having left his
own native home to come to Van Diemen’s Land on the
faith of the pledge given by the Imperial Government that
transportation should cease to this island.”


Now, unfortunately for the country and the people,
whom these persons are said to represent, there does not
happen to be one iota ot truth in any of the preceding state-
ments. In the first place since the last census was taken
there has been a decrease of more than 7000 “ in the
prison population of the island.
In the second :—There is not a person in Van
Diemen’s Land reckless enough to make such statements
as those hazarded by Mr. Weston in the face of any
portion of the public in this country. Where are the
places in this island desecrated by the commission of such
abominable atrocities as are alluded to ? Where have
they been perpetrated ? Who are the parties who were
their active or passive agents ? One-third ot the popula-
tion in the island is concentrated in the city of Hobart
Town. Every street in it is studded with the work-shops
and industrial abodes of persons who were once prisoners,
but who now form in themselves, and their w r ell-reared
and educated children, the bone and strength of our
community. In the whole world there cannot be found
another city, of the same extent and population as
Hobart Town, so free from crime, or which exhibits
clearer proofs of its progress in all the characteristics
which accompany the advance of Society, and the exist-
ence of a sound and regenerating principle of morality.
Five-sixths ot the houses, even in its lonely suburbs, are
without the protection of window-shutters. Yet, how
seldom do we hear of house-breaking and robberies ?
For years past, respectable females, attached by their
duties to a branch of the Public Service, have walked
alone and unprotected, in all kinds of weather, and at
every season of the year, and in every shade of light and
darkness, the police-less roads in the neighbourhood of
this city, without having ever encountered rudeness by
word or deed ! Here, no man dare face a Public


Meeting and tell bis auditors that they were guilty of
crimes “ which called for the signal vengeance of the
Almighty !” Where, then, does the Aceldama of
M essrs. Wright, Weston, and West exist? Surely it
cannot be in Launceston, the seat of such exquisite
morality—such enlightened patriotism—and the quondam
scene of the Rev, John West’s Missionary labours ! It
is not to be found in any of the Convict Depots ; —since
men of all parties, of all creeds m religion as well as
politics, have testified, under their own “ hands and
seals,” to the moral and physical impossibilities which
oppose themselves to the perpetration of the enormities
alluded to in any of our Convict Depots. Where, then,
is this “ English organized Hell-upon-Earth” to be met
with? In the diseased imaginations of men, debased by
a constant reflection upon subjects congenial to their ovrn
immoral organizations ! This is the an-wer which expe-
rience in Van Diemen’s Land can always give to such
reckless audacity of assertions as is indulged in by our
Delegates and patriotic “ Leaders.”
In the third place —the document which contains the
promises of the Home Government made to the Colonists
of Van Diemen’s band on the subject of Transportation,
is dated sth February, 1847. No promise, either expressed
or implied, was ever, previous to this date, made by the
British Government to either suspend or discontinue
Transportation to this Colony. How, then, could the
Rev. John West’s statement “that he was induced to
abandon his native home to come here on the faith of
such a promise” be true ? The Rev. Politician has been
in the Colony since 1843, and he has the effrontery to
tell his audience that he was entrapped to embark for
Van Diemen’s Land by a promise made four years after
he arrived here!
1 solicit from the public a calm consideration of the


facts here alluded to ; and, after it is bestowed, 1 would
ask them these questions : —Are the “ means” employed
by our ostensible Representatives “ moral ?” Are they
such as to raise in public esteem the character of our
people ? Are they calculated to subserve the interests of
a righteous cause, or to elevate the standard of public
morality amongst us? Can our “moral material”
interests be benefitted by our subsidised Agents astounding
and shocking the world by exhibiting the people, on whose
earnings they live, as monsters of depravity and incar-
nated fiends ? The cause they champion is a holy one ;
but surely it must soon be invested with the contempt of
mankind, if not rescued from such immoral advocacy!
In my next communication, the general views I have
expressed upon the different subjects alluded to in this
Letter, shall be examined in detail.
DION.
LETTER 11.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ADVERTISER,
Hobart Town , June 20, 1851.
SIR,
From the London Times down to the Rev. John
West, the fortunate architect of the Australian League,
every writer and speaker upon the subject of Transporta-
tion assumes that “ the Colony of Van Diemen’s Land,
once prosperous and happy, has been utterly ruined by
pouring in upon it enormous masses of Transported
Offenders.” This seems to be the text from which all the
opponents of Transportation, so far as their hostility to
it on “ material” grounds is concerned, draw their argu-
ments. Unsupported, as this generally-believed-in
assumption is, by facts connected with either our past


history or present condition, the free use made of it by
the opponents of the system it is employed to damage,
appears to me—and when considered calmly by the public
must also appear to them—to be rather a source of
strength to their enemies than to themselves. When a
cause is good, it surely requires not the aid of untruth to
ensure its success. Its own merits are only required to
be eliminated in order to draw towards it the support of
all sincere and virtuous men. But when once it becomes
associated with “ immorality,” or that its Apostles reject
not from its service the mercenary alliance of unworthy
Agents, the “ cause” is shunned by all who fear con-
tamination from a contact with its supporters. This is
precisely the case with the question of Anti-transportation
in this Colony. Its intrinsic goodness as well as justice
cannot be denied ; but, unfortunately, neither its Chief
Apostles, nor the “ means” they employ for the ostensible
purpose of subserving it, are of that character calculated
to enlist under their banner such an array of strength, as
would be irresistible in virtue of its immense moral power.
The question of Anti-transportation can never command
that attention from British Statesmen, or that support
from the Colonists which its merits entitle it. so long as it
is made subservient to schemes of personal ambition, and
while falsehood is made the medium of extending its
influence.
We shall examine, by way of illustration, the basis upon
which a few active and cunning men have for some years
rested the “ material” support of this question ; and when
the facts which this inquiry shall evolve are considered
by a just and impartial public, it is to be presumed that it
will be in the power of each person to account for the
comparative apathy which pervades the general body of
the Colonists in reference to the subject of Transportation,
as well as for the indifference with which our reraon-


Population
29,079
Free „....
15,067
Bond
12,706
Excess of Free over Bond ..
2,361
Area under Crops, Acres .. ..
56,696
Wheat per bushel
Exports
£157,906
Imports ... *
392,666
strances against its continuance have been treated by the
Colonial Office.
“ A once prosperous Colony has been ruined by
throwing upon it an enormous mass of Transported
O Senders.”
This proposition lias now all the force of an axiom ;
it has been repeated so often, and is so generally believed.
It forms the fundamental article in the creed of all
Leaguers. Every man in the Colony who has gone
through the Bankrupt and Insob ent Courts—every un-
happy landed proprietor pressed by the weight of incum-
brance on his property —is regarded by the public, and
very often by himself, as a victim to the “system,’ Now
even putting all other considerations apart, except such
as are connected with a natural proneness to receive
pleasure from gratifying our curiosities. — it would be
worth spending a short time in investigating this subject
—the facts are so strongly and strikingly opposed to the
assertions with which the popular belief has connected
them.
Let us go back so far in our history as 1832, when
there were neither grievances of “a moral or religious”
nature complained of. During that year we stood in
the following position in reference to the subjoined
particulars:—


In 1833, the free population was .... 18,214
Bond 14,990
Excess of Free over Bond 3,224
Wheat per bushel ss.
In 1834, the free population was.... 21,084
Bond 15,538
Excess of Free over Bond 5,546
Area in crop, acres, 69,041
Wheat per bushel 11s. 6d.
Experts £203,522
Imports 476,607
lii 1835, the free population was .... 21,991
Bond 16,968
Excess of Free over Bond 5,023
Area in crops, acres 87,283
Wheat per bushel 6s. 6d.
Exports 02,679
Imports 583,646
Keeping these figures in our recollection, we pass
over the halcyon days “ of the once prosperous colonists,”
to examine how we stood in relation to “ Convictism and
prosperity'’ during that period when “ wealth and happi-
ness endeared each scene.”
In 1838, free population 26,055
Bond • 18,133
Excess of Free over Bond 7,922
Area in crop, acres 108,000
Wheat, per bushel Bs. 9d.
Meat, per lb 4h\
Epxorts £581,478
Imports 702,956
In 1839, Free population 25,747
Bond 17,077


Area in crop, acres
100,348
Wheat, per bushel
26s.
Meat, per lb
4d.
Exports
£875,165
Imports
746,887
Excess of Free over Bond 8,670
In the years 1840, ’4l and ’42, the excess of Free
population over the Bond was respectively to each 9,474,
17,435, and 16,756 ; and the price of Wheat varied from
95., 75., to 6s. 6d. per bushel. Meat from 6d per
lb., and the area in Crops, in the last year referred to was
155,525 acres. The Exports in 1840 were valued at
£867,007, and the Imports to £988,356. It might well
be said that the Colonists were then “ in a happy and
prosperous condition.”
In 1839, when Wheat sold for 265. per bushel, and
Meat brought 4d. per lb., out of an aggregate population
of 43,824, there were 17,077 convicts. It was during
this year the famous Meeting was held at Launceston, to
petition the Queen and Parliament, not to violate the
pact which subsisted between the Colonists and the Mother
Country, by doing away with Transportation—as upon
the faith of its continuance many millions of capital had
been invested in the country. It was, during this year,
that the same men, who complain of being ruined in
their e ' moral and material” interests prayed that upon
moral and material” grounds they were entitled to have
Convicts sent to Van Diemen’s Land ! In 1843, the
price of Wheat fell to 3s. 6d. per bushel —and of Meat
to 2|d, per lb. Up to the present year the same prices
have been current. The whole question, then, as to “ the
ruin of the colonists” must be solved by ascertaining the
causes which led to the reduction in the prices of agricul-
tural produce, which began in 1842, and continued up to


1851. What, in the first place, produced the great rise
in the value of stock, and other agricultural produce,
which commenced in 1834, and continued up to 1842?
There is no person in the Colony ignorant of the fact,
that the Settlement of Port Phillip, and the monopoly
which we enjoyed for seven or eight years in supplying
the exigencies of the New Colony, were the causes of the
exorbitant prices obtained for all we produced in Van
Diemen’s Land ! An authority whose veracity no
Leaguer can doubt, namely—Dr. Lang, thus describes
the market to which we brought our agricultural produce
with so much profit up to 1842 and ’3.
“ The immense profits that were expected to be realized from
the rearing of stock, threw the more sober pursuit of agriculture
into the shade, hut little attention was paid in the mean time to
the raising of food for man; in addition to which, there was an
extensive failure of the crop in New South W ales in 1838, which
was succeeded by a great dearth in 1839.”
To the causes adverted to here, the immense rise in
the value of Van Diemen’s Land produce, which
commenced coeval with the settlement of Port
Phillip, and which continued, until the settlers, in
the first place, became insolvent —and in the second —
they began to export to Van Diemen’s Land the
same articles we had been making enormous profits
by sending them—was entirely owing, 'lhe same
author states “ that the depression which succeeded the
enormous transactions in the land and stock throughout
the entire Colony of New South Wales during the
years 1839~’40 and ’4l, there was an amount of insolvency
as declared in the Colonial Insolvents’ Courts of Ten
Pounds (some say as much as £2O) per head for every
man, woman and child in the Colony.”
Dunne the exciting times when Wheat sold at 20s
o
per bushel, and Meat at 6d. per lb—speculation and


extravagance amongst the colonists, prepared the way for
many a year of painful deprivation and suffering. Dr.
Lang, in adverting to these subjects, says —“Accordingly,
not a few who had commenced with considerable capital
lost everything, and were ruined, and many others who
had obtained unlimited credit for a time, from the Colonial
Banks, became insolvent—and of the latter, a considerable
number had greatly accelerated this consummation by
habits of extravagance and dissipation.”
In 1840, the proceeds of the Sale of Land in the
Districts of New South Wales and Port Phillip, realized
£219,127 16s. 6d. and, in 1842, they fell to
£2,729 12s. B d. In 1840, Port Phillip alone imported
to the value of £392,026, while its exports were valued
at £154,650. In 1843, the Exports from the same
Districts reached the value of £243,959, and the Imports
were reduced to £186,249.
The revolution in our relations to the best market we
ever bad for the produce of this island was completed in
1843. Port Phillip, sustained, by its unlimited resources
in agricultural and pastoral wealth, recovered the shock
produced by a system of extravagant speculation, and
became an u exporter” instead of an “ importer” of the
necessaries of life. This transposition in the circum-
stances of the parent and child, produced the natural
effects upon the fortunes of the colonists of Van Diemen’s
Land. And we, who had been even more unguarded
in our speculations than the settlers in Port Phillip, and
not having the same resources to fall back upon, felt
the reaction of fortune more keenly at the moment, and
are likely to experience its effects to a more protracted
period than our younger rival. In 1843, Wheat fell to
3 s. 6c?. per bushel, and Meat to 2|c?. per lb. Can there
now be a doubt as to the causes which produced this


reduction in the price of agricultural produce ? Can it
be stated with truth that the reaction was produced by
the arrival in that year of nearly 5000 probationers?
What was the condition of the vast majority of the
Landholders and Colonists when in 1843 the Port
Phillipians no longer afforded them a remunerating
market for their produce? Were they not involved in debt
—encumbered by mortgages, and overlaid with judgments?
Were not their purchases of land—the interests of their
mortgages —as w r ell as their habits of living, all regulated
by the assumption that Wheat was for ever to bring from
10s. to 20s. per bushel, and Meat from 4 d. to Qd. per lb. ?
The greater portion of the available laud in the Colony
was purchased and mortgaged upon these short-sighted
assumptions. What wonder then that the re-action in
prices should have brought with it the depressing
consequences of general insolvency and wide spreading
suffering ?
If the “ ruin” said to have overtaken “ once
prosperous colonists” were produced by the introduction
“ of an overwhelming mass of transported offenders,”
why was the Colony more prosperous in those years,
when the free and bond population were nearly balanced
in point of numbers? In 1839—one of the most
prosperous periods in the annals of this Colony—the
excess of the Free over the Bond population was only
8670. In the year 1850 and .1851, when the cry is that
“ the once prosperous colonists have been ruined by the
introduction of an overwhelming mass of Convicts,” the
“ Free Population” is in excess over the “ Bond” by
over 31,000 ! being the greatest disproportion between
these classes which has ever existed since the first
settlement of Van Diemen’s Land as a Penal Colony !
I now invite the earnest attention of all sincere


friends to the Colony to weigh the facts I have here laid
before them, with impartiality and in a spirit of candour.
Let them be compared with the gn endless assertions of
those who embrace a noble cause for the sole purpose of
hugging it to death ; and next let them draw their own
conclusions as to the causes which produced the alleged
“ruin of once prosperous colonists.” In my next letter,
the “ alleged ruin” shall be enquired into.
DION.
LETTER 111.
TO THE EDITOR'OF THE ADVERTISER.
Hobart Town, June 24, 1851
SIR,
In dealing with the subject of that “ ruin of our
once prosperous colonists,” which it is asserted has been
effected by “throwing upon the country enormous masses
of Transported Offenders,” it is fortunate that we have
a period in our history which is allowed by the now
prominent Members of the Australian League to have
been, so far as our “ material and moral are
concerned, a time of “ unprecedented prosperity.” It is
important the Public should know when the colony
enjoyed this state of “ unprecedented prosperity,” and
upon what evidence the assertion rests ; for when these
particulars are properly ascertained, we shall be able, by
contrasting our present condition with what it has been
in our “ prosperous” days, to calculate the extent of the
ruin which has overwhelmed us since ; and to test the
sincerity of those men who, under the pretence of a con-
scientious abhorrence of the principle of Transportation,
use all means to make the name of Van Diemen’s Land
odious and detested, and to depreciate its moral and
material condition.


In March, 1839, a Public Meeting was held at
Launceston, at which “ no less than 200 of the leading
Colonists of the Northern Division of the Island attended.”
So the Launceston journals of that year record. “Thomas
Archer, Esq., was moved to the Chair by Thomas Henty,
Esq., and seconded by John Sinclair, Esq.” The Reso-
lutions against the discontinuance of Transportation,
moved, seconded, adopted, and embodied in a Petition to
Her Majesty were equally as expressive of the hostility of
“ the leading Colonists of the Northern Division” against
Transportation being put an end to, as their “protests ’’
are now against its being continued. Among “ the 200
leading Colonists of the Northern Division of the Island,”
who distinguished themselves by their ardour and elo-
quence against the nefarious intention of the British
Government, to discontinue the deportation to this Colony
“of Transported Offenders” the names of William
Henty, James Robertson, J. W. Gleadow, James Cox,
T. Bartley, Thomas Archer, and the Rev, Henry Dowling,
with many others who are now seemingly the foremost
among the enemies of Transportation, but who were most
actively associated in 1839 with that party which gave
expression to its opinions upon the “material” condition
of the Colony as connected with the subject of Transpor-
tation in the subjoined paragraph of a Petition to the
Queen :
“ The Petitioners believe, that they are henefitted by the ex-
isting system. They do not desire to conceal this belief. They
emigrated under the existing system ; have embarked large capitals,
and (by the aid of them and their industry) have acquired
extensive property under it, it may be truly said under the faith of
its continuance ; they have laboured industriously, and endured in
past time much hardship, and risked much danger under it; but
the result is one which, if they wished, they could not conceal, —
unprecedented prosperity, as manifested in a large Import and
Export Trade, in the advantages resulting from which the Mother


Country is a joint participator —in a highly improved Territory—
and large and flourishing Toivns and Villages."
That the Colony was “in a highly improved and
flourishing condition ” in 1839, the united voices of “ 200
of the leading Colonists of the Northern Division of the
Island” leave us no room for doubting. It must, there-
fore, have been, at some period subsequent to 1839, that
“ the once prosperous and happy Colonists were over-
whelmed in ruin by the outpouring upon them of enormous
masses of Transported Offenders.'’ Every year since
1843, adds to the force of the opposition against the
System of Transportation ; and it must be inferred from
this circumstance that the “ruin” of the Colonists pro-
ceeded in a ratio with the intensity of the opposition to
its continuance.
When, however, we come to test this assumption by
facts, the possibility of its imnosing upon us is prevented.
In 1839, wheat brought the highest price it has ever
reached in the Southern Hemisphere : so did all other
descriptions of Agricultural Produce raised in this Island.
During this year of “unprecedented prosperity,” we
petitioned to have Transportation continued, upon the
pleas that our “ moral and material” interests were pro-
moted through the influence of a convict immigration ;
and that, unless convict labour was supplied, “ property
would be shaken to its very foundation.” Now let us
compare the period of “ unprecedented prosperity,” viz.,
1839 with that of 1849, when “ the colonists are repre-
sented to have been overwhelmed in ruin by pouring in
upon them enormous masses of Transported Offenders
and we shall be enabled to determine how far such repre-
sentations of our present, when contrasted with our former
condition, are borne out by facts.
In 1839, the aggregate Population, exclusive of


Horses
9863
Horned Cuttle
75,915
Sheep
.... 868,590
Military, was 42,824. Of these 17,077 were Convicts;
leaving an excess in favour of the Free Population of
BG7O. The area of Land in Cultivation comprised
100,348 Acres. Cereal Produce, 1,044,857 bushels.
Potatoes, 11,373 tons. It will be seen from these figures,
that in 1839 we raised something over 24 bushels of cereal
food, and 5| cu ts, of Potatoes to each Inhabitant of the
Island. Let us contrast these data with those of 1849.
Exclusive of Military our population in 1849
numbered over 69,000. The area in cultivation
increased to 166,223 acres. Cereal pr0duce—1,894,296
bushels. Potatoes, 22,164 tons. Taking into con.-idei a-
tion the increase of population, the results are, that in
this latter year, we raised, for each item in the number ol
our inhabitants, three bushels of cereal food, and 1 cwt,
of Potatoes more than we did in that year of “ unprece-
dented prosperity,” namely 1839 !
Let us next examine our condition as respects the
great staple of Australian Colonists Stock. The
Official Returns for 1839 inform us that in that year our
wealth in Stock consisted of—
In these days of ruin and desolation “to once prosperous
colonists,” it may be some satisfaction to learn that in
1849 when the Probation System was in full activity,
and “ Cheap Labour” had been for six years diminishing
the profits of the Capitalists, that the Statistics of Stock
exhibited the following results .
Horses 18,507
Horned Cattle 83,520
Sheep 1,712,291
From that year of “ unprecedented prosperity,”


1839 until 1849, although the population only increased
by two-thirds, the Pastoral Wealth of the Colony in
Horses and Sheep increased one-half. So far then as
our Agricultural and Pastoral Interests are concerned, an
unprecedented improvement has taken place in them,
notwithstanding Wheat had fallen since 1839, from 2 65.
per bushel, to 3s. 3d., and Meat from sd. to 2 \d. per
lb.! Wool was more than double the price in 1839 to
what it was in 1849; yet the relative value of the exports
in this staple was £194,647 and £202,334. The next
great test of prosperity which is applicable to a Colony
like ours, is the amount of tonnage it employs, in
exporting its own produce, or importing that of other
countries. Let us apply this test to the periods we have
been instituting a contrast between. During 1839 the
Tonnage of Foreign and British Shipping, entered
inwards, was 79,283 tons, and outwards, 77,556 tons.
In 1849 we had, under the same heads, 99,063 and
99,130 tons ; thus showing an increase, during ten years,
of 19,780 tons under the first item, and of 21,564 under
the second.
The contrast in our condition is even more forcibly
pressed upon us, when w'e compare the Shipping Interests
of the Colonists in 1839 and 1849. The total Tonnage
belonging to Ports in Van Diemen’s Land during the
former years amounted only to 10,883 tons, while in the
latter reached 21,532! During the year 1839, there
were built 13 vessels, of the united tonnage of 651 tons;
and in 1849, 22 were completed for sea, of the united
tonnage of 2200 tons ! There were employed in the
Coasting Trade 1715 tons of shipping in 1839, while in
1849, 4120 tons found employment in the same trade !
In Agricultural, Pastoral, and Commercial Wealth, the
progress of the Colonists has not only been satisfactory,
but unprecedented, when it is taken into consideration


that in 1842 their properties were mortgaged for more
£BOO,OOO, bearing interest from Bto 20 per cent.! We
have no returns unfortunately of the sums deposited in
Savings’ Banks for any year prior to 1847 ; but in that
year we learn that the total amount deposited by 2612
persons was £38,796 15s. Id. The following year the
sums placed in the same depositories increased con-
siderably, and in 1849, the total of all deposits in the
various Savings’ Banks reached £49,204 14s. 10 d. To
those who assert that the working classes of this country
are a depraved and demoralized race, I commend the
consideration of the preceding facts. Since 1839 more
than 1200 stone and brick-houses have been built in the
City of Hobart Town alone, and upon which over
£300,000 have been expended. There were only 22
Breweries in the Island in 1839; there are now 50.
But why pursue this subject further? No person
can be more convinced of the groundlessness of their
assertions regarding the ruin of the Colony, than those
who allow their prejudices to overcome their judgments
while uttering such mischievous fallacies. If the Colony
was in such rapid progress to decay, how is it that the
Landed Proprietors have enabled to ease themselves of
more than half the incumbrances which pressed upon
them in 1842 ? The mortgages given as security for
purchases of land, while the mania of speculation was at
its height, and when the interest of money ranged from
10 to 20 per cent., are reduced at this moment to nearly
half their original amount ? Our Revenue and
Expenditure are nearly equalized, and the former would
be in excess of the latter, had not the deficiencies of
former years to be provided for. The people are well
fed, clothed, and housed; —their increase, during the
last ten years, whether we regard the aggregate number,


or the proportion of the free to the bond, has been nearly
doubled to what it was up to the ten years, ending 1839
two-thirds more have been added to tie area of
cultivated land—the proportion of food to population is
now more than it ever has been—the number of horses
and sheep have been doubled during the ten years
ending 1849 —the tonnage of vessels visiting our ports
increased—while that belonging to ourselves is multiplied
two-fold —our exports, notwithstanding the low prices of
agricultural produce, are greater in value now, than they
were for the last eight years. Our towns, are in point of
population and wealth, augmented in the proportion of
nearly two to one, if we contrast their present circum-
stances with those which received the character of
“ flourishing” from the assembled colonists in 1839.
Where then are we to look for the evidences of that ruin
which it is asserted has overtaken us ? Not surely
among the agricultural classes—for they were never more
contented or happy. Not to the flock-masters can we
appeal in proof of the terrible distress we are all said to
be the victims of, for their exports of wool are now greater
than ever. Our ship-owners were ne\er more prosperous,
nor our merchants more independent. Where then is
this “ ruin of our prosperous colonists” to be met with ?
Men whose interests and that of this Island are in no
other way connected, except so far as they can be made
to administer to selfish purposes—men who permit them-
selves to be led as the blind dupes of cunning and uneasy
agitation—persons who are hurried blindfolded into every
vortex of popular clamour—and who are either unwilling
or unable to eliminate truth, or to distinguish it from
ingeniously concocted sophistry, such persons do indeed
assert “ that the colonists are ruined”—although in every
element of prosperity their progress is as remarkable, as
all assertions in reference to their ruin are absurd. Why


Van Diemen's Land —without the help of valuable mines,
or illimitable agricultural resources such as are possessed
by Adelaide and Port Phillip, sustained its position,
despite the difficulties it has had to contend against,
shall be the subject of my next communication.
DION.
LETTER IV.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ ADVERTISER.”
Hobart Town , June 27, 1851.
SIR,
I now come to consider the subject to which the con-
cluding paragraph of my last letter referred ; namely
“ Why Van Diemen’s Land without the help of valuable
mines or unlimited resources in agricultural and pastoral
wealth, such as Adelaide and Port Phillip abounds, sus-
tained its position despite the difficulties it has had to
contend against.”
In a community characterised by such an amount
of intelligence as ours unquestionably is, it may appear
quite superfluous to discuss the proposition herein set
forth. To every person of common sense, and unbiassed
mind, the causes to which we owe our present state of
prosperity must be apparent. There is nothing doubtful
or obscure in the history of this country ; its political and
social condition has not originated in, or been influenced
by, circumstances about which men can differ, as to
whether they ever occurred or not. The particulars of
our history are patent to every member of the community
when the Colony was in a state of “ unprecedented
prosperity” is generally known to even those who are,
comparatively speaking, young Settlers. The days of


wild speculation and extravagant habits—of unlimited
credit—of Banking accommodation —bill discounting—
high prices, and general mortgaging, have not yet been
forgotten. Neither are the results which succeeded them.
Why, then, should it be necessary to elaborate the parti-
culars of a history so well authenticated—so perfectly
remembered, and of such recent date? Why has a
necessity arisen for recalling to the public mind the
unpleasant consideration of the hardships we have endured
in our exodus from that wilderness of difficulties into
which we voluntarily and blindly precipitated ourselves ?
The causes which produce the necessities, 1 regret to say,
do us no credit. We are ungrateful; and our ingratitude
is even rendered more odious, by the injustice and shame-
lessness of our attacks upon the agents of our social
redemption. A large proportion of those persons who
owe all they possess to “ Convict Labour,” and who
could not by any other means than “ cheap labour” have
redeemed themselves from ruin—men whose properties
have been rescued from the Sheriff’s custody, and saved
from a fatal collision with the Auctioneer’s hammer—by
the shackled strength of the Convict’s arm, would now
have us believe that the “ruin” and not the “ salvation”
of their temporal interests has been the result of “ Con-
vict interference.”
In two ways they seek to justify their ungrateful, as
well as inconsistent, depreciation of the Convict labour:
First, it is asserted that it is not cheap in reality , although
it may be nominally. Secondly, that instead of being a
gain, even to the material interests of the Country, it
has seriously injured them. Upon these two points I
purpose offering some remarks, not with a view of urging
arguments in favour of the continuance of Transporta-
tion, but for the purpose of supporting the proposition
that Van Diemen’s Land is indebted for its recovery from


a state of painful depression ; and for its present state of
unprecedented prosperity to the abundance and conse-
quent cheapness of labour.
To prove this, I return to the year 1839, which,
according to William Henty, James Robertson, Theodore
Bartley, Esquires, and others “too numerous to mention,”
was one of the “ unprecedented prosperity,” and during
which “ 200 of the leading Colonists of the Northern
Division of the Island” told that Sovereign and Parlia-
ment, whom they now denounce for acting upon the
advice embodied then in their petition, “ that they
naturally did not desire to see their Property shaken to
its very foundation, by a change in the system of Second-
ary Punishment —operating powerfully as that change
would on the Supply of Labour in the Colony : more
PARTICULARY AS FROM THE LIMITED EXTENT OF CROWN
LANDS AVAILABLE FOR SALE, THIS COLONY, UNLIKE
THE NEIGHBOURING PROVINCES, HAS NOT THE MEANS
OF CARRYING ON AN EXTENSIVE IMMIGRATION OF
LABOURERS.”
Let the extent of our Agricultural and Pastoral
Resources, during the Year 1839, be considered. During
1839, when Wheat sold at 265. per bushel, and Meat4d.
per lb., our Agricultural Wealth consisted of—
Wheat, 571,703 bushels at 265. per bushel,
value.. .. .. •• •• ..£743,213
Barley, 149,506 do., at Bs. per do., value .... 59,802
Oats, 312,438 do., at 7s. 6d. per do , value.... 117,164
Pease, 9,506 do., at 10s. per do., -value 4,753
Beans, 1,704 do., at 12s. per do., value .... 1,022
Potatoes, 11,373 tons at 200 s. per ton, value 113,730
Turnips, 44,880 tons, at 455. per ton, value.. 100,980
Hay, 23,952 tons, at 120 s. per ton, value .... 143,712
Total value of all the Agricultural Produce
in 1839 £1,284,376


This year, it must be remembered is registered in
the annals of Colonial History of one of “ unprecedented
prosperity and when all complaints were hushed, with
the exception of those made by the present Leaders of
the League against the British Government for having
determined to discontinue the deportation of Convicts to
Van Diemen’s Land ! our Farming and Labouring
Population at that time comprised 8.822 men, according
to the Official Returns. r l he total amount of cereal
Produce raised by the labour of these men consisted of
1,044,857 bushels ; and for each man’s labour there is a
result of 118 bushels. And by dividing the total value
of all descriptions of Agricultural Produce with the
number of men employed, it will be found that each man’s
labour was worth, in 1839, upwards of £145 to his
employer ! Of course these calculations are made in the
gross, and without reference to the various and necessary
deductions which are usually made on account of Food,
Seed, &c.
Let us now suppose that we paid in 1839 the same
rate of wages to Farm Labourers and Servants which is
paid in Port Phillip and South Australia; and which
we must do in order to prevent Free Labourers from
emigrating ; and that each Labourer cost us £25 a year
salary, and £4 for rations, it is evident that we could have
done so without much inconvenience to the Owners of
Capital; for, after deducting the necessary expenditure
in wages of £255,838, the ample sum of £1,028,538
would be still left to meet the interest of capital and all
other contingent charges. But could we have paid this
rate of wages in any of the years which succeeded 1839,
and have a balance in our favour large enough to pay the
interest and supply the legitimate profits upon Capital,
much less to pay off the Mortgages calculated upon the


exorbitant, prices which the Settlement of Port Phillip
and other unusual circumstances forced agricultural pro-
duce up to ? The man who believes in our ability to have
done so, is either too ignorant to argue with, or too pre-
judiced to be heeded. All we saved in the price of labour
we added to our capital ; and the convict “ losses” were
our clear “ gains by these “ gains’’ we sustained our
position, surrounded by, and labouring under, disadvan-
tages which would have overwhelmed in ruin the people
of any similarly circumstanced settlement.
But we are told that “ convict labour” is not
“ cheap but that on the contrary it is the most useless
and expensive of all labour—at least it is so now ! In
1839, it w r as asserted by the same persons who now
depreciate it, that “ convict labour” had brought Van
Diemen’s Land to a state of “ unprecedented prosperity.’’
Now let us compare the results of convict labour in 1839
with those of 1849. The area under cultivation in that
year was 100,348 acres, or 11 acres for each of the farm-
ing and labouring population. There were 40,350 acres
under wheat—the produce being 571,703 bushels, or
something over 14 bushels to the acre. In 1849 the
farming and labouring population amounted to 11,693,
the area in cultivation to 166,228 acres, or 14 acres for
each individual. The breadth of land under Wheat to
67,349, which produced 1,111,254 bushels, being about
15 bushels, to the acre. What do these “ facts” teach
us 1 Do they not prove that with less labour, in propor-
tion to the extent of land under cultivation, we produce
more and cultivate to a greater extent, than ever we have
done up to and including that year hallowed in the me-
mories of all old colonists by the recollection of 265. per
bushel for Wheat, 4d. per lb. for Meat, and £lO per ton
for Potatoes,


Barley, 309,451 bushels, at 3s. per bushel ....
46,417
Oats, 456,015 bushels, at 2s. 6d. per bushel..
57,001
Peas, 15,970 bushels, at 3s. 6d. per bushel....
2,794
Beans, 1,606 bushels, at 4s. per bushel
321
Potatoes, 22,164 tons, at 70s. per ton
77,474
Turnips, 35,520 tons, at 20s. per ton
35,530
Hay, 38,088 tons at 40s. per ton
76,176
Tares, 6,517 bushels, at 6s. per bushel
1,955
We must now return to the examination of our
capabilities as agriculturists to pay the same rate of wages
we might have done in 1839, and which we must do as
soon as transportation is discontinued—or else abandon
the colony to a few flock-masters and wool-dealers. It
will not, I presume, be now contended that it was the
alteration in the “ system’' which produced the fall in
the prices of agricultural produce, since 1839. This
portion of the subject I have already dealt with ; it only
now remains to show the agriculturists of the country the
altered position, the reductions in the value of their pro-
ducts placed them in—and to lay before them that state
of things, with which they must be prepared to grapple,
so soon as transportation is discontinued, but which is
studiously concealed from them by their wily leaders.
In 1849, the amount and value of the agricultural
produce of the colony were as follows:
Wheat, 1,111,254 bushels, at 3s. 6d. per bushel 194,469
Total value of all Agricultural Produce of 1849. 493,127
It will be seen by contrasting these figures with those
under the head of 1839—that although we increased the
amount of Agricultural Produce by nearly one half,
during the last ten years—its value has decreased from


£1,284,376 to £493,127, being a falling off in the
resources of the Farmers to the extent of £791,249.
Supposing now that we had to pay to Labourers the same
rate of wages obtained by them in the other Colonies,
namely, £25 per annum, and £4 worth of rations, how
much of this sum should we be able to pocket ? What
proportion of it would remain to pay the interest of
mortgages, and to meet the numerous demands created
by former habits of thoughtlessness and extravagance ?
Where should we look for the means of educating our
children, or for carrying on the expensive operations of
Farming in a Country where every acre you might clear
would cost £25 or £3O ? We have already made ourselves
acquainted with the facts of there being less labour
employed now to rai-e a greater amount of produce than
was ever known before in this Colony,—and that the
farming and labouring population only amounts to 11,693
men. The area under cultivation being 166,228 acres>
and the quantity of cereal produce raised, amounting to
1,894,296 bushels, it appears that in 1849, the propor-
tion of cultivated land, to the number employed in agri-
cultural pursuits, was 14 acres to each individual—while
in 1839 it was only 11 acres per man—and that there
were raised 162 bushels in 1849, to the 118 bushels
placed to the credit of each person employed in 1839.
It must be farther remarked, that the acreable produce in
both years was very nearly the same in quantity. The
“ Convicts” interference in the production of agricultural
wealth, is therefore satisfactorily proved to have been
beneficial in-a greater degree during 1849, than it was in
1839. We shall next see the effects of the “interference'”
of “ low prices," —with only agricultural produce, to half
the amount we had in 1849 —the labour of each man
returned over £145 to his employer—while, with all the
advantages of immensely increased resource*, the same


quantity of labour only created wealth, amounting to £42!
Were these results brought about by an influx of Convict
consumers , or by a fall in the prices of agricultural pro-
duce? It is not necessary to add another comment to
such “ facts!”
The entire value of our immensely increased produce
being only £493,127, from what funds could the farmers
furnish the means of paying trehly increased wages ?
The cost of wages in 1849, if regulated according to the
scale already laid down, and which is based on the average
rates prevailing in the adjoining colonies—would have
amounted in that year to £339,097 —leaving instead of a
balance of a million sterling and upwards in the hands of
the agriculturists, a miserable residue of £154,030 —being
an insufficient sum to co\er the expenses of rescuing their
land.
I am convinced, Sir, that no real friendstothe Colony
can overlook the facts which I have now placed before the
public—nor permit them to be deprived of their just
influence. It is well that everyone engaged in the struggle
to rid this fair land of the transportation system, should
give to them a calm consideration so that we may not
be led into either expressing ourselves, or acting after
the fashion of some people, who under the cloak
of religion, and the mask of patriotism “ bear false
witness against their brethren,” and peril our dearest
interests by the folly and immorality of their
proceedings. As this communication has run to
more than an ordinary length, and as the questions under
consideration are the most important to the community,
both as regards the “ moral” and “ material” interests
of the country, I shall postpone to a future opportunity
any further observations upon them—and conclude for
the present in the language of the Launceston petitioners


in 1839—by asserting my ability to convince all rational
men —“ That from the limited extent of Crown
Lands, available for sale, this Colony, unlike
THE NEIGHBOURING PROVINCES, HAS NOT THE MEANS OF
CARRYING ON AN EXTENSIVE IMMIGRATION OF
Labourers —and that consequently it behoves us to
gather around a cause so dear to us as that of Anti-
Transportation—experience and wisdom of a higher and
less suspicious character than that which at present takes
so prominent part in advocating it.
DION.
LETTER V.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ADVERTISER.
Hobart Town, July 2, 1851.
SIR,
In this communication I must depart from the order it
was my intention to observe, in meeting those subjects I
purposed bringing under the consideration of the colonists.
My reason for doing so is this—that while attention has
recently been drawn to the subject of crime in Van
Diemen’s Land, the opportunity for exposing the mis-
statements made in reference to the moral character of
the people, seems more than ordinarily favourable.
Amongst the various fallacies promulgated by
patriotic imposture, and believed in by its unthinkingdupes,
there are none so useful to the purposes of faction, as the
assertions made in reference to the enormous amount of
crime which is said to exist in Van Diemen’s Land. It is
said truly enough, that the name of Vandemonian excites
even the horror of the uncouth Yankee loafers who swarm
over the Gold Fields of California, and revel in the
gambling houses of San Francisco—-that a Native of this


beautiful island is debarred, by a reluctance to own himself
as such, from gratifying the natural desire of every man
to acknowledge the land of his birth—and that the coun-
try deserves to be blotted from the list of creation by the
avenging power of the Almighty on account of its sins
and abominations. It is hard, indeed, to bear up against
such a lot, or to be calm amidst such a hurricane of
reproaches. But it would be truly surprising if the case
were otherwise. We cannot wonder that such opinions
should be formed of us by people who are aliens to us in
feelings, interests, and nationality, w T hen a similar estimate
of the desperate and atrocious nature of our characters
is held almost universally by the inhabitants of that
country, which we are accustomed to look to as our own.
There is not a British subject who, upon arriving for the
first time in Hobart Town or Launceston, does not land
upon our shores having his mind impressed with a belief,
that there is no security for honor, life, or property, unless
they are entrenched behind the points of bayonets or the
muzzles of revolvers. At every step he is prepared to
commence a struggle in defence of his jugulars. At each
corner of a street he expects to be sprung upon by an
assassin. He scrutinizes anxiously every one who passes
by, in the expectation of detecting the hiding place of the
thirsting dagger. He would feel no surprise, although
he might be horror struck, at being compelled to witness
in the public thoroughfares of our most fashionable
streets, the perpetration of the worst species of abomina-
tion, with' which the disordered fancies of corrupt men
have associated the character of the people. And why
should he feel or act otherwise. Have we not ourselves
penned the articles of his faith in regard to us ? His
impressions are but the results of his belief in our own
assertions! We have laboured to invite upon the people
of Van Diemen’s Land the concentrated hatred of the


world. The armoury of Satan has been exhausted of
weapons to carry on the crusade against the moral reputa-
tion of our brethren ; and every rank, grade, and pro-
fession, from afflicted bankrupts to discontented mission-
aries of religion, has been ransacked for recruits to use
them. We have combined every element we could by
any means get command over, into one focus ; and con-
centrated the fire of a burning lens upon the moral vitals
of the community. Those vitals we have gnawed into
shreds—the mischievous zeal of our high priests has col-
lected their mangled fragments into a loathsome pyre—
and they are burned by fire, fed from the igneous breath
of patriotic slanderers. Why then should we feel
astonishment, when the world turns up its nose, while
snuffing the disgusting effluvia of our own works ?
It must be distinctly understood by every inhabitant
of this Colony, that their leaders—that is the Leaguers—
would be utterly powerless as a party, if they did not
misrepresent the material, and slander the moral condition
of the people. In the absence of a true and a pre-
ponderating balance of crime against the Colony, their
interests require the fabrication of a false one. Without
an appalling list of murders, and a frightful catalogue of
nameless abominations, they could neither impose upon
honest men, nor cheat rich men. Even the Rev. John
West, “ eloquent and simple” though he be, would fail
to excite the sympathies of cockney philanthropists towards
his cause, were he unprovided with a dark record of
human atrocities. The u foul murders”—the “ atrocious
outrages”—the “dreadful occurrences”—the “diabolical
assasinations,” and the “ unnatural crimes” said to be
committed in this colony, are the keys to the hearts and
purses of his future auditors. He is even now manufac-
turing them, in obedience to the orders of those persons
who have made their fortunes amongst us. When he is


sixteen thousand miles away, the same tongue which may
be employed in the forenoon expounding the Gospel of
the God of Truth and Charity, may in the afternoon drip
slanderous poison on the characters of the people of his
adopted home. And why? Because his party has associated
with the advocacy of a just cause, the most “ immoral” of
means. The cause of the colonists requires no such aid ;
on the contrary a deep and irreparable injury is inflicted
upon it, by those who have bound it “to a body of
death” while endeavouring to make its triumph dependent
on the debasement and ruin of the colonists.
It is the fashion of our libellers to prove the depra-
vity of the 70,000 inhabitants of this island by instituting a
comparison between the crimes committed here, amongstso
limited a community, with those committed in England and
Wales, containing a population of 17,000,000. Can any-
thing more clearly exhibit their anxiety to make us detested
throughout the world, than such a discreditable ruse as
this ? By such a mode of testing the comparative
morality of the two countries, if only one murder occurred
per annum with us, we should be 200 degrees lower in
the scale of morality than England or Wales, even after
allowing to them a liberal margin of 42 murders during
the year. It could be only in the event of a complete
absence from crime of all descriptions, that the superior
morality of so small a community as ours could be sus-
tained in any contrast with so large a community as one
embracing 17,000,000 of people. For instance, if the
total number of criminals in this colony only amounted
annually to 10—it could not be said that the people were
wicked, or the morals of the community depraved. Still
the proportion of offences to population would be one to
seven thousand. But let the number of criminals in
England and Wales be 2000, the balance would be against
us—as the criminals would be in proportion of 1 to 8,500*


We ought to be entirely free from crime before we can
institute, with advantage, any contrast so general in its
range as one embracing so thickly populated a country as
England. There are hundreds of places in England and
Whales, where crimes are perpetrated, and which might be
placed in a most unfavourable light, if taking their popu-
lation into account. We instituted a contrast between
the amount of local crime and the general average of
offences throughout the United Kingdom. It is by a pro-
cess of this kind our country’s comparative morality is
tested, by persons who are anxious to appear as the
friends of the colonists. But with what truth or justice
w'e shall presently see.
Nearly two thirds of our population live in towns.
The aggregate amount of all persons in the island amounts
to 70,000. The town of Liverpool, in England, so cele-
brated for its churches—its ministers —its merchants, and
its wealth—where men are not scared out of its precincts
by immorality and vice—where moral and material
interests are pre-eminent in fame throughout the world—
this town of commerce—of moral and material wealth,
and containing about 286,000 inhabitants, I shall place
in contrast with Van Diemen’s Land so far as regards
crime. W e have been lately informed upon the authority
of a favourite receptable for the lucubrations of excited
Leaguers—that during six months, only 33 serious
offences occurred in all England, whereas, in five months
36 were credited to Van Diemen’s Land, Upon looking
over the criminal statistics of the town of Liverpool, I
find that in the year 1847, there were 25,250 persons
brought before the police magistrate, and that out of this
number 19,091 were committed and convicted by various
tribunals! There were 5,675 taken into custody on
charges of a felonious nature, 4 for murder, 7 for man-
slaughter, 824 for being reputed thieves, 6 for indecent


assaults, and 9 for wilful exposure of the person. I have
been compelled to refer to 1847, so far as Liverpool is
concerned, by my inability to obtain statistics of a later
period. In the case of Van Diemen’s Land, I shall, how-
ever, take the latest information which has reached the
public concerning our position as to crime. The total
number of persons brought before the Police Magistrates
in Van Diemen’s Land during the year 1849, was
19,548 a formidable array of figures no doubt, and one
full of hope and joy to all “ true friends of the country .”
But when we come to consider that from this total there
are 8198 offences against “ convict discipline” to be sub-
stracted, and which consist of such crimes as “ idleness,”
“neglect of duty,” &c., the 19,548 criminals dwindle
down to 11,350 cases, and out of them there were only
380 deemed to be of sufficient importance to undergo in-
vestigation by Judges and Juries—out of them again
there were but 245 convictions, viz., 133 before the
Supreme Court, and 112 by the Courts of Quarter
Sessions. Two were convicted of murder; two for
“ intent to commit, &c, and 116 for larceny. In Liver-
pool 862 were committed, and tried before the Courts of
Assizes and Quarter Sessions. Of these 446 were impri-
soned ; 170 transported, and 2 condemned to death—
making a total of 618 convictions for the most serious
class of offences. The proportion of persons committed
for trial before the Superior Courts, and the number con-
victed, being in the ratio of 1 to 304, and 1 to 462 of the
population. In Van Diemen’s Land, where the smallest
offence against the laws is met with prompt punishment—
where the police are well organised—where the whole
community is placed under their immediate surveilance—
the proportion of committals are in a ratio of 184, and 1
to 244 of the entire population. When the nature of our
population is taken into consideration—when theinordinate


temptations to drunkenness and dissipation which are
found to exist in all new settlements are allowed for—it
is surprising to find, that, in a contrast with a town such
as Liverpool is, numbering as it does so many thousands
of independent citizens amongst its inhabitants, who are
placed by fortune above every temptation to crime, that
the results are so- much in our favour. It must be re-
membered that the proportion of the humbler to the higher
classes exceeds by more than two to one the comparative
ratio of the same classes in any part of England and
Wales. So that a large allowance must be made upon this
ground alone for the excess in petty crimes which distin-
guishes the criminal statistics of this country over most
parts of England and Wales.
It may be useful to add, for the benefit of those
who appear ignorant of such matters, that during the
year 1847 there were committed for trial, or bailed, in
England and Wales, 28,883 persons, including 72 for
murder, 13 for attempts to murder, 221 for shooting at>
stabbing with intent, &c., and 97 for offences of a certain
These authentic data present a somewhat
different view of the state of crime in England from that
manufactured to serve the purposes of expectant slander-
mongers. A further consideration of this matter shall
form the subject of my next letter.
DION.
LETTER VI.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ADVERTISER,
Hobart Town , July 4, 1851
SIR,
The best arguments in favour of the cause of Anti-trans-
O
portation is the fact of its continuing to survive so long


an association with glaring inconsistency and evident
hypocrisy. No other cause could have preserved its
vitality, if forced to undergo an ordeal similar to that
which has, unhappily for those who are its sincere adhe-
rents, been its unlucky fate. The peculiar hardships of
its destiny consist in the character of the personal and moral
power which principally controls it. From neither can it
ever derive strength, nor contract respect. If there had
been nothing of a questionable nature in the mode adopted
now-a-days to enlist general sympathy in favour of the
discontinuance of Transportation,—if the material and
moral character of the country had not been made the
subjects of unfounded misrepresentations, under the
immoral pretence of securing future good by the infliction
of present evil—still the cause of Anti-transportation
could not but suffer by being committed to the sole charge
of men, who but twelve years since, placed upon public
record not only their opinions and sentiments, but evidence
as to facts, which remain as reproaching witnesses of
either past incorapetency, or present insincerity. The
fact of the question of Anti-transportation, under all the
disadvantages it has had to contend against being still
popular, is the best proof of its intrinsic merits ; but that,
under ordinary circumstances, and unaided by unforeseen
contingencies, it can ever unite its supporters into a
phalanx, possessed of moral power adequate to achieve
its triumph, so long as it is under the personal and
moral control of its present Leaders, is a probability to
which no one who disbelieves in the efficacy of falsehood,
as an agent in working reforms beneficial to Society, can
ever look forward with a hope of being realised.
The “ moral” reputation of the people is that which
has suffered most through the action of this nefarious
species of political warfare. “ Wherever Convicts i do


congregate/ there, as a matter of course, crime, to an
unlimited extent, and of the most diabolical character,
must abound.” This is an axiom, there is no difficulty
in getting the world to adopt as an article of its faith.
On the contrary, we find it impossible to exaggerate too
much, for its credulity to swallow, the crimes of unhappy
beings who are outlawed from Society, and placed as far
beyond its ken, as they are removed from its sympathies.
Through this opening into the ungenerous credulity of
human nature, an unceasing flood of slanderous lava is
poured from the tongues and pens of those who, but a
short time since, used the same instruments to record
their moral and material obligations to the Convict Popu-
lation. The Convicts’ labour, they maintained, had been
and was the source of their wealth ; and the Convicts’
presence acted more as “ a provocative to highly exem-
plary conduct than otherwise.” If such sentiments had
been those of a few individuals, and had not been
expressed, published, approved of, and supported by all
the Leaders of the League in Van Diemen’s Land, it
would be unnecessary to refer to them in any discussion,
which the immoral and inconsistent character of the
means resorted to, for the purpose of degrading the people
of this Colony in the eyes of the world, could originate.
But when we are obliged to listen to the harangues, and
to peruse the “ protests’ 0 and “ speeches” of the “ patriotic
Leaders” of the present day;—when the usages of
society compel us to bear patiently, and without openly
manifesting our disgust at such inconsistent hypocrisy,
the presence of men, who now express such an amount of
pious horror, at the bare idea of living in a country where
Convicts form the mass of its labouring Population, it
becomes necessary to examine how far the u moral evils”
of Convictism have increased since such persons expressed
their anxious desire to have it continued : and whether


those “evils' 5 are such as to justify the change in their
sentiments as to its moral and material effects upon the
country and society. If the “ moral evils” have not
increased, the Leaders of the League must have been
either ignoramuses in 1839, or hypocrites in 1851.
I shall bring under the public notice a few of the
recorded opinions of the Chiefs amongst the Leaguers of
1851, as to the “ moral” aspect of the Convict question
in 1839 :—•
“ That in particular, as respects the character of the free
population of this Colony, the effect which a large labouring Convict
Population has had upon their social condition has been entirely
misrepresented. As a body, the Free Settlers of Van Diemen’s
Land of the present day need not fear comparison with any other
equal number of the Queen’s Subjects, in any part of Her Majesty’s
Dominions —whether as to humanity, as to good morals, or as to
their attention to the Ordinances of Religion. Indeed, it is believed
that the very presence of a Convict Class, as to whom it is merely a
rhetorical exaggeration to say, that they are Slaves, operates rather
as a provocative to highly exemplary conduct than otherwise. Their
whole aspect in fact is that of a moral, religious, intelligent, active,
and industrious community of Britons: and of the truth of this
they challenge investigation.” —[Petition to the Queen and Parlia-
ment, adopted in Launceston, March, 1839.]
To this Petition are the names of every leading
Member of the League in the Northern Division of the
Island. Yea ! even those of Messrs. Henty, Robertson,
Gleadow, Oakden, and J. A. Jackson, the London
Agent!
Now we shall examine what the “moral” condition
of the people was at that period, when the present heads
of the “ League” testified to its edifying and beneficial
character.
The Population consisted of 25,747 Free persons,
and 17,077 Convicts; total, 42,824. The number
brought before Police and Visiting Magistrates during


the Year 1839 was 22,798, and the number of convictions
before the Supreme Court and Courts of Quarter Sessions
was 263. Of the 22,798 persons dealt summarily with
by the Magistrates, 9277 were for offences against Convict
Discipline; the remaining 13,621 being misdemeanors of
one sort or another. During the year 1838, the number
brought before Magistrates and dealt summarily with,
amounted to 26,701, and the number committed for
serious offences to 305. From 1830 to 1839, both years
included, the executions for capital offences were 99.
There were flogged during the year 1837 the extraordinary
number of 2058 persons ; in other words—one individual
out of every twenty who inhabited the Island came under
the lash of the flagellator. During that year, 66,518
lashes were inflicted. In 1838, 1984 persons were
flogged ; the total number of lashes inflicted being 58,204.
Sentences of Transportation were extended in 427
instances during the same period.
These were in truth the rampant days of “ the lash,
the triangles, the gibbet, and the gallows.” When every
two out of three individuals in the community were
dragged annually before the Magistrates. When every
tenth person was periodically fined for drunkenness.
When one out of twenty was flogged ; —one to 83 trans-
ported, and one to 4,000 hanged. We are assured that
in “ these prosperous and happy days’' the Colonists
flourished in worldly wealth, and waxed Godly, even unto
the most edifying state of righteousness. So say
Ministers of the Gospel:—
“ But as the prayer of the Petition made distinct reference to
the humanity and morality of the Free Settlers of the Colony, and
also the extension of Religious Education amongst the Convict
Classes, he felt subpoenaed, by the duties of an honest conscience,
before that Assembly, there to lift up his voice in defence of a people
who had been grossly misrepresented.” * * * *


“ He had been delighted oftentimes to observe, even in the Chain
Gangs and Road Parties, the order, attention, and frequent manifest
feeling under religious instruction of the Convicts. A decency
marked their Religious Meetings equal to that of any Congregation in
England.”-- [Rev. Mr. Dowling, at Launceston Meeting, March,
1839.]
“The Reverend Mr. Simpson, the Wesleyan Minister stationed
in this Town, confirmed what had fallen from the Reverend Mr.
Dowling.”— Launceston Paper, March, 1839.
“ L. W. Gilles, Esq., in referring ‘ to the increasing morality of
the Prisoners, adduced some Statistical Returns, furnished by the
Reverend Dr. Browne, showing the numbers of those classes
recently Married, and converted into useful Members of Society.’ ”
— lbid .
It would appear, then, that no waxjes , abundance
of whip-cord, a liberal use of the rope, and frequent
extensions of the Sentences of Transportation were
regarded as the only valuable accompaniment of Trans-
portation which could make it a source of material and
moral wealth to the Colonists. It is quite clear that the
enormous mass of crime, which the records of the Country
up to 1839 exhibit, never once alarmed them as to the
risk they ran of incurring moral shipwreck by coming into
contact with it. All was content, happiness, and pros-
perity, up to that fatal period when it was ordered that
the Convict should, in return for his labour, receive the
small pittance of sixpence per day ! If the moral results
of the system were not complained of until the sixpence
per day was awarded to the Convict, they have been so
much improved since this unwelcome innovation was
made, that it would be impossible to account for the
change which has taken place in the sentiments of the
originators of the League upon the ground of any shock
their moral sensibilities could have received from an
alteration in the system of Transportation, which, how-


ever open to censure in a material point of view, has
most undubitably mitigated the hardships of the Convicts’
destiny, and diminished the ratio of crime.
In 1849, the Population increased from 42,824
(being the number of Inhabitants in 1839) to 70,164 ;
the number of Persons brought before the Magistrates
and dealt with summarily, was 19,548 ; the number of
offences against Convict Discipline being 8198 ; and of
misdemeanors 11,350. The number of Convictions
before the Supreme and Quarter Sessions Courts was 245.
During the ten years ending 1849, their suffered the
extreme penalty of the law 90 persons ; the Sentences of
Transportation extended in 255 instances; and one
person was flogged, who received 36 lashes ! When
compared with those years of moral and material bliss,
the lively recollection of which stimulated “ the Leading-
Colonists of the Northern Division of the island into open
action against the attempt to deprive them of the benefits
of Convict masses,” it will appear that during the last
ten years capital executions have fallen off from one in
four thousand to one in six thousand ; —that Convictions
before the Superior Courts have been reduced from 1 in
163 of the population to lin 245 that sentences of
extension in periods of Transportation are now in a ratio
of 1 to 275 ; whereas in the days of super-excellent
“ humanity and morality” they rated in the proportion of
Ito 100 ; —that the total number of all offences is 1 to 3|
of the Population;—while, during the happy period when
Servants received “ no wages,’’ it was 1 to 1| ; and that
for every 2058 men flogged, when “humanity and
morality” were in their prime, the flesh of only one
solitary individual has been scored by the flagellators
cords in the degenerate year of 1849 ! ! !
It is unnecessary to deduce further proofs of the
unprecedented advance of the Colonists in a moral point
of view; the vastly increased attendance at places of


Religious Worship; the number of their Schools and
Churches; the immense increase in the number of
Marriages, &c. &c., are facts which speak for themselves.
They need no comment. Why, then do the abettors of
the System under which the w'hole Island was debased to
a condition of a “ Hell of crime and torments, 5 ' volunteer
to head a movement, which some years since they
denounced as unjust and immoral ? Tasmanians ! —study
the history of your Leaders, in connexion with what you
know to be facts, and you will cease to make the “ incon-
sistency” of the Colonial Office a subject of reproach,
when you come to reflect that the “ Leoyuers" who now
press your demands there, were the “ Petitioners” of
1839!
DION.
LETTER VII.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ADVERTISER
Hobart Town , July 11, 1851
SIR,
I have, in former letters, established to the satisfaction
of all impartial men, the following propositions :
1 st. That the material condition of the Colony has
been advanced beyond all precedent during the last ten
year.
2nd. That crime and punishment have decreased by
one-haif during the same period.
3rd. That convict labour was the means through
which the Colonists were enabled to surmount difficulties
superinduced by extravagant habits and unwise specula-
tions.
4th. That had they been compelled to pay the same
prices for labour as were current in the adjoining colonies,
they never could have arrived at their present state of


prosperity—inasmuch as the natural resources of the
Island are so far inferior to those of South Australia and
Port Phillip.
sth. That it was the sudden fall in the prices of
agricultural produce, which by rendering it almost
impossible for the owners and purchasers of land, to
meet engagements, based upon the supposition, that
Wheat was always to fetch 20s. per bushel, and not the
alteration in the system of Convict Discipline, which
occasioned the temporary “ ruin of once prosperous
colonists.”
6th. That the men who now lead the opposition to
Transportation, are the same persons who petitioned for
its continuance in 1839—who never denounced it as
injurious to their moral and material interests, until a
charge of sixpence per day was made for the convict’s
labour—who declared that the presence of convicts acted
“ rather as a provocative to virtue than otherwise”—
who lauded the system under which the flaggellator’s
cords blushed perpetually with the blood of human
victims—who beheld without emotion or horror 50 human
beings annually immolated upon the scaffold—who
declared that to deprive them of convict labour, would
be a breach of faith upon the part of the Home Govern-
ment, and the means of effecting the complete ruin of
the Colony.
7th. That these men, are the same, who in 1851,
affect such horror at the presence of Convicts—who deny
now that their labour benefits them—who swear that now
the morals of the country are deteriorated by contact
with the crimes of transported offenders, and that the
country is ruined—who shudder at the bare idea of the
lash, now , that it is never used —who direct their
u eloquent and simple” wrath against “ the gibbets and
the gallows” which are now comparatively speaking,


tcnantless—who denounce crime and vice, now that they
are light and venial, when contrasted to that “ moral
condition,” which was the object of their eulogies—and
who formerly swallowed elephants, and now strain at gnats.
Bth. That the means employed by these men, to
carry on the present agitation, are immoral in the highest
degree—disgraceful to those who employ them—injurious
to the cause they are intended to support —and productive
of the most minions consequences to the moral and
material interests of the Colony.
The foregoing propositions, in connection with the
“ facts” by which they are supported are now before the
public. Let those who deny the “ facts,” or object to
the “conclusions,” prove their inaccuracy, and exhibit
their unfairness. If in any particular it can be shown,
that I have stated what is untrue—or drawn any but
legitimate conclusions, I shall at once acknowledge my
error—but so long as I am merely met by often refuted
fallacies, and stereotyped abuse —so long as the
persevering slanderers of the country, barricade them-
selves behind ramparts of filth, and use no other weapons
but such as are congenial to the scavengers of politics,
and to the angry, but impotent drabs of faction —so long
shall the thinking portion of the community, regard my
propositions as having been fairly and legitimately
substantiated, and therefore entitled to their careful
consideration.
Before I close, however, this series of communica-
tions, I shall add a few more proofs in addition to those
by which I have already established the proposition.
“ That the means employed by the leaders of the League
are immoral in the highest degree —disgraceful to those
who employ them—injurious to the cause they are
intended to support, and productive of the most ruinous
consequences to the moral and material interests of the
Colony.”


There are persons engaged in agitating the subject
of transportation, who make a merit of having whatever
they are pleased to term “ moral courage 5 ’ sufficient to
brave the scorn and contempt of a people whom they are
habitually calumniating to their faces—they tell us that
a necessity exists for ithis exhibition of mendacious
effrontery—that the people would be unable to fathom
the depths of their wickedness, if their researches into
their own immoral and depraved natures were not
stimulated by the slanderous reproaches of pious (?)
laymen and their oleaginous shepherds ! The moral
audacity which sustains our lay leaders, while flinging
in the teeth of a community they exist by, a foul
catalogue of hideous abominations, might have engaged
our surprise, had it not been already employed in
wondering, at that clerical simpleton, who, in exchanging
£lOO per annum for £6OO per ditto, declares “ that he
is making a great personal sacrifice The following
incident will give some idea of the “ morality,” of
the “ means,” employed by this class of agitators to
accomplish their purposes here , and to prevent an
immigration of free people to our shores.
One of the chief leaders of the League is a person
who signs himself “ M. Gaunt, M.D.,” and who resides
at 11 Windermere, Van Diemen’s Land.” In a letter
dated 31st October, 1849, and which is addressed
through the Secretary of State, to the readers of every
country where an English newspaper is published, the
following picture is given of the present condition of
society in this country :
“ A Convict named Cripps absconded from a gang station on
Tasman’s Peninsula, enticing away with him a hoy, notoriously
addicted to * * * * In about a fortnight the man Cripps was
discovered alone in a remote part of the Peninsula. On being
apprehended, a bag was found in his possession, which he appeared
anxious to secret. On examination, the bag was found to contain


station declared to be human flesh. * * * *
From all that
subsequently transpired, conviction was produced
on the mind of
every one that this monster in human shape, having,
&c., * * *
afterwards killed him for food. * * * *
I have every
several pieces of human flesh, which the medical officer of the
I have omitted passages from this already disgusting
narrative, which a respect for your readers prevent me
from republishing. In the same letter it is alleged, “that
a great many cases have recently occurred of # * *
And that, within the last few days, three parties for wilful
murder (under circumstances of horrible brutality) have
been discharged by the Attorney-General; although in
the former cases the committing Magistrates had no
doubt of the men’s guilt.” These allegations are set
forth to the Secretary of State “ as illustrative of the
reason to believe that this horrible wretch is now at large in this
colony.”
frightful consequences of the gang sy-tern.”
Now, here we have the deliberate assertions of a man
who is honoured by all the Leaguers—who is looked upon
as one of their best supporters, and most liberal subscribers
—and who has been “ told off” to act as one of the
literary tirailleurs, while the main army is advancing upon
the Coloniaboffice. What are the facts of these two cases
“ illustrative of the frightful evils of Chain Gangs ?”
Cripps absconded from Port Arthur 21st September,
1837, along with a man named Reed, who was then 23
years of age. After being in the “ bush” for seven days
zoithout food, Cripps was apprehended, when in an almost
famished condition. “ Human flesh” was found with
him, no doubt; but it was the general supposition, sup-
ported, too, by many collateral circumstances, that hunger
originated a desperate struggle for life between the two
famished absconders, and that the weaker fell a prey to
the stronger man. Cripps was tried, and sent to Norfolk
Island in 1837, where he died. Two years after this
occurrence “ 200 of the leading Colonists of the Northern


Division of the Island ” petitioned to the Queen and
Parliament to continue Transportation to this Country,
and registered their convictions, “ that the presence of
Convicts acted more as a provocative to virtue than
otherwise!” Yes! the very same men who employed
“ IVI. Gaunt, Esq., M.D.” to bedaub the character of
the Colonists with these atrocious crimes, petitioned, to
have the system under which it was alleged to have
occurred, continued ; inasmuch as it tended “to secure
the moral and material interests ol the Country.” Yet
these are the persons who seek the confidence and the
money of the Colonists, and found their titles to both, on
their purely moral, honest, and consistent opposition to
Transportation ! These are the simple facts connected
with the first case. Those which bear upon the second are
the following :—A soldier and another man quarrelled in a
house of bad fame—a female interfered on behalf of one of
them—curing the melee a blow was given, which proved
fatal to one of the combatants—the survivors were taken,
but for want of evidence against them, the Bills were
ignored one of the accused “ was always free” the
second had never been in a chain-gang and the third
had been free since 1843, “and never subjected to the
gang system at alf.” It cannot be a matter to wonder at,
that such as call themselves our “ leaders,” should boast
of their “ courage,” or rather of their presumptuous
audacity, in openly misrepresenting facts, and slandering
our reputations before a horrified world! It is our
quiescent toleration which engenders and supports that
“ audacity,” and permits half-starved itinerants to fatten
on the nourishing carcass of a community, they represent
as loathsome and disgusting.
At the Sydney banquet to the salaried vituperator of
the colony, the Rev. John West stated, amidst “loud
cheers,” “ that Convict Labour, though it might be pro-
cured at Six-pence per day, was even rejected at that.”


Every man’s experience in this country is sufficient to
appreciate such an assertion at its proper value, and to
stamp it as an unmitigated and unqualified untruth.”
But, still, the person who uttered it is believed in, trusted,
respected, and even rewarded, by some of our unsuspect-
ing and honest citizens ! Why is it, that such men do
not denounce the mis-statements of Dr. Gaunt ? Is it not a
crime “ to bear false witness against your neighbour ?”
Have not Dr. Gaunt and the Rev. John West done so ?
Yet there arises not amongst the host of dupes and knaves
to which they have attached themselves, one manly
individual to interpose a shield between a people, upon
whose hard earnings they live, and the slanderous tongues
of their mendacious \ituperators. Why is it so ? The
cause of Anti-Transportation has been embraced and
monopolized by persons who regard it has “ a stock-in-
trade,” as a means of promoting their own temporal
welfare, and of administering to feelings of revenge,
and to schemes of personal ambition. No “ means”
are rejected from their service : every person who has
a taste for slandering a capacity for lying —or
the unnatural propensity to calumniate the land of his
birth or adoption, is regarded as a welcome and useful
auxiliary —he is embraced as a fellow-labourer, and
cherished as a brother —he is generally well rewarded for
his services —he thrives but his unfortunate, because
maligned country, pines under the disgrace which his
“ infamous affection ’ has stamped upon its reputation.
Thus it is, and will be, until public execration drives from
the political stage the rampant hypocrites who prayed for
the continuance of an evil they now deprecate, as it costs
them “ Six-pence a day .”
DION.
PRINTED AT THE “ HOEART TOWN ADVERTISER” OFFICE.




I
l £ii •
tißCro
' :fq ifa r
