

Letters Latent ,
Victoria, by the Grace of God of the United
Dated 2Qth October 1900.
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen,
Defender of the Faith, Empress of India:
To all to whom these presents shall come,
Greeting.
WHE REAS, by an Act of Parliament passed on
Preamble.
the Ninth day of July 1900, in the Sixty-fourth
Eecites Imperial Act 63 & 64 Viet.
year of Our Deign, intituled “ An Act to constitute
c. 12 and Proclamation of 17th
September 1900.
the Commonwealth of Australia,” it is enacted
that “ it shall, be lawful for the Queen, with
“ the advice of the Privy Council, to declare
“ by Proclamation that, on and after a day
“ therein appointed, not being later than one
“ year after the passing of this Act, the people
“ of New South Wales, Victoria, South Aus-
“ tralia, Queensland, and Tasmania, and also, if
“ Pier Majesty is satisfied that the people of
46 Western Australia have agreed thereto, of
“ Western Australia, shall be united in a Federal
“ Commonwealth under the name of the Oom-
“ monwealth of Australia. But the Queen may,
“ at any time after proclamation, appoint a
“ Governor-General for the Commonwealth: ”
And whereas We did on the Seventeenth day of
September One thousand nine hundred, by and
N r .jo
hio
13^
COMMOMWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
LETTERS PATENT passed under the Great Seal of
the United Kingdom, constituting the Office of
Governor*General and Coinmander-io-Chief of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
Letters Patent constituting the Office of
Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief of the
Commonwealth oe Australia
31023,
50.—7/3/1904. Pk. 30. A


with the advice of Our Privy Council, declare by
Proclamation that, on and after the First day of
January One thousand nine hundred and one, the
people of New South Wales, Victoria, South
Australia, Queensland, and Tasmania, and also
Western Australia, should be united in a Federal
Commonwealth under the name of the Common-
wealth of Australia: And whereas by the said
recited Act certain powers, functions, and autho-
rities were declared to be vested in the Governor-
General : And whereas We are desirous of making
effectual and permanent provision for the Office of
Governor-General and Commander-in-Ohief in and
over Our said Commonwealth of Australia, without
making new Letters Patent on each demise of the
said Office: Now know ye that We have thought
fit to constitute, order, and declare, and do by these
presents constitute, order, and declare, that there
shall be a Governor-General and Commander-in-
Chief (herein-after called the Governor-General) in
and over Our Commonwealth of Australia (herein-
after called Our said Commonwealth), and that the
person who shall fill the said Office of Governor-
General shall be from time to time appointed by
Commission under Our Sign Manual and Signet.
And We do hereby authorise and command Our
said Governor-General to do and execute, in due
manner, all things that shall belong to his said
command, and to the trust we have reposed in
him, according to the several powers and authorities
granted or appointed him by virtue of “ The
“ Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act,
“ 1900,” and of these present Letters Patent and of
such Commission as may be issued to him under
Our Sign Manual and Signet, and according to
such Instmctions as may from time to time be
given to him, under Our Sign Manual and Signet,
or by Our Order in Our Privy Council, or by Us
through one of Our Principal Secretaries of State,
and to such laws as shall hereafter be in force
in Our said Commonwealth.
Office of Governor- General and
Commander-in-Chief constituted.
Governor-General’s powers and
authorities.


Great Seal.
Appointment of Judges, Justices,
&c.
Suspension or removal from office.
Summoning, proroguing, or dis-
solving the Commonwealth Par-
liament.
Power to appoint Deputies.
11. There shall be a Great Seal of and for Our
said Commonwealth which pur said Governor-
General shall keep and use for scaling all things
whatsoever that shall pass the said Great Seal.
Provided that until a Great Seal shall be provided,
the Private Seal of Our said Governor-General
may be used as the Great Seal of the Common-
wealth of Australia.
111. The Governor-General may constitute and
appoint, in Our name and on Our behalf, all such
Judges, Commissioners, Justices of the Peace, and
other necessary Officers and Ministers of Our said
Commonwealth, as may he lawfully constituted or
appointed by Us.
IY. The Governor - General, so far as We
Ourselves lawfully may, upon sufficient cause to
him appearing, may remove from his office, or
suspend from the exercise of the same, any person
exercising any office of Our said Commonwealth,
under or by virtue of any Commission or Warrant
granted, or which may he granted, by Us in Our
name or under Our authority.
V. The Governor-General may on Our behalf
exercise all powers under the Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act, 1900, or otherwise in
respect of the summoning, proroguing, or dissolving
the Parliament of Onr said Commonwealth.
YI. And whereas by “ The Commonwealth
of Australia Constitution Act, 1900,” it is
amongst other things enacted, that We may
authorise the Governor-General to appoint any
person or persons, jointly or severally, to be his
Deputy or Deputies within any part of Our
Commonwealth, and in that capacity to exercise,
during the pleasure of the Governor-General, such
powers, and functions of the said Governor-
General as he thinks fit to assign to such Deputy
31023.


or Deputies, subject to any limitations expressed
or directions given by IJs: Now We do hereby
authorise and empower Our said Governor-General,
subject to such limitations and directions as
aforesaid, to appoint any person or persons, jointly
or severally, to be his Deputy or Deputies within
any part of Our said Commonwealth of Australia,
and in that capacity to exercise, during his
pleasure, such of his powers and functions, as
he may deem it necessary or expedient to assign
to him or them: Provided always, that the
appointment of such a Deputy or Deputies shall
not affect the exercise by the Governor-General
himself of any power or function.
YII. And We do hereby declare Our pleasure
to be that, in the event of the death, incapacity,
removal, or absence of Our said Governor-General
out of Our said Commonwealth, all and every the
powers and authorities herein granted to him shall,
until Our further pleasure is signified therein, be
vested in such person as may be appointed by Us
under Our Sign Manual and Signet to be Our
Lieutenant-Governor of Our said Commonwealth ;
or if there shall be no such Lieutenant-Governor
in Our said Commonwealth, then in such person
or persons as may be appointed by Us under Our
Sign Manual and Signet to administer the Govern-
ment of the same. No such powers or authorities
shall vest in such Lieutenant-Governor, or such
other person or persons, until he or they shall
have taken the oaths appointed to be taken by the
Governor-General of Our said Commonwealth>
and in the manner provided by the Instructions
accompanying these Our Letters Patent.
Succession to the Government.
Proviso. Oaths of office to be taken
YIII. And We do hereby require and command
all Our Officers and Ministers, Civil and Military,
and all other the inhabitants of Our said
Commonwealth, to be obedient, aiding, and
assisting unto Our said Governor - General, or,
in the event of his death, incapacity, or absence,
Officers and others to obey and
assist the Governor-General.


Power reserved to Her Majesty
to .revoke, alter, or amend the
present Letters Patent.
Publication of Letters Patent.
to such person or persons as may, from time to
time, under the provisions of these Our Letters
Patent, administer the Government of Our said
Commonwealth.
IX. And We do hereby reserve to Ourselves,
Our heirs aud successors, full power and authority
from time to time to revoke, alter, or amend these
Our Letters Patent, as to Us or them shall seem
meet.
X. And We do further direct and enjoin that
these Our Letters Patent shall be read and pro-
claimed at such place or places as Our said
Governor-General shall think fit within Our said
Commonwealth of Australia.
In witness whereof We have caused these Our
Letters to he made Patent. Witness Ourself at
Westminster the Twenty-ninth day of October in
the Sixty-fourth year of Our Reign.
By Warrant under the Queen’s Sign Manual,
MUIR MACKENZIE.


