



LETTERS I
LETTERS
FROM
WANGANUI,
NEW ZEALAND.
“ 1 much wish, that more was known in England about the real position
of the Maoris and the Missionaries; and this can only be gathered by
persons living, as we have done, in contact with them so long, and having
no prejudicial intersets to serve. lam more convinced every day, that as
long as the present system is continued, the Maoris will not be improved,
and no one is more anxious for their welfare than I am.”
Extract from a letter to the Publisher.
LONDON:
E. CHURTON, 26, HOLLES STREET,
1845,


•WOKING :
J. BILLING, PRINTER AND STEREOTYPER.


LETTERS, &c.
THE LAND QUESTION.
Wanganui, March, 1844.
Dear ,
On our arrival at Port Nicholson, in December 1840,
some of us having heard from many accounts, that Wanganui
was a most eligible district, and would be surveyed, and pos-
session given in three or four months, determined to go thither,
waiving our right of choosing elsewhere, on condition that the
Company would guarantee us a town, as some compensation, with
a quarter acre to each section. We were led to this determi-
nation, —although purchasers of second series or country lands,
which were understood to be either in the immediate vicinity
of Wellington, contiguous to the first settlement or block of
110,000 acres, or in any other of the Company’s possessions,
either at that time, or subsequently, to be purchased,—on finding
that the country around Wellington was, from its mountainous
character, totally unadapted (excepting small districts, which
would be required for the holders of first series,) for cultivation,
and that so small a portion had been surveyed, that years must
elapse before there would be any chance of our obtaining any
land in that district.
On February 27th, 1841, a large party of the principal land-
owners arrived at Wanganui, expecting that about one hundred
sections would be given out, according to advertisement, on the
18th of March; but we soon found that so little progress had
been made in the surveys, that there was no chance of any being
ready for some months.
I need not enumerate all the annoyances, discomforts, losses,
&c., we had to endure during the period that intervened —the
want of houses was the greatest, as, of course, no one thought of
being at the expense of putting up one at the exorbitant rate the
Maoris demanded, when he did not know how long he might
a 2


possess it; so we did the best we could, living in tents or in large
houses, ostensibly lent us by the Maoris, but completely under
their control, subjected to every sort of depredation, not only
from them, but from a worse set, who at that time were very nu-
merous in Wanganui, the sawyers, convicts, surveyors’men, &c.
My own sufferings and losses (in consequence of the wreck
of the Jewess, which event, detained me nearly five months
from Wanganui) with the loss of your house, &c., will, I think,
be long remembered by both of us.
In September, a number of sections were given out; but by this
time the Maoris had become aware of the increased value of
land, and began to raise disputes about giving it up, many
saying that they had never sold any; others, that the portion
sold, only consisted of a small one, including the town reaching
to the sea, being nearly all sand hills. Some, who acknow-
ledged the sale of the land, denied the sale of the timber;
and any person wanting a log, had to pay a blanket for per-
mission to cut it; this, of course, greatly enhanced the value
in their opinion, and many would not sell their land at all.
Besides these obstacles to the quiet possession of our sec-
tions, the Maoris began to have disputes among themselves as
to who were the real owners of the soil, and all sorts of claims
were urged to prove the right; some as having been the origi-
nal possessors, others by right of conquest —by marriage—gifts,
&c.; so that it was quite impossible to say which party had just
claim to it. The party who claimed by conquest, were those
who had got most of the payment (for, as usual, there had been
a rush , and the strongest had got nearly all); these having little
interest in the land down here, were willing to give it up to us,
but the other party, having by this time firmly settled them-
selves here,* denied their right to do so; and no man was fool-
hardy enough to expose himself to the certain consequences
which must have followed any attempt at occupying his land.
The latter party, however, expressed their willingness to sell
their land, after reserving a large, and the most valuable district;
and application was made by the settlers to Col. Wakefield, for
the purpose of procuring some further payment for those
Maoris, who were either not present at the first purchase, or had
received nothing.
* I should state that until the arrival of whites here, this was not a
permanent residence of the Maoris, being principally a fishing station.
At that time there was scarcely one house for twelve miles up the river,
now there is a large population, and potatoe gardens in almost every sec-
tion near the river; on one or two chosen for the timber, there is scarcely
a tree remaining.


Col. W. promised that further payment should be made;
and we waited in full expectation that a few weeks would see
us in quiet possession. In the meantime, more settlers ar-
rived ; more sections, on paper, were given out; we had, most
of us, got a house of some sort; the refuse of our population
had gradually taken their departure ; and Wanganui, instead of
being considered as the most abandoned place in New Zealand,
(which, however, was a distinction to which I deny it was ever
entitled to,) began to be more justly appreciated, as its climate,
soil, and natural advantages began to be more generally known.
This was about January, 1842.
Soon after this, disputes with the Maoris became more fre-
quent in all the settlements; further payment was required for
all the land said to have been sold, and large tracts in every
district were entirely disputed; the Company’s titles began to
be considered worthless, and Government to be looked to as the
party that was to settle all disputes.
Mr. Spain was to enquire into every claim, and decide upon
it. By this time the Maoris had formed most extravagant no-
tions of the value of the land—talking of ships, horses, cattle,
and casks of gold, as very trifling affairs, and every Maori had,
by this time, some claim to the land in question.*
Col. W. now refused further payment, until the decision of
Government was known.
In June, some more sections were given out, making, with
what were previously chosen, about 270; this was all that had
been sold in this district.
The town sections were also given out —the town consisted of
2000 quarter acres—the Company choosing alternately with
the sectionist; thus depriving us of the best half of what was
chosen, and reserving the entire remainder of a town, to which,
by the terms of our land orders, they had no claim whatever, as
the very place where the town is fixed, might have been chosen
by a settler having an early order.
Most of us who had any money left (I need not remind you
that doing nothing is rather expensive in a colony) set about
building on our town sections ; many giving up all thoughts of
going into the country.
Mr. Spain was expected daily. He arrived here in April, 1843.
When Mr. Spain left, it was generally understood by us, as
* It is not my intention to enter into the intricate question of how the
Maoris become each an owner of part of the soil; hull certainly am of
opinion, that there are very few, except actual slaves, who have not
some claim to the soil, or some portion which is their own.


well as by the Maoris, that his decision would be made in two
months at farthest.
The Maoris shewed a disposition to allow some of us to go on
our land, and several persons took advantage of their consent,
and went. In some cases, they met with no interference, prin-
cipally, I believe, because they were so far from the town; —one
gentlemen and his wife went so far that they were, after some
months, found by the natives of the next river who laid claim
to the land, and after being there the worst part of the year,
and digging, fencing, gardening, were obliged to give up
and return here; —in others, the annoyance was so great, that
the parties immediately gave it up, or, as one or two have done,
remained to be worried out of their lives by the Maoris who
have settled themselves all around them. Poor D. is one of
these He has now a pah, containing sometimes 300 natives
close to his house; they bully him to death. Only the other day
when he was from home, a party of Maoris came in and obliged
Mrs. D. to cook some food for some visitors who had just ar-
rived; and last Sunday week, some young vagabonds shot
three of his fowls with bows and arrows, and he dared not re-
taliate ; they are continually abusing him for not ploughing
more land, saying they shall want it soon, and he must plough
it ready for them.
You know what prevented us going up to Motongonga, but I
think you will agree with me that it was, perhaps, as well we
did not, I think our friend Mawai would have found a “ flaw
in our lease.”
In July, 1843, the terrible affair at Walrau took place;
this, of course, upset everything, and nothing could be done
“ until the new Governor arrived.”
In January, 1844, Capt. Fitzroy arrived ; it is, at present, im-
possible truly to see his intentions, but, from what little oppor-
tunities we have had of judging, he seems to lean entirely to
the Maoris.
He says they are to keep their pahs, cultivative grounds, and
burial places. Ido not see either the expediency or the justice
of this; —their pahs they care very little about, they are most of
them poor affairs, many of them if burned down one night, are
rebuilt the next day, and in situation they are not particular,
they frequently desert them entirely, and build one somewhere
in the neighbourhood; besides, a great many, particularly in
this place, have been erected since, and because white men have
come here ; the same will apply to their potato grounds, which
they cultivate for one or two years, and then leave. What,
therefore, can be the use of giving these up to the Maoris,


who do not want them, and, perhaps, depriving a settler of ten
or twenty acres of the best land in his section ?—we are not
informed how these gaps are to be filled up. Of what use is the
Motongonga section to me, if they are allowed to keep the pah
at the mouth of the creek? —there was not a house there
when I chose it. As to their burial grounds, I really do not
know what they are; I confess I never saw one that could be
dignified with the name.
In regard to our future progress, I am really puzzled how to
form an opinion.
If we can put any trust in what the Maoris say, we shall be
right enough; but who can trust a Maori’s word ?
They say that as soon as they are all paid, they intend to go
up the river, only reserving the Putiki pah and the valuable
country adjacent, and only come down here occasionally to
fish and trade with us. But their notions of payment are so
ridiculous, that I do not know how they are to be satisfied; and
if they are now paid, I greatly fear that in consequence of the
imperfect knowledge we have of the real owners, and from the
crafty nature of the Maoris, in a few months the same disputes
will arise, as fresh claimants start up to endeavour to screw
something more out of the too easily yielding Pakia.*
This will only be put an end to, by greatly and quickly in-
creasing emigration, or by the presence of a military force,
which may keep the Maoris in awe.
But at present I see no prospect of either of these arriving,
so I intend to get out of it as soon as I can.
Yours, Dear ,
ALPHA.
MISSIONARIES AND DEVILS.
Wanganui, March 30th, 1844.
Dear ,
I shall, no doubt, be accused by persons unacquainted with
the subject (as those in England assuredly are) of prejudiced or
interested views, when I state it as my belief, that the Mis-
sionaries have done very little, if any thing, towards the im-
provement either of the civil or moral condition of the Maoris,
That the cessation of wars and cannibalism may be attributed
to the influence of the Missionaries, I will not entirely deny; but
I think the former may also be traced to the fact, that at pre-
sent almost all the Maoris have muskets, and as I believe them
* White man.


to be naturally a cowardly race, they are really afraid of being
killed, as the keeping at a distance, and the time taken in load -
ing, gives a man more leisure to reflect upon the chances of
death, than the fierce rush and onset with tomahawks or clubs,
the ancient weapons. I am also convinced, that both war and
its attendant cannibalism would soon have ceased, on the occu-
pation of the country by whites, although no Missionaries had
been among them.
It will be urged, that the natives must be better than before,
as they are nearly all Christians ! Truly as far as the name, they
are—but what else? I appeal to any one who knows anything of
them, whether they are one jot more moral or more civilized
than their neighbours, the Devils , as the unchristian natives are
styled par excellence; whether in fact, you would not sooner,
at any time, trust or believe a Devil rather than a Missionary ?*
Are the women more chaste? are the men more honest? is
hospitality to strangers more exercised among the latter ? 1
must answer, No. Are they not more lying, sneaking, and ex-
tortionate? Yes.
True, they have all the Testament by heart; and if you speak
to one of them about something he has done wrong, he will cer-
tainly deny it, saying, it could not have been him, for he was a
Convert, and will probably quote scripture to you.
Outwardly they are, to appearance, Christians, regular in
their attendance to prayers and forms of w r orship ; but why ?
because they are afraid to do otherwise, for fear, perhaps, they
should be turned out of the pale of the Converts, or in some
way incur the displeasure and censure of their minister, whom
they hold in great awe—indeed, whose influence over them is
unbounded, where any thing in matters of religion is concerned.
It will be said, if the ministers have such influence over them,
how is it they are no better?
I think that the reason is, that many of them are quite satis-
fied if the Maoris say their prayers regularly, give them a piece
of land, and keep it in order for them; if they do this, they give
themselves little further trouble in the matter, while the really
true ministers of the gospel (and there are many such now
among them) are deceived by the show of devotion of the Ma-
oris, and believe them to be the Christians they appear to be.
The influence the Missionaries have over the Maoris is easily
accounted for, being only that which the civilized and lettered
white has over the rude uncultivated savage, not traceable to
any superior virtue or religious feeling, but simply to the fact
of their being white men.
* Convert.


Thus, a minister, fully understanding the Maori language, has
always been able to do as he pleased with the natives (in re-
ligious matters); and for the same reason, so has a sawyer or
whaler among the Devils; and, at the present time, there are
so many persons acquainted with it, that it would not be difficult
to name several (one in particular will immediately occur to you)
who though belonging to neither of those classes, have obtained,
from their intimate knowledge of the language, and practical
acquaintance with the habits and customs of the natives, as much,
or probably more, influence than any Missionary.
It is clear to me that the natives do not attach any great im-
portance to the fact of being a Missionary,* or how can we ac-
count for the indifference with which they put it on or off, if
I may so express it, as fancy, fashion, or anger dictate; yet
is not this an every-day occurrence ? Is a true belief in our
Saviour, and all the wondrous mysteries of the gospel, to be
laid aside in a fit of jealousy ? or put on because a new blanket
may be got by it ?
As this paper may be seen by some who would feel but little
delight in their perusal, I shall not enter into particular details,
but I have no doubt many instances of what I have only
faintly alluded to, will occur to your memory.
I will sum up by saying, that I think the whole system
is wrong.
The ministers are, in many cases, a set of illiterate, narrow-
minded men, who care little for the Maoris, but manage to
make themselves snug ; while the really pious and well mean-
ing are so truly zealous in their exertions, that they try to make
them better than man ever was yet, or will be; being good men
themselves, they are apt to look with too favourable an eye on
others, they only see the bright side, their habits of life prevent-
ing them from knowing that, which to us is well known.
The mere knowledge by rote of the Testament, and the ab-
staining from cooking on a Sunday can never, in my opinion,
make a man a Christian ; and as long as the present state of
teaching the Maoris exists, they will be no better than they are.
But let the system of education be revised; let schools for the
diffusion of the English language be opened, that the mind of
the native may be enlarged by the knowledge to be obtained
from a study of geography, arithmetic, and, in fact, from all
those books which convince a man how little he naturally knows
—teach him to know that he is something better than a talking
hog, and then, I believe, you will be able to make a Christian of
him, and a gentleman.
* Tukua te inihionari.


But I wall tell you more of him when I write of himself.
This letter was intended to treat only of the Missionaries.
Dear ,
Yours, truly,
ALPHA.
SOIL, CLIMATE, AND PRODUCTS.
Wanganui, April 2, 1844.
Dear ,
Being but little acquainted with the qualities and dis-
tinctions of soils, I do not profess to give much information
respecting them.
Along the sea coast, from the rocks at Paripari, there is a range
of sand hills and swamps in breadth from half a mile to two or
three miles, then you come to fern land, which is a sort of clay,
but not what I have seen at home, being harder and drier; in fact,
appearing to me more like a mineral clay than a vegetable one. I
do not know whether there are these different kinds, but what I
mean, is, that this is dry and full of iron, while that about London
is soft and muddy. This appears to be what New Zealand was
made of; the other to be a deposit after England was made. The
only alluvial deposit I have noticed, is one of pumice stone on
the banks of this river; but I am no geologist.
This clay, when covered with fern, does not seem to improve
at all; the vegetable matter left by the decayed fern is but a poor
light spongy stuff, which, I think, if the fern were taken off, would
soon blow away.
But when you come to the grass district it improves greatly,
giving you six to eight inches of very decent mould, which turns
up well, and I should think will grow almost anything.
As you approach the bush, the mould becomes richer from the
quantites of decayed leaves, trees, &c.
Such however is the extraordinary nature of the climate, that,
for my part, I should not be at all particular about the quality
of the soil, as I believe that by a little management, you might
get a very good crop of wheat out of pumice stone or sand. P’s
garden gives a proof of the former, and G.’s, mine, and others
of the latter.
So many instances of the wonderful growth of plants may be
seen on referring to the New Zealand Journal, that I shall say
no more about it.
Of the climate, I can speak with more certainty ; it is indeed
a beautiful one, and I do not suppose equalled in any part of the


world. It is never too hot nor too cold, too wet nor too dry, nor
too calm, yet sometimes too windy; but you are not obliged to live
in the wind’s eye. But I will give you the months as they come,
and you shall judge for yourself.
January. This is the hottest and driest month of all; splendid
harvest weather; there will be perhaps one to three heavy showers
during the month; I have never known the thermometer (in the
shade) above 76°; I think the average may be taken at about 68°.
February is a degree or two cooler than January, with three
to six showery days.
March. Scarcely any difference on the average, but one or
two raw days; thermometer at 50°, usually 63°.
April. Much the same, but nights cooler, shut bedroom
windows.
May and June, Both fine, rain however on the increase;
thermometer 50° to 55°.
July and August. More rain and slight frost at night; ice
rarely a quarter of an inch thick; thermometer average about 52°.
September. Not so many wet days, but some very heavy
rains; thermometer 55°.
October. Still some heavy showers, but less frequent; ther-
mometer 60°.
November. Much the same; thermometer 62°.
December. Very fine, same as January; thermometer 65°.
There is really very little difference in the seasons; whether in
summer or winter, a fine clear day is generally a warm one,
thermometer 65° to 75°, whereas on a wet day it will mostly be
50° to 60°; it is seldom at any season lower than that after nine
o’clock in the morning; a frosty night, such as happens from May
to September, is generally followed by a clear warm day; the frosts
are just severe enough to kill tomatos and such tender plants,
but not enough to destroy any of the common vegetables or
flowers, most of which are just as abundant and grow as freely
in winter as summer.
There is little occasion for any difference in clothing all the
year round, and there are few days when, of an evening, if you
are so inclined, you may not have a fire to sit by, or on the con-
trary few so cold that you cannot do without one; with me, at
any time, a rainy day is one for a fire, when the rain is over, the
fire goes out, and most likely two or three doors and windows
left open.
At least seven months in the year there is very little danger
in sleeping in the open air, only taking care to protect yourself
from the heavy dew.
Windy weather is very prevalent; I hardly know which season


to distinguish as the least windy,—at all times there are plenty
of windy days ; summer, or winter, or equinox makes no differ-
ence ; I think however, if there is any distinction, summer is the
most windy.
The west to north winds are the most usual; it will blow from
this direction with more or less intensity for several days, some-
times being only a light air, and at others amounting to almost
a gale, then a light south or south-east will spring up, and con-
tinue for three to eight days; during this time the weather is
almost always fine, and this time is preferred by the Maoris for
going to sea to fish, as the bar is smooth, and the breeze favour-
able for running in.
These winds, which may be called sea breezes, commence about
10 a.m. and generally subside towards evening; it very seldom
blows during the night, only in stormy weather, which is not
common here.
We have a real gale now and then, mostly from the south-
east, and then indeed we have enough of it; still they are not
nearly so bad as many I have witnessed at home, and altogether
I do not consider that there is more wind at Wanganui, than on
the coast of England; further inland the wind is less prevalent.
Between south-east to north we scarcely ever have the wind.
Lightning is not unfrequent, but thunder is seldom heard. I
have not seen any snow, and hail very seldom, no fogs. Me-
teors, or falling stars, are very abundant, and some exceedingly
beautiful; I have seen many larger and brighter than the planets,
leaving a train behind them like a rocket.
Earthquakes are frequent, but not often severe; the worst we
had was on July Bth, 1843, when I wrote as follows:
“ Saturday, calm and dull; about noon it rained smartly; about
1 p.m. a slight air seemed to come from the south, then sud-
denly a squall of wind and rain from the north west, this only
lasted a short time, when a mist, such as I had never seen before,
covered the river, this soon cleared off and the afternoon was fine.
About a quarter to five a shock of an earthquake alarmed us
all; it commenced with a sudden wavy motion of the earth, ac-
companied with a dull rumbling noise, it seemed to proceed from
Taranaki, it increased for about half a minute, then gradually
subsided, lasting perhaps two minutes altogether. The vibration
was so great that it was difficult to stand, everything seemed to
be moving in some terrible manner, the houses rocked perceptibly,
and continued to do so for some time, the springiness of the
poles causing them to vibrate considerably out of the perpen-
dicular, the earth seemed to be giving way ; the sensation was


most unpleasant, it seemed as if one’s heart was shook out of
its place ; many turned quite sick.
Some persons on a hill declared that the whole valley below
rose and fell like the sea; and this must be nearly the fact, as it
is quite certain, that either the flat on this side or the other has
been raised two or three feet, as parts of the town are now visible
from Putiki which were not before. There were some rents
about five feet wide and 200 or 300 long, made between high and
low water mark in the river, but they did not appear to be deep,
as they were nearly filled up with mud the next day, nor was
any great commotion observed in the water, which suddenly ran
some few feet up the bank and then subsided, many rotten
trees and branches fell, and nearly all the clay houses and brick
chimneys suffered damage, a large portion of the face of Shake-
speare’s cliff fell in.
Altogether I think this may be considered as a pretty smart
shock, and had the buildings been numerous and built high, I
have no doubt there would have been a great deal of damage
and probably loss of life. Mr. L., who was in Trinidad when a
severe one took place, says that he thinks this w r as quite as bad.
The Maoris say they never heard of any worse, and only one so
bad ; but I sincerely hope never to feel such another. We felt
slight shocks during the night, and for a day or two after.
We have had a few slight shocks since, but we are pretty
well accustomed to them; the shaking is little more than that
produced by the numerous vehicles in London.
Low rumbling noises, are frequently heard in the air, which I
have no doubt are produced by the same cause.
The vegetable products of New Zealand are very numerous.
I shall not attempt to enumerate them, but I believe there is
timber suited for any purpose to which the already known woods
are adapted, and there are some, such as the totara, kaikatoa,
ake, &c., which, either in beauty of grain, or in some other pro-
perty, far surpass many of those in general use.
The trees are nearly all evergreens, but appear to me to be-
long to entirely different genera to any we have at home ; for
though we speak of white and red pine, &c., this refers to the
wood not to the tree, many bear beautiful blossoms, and most of
them produce berries, which are eaten by the birds and natives,
some of these are tolerable, but most are too strongly flavoured
with resin or turpentine for me.
There are also many small shrubs bearing a sort of fruit; of
these the purapura and tutu are the best; the latter bears a small
black berry hanging in long pensile clusters ; these are pressed


by the Maoris, and the juice squeezed through an old mat, some
sea-weed is added, and thus a most delicious thick drink is
formed; I think you can speak of this from experience, so can
I; the seeds however are poisonous.
There is a very delicious plant found in swampy woods,
called keakea; the young leaves covering the blossom are eaten
in the summer, and the fruit (pirori) is ripe in the winter; it is
only abundant every three years, which indeed is the case with
several other fruits.
The pitau, a species of fern tree, is also an article of food, and
so is the root of the common fern.
The Maoris cultivate potatoes of many varieties (of these there
are two principal crops in the year,) kumeras, maize, taro,
various kinds of pumkins, and a green melon, and a small
leek. We have endeavoured to introduce many other vege-
tables, but with little success, the Maoris generally asking you,
what they shall get for them from the whites; and if they find
there will be no chance of selling them, not taking any more
trouble about them.
The animal kingdom is rather limited. The only indigenous
quadruped is a small rat (kiouri), formerly very numerous and
used as food by the Maoris, but now scarce, from the increase
of the Norway rat (poawaiki), cats (ngeru), &c.
There are certainly four, and probably more kinds of lizards;
they are very distinct, one is large, about two feet long, the
others small, about six or seven inches ; one is a most beautiful
pale green; another thicker and stouter, variegated with brown,
purple, green, &c.; the third very similar to the common L. agi-
lis at home. There are many apparently well authenticated ac-
counts of a larger kind having lately existed in the mountains,
and I think it not improbable it may yet be discovered; Ido
not confound this with the tuniwa, which of course is fabulous,
as is the mairo, or wild man of the woods.
The croaking frogs which Mr. Polack says he heard by thou-
sands, were, I believe, produced from the lungs of the bittern ;
I have never met a native who had seen or heard them.
Of the birds the most remarkable is the kiwi; but this is be-
coming very scarce, being easily killed by dogs and cats.
The katapo is a bird not mentioned in any of the books. From
the descriptions I have had from the Maoris, I think it must be
something of the Gallinaceous order; it is said to be nearly as
large as a turkey, but is evidently very scarce at present.
Moho is another large bird nearly if not quite extinct; it is


very fat; the wings are too short to admit of its flying; it was
plentiful here about five years ago.
Weika is a large bird about the size of a young hen pheasant;
I think it is something of a rail; it is not uncommon, but very
seldom seen feeding at night.
I have seen three other rails not mentioned in the books, one
is very much like Bewick’s spotted gallinule.
Quails like the European are not uncommon, but local.
Some bones of a very large bird have been found near
Taranaki, by the Rev. Mr. Taylor; they probably belong to an
emu, which is said to exist at present, in the middle island.
These, I think, are the only land birds not mentioned in the
books, where many of those described, such as woodcocks, snipes,
swallows, magpies, nightingales, &c., are only to be found.
I know of five species of anas, # one dabchick (podiceps
minor), one whimbril, three tringa, one charadius himantopus,
one oyster catcher, one bittern, one egret, three shags, or cormo-
rants, smaller than at home. These are the principal water birds,
but I cannot say any are very plentiful, certainly nothing like
what one would expect to find in an almost uninhabited country.
The sea birds are numerous, but similar to those seen any-
where else.
The sea fish are plentiful and various, good, bad, and indifferent,
(few of the first); but persons at home, when they read, as they
invariably do in books of travels, of cod, salmon, turbot, makarel,
&c., &c., are not aware but what the fish are really what they
are represented to be ; but this is not the case ; in form or in
colour they may slightly resemble their namesakes, but they are
frequently of entirely different genera or species, and very few
are to be compared to our fish; the most abundant, the kawai,
which is sometimes called salmon, and sometimes mackerel, is
inferior to the most indifferent sea fish ever brought to table in
England; I can almost live on fish, but two or three kawai in a
season are quite enough for me.
The hapuka, some flat fish, sea eels, and some others, are
pretty good fish, but the good ones are seldom caught, the bad
are the most abundant.
Of fresh-water fish, in lieu of eels only, as is stated by most
writers who profess to give a true history of the country, I have
the names of fourteen kinds; of these, I have seen twelve, and I
have no doubt there are many others ; two of these, the takeki
and ngauri, resemble the smelt and whitebait; the first I believe
* One of these is the A. clypeate, or shoveller, of Bewick.


to be precisely similar, even the cucumber smell is the same;
there is also a small crawfish.
The insects are few and not peculiar. I have seen but two or
three genera which are not met with in England; the common
kinds scarcely differ from those at home, but the genera and
species are much less numerous; for instance, I have met with
only six species of butterflies, one sphinx, and very few moths ;
the coleoptera are very few, the cirambyces being the most abun-
dant. The only ones which appear to be injurious are a locust
rather larger than L. viridissima in England, and the larva of a
moth (noctua); the former is destructive to the growing corn, and
the latter is very abundant in gardens, feeding on the blossoms
and fruit.
I have seen no snails and very few slugs.
Yours,
ALPHA.
OF WANGANUI.
April 12th, 1844.
The River Wanganui takes its rise from the other side of
the mountain of Tongariro; at first it is but a small stream,
running through an open country, but this part is very little
known to Europeans, only one or two having been further up
than Kaiatawa, which is about one hundred miles from here; at
that place it is about sixty yards broad, and gradually increases,
by the addition of numerous small tributaries, to 300 or 400,
which is the average breadth here. Canoes can go up four days
above Kaiatawa, this may probably be about forty miles. The
whole length of the river, I should calculate to be 200 miles;
its course is very indirect, winding continually in small reaches,
many not a quarter of a mile in length, and few exceeding one
mile. From Kaiatawa downwards, until you reach Te Rimu,
where the influence of the tide affects it, it is a continued suc-
cession of rapids and pools; below Pitawa, seventy miles from
here, I reckoned seventy-one rapids and shallows. On this side
of Te Rimu there is plenty of water (two or three fathoms at least)
until you approach the sea, where the accumulation of silt, and
the influence of the wind and surf, cause the water to be much
shallower, and the channel very narrow; in some few parts there
is scarcely six feet at low water, which is about the depth on
the bar; the tide rises ten feet, so there is plenty of water for any
vessels we are likely to require here for many years to come.


The formation of locks up the river, would certainly improve the
means of inland communication, and the embanking the mouth
would probably deepen the water on the bar; but I fear these
necessary works are not likely to be undertaken for many years
to come.
At spring tides during the dry weather, the salt water flows
a little above the town, but at neaps and in wet months the
water is fresh.
This being nearly the largest river on the coast, a great por-
tion of the rain in the winter finds its way to the sea through
its channel; this frequently causes heavy freshets, which bring
down timber of every description in amazing quantities, fur-
nishing us with abundance of fire wood, &c., on cheap and easy
terms; one good freshet will bring enough to last a twelvemonth
or more. During a freshet, though the tide rises, the current is
downwards:
Notwithstanding these freshets, the country is not subject to
floods, as the banks of the river are (above the town) many feet
above the level; from the town to the sea the banks are low, but
I do not think a rise of water to their height is of very common
occurrence, as it would require to rise at least seven feet above
the highest spring tide, to reach my house. Now, a freshet
generally affects the river here only a few inches; the highest
I have seen rose about twenty inches ; all last winter none
reached above the top of spring tide. The only flood of any
consequence on record, happened about ten years ago, when all
the district from the town to the sea was under water; but the
chances of so many concurrent causes uniting at once, might not
happen again for centuries. First there had been seven or eight
days incessant rain—this is very unusual; next, it was the top of
spring tides; and last a gale was blowing from the sea, causing a
surf on the bar, which actually kept back the water—this is of
very rare occurrence ; so I think we have little to fear from the
floods, as I am not aware that any of our kitchens and wine-
cellars are below high water-mark. Up the river, where it is
narrow and confined by precipitous banks, it frequently rises
twenty or thirty feet, and on the above occasion it was about
eighty feet higher than usual.
The country about Wanganui from the sea to the town, is
mostly sand hills and low level patches of swampy land; these
are nearly all dry during the summer, and at all times furnish
good pasture for cattle, being covered with grass, tortoi, sow-
thistle &c. Near the town the sand hills are covered with low
fern ; this, from the continual trampling of the cattle, and rooting
of pigs, is gradually giving way to a grass, which seems to be a
B


similar species to that which grows on commons in England,
and springs up wherever the ground is much trod on, as path-
ways, old pahs, &c.
The town is situated on the left bank of the river, about three
miles from the heads ; the block contains 500 acres, besides re-
serves for walks, public buildings, &c.; it is divided into quarter
of an acre sections, of which each holder of a country order is
entitled to one; but as there are only 270 sections, * the Com-
pany get 1730 for themselves, to bring into the market at that
unknown time, when Wanganui land is w'orth purchasing.
The site is exceedingly well adapted for a town, being almost
a perfect level, only two small ridges of hills, not exceeding
twenty acres, which are reserved for public gardens, intervening.
The height above the river is about twenty feet, at the lower part
of the town, the bank slopes toward the water, affording great fa-
cility for landing goods, &c., &c. Further up, the banks are even
with the rest of the land, there are several natural drains, which
will be very available some day next century.
There is plenty of water opposite, the river being 360 yards
wide, and from three to seven fathoms deep.
The buildings are nearly confined to the lower bank, or Taupo
quay; there are a few good wooden houses (though they cer-
tainly look like barns with chimneys to them) belonging to the
Gentry /! I and a church of the same description; the rest are
either clay, or toitoi.
On the opposite bank, the land rises rather steeply to the
height of perhaps 150 to 200 feet; this seems to be the level as
far as the eye can reach, in an easterly direction ; there are at all
events no hills that way 5 it is however a good deal broken by
gulleys, mostly leading to the Purua and Putiki valleys; the
further you go, the more level it becomes, it is very good land
and mostly covered with grass, the gulleys with timber, it is in-
tersected by numerous rivulets, and within three miles of the
town are several lakes, varying in size from 80 acres to half an
acre; these furnish a constant supply of eels, and abundance of
wild-fowl; the Maoris declare they will not sell them, and I hope
they will adhere to that resolution, as they would otherwise pro-
bably fall to the lot of some gentleman who preserves , and we, who
have not the luck to have a lake or a creek, would be deprived
of our ducks. The land in this district appears to be well suited
to every description of agricultural purpose, and maybe con-
sidered as valuable as any in the colony.
As you ascend the river the country is more hilly; there are
* I should have said 270 land orders ; the number of holders is 123, of
whom there are only twenty-seven residents.


however several fine flats, of soil superior to what is usually-
found, with some excellent wood, and streams suitable for erect-
ing mills upon; the hills are thickly wooded; on the banks there
is a deposit of pumice stone, in some parts twelve feet deep, but
it does not extend more than a few chains from the river, it is
covered with thick fern.
Beyond Kaiwaike, the limit of the Company’s land, the country
is not very inviting for English settlers, being scarcely any thing
but steep hills, varying in height from 300 to more than 1000
feet, and all covered with timber; there are however, all the way
to Kaiatawa, occasional patches of flat land of the richest de-
scription, but they are too small to be of much use, many of
them are splendid situations for a country residence; they are
all occupied by the Maoris.
Further up, the country is represented to become open ; large
planes extending in all directions, and probably reaching as far
as the east coast; here are also the celebrated hot springs of
Taupo, Roturoa, &c. The magnificent mountain of Tongariro.
rising ten or twelve thousand feet, forms one of the principal
objects in this scene; this mountain is volcanic, but only gives
out a little smoke, or more probably steam at present; his bro-
ther Taranaki, who quarrelled with him formerly about his wife
Pianga, and shifted his quarters in consequence, most probably
put his own pipe out then, as he is quite quiet now.* Towards
the east, are the Tararua, and Rua Wahina ranges; these are
high mountains extending from the interior down towards
Wellington; they are capped with snow, but the timber
reaches nearly to the top.
On the west side, there is a ridge of hills, about fifteen miles
distant, which bound the view in that direction; lam not aware
that any one has been over them, but from the appearance of
the country as seen from the east, I have no doubt it is an open
district, extending right away to Nga Motu, or Taranaki.
The quantity of land under cultivation at Wanganui, does not
exceed sixty or seventy acres ; for although we have been here
more than three years, we have yet no title ; the Maoris are still
the owners of the soil, and they are such hard landlords, that
few have ventured to become their tenants, and even those few
are daily expecting notice to quit. Ewaka says, Mr. Bell’s
farm will make a capital kumera ground. The produce has
been generally satisfactory, but people are in too great haste to
get a crop, and do not sufficiently work the land beforehand ;
the consequence has frequently been, that the quantity reaped
* The books say, this is a volcano in active operation.
B 2


has not amounted to the seed sowm ; but under good manage-
ment, there is no doubt the returns will be ample.
Cattle thrive amazingly, sheep promise well, and all kind of
poultry &c. increase to a wonderful extent; there is no trouble
in rearing the last, they promise soon to overspread the country,
and I think it not improbable, that cattle will at no distant time,
become wild, several have been away from here so far, that the
owners had great difficulty in finding them; rabbits, will be
turned out in a month or two, and no doubt will do well; two
or three miles from the town, there are lots of bush pigs for
any one who likes to be at the trouble of catching them ; many
persons however, say that good pigs are to be got, without going
nearly so far for them ; and of this I have no doubt, as I lost
three very fine ones, about a month ago.
ALPHA.
THE MAORIS.
May Ist, 1844.
The number of natives on this river, may be reckoned at nearly
4000; Mr. Taylor, in May 1843, estimated them at 3243 ; at
least, he obtained the names of that number; but I think he is
below the mark, as it must be very difficult to get the exact ac-
count of all, and he has the male adults alone, at 1503. Now,
as very few are without one, and many have two or three wives,
and children appear tolerably plentiful, I think 4000, will be a
low calculation.
This does not include the inland districts, Taupo, &c., but
merely the Wanganui river.
They are of various tribes ; but still in many ways connected
with each other, and with other large tribes along the straits,
and in the interior, with Rauperaha’s tribe or Ngati Raukawa,
they are less allied than with any other, and hold him as their
worst enemy.
The greater number are Missionaries,* and many are bap-
tized ; to me, nothing can be more ridiculous, than the manner
in which their new Christian names are given them ; thus, in-
stead of reserving their own names, with the addition of a mo-
dern distinctive one, they are mostly confined to the surnames
of the minister, tacked on to an extraordinary mixture of letters
intended to represent some old Jewish name from the bible.
* The word Christian, by some extraordinary omission, is never applied
to a native, they are all Missionaries. Certainly Christian would be a
misnomer.


thus we have Horomona Harawera,* Nahanarha Rewirajf
Hakeraiha Wiremu. J The few modern names they have taken,
are equally ridiculous, being principally, King George, Governor
Albert, Bishop Selwyn, or some other connected with either the
church or the government. Though to some this may appear a
matter of little import, I cannot help thinking it is of great
consequence, as being the probable means, of causing these
people to forget their ancestry, and thus take from them one
great incentive to noble actions.
Many of these Missionaries are not very particular in obeying
the precepts, though all know the words of the Book. Polygamy
is still not uncommon, the principal chief at Putiki has three
wives, all Missionaries.
I will just sum up all about their religion, by saying, that they
are not capable of knowing what is meant by it, with their
present imperfect knowledge; they can read it, it is true, but that
they understand what they read, I totally deny; they do not
even understand the language it is written in, for all such words,
as honour, glory, repentance, &c. they have no corresponding
word in their language, their notions do not reach so high, their
ideas are not sufficiently refined. Ask them what these words
mean, and they cannot tell you; all the answer is, that it is a
Missionary word, just as okiha is an ox, and pokiha a fox.
But as the late Mr. Mason said, they perfectly understand the
doctrine of the Trinity, though he allowed their notions of meum
and tuum were not very clear, I suppose my judgment will not
have much influence. That they can he made Christians, I be-
lieve, and that they may, I truly hope; hut as long as the present
system lasts, I am certain they never will.
Much has been said, and written, of the decrease of the native
population, where the white man has come in contact with him;
I am not inclined to think that has taken place here, nor even
generally in the island. I cannot think that at any time, the
population was very large, and if we consider the numerous
wars, which were continually occurring, by which whole tribes
were exterminated, we need not be surprised at it.
The frequent recourse by the women to means for producing
abortion, must be a very principal reason for the scantiness of
the population. This cause, I regret to say, is still in existence,
and is certainly, not sufficiently condemned by those who should
prevent it; although soidisant marriages with white men and
Maori women are common, yet half caste children are few in
proportion; and I believe principally from this cause.
• Hadfield. f Davis. J. Williams^


As regards natural deaths, I am inclined to think, and I found
my opinion from conversation with the Maoris themselves, that
they are much fewer now than formerly—a few timely doses of
medicine, which is never refused, have, I am certain, saved many
a life; and if they could only be induced to keep themselves
clean, and not sweat themselves to death, in their filthy and
abominable hot-houses, there is no doubt there would be less
sickness than now.
I am of opinion, that as regards diminution of numbers,
or any other evil influence, they have not suffered at all by their
communication with us; it is a farce to talk of corruption of
morals, when there were none to corrupt; who ever heard of a
virtuous girl, between ten years old and marriage, and then only
because she knew the penalty for being false to her lord ? Even
the very whalers, who have been denounced as everything that
was vile, have helped to improve, rather than deteriorate the
character of the Maori. I appeal to any one who has been in
the neighbourhood of the old whaling stations, whether the
Maoris there are not very far advanced before the rest, and
whether the women who are living with some of the resident
whalers ,* are not far superior to those living with the Maoris,
either in manners, habits, and appearance. Drunkenness has
had no evil example to them, as they seem to have a natural
antipathy to spirituous liquors, and wines were little known be-
fore we came. Only one of our diseases of any severity, has yet
been introduced among them, and that seems in a great measure
to have lost its pernicious influence here, it is seldom very se-
vere, yields to native remedies, and is not very common among
them.f
Their pahs are situated on any available part of the bank of
the river; there are settlements varying in size from two or
three houses to large villages; almost all the way up, the houses
are of the most wretched description, being merely a few poles,
supporting a roof, and all covered with rushes or grass of a
peculiar kind ; the height of the walls are about four feet, to the
top of the roof about six, size ten by six; there are generally
much better houses in the town, but they seldom live in them,
preferring the warmth, (and smell I suppose) of the smaller.
They fancy some of these places are almost impregnable, and
wonder if white men could take them, poor fellows !
* There are whalers who have been in New Zealand many years, and
settled down quietly, and are often decent fellows, with a tidy house,
garden, &c. Since the colony has been formed, many have married their
women.
f I am mistaken in considering this disease as introduced by the
whites, it was known previous to their arrival.


They have large cultivations of potatoes, &c. in the neigh-
bourhood of the pahs, and breed a great quantity of pigs; at any
place of any size, they have an eel dam, nearly across the river;
the baskets are exactly like those in England: during the fresh-
ets, they take great quantities of fish, of various descriptions,
these, with pigeons, parrots, &c. constitute great part of their
food during the winter, when very few come down here, except
on a sacrament day, or to a great feast; in the summer most of
them are down here for about three months, to fish, when the
quantity they take is very great; what they do not require for
present consumption, they dry in the sun.
They are extremely filthy in their persons and habits, they
seldom wash themselves, and will wear a shirt until it is worn
out, they seem to have no pride whatever in making themselves
decent, and are not the least improved in personal appearance,
or cleanliness, since our arrival, although great pains have fre-
quently been taken to instruct some of the youths in our ways,
by having them in the house, and treating them in every respect
as one of the family, yet this has never met with success, they
have soon returned to live among the Maoris, preferring an
idle life of independence, to one where there is the least show
of constraint; and unless they are made sensible of their present
degraded state, of which they are now unconscious, I see no
chance of their improvement; indeed, they are just as fully con-
vinced of their own superiority over us, except as regards the
arts, as we are over them, and in many things will not give up
their own opinions for a white man’s.
I am certain that they are quite capable of civilization ; their
intellects are not at all inferior to ours, all they require is suf-
ficient inducement; their wants are now easily supplied, and they
will not work to better their condition, as long as they do not
wish to better it; what the most proper means may be to induce
them to reform, I cannot clearly say; but I think the quickest
means would be, to endeavour by every means, to teach them to
speak and read English; this would naturally create a desire
for knowledge, and of course for improvement; it is absurd to
talk about preserving the purity of their language,—of what use
is it; even now the language is so garbled by the introduction of
Maori English, that a person of the last century would not
know it ; and this process is going on so rapidly, that in a few
years, it will be the oddest lingo in the world. At present the
Missionaries seem to be afraid the Maoris should be contami-
nated by the knowledge of the English language; and so they
will if they are not taught properly, as what they do pick up
now, is not of the most classic description, but such as is usually


heard from sawyers, sailors, &c.; few persons of a better descrip-
tion ever speaking anything to them but bad Maori, even the
boys living in the house of the white Missionary scarcely know
a word of English ; there is however among the younger persons
a general wish to learn it.
They are mostly of a lively disposition, and very fond of ridi-
cule ; a Maori is never at a loss for an answer, or repartee;
though these are frequently not of the most decent description ;
they find nicknames for any one, where the slightest opportunity
offers; they are very prone to exaggeration, and any little oc-
currence is magnified by them into a matter of importance.
The capsizing of a canoe at sea, for instance, will cause (in
words) the death of at least three or four men; quarrels are not
common among them, and they generally end in words, the
ladies as usual, having most of the talk; in their dealing, they
are not at all scrupulous, and I believe, would beat any Jew
hollow, and frequently after concluding a bargain, for a pig, for
instance, will return in an hour or two, and bring the payment
back, forcibly taking the pig away, and throw your blanket to
you, saying the payment is not sufficient, or that the pig be-
longed to another person, who is not satisfied. In buying po-
tatoes, you must be very careful, for if your back is turned they
will often manage to get two or three baskets back into the canoe,
yet in no case have we any redress, as the magistrates have
neither the authority, power, or will, to interfere ; though if a
white man offends a Maori, they make him pay for it.
The friendship of a Maori should be guarded against, as much
as possible ; it is the most expensive in the world ; they are for
ever begging, they are never satisfied; they tax everything you
have, from tobacco and fishhooks to blankets and guns ; it is
true that great promises are always made, of the handsome re-
turns you are to get, in pigs or mats, but I should say that for
all that is got in this way, at least ten times the value is given ;
but you know even better than I do, the value of Maori friend-
ship ; my advice is, if you choose to give, give, but expect no
return ; should you get any, so much the better, but reckon on
none ; never pay beforehand; but the best way of all, is to keep
them at a distance, and I am certain they respect you the more,
and treat you the better for it; this I know from my own expe-
rience, having tried both ways.
Their amusements are not very varied, and some of these are
falling into disuse ; the haka is among the latter, and certainly,
the sooner it is forgotten, the better for the morals of the people;
their songs are not much better; and though w e have been told
so much of the love of poetry, music, &c. in the lying books.


I must say there is little of either in the Maori songs, and the
sense is anything but akin to one or the other. They have a
very favourite game, played by moving the fingers, with a pe-
culiar muscular action, but I have never met a white man who
could explain it. They are expert at draughts, and will beat a
very good player; at cards their only game, is beat my neighbour,
which is played in a way of their own, with any odd cards they
can get. They do not gamble or play for stakes ; they are good
swimmers, and wrestlers, but not fast runners nor good jumpers.
The men are mostly well made, strong and active ; many with
fine,open, intelligent, handsome countenances, they are very little
darker than an Italian, though the dirt with which their faces are
generally covered, makes them appear darker than what they are ;
it is not true, that they have neither beard nor mustaches, though
they frequently pull out the hair from their faces; but now
whiskers are becoming more fashionable ; their hair is almost al-
ways black, long and glossy; in a few however, it is rather
frizly ; I have never met any of the very dark Maoris we read
of, though there may be such.
The women are very inferior in personal appearance to the
men, they are much below the average height; and from the
constant hard labour, to which they are exposed, from early
youth, they lose much of their natural grace of figure ; from
carrying heavy loads of potatoes, &c. they contract a stooping
gait, and their ancles become thick and clumsy ; their faces are
often pleasing, but very seldom pretty; a really handsome woman
I never saw. I think however, that as they become more civil-
ized, they will greatly improve in appearance, as the children
are many of them very good looking, and it is owing to the se-
vere life they lead, that they do not remain so. I am the more
inclined to this opinion, from having observed, that those girls
who have lived from an early age with white men, are generally
better looking, and certainly fairer than the rest, which may, I
think be attributed, to the absence of laborious occupations, and
the easier life they lead ; 1 believe the constant use of soap has
improved their complexions ; at all events, a girl who uses soap
daily, has a much clearer skin, than one who anoints herself
with oil and red ochre. The old women are the most filthy ob-
jects that can be imagined, Macbeth’s witches are beauties com-
pared to them; but four years in a colony strengthens one’s
nerves, and leads one to look upon as trifles, scenes which in
England would have caused one to faint.
ALPHA.


PAST AND PRESENT POSITION,
May 20th, 1844.
I have little to add in the way of information to what I have
written in my former letters. I shall, therefore, conclude by
giving a short account of our past and present position, with a
few notions of our future expectations.
On our first arrival here, our hopes were buoyed up by the
idea that we should obtain our land directly—money was plen-
tiful, experience (in colonial matters, at least) was wanting ; we
Were really and truly green, even those among us who knew
something of worldly matters at home, soon found we had much
to learn. It is not, therefore, at all surprising, that many
should have been brought to the verge of ruin by the examples
they met on every side ; some, but I think they were previously
so inclined, have become little better than complete vagabonds;
but to others, I hope the rememberance of their folly will be of
the greatest service, and they will, hereafter, think of New
Zealand as the school in which they learnt in the shortest time,
and, perhaps, at a cheaper rate, more knowledge of mankind,
than would have been gained at home in years,—may they
profit by that knowledge.
At that time, Wanganui promised to be soon a flourishing
place, but still not many persons came here, it had much to
contend with in the envy of the Wellington people, who feared
that when its merits became known, it would draw all the agri-
culturists from that place ; then, just as people began to think
of coming here, the land question became a subject of interest,
and every one talked of waiting until that was settled. We
have remained in this position up to the present time—the daily
talk being, “ only wait till the Land Question is settled, and then
Wanganui must go a-head.”
The question is now settled ; at least, so says Mr. Spain. On
Thursday last he gave his decision, after several days passed in
talking to the Maoris, and trying all means to induce them to
come to terms; he told them, after enumerating the different
clauses of the sale, respecting the quantity of land reserves, &c.,
that he now offered them £lOOO in money, in full payment for
the land surveyed by the whites, that if they preferred goods,
the money should be laid out to the best advantage for them—
to both these offers, the chief Maori (Mawai) answered, No.
Mr. Spain then declared his regret at this refusal, and told
them that it would not prevent the land going to the whites,
that he and their protector Mr. Clark, had agreed that the land
must be sold, and the payment was sufficient, and that we were
to have the land.


Thus we stand at present;* and after four years of anxious
expectation of quiet and easy possession of land, which we were
told the Maoris would be almost too glad to give us, we now
find that they will not sell, but that notwithstanding their
refusal, we are, nevertheless, to have it—but how? that they
will not give it up quietly, is certain ; that possession on suffer-
ance, which may likely be obtained, is worse than none ; the
only thing that remains is the employment of force and mili-
tary protection. But who ever anticipated this, and who will
wait for it, if by any means he can get away ?—I fear that our
future prospects are not very cheering,—granted however, that
quiet and undisturbed possession is, at last, obtained, what will
be our chances for the future? To this I answer, that if a man
expects to make a large or rapid fortune, New Zealand is not
the place to do it in, I believe the only article of commerce, of
any importance, which may be made to compete with the pro-
ductions of any other country, is the flax; and without a large
export of some kind, we cannot expect to make large fortunes:
but if a man is satisfied with the necessaries or comforts, and
does not much aspire to the luxuries of this life, and looks for-
ward to the prosperity of his children rather than to his own,
by assiduity and perseverance, there is little doubt he will be-
come independent, and his descendants possibly rich, but he
must make this his country and leave old England for ever.
But if a man has no notion of toiling like a slave that his chil-
dren may be idle, and is equally content with such necessaries
and comforts, he may as well stay at home; he will, at all
events, have one great advantage over the colonist, that is, good
society, which is at a great premium here.
So we continue to vegetate; how it is we are not killed with
ennui , I cannot imagine—for a duller life than ours at present
cannot be conceived; but I must say I never in my life found
time hang so lightly on my hand, or was less free from care,
blue devils, or sickness, than since I have been here—the days
pass so quickly that you can scarcely believe that Sunday is
come again, few can say with certainty what day of the week it
is, and yet you do nothing—walk a few times up the beach,
smoke a pipe or two, chat with a few Maoris, kill a pig, and the
day is done.
Fortunately for us, living is cheap enough, or many of us
never could have stood it so long ; but I never heard of any
one starving in New Zealand, and in Wanganui in particular;
* While this was at press, a letter was received, stating that Ekuru
is dead, and that now Mawai says that he is friends with all Mauris,
and will sell the land. He has written to Capt. Fitzroy, to say he will
take £ 1000.


those who have got any money left, may live here tolerably well
for a place like this—and if you have a good house over your
head, you may be pretty comfortable, but you must be content
with your own society or that of the Maoris, for there is scarcely
any one else in the place to speak to, our set being very small
here. I subjoin a list of the prices of a few articles, so that you
may form some notice of our household expenses.
Beef, one ox killed last week, very fine, per lb. 8c?.
Mutton, 1 sheep a week, per lb. 6d.
Pork, staple article, and very excellent in quality, not so rich
as English pork, but far preferable for constant consumption.
Pigs daily brought in by the Maoris, and for some months past
sold alive at less than 1c?. per lb., bought by the carcase from
the whites, at 1 \d., and retailed at 3 d.
Poultry scarcely saleable at any price, and pigeons, ducks,
&c., if you like to be at the trouble of shooting them.
Butter, fresh, per lb. Is.
Cheese, per lb. 9 d.
Fish, 3 to 8 lbs., fish-hooks, pipes, or tobacco.
Potatoes, per ton, about 12s. in trade.
Flour, per ton. £2O to £25.
Sugar, good, (per bag, of 1 cwt.) per lb. 2d. to 3d.
Rice, do. do. per lb. 1 \d.
All kinds of vegetables in our own or other people’s gardens.
Most kinds of spirits and wines much cheaper than in Eng-
land, but seldom quite as good.
Beer dear, but we shall soon supply ourselves.
Joe and his wife, per annum, £4O, but I have no doubt many
would gladly come for less.
Daily wages nominal, paid generally in trade, the golden age
is past.
Maori work, such as fencing, digging, thatching, &c. reason-
able enough, if you can get them to w'ork, generally by contract,
a shirt or blanket, or so much tobacco for the job.
Fire-wood as much as you like to go for, but dear if bought
by the Maoris—a canoe’s load being about 2s. Talking of canoes,
I forgot in my letter about the natives, to say that from Pitawa to
Putiki, the number of canoes of every description was nearly 700.
I remain. Yours,
ALPHA.
Wanganui, 1844.
Dear ,
You have asked my opinion on several subjects relative to New
Zealand, and I will endeavour, as far as a three years’ residence
will allow me, to give it you.


In the first place comes, I think, the “ mighty bugbear, the
Land Question, and the general conduct of the New Zea-
land Company to the settlers.” I purchased my land in
October, 1840, and left England the following January. On
my arrival at Port Nicholson, I found, to my great surprise,
that my land was to be chosen here, 120 miles from where my-
self and goods were landed; this, I confess, much surprised
me, especially when I found that I was to get there the best
way I could. I, with several others in the same predicament,
waited on Col. Wakefield to know what was to be done, when
we were very coolly informed, that when the land was surveyed,
he would communicate with us ! We had paid our money in
England for land, for which at that time not a stick of tobacco
had been given by the Company, and which had not been
surveyed when we arrived. A sort of payment was made,
which ended in a regular scramble amongst the natives, the
real owners I believe getting the least portion. Of course, the
natives would not yield possession, when the survey was com-
pleted ; and in this wrectched state has the Land Question re-
mained here to the present day. The consequence has been,
that, with the exception of that of some half dozen, who have
paid the natives from their own pockets, the capital brought out,
has been expended in maintaining ourselves, living in daily
hope of the “ Land Question being settled,” —a time which I
think will be remembered by all to the end of their lives.
And what has been the fate of those who paid the natives to
allow them to cultivate some small portions of their sections ;
they have lived in constant trouble and annoyance—their cattle
maimed by the natives—their houses constantly full of men,
women, and children —who, if told to go out, will tell you it is
not your house, and, perhaps, threaten to turn you out! Who
would live such a dog’s-life as this ? When a man buys land,
he does not expect that he will have to risk his life to gain pos-
session of it; to have his house, his fire-side occupied by a set
of filthy, dirty, thieving savages, whenever they choose to walk
in. The Missionaries have, in some instances, been of use, in
partially converting the natives ; but, in many instances, the
name is used as a cloak to their vice; a native who has stolen
any thing, will say, “it was not I, I am a Missionary,” and
imagine that you think him, or rather ought to think him, above
suspicion on that account! The character of the New Zea-
lander has been far too highly spoken of in all the works that
I have read.
The climate of New Zealand is beautiful in the extreme, and
evidently suited to European constitutions; the winters much


about the temperature of our autumn, and the summers warm,
without being oppressive. The land, is upon the average, I
think, good; the expense of clearing, ranging from 25.5', to £2O
per acre. The town of Wanganui is, I think, well chosen ; and
should the place ever “go a-head,” will have a very pretty ap-
pearance. The river is a noble stream, and with a little ex-
pense and trouble, a vessel of 200 tons could come up abreast
of the town. A steamer would be a capital speculation on this
coast, and I am much surprised, that in the present depressed
state of affairs at Sydney, we have not, ere this, had one from there.
Port Nicholson is a place I dislike very much, from the preva-
lence of S. E. andN. W. gales, which blow there, I really think,
ten months out of the twelve. The harbour, certainly, deserves
the character given of it, and from that, Wellington will always
flourish to a certain extent, totally independent of the agricul-
tural portion of the colony.
Mr. Spain’s visit here, has ended in disappointment and
vexation —disappointment to the settlers from the ru n-set-
tlement of the Land Question as regards possession, and vex-
ation to Mr. Spain, in having been duped by the Maoris.
The question now seems to be capable of settlement only by
recourse to an armed force. The cause of their not accepting
the payment offered, I attribute to their imagining that by
holding out they will get more, not to any “ amor patrice,”
to which some, perhaps, who set by their fire-sides at home, and
imagine the natives a harmless, inoffensive, honest race, may
be pleased to attribute it. Mr. Spain has declared the land to
be the property of the white man—how possession will be ob-
tained, or when , time will show.
The system of teaching the natives, and of giving them
Bibles and Prayer-books in their own language is radically bad ;
the attempt to turn a jargon, like the Maori, into a pure lan-
guage, by the Missionaries, is a decided failure, and the w ords
they have had to coin, are ludicrous samples of language making,
very few Maoris understand it; and thus in the translation of
the interpreters, who use the Missionary Maori, the real mean-
ing is often not at all, and, at best, but imperfectly conveyed—
sed sat est. I know you will be angry with me for bringing
this to so speedy a conclusion; but when we meet in dear old
England, which, if life be spared, we will, I will yarn to your
heart’s content
Your friend.
BETA.


Wanganui, January, 1842.
My dear ,
In accordance with your request, I proceed to give you, in
writing, my opinion of the proceedings of the Missionaries in
this country.
I must premise, that I arrived here in August 1839, fully pre-
pared to second, to the best of my power, the efforts of the
Missionaries, had I become convinced that those efforts were
calculated to improve the condition of the native population, and
prepare them for an amalgamation with the European colonists,
equally advantageous to both races.
My first impressions of the effect of their proceedings on the
natives were certainly favourable. We found the new Mihanere,
or converts, in Queen Charlotte’s Sound, able to read and write
with considerable fluency in their own language, regular in at-
tendance at school and prayers, and strict in the observance of
all the forms, at least, of the Christian religion. In every other
part of Cook’s Straits where the new faith has spread, the rule,
so far, held good ; but a few months’ sojourn in different parts
of the coast taught us to remark that it was indeed the forms
alone that they observed, and that in all the moral virtues which
it is the principal object of the Christian faith to inculcate, they
were by no means superior to those natives who remained firm
to their ancient rites. I soon learned to compare the converts
to a race of Jesuits, or rather Pharisees: —as they carried the
observance of forms to an unreasonable and even ridiculous de-
gree, (introduced new forms which they declared to be part of
the Divine Law) ; refrained from useful labour and innocent re-
creation, for the purpose of pouring over their books as an im-
perious duty; and referred every, even the commonest every-day
occurrence, to the New Testament, while at the same time they
made no scruple of thieving, lying, and commiting other crimes,
from the guilt of which they defended themselves on the plea
that as they were Mihanere, it was not possible that they could
have transgressed the laws of our Saviour.
A few instances will best explain these points in the character
which the natives uniformly acquired as they became Mihanere.
At Port Nicholson, in September 1839, during the sale of that
district by the natives, I frequently heard the head chief Ware-
pori, remark that “ the Mihanere made him sick, for instead of
working at their plantations or canoes, or going out to fish, they
were deafening his ears with their long prayers three times in
every da.y, and three times in every night, while they spent the
intervening time in practising either hymns or catechism.”


While walking one Sunday from Waitotara to this place, I offer-
ed the natives who were carrying ray things, some potatoes and
other food which I had had cooked on purpose on the Saturday
night. They were Mihanere ; and refused, alleging that “if they
touched food on Sunday, before the sun had reached the meri
dian, they would surely suffer under the anger of our Saviour.”
No remonstrance could drive this chimera out of their heads,
as, they said, the white Missionaries had commanded them to
follow their present course.
At Te Kau arapana, twenty miles up this river, in April 1840,
I was strongly condemned by a Mihanere orator for the heinous
crime of smoking tobacco in a pipe, which he stated to be a
transgression of the Divine Law, as expounded by the white
Missionaries ! !
I need hardly bring to your recollection, Emare, the chief of
Operiki, who cannot sell a pig, or fill a pipe of tobacco, without
quoting the New Testament and our Saviour’s name, although
he is one of the greatest rascals that inhabit the banks of the
river. About a year ago on missing some small articles out of
a cargo which his people had been assisting me to land here, I
went to him and desired him to procure their restitution. He
strenuously denied the possibility of any of his tribe, who were
all Mihanere, being the thief, as they could not, he said, have
transgressed our Lord’s commandment. On threatening him,
however, with the anger of a more powerful chief whom he
knew to be able and willing to protect me, two of his people
made great haste to find the missing things, and laid them in-
side my door within ten minutes.
I considered, however, that these evils arose from omissions
rather than errors, in the way of teaching pursued by the Mis-
sionaries. lam sorry to have to add, that a little further ob-
servation displayed their proceedings in a less pardonable light,
and proved that some of them could only have arisen from the
very worst of motives.
The Mihanere soon learnt to apply that name to themselves as
well as their white instructors, while they distinguished the un-
converted natives, together with all white people unconnected
with the missions, by the charitable epithets of Rewera and Hu-
rai, or “ Devil,” and “ Judah or Jew.” They soon learnt to bear
suspicion, and even hatred, to anyone coming to buy their land,
and especially to any one connected with the New Zealand
Company. While travelling up from Port Nicholson towards
Taranaki, in March and April 1840, with no intention of buying
land, I was received with hardly common charity at the Mihanere
pahs or villages, until I had defended myself from the grievous


charges which, they said, the preaching of the Church Mission,
had induced them to bring against me: these were chiefly, that
I intended to come with white people and seize upon their land;
and that was a Pikapo , or Roman Catholic, and therefore
certain to cut all their throats and drive them to the mountains !
Upon explaining to them the falsehood and absurdity of these
statements, I was admitted to a share of the hospitality which is
so universal and admirable a part of the primitive native custom.
I need not add that at all the “ Devil ” pahs, I enjoyed this, un-
tainted by the unwillingness to grant it at first. It was not in
a solitary instance that I experienced this unwillingness, but in-
variably at every Mihanere settlement: and equally invariable
was the reference, on close inquiry, to the white Missionaries
as their authority for these wicked statements.
You may be led to wonder at the fact that the white Mission-
aries should so easily acquire sufficient influence over the minds
of the natives as to make them believe these absurd stories : but
it is to be remembered what childish minds they possess, and
how ready they are at all times to receive and propagate with ex-
aggeration the most foolish reports: and I have also been told
by many that “ they did not like Mr. * * *, who turned them
out of his tent and was a pakeka riri , or angry white man, but
that he had Jesus Christ in his mouth, and threatened them
with his vengeance should they not do his (Mr, * * *) bidding.”
It soon became evident that the Missionaries themselves had
some object in this mean and disgraceful opposition : for al-
though Port Nicholson, and the adjacent districts have been
colonized by a body of persons who carried out the most phi-
lanthropic intentions of all those who have formed them-
selves into societies in London, for the purpose of protecting
the aborigines ; although the reserves for the natives, in the
Company’s territory at least, were most ample and most strictly
observed ; and although the natives of the whole neighbourhood
soon became aware how great an advantage they had acquired,
not only from the immense value conferred on the portion re-
served for them of that land which was before not worth a groat,
but also from the creation of the civilized wants which were
supplied as soon as they arose, the opposition still continued
from the same quarter, and is even at this day, in some places,
kept up with unabated energy.
It is about a year ago, that the inhabitants of Wellington in-
vited the natives to join in the public rejoicings held on the
anniversary of the landing of the first settlers. A prize was
provided for a canoe race, and a feast prepared for all the natives
of the district, who w ere begged to amuse the white people with
D


a war-dance. Nothing could be more harmless or better cal-
culated to keep up a friendly feeling between whites and natives;
yet Mr. , a Wesleyan missionary, who had been sent down
from Hokianga soon after the formation of the white settlement,
dissuaded the natives from taking any part in these public sports;
and, as I have been told, by means of the most impious threats
of the anger of God, should they venture to do so. At any rate,
some very strong and unusual argument must have been made
use of, for all those who called themselves converts, remained
shut up in their pahs the whole of the day.
I need hardly quote to you the almost open misconduct of
Mr. , the Church Missionary here, who has induced the
natives to refuse the settlers possession of the land which was
bought for them, and whose illicit doings will, I imagine, im-
mediately call for some marked and public expression of disap-
proval from the assembled inhabitants of this place.
There can be no doubt, but that their whole object has been
to obtain land for themselves, and to overthrow all those who
might become their rivals in the work. lam led to this con-
clusion by proofs too numerous to be related, but too convincing
to be doubted. I can only refer you to some which have become
official papers. On referring to the “ Correspondence relative
to New Zealand,” printed by order of the House of Commons,
in May 1841, at pages 129, 142, and 143, you will find very
strong evidence of Mr, ’s land-sharking propensities,
and of the reasons which induced him to calumniate his rivals
in buying land.
The Mr. mentioned above, had just before the affair I
have described, laid claim to sixty acres in the best part of the
town of Wellington, on behalf of the Wesleyan mission.
In order to support all these views, they have uniformly re-
fused to instruct the natives in the English language, or even to
print in their own anything but the New, and some few parts of
the Old Testament, together with a few hymns and the catechism.
They doubtless feared that the too easy communication between
the white people and the natives would tend to weaken their ex-
clusive influence, and to remove the delusions under which they
strove to keep the minds of the latter.
I cannot conclude better than by comparing the present con-
dition, moral and physical, of the converted and unconverted
natives.
The former are, almost invariably, suspicious of every white
man not a Missionary, uncourteous and overbearing in their
dealings with us, treacherous as to fulfilling contracts by which
they have ceded their lands on any former occasion; and devoid


of any of that obedience and submission to their head chiefs
which used to prove so useful in the intercourse between the
white man and the native. Generally speaking, they are dis-
tinguished from the unconverted natives as rogues, thieves, and
liars ; and there is not a white man (not a Missionary) travel-
ling about the country, but will spend the night at a “ Devil,”
in preference to a “ Missionary ” pah. This character applies
equally to those in the immediate neighbourhood of white settle-
ments, and those who see few white men but their Missionary
tyrants.
The “ Devil ” native, as he is charitably called, presents a
pleasing contrast to the above. Frank and straightforward in
his intercourse with civilized man, obliging and fair in his deal-
ings, hospitable and desirious of friendship and civilization, the
unconverted natives still maintain respect and subordination to
their head chiefs; who, uncorrupted by the disgraceful instruc-
tions of the Missionaries, are always ready to influence their
followers to treat the white man in good part. They have need
of no commandments to keep them from stealing, as this seems
with them a natural point of honour; and the few native chiefs
whose pride and dignity will not allow them to fall back from a
bargain for land which they have once executed, are almost
without exception unconverted natives. I cannot cite a better
example than the Ngatipehi tribe, who inhabit the shores of
Lake Paupo in the interior of this island. They are almost all
“ Devils,” and you must have observed, how free they were from
the begging and stealing vices of the so-called converts, how
ready to oblige, and how courteous and frank in their whole be-
haviour, not only during our recent visit to their own country,
but during their passage through this settlement on a war ex-
pedition last year.
In comparing the two classes, I have of course laid down the
general rule, and will not deny but that many exceptions may
Be found among both.
I can only conclude with my strong and sincere opinion, that
unless the Missionary system is thoroughly reformed, and the
Missionaries superintended by some person of tried integrity and
disinterested character, while the teaching is so arranged as to
combine the English language, and a knowledge of the arts of
civilization, with the Christian religion, some disagreements
will arise which may lead to serious consequences; and, if
so, the guilt of those consequences will undoubtedly be on the
heads of those men who were sent here by the people of England
for far different purposes. I remain, my dear
Very sincerely, yours,
E.


Wanganui, May 10th, 1844.
Dear ,
In compliance with your request to furnish you with a
few remarks upon the present state of New Zealand, particularly
Wanganui, I will commence, by stating that I landed at Wel-
lington, in February, 1842.
Wellington from the sea has a very pretty appearance. The
foreground of the picture is occupied by the ships in the harbour,
and the several boats passing to and from the shore, then comes
the long line of shops and stores on the beach, further off are
several houses and cottages scattered about in picturesque irre-
gularities, backed by the wooded heights of the Tinakori range.
Looking towards the north or up the harbour, the smoke of Pi-
toni is seen rising at the commencement of the valley of the
Hutt, with ranges of hills on each side, beyond which is seen the
still more lofty mountains behind Waikanai, called the Tararua
range. The second time I visited Wellington it was greatly im-
proved; the fire in November, 1843, had swept away many of
those temporary Maori buildings, usually built by the first
settlers, their places were filled with neat weather board or brick
buildings.
The road from Wellington to Wanganui, after passing along
the rich wooded valley leading to Porrirua harbour, proceeds
from thence, over a range of high land, to the shores of Cook’s
Straits, at Pukarua, and thence along the beach for the re-
mainder of the distance (111 miles in all.)
The first sight of Wanganui, as you come from the south and
arrive at its bank, two and a quarter miles from its entrance, pre-
sents to the view a fine river at your feet 660 yards wide. One
mile and a half further up, on the opposite bank, is situated the
town, on a large flat with two ranges of small hills upon it, which
approach to within 200 yards of the river. Between the ends of
these hills and the river’s bank, the principal part of the inhabi-
tants reside. The river opposite the town is 260 yards wide.
From the high ground opposite the town a view of the country
for many miles round can be obtained. To the south and south-
west the sea forms the horizon. To the westward the Waitotara
point stretches out into the sea, at about twenty miles distant,
forming one boundary of a bay called by the whalers Motherly
Bay, because it is into this bay (at the bottom of which the
Wanganui empties itself) that the female whales come to calve.
To the north-west Mount Egmont rears his conical peak above
the scene. Then comes a series of rugged wooded ridges form-
ing a rough outline to the rest of the horizon. The highest
point in these ridges is Taupiri or the Devil’s Thumb, twenty


miles distant from the town, bearing N. N. E. This prominent
hill and Tongariro are in a line with the mouth of the river.
The district of Wanganui will comprise 40,000 acres, in a
space whose greatest length will be about fourteen miles in the
direction of the coast, by ten miles inland. At present it is
divided as follows—
Sections surveyed .... 36,800 acres, including native reserves.
Town and Public reserves 1455
River 1590
Land to be surveyed, about 5000
Number of sections surveyed 368
Number chosen 2551 2g^
Native reserves 25 ■*
Unchosen sections 88
There have been four selections of the country sections, when
the number selected were as follows :
September 23rd, 1841 80
November 4th 32
December 16th 78
June 6th and 7th, 1842 90
280
Reserved 20
The town comprises 2000 quarter acre sections, out of
which a section has been chosen for each country section (ex-
cept for the native reserves,) and the Company chose alter-
nately with the sectionists. The sections were chosen on the
Bth of June, 1842.
The river divides the district nearly equally. In each division
the land is broken up into valleys, taking a general direction of
east and west, those on the left bank terminate on the river’s
bank, but the district on the right bank is divided by high flat
land about three miles from the river, the valleys falling on one
side to the river, and on the other they form the sources of the
Karaka, Kai-ivi, Okahu and Ototaka streams, which all fall in-
to the sea within twelve miles from the mouth of the Wanganui.
The whole of the district is plentifully supplied with wood, many
sections certainly have none, and few are entirely covered with
timber, but generally small patches are found on the sides of the


ridges, and in some few places exceed 500 acres in extent.
Every valley has its rivulet, most of them never dry ; in many
places springs of the finest water rise to the surface. This abun-
dance of water,which is general to New Zealand, gives it an inesti-
mable advantage over its near neighbour Australia.
The sections on the left bank have the preference to those on
the other, for many reasons. The soil is considerably better, the
sides of the valleys are not so steep on the ridges, and at the ex-
tremity of the survey in the left, there is more flat landj than on
the right of the river. Again, the valleys on the left bank and
their intervening ridges commence at the boundary of the dis-
trict and terminate on the river’s; therefore a more ready and
easy access can be obtained to the sections. The soil on this
side is also better, being nine inches to a foot in thickness, lying
upon an impervious clay, under which is a stratum of loose
gravel, then another of clay, and lastly a thick bed of blue clay
containing shells of existing species of shell fish in the neighbour-
ing seas.
The soil on the right bank is not so deep (except upon the
broken and high ground in the north and north-west directions)
and much more sandy. By reason of its thinness, the sub-
stratum of clay gets turned up, and this at first contains a large
quantity of hydrate of iron, which is detrimental to vegetation;
but after a time, by exposure, the clay falls to pieces and proves
beneficial; care must be taken that not too much of it is thrown
up at a time.
There is no place on the face of the earth that I know of open
for colonization, that an Englishman can go to, where he can find
a climate so adapted to his constitution as New Zealand. If he
wishes to have the rigour of the winter abated he can find it
here; he will not find the heat of the summer increased (I speak
of Wanganui.) The summer’s day is generally ushered in with
a light land breeze, to which succeeds a stillness until nine or ten
o’clock, when a light south-easter comes from the sea, increasing
gently as the dayadvances, (thus ameliorating the heat of the sun,)
subsiding towards evening,leaving the air perfectly cool and calm.
The rigour of the winter months is sufficient to make a man feel
the comfortable influence of a blazing fire of an evening; keeping
up the remembrance of the happy Christmas times in Old
England, without the pinching severity of its nature; ice
is never more than three eighths of an inch thick, and that
only in a very exposed situation. The only drawback upon the
constant enjoyment of this delightful climate is the ‘ wind, the
mighty wind.’ The gales generally last for three days, some-
times four or five, scarcely ever longer. At Wanganui we have


the consolation that they do not blow with the violence which is
ascribed to them at Port Nicholson, neither do they last so long.
Yet it is far better to have these healthy purifiers of an atmo-
sphere, than the hot winds of Australia, the tornadoes of the
Indies, or the enervating heat and closeness of America.
On the next subject of which I shall speak, I know 7 there
exists great diversity of opinion ; and if I fall into error, it will
not be willingly. The Missionaries and natives are so connected,
that it will be almost impossible to speak of one, without men-
tioning the other.
The natives of New Zealand, as found by Capt. Cook, present
one of the most deplorable pictures of the family of man, that
can well be imagined. A beautiful country was inhabited by a
race of beings, who were carrying on war with each other, not
“ a war to the knife,” but a war for the teeth. They considered
as a virtue, many vices that are common to all aborigines;
honour and faith seemed not to be known amongst them, but
hospitality was a constant practice. False promises and de-
ceit they carried to an excess, which prompted Cook to say,
“ Never trust a New Zealander.” Shortly after, the Missionaries
came amongst them to teach the word of God, and shew them
how to live as human beings who have a knowledge of another
world. But along with them came another class of white men,
who have done much harm, and more serious injury to the na-
tives than any thing else. New Zealand, from the laxity and
inefficiency of the civil power, soon became the receptacle of the
most vicious and wicked of mankind. Can you conceive a more
immoral or baneful class of men, than the most desperate out-
casts of Sydney ; these and runaway sailors, from ships which
visited the harbours, spread themselves over the country, coha-
bited with the women, and by gratifying the avarice of the men,
gained a most pernicious influence over them. Is it to be won-
dered that the natives should have learnt so many vices, when
we contemplate what a number of these persons were intermixed
with them. They saw these fellows constantly practising the
most vicious and deceitful conduct towards them and towards
their own countrymen. It is needless for me to give you an
illustration of the fact, for it is too well recorded.
Again, how is it likely that their avarice should be subdued,
when they saw those people who came to preach the gospel,
and to show them truth and honesty, grasping to obtain large
landed property, and there were those who were guilty of
downright vice. What then was the character of the natives, as
found by the present race of settlers, when they arrived here ?
Why a curious mixture, in which cunning and deceit were most


prevalent, whilst here and there was found one who would act
honestly. What else could be expected, from minds of untu-
tored savages, inherently bad, increased by the example of so
many bad characters, and restrained by so few good ones ?
How often do we hear a man say, when he happens to be
outwitted, or cheated by a native —“ See what the Missionaries
have taught them, what good have they done ?” To the first
question, I think you can find an answer, in the foregoing de-
scription ; all the vices of the natives must not, cannot, be im-
puted to the Missionaries. That they have not always acted
honestly, and given them good and proper advice, in secular
affairs is well known; and it is to be hoped, that under the pre-
sent administration of the church, better ministers will be put
over them, as there is now a bishop, and regular church esta-
blishment. To the latter question of “ what good have they
done?’’ I ask you as a Christian, as a believer in the faith of
Christ, is it not an inestimable good to have shown them, that
the Redeemer liveth, and to have pointed out to them the path
by which they may insure the salvation of their souls. That
the natives are not so far advanced in Christianity and civiliza-
tion as I had expected, is quite true; and this brings me
to a most important question—ln what way can they be
more speedily civilized? I should answer, by teaching them
English; for as long as they retain their native language, all
feelings and sentiments must be expressed in idioms, that cannot
convey the true sense; but teach them English, and they will
then have opened to them, a vast store of knowledge, which
will enable them to guide their conduct, by thoughts and max-
ims, of which before they never could have formed any idea.
What is the use of perpetuating such a miserable jargon of
fourteen letters, without beauty or literature. The sooner it is
consigned to the tomb of the Capulets the better.
The opinion that they are now such poor innocent creatures,
and as some say, never entertain an evil thought towards their
white neighbours, is as fallacious as that the whole race are a set
of wicked, deceitful blackguards. That they still retain a very
great portion of falsity and wickedness is too true; but I do be-
lieve that there are those among them, who have some feeling of
what is right and what is wrong.
I remain yours,
H.


Extracts from the Wellington Gazette.
STATISTICS OF WANGANUI.
Sectionists twenty-eight. Quantity of land claimed by them,
6,000 acres. Quantity of land under cultivation, eighty acres.
Value of horned cattle, horses, sheep, and goats, £2,500. Value
of buildings, £3,000. Married heads of families, seventy-two.
Unmarried adults—males, forty-eight; females six. Children—
males, forty; females, twenty-six. Total white population 192.
The most striking circumstance connected with this table, is,
that in an agricultural district, and a community professedly
farmers, the nominal possessors of 6,000 acres, should, after
three years’ residence have but eighty acres under cultivation!
This would evidence most culpable inactivity, were it not well
known to be caused by the unsettled state of the native claims.
There is not any where a community of equal number more ac-
tive in the pursuit of their objects, more persevering, more
capable of directing their powers to a useful end, than the sec-
tionists of Wanganui district; and had the inducements which
prompted their emigration been realized, had they been suffered
to task their energies, the miserable exhibition of a cultivated rood
here, and a few acres there, would not now reproach those, to
whose impolicy and apathy is owing the present untoward
state of things.
I have just returned from Dr. R.’s section, up the river, on
which he has been at work these nine months, and has laid
out a considerable sum. All he has to shew, is about twelve or
fourteen acres fenced in, and some of it broken up, on which
the fern is beginning to grow as thick as ever, as he cannot
venture to put any crop in the ground, as the Maoris have told
him, if he does they will destroy it. His house, or rather the
frame of it, is standing to rot, as the chief says if he completes
it, he will burn it to the ground.
Another settler, who has been on his section above a year and
a half, has about three acres under cultivation; though he had
cleared ten or more, the Maoris would not allow him to break
it up. They bully him out of his life, they come into his house
and sit down, smoke their pipes, &c. If he tells them to go out,
they immediately ask him if the place belongs to him. The
other day the children from the pah, amused themselves with
shooting his fowls with bow and arrow, all of which he is obliged
to put up with till the Land Question is settled. Mr. Mac G.,
who has paid the natives to allow him to settle and break up
about five acres, was not allowed by them to saw up one of his
E


Quantity of stock
in New Zealand, Sept.
1843.
Horses.
Cattle.
Sheep.
Goats.
New Plymouth ....
10
80
800
Wanganui ........
5
150
200
Manawatu
30
Kapiti
100
s*
Mana
2
30
1000
Wellington
150
1800
4000
1
Nelson
50
500
2000
p
Q,. Charlotte’s Sound
1
20
cr
Cloudy Bay
15
Akaroa & Port Cooper
1
170
Waikonito
80
200
2000
299
3095
10,000
trees for his house, though he offered a blanket as payment. Mr.
Bell, who had the seventh choice in this place, arranged with
the prior choosers, to let him pick out a section before the land
was given out; by this means, the surveys did not hinder him,
and he agreed with the natives to let him go to work on about
fifteen acres of ground, which, after paying pretty high for, was
carefully marked out, and every now and then the chief came to
see he did not encroach on his boundary, though this land was
not such as the Maoris use themselves. He has purchased a
right to use about thirty acres, and that is all, as he has offered
a large sum for more, but they say he has too much already
for one man : he is obliged to pay a blanket for every tree he
cuts in his own bush. He is obliged to allow them to come
into his house at any time, though a sad bore to his wife and
family. Such is a specimen of Wanganui sectionists, till the
Land Question is settled.
Mr. B. has grown a large quantity of grain this year, but
there seems to be great doubt at present whether he will get
a market for it or not. —March 20.
J. BILLING, PRINTER, WOKING, SURREY
