

P V' V LETTER ' ' a |i
||, ON THE MATURE AMO ORIGIN ||
11: ° p thb ** ii||
|| GOLD DEPOSITS OF ||
MiH»- AlTS'Jn.A tt /w a |
tifc Er till
m
BRIDLINGTON:
J&.'KJ S&> Tram, m ar.* t wjsfr
O-^ci
rfi
EV if
SIMPSON DAVISON, Jti
IP SIMPSON DAVISON, 3
Z-«te of Burlington, Yorkshire, addressed to fU'
•Ch^X:
|£, EDWARD HAMMOND HARGRAVES, jg!
it ESQ, SYDNEY. <S
m
til
t|
PRINTED BY JAMES CAPE, HIGH-STREET.
MDCCCLIV.


■
■v rv # ,
I ■ ' ' • •* - *
i


LETTER
ON THE NATURE AND ORIGIN
OF THE
GOLD DEPOSITS OF
AUSTHA.I^IA.,
SIMPSON DAVISON,
Late of Burlington , Yorkshire , addressed to
EDWARD HAMMOND HARGRAVES,
ESQ, SYDNEY.
BRIDLINGTON;
PRINTED BY JAMES CAPE, HIGH-STREET.
MDCCCLXY.


PRINTED BY JAMES CAPE, HIGH-STREET.


TO E. H. HARGRAVES, ESQ.
I address to you, in writing, the theory I
lately explained verbally, relating to the distribution
and deposition of alluvial gold, and to the presence
of gold in quartz veins, which theory you then re-
marked was more rational than any you had previ-
ously heard advanced.
I do so with more satisfaction, because 1 have
long known your consistently maintained contempt
for the vague conjectures of speculative geologists,
and your incredulity, having led to results of such
immense magnitude, contrasts strongly with the
faith of those, who, believing in the sufficiency of
science (myself of that number) concluded, because
amongst a host of geologists, who had either exa-
mined or reasoned upon the geology of Australia,
none had ever confidently declared or proved it to be
rich in gold fields, that, therefore, gold existed only
as it had been found occasionally in small speci
mens, or in alluvia of extreme poverty.
I write to you consequently as to one perfectly
unbiassed by any prejudices that cannot be
ed by an appeal to the evidence of nature.
Almost all men engaged either in gold digging,
or in studying geology do form conjectures as to the
origin of the precious metal, from the most hnmble
wielder of the pick and shovel, to the most learned


professors in Europe, and, I may be excused for ad-
ding, with almost equally unsatisfactory results.
I have constantly endeavoured to avoid forming
hasty conclusions, rejecting as groundless, at vari-
ous times, a variety of crude hypotheses, yet I have
alway reflected and reasoned, more or less, on this
interesting subject, finding it an agreeable study,
both, when I have been occupied in the depths of
the earth where the mysteries of nature are reveal-
ed in her secret laboratories, and when travelling
over superficial auriferous areas; latterly I have
been more ardent and systematic in my investiga-
tions from a growing conviction that the subject
involves questions of real practical moment. I
have visited or resided at almost every principal
digging in California, in Victoria, and in New South
Wales; coupling this experience with a previous
knowledge of the received principles of geology I
am conscious of possessing advantages in treating
of the subject that but few men have enjoyed.
I believe Sir R. L. Murchison first advanced
the hypothesis that alluvial gold has been produced
by “the natural abrasion or grinding down of quartz
veins,” an opinion that almost every geologist,
writer, lecturer, and newspaper correspondent has
adopted; bat although its supporters present so
formidable a numerical array, it is but an indivi-
dual opinion adopted without challenge—all these
geologists seem to labour to reconcile nature to


Sir R. L. Murchison’s hypothesis, rather than to
judge from nature, whether the hypothesis be true
or false—l am decidedly of opinion (and I have
often heard you express a like incredulity) that the
hypothesis is not a true one of universal applica-
tion, and many reasons for such an opposite con-
clusion will be found in the statements I shall
make in support of my own views.
Sir R. L. Murchison’s discovery that the gold
was only deposited in the veins of the Ural rocks,
just previously to the formation of the auriferous
drift, and that this drift is newer than the sands
and gravels of the old Palaeozoic, secondary or ter-
tiary rocks, is most unfavourable to his own hypo-
thesis—the abrasion or grinding down of so hard a
rock as quartz cannot then have been the slow work
of many ages, but would have been performed in a
short geological period. Gold, therefore, is more
likely to have been derived from a softer matrix
than quartz rock.
My theory is this, that all alluvial gold has
been distributed and deposited by means of a pe-
rishable lava , and that quartz veins, as well as
some other dykes traversing constants have been
the fissures of discharge, the only remains of the
decomposed lava being gold, quartz and other peb-
bles, clays, and ferruginous earths—because
1. Alluvial gold has often a fused appearance
and frequently presents a cellular or a ragged sur-


face, such as must have been destroyed by abrasion.
2. It is found in schists, in such shape and po-
sition that no mechanical force could possibly have
placed it there.
3. It is found ricli along present rivers, creeks
and watercourses, showing the configuration of the
bedding rock beneath the auriferons drift to have
been the same at the time of its deposit as at the
present day.
4. It is found rich in the neighbourhood of vol-
canic disturbance, and where quartz veins and trap
dykes traverse certain schists and granites called
constants.
5. Gold is also found in quartz veins, and quartz
veins are admitted to have been filled by mineral
fluids or vapours
The reports of our colonial geologists frequent-
ly represent the alluvial gold as having undoubtedly
been disintegrated from “the neighbouring quartz
veins” or affirm it to be “a well-known fact that
quartz is the chief matrix.” It appears to me very
doubtful, Sir, that gold has been disintegrated to
a ny great extent from quartz veins; and the con-
jecture, that quartz is a chief matrix from which
gold has been derived, is by no means an ascer-
tained fact.
Mr. Stutchbury, in reporting on the Wentworth
Gold Field, says, “that its original site is in the
quartz rock immediately adjacent is evident from


the unabrased appearance of the gold.” That the
gold in that locality has never been subject to abra-
sion is clear to all who know its peculiar character,
but it is not evident that its site was ever in the
adjacent quartz rock; for unless by abrasion, by
what means was it released? Moreover, the adja-
cent quartz, if auriferous at all, presents no such
rich quality as to lead to the inference that atmos-
pheric influence alone had disintegrated quartz of
such poverty, and left alluvial gold so abundant.
No, Sir, the quartz vein w'as the fissure of ejection
of a perishable Java, which lava on decomposition,
left the gold it contained in its present unabraded
condition. The peculiar honeycomb rock of these
diggings is the lava imperfectly disintegrated, the
brown ochreous matter with gold, a few pebbles
and earthy matter are all its other remains.
The Secretary of the Great Nugget Gold Com-
pany, Mr. J S. Mitchell, in a report of their claim
says, “the gold found in the creek in the alluvium
near the vein is not so water-worn as that found
further down;” and he has no reason to think from
any gold he has seen that it is produced in any o-
ther than a quartz matrix ; the hydrodynamic force
required to roll gold along with other drift a short
distance down the creek must have been very in-
significant compared with the powerful long conti-
nued abrasion necessary to disintegrate gold from
so exceedingly hard a rock as quartz. No, Sir, the


gold came from the fissure of the present quartz
vein, but it has been released from a matrix much
softer than quartz —from a perishable lava, which
has left behind only gold, quartz, and other pebbles,
and a debris of clay and earth. The gold is less
water-worn near the vein, because it has not rolled
after congealation; and much of the gold lower
down the creek appears water-w r orn, because it
congealed in the act of rolling in a flux of matter,
that did not cool into hardness at the same moment.
The hills that surround Mokelumne Hill in
California consist of a soft white felspathic sedi-
mentary lava. Professor Blake, an American
writer, calls it a “stratified soft and friable sand-
stone, lying perfectly horizontal over the vertical
edge of slate rocksand Dr. Trask describes it
as “a volcanic tufa overlying auriferous drift.” I
suppose it to be andesitic or albite lava, and under
it gold is found in abundance, at a depth some-
times exceeding a hundred feet; below the lava are
found occasional beds of soot balls, and interstrati-
fied are layers of rounded pumice-stones, showing
its volcanic origin, and that some vents have eject-
ed dry matter simultaneously with the discharge
of lava.
The pipe-clay of Victoria, a soft felspathic clay
slate, probably an albite clay state, always under-
lying gold, presents a lithological character closely
resembling the lava of Mokelumne Hill, under con-


ditions widely different; these localities heirg re-
markably rich. IJoth the rocks are entitled to far
greater consideration as constants than they have
yet received from geologists. It (the albite either as
schist or lava) does not occur in California In
other localities than the one I have mentioned,
nor in New South Wales at all, unless a white
bedding rock at Tambaroora can be considered as
an allied rock ; but in Victoria it is almost every-
where present on the gold fields. It is very dif-
ferent from the white alluvial plastic clay that
diggers sometimes call pipe clay.
French Hill is situate two miles from the
Mokelnmne River; between the hill and the river
is a steep gulch, found to be very rich at the ti me
of its discovery, the gold reposing on a schistose
bed, and intermixed with a small quantity of drift.
On following the deposit of gold up the gulch, and,
arriving at the foot of the lava hill, the auriferous
bedding rock was found dipping into the hill.
Thus was first discovered the auriferous character
of the lava hills, appearing as if a perishable lava
had overflowed the highest ridge of the bedding
rock at the foot of the lava hills, bearing gold
along its course down the gulch, and as if a less
perishable lava had remained and formed the ex-
isting hill. Stockton hill, on the opposite side of
the valley, presents similar phenomena, the plura-
lity of auriferous beds, or the second and third


bottoms in that locality and at Ballarat, in Victoria,
shew a repetition of auriferous lava streams. The
lava sometimes passes into a sort of wacke or into
a dark red or a yellowish red rich auriferous clay,
exceedingly tenacious and insoluble, these are
called lavas by the diggers there, and I consider
them the sediment that has not assumed the form
of scoria of a larger body of lava—the same clays
are common at Bendigo, and at the Wentworth
Diggings, and are so extremely tough that it is
almost impossible to dissolve them without the aid
of machinery.
In schistose rocks, diggers find gold in such
shapes, and so exactly conformable to the con-
taining rock, that it must have been melted into
it, or otherwise, as some have supposed it must
have grown there—that is to say, they suppose
schist to be a matrix, in the same way as others
have considered granite to be a matrix, or that
gold has been derived by the separation or sepa-
gation of mineral particles from the rocks con-
taining it. Dr. Trask implies that schist is a
matrix, when he says, “in addition to its (the
schist) containing gold as an integral part, when
unassociated with the quartz veins , it (the schist)
frequently becomes the retaining medium of this
metal (gold) when in contact with these veins.”
Dr. Trask here records the phenomena, but does
not account for them, and speaking of gold as an


integral part shews he does not adopt the abrasion
hypothesis. I think you will remember I have
said to you frequently in California, that schist
was a matrix if granite was, but neither one
nor the other is a matrix. Mr. Rudder (now
the superintendent of the Australian Agricultural
Company’s gold fields) used to maintain and, as he
considered, proved to me at Foster’s bar, the hy-
pothesis of granite matrices. The Rev. W. B,
Clarke also holds the same opinion. I do not,
however, consider granite to be more a matrix
than schist, since it is never found in granite be-
yond a certain depth, seldom as deep as two feet;
the specimens shown as granite matrix, is gold in
granite detritus, unmixed with foreign matter, and
accidentally cemented. The theory now offered
confirms Dr. Task’s observations, and accounts
satisfactorily for the vicinity of quartz veins being
rich in gold.
Mr. Selwyn, in reporting on the geology of Vic-
toria, says “gold has been formed in or near
quartz veins which are seen traversing Paleozoic
strata”—like Dr. Trask, he doubts of their being
the only matrix, and when he speaks of the drifts
being “ derived by the decomposition, breaking
up, and spreading abroad of these quartz veins
along with the ordinary sandstones and slates,” he
implies the latter are matrices near quartz veins.
He terras the constants Palaeozoic strata, without


however seeing any fossils—in my experience I
have not seen or known of any fossils found un-
derlying' gold deposits, and lithological character
alone not being sufficient to determine a Palaozoic
rock, I question the propriety of applying such a
term. His adoption of the hypothesis that quartz
veins are always richer at the surface, and the in-
ference that the deposits consequently occupy the
lower positions of the drift, is not satisfactory.
The gold in Victoria is nearly all found richly and
thickly embedded on the base rock, and in the su-
perincumbent strata it is frequently difficult to
find a tracing of gold through strata of some
thickness. His statement that “the auriferous
drift is composed of angular and partially rounded
fragments of slate, quartz, &c., being seldom
waterworn with a few local exceptions,” I do not
think correct. At Bendigo the drifts on the
flats is sometimes angular, but the succession of
white hills containing by far the principal body of
drift is composed of quartz pebbles as rounded as
they can possibly be—perfectly rounded pebbles is
the rule, and partially rounded fragments the ex-
ception. The supposition that quartz veins are
always richer nearer the surface, I shall treat of
subsequently in speaking of quartz veins, and
show the cause of their sometimes being so. All
the phenomena, Sir, yield to the perishable lava
theory.


I recall to your remembrance as an instance of
the impossibility of mechanical deposition, the
piece of gold we found on Wood's Creek, about
twice the size of a guinea, thin as a wafer, closely
wedged in fissile clay slate ; it could never have
been rolled and placed there by ordinary hydro-
dynamic force owing to its extreme delicacy.
The generally flat character of all slate gold
forbids the supposition that it was abraded from
quartz veins, rolled and deposited in a cold state
by cataclasmal agency, for scarcely any conceivable
superincumbent weight of water and drift could
have so flattened it after its deposit. No, Sir, it
was deposited there in a molten state.
Granite gold is usually either in very thin flakes
or in small solid grains. The first are formed by
melted gold spreading and cooling on the sides
of the crystals in granite, and the second in the
interstices of granitic debris ; but it never contains
gold in those thicker grains with two flat sides,
such as the schist’s pioduce.
Mr. ,T. B. Jukes, in a lecture at the Museum of
Practical Geology in London, says, the letters of
diggers speak of gold as appearing as if it had been
fused, and adds, it is probably a mistake. No, Sir, it
is not a mistake ; 1 will instance the nuggits from the
Me.lvor diggings, in Victoria. They appear as if
one side was yet in a state of fusion, with the other
side indented as if just cooled on a sandy or gritty floor.


He also makes a common mistake, but a very
reasonable one, in saying the beds of rivers are
large natural cradles, and where they are crossed
by a bar of rocks, gold may be looked for above
the bars as in a digger’s cradle—the exact reverse
is almost invariably the case —the sheltered or lee
side of trap dykes of obstructing rocks is richer
in go/d deposits than the weather or stream side.
Gold deposits are found rich along the courses
of the present rivers and creeks. Sir R. J Mur-
chison says, the auriferous drift of the Ural is
composed of ancient gravel, and must not be con-
founded with that produced by causes now in ope-
ration ; whilst Mr. Stuchbury, in a report of the
Turon, expresses a belief of the sufficiency of ex-
isting influences operating through a long period
of time, undisturbed by great convulsions, that these
influences have disintegrated auriferous quartzose
dykes, and rains and floods have assisted the re-
lease of gold from its quartz matrix, and washed
it into the lower levels where it now rests.
I agree with the former, that the influence of
existing destructive agencies without a radical
change of surface does not account for the auri-
ferous drifts, and wonder the accumulation of drift
in the valley of the Turon, forming hills and ter-
races, above the reach of any present floods, could
have been referred to a deposition by agencies now
in operation, without pre-supposing a change of


elevation. My theory teaches that the valley of
the '1 uron, at the time tine gold deposit was filled
with drift by means of a perishable lava, its
remains now forming Ithe “ ancient gravel.”
Through this gravel the riiver has worn its present
channel, and made the recent gravel.
Quartz veins being rare on the richest part of
the Turon, about Sofala, and also on the rich
Yuba, in California, the fissures there have not
apparently filled with siliica after their auriferous
discharges. Below Monday point, on the Turon,
on the opposite bank, some height above the river,
I observed a long fissure ’parallel with the strike of
the schist, that had apparently contained rich de-
posits of gold—this probably was a fissure without
quartz that had discharged auriferous lava. I dare
say you will remember it.,
Gold is found more abundant in rivers, creeks,
and gullies, because they were filled with perish-
able lava, containing gold, which also, after and
during disintegration, facilitated the rolling of gold
from the banks into the llow’er levels. It is often
hard to believe that gold can have rolled over a
fissile vertical schist by aqueous agency alone.
Even supposing the schisit to have been worn down
a considerable depth, a fissile slate would continue
renewing its crevices, and into these the gold
would find its way.
Schistose formations, traversed by quartz veins


or trap dykes, are the most prolific in gold. In a
process of abrasion that would grind down the
quartz veins, the quantity of other rock ground
down at the same time would be hundreds of times
greater, as it occupies an infinitely larger superfi-
cial area. Much of it would also be indurated.
The boulders and pebbles so derived from the hard
rock other than quartz, and united with auriferous
drift, ought far to exceed the quartz detrius. After
denudation the harder rocks are usually left stand-
ing some height, because of the quicker disinte-
gration of the softer containing rocks, but the
very hard quartz veins are level with the surface,
or rarely found a few feet high, and further the
quartz and gold specimens found in alluvia are
either pieces of gold with a little quartz attached,
or pieces of quartz rich in gold but hardly ever
rounded quartz pebbles or boulders with a very
little gold—a small speck or two, if the rounded
quartz had been abraded from quartz veins
amongst the countless number of pebbles such
poor specimens would have been found plentifully.
No, Sir, the auriferous drift of the White Hills, at
Bendigo and elsewhere, is a volcanic or peculiar
trap quartzoze conglomerate, and not as generally
supposed a drift produced by denudation and de-
posited by the ordinary action of water; but al-
lowing all rocks other than quartz to have been
entirely disintegrated, where are the remains in


mud, shale, or whatever formi deposited, hundreds
of feet thick as they ought tto be by the abrasion
hypothesis in beds newer tham the tertiaries ? Sir
R. I. Murchison affirms the .auriferous drifts are
newer than the tertiaries; Mr. Selwin attests they
are of very late tertiary date ; a.nd Dr. Task says, in
speaking of the bones of gigamtic mammalia found
in the auriferous drift, “during their existence in
the tertiary period a fresh outbreak of volcanic
force took place, and its fiery ravages swept from
existence the entire race that occupied its surface,
and inhumed their remains beneath the scalding
flood.” I suspect the scalding flood to have been
the auriferous lava.
The drift, consisting almost entirely of quartz
pebbles, is a bed over fifty feet (thick, at Bendigo,
covering a large area forming the White Hills; and
at Ballarat, the drift exceeds a thiickness of a hun-
dred feet. In these schistose formations, Sir, the
fissures, now quartz veins and trap dykes, have dis-
charged gold, and the interstices of the schists
have been the receptacles. The deposits on gra-
nite have been formed in like manner. The dis-
charges from fissures in granite h;ave usually been
of greater poverty (the diggings in granite near
Braidwood are the richest I have known) and the
gold distributed by means of some fluid, (hat has
since disappeared, which I have teirmed a perisha-
ble lava.


The distribution and deposition of gold by this
lava having been partly chemical and partly me-
chanical, its gold presents a good deal of evidence
of abrasion, because it may have frequently cooled
into solidity before the other fluids, in the act of
rolling, and have yet continued to roll, whilst other
gold has an unabraded appearance, and is either
rough, or cellular, or diop-like, or flattened be-
tween slates, because it has settled in a fused state
amongst stones, sand, or other solid and settled
matter, and has not been rolled afterwards.
Gold is found accumulated so closely to the bed
rock, (it is frequently all contained in a bed of two
inches in thickness at Bendigo,) that the superin-
cumbent strata must have been in strange violent
disturbance ever to shake it so to the bottom, and
the regularity of the strata overlaying the gold on
the flats at Bendigo and Mount Alexander, of
alternately sand and clay, pebbles, clay and sand
again, separated by clear lines of demarcation,
does not attest such disturbance immediately over
the present gold deposits—the only conclusion on
the abrasion hypothesis would be, that the gold
must have settled first in an auriferous drift, and
then have been denuded again, and then the pre-
sent strata regularly deposited, fto, Sir, the gold
was generally deposited in Victoria in rich floods
of lava, and the superincumbent strata on the
flats were deposited afterwards.


Quartz veins are admitted to be cracks and
fissures caused by the disturbance and intrusion of
igneous rocks, or by the cooling of igneous rocks
themselves. Mr. J. B. Jukes says, “To many of
these the molten rocks gained access and filled
them up, forming what are called dykes, and others
remained more or less open until subsequently
filled up with other minerals. Of these minerals
quartz is probably most abundant, besides quartz
many other minerals accumulated in these veins,
and amongst them many metals such as lead, tin,
copper, silver, and gold.” The Rev. W. B. Clarke
believes the true origin of quartz veins to be
caused by “ the cooling condensation in fissures
of the rocks of silica dissolved in steam, derived
from peculiar traps, which may have produced
auriferous impregnations as well as siliceous.”
Sir Charles Lyell says, “ almost every vein has
probably been the channel by which hot springs so
common in countries of volcanoes and earthquakes
have found their way to the surface.”
I suppose whilst discharging the perishable lava
with its contents of gold and silica dissolved (the
silica, I suppose, has cooled in the act of rolling, in
the form of quartz nodules , and thus originated the
rounded quartz pebbles so abundantly found, instead
of their being as is generally supposed, the produce
of denuding process, or it is possible that like cal-
careous nodules in amygdaloids they may have been


formed as silicious secretions in the cells of lava
during its cooling and consolidation, and the
foreign fragments are accounted for exactly as
geologists account for them in other traps) the
silica which might previously have been either dis-
solved in steam or in liquid by heat with proper
fluxes, accumulated and usurped in the fissure the
place of the perishable matter, as the ejective force
became more feeble, congealed with its contained
metal. Thus, Sir, the auriferous quarts veins were
formed.
Trap dykes also have produced gold in like man-
ner, the molten rock having gained access to the
fissure, and expelled the silica with its associated
metals. Portions of the molten rock may also
probably have been removed with the siliceous lava,
and formed nodules of trappean character by cool-
ing in rolling, as quartz pebbles have done, and
thus originated the numerous rounded trap pebbles
and boulders so frequent in auriferous drift.
It is a fact, well known to geologists, that
although silica is abundantly distributed through
nature, it is remarkably scarce in existing vol-
canic and trappean rocks. This circumstance, so
far from being unfavourable, supports my theory ;
it shews that a separation occurs in fused rocks
between silica and its associates, and the hoin-
blendic and felspatbic traps —that there exists a
sort of repelling property between the two classes


—therefore, silica and its associates have been
discharged in a lava or peculiar trap of their own
separately in the way I have described, and when
hornblendic or felspathic traps have been the mol-
ten rocks that have filled the fissures, they have
not united with the siliceous fluid but probably
have expelled it.
The best auriferous quartz veins are not always
found amidst the richest alluvial diggings. I
account for it in this way—Californians divide
them into V veins and into A veins, the letters
describing the shape of the vein when cut trans-
versely ; the V veins, in discharging great quanti-
ties of auriferous lava, have become enlarged at
the top, they usually exhibit rich quartz specimens
at the surface, and are situate in the neighbourhood
of rich alluvia; the A veins, on the contrary, have
discharged but little lava or none at all, and are
not, consequently situate in the midst of rich allu-
via, but yet contain their metal undischarged and
increase or diminish less abruptly in bulk down-
wards ; these, therefore, are far more highly valued.
The Macgregor auriferous quartz vein, on Mit-
chell’s Creek, N. S. W., is an example of an A
vein from twelve to twenty feet wide at the surface,
and is interrupted without lateral disturbance by a
trappean hill near its northern terminus, and, as
might be expected, is prolific in metal near the
hill. I consider this quartz vein when fluid has


had but a very feeble pressure from below, it
forms, to speak geologically, a sort of anticlinal
axis to the rocks on either side, and has pro-
bably not discharged at all, or if so, not with suf-
ficient force to eject its metal, but the silica with
its metals has almost immediately cooled on filling
the fissure —the trap, an ophitic porphry, has in a
molten state only partially occupied the fissure
and risen until it formed the present hill.
The following passage from Sir Charles Lyeli
on mineral veins is strongly corroborative of my
theory. “We are led to infer that there has often
been an intimate connection between metalliferous
veins and hot springs holding mineral matter in
solution; yet we must not on that account expect
the contents of hot springs and mineral veins would
be identical. On the contrary, M. E. de Beau-
mont has judiciously observed that we ought to
find in veins those substances which being least
soluble are not discharged by hot springs, or that
class of bodies which the waters ascending from
below, would first precipitate on the walls of a
fissure as soon as their temperature began slightly
to diminish, the water after precipitation being
chiefly charged with the most soluble substance
—such as the alkalis, soda, and potash ; these are
not met with in veins, although they enter so
largely into the composition of granitic rock.”
Exactly so, Sir, the hot water holding mineral


matter in solution is the perishable lava, and owes
its perishability to the water, alkalis, soda, and
potash, and the least soluble substance is quartz
rock. I think, however, the quartz veins have
not been formed by a slow precipitation, but when
tiie silica has cooled to a certain degree it con-
gealed all at once, or nearly so; hence the com-
pact character of auriferous quartz veins ; by slow
precipitation the silica would most likely have
formed large and regular crystals at the sides.
Again, Sir C. Lyell writes, “siliceous and me-
tallic matters have sometimes found their way
simultaneously into such empty spaces (fissures)
by infiltration from the surrounding rocks or by
segregation, as it is often termed, mixed with hot
water and steam. Metallic ore, may have per-
meated a pasty matrix until they reached these
receptacles (the fissures) formed by shrinkage.
Yes, Sir, and when the hot water, mixed with me-
tallic ores, had filled up the fissures, it must have
necessarily boiled over if the supply continued
this matter forced out by steam or boiling liquid,
is the perishable auriferous lava, Silica and gold
having simply found their way simultaneously
quartz cannot, with propriety, be termed a matrix,
but only an associated or twin born mineral.
1 he same distinguished geologist further writes :
“ e are prepared to expect a desi ruction of what-
ever may once have formed the uppermost part of
ancient volcanoes, more especially as superficial
parts are always of the lightest and most perish-
able materials. The abrupt manner in which trap
dykes usually terminate at the surface, and the


water-worn pebbles of trap in the alluvium which
covers the dyke, prove incontestably that whatever
was uppermost in these formations has been swept
away.”—This refers to denudation, but the perish-
abilty of whatever was uppermost in traps, is of
importance in ils bearing on my theory. In offer-
ing the theory, I do not suppose denudation has
never taken place ; on the contrary, when aurifer-
ous lava floods have filled up the valleys through
which rivers were flowing, before these rivers re-
gained their usual course, they might accumulate
bodies of water or lakes, and overflowing the scou-
riaceous auriferous lava, assist its disintegration,
and produce many phenomena analagous to those
produced by denudation.
I think the lava, on cooling, has usually become
scoriaceous, the heavier matter, gold, quartz no-
dules and foreign fragments, having previously
probably formed a sediment. These existing evi-
dence of scoria is seen in the honeycomb rock of
the Wentworth diggings, in the lava hills around
Mokelumne hill, and in the inadhesive red earth
that so invariably accompanies the kind of dig-
gings called surfacings, as well as the drifts. The
red earth is very different from argillaceous clay,
and is composed of the small fragments or powder
of a destroyed scoria. You will, no doubt, re-
member how the inadhesive qualities of the red
earth on Yuba rendered it so unfit for damming
purposes.
In conclusion I invite yourself, or any geologist,
to point out objections to the theory, premising
that it be done with the candour and temper of phi-
losophers seeking after truth, and not the narrow-
minded, straw'-splitting disposition of advocates
obstinately maintaining opposite systems.
I am, sir, your most obedient servant,
SIMPSON DAVISON.
Sydney, March, 1854.


1508
00549204


•
>-
