

LETTERS
IN DEFENCE OF THE
DENOMINATIONAL SCHOOLS
BY THE REV. FRANCIS BERTIE BOYCE.
Sjrbucg,
GEO. LOXTOX AND CO., PRINTERS, BRIDGE-STREET.
1884.




INTRODUCTION.
It has been thought that these Letters, written
during the Education controversy that arose through
the Pastoral of the Roman-Catholic Bishops, should
be republished, but for private rather than general
circulation. The history they contain will in the
present form be a more permanent record of the
injustice done the Church, the knowledge and
remembrance of which may strengthen her position
should the question ever be re-opened.
The writer has been assured in many quarters
that the letters were never successfully answered.
In the storm, the more convincing the argument
the louder, to drown it, was the “No Popery” cry
commonly raised by the Press generally, and those
who desired Public Schools only. In quiet times,
and with sectarian bitterness calmed down, the
country may yet realize the great error it has
committed.




LETTERS ON THE EDUCATION QUESTION.
Denominational Schools and State Aid.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sib, —Permit me to point out, through the medium of your
columns, that the advocates for the abolition of Denominational
schools are altogether in error in stating that such schools mean,
financially, State-aid to religion.
I find that last year there were 128,125 children enrolled;
of these, 35,028 were in Denominational schools. The ex-
penditure for the latter out of the revenue was £31,490, or at
the rate of 19s. per child. For the former, the Public, Half-
time, and Provisional schools, the expenditure was £129,456, or
at the rate of £1 7s. 9d. per child. The cost would be about
Is. sd, per head less if only Public schools were included. The
salaries, books, and stationery are not, however, the only ex-
penses of a school. A largo item is the cost of buildings. In
the last two years, the Council has spent in erecting Public
schools and keeping them in repair, £257,387. I have not
before me the cost of buildings during the previous ten years
in which the Act has been in force, but allowing that on an
average £50,000 were spent annually, the total sum invested
would be £757,387, which, at 5 per cent., would yield £37,869
per annum, thus at once raising the cost per head in Public
schools to £1 16s. The Churches have to provide the buildings
for Denominational schools. I admit that in a few instances
money might be saved by working two schools into one. But
even then a very large balance would be left against the Public
schools.
From the reports of the different inspectors it appears that
Denominational schools, as regards secular teaching, are
generally quite on a par with Public schools. There is no
inspection on religious subjects. The State recognises the
secular instruction only. If it cost the State 19s. per child in
these schools, and £1 16s. in Public ones, with equal secular
results, where is the State-aid to religion ? Does not the system
rather mean religious aid to the State P What becomes of the
logic of those ratepayers who cry out against the Denominational
clause of our present admirable Public Schools Act, when
directly the Denominational schools are closed the amounts
they will have to pay out of the revenue will be rather increased
than lessened. If, therefore, figures mean anything, those who
are attempting to upset our present Protestant, lioman Catholic,


and Hebrew Denominational schools, surrounded as they are
under the present Act with so many disadvantages, which the
Churches have to make up, must find some other cry than that
of State-aid to religion.” Such a cry could only arise from the
imagination, as it cannot be founded on facts.
Trinity Parsonage, I am, &c.,
Orange, sth September, 1879. E. B. BOYCE
Danominational Schools and State Aid.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, —I beg permission to reply to the letter of the Bev.
J. C. Kirby, in your issue of the Bth instant. I had said that
the annual cost in Denominational schools was 19s. per child,
and in Public ones £1 16s. The secular teaching being alone
recognised by the State, I enquired where was the State-aid to
religion financially? I stated that the secular teaching in
Denominational schools was generally quite equal to that in
Public ones. The following is the table for 1878 on page 9of
the Council’s report: —
Schools below Standard. Up to Standard. Above Standard
Denominational .. 39'0 .. .. 26y .. .. 22-0
All 43-5 .. .. 24-3 .. .. 18-8
Mr. Kirby’s statement may appear fairer, yet as all others
were included in the £1 16s. per head, so all were represented
in the comparison. If, however, the standard should be slightly
below that of ordinary Public schools, apart from Provisional
and Half-time, it must be rather the fault of the Council than
of the system.
Mr. Kirby, although one of the most intelligent of the
advocates for Public Schools only does not dispute my figures
nor show that a single penny from the taxpayer goes towards
religious instruction. I might almost concede everything he
has advanced, and still inquire where is the State-aid to religion ?
He says, however, that the State lends a prestige to Denomi-
national schools by giving them certificates, but for which, I
contend, the Churches pay a very handsome bonus in different
ways, particularly in the shape of school premises. Many of
the buildings are of a good class, and eminently suited for the
purposes required, though I admit that,like many very poor public
schools I know, it would be well if some were improved. It is
also urged that some of the sites for Denominational schools
were given by the Crown, but, on the other hand, I would point
out that in my estimate of the amount the Council had spent in
buildings, I did not include the cost of the good properties with
which it started in 1867. The value of such Ido not know, but
can well believe that if it were computed, that the interest, at


5 per cent, per annum, would raise the cost to many shillings
per head more. In fact, the capitalised cost of buildings will
show a steady increase, year by year, in the cost of Public
school instruction, whilst it cannot he overlooked on the other
side that the cost per head in Denominational schools is likely
to decrease as the smaller ones, it appears, are gradually being
closed, and so the average cost per pupil lessened.
Mr. Kirby says that there are many competing schools, and
that the competition is financially unhealthy. I would answer
that the cost of all the Denominational schools having less than
100 children could be added, and still leave a large balance
against the Public schools.
If we wish to see what is State-aid to religion, we have only
to turn to the Public schools themselves. Apart from the fact
that the master gives regular instruction out of the Scripture
lesson hooks, a subject in which the inspectors examine the
children, hut which, strange to say, I understand they do not
recognise at all in Denominational schools, a liberal State
provides well-furnished class room. In such the minister of
any church can have praise, prayer, and Bible readings, and
teach religion in any way he thinks proper during one hour of
each day. The State thus practically endows the Churches
with the use of their buildings for one-fifth of the school time.
In fact these class rooms remind one, in some respects, of
“Union” churches in different parts of the interior, built by
three or four denominations unitedly subscribing, but in this
case erected by a liberal Government and placed at the disposal
of all for an hour each day. Thus Public schools may be said
to mean State-aid to religion, whilst Denominational schools
mean Church aid to the State.
The concluding point brought in by Mr. Kirby, as to
whether it is desirable to have Denominational schools at all, it
is not my intention to discuss. Their high and varied uses are
fortunately known to a large number of earnest educationists.
My simple aim is to show that the cry which is now raised
throughout the country, that such schools mean, financially,
State-aid to religion, is utterly without foundation, and that
consequently some other argument must be sought for than the
one I hope now disposed of by the hard facts submitted.
I am, yours, &c.,
Orange, September 11, 1879. E. B. BOYCE.
Church Aid to the State.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCHMAN.
Sir, —The common cry at present is that Denominational
schools mean State-aid to religion. The cry is based on a want
of knowledge of circumstances.


For instance, in a certain town about £5OOO has been
spent by a Church in erecting buildings now used as a Denomi-
national school- Had such not been the case the Council of
Education would have had to have spent a considerable sum in
providing for the accommodation in schoolrooms, classrooms, and
larger playground lor between 300 and 400 additional children.
Thus, under this Denominational system, the Church referred
to contributes, at 5 per cent., two hundred and fifty per
annum for educational purposes. As the proficiency attained
in secular knowledge is quite on a par with that found in any
ordinary Public school, I think any business man would say
as a matter of figures that this showed Church aid to the State,
and not State-aid to religion.
The case mentioned is only a fair sample of many that
could be named.
I am, &c.,
F. B. B.
The Public Schools Act.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE TOWN AND COUNTRY JOURNAL.
Sib, —I beg permission through the colums of your widely
circulated and well-conducted paper, to address your readers
on the raging question of the day. It is certain that in a few
months a general election will take place, and the electors wil
be called upon to decide whether our Public Schools Act shall
be overturned or not.
Archbishop Vaughan has advocated the substitution of
payment by results on one side, while, on the other, the secular
party have demanded an alteration by the abolition of all
Denominational schools. In opposition to many whose opinions
deserve the highest respect. I trust the coming battle may not
be the Isandula of the present Act, in the triumph of either
party. It is my conviction that the Act, which has always been
looked upon as a fair compromise, has worked well. In fact,
our educational arrangements have been the admiration of
many visitors from other parts. Compulsory education would
no doubt be useful, but those who desire it could have it in-
troduced in a short special Bill. It need not interfere with any
of our present methods of action.
But few candidates, if any, are likely to advocate “ payment
by results.” The testing question will be, Shall Denominational
schools be continued ? Shall those buildings such as St. Philip’s,
St. James’, Christ Church and others, in Sydney and elsewhere,
any longer be used by the State for educational purposes ?
I do not wish to cry down Public schools ; they are, in many


respects, well adapted for a mixed population. I must, however,
candidly confess that there are advantages surrounding Denomi-
national schools, which make them in some points better than
Public ones, and which show me we should be making a grand
mistake by abolishing them from our educational machinery.
Before, however, referring to their chief advantage, I will, as
briefly as I can, show some minor points which deserve con-
sideration.
History is, and can be, freely taught in our Denominational
schools. To keep the glorious historic past in darkness is a
serious error. The fear of offending some has so far banished
this important branch of education from our Public schools.
It is unwise to bring about an educational monopoly. The
present Act permits a wholesome competition, but will prevent
an unnatural one in small places where there are only sufficient
scholars for a single school. Dr. Vaughan would intro-
duce denominationalism into every little place in the colony,
To that the present Act is a barrier. There must be 70 child-
ren in the public school, so that all sects are first provided for,
and none can have a right to complain. If there are sufficient
additional scholars in the neighbourhood, a certificate may then
be granted to a denominational school. Thus the State pro-
vides first for all creeds, and afterwards a second school may be
established, provided there are scholars and the denomination
will pay for the buildings. Two or more schools naturally com-
pete and prevent a monopoly. With compulsory education a
teacher may become quite an autocrat. He may be inefficient,
or show a spite against a child, and in such a way that no
direct charge could be founded ; yet the parent would be com-
pelled to send his child to the school, otherwise the master
might send the policeman with a summons. In such a case
there would be a remedy if there were a Protestant Denomi-
national school in the town. When all is narrowed down to
Public schools only, and competition, which is the life of many
things beside trade, consequently banished, teachers may become
lethargic, and our schools may sink into that miserable state
of red-tapeism which surrounds so many Government depart-
ments.
If there be any way of partly satisfying our Roman Catholic
fellow-citizens, why should we be so illiberal as not to adopt
it ? That the State is not out of pocket by the present arrange-
ments I will show in a following paragraph referring to State-
aid to religion. The Denominational clause of our present Act
enables them to use our educational machinery. Thus the
views so ably advanced by Bishop Moorhouse are carried out,
but minus the most objectionable features of his proposal. To
say that no such advantage would be allowed Protestants in
Roman Catholic countries is quite beside the question. It is


the glory of the English people to mete out even-handed justice
to all. Let us not neglect the old Bible maxim, which tells us
to return good for evil. It should be remembered that no
system can be truly national that practically excludes any large
section of the community. The present Act is fair to all. I
have been told that the Jews in Sydney, one of the least
numerous of the religious bodies, are quite as unwilling as
many others to give up their Denominational school.
The chief advantage of Denominational schools, and I
view the question from a Christian Protestant standpoint, is
that religious instruction can be imparted through them far
more fully and completely than in other schools. It has been
lately generally acknowledged that education without religion
was most unsatisfactory. Religion is the foundation of all true
morality, and, consequently, it is essentially necessary to in-
culcate its principle in the young. True education is materially
helped by the reading of God’s Word, and the opening and
closing of schools by the singing a hymn and prayer. I under-
stand the reading of the Bible, with questions and explanations,
for about half-an-hour each morning, is one of the chief
characteristics of nearly all Protestant Denominational schools.
The masters are generally selected from among those duly
qualified by the Council, for their suitability to give religious
instruction, and they, in many important ways, assist the parent.
There is very little hope of getting the Bible into our Public
schools as in London ; why then do away with those which
have the Bible ? To this it is replied that there are Scripture
lessons. They, however, are insufficient; they are only used
once a week at the most, in some instances less than that. I
have known cases where they have been omitted altogether for
a considerable time. It is also said an hour a day is allowed
to ministers. I reply, generally, that clergyman are over-
worked, and cannot often attend. In some schools there are
three departments, in others two, and often, many schools in
one parish several miles apart. So far the hour has been very
little used, and we have no guarantee that it will be availed of
even to any moderate extent in the future. It is further said,
if we join in getting Protestant schools closed, we shall also, at
the same time, be getting Roman Catholic ones closed. I reply,
that I consider it sinful to surrender the Bible because others
may misuse it. Why concede a good thing because others err ?
I cannot think it right to turn 10,000 children out of institu-
tions in which there is the daily free use of God’s Word, that
they may go to our hibleless and prayerless Public schools. If
we injure the Church of Rome, we far more damage our own
children. If we surrender the Bible that we may wound Rome,
we do evil that good may come, and so adopt a well-known


principle of the Jesuits, and one ever to be avoided by men
walking in the light.
But, Sir, it is continually argued that Denominational
schools mean State-aid to religion. The State, however, re-
cognises the secular teaching only, and for that it pays. The
cost last year to the State was about 19s. per child in Denomi-
national schools, while it may be fairly stated as not less than
£1 16s. in Public schools, If the cost were more it might be
State-aid to religion, but being so much less it cannot be. It
is rather the Churches helping the State. The charges upon
the taxpayer would be rather increased than lessened if Denomi-
national schools were closed. They are cheaper and a positive
saving to the State. I admit that the teachers may, if they
wish, use one-fifth of the school time in giving religious in-
struction, but the master’s salary is not the only cost of a school.
The churches, in providing the buildings, contribute considerably
over one-fifth of the total cost. I challenge any one to prove
that the State did not get the very fullest value in secular
results, according to the inspector’s reports, for the £84,490
spent last year in all Denominational schools. Thus the cry
“State-aid to religion” vanishes into airy nothing. At the
most it can only be twisted into meaning State permission to
teach religion.
In the event of an alteration in the present Act, which
would lead to the extinction of Denominational schools, two
things appear to me inevitable.
The first is the abolition of the Scripture lessons from
Public schools. Roman Catholics object to these lessons. One
bishop, Dr. Murray, has issued a “ pastoral” against their use.
With Roman Catholics refusing instruction from them, and
having no other way of using our educational machinery, it will
be considered unjust to continue them for Protestant children
only. Will it not be State-aid to religion for Protestants and not
for Catholics ? Would not Catholics complaim, with some fair-
ness, that they were taxed to teach doctrines which they did not
hold, and say that the State, if it teaches any religion, should
give all a chance ? The only logical standing ground for the
State in such a case, would be to make the schools purely
secular. In Queensland and Victoria this difficulty stared the
Parliaments in the face, and it was met by sweeping all religion
from the schools. Let us take warning.
The second “ inevitable ” is, that the Roman Catholic
children now under the Council of Education, in Denominational
schools, will be handed over to the teaching of the Jesuits.
Roman Catholics will .have their oivn schools. This is a point
Protestants appear to quite overlook. Is it not better then in
the interests of the country to have the children under the
Council than under the Jesuits, Marist Brothers, Franciscans


and Nuns. As matters are the curriculum in a Roman Catholic
Denominational school is the same as regards secular teaching
as in a Public school. The same books are used, except the
Scripture lessons. The masters appear to work hard for secular
results, and in many cases have been very successful. In many
instances they appear more anxious to please the inspectors, to
whom they look for promotion, than the priests. Remove the
Council’s certificate and the schools would not be closed ; they
would become private schools. The masters would be trans-
ferred to Public schools, and the good books of the Council of
Education, if left behind, would be burnt. The Jesuits, and
other teaching religious orders, would step in and take charge.
They, as Archbishop Vaughan has said, would give a thorough-
ness of Catholic tone to the teaching which the present system
cannot give. Then there will be no inspection, and nothing to
check the full tide of superstition. I, as a Protestant, would much
prefer the Roman Catholic children remaining under the Council
to letting them go the Jesuits. The former will make them
much better citizens than the latter. It may be asked, could
such schools be supported ? I answer that, if in country places
like the Vale Road, near Bathurst, German’s Hill, near Orange,
and in many other parts I could name, “ close ” schools flourish
under the “ sisters,” not far from Public ones, how easy will it
be to keep them going in good-sized country towns, where
children are so much more numerous ? Would these “ two
inevitables,” from an alteration of our present Act, benefit the
country at large ?
The foregoing, Sir, are a few of the many reasons which
convince me that we should uphold our Public schools Act in its
integrity against its foes on either side. It stands nobly and,
I trust, will remain triumphantly firm as a rock between the
two extremes. Its basis is comprehensive, liberal and national.
Evil will be the day when, in a spirit of conservatism, all are
narrowed down to Public schools only. If there be evils in
connection with it, there are others, which, far more than the
Denominational schools, may check a people’s progress and
blight our national life. The advocates of pure secularism,
which practically is infidelity, are bidding for an alliance with
Bible-loving men to overturn that Act, which, not excepting the
laud law, has been our greatest masterpiece of legislation. To
such, knowing the crying evils under the flags of Communism,
Nihilism and Socialism, which have followed the negation of
Christianity, we should show an uninviting and repellant face.
We shall be doing so, and adopting a wise and far-sighted policy,
by surrendering none of the religious privileges of the present
Act, but by upholding all with an earnest conviction that such
a course is most conducive to the interests of true education.


It has been said, “ the child is the father of the man.”
Knowing that such is but a truism, I can see in those now
enjoying their young and bright school life, the future leaders
and citizens who, for a generation, will hold the destinies of our
land in their keeping. Let us mould them, then, in everything
that is good. Let us curb nothing that is good, and, whilst
giving fair play to all, let us especially protest against the
abolition of those schools which have the free use of God’s
word—the inalienable birthright of Englishmen—and which
can give a tone to early training far higher than any other book
yet known in the world.
I am, Sir, your most obedient servant,
Orange, October 7, 1879 F. B. BOYCE.
[Copies of the foregoing letter to the Town and Country Journal, with
some unimportant alterations, were sent to, and published in, the Watchman
of Bathurst, and the Wellington Gazcite.~\
Denominational Schools.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE PROTESTANT STANDARD.
Sir, —It was with much regret that I noticed the tone of
your article regarding the utterances of the Bishop of Sydney,
I consider it offensive to a large number of persons who cannot
but recognise in him one who for a quarter of a century has
been a faithful upholder of the blessed Reformation. It is my
conviction that no man in this colony has done more to spread
the benefits of pure Evangelical truth than he has. I beg
therefore as a Protestant to respectfully protest against your
classing him with Archbishop Vaughan by saying that “ both
are guilty of the grossest immorality and unfaithfulness under
the pretence of advancing religious education.” Such language
is altogether undeserved regarding the one who laid the foun-
dation-stone of the Protestant Hall, and whose utterances on
the occasion are still remembered with thankfulness.
Trusting that your columns are open to a fair discussion
of the question of religious education, permit me to endeavour
briefly to show that Protestants can conscientiously hold dif-
ferent views in dealing with it, and to chiefly point out in doing
so, that, in my opinion, there are many reasons why the
Denominational clause of our present admirable Public schools
Act should be upheld.
Fortunately at present there seems to be a general con-
sensus of opinion, that education is incomplete without religion.
A religious education is materially helped by the daily reading
of God’s Word, and by opening and closing schools by singing
a hymn and prayer, I understand that the reading of the Bible
for about half-an-hour each morning is the chief characteristic


of our Protestant Denominational schools. The masters are
generally selected for their suitability to give religious instruc-
tion, and they, in many ways, assist the parent by sowing seed
that will bear real fruit. There is very little hope of getting the
Bible into all Public schools as in London. Why then close
the schools in which we have the whole Bible with its free use?
It is answered —do so, and we shall close Romish schools. Is
it not, however, sinful to surrender the Bible merely because
others abuse it ? Why concede a good thing because others
err ? It is wrong to do evil that good may come. I cannot
think it right from a Christian point of view to turn thousands
of children cut of institutions in which they daily hear God’s
word that they may go to our Bibleless Public schools.
But it is argued that Denominational schools mean State-
aid to religion. Is such however the fact? The State does not
pay the whole charge of Denominational schools. They cost
the State last year about 19s. per child, but in Public ones the
cost was about 365. The secular results are nearly equal.
There is no recognition by the State or examination by in-
spectors in any religious subject whatever. If the cost were
more it would be State-aid to religion, but being much less it
cannot. The cost to the taxpayer would rather be increased
than lessened if there were Public schools only. At the most
it can only be said to mean State permission to teach religion
for which each Denomination that desires that advantage has
to pay a heavy bonus in the shape of buildings. State-aid to
religion is merely a catch argument. I challenge any one to
prove that the State did not getfullvalue in secular results accord-
ing to the Inspectors reports for the £34,490 spent last year
in the schools in question, If, however, we wish to see State-
aid to religion we have only to go to our Public schools as it can
easily be proved. The same cry if carried to its logical con-
clusion may cause the abolition of every vestige of religion from
Public schools, as in Queensland and Victoria.
Denominational schools can be availed of by all creeds. I
have heard that the Jews in Sydney, one of the least numerous
bodies, are quite as unwilling to give up their Denominational
schools as many members of the Church of England.
The present Act admits new Denominational schools only
in centres of population. There must be seventy scholars in
the Public school so that all sects are provided for, and then if
the Council be willing, and there be sufficient additional children,
the second school may be started. This will prevent, and has
already prevented, an educational monopoly. With compulsory
education on his side the Public schoolmaster may become quite
an autocrat. He may be inefficient or have a spite against a
a child, a not uncommon human failing, but upon which it
is difficult to found a charge to his superiors, and the parent


would be compelled to send his child to the school, otherwise
the master might send the policeman with a summons. With
a Protestant Denominational school in a town, the parent has
a remedy. Competition is nearly always healthy, and will lead
to the correction of many abuses. Where there is no competi-
tion, teachers may become lethargic, and our schools may sink
into that miserable red-tapeism which surrounds so many
Government institutions.
But sir, there is one point which Protestants much over-
look ; it is that Romanists will have their own schools. Is it
not better then to keep their children under the Council of
Education as at present, than hand them over to the Jesuits
and others? As matters are the curriculum in a Roman
Catholic Denominational school as regards secular teaching is
precisely the same as in a Public school. The same books are
used except the Scripture lessons. The masters appear to work
hard for secular results; they appear in most instances rather
more anxious to please the inspector to whom they look for
promotion than the priests. Remove the Government certificate
and the school will not be closed. The masters will be removed
to Public schools and the good books of the Council, if left
behind, will be burnt like heretics have been in by-gone years.
The Franciscans, the Marist Brothers, Jesuits and Kuns will
step in and take charge. They, as Dr. Vaughan has said, will
give a Catholic thoroughness of tone which the present system
cannot give. Then there will be nothing to check the full tide
of superstition of the worst kind. I, as a Protestant, would
much prefer the Romish children remaining in the hands of the
Council of Education to giving them over to the Jesuits. The
present system means much light, the other much darkness. It
may perhaps be asked could such schools be kept up ? I answer
that if in country places, such as the V ale Road, near Bathurst,
and German’s Hill, near Orange, these close schools can flourish
not far from Public ones, easy it will be to keep them going in
a good sized country town, where children are so much more
numerous.
For these reasons, sir, and others that could be adduced,
I utterly fail to see that Dr. Barker is guilty of the
“ grossest immorality.” I believe that Protestants can con-
scientiously differ upon the question, and that it is altogether
unnecessary to use hard and insulting expressions. It is my
earnest hope that there may be no alteration in our Public
Schools Act. Compulsory education can be introduced in a
short special Act. The one we have is fair to all, and an un-
mixed blessing to the land. If altered, rely upon it everything
of a religious nature will be cut out. So far the controversy
has been mainly amongst ministers of religion. It will be
viewed- in a different light when it comes before men, who, by


an overwhelming majority opened the Museum and Public
Library on the Lord’s Day, and who have ignored the crying
evils of the liquor traffic. Godlessness and infidelity are far
worse enemies to combat than the fancied one of a few Denomi-
national schools. Both Romanism and infidelity have to be
met with the same weapon, which is the Sword of the Spirit.
It is therefore my humble and firm conviction as a Bible-loving
Protestant that it is our plain duty to keep in tact all the
blessed privileges we bold under our present School Act, and
that Christian men of every creed would show a wise and far-
sighted policy if they be united with one good Protestant
bishop in upholding those schools which have the whole Bible.
I, am, Sir, your obedient servant,
Orange, September 16th, 1879, P. B. BOYCE.
(advertisement).
The Education Question.
TO THE READERS OF THE PROTESTANT STANDARD.
In the issue of the Standard of the 27th ultimo, the editor published
a leader of over two columns in length, concerning a letter he had
printed, protesting against hard and insulting expressions in a previous
issue regarding the Bishop of Sydney. A further reference was also
made in the issue of the 4th instant. The following comparatively shoit
reply was then forwarded, but its insertion was refused, and is therefore
now printed in the Herald.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE PROTESTANT STANDARD.
Sir, — I had hoped that your charge of t! the grossest
immorality and unfaithfulness ” against the Bishop of Sydney,
and, consequently, against others who advocate the same line
of action, would have been withdrawn or modified on it being
shown that Protestants could consistently differ at the point of
issue. You have, however, repeated the expression, and un-
supported it by any reasons carrying conviction when analysed.
The pith of your arguments appears to be that Dr. Barker,
in pleading for Church of England Denominational schools,
knows he is also pleading for Roman Catholic schools. If
there be the grossest immorality in this there must be, logically,
as the receiver is as bad as the thief, immorality on the part of
every minister of religion, whether Church of England,
Presbyterian or Wesleyan, who still draws his stipend Avith
Romish priests from the State. Also, there must be immorality
on the part of all those of any Church avlio continue their
present Denominational schools. Those, however, who support
the present Act in its integrity merely plead for that Avhich
they believe to be right. I cannot see that there is any im-
morality in pleading for truth, though others may support it
from a’ different motive. Eor instance, the State grants per-
mission to Romish priests and Protestant ministers to celebrate


marriages. Supposing the State were to say, —“ We will with-
draw the permission, and prohibit any from celebrating mar-
riages but the registrars.” If in such a case Church of England
or Wesleyan ministers pleaded and protested against the wrong,
you would doubtless say they were immoral, because in so
doing they also fought the battle for the Romish priests.
Would it be right to be silent under such circumstances,
although they would know that in agitating they ivould assist
the priests as w r ell as themselves ? In such a case they would
be merely advocating their own rights, just as many Protestants
are now standing up for theirs. Many consider truth of vital
importance, and loudly lift their voices against the raging
storm of secularism. It is known that there are about 10,000
children who now have the great advantage of the daily reading
of God’s word. For the whole Bible in our schools we contend,
and we protest against the children being deprived of the
privilege they now have. It has justly been complained of
Ur. Vaughan that he has said, “ A Catholic first and an English-
man afterwards.” I might with justice complain of you for
practically crying, “ Down with Rome first and the Bible after-
wards. las a Protestant cry, with emphasis, “ the Bible first.”
Persons who are acquainted with the merest elements of
Theology will at once perceive that I am upon the only ground
upon which a true Protestant can safely stand. I, therefore,
entirely fail to see that there is the “ grossest immorality and
unfaithfulness ” in the course now being followed by many
earnest Protestants.
Your attempt to reply to my statement that Denomi-
national schools do not mean State-aid to religion, would have been
much more satisfactory had you accepted my challenge to prove
that the State had not received the fullest secular results for
the money spent last year in such schools. That challenge you
conveniently passed by. The only pertinent question you ask
is, who pays the master for the one-fifth of the school-time
allowed for religious instruction ? I answer that the master’s
salary is not the only cost of a school. The churches pay
considerably over one-fifth of the whole cost by providing the
buildings, and so even leave a bonus for the State.
My expression that the Public schools are “ Bibleless ”
you consider as offensive and erroneous. I cannot, however,
concede that the Scripture lessons are the Bible any more than
Dr. Whately’s sermons are. The hour a day for ministers, so
far, has been but very little used; most ministers are over-
worked, and having several schools in their districts, probably
miles apart, find it impossible to attend them. If at any time
the Council of Education has provided Bibles for Public
schools, the fact has been kept a profound secret. Regarding
Queensland and Victoria, such has been the triumph of


secularism that Scripture lessons have been abolished, and the
only concession made to religion is that the children may be
“kept in ” at the close of the school for ministers to instruct
them. To such children the memories in after-life of religious
teaching are likely to be anything but pleasant.
I trust the example of our sister colonies may be a loud
and solemn warning to ourselves.
In my former letter I showed by arguments not yet
answered, that Protestants could consistently differ upon the
question at issue. In fact, I consider that I fairly proved that
my side Avas in reality the more Protestant of the two. These
are days, however, when men holding the great essentials of
our faith should speak charitably of one another, and 1 freely
concede that I believe you are following, though mistaken, the
dictates of your consciences in taking the side you do. AVe
may differ in these “ non-essentials,” and still hold our several
opinions firmly and decidedly, without using violent expressions
regarding each other. Por my part, I shall continue to support
the present Public Schools Act in its integrity, in the confident
belief that it is wise to uphold all the religious privileges it
permits. I shall also especially regard it as the purest Pro-
testantism to uphold those schools which have that Book itself
which contains the foundation of all true education, as well as
of national greatness.
I am, your obedient servant,
Orange, 6th October, 1879, P. B. BOYCE.
The Proposed Act of Uniformity.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EVENING NEWS.
Sm, —I have read the speech of Sir Henry Parkes on the
new Education Bill with care, and am forced to the conclusion
that it contains no reasons worthy of the statesman that he is,
for narrowing us to a uniform system by abolishing all the
Denominational schools. In fact, the only attempt at argument
appears to be that Public schools have been insulted by Arch-
bishop Yaughan. I need scarcely point out that no writer on
political economy, free from religious excitement, would accept
that as a reason, especially for closing the Church of England
schools. Other portions of the new bill, such as compulsory
education, the teaching of history, and high schools, naturally
meet with general acceptance, and need but little defence.
The whole debate lies around the 35,000 children in the
Denominational schools as they are under the present Act, and
that question should not be burked. It should be proved that
those children will receive a better religious and secular educa-
tion in Public schools to warrant so serious a step as that
proposed. No such proof has been offered,


I maintain that so important a change as the closing of
some of the best educational institutions in this colony ought
to be clearly justified. St. James’s, St. Andrew’s, St. Barnabas’s,
St. Philip’s, St. Paul’s and Christ Church schools have each
received first-class reports from the council’s inspectors, and the
State has consequently received as good a secular article in
them as in Public schools, and at about half the cost. From
the simple fact that so many parents prefer these and other
Denominational schools, why, without some powerful reason,
which has not been given, should they be closed ? Why should
the State interfere when secular results are fairly equal with
Public schools ?
The only matter that some might interpret as a reason was
the hope expressed that Protestant and Catholic should sit
together in the schools. The dream is pleasant, but those who
know what Koman Catholicism is, are satisfied that their
Denominational schools will be continued as private schools by
the Jesuits and other teaching religious orders. We must be
practical. They will have separate schools. My opinion is
that it is better to have these Schools under the control of the
State than under the Jesuits.
It is gratifying to find that the Premier was so clear re-
garding the necessity of religious teaching. He said, “He
would never give up this system of general religious teaching.
He did not believe in any people becoming a great people with-
out a profound faith.” It cannot, however, be forgotten that
the “ scripture lessons ” are distinctly objected to by Roman
Catholic Bishops, and by many laymen. Is it statesmanlike to
have State instruction for Protestants and none for Catholics ?j Is it
right to tax the latter to have the former taught their religion ?
Directly, all Denominational advantages are taken from Roman
Catholics, the Premier will find his position on this point un-
tenable. All should be treated with equal fairness. The defeat
of Denominationalism means the early death of the scripture
lessons.
It was naturally supposed some attempt would have been
made to show the State was injured by the Denominational
schools ; but such was not the case. The favourite argument
of State-aid to religion was not brought up ; no doubt, because
its hollowness in this case has been proved. Persons, in
answer to the assertion that there is financial State-aid to
religion, have cried in vain—how much ? The cost last year
per head, in Denominational schools, was less than £l ; whilst
in Public schools, allowing for the interest on the capitalised
cost of buildings, it was but little less than £2. By providing
the buildings, the Denominations pay largely towards the cost
of the schools. Thus Denominational schools mean merely
permission to the master to teach religion. In principle it is


much the same as the permission in Public schools for the
clergyman to use the class-rooms, except in that case the State
provides the building, and in the other the Denomination has
to make up for the pay of the master.
It is unfair for the Ministry to avail itself of the illogical
“ no popery ” cry, now prevalent, to push an uniform system
on the country. No calm decision can possibly be arrived at
amidst all the religious excitement now prevailing. The House
will soon dissolve by effluxion of time, and the matter should be
left open for the country to express its opinion. At all events
there should be some reasons given why the admirable com-
promise now existing should be disturbed, i.e., public schools,
first and foremost, for all who want them, so that none have a
right to complain ; and secondly, Denominational schools for
Protestants and Catholics, with the same secular curriculum
as in Public schools, on the condition that the Denominations
pay for the buildings. Such a compromise provides a national
system, as placing all under the same secular curriculum, yet
at the same time reasonably meets the varied wishes of a
people, on the one side dissatisfied with the teaching or scanti-
ness of the scripture lessons, and on the other who desire the
more secular public school.
I am, your obedient servant,
November 25th. HOCK.
The New Education Bill.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sie, —After the remarks of Sir Henry Parkes, when asking
leave to introduce the above bill, the country was led to expect
an extension of the facilities for imparting religious instruction
rather than the decided diminution which appears now that we
have the bill itself.
Under the present Act the Council of Education permits
ministers to impart religious instructions in all schools through-
out the colony, whether there are class-rooms or not. In the
larger schools, I believe, generally class-rooms are built, because
such are necessary for the ordinary working of the school.
According to the new bill the children must be separated, and
so, unless there be a class-room no minister can give instruction,
and no class-rooms are to be built unless there be a “ regular
attendance” of fifty scholars. I, presume the words “regular
attendance ” mean average attendance, which, with a good com-
pulsory clause in force, is likely to be about 20 per cent, less
than the enrolment. Thus there will be, except in the isolated
instances where there happen to be class-rooms, probably no less
than 408 Public schools, 285 Provisional schools, and all the


Half-time schools deprived of any religious instruction clergymen
may be able to give.
Another disappointment is that there is nothing in the bill
distinctly requiring that all children in all schools shall regularly
receive from the master some religious teaching of the general
kind, which is indicated. In the present Act secular instruction
is said to include general religious teaching. It does not,
however, appear to be commonly known that only about one-
third of the children are instructed from the “ Scripture lessons.”
In the Council’s printed “ standard of proficiency ” for the first
and second classes, such lessons are excluded. Many, in their
exaltation of the religious character of Public schools, have quite
overlooked this fact. I regret the Council’s annual report does
not give the number of children in those classes. It must be at
least 50,000. It Is worthy of note, however, that the inspector’s
reports show schools with first and second classes only. For
instance, in the Bathurst district there are twenty-two such
schools. Thus, the only thing that may be said to prevent them
from being absolutely “ godless ” is, that there are a few para-
graphs referring to Scripture scattered at lengthy distances
through the reading books. Why should it not be clearly settled
by the bill that all children should receive religious instruction
at the very least two hours each week.
The bill purposes to abolish all Denominational schools in
two years ; but unless the fees can be reduced, as in Public
schools, the excellent Church of England schools with their ten
thousand children brought under daily religious instruction, will
receive a serious blow at once. As regards the Roman Catholic
schools there is little doubt they will remain open, but the
management will be transferred from the Council to the Jesuits
and other teaching religious orders. To those who know what
Roman Catholicism is such a result is inevitable, yet there is
nothing in the bill to meet such a contingency by inspection or
otherwise. We know that now, in these schools, that the secular
instruction is the same as in Public schools. The masters work
hard for secular results, and in some cases give the religious
instruction before the ordinary school hour that they may devote
the whole five hours to the Council’s curriculum. The inspector
can walk in at any time, and see that all is properly carried on.
The teachers are frequently more anxious to please the inspector,
to whom they look for promotion, than the priests. When the
certificates are withdrawn these servants of the Council will be
placed in Public schools, and the Jesuits will step in and take
charge. The excellent books of the Council will be thrown out if
left behind, and books will be introduced tending from every sub-
ject to distinct Romish teaching. Thomas Carlyle’s opinion of
“ Ignatius’s black militia ”is well known. Your readers can see
much regarding their doings in France in the September number


of the Nineteenth Century. Tims the present system means
much light, and the other darkness that may be felt. In the
absence of all inspection or check it is far better to let the
children remain as they are. The Council will make them
better members of society than the Jesuits. It may be asked
could such private schools exist ? I answer that if in a dozen
small country places I could name, they flourish through the
cheapness of system under the “ Sisters,” how easy will it be to
maintain them in comparative prosperity in large centres of
population ? This point, Sir, has influenced many Protestants
in upholding the Denominational clause of the present Act.
Some of the points of the new bill are undoubtedly good.
I hope, however, some distinct reason will be given to warrant
the closing, as far as the State is concerned, of all the Denomi-
national schools. What injury have they done the State ?
Some justification is demanded in the face of a large number of
persons desiring their continuance, and the cost per annum for
each child being 19s, 6d., as against at least £1 16s. in Public
schools. Why should not a National Education Bill be of a
broad and liberal character, instead of being narrow and con-
servative ? A Denominational clause is but an enlarged con -
science clause. If we are to have an “ Act of Uniformity,” I
trust the reasons given for it will justify us in the eyes of posterity.
I am, your obedient servant,
Orange, 15th November, 1879. F. B. BOYCE.
The Proposed “ Act of Uniformity.”
TO THE EDITOR OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHURCHMAN,
Sir, —There are two points in the new Education Bill
which especially deserve attention :
There is nothing in the Bill distinctly requiring that all
children in all schools shall regularly receive from the master
some religious teaching of the general kind which is described.
In the present Act, secular instruction is said to include general
religious teaching. It does not, however, appear to be commonly
known that only about one-third of the pupils are instructed
from the “ Scripture lessons.” In the Council’s printed
“ Standard of Proficiency ” for the first and second classes, such
lessons are excluded. Many appear to have gone into ecstasies
over the religious character of the Public schools, quite over-
looking this important fact. Taking the aggregate enrolment of
the schools, the number in these classes cannot be less than
50,000. The exact number I am unable to ascertain. In the
Camden district, however, the Inspector’s report shows 4,178
children examined, of whom 3,174 were in the classes named,


If the same proportion were in all schools, the number would
he much above 50,000. Further, to bear out what I say, it ap-
pears that, in the Cumberland District, out of 5,084 scholars
examined in reading and writing, only 1,000 were examined in
the Scripture lessons. Again, in the Bathurst District, there
appear to be 22 schools with first and second classes only.
These, therefore, are absolutely “ Godless,” except that there
are a few isolated paragraphs scattered at lengthy distances
through the reading books referring to spiritual subjects. Why
should it not be clearly settled by a new Act that all the children
should receive religious teaching at the very least two hours
each week ?
The second point is that the new Bill will exclude clergy-
men from giving instruction where there are no class rooms.
The Council of Education at present allows clergymen for the
hour a day in any of its schools in the Colony ; but under the
proposed Bill, not more than one-fourth of the schools will be
accessible. It says the children must be separated , but that
class rooms are to be built where there is a regular attendance
oififty children. I presume the words “ regular attendance ”
mean average attendance, which, with a good compulsory clause
in force, is likely to be about 20 per cent less than the enrol-
ment. Thus there will be except in the few cases where there
happen to be class rooms, 400 Public schools, the 285 Pro-
vincial schools, and the 115 Half-time schools deprived, chiefly
in country parts, where Sunday schools are scarce, of any
religious instruction clergymen may be able to give. The
decided diminution in the proposed Bill of the facilities for giving
religious teaching ought to be protested against.
We are threatened with an uniform system, which will di-
minish, by the extinction of the Denominational schools, yet
more seriously the power of the Church to impart religious
knowledge. To my mind, it is much to be regretted that
Christian men of all classes will not join in the far-sighted policy
of upholding ALL the religious privileges of the present Act,
In reality, with the extinction of the Denominational schools the
death-knell of the Scripture lessons, and probably of all religious
teaching, will be rung. Romanists distinctly object to the
Scripture lessons. Dr. Vaughan and Dr. Murray of Maitland
have both publicly objected to their use for Roman Catholic
children. Directly all special Roman Catholic advantages are
removed, it will be next to impossible to retain the Scripture
lessons. It will be argued that Roman Catholics are being
taxed to teach Protestant children, and that, if any religion is
taught, all should have a chance. It will be said that there is
State Aid for Protestants, and none for Catholics. This difficulty
met the Parliaments of Queensland and Victoria, and they
swept all religion from the schools. Let us take warning.


With only 22,000 children in the Sunday schools of our Church,
let us endeavour to maintain some Biblical truth in the day
school. The support of the Denominational schools is the key
to the whole position. When the citadel is stormed, and the
flag of secularism flies from the tower, the loss of a mere outpost
like the Scripture lessons is the “ inevitable,” and is only a
question of time.—l am, &c,,
Orange, 24th November, 1879. F. B. BOYCE.
The Education Question.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EVENING NEWS.
Sir, —I beg to thank you for the excellent leader in your
issue of the 28st, in which you wisely advocate the continuance
of our large Denominational schools. For the following reasons
it appears to me also that to close them would be most unjust
and impolitic.
1. It is Protestants who desire their extinction. They
should remember, however, that the best way to overcome error
is by teaching the truth. The Bible will conquer Eome easier
than secularism. If we cease teaching our religion and Roman
Catholics continue to teach theirs, Protestantism will in time be
at a great disadvantage. There are 10,000 children now in Protes-
tant Denominational schools in which the Biblical truth is fully
and freely taught. Why do away with a powerful antidote to error ?
2. By closing Roman Catholic Denominational schools we
imperil the Scripture lessons in Public schools. Take away all
Roman Catholic advantages under the Act, and they will say
why continue the Scripture lessons to which we object ? It is
unjust to have State aid to religion for Protestants and not for
Catholics. In Queensland and Victoria this was seen. All
religion was swept from the schools and they have become
“ Godless.” Let us take warning.
3. It is the extreme of illiberality and bigotry not to allow
Denominational schools to those who desire them, when they
are such a large saving to the State. Last year the cost per
child was 19s. 6d., and in Public schools it was at least (with the
cost of buildings capitalized and interest charged) £1 165.,
consequently, if all the children were turned into Public schools,
taxpayers would have to make up a large deficiency now supplied
by the Churches.
4. The competition between two schools in large towns is
highly beneficial. There should be no monopoly. Competition
is the life of many things besides trade.
5. If Roman Catholic Denominational schools have their
certificates taken away they will be kept open under the Jesuits.
I, as a Protestant, prefer the children should remain as they


are. Now they arc taught from the Council’s books, and we
have the right of constant inspection.
G. To close the schools named will leave the question un-
settled. Witness the agitation now proceeding in Victoria.
7. A national system should be comprehensive, reasonably
elastic, and liberal. It should not practically exclude a large
section of the community, nor be narrow and conservative, as it
must be with public schools only.
1 believe, sir, that it is most unwise to legislate on the
question at present. Firstly, because before an alteration is
made a commission is desirable to inquire fully into all the work-
ings of the excellent Act we have, and report thereon to the
Legislature. Secondly, because the present Parliament does
not represent the country fairly, a new electoral Act is the crying
want of the day ; and thirdly, because the country is in a high
state of religious excitement, and consequently, no calm decision
can be arrived at. My own humble opinion is that our present
liberal Act has worked well. It has been the admiration of
visitors from other colonies, and requires only one chief addition,
and that is a “compulsory” clause.—l am, your obedient
servant, EOCK.
4th November, 1879.
The Cost of Denominational Schools.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, —The cost of educating children in the Denominational
schools under the present Act has been rather kept in the back
ground. Mr. Buchanan, however, partly dealt with it when he
said, in the Assembly—“ The education question must be con-
sidered on economical grounds,” and that at present there was
“ a loss of £21,400 to the State in teachers’ salaries.”
I need scarcely point out that if his assertion be correct
that he has made out a case of gross mismanagement on the
part of the Council of Education. He implies that the teachers
in many Public schools are not sufficiently employed, that many
are idling their time away, that the same staff (if fully worked)
could teach many thousand more children, that the proportion
of teachers to the children is altogether too great, that the
buildings, playgrounds, &c., are much too large, and that the
schools are managed with reckless extravagance rather than with
wise economy.
That such a state of things does not generally exist is well
known to all who are acquainted with the working of our Public
schools. Looking at the question as a whole, it is probable that
if all Denominational schools were closed to-morrow, that


scarcely any of the teachers, who are all servants of the Council,
would be dismissed; and that although by squeezing the
Denominational children could he got into the Public schools,
yet, as they are not too large, it would be necessary ere long to
provide extra accommodation by building for those now arranged
for by the Churches. But even if there happened to be ample
space now, the advantage would be only temporary, because,
as population increased, the State would have to provide for
children whose room would be occupied by those taken from the
Denominational buildings. The only probable saving is, that
the Roman Catholic schools would become private institutions
under the Jesuits ; that, however, is a contingency the State
ought not to consider with the hope of saving its money.
But what was the whole relative cost of the two systems
last year? The amounts paid were as follows: —For 81,229
children in Public schools only, £250,173 11s. 6d.; 85,028
children in Denominational schools, £34,425 7s. 3d, ; it con-
sequently cost the State £3 Is. 7d. per child in Public schools,
and only 19s. Bd. in the much-abused Denominational schools,
which teach the same secular curriculum as the others.
Included in the amount for Public schools is £148,436
7s. 4d. for buildings, rent, repairs, &c., for the year. It may he
argued that it is unfair to estimate the relative cost per child
as I have done. I can admit it may be fairer to capitalize the
cost of tlie buildings from the commencement, and allow the
annual interest thereon as a part of the expenditure for the year.
But if this were done it would be found that before very long
the cost would be even greater. In fact on that data the expense
of Public schools would steadily increase, whilst on the other-
hand the cost of Denominational schools would remain stationary
as buildings, repairs, &c., for them have to be provided by the
Churches. It may be added that a large amount has yet to be
spent in erecting Public schools ; apart from new ones con-
tinually being applied for, there are very many of the present
buildings, especially in the country, poor and exceedingly un-
suitable.
Thus, Sir, the Denominational schools, notwithstanding a
few small competing ones, are a real saving to the State.
Although the teachers may give one-fifth of the school time to
religious instruction, yet the Churches by contributing the
buildings pay considerably over one-fifth of the whole cost of
the schools. The Denominational system as under the present
Act, might be extended in centres of population with a decided
advantage to the taxpayer. Those who are in favour of the pro-
posed “ Act of uniformity ” would positively increase the burdens
of the country for the sake of being illiberal. There are or will
be Public schools provided throughout the colony, and for my
own part, I cannot see that those who desire them have any
right to complain if others have their children taught the same


National secular curriculum in buildings erected at their own
expense. There is a large section of the community that will
never be satisfied with Public schools. There is another large
section who desire to have the whole Bible in their schools, and
why, when it can be arranged at an enormous saving to the
State, should persons not be permitted advantages which they
conscientiously believe to be necessary and just.
I am, &c.,
F. B. BOYCE.
December Bth, 1879,
The Late Education Meeting.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, — I beg permission to refer through your columns to
some of the statements made at the meeting in the Protestant
Hall on Tuesday evening, IGth December.
Facts and figures were very generally avoided. It was
published last week that the cost in 1878 in Public schools was
£3 Ts. 7d. per child, and in Denominational schools 19s. Bd.,
but so important a fact is quietly ignored. The leading idea was
evidently to raise a “no Popery ” cry, and consequently the
changes were rung upon the “ Pastoral, ” A similiar cry was
raised by the Conservatives, to prevent the disestablishment of
the Irish Church, but the electors saw through it. When the
religious excitement has passed away, it will be seen, perhaps
too late, that the Pastoral was no reason for surrendering great
principles expressed by politicians in 1874 and since, and es-
pecially that the insult to Public schools was a very poor ground
for closing; the Church of England schools.
o # # o
One of the chief points dwelt upon was an alleged alliance
between the Churches of England and Rome. That such
existed in the true sense of an alliance I challenge anyone to
prove. With equal reason I might allege an alliance between
those who spoke at the meeting and those who deny the divinity
of our Lord with spiritists and atheists, because they all voted
in the same way. The evils in Europe concomitant to the latter,
under the heads of Communism, Nihilism, and Socialism, are
well known. Permit me also to observe that the spirit of
infidelity is an “ Antichrist.” Theßible-lovingJProtestant stands
between opposing parties, and I humbly conceive it to be his
clear duty to advocate, not the suppression, but the teaching of
the truth, believing in its own vitality to overcome error. The
Bible will conquer false doctrine far easier than will Secularism.
It should not be forgotten that Dr. Vaughan wants payment by
results, which virtually would overthrow the Public school
system. The Bishop of Sydney distinctly advocates the principle


of the present Public Schools Act, with compulsory education
&c., added.
The following were the other chief arguments used at the
meeting.
1. That all the children should sit together. This also was
the only argument used by Sir Henry Parkes against Denomi-
national schools when introducing the bill. But Roman
Catholics will have their own schools under the Jesuits and
teaching religious orders. The bill provides for High and
Superior schools, and not for higher classes in the Public schools.
Thus it violates the principle and separates the rich from the
poor. I must confess that Ido not see how the utopian idea of
all children sitting together is to be carried out.
2. One speaker said the Bible should be used in all our
Public schools. I heartily concur in so noble a sentiment, and,
therefore, cannot conscientiously advocate the surrender of
those schools which have the Bible.
3. It was said that business-men would not use two hands
where one would do, referring to the dual system. I never,
however, knew a business man to pay £3 Is. 7d. for an article
if he could get it for 19s. Bd.
4. The argument of Church aid to the State was briefly
referred to, but the speaker failed to show that the State did not
reap a decided monetary advantage through the churches pro-
viding school buildings.
5. It was inferred that there was as much, or even more
religious teaching in Public than in Denominational schools.
In all well conducted Church of England schools, there is the
daily reading of the Bible, with prayer and praise. In most
Public schools one hour a week only is usually devoted to the
Scripture lessons. These lessons, however, are not included in
the “ Standard of Proficiency ” for the first and second classes,
which last year consisted of about 50,000 children.
6. It was further said that the few remaining Denomi-
national schools were not worth fighting for. Passing by the
fact that there were 35,306 scholars in 1867, and notwithstand-
ing the decrease in the number of schools 35,028 in 1878, and
that the schools that exist have steadily increased in excellence,
those who take a broad view of the question see that they are
the key to the whole position of religion in all the State schools.
With the destruction of the Denominational schools, the death-
knell will be rung of the Scripture lessons in our Public schools,
and probably of all religious teaching, and the name of the great
Redeemer will be expunged from the reading-books. Both
Drs. Vaughan and Murray, with many Catholic laymen and
Jews, have objected to the Scripture lessons. When all Roman
Catholic advantages are removed, it will be called an injustice
to continue a direct Protestant advantage. The crushing argu-


ment will be used that there is State aid for Protestants and
none for Romanists, and the schools will he made thoroughly
secular and utterly “ Godless.” Mr. Parnell appeared to see
right through the question when he said, that as the Scripture
-lessons were admitted, he might possibly feel it his duty to vote
for Denominational schools. Thus the supporters of the present
admirable compromise of the existing Act defend the citadel;
when it is stormed and the flag of uniformity flies from the
tower, the loss of an outpost like the Scripture lessons is in-
evitable, and only a question of time.
I maintain, Sir, that no argument of weight was advanced
to warrant the destruction of the schools. In the face of a
large deficiency in the revenue why increase the expenditure ?
To purchase one school with site will cost £30,000. In uphold-
ing them we shall not only be legislating in a far-sighted and
statesmanlike manner, and continue a policy much like that
adopted by Mr. Gladstone and the Liberal party in the mother
country, but also probably settle the question for many years, as
well as prevent agitation which otherwise will show itself at
every general election. Why unnecessarily create a standing
grievance in our midst ?
It is devoutly to be hoped that something may arise to cause
the Government to pause before it forces an “ Act of uniformity”
on the people, and to deal in a more liberal way with sections of
the community whose wishes ought not to be ignored, especially
as the system they desire is much cheaper to the State, and yet
equally efficacious.
I am, yours, &c., F. B. BOYCE.
Orange, December 19th, 1879.
The Education Question.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, —The Rev. Dr. Barry, in your issue of the 30th, denies
that it was asserted at the late Education meeting at the
Protestant Hall that there was any alliance between the Churches
of England and Rome. By so doing, however, he distinctly
contradicts one speaker who spoke of “ the league between the
Church of England and the Church of Rome.” The blame for
the cry “ unholly alliance ” be throws on Mr. Alexander Gordon.
He, certainly, and with no little ability, has publicly advocated
payment by results. The Bishop of Sydney, on the other hand,
wisely and clearly maintains the same ground he has occupied for
years, and Dr. Vaughan, if he sides with him, has to abandon
the whole object of the Pastoral. lam perfectly satisfied with
Dr. Barry’s quixotic explanation.


1 showed from last year’s report laid before Parliament that
the present Denominational schools were one-third cheaper in
comparison with the Public schools. The figures are worth
repeating—l9s. Bd. per child in the former, and £3 Is, 7d. in the
latter. Dr. Barry’s main endeavour in his letter is to combat
that stubborn fact, but in so doing merely tries to cast discredit
on the buildings which the churches supply, saying that in the
very ingredients of cheapness there was an arguement against
the fact. He deals with the four following points ;
1. That some Denominational school teachers do not get
house rent.—l can admit that this appears somewhat unfair,
but I presume that when a teacher was promoted or removed
to any of the particular schools, he knew there was no residence
and would not have accepted the appointment unless there was
special advantage to himself. If, however, the Council of
Education in all the cases referred to were to raise the salaries
to an equivalent, the relative cost would even then stand Is.
4d. per child as against the TB Is 7d.
2. That the buildings are cheaply erected and not suitable
I have carefully read the reports of the inspectors of the
different districts for last year. Definite information is not
given in each report, but I find that with two unimportant
exceptions there is a remarkable freedom from complaint regard-
ing the buildings in which Denominational schools are held.
I notice that of the twenty Church schools in the Camden
district ten buildings are marked as “fair to good,” six “ fair,” and
four “ tolerable.” In the G-oulburn district the inspector states
that allowing the full space proper for each child there is room
for a third more children, thus showing the scholars are not
cramped. In the Maitland district the inspector writes : —“The
buildings used for Denominational schools are, with two or
three exceptions, very suitable and well furnished, and the stock
of working appliances is as good as that found in Public schools.”
From the Mudgee district the inspector reports that “ the
Denominational schools are substantial structures, well organized
and fully supplied with all requisites.” On the other hand
there are indications in these reports that many Public school
buildings are far from satisfactory. The inspector in the
Armidale district says that “ half the number are fair to good,
and the remainder are from tolerable to bad.” It is a great
mistake to suppose all Public school buildings are first-class.
The Council only consented lately to erect new premises in Molong
after a telegram had appeared in your columns stating that over
a hundred old newspapers had been used to fill up chinks in the
walls. There is little doubt that the average Denominational
school premises throughout the colony are quite on a nar with
those used for Public schools.


3. It is complained that the money required to keep the
buildings in repair is raised by entertainments, &c. I answer
that it does not concern the State where the money comes from.
+-U i j, arr y were t° re nt a house I suppose he would not require
the landlord to tell him how he procured the funds to keep it in
repair, or even how he managed to get the money to build it.
4. That the parishioners do not want the schools, and that
many are only kept open because the Bishop’s consent cannot
be had to close them. But the fact that last year, taking the
aggregate enrolment, an army of about 15,000 Church of
England children attended the schools is a clear proof that a
very large body of parents the daily religious instruction,
and prefer them to Public schools.
In a letter in your issue of the 19th, Dr. Barry boasted that
the comparative cheapness of the Denominational schools had
been refuted a hundred times. He has now brought forward
V s * ea( iing evidence, and I leave your readers to judge with
what result. I think it will be admitted by all candid minds
that the economical is no ground whatever for their destruction,
but is a strong argument for their continuance. It is also my
conviction that when the excitement concerning the stock
argument, the Pastoral,” has subsided, that the majority will
see that it will be most unwise to close those Church of England
schools, which have done, and are doing, such good service to
the btate. I am, your obedient servant,
Orange, 31st December, 1879. F. B. BOYCE.
The Cost of the Denominational Schools.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
® ra > f beg permission to reply through your columns to
my opponents on the above question. I had stated, in your
issue of 9th ultimo, that in the previous year —for 81,229
children in Public schools only, the cost was £250,173 lls.Gd.,
and for 35,028 children in Denominational schools, was £31.495
7s. and stated that the relative cost of the two systems was
£3 Is 7d., as against 19s. Bd. per scholar. The Eev.’ Dr. Barry
combats those plain facts, and has several times asserted lately
that the greater cheapness of the Public school system has been
proved a hundred times. It may have been to his satisfaction,
but many who have gone into the matter most certainly disagree
with him. It is worthy of note that at the late Education meet-
ing in the Protestant Hall, one who has been a leading member
of the defunct League confessed publicly that Dr. Vaughan had
done more to advance education than the League could have
done in twenty years, thus candidly acknowledging the inherent


Weakness of its arguments, and that the present movement was
due not to statesmanship but to the far-famed “ Pastoral.”
It is quite unnecessary to entangle the question with matters
which do not properly belong to it, and which have been intro-
duced. Provisional and Half-time schools are in sparsely peopled
districts, and the former have unclassified teachers, so I have
not included them in the figures quoted. It would have been
unfair to have done so, as Denominational schools are classed
and ought to he compared with Public schools, which are their
supposed equals. Further, why mix up the question of the pro-
ficiency of pupils with the cost? On this point it is a mistake
to say that the Denominational schools do not produce such
good results as all other State schools. Page 9of the Council’s
last report most clearly shows that they are infinitely superior
to the Provisional and Half-time. The same page shows that
by a small per centage they are slightly inferior to Public schools,
but that is more than compensated for by the additional
Scriptural and historical instruction given of which the inspectors
take no account. It was also unnecessary to introduce the
question of “ payment by results.” Sir Henry Parkes has
brought in a bill to destroy the Denominational schools, and to
abolish the compromise under the existing Act. He has raised
a definite issue. The question is—Shall the system, as it is
working under the present Act, stand or fall ? Shall the Denomi-
national schools that remain be destroyed or not P
Further, Dr. Barry does not appear to argue fairly, and he
misrepresents me. My figures are founded on the aggregate
enrolment and total expenditure of the whole year of 1878.
He takes the enrolment of the last quarter of the year, and
divides the expenditure for the whole year by the lesser number,
manifestly producing a much higher amount per child, and com-
plains that I have taken off 11s. 4d. per child from the Denomi-
national cost, He also overlooks that I included the expense
of buildings for the Public schools, and accuses me of adding
17s. per child to the cost of the latter. These differences, he
twice says, “ are worth repeating,” and the error runs through
his figures. I fear there is some inconsistency on Dr. Barry’s
part in this. If he frankly acknowledges the difference as an
error on his part, I shall be satisfied; but if he maintains it, I
shall consider that he is either wilfully unfair, or that, great as
he is in controversial theology, he is altogether at sea when
dealing with figures. I might mention that the relative cost
appears to be from the average attendance —Public schools,
38,464 scholars, £6 10s. per head; Denominational, 15,510
scholars, £2 4s. sd. Thus, under a different mode of reckon-
ing the proportions are still fairly preserved.
After clearing the question somewhat, I now notice that in
your well-written leader of the 2nd instant that it is stated that
the bare cost of tuition, taking the average attendance, is 9s. Bd.


per child less in the Denominational schools than in the Public
schools. The difference is attributed to the fact that the Church
schools are chiefly in centres of population, and have an average
attendance of 91 as against 61 ; and that it is cheaper to work
large schools than small. Ido not argue that an uniform
system Avould be no saving whatever, but rather that by
economising in one direction there would be a greater loss in
another. It may be remarked, however, as the Council says in
page 11, that many of the Public schools with few scholars for
the teacher are worked cheaply, which ought to lower the
average cost. There are over 200 teachers in Public schools
with salaries of less than £IOO per annum, as against only
twelve in the Denominational. Further, after a certain point
the working of two schools into one produces but a small saving.
In the Public schools in the year in question, with an attendance
from 200 to 300, as compared with those of from 300 to 500, the
cost is the same within twopence per head. In view of these
facts, is it probable that if the Denominational schools are
destroyed there will be any saving in the bare cost of tuition
over and above the 9s. Bd. per child already less than that in
the Public schools ?
The bare outlay for tuition is not, however, the only cost of
the Public school system, as there are the large items of build-
ing, rent, repairs, and furniture. Why should they be excluded P
Here is the grand difference between the cost of the two systems,
as the denominations have to provide their own buildings, &c.,
and keep them in proper repair. That they do so and thus save
the State a large outlay is clear ; and I quoted the reports of
the Council’s Inspectors to prove that the buildings were on an
average equal, if not superior to the average Public school
buildings. Mr. J. B. Durham, who gives a solitary case at
Paddington, is wrong in saying that I gave my own opinion.
I produced the best authorities. An illustration of the aid to
the State is seen by several school buildings of different Churches
being used by the Council five days a week at various rents,
such as £1 per week and upwards. These rents are being paid
until the Council shall have erected its own schools, and in the
meantime they form a handsome addition to the income of the
particular Churches. Where there is a Denominational school
the buildings are used by the State free of all charge. Thus by
the denominations providing the buildings the system is Church
aid to the State, and not State aid to religion.
There are two ways of dealing with the cost of Public
school buildings—one is to let the outlay stand as a part of the
system for the year in which it has been incurred. Those who
approve of that course must admit the relative cost of the two
systems for 1878 to be exactly as I have stated, 19s. Bd. as
against £3 Is. 7d. They would do so in the hope that the cost


o£ the buildings, &c., would be less in other years. Since, how-
ever, the principle has been abolished that residents should pay
one-third of the cost, the amount has been uniformly higher
than that of tuition. In 1876 it Avas £96,899 ; in 1877, £ll3,
395; in 1878, £148,486. It promises to be an enormous item
in the future, as not only are many new buildings and enlarge-
ments constantly needed, but it is unlikely through rivalry and
other causes, that those towns which'have the poorer buildings
erected under the one-third system will remain satisfied while
there are school-houses so greatly superior in the neighbouring
communities. The item for repairs is large, and will increase
as the buildings become a little old. The destructiveness of
children is well known, and many landlords refuse to let houses
to schools, because of the serious wear and tear. If therefore
the expense of the building is to stand as the cost for the year
inwhichithas been incurred, there is every probability of education
remaining greatly dearer in our Public schools than in the
Denominational. The other way to deal with this part of the
question is to capitalize the value and expenditure on buildings
from the commencement, and allow the annual interest as the
cost of that part of the system for the year. This is probably
the fairest plan, as it does not overburden a single period, but
reasonably distributes the cost. Of course on this style of com-
putation, whilst making the cost less at present, the expense of
the system would steadily increase year by year, whilst that of
the Denominational would remain almost stationary.
I think nothing has been advanced to disprove the statement
that the cost of education in our Denominational schools is about
one-third of that under the Public school system.
It has been said an uniform system would produce better
results as a whole. It should not be forgotten, however, that
this uniformity, which is so strenuously advocated, will produce
bitter non-conformity. The Roman Catholics will have their
own schools. Thousands of children now largely under the con-
trol of the State will be handed over to the Jesuits, Marist
Brothers, Sisters of St. Joseph, and other teaching religious
orders. Any one who views the subject in the light of their
movements throughout this and the two neighbouring colonies
can, I think, come to no other conclusion. Uniformity, there-
fore, will not reach them, and I submit that any educational
arrangements that fail to reach a very large number of children
must be defective. Why should the State, if it desires to
educate all, not use both its hands F With its strong right hand
in Public schools, the majority of children will doubtless be
reached, and with the good left hand in Denominational schools
in centres of population, Bible-loving Protestants and the
Roman Catholics will be reached. Why should the State work
with one hand only, and allow the other to hang useless by its


side P Such may be uniformity, but it is not true statesmanship
or Christian liberality. This point appears all the more forcible
when the work the Denominational schools are able to accomplish
is manifestly cheaper, in some cases much superior, and, as a
whole, equally efficacious in carrying out the supremely important
object the State has in view, which I conceive to be the education
of every child throughout the colony,
I am, &c., E. B. BOYCE.
Orange, January 10th, 1879.
The Education Question.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE HERALD.
Sir, In reply to the Bev. J. C. Kirby, who, I imagine has
appeared on the scene to rescue Dr. Barry, I beg to say that, as
the question had arisen as to what the cost actually was between
the Denominational and Public schools, the introduction of
questions of the proficiency of pupils seemed needlessly to
enlarge the point. There can be no objection to discussing the
matter ; but I refer to it again merely as a last word from me
on that subject and the cost of the schools.
Permit me again to state that those are mistaken who say
that Denominational schools are inferior in comparison with ail
other State schools. In proof I give the exact figures in the
table of proficiency at page 9of the last report Public schools,
below standard, 843 ; up to standard, 31*4 ; above standard,
24-1. Provisional—below standard, GG*5 ; up to standard, 4-6 ;
above standard, 6. Half-time—below standard, 57*4 ; up to
standard, 12’9 ; above standard, B*9. Denominational—below
standard, 39; up to standard, 2G‘7 ; above standard, 22, All
—below standard, 43-5 ; up to standard, 24-3 ; above standard,
18-8,
This statement unmistakably shows the Denominational
schools to be decidedly superior in comparison with the others,
as a whole. I love to argue fairly, and again admit that com-
paied with Public schools only, the per centage of proficiency
is not quite so great in secular subjects, the difference being
what Mr. Kirby says. That, however, is to be expected, because
more time in Denominational schools is devoted to religious and
some historical instruction, of which the inspectors take no
account. Religion is the foundation of true morality; parents
desire their children to be not only sharp and clever, but also to
be virtuous and good, and consequently feel that the little less
secular instruction is more than compensated for by the religious
training given. It may be added that in the Church of England
schools the teachers have not only been selected from the
Council s staff for their intelligence and classification, but also


for their high moral characters, which usually have helped to
give a healthy tone to the schools.
Eegarding the buildings used for the Denominational schools,
it is unfair to pick out two or three bad ones, and judge the whole
IGO from them. I know several overcrowded, many unsuitable,
and some exceedingly poor Public schools, but I do not judge of all
by them. Comparisons can alone be made by the average of each
system, and I reassert that the Denominational buildings are
quite equal on an average to those used for Public schools. When
alluding to the subject in your issue of the 3rd I did not give my own
opinion, though I might have stated that all the Denominational
buildings I happened to know were remarkably good. I pre-
ferred quoting the statements of several of the inspectors of the
Council of Education, who are supposed to have no political
bias, and are required to report annually on the material con-
dition of all school premises. It is unnecessary to repeat their
words, but they fully prove my assertion. In fact, Mr. J. D.
Bradley, the inspector of the district with Maitland for its head
quarters, could scarcely have used expressions more suitable to
the case. He says, “ The buildings used for Denominational
schools are with two or three exceptions very suitable, and well
furnished, and the stock of working appliances is as good as
that found in Public schools.” I trust Mr. Kirby, will
forgive me if I prefer the opinions of the Inspectors to his
own.
Eegarding the cases in which residences are needed. I have
shown that by an addition of salary equal to 2s. Bd. per child,
the Council could supply all at the rate of £5O per annum each.
The relative cost of the two systems on the aggregate enrolment
in the year in question was 19s. Bd. per child in the Denom-
inational, as against £8 Is. 7d. in Public schools, a difference of
over 200 per cent, ; surely the Government cannot expect the
Denominations to do its work much cheaper. In passing, I
might mention that the Eev. E. Dunstan, in a speech at Eorbes
last week, computed that the extra cost to the country, if the
85,000 Denominational children were sent to Public schools,
would be nearly £70,000 per annum.
The principle of the existing Act for which I contend does
not admit the introduction of new Denominational schools in
small places. It is that principle alone which is on its trial.
New schools have so rarely been opened in centres of population
simply because of the hostility of the Council of Education.
who applied for one had first of all to make up their
minds to a determined fight. In both the Petersham and
Grenfell cases appeals had to be made to Parliament. The
unfairness of administration during so many years has done
much to injure the system, which, but for its inherent vitality,
would probably have long since succumbed.


As the leading cry of secularists is “ No Popery,” the most
important part of Mr. Kirby’s letter is that which refers to the
monks and nans. He fails to show that a system which would
not reach a large section of the community is not defective, but
endeavours to prove that, as regarding the Roman Catholic
children falling into the hands of Jesuits and others, we have
and shall have monks and nuns, whether or no.
I am aware that some ladies of the order of the Sisters of
St. Joseph have been appointed by the Council to Denomi-
national schools. There is a discretionary power, and the fault
of which, Mr. Kirby complains, must rest with the Council,
which, fortunatelv, will soon cease to exist. Their numbers are
very small indeed in comparison with the body of Roman
Catholic teachers —about one in eighteen. It must not be for-
gotten, however, that all the Roman Catholic schools with the
“ Sisters ” referred to are under the regular supervision of in-
spectors, who are chiefly Protestant, and who can enter the
schools at any hour of the day, with or without notice. The
books and secular curriculum generally are precisely the same
as in Public schools. The teachers are frequently more anxious
to please the inspectors than the priests. The reports of the
several examinations are published side by side with those of the
Public schools, and prove good progress is made. The Council’s
system of teaching, which tends to develop the thinking powers,
is fully carried out, and the State gives a fair secular education
in those schools to an army of children who will never be reached
bv the narrowness of uniformity. Mr. Kirby says I wish to
frighten good Protestants into keeping up the present system.
I merely, however, place the clear inevitable before your readers.
Archbishop Yaughan has stated that in the event of the with-
drawal of Government aid that he would use to do the work
the Jesuits, the Franciscans, the Marist Brothers, the Christian
Brothers, the Xaverian Brothers, the Premonstratensians, and
the different orders of the Sisters, It can be seen that this is
not a mere boast, as there are now fifty-one “ close ” schools
under the Sisters and others, principally in the country parts,
and therefore how easy it will be to maintain them through the
cheapness of the system in the centres of population where the
Denominational schools chiefly are ? The reading and other
books in such schools will tend in every way to help the Church,
and if an inspector desires to enter he will be politely told that
the schools are private and that he has no business there. To
me it is astonishing that Protestants who appear to distrust
every step taken by Rome should willingly agree to the transfer
of many thousand children now largely under State control to
the Jesuits and their friends. The child-like simplicity of those
Protestants who imagine that the bill before the country will
close Roman Catholic schools would be amusing were it not for


the seriousness o£ their delusion. Thus the penalty for injustice
and illiberality will he a dual system of the worst kind.
Mr. Kirby says that “ payment by results ” is the Roman
Catholic side of the question, and that but a small minority sup-
port the Denominational schools. In upholding those schools
which have daily praise and prayer and the whole Bible, I con-
sider I take the Protestant and Liberal side. Protestantism and
secularism are not the same. I may add that I conceive the
true issue before the country to be, shall we have any religion in
any of our schools or not ? The effect of the bill if passed, must
necessarily be to ere long sweep all religion from the State
schools. Should they become “ Godless,” the minority will
have the consolation of feeling that their hands are clean, and
their consciences clear of the great wrong inflicted on the
country. F. B. BOYCE,
Orange, 23rd January, 1879.
The Unholy Alliance.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE WESTERN ADVOCATE.
Sir. —Your correspondent “ Churchman ” appears to view
the Education question from the light of the Pastoral, instead of
remembering that our first duty is to our own children, and
that the real issue is whether there shall be any religion in our
schools or not. The destruction of Denominational schools in
Victoria and Queensland was the prelude to the abolition of
religion from all State schools. To be consistent, the State when
there are no Denominational schools will have to make education
purely secular, and then Archbishop Vaughan will turn round
and say “ Ah ! you make your schools Godless after all.”
The Bishop of Sydney is one who, I believe, has done more
for Protestantism than any man who has ever come to this
colony. He is wise and far-seeing, and also knows the main
issue, not forgetting first principles, and especially that secular-
ism is not true Protestantism.
“ Churchman’s ” letter is based on the idea that Denomi-
national schools mean monetary State aid to religion, but in
reality they are the contrary. The masters are allowed to give
religious instruction during one-fifth of the school time ; but as
the Bishop shows the Churches by providing the buildings con-
tribute more than one-fifth to the whole cost of the school.
Thus the State dees not pay for the teaching of pernicious
doctrines as “ Churchman ” says. The arrangement merely
means State permission to teach religion. The same principle
is recognised in Public schools, where priest and parson alike
have State permission to give religious instruction. “ Church-
man’s ” argument if carried out would ultimately lead to the


suppresion of all religion. There is now freedom for Romish
priests and Protestant ministers to preach sermons wherever
they like, but he might argue ministers must not preach because
priests do. Because some misuse a good thing is it to be sur-
rendered ? When Martin Luther began to read his Bible did
he say this book must be burnt or suppressed because the
Church of Rome has abused it ? It would be wrong for the
Church of England to surrender the many Christian privileges
of her own schools merely because unsound doctrine was taught
in others.
Out of the 35,000 children last year in Denominational
schools about 15,000 were of the Church of England. Pastor
Chiniquy, when in Orange, most earnestly recommended that
the Bible should be taught in all Public schools, and that they
should be opened with prayer. Why should the Bishop of
Sydney help to destroy those schools which have the Bible, and
in which both prayer and praise are regularly heard ? They
give the same secular teaching as the Public schools, and in
addition, daily religious instruction from that book which is
alike the only foundation of true morality, and of our country’s
greatness.
The differences between Dr. Vaughan and the Bishop of
Sydney are distinct. The former wants payment by results,
which upsets the present system ; and the latter supports the
Public Schools Act, which includes the present Denominational
schools, and he also advocates compulsory education, etc.
Dr. Vaughan, if he supports them, must abandon everything for
which the Pastoral was written. The term “ unholy alliance ”
was raised as a mere election cry, and by men who were beaten
in argument. Striking pictures might with equal justice have
been drawn of an “ unholly alliance” on the other side, between
Godfearing though mistaken men, and representatives of an
infidel antichrist. By a little sketch of the imagination, two
well-known doctors of divinity might have been pictured walk-
ing to the poll arm in arm with Mr. Charles Bright, and
followed by several spiritist mediums. The history of this
question will some day be written, and it will be seen that the
Bishop of Sydney acted as a brave man in resisting public
opinion, and if the result is that all religion is driven from our
schools, his hands will at all events be clean, and he will have
faithfully done his duty.
I am, etc.,
Orange, 29th December. F. B. BOYCE.


The True Issue.
TO THE EDITORS OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHURCHMAN.
Sirs, — The true issue before the country in this educational
crisis is, “ Shall there be any religion in our State schools or
not ?” The destruction of the Denominational schools will be
the immediate prelude as in other colonies to the entire abolition
of all religion from our schools, even to the withdrawal of aid
from our Affiliated Colleges. To be consistent, the State, when
there are no Denominational schools, wall have education wholly
secular. Archbishop Vaughan will then be able to turn round
and say, “ Ah ! you must own that you have made your schools
godless after all.”
The Metropolitan has thoroughly floored in argument the
advocates of an uniform system. They could not answer, and
so like schoolboys ran off crying “no popery.” They merely
echoed a well-known war cry used in England for party purposes
as often on the side of wrong as that of right. Titus Oates,
when the supposed plot was shown to be false, still shouted
even in the stocks “no popery.” At the East Sydney election
Dr. Renwick is reported to have said, “ The question is, shall
the Queen of England reign in this country or the Pope of
Rome ?” Never was a falser issue placed before an intelligent
electorate. Never were men’s first duties, which undoubtedly
are to their own children, so utterly lost sight of. Never were
the true foundations of peaceful homes and national prosperity
so completely ignored. The question w 7 ould have been correctly
put if it had been said, “ Shall the Protestant Standard and the
infidel followers of Charles Bright rule the Country, or men w T ho
love the glory of the great Redeemer ?” Yet the electors said
we will close our own schools in which true religion is daily
taught, so as to close Roman Catholic schools. A working man
described the situation by a homely and expressive saying.
Protestants, he remarked, are acting “ like the man who bit off
his nose to spite his face.”
At this juncture to allay this anti-Roman Catholic feeling,
which just now promises to be so disastrous to our religious life
generally, there are four suggestions I w'ould respectfully make—
1. Let Christians show the difference between Protestant-
ism and Secularism, especially, that one is founded on the Bible
and the other on infidelity.
2. Let those who love the Bible cease for the present from
any attacks on the Church of Rome, so as not to help to main-
tain the present panic. It would be well also for the clergy to
show the encroaching nature of the insiduous infidelity of the
age.


8. Let the advocates of the present liberal policy point out
that Roman Catholics will have their own schools", and that
nothing in a free State like ours will close them. The abolition
of Denominational schools means that the Roman Catholic
children in them will be taught by the Jesuits, Marist Brothers,
Nuns, and others teaching religious orders. At present the
State largely controls these children. They are taught under
the Council’s system and out of the Council’s books, and there
is the full right of inspection which is constantly exercised. All
will be changed under the Jesuits. Pastor Chiniquy has shown
that the chief object of Jesuitical education, apart from the
erroneous principles inculcated, is to cramp the intellect, develop
the memory at the expense of the thinking powers, and lead the
mind from every point to trust the Church. On the contrary,
in schools under the Council the main object is to develop the
thinking powers. If a man thinks for himself, he is likely to
be no slave, but free, and no longer priest-ridden. That these
schools can be supported there is not a shadow of a doubt. Are
there not already fifty such in small places in this colony, and
consequently how easy it will be to sustain them in the centres
of population ! This argument if fully worked out is unanswer-
able when used by Protestants. Let it be remembered that it is
far wiser to keep the Romish children four hours out of the five
each day under entire State control than to pass them over body,
soul and spirit to the Jesuits.
4. It may also be pointed out that if we neglect or only
partly teach children the truths of our religion, and the Roman
Catholics persistently and successfully teach theirs it will
eventually give them an immense advantage. In a few years
perhaps a Protestant layman taught in an almost secular school
may meet a Roman Catholic layman who has been daily trained
in all the mysteries and intricacies of his faith and so armed at
all points with arguments. The latter will conquer in the fight.
If we neglect and Roman Catholics teach religion, it will greatly
tend to the future dominance of their Church.
There is little doubt that whether the Public Instruction
Bill passes through Parliament with its 2Gfch clause or not, the
education question will be fought out at the coming general
election. The war cry of the secularists will be “No Popery,”
and that alone. At present the great body of Protestants over-
look the true issue and only view the question as one between
themselves and the Catholics. It is my firm conviction that the
only chance of victory for those who believe that there should be
religion in our schools is to meet and overcome that “No
Popery ” cry with convincing argument, and I may add with
that withering sarcasm which its hollowness so richly deserves.
I am, &c. ROCK.
13th January, 1880.


The Education Question.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EVENING NEWS.
Sir, —Those who look right through this question cannot
hut see that the real point is—shall we have any religion in our
schools or not ? In other colonies the abolition of Denomi-
national schools was immediately followed by the sweeping of
all religion from all State schools, and in one colony the name
of our Lord was obliterated from the reading books. The
Scripture lessons could not be maintained because they were
objected to by Roman Catholics, and the State having removed
all their advantages, could not tax them to teach Protestant
children religion. Thus the State, to be consistent, had to make
education wholly secular. Religion, which is the foundation of
morality, had to be left out. The schools became godless.
That such will be the result here, if the Denominational schools
are destroyed, is certain. Our first duty is to our own children.
Why should they be seriously injured merely to aim a blow at
Rome ? I heard the question stated expressively by a workman
in a homely proverb. “ Protestants,” he remarked, “ are acting
like the man who bit off his nose to spite his face.” _
There seems to be a general concensus of opinion that no
education is complete without religion. Is it not somewhat
mean of the State to throw the teaching of it wholly on voluntary
societies ? Why should the State expect its educational work
in that important branch to be done for nothing ? Some say
throw it on the clergy. I. am a member of the Church of
England, and from a somewhat wide experience can say that
there are no men of any profession in the colony so over worked
as the clergy of the Church of England. The advocates of an
uniform system should prove that they are sincere by guarantee-
ing the stipends of 15 catechists, at £l5O a year, to teach
religion in the public schools in and near Sydney, If they did,
probably Dr. Barker might cease his opposition to the extinction
of those admirable schools which now have daily praise, prayer,
and Biblical intruction.
The change proposed by the 2Gth clause of the bill is a
violent one, and Sir Henry Parkes has given no reason worthy
of a statesman for making it. 160 schools, containing an ag-
gregate enrolment, according to the last report, of 35,000
children are, I repeat, to be destroyed. They are conducted
under the same regulations with the same inspection, with the
same class books, and same national secular curriculum as the
Public schools, and with fairly equal results. The cost to the
State is one-third of that in Public schools —19s. Bd. per child
as against £8 Is. 7d. The saying, why should we pay for two
classes of schools ? is answered by the plain fact that the two


systems together are infinitely cheaper than one would be. If
all the Denominational children were sent to Public schools
would they not cost as much per head as those now there ?
Would not that mean the enormous additional expenditure of
£70,000 per annum? As a matter of State policy, the case can
scarcely be argued. The Bishop of Sydney stands out before the
country unanswered, and, I believe, unanswerable.
The only reply really made to him has been that of an
“unholy alliance.” If, however, there be an alliance with
Eome merely because both vote the same way, there must also
be an alliance on the other side with the infidel—antichrist.
By a little stretch of the imagination a lamentable picture might
have been drawn at the late election of doctors of divinity walk-
ing arm in arm to the poll with a leading free-thought lecturer,
and followed by several spiritist mediums, unitedly going to vote
against those schools which have the Bible.
But what would be the gain of uniformity ? Echo answers
what ? Someone says cheapness, but hard facts have over-
whelmingly proved the contrary. Others say better secular
teaching, but the warmest advocates must admit such would be
infinitesimal, and so really unimportant. But even an infini-
tesimal improvement is doubtful. Competition is the life of
many things besides trade, and between different schools it has
been highly beneficial. With no competition in the centres of
population our Public schools may degenerate and sink into a
lethargic condition, and so become eaten up with the red tape-
ism which now surrounds so many government institutions.
Those two arguments, cheapness and effectiveness, are the sheet-
anchors of uniformity, but when analysed vanish into airy
nothing. Uniformity is useful in small country places large
enough to support but one school; but it is a grand mistake in
centres of population, where Denominational schools chiefly are.
But what would be the loss by uniformity ? Firstly, a bitter
nonconformity, which will show itself at every general election ;
secondly, the early abolition of all religion from the Public
schools; thirdly, a very large increase of cost; fourthly, a
defective system. Two systems will reach more children than
one. Any educational arrangements that fail to reach a very
large number of children must be defective. The majority of
Roman Catholics will not be reached by Public schools. They
will have their own schools under Jesuits, Marist Brothers, and
other teaching religious orders. Now the children are under
the full control of the State for four hours out of the five each
day. Now their thinking powers are being developed, and there
is every probability of their growing up fairly educated and free.
The difference between Jesuitical education and that under the
Council has been well described by Pastor Chiniquy. Those
who imagine the Roman Catholic schools will be closed by the


bill can have but a slight knowledge of their system. It is
strange that the many Protestants who foresee it would not prefer
keeping the children under State Control, as they undoubtedly
now very largely are.
I trust some statesmanlike reasons will be given for the
radical change proposed ; for, certainly, none have yet been ad-
vanced. The Pastoral is a very poor reason for a statesman to
adduce why some of the finest educational establishments in the
colony should be destroyed, some of which have done good service
for over 40 years ? They combine all modern improvements
with good associations. The experiment of educating children
almost without religion has yet to be proved successful. Those
who desire such a system have all they require in our Public
schools, and ought not to be so illiberal as to complain, but
cheerfully assist others who earnestly desire another mode
equally efficacious, and at one-third the cost, and which will do
valuable work for the State by gathering in thousands of children
which Public schools alone will signally fail to reach.—
I am, your obedient servant,
ROCK.
The Protestant Side of the Education Question.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EVENING NEWS.
Sir, —It having been clearly proved that the continuance of
the compromise under the existing Act is more economic, will
reach more children than public schools only, and is a broader
and more advantageous policy generally than that in the pro-
posed bill, it may be asked why should the Denominational
schools be destroyed ? Why should so radical a change be
made ? The only answer most men would make is “we Pro-
testants object to support Roman Catholic schools.” They
wrongly imagine that the question is only between Protestant
and Catholic.
The true issue, however, is, shall we have any religion in
our State schools or not ? Shall the State schools be wholly
secular and therefore Godless ? In a colony like ours, with no
State religion, directly all Roman Catholic advantages are
abolishei, all Protestant religion will have to be swept from
the schools in response to the crushing argument, that it is
unfair to make Roman Catholics pay to teach Protestants their
religion. The State, to be consistent, will have to make edu-
cation wholly secular. At present there is but very little religion
in Public schools ; they are now all but secular, but what re-
ligion there is will have to go. The Denominational schools
are the key to the whole religious position ; when they fall the
citadel will be taken, The capture of a mere outpost like the


scripture lessons for a few upper classes will be merely a
question of a short time, and probably, as in a neighbouring
colony, the very name of our blessed Lord will be obliterated
from the reading books, to our everlasting disgrace. The 26th
clause of the bill is an easy high road to complete secularism.
The Protestant side of the question is to support religion
in the schools. Protestantism and Secularism are very different
things. Chillingworth describes Protestants as those “ who
take the Bible only as the source from which they derive all the
principles of practice and doctrine.” It was at the Diet of
Spires in 1529 that the name Protestant was first given. To
show the foundation, I will quote from the never-to-be-forgotten
protest. “ The word is the only truth; it is the sure rule of
all doctrine and all life, and can never fail or deceive us. He
who builds on this foundation shall stand against the powers of
hell, whilst all the humane vanities that are set up against it
shall fall before the face of God.” Protestantism is thus based
on the Bible. On the other hand Secularism dispenses with the
Bible, with praise, prayer, and Christianity generally. What is
Protestantism without praise and prayer ? Where there is no
religion there can be no Protestantism. Secularism dishonours
the great principles of our faith by surrendering and rejecting
them, whilst Protestantism elevates them, and especially the
name of our Eedeemer. The Church of _ England Denomi-
national schools are supported because they inculcate Protestant
faith. They have the daily reading of God’s word, with praise
and prayer. To advocate them, in which last year there were
15,000 children, is true Protestantism, and by so doing religion
in all State Schools is maintained. On the other side, to demand
their abolition is to forfeit that name, around which so many
glories have clustered, and to take that of secularist. Thus, on
this question, Public schools only is the secular side, and the
principle of the existing Act is the Christian and Protestant
side.
In passing let me add, true Protestants believe that the
Bible can conquer error easier than Secularism can. Our Lord
said His words were “spirit and life.” St. Paul said, “ The word
of God was quick and powerful.” He also spoke of the Bible
as the “ sword of the spirit.” Why, if there be a power inherent
to the sword, should it be allowed to lie idle in its scabbard ?
But it is argued that the principle of Denominational schools
is abused by the Roman Catholics. The abuse of a good thing,
however, is no argument against it, otherwise the Bible itself
should be surrendered. It is also said that we cannot conscien-
tiously pay to teach Roman Catholic dogmas. I answer em-
phatically we do not pay. The denominations are allowed to
use one-fifth of the school time for religious instruction, but by
providing the buildings they contribute more than one-fifth of


the whole cost of the school, The State pays for the secular in-
struction only—in fact, the arrangement means Church-aid to
the State, and not State-aid to religion. In proof I quote the
relative cost to the State of the two systems, according to the
last report. In Public schools its was £8 Is. 7d. per child, and
in Denominational schools only 19s Bd. The difference arose
largely through the Churches providing the buildings.
One strong reason ivhich moves Protestants to uphold
existing arrangements is that it is not only liberal and charitable
towards Roman Catholics, but keeps their children very largely
under State control. Protestants distrust the Roman Church,
especially in the matter of education. Let it never be forgotten
Roman Catholics will have their own schools, and be it said to
their honour that they are determined not to neglect the
religious training of the young. If all Government aid were
withdrawn immediately, not a single Roman Catholic Denomi-
national school would be closed, but all would be continued
under the Jesuits, Marist Brothers, Sisters, and other teaching
religious orders. To any who know what the Church of Rome
really is, such a result appears inevitable if the 26th clause
passes. Already they have a goodly number of small “close”
schools under the Sisters in sparsely peopled places, and I ask
will it not be easy, through the cheapness of the system, to
maintain such schools in centres of population where Denomi-
national schools chiefly are ? Archbishop Vaughan has stated
that he can do so, and that any strain upon their resources
would only be temporary. In Roman Catholic Denominational
schools the secular curriculum is precisely the same as in Public
schools. The same reading-books are used, and the same
grammar and geography books, &c. The methods of instruction
are the same, and the results are much the same ; the schools
are regularly visited and examined by inspectors —mostly
Protestant —-who publish their reports side by side with those of
the Public schools. The teachers are usually trained by the
Council. They look to the inspectors for promotion, and gener-
ally are more anxious to please them than the priests. All will
be changed when the Jesuits or Marist Brothers step in and take
charge, as the schools will then become private, the Council’s
books will be set aside, and no inspectors will be admitted. To
show what may be taught, I would point out that in their read-
ing books historical facts are perverted, and everything that
tends against the Church is suppressed. Their grammar books
have the illustrations helping the teaching of the Roman Catholic
doctrines. Their geography books set forth the social and intel-
lectual condition of countries in such a way as to exalt Roman-
ism and disparage Protestanism. They show, for instance,
Ireland as prosperous before the Union, and decaying ever since.
I dare not trespass on your space to give extracts, but the more


the books are looked into by Protestants the worse they appear.
Thus, now, the children during at least four hours out of five
each day are under State control, but when the aid is withdrawn
to Denominational schools they will be handed over body, soul,
and spirit to the Jesuits and Marist Brothers, Avho will mould
them as they please. Is it not better to have them taught from
the Council’s books than those of the Marist Brothers ? I ask
which is most likely to make them free and useful citizens, the
Council’s curriculum or the Jesuits ? Whatever evils there
may be now, would they not be intensified a hundred times
under the Jesuits P I feel it is of great importance that all
Homan Catholics should be properly educated, and I earnestly
ask Protestants and others to calmly consider this point, and to
prevent the children passing from under State control into the
hands of those I have named.
But our chief duty is to our own children. Why should
we injure them by excluding religion from our schools, merely
to deal a blow, as some think, at Home ? Is it Christian or just,
or charitable ? The blow may recoil with terrible force in the
shape of an injury to ourselves. Heligion is the foundation of
righteousness and true morality. Highteousness exalteth a
nation by leavening the different paths of life, so producing
happy homes and general prosperity. It is of lasting importance
that our children should be virtuous and good as well as smart
and clever. The Earl of Shaftesbury lately said that education
without religion he abhorred from his inmost soul. Every true
Protestant should have much the same feeling. Let none lay
the flattering unction to their souls that they are taking the
Protestant side by advocating the abolition of those schools
which have the whole Bible. They who do so are on this educa-
tion question Secularists and not Protestants. There cannot be
true Protestantism where Christianity is dispensed with. Eur-
ther, let those who love the Bible keep their hands clean and
consciences clear by not countenancing any movement the im-
mediate or ultimate effect of which must be to make all State
schools entirely secular, and thus inflict an enormous wrong
which more than one generation will suffer from. —
I am, sir, &c., E. B. BOYCE.
Orange, February 9th, 1879.
The New Education Bill.
TO THE EDITORS OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHURCHMAN.
Sirs, —The humiliating and powerless position of our
beloved church during the educational controversy must have
caused the keenest pain to her faithful sons. Ever since the
Pastoral has been issued a series of disasters seem to have con-


spired together to cause the destruction of our schools. They
began with the surrender of the position in Bathurst, and the
consequent conversion to uniformity of Mr. Suttor, the Minister
of Public Instruction. The next was the resignation of
Mr. Alexander Stuart, the champion of the Denominational
system, whose loss it is difficult to estimate. That was followed
by the East Sydney election with its disastrous end, and which
I consider was largely attributable to Archbishop Vaughan
saying that Mr. Tooth was in favor of “ payment by results.”
Of such opinions Mr. Tooth should have boldly shaken himself
free, unless he held them. Since then in the Assembly the
church has been insulted by the contempt heaped on our Bishop,
and particularly by Mr. James Greenwood saying that he con-
sidered “ Dr. Zachary Barry the head man in the Church of
England.” The 26th clause was carried, because there were
scarcely any members of ability in the House to represent our
views, combined with the “ stone-walling ” policy of the unusu-
ally strong coalition ministry, which would allow no adjourn-
ment, but forced on a division at a very late hour, thus unfairly
choking reasonable discussion.
Why did so many vote with the ayes ? Not from con-
scientious conviction, but for fear of risking popular favor. So
successfully has the “ no Popery ” cry been worked up, and
anti-Bomish excitement sustained, that many of the members
themselves failed or pretended not to see the falseness of the
issue, and stabbed the Church of England, and merely because
Dr. Vaughan had attacked Public Schools. We are to feel the
knife because of the faults of another.
In our dilemma we look to the Upper House. There are
men there who have wider views, and who are far more com-
petent to deal with the Education Question than those in the
Assembly. They are not so likely to be led away by Protestant
excitement, but doubtless will deal with the question on its true
merits. What should we do at this juncture ? I answer,
agitate —agitate. Let another great meeting of churchmen be
held in the Masonic Hall to protest against this act of spoilation.
Everything that is possible should be done to strengthen the
hands of the Members of the Council favourable to our side.
It is my firm conviction that if the colony were polled, whilst
only a small minority would favour “ payment by results,” a
majority would uphold the existing Denominational schools.
Why should churchmen sit quietly and see their property de-
stroyed? Why should some of our finest educational establish-
ments be closed P What sins have they committed ? The fact
is the enemy stand defeated on every point of the controversy,
and are only winning by working upon the credulity of those
who know next to nothing of the question. A person speaking
to me lately, said : “It would be giving in to the Catholics to


keep up their schools,” He was a fair specimenof the thousands
of unthinking voters who only need educating on the true points
at issue. Their only idea is to close Roman Catholic schools.
With equal logical consistency they might vote to close St. An-
drew’s cathedral and all Protestant churches, if by so doing
they could shut up St. Mary’s and all Roman Catholic churches ;
for the existing Denominational system means, as a matter of
principle, nothing more and nothing less than State permission
to teach religion.—l am, &c.,
23rd February, 1880. ROCK.
The Triumph of the Pastoral
TO THE EDITORS OF THE AUSTRALIAN CHURCHMAN.
Sirs,— The Education Bill has passed, and in a month will
be law. The Protestant Standard and the Orangemen are satis-
find, as the Pastoral, out of which it arose, is thought to be
avenged. By those who do not see further than their noses, by
the heroes of the sounding brass and tinkling cymbal, the pagan
of victory will be loudly sounded.
It requires, however, biit very little foresight to see that the
triumph is in reality on the other side. Firstly, a blow has been
received by the Church of England. Our splendid schools,
with 15,000 children on their rolls, under daily religious instruc-
tion, will nearly all have to be closed. Some of them have been
in existence for nearly fifty years, and are regarded with affec-
tion by many of our best citizens. But the “ Pastorl ” was
written, and they must fall, Dr. Vaughan’s old antagonist,
Dr. Barker, is to feel the knife.
Secondly, a blow has been struck at our common Protestant-
ism. The new Act is the royal high road to pure secularism.
Ere long the little religion that remains in the Public schools
will be banished, and Dr. Vaughan will be able to quietly rejoice
in the fact that the Pastoral lessened the religious instruction
throughout New South Wales given to Protestant children.
Thirdly, the Roman Catholic children will be more than
ever kept under priestly control, and daily taught the dogmas
of their church. Dr. Vaughan has cared but little for Denomi-
national schools, as his recent speech at Forest Lodge proved.
Perhaps the same curriculum as the Public schools let in too
much light! There will be no inconvenient interference by the
Council with its books and inspectors, ; and under the Monks
and Nuns, the children will breathe the thoroughly Catholic
atmosphere advocated by the Pastoral. Dr. Vaughan has not
gained “ payment by results,” but he will give the children the
education he wishes, Schools kept by Jesuits, Marist Brothers


and Sisters, are worked cheaper than any other system in the
world, and by them he will fulfil his utmost desires. Are not
the fifty “ close ” schools under the Sisters, and the money now
being subscribed in different places, an earnest of that which
will be accomplished ?
Time will show who is the wiser, Sir Henry Parkes or the
Bishop of Sydney ! In view of present facts, is not the decided
and remarkable triumph of the Pastoral a certainty ? If Dr.
Vaughan deals a blow at Protestantism, and at the same time
causes the children of his flock to breathe an intensely Roman
atmosphere, is not the real object of the Pastoral more than
gained ? The sense of injustice combined with the necessity
will make his people exert themselves and turn an apparent
defeat into a marvellous victory, and which also will materially
help to permanently strengthen the papal church throughout
this colony.—l am, &c,, ROCK.
22nd April, 1880.
George Loxton and Co., Printers, i6a Bridge Street, Sydney




