



Baker
ANGUS A ROBERTSON,
89 Castlereaqh St., Sydney
BETWEEN KINO A MARKET STS.






LETTERS
OF THE
CULTURE OF THE VINE,
FERMENTATION,
AND THE MANAGEMENT OF
WINE IN THE CELLAR.
BY MARO
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
STATHAM & FORSTER,
“Australian Daily Journal” Office, 575, Lower George-itreet.
MDCCCXLIV.




CONTENTS.
LETTER I. page.
Climate—Site— Aspect—Meteorological Influences 1
LETTER 11.
Soil 7
LETTER 111.
Choice of Varieties of the Vine 16
LETTER IV.
Diseases of the Vine 30
LETTER V.
Formation of the Vineyard 35
LETTER VI.
Preparing Ground for Planting 44
Planting the Vineyard 45
LETTER VII.
Management of Vineyard after Planting 50
LETTER VIII.
Upon the Use of Manures, and the best modes of
Restoring an Exhausted Vineyard CO
LETTER IX.
Theory of Fermentation 66
LETTER X.
Wine Making 77
LETTER XL
Utensils and Buildings SO


LETTER XII.
Vintage—GATiiEniNO the Crop 93 ]
LETTER XIII.
Vintage—Crushing the Grapes 101
LETTER XIV.
Primary Fermentation—Fermentation of the Must... 100
LETTER XV.
Secondary Fermentation 11l
LETTER XVI.
Secondary Fermentation— Management of the Wine
IN THE Cf.I.EAR 118
LETTER XVII.
Preparation of Wine for Use 134
LETTER XVIII.
Description of Celear 141
LIST OF ERRATA IN “MARO.”
Page 9, line s—For "Johannisbcrger and Markebrnnner,”
read * Johannisberg and Markebrunne.”
“22, “ 19 For “ loosely set,” read “ closely set.”
“22, “ 20—For “to disease,” read “to a disease.”
“31, “ 28—For “nearer,” read “nearest.”
“33, “ 31—For “ Jbsterops,” read “ Zosterops.”
“39, “ 2—For “needs,” read “need.”
“90, “ 17—For “insertions," read “interstices."
“131, « 21—For “years,” read “years old.”


INTRODUCTION.
Nearly two years since, I commenced a Series of Letters
upon the Culture of the Vine, and the Manufacture of
Wine, to appear, from time to time, in The Australian
Newspaper. Circumstances caused an interruption in
the publication of these Letters, and the connexion hav-
ing been thus broken, it was considered most advisable
to print the whole series in the form in which it is now
presented to the public.
The original Letters were published under the
signature of “ Maro,” but the Proprietors of The
Australian Daily Journal, who have undertaken to
publish them at their own risk, having suggested that
the little volume would probably be received with greater
attention, if the authorship were avowed, I have
willingly acceded to their request, that my name might be
attached to it. Having thus consented to appear before
the public as its author, it is but just that I should say,
that I have had little leisure to devote to the duties of
authorship, and still less personal inclination so to em-
ploy the little that I have possessed. I am very conscious
of the imperfect state in which the following observations


are presented to my fellow colonists. I never in-
tended to write a book ; but having persevered during
more than twenty years in the attempt to produce a
Merchantable description of Wine, at all events for our
domestic consumption, I have been made so sensible—■
and the conviction has been strengthened with increasing
experience—of the remarkable fitness of the soil and
climate of the eastern counties of New South Wales, for
vineyard cultivation, as well as of the prevailing absence
of just ideas upon the subject, that I was induced to
make an attempt to direct the attention of our landed
proprietors to one, at least, of the veins of that vast mine
open to colonial enterprise, which, if not altogether
untried, has, at all events, been but superficially or
unskilfully worked. Such was the origin of the follow-
ing letters.
It may naturally be asked how it happens, if the
soil and climate be so favourable for vineyard culture,
that we do not see our hills clothed with vines, and their
produce the common beverage, of every class in the
community'? The reply is simple and obvious; it is
owing to the almost entire absence of practical acquaint-
ance with its details. Had our Home Government
fulfilled its duty, there would have been conveyed to
our shores, during the prevalence of the Bounty System
of Emigration, two or three hundred families of Ger-
man, Swiss, or French vine dressers. Had this been
done, vineyards would, ere this, have become common
amongst us. Not only have they omitted to perform that
which would have been the act of a wise and paternal
Government, but they absolutely interfered with private
arrangements, and refused their assent to a wise and
IV


salutary measure of Sir Richard Bourke’s Administra;
tion, which authorised the introduction, under bounties,
of a limited number of foreigners, conversant with this
species of culture, because, forsooth, they chose to
assume that such introduction would, pro tun to, inter-
fere with Emigration from the British Islands !
The want of foreign vine dressers is, however, not
the only reason why the cultivation of vineyards has
made such singularly slow progress. The colony has
been most unfortunate with respect to the sorts of vines,
which, up to a comparatively recent period, were intro-
duced into it, of which I am about to give the reader one
or two curious examples. During the earlier years of
the colony, the wars of the French Revolution were
the means of preventing communication with the Conti-
nent of Europe ; but in 1815 and 1816, my father made
a tour of eighteen months’ duration through France and
Switzerland, for the express purpose of collecting vines,
and of obtaining information respecting their culture,
previously to his return to New South Wales. In this
tour, which was made chiefly on foot, through the
greater part of the best wine districts, to the extent of
many hundred miles, he was accompanied by my
brother and myself. He returned to England in 1816,
with, I think, about thirty of the best varieties of the
vine (from six to twelve cuttings or plants of each)
which were collected in the vineyards in which they
grew, and taken from the vines, in most instances,
literally under our eyes. Circumstances preventing his
embarkation for this colony until the following year, the
whole of these vines, with a great variety of olive and fig
trees, the caper, and other valuable plants, w ere entrusted
V


to the care of a nursery man near London. In April.
1817, this collection,or what was said to Sethis collec-
tion, was embarked with us, together with several other
sorts of vines, and a number of fruit trees, and other
plants from England. At Madeira, where we touched,
the season being too far advanced to obtain cuttings at
the time, a mercantile correspondent undertook to pro-
cure and forward to Sydney, by the first eligible
opportunity, several tubs full of the best varieties of
wine grapes (which are understood to be steven in num-
ber) cultivated in the island.
tn October, 1817, a great part of the collection we
had with us was landed alive at Sydney, and in the
course of time throve. But after several years’ careful
cultivation, the only sorts which we obtained, were
those now known as the Gouais (La Folle), Muscat
Noir, Black Hamburgh, little Black Cluster, Miller's
Burgundy, and Cweet Water, of which, all but the first
three had been before introduced, and probably only the
first two had formed part of the original collection from
Prance. We have never been able to account in any
manner for the remainder of the French vines, and from
the information we now possess, we know that they
ought to have consisted, after making a due allowance
for deaths, of from twenty to twenty-five of the most
Valuable varieties in France. The Madeira collection
arrived in good order the following year, 1818, but
instead of comprising seven distinct sorts, consisted of
only one, and that so worthless, as to be utterly unfit
for trine, or, indeed, any other useful purpose. However
mortifying it is to discover at the end of a Voyage, that
one has incurred much trouble and expense to introduce


plants of little value, it is infinitely more so, when
several years elapse before the fact is ascertained, as in
this instance, proved to he the case. We cultivated our
vines, and in the course of time planted a vineyard of
more than an acre in extent. We fully believed that it
contained the best varieties grown in Languedoc, at
the Hermitage, Cote Rotie, in the C6te d’or, &c., &c.
And were greatly surprised to discover, when they bore
fruit, that so little variety existed amongst them ; as if
one or two sorts only were prevalent over such an
immense extent of vineyard country. Our wine, too,
did not answer expectation. In short, although the
vines flourished, the vineyard seemed to be a failure,
and ignorant of the true cause, we were half inclined to
give the matter up.
In 1825, the Australian Agricultural Company
imported other sorts of vines from the Horticultural
Society’s Garden at Chiswick. Of the genuineness of
these, there could be no doubt; and amongst them was
the Verdeilho, one of the best sorts cultivated at Madeira.
From this variety, and from two sorts of Muscat, we, in
a few years more, began to make good wine, but in very
small quantity. Having, however, now ascertained that
our earlier failures were attributable rather to the sorts
of grapes we had to plant, than to any fault in the soil,
we proceeded with greater confidence in our experiments.
But, by this time, ten or twelve precious years had been
lost.
In 1832, Mr. Busby’s collection was imported, and
the vines began to bear in 1834. The spurious nature
of our importation in 1817, was now made very evident.
I may here observe, that on two other occasions, within


my knowledge, have spurious collections been sent to
the colony, one from Xeres, the other from the Con-
stantia Vineyard ; but it would little interest the reader,
were I to enter into the details.
I have stated the foregoing facts, that the causes
of our slow progress in vineyard cultivation may be
better comprehended. With the exception of two of
the varieties of Muscat, which appear to have been for-
merly much more liable to suffer from the disease called
“the blight,” (see Letter 4,) than they are now, the
Verdeilho was the first really good wine grape intro-
duced. How different is the field now thrown open to
the cultivator ! We have varieties, the genuineness
of which is unquestionable, suited to almost every varia-
tion of our climate. The Pineaus, and others from
Burgundy, and Champagne for the colder districts;
the Scyras, Verdeilho, Carbenet, Malbec, Riesling,
Aucarot, and the Muscats, &c., for the milder; the
Rousillon grapes, the Blanquette, &c., for the warmest.
Thus, much of that which formerly impeded success, is
now removed, and if bad sorts are planted, it can only
be for want of proper precaution. The art of pruning
and dressing a vineyard is certainly difficult to teach to
an ordinary laborer ; but, if an intelligent person be
chosen, not altogether a hopeless undertaking. I have
reason to know, however, that at the present moment,
(May, 1844,) there are several families of German
Vine Dressers, who have either deluded themselves, or
have been deluded by others, into the belief, that vine-
yards might be successfully cultivated at the New Zea-
land Company’s new settlement, at Nelson; and that these
poor people are now there, in an almost starving


condition. We have requested afriend to engage,and send
up three or four of them for us, and I strongly recom-
mend those persons who desire to cultivate the vine, to
follow the example. If allowed a good ration, and a
small plot of garden ground, these Germans will he
content to hire at low money wages, and will generally
prove to be orderly and industrious servants, capable of
performing most of the ordinary operations of farm
husbandry.
In writing upon the culture of vineyards, it would
argue extreme ill-taste, were I to omit all mention of
the exertions of a fellow laborer in the same cause, who
preceded me. I allude to Mr. James Busby, who pre-
viously to his residence in New Zealand, devoted much
time to promote this object. He published first a trans-
lation of part of Chaptal’s Treatise ; subsequently a little
manual of great merit, to stimulate the smaller settlers
to plant the vine ; and lastly, a Journal of his tour in
the South of Spain, and through France, in 1831,
These successive publications are exceedingly creditable,
as well to the intelligence of Mr. Busby, as to the zeal
with which he pursued the subject. I think that any
erroneous views which may be expressed in them, are
attributable to his not having had practical experience
to the extent which was desirable ; for I am perfectly
well convinced, that had he been so fortunately circum-
stanced in that respect as myself, he would long ere
this, have given to the colony ample evidence of his
superior capability of turning that experience to the
public advantage. His three works are, I believe, now
out of print. But Mr. Busby has conferred a still
greater and more enduring benefit upon the colony by


collecting and importing the splendid assemblage of
varieties of the vine now in the Sydney Botanic Gar-
den. I have noticed this collection in one of the suc-
ceeding letters, (No. 3,) I will not, therefore, make
further allusion to it here, Monsieur D. N. Joubert has
been another benefactor. In 1837, he brought out a col-
lection of the best sorts cultivated in the Medoc, and I
am happy to bear testimony that the chief part of them
have, been easily identified, and that they bid fair to
become amongst the most valuable of our acquisitions.
I have been indebted to a friend, whose con-
tributions to science, need no commendation from
me for the valuable Note at page 32, upon the
disease called “ the blight.” Attentive observation
had almost satisfied me that this malady would prove
to be the attack of a parasitical plant, and it is
gratifying to have one’s surmise confirmed by such
undoubted authority.
If I were possessed of very moderate skill in
drawing, I could, by means of a few simple
sketches, have rendered several portions of the fol-
lowing letters much more intelligible to the reader,
and I might have furnished drawings of several imple-
ments, &e., which would probably have been useful to
our Cultivators of the Vine, There is, however, lam
assured, a difficulty in the execution, at Sydney, of
engravings, at a sufficiently low rate to enable them to
be freely introduced into a little work of this kind.
Notwithstanding these and other manifold deficiencies,
I trust this attempt will prove not otherwise than use-
ful to my fellow laborers in the Australian Vineyard.
WM. MACARTHUR.
Camden, 27th May, 1844.
X


LETTER I.
CLIMATE—SITE—ASPECT—METEOROLOGICAL
INFLUENCES.
CLIMATE.
In treating of the Ccltuiie op the Vine, in New South Wales,
it may perhaps appear superfluous to many of your readers
to offer any remarks upon the subject of climate. Certainly it
would be difficult to find a climate more propitious than that
of the County of Cumberland, and, indeed, of the whole coast,
from Illawarra to Moretonßay. Nevertheless, it is equally cer-
tain, that within 100 miles of Sydney, numerous sites exist, offer-
ing every natural advantage essential to the production of a
wine of reputation, save this first of alhrequisitcs. The great
elevation of many portions of the inland districts, must, I fear, pre-
clude all hope of their ever producing wine for their consumption.
a
LETTERS
ON THE
CULTURE OF THE VINE.


Over a still larger extent, however, in which the cultivation of
vineyards has not, that I am aware of, been hitherto attempted,
they might be established with every prospect of success. Their
climate, it is true, is not comparable for this purpose to that of
the coast; hut how vastly superior to that of even some of the
most renowned wine districts of Europe! In every one of our
inland counties, from the Murrumbidgee northwards, wherever
the elevation does not much exceed 2000 feet, situations exist in
which the vine would flourish, if the proper varieties were se-
lected and well managed. What a source of saving and advan-
tage would itnot be to the inhabitants of Yass, Goulburn, Berrima,
Bathurst, &c., did their respective districts produce wine sufficient
for their own consumption. And what exists to prevent it ?
No natural obstacle certainly ; nothing hut apathy or want of
information. Wherever the climate is warm enough for the
successful cultivation of the earlier or dwarf varieties of maize;
wherever the peach or the fig can he made to bring their fruits
to complete maturity, without the assistance of walls, there must
be situations warm and sheltered enough to ripen the fruit of the
vine. There are varieties of grapes in the colony well adapted
for cold and elevated sites; some of them are cultivated in the
best vineyards of Europe. I shall point out several, which I
have had the opportunity of noticing, when I come to treat of
this part of the subject.
S I TE.
The sites recommended as the best, by all writers upon the
vine, are the sides of gently sloping hills, sufficiently elevated
above the valleys or plains, to be beyond the influence of the hoar
frosts of Spring, and the chill humid exhalations occasionally
prevalent in such situations. The first may, in a single night,
frustrate the hopes of the cultivator by cutting off the young
shoots, and the last always greatly retard the maturity of the
fruit, and are at times, otherwise prejudicial. In the interior of
the colony it will be advisable to pay scrupulous attention to this
point, that nothing may be neglected which can contribute to the
perfect maturity of the crop. Towards the coast, these preeau


lions may be less rigourously observed; nevertheless, it is im-
portant not to overlook them. I know two vineyards in the same
neighbourhood, one in a valley or plain, near stagnant water, the
other on the side of a hill, at an elevation of from 100 to 150
feet. The crop in the latter is ripe usually three weeks or a
month earlier than the crop in the former. In the low situation
much damage was sustained during three successive seasons from
hoar frosts, (on one occasion so late as the Bth November,) and
the late-ripening varieties of grapes with difficulty attain com-
plete maturity : whilst on the hill, the frost has never been known
to affect the young shoots, and every variety of grape attains
early and certain perfection.
In Europe, some of the best vineyards are situated on the
sides of very steep hills. On the banks of the Rhone, for in-
stance, the vineyards which produce the delicious wine called
Cote Rotie are situated on such abrupt slopes, and have of
necessity been formed into terraces so narrow, supported by
such high walls, that from the opposite bank of the river, they
literally have the appearance of gigantic flights of steps. The
cultivation of these abrupt hills must be very expensive. Nothing
but the high prices obtained for their produce could enable the
proprietors to continue it-
The vineyards which produce a large portion of the best
wines of Bordeaux, are said, on the contrary, to be situated in an
extensive plain, many of them upon gentle undulations rising
out of marshy ground; nay, the “ Palus ,” a tract of rich alluvial
land, on the right bank of the Garonne, near its confluence with
the Dordogne, and formed by the inundations of these rivers, is
remarkable for producing a wine of great body and full flavour.
But, although the crops in the “ Palm" are generally much
more abundant than those of the adjacent hills, they are said to
be more frequently damaged by spring frosts, and to be some-
times altogether cut off. These instances of the successful culti-
vation of the vine in such situations are to be considered in France,
rather as exceptions to a general rule. The plain or low situa-
tion must generally be objectionable here for the causes above
mentioned; the abrupt hill also, both on account of the great
outlay required, in the first instance, and the expense of main-
B 2


taining it in proper cultivation. In this climate, subject as it is
to tremendous bursts of rain and to long droughts, every slope
planted with the vine, however gentle, ought to be terraced. If
the inclination be rapid, greater for instance than one foot in 5
or 6, the expense of forming the terraces would be discouraging,
and without them the soil would soon be washed away by the
heavy rains; whilst, in long droughts, the plants would be de-
prived of a proper supply of moisture.
Were I to choose a situation for a vineyard, it should be
elevated from 100 to 300 feet above the neighbouring plains or
valleys, open to the rising and meridian sun (unless in parts of
the colony very subject to spring or early summer frosts, when
I should choose a full northern aspect), sheltered cither by wood
or rising ground from the violent land winds, but in itself of very
gentle inclination. I should not desire a greater slope, for
instance, than one foot in 30 to one in 60. I shall hereafter
point out the method I consider to be the most advantageous to
adopt in forming a vineyard on a hill side.
ASPECT.
The most favourable aspects for the vine in this colony, are
those from east to north, and in the colder and more elevated
regions, even round, perhaps, as far as north-west, but sheltered as
much as possible by the ground or by thick wood from the south
south-east round to the north-west. In the county of Cumber-
land, I should prefer a north-eastern aspect, sheltered from north
north-west to south south-east. As it is rarely that one can
meet with a site comprehending every advantage, I shall content
myself with observing that the great object is to have the vine-
yard open to the full rays of the meridian sun, without being
exposed either to hot winds from west and north-west, or to any
of the strong land winds, usually more or less prevalent in the
spring. Violent winds are apt to break off the young shoots
when they have attained from a few inches to two or three feet
in length, and besides tearing the young leaves, may produce
great damage at the periods of the flowering and the ripening of
the fruit. It is not advantageous, however, to have any shel-
4
LETTERS ON THE


tering wood within thirty or forty yards of the vineyard, unless
it be a low hedge, or shrubbery of moderate height.
METEOROLOGICAL INFLUENCE S.
The state and temperature of the atmosphere is of great
importance to the Vine, particularly at certain seasons. Abun-
dant rains, during the latter part of the Autumn and the Winter,
may in this colony be considered as favourable, so also are occa-
sional moderate mild rains, until the fruit begins to swell to
maturity. In the Spring, the great evil to be guarded against is
the hoar frost, which sometimes occurs late in low situations,
even in the county of Cumberland, but much more frequently as
we advance into the interior. There is a very simple preventive,
which every person possessing a vineyard in a situation exposed
to Spring frosts, should be prepared to adopt. Twice this season
(on the 4th and 19th October) has a vineyard which is under my
observation, been preserved from extensive damage by the pre-
caution. Small heaps of straw, rather damp, and mingled with
a few shovels full of loose earth are placed in readiness at inter-
vals of six or eight yards, all round the vineyard, and as it is of
some extent, along some intersecting cart-ways. A dray load of
this short straw may, perhaps, be divided into from twenty to
thirty heaps. If the thermometer and the appearance of the
weather over-night indicate the possibility of frost, a vigilant look
out is commenced an hour or two after midnight. As soon as
the thermometer approaches the freezing point, or falls a little
below it, a certain number of the heaps of straw, say every sixth
or eighth, are lighted; each is so managed as to be kept smoul-
dering (which it is very easy to effect by the admixture of earth,
or by sprinkling a little over it), for about an hour. Of course
a dense smoke is produced, the state of the atmosphere prevent-
ing it from rising or dispersing. As they burn out, fresh heaps
are lighted, taking care to reserve a sufficient number to produce
the densest smoke, from sunrise to an hour after. By these
simple means, either the dew is prevented from freezing upon
the tender shoots of the vine, or if they are frozen, the sun’s rays
are prevented from acting upon them, until the slowly increasing
5
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


warmth of the atmosphere has thawed them. At the vineyard
above mentioned, on the morning of the 19th October, the ther-
mometer fell below the freezing point soon after midnight, and
was at 28 ° or 29 ° about sunrise ; no damage was done to the
vines, although potatoes not more than two hundred yards dis-
tant, were quite cut off.
High winds, as I have already observed, are very injurious at
all times. The tender shoots of some varieties of vines are apt
to be blown off by them, before they are long enough to be
tied to the stakes. Violent winds sometimes also prevent the
fecundation of the flower, and are said greatly to retard the ripen-
ing of the fruit. Cold rains, at the period of the flowering, are
also likely to render a large portion of the blossoms abortive.
A single day of cold rain m Europe, at this period, sometimes
cuts off one-third of the crop; but a mild warm rain immedi-
ately after the flower has passed, is supposed greatly to favour
the setting of the fruit. During the period of maturation, which
in this country lasts usually from five to seven weeks, it is desi-
rable that the temperature throughout the twenty-four hours,
should be as uniform as possible. At this season, as well as in
the spring, the advantage of a moderately elevated site is expe-
rienced, the variation of the temperature being much less than
in low grounds. It should not be forgotten that the maturity of
the fruit is more accelerated and, more uniformly regular, (a
very important quality) in a situation favoured with a mode-
rately high temperature, as well by night as by day, than where
the range is much greater, although the average of the twenty-
four hours is as high or higher. The damp cold which, in low
situations, at night or rather towards the morning, succeeds the
burning heat of the day, is certainly unfavourable to the quality
of the produce. Rain, in any considerable quantity, rarely fails
to produce injury, sometimes to a very serious extent, during
the period of maturation, but some varieties of grapes are much
more susceptible of being damaged than others. I shall point
out these peculiarities at the proper place. A few hours of
mild moderate rain, about a week or ten days before the fruit
is quite ripe, is considered to be very advantageous; it hastens
the maturity of the grapes, improves the quality, and increases
the quantity of the vintage.
6
LETTERS ON THE


The excessive heat which occasionally prevails during a hot
wind, sometimes causes extensive damage to the bunches of
grapes which are exposed to it, but this evil rarely, if ever,
happens if the vines have been properly managed, as I shall
shew when I come to the heads of planting and pruning. The
varieties of black grapes, after they have changed colour, are,
as might be imagined, more susceptible of injury from this
cause than the white.
The severe hail storms, which sometimes ravage-whole dis-
tricts in their devastating track, are of course destructive in the
highest degree to the hopes of the vigneron. Even showers of
smaller hail may be productive of very extensive damage. The
blow inflicted by a hailstone, even of moderate size, is apt to
bruise the tender fruit, which frequently either shrivels up in
consequence, or decays, and not unfrequently, in stages more
advanced towards maturity, may communicate rottenness to the
remainder of the bunch.
LETTER II.
SOIL.
Wirn the exception of climate there is no point of so much
importance, in determining the site of a vineyard, as the nature
and quality of the soil; and where the climate is congenial to
the grape, the choice of a proper soil may be said to outweigh
all the other considerations put together. Nor is it to the mere
surface that attention should be directed: the subsoil is at least
of equal importance, and should be examined to the depth of
several feet. The fine quality of the wines of the “ Palus,”
near Bordeaux (as mentioned in the preceding paper), is attri-
buted to a stratum of gravel and sand, 3 or 4 feet from the
surface, the soil, which is superincumbent (a rich alluvium),
being considered to bo altogether unfavourable to the produc-
tion of a wine of reputation. Strong tenacious clays and wet
7
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


situations are unfavourable to the health of the plant. These
should never be chosen. In almost every other description of
soil, provided it be loosened to a sufficient depth, the plant itself
will flourish ; but it is only where there is a considerable inter-
mixture of stone or gravel, cither in an entire or decomposing
state, that the better qualities of wine are, as a general rule, to
be expected. No matter how poor and arid the surface may be,
let their be only depth sufficient amongst the stones for its long
rambling roots to penetrate, and to a certain extent the vine
will flourish, and probably produce a rich flavoured wine. I
ought to observe, however, that light deep sands which cither
have no subsoil for a considerable depth, or which rest upon a
strong tenacious clay, are considered by the French to be unfa-
vourable for the production of good wine. And it is probable
that the same objection may, to a certain degree, extend to soils
formed by the decomposition of coarse sandstone, such as we
meet with round Sydney. Strong deep wheat lands are also
rarely planted with vines. Although they produce abundantly, the
wine from them, in France, is said to be almost invariably defi-
cient in body and flavour. They are besides considered to be
more profitably employed in the growth of grain and in other
kinds of husbandry. Although the superior warmth of our
climate may, to a certain degree, obviate the objections, which
in less highly favoured latitudes apply to this description of soils,
it will be prudent not to disregard the experience of other coun-
tries not so favourably circumstanced. Two thirds of the vine-
yards of France are, it is stated, planted in soils that could not
profitably be employed in the growth of any other species of
agricultural produce, and hence, say the French, the particular
value of this plant to them.
With the exceptions above mentioned, it appears to matter
little what rock or stone enters into the composition of the soil,
provided only it be contained in a sufficiently undecomposed state
to act as a drain to superfluous moisture, and to permit the roots
of the vine to penetrate freely in all directions. To what par-
ticular property in these stony or gravelly soils, the favourable
influence is to be attributed, does not appear to me to have been
satisfactorily explained. It cannot be to mere permeability or


facility of drainage, because it is evident that a deep sand must
be equally permeable. Whilst, on the other hand, it is well known
that several of the most celebrated vineyards of the Rhine, being
composed of various coloured marles, more or less intermingled
with stones (Johannisberger, Markebrunner, and the vineyards
at Hockheim for instance), are of so tenacious a nature, that after
rains it is not permitted to walk in them until the ground has
to some extent dried, and that in long droughts they become
seamed as it were with cracks. It merits observation, however,
that the finest Mocha coffee and the choicest kinds of tea pro-
ductions which, like wine, are valued for their aroma, are said
to be grown on soils precisely analogous to those which are found
to produce the best wines. An opinion has been put forth, and
has become prevalent, that none but very poor soils ever produce
the finer wines, and that the presence of calcareous matter is
also absolutely necessary, I believe this to be erroneous in both
instances, with respect to the first, it is very true that in cli-
mates, not naturally favourable to the vine, it rarely happens
that, when planted in very fertile soil, there is sufficient warmth
to bring the fruit to the requisite degree of maturity. The plant,
acquiring an extraordinary state of vigour, is too much disposed
to produce wood and leaves, and in the cooler climates of vine-
yard cultivation, the fruit is rarely or never in such case suffi-
ciently provided with saccharine matter to make good wine.
But the result may be very different in climates where the sum-
mer is warm and prolonged: witness the wines grown on the
rich volcanic soils at the bases of Vesuvius, Stromboli, and Etna;
and those of Madeira. With regard to the last assertion, the
evidence of all the writers upon the vine I have ever perused, is
decidedly at variance with it, not to mention my own slender
experience.
All concur in pointing out calcareous soils as eminently
favourable to the vine, and stating that they compose a very large
portion of the vineyards of Europe. But this, by no means, im-
plies that no others are favourable. In order that I may render
this conclusive to the minds of your readers, I shall make one or
two quotations from writers of the highest reputation.
First: the author of the very able' 1 Essai Statistique sur tous


les Vignobles de la France,” after describing and classifying all
the different kinds of soils says, “ All the different kinds of soils
we have just described contain more or less argillaceous earth,
and often oxide of iron in small quantity, and upon all the vine is
cultivated with more or less success There is not one that does
not produce a wine of distinction. Thus the wines of the Her-
mitage (Dept, de la Drome) of Chenas, Condrieux, Fleury, Juli-
enas (Dept, du Rhone) are produced upon decomposed granite,
as are those of St. Joseph (Ardecho) and those of Moulin-a-Vent,
Torreins, and la Chapelle de Guinchey, the best of the arron-
dissement de Macon. Decomposed schistus or shale produces
the wines of Banyuls, Collioure, and Port Vendre (Pyrenees
Orientates) of la Malgue, arrondissement de Toulon, of Cote
Rotie, arrondissement de Lyon, &c., &c. A clayey soil produces
those of the Palus (Gironde), particularly those of Queyries,
which are considered to be the best; also, the wines of Fron-
tignan (Hcrault.) To it also may be assigned the white wines
of Bergerac (Dordogne), for the clay predominates over the
calcareous earth in the vineyards which produce it. Pebbly or
gravelly soils produce the renowned wines of the Medoc and the
Graves of Bordeaux; the wine of Rivesaltes (Pyrenees Orien-
tales) ; and of the Cotes du Rhone (Gard.) Sandy soils are gener-
ally less favourable to the quality of the wine ; nevertheless, the
wine of Cap-Breton (Landes) is produced in them. Calcareous
soils are the most prevalent, and, without exaggeration, they
may be said to support three-fourths of tho vines of France.
,The exquisite wines of Burgundy and Champagne are produced
in them, as well as those of a great number of other vineyards of
considerable reputation.” And, a little farther on, the same
author continues, “Alight, dry, pebbly or gravelly soil, in which
rains and dews can readily penetrate, and its roots extend them-
selves freely in all directions, is that which best suits tho Vine,
provided it is so situated as to receive without obstruction the
rays of the sun. If the surface soil should be 18 or 20 inches
deep, so much the better. Frequently, however, it has not a
third or a fourth part of this depth, still the Vine succeeds, par.
ticularly if it is superincumbent upon a soft or decomposing rock,
which the pick can, without difficulty, gradually reduce. In a
10
LETTERS ON THE


soil of this nature, clover, lucerne, perhaps even sainfoin and
certainly the cereal plants would not flourish. Were it not for
the vine, what would the Medoo and the Graves of Bordeaux
produce ? and what would be grown on so many other wretched
soils scattered over the whole surface of France ? Heath, or a
little miserable herbage, scarcely fit for the browsing of sheep.”
Dr. Henderson, in the introductory chapter to his excellent
history of ancient and modem wines, says, under the head of
Soil, page 11, “Of all the fruits, the grape is, perhaps, the most
susceptible of alteration in its nature, from the qualities of the
soil where it grows; and the immense variety of vines ought
probably to be referred to the operation of this cause, rather
than to original differences in the species, or to the modes of
culture to which they are subjected. In general, it may be
observed, that the lighter and more porous soils are best suited
to the vine; for, although the plant will shoot up with great
vigour, and yield an abundant crop of grapes in rich and moist
ground, yet the excellence of the fruit is commonly in the inverse
ratio of the luxuriance of the growth. Strong argillaceous loam
is very injurious to the vine; as it not only checks the free ex-
pansion of the roots, but from its retaining an inordinate quan-
tity of moisture, keeps them in a state of constant and destructive
humidity, and often imparts to the wines a peculiar earthy taste,
such, for instance, as we perceive in almost all those which are
produced at the Cape of Good Hope. In calcareous soils on the
other hand, the vine flourishes, and the liquor which it yields is
high flavoured and spirituous; as such grounds readily absorb
moisture, they are advantageous in countries where heavy rains
prevail. But a stony or gravelly soil is still preferable, as it
allows the roots to penetrate freely in all directions, while a
sufficient degree of moisture reaches them: and they are pro-
tected from the scorching influence of the sun, by the stratum of
pebbles or debris, which forms the surface, and which, in colder
climates, may be useful in reflecting the heat towards the branches
and roots of the plant. Volcanic soils, also would appear to be
extremely favourable to the successful culture of the vine; for
some of the richest wines of the south of France, the wines of
Madeira, and the best wines of Italy and Sicily, are all derived
11
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


from such soils. “In the southern departments,” says Dussieux,
«the vine flourishes in volcanic soils, in flinty grounds, and in
quartzose sand, mixed with vegetable mould, and a small portion
of alumine. Towards the centre of France, it thrives in argil-
laceous slate, and, above all, on. chalky rocks, which are easily
decomposed by the contact of air. In the north, fat sand, with
a mixture of calcareous loam, is preferred. But the chief con-
sideration is to find soil which is sufficiently porous, and at the
same time retaining but little moisture; and for this purpose
almost every combination of earths and rocks will answer.”
Occasionally it may be observed, that the vine will produce
excellent fruit on rich lands where there are substrata of gravel
or rock.”
These authorities being, I should hope, sufficient to convince
your readers that other soils besides those of a calcareous nature
are well adapted for vineyards, I shall without further quota-
tions proceed to point out many soils In this country which
appear to me in a greater or less degree, to possess the requisites
for the production of good wine. I shall also in some instances
specify where I have observed them to exist, but in so doing,
I cannot avoid expressing my regret that my acquaintance with
the surface of the country is not more extensive. Hundreds,
nay thousands, of the most promising sites for vineyards doubt-
less exist, which I have never seen. Your readers must therefore
consider the following observations as applying solely to the
limited tracts I have had an opportunity of examining, and not
by any means as an attempt at a statistical account of the country
at large, with reference to the capabilities of its soil for the pro-
duction of good wines. I shall consider myself amply repaid for
such trouble as I may have taken, should the perusal of these
papers induce the fortunate possessors of any of these favoured
sites to study well the subject, and afterwards to devote a portion
of their time and means towards converting them into, perhaps,
the most valuable species of agricultural property which exists
in the world.
Commencing nearest to Sydney, the first description of soil
' I shall mention is prevalent to a considerable extent upon the
.chain of hills to the northward of Parramatta, extending from the
12
LETTERS ON THE


neighbourhood of Kissing Point, by the Pennant Hills, to Castle
Hill, Baulkham Hills, Toongabbee, Seven Hills, and perhaps con-
siderably farther. It is a light, free, blackish or brownish soil,
lying over shale, generally with an intervening stratum of mild
clay containing portions of iron-stone or shale. Wherever in
1 his description of land the shale is sufficiently near the surface
to admit of from 6 to 12 inches in depth being moved in the
trenching, (for in no case would I recommend a hill to be planted
with' vines without deep trenching) and intermingled with the
soil, it ought to prove very suitable. The greater the quantity
of shale which is turned up the better, and I may observe that,
to a certain extent, the deeper the surface soil is, the thinner
the intervening stratum of clay, the less tenacious in its nature,
and the more full of iron-stone the better.
The next kind of soil I shall notice is a light red or brownish
loam, resting upon a very thin stratum of mild red clay, with a
very loose friable shale underneath, first of a light red colour,
but darker below. Many of the hills in the district of Appiri
abound with this soil; occasionally I have met with it without
the intervening clay. lam sure it might be made to produce a
fine wine. In the neighbourhood of Mulgoa I have observed an
excellent soil for vineyards; a considerable extent of light stoney
land immediately overlying a loose shattery fine grained sand-
stone passing into shale. Upon this soil, one or two prosperous
vineyards already exist, the produce of which, I believe, amply
repays the spirited proprietors for their praiseworthy exertions,
in acting as pioneers, I may say, to the surrounding inhabitants.
Throughout many of the hilly districts of the county of
Cumberland, there exists a reddish or brownish loam, resting
upon a stratum of mild red clay, which gradually passes into a
decomposing calcareous sand-stone, sometimes alternating with
shale, and containing boulders or blocks of very hard blue or
brown calcareous sand stone, which is occasionally traversed by
veins of calcareous spar. This description of land frequently
contains numerous small lumps of nearly pure carbonate of lime,
intermingled with the subsoil. Where the stratum of clay does
not exceed from twelve to eighteen inches in thickness, this will
probably prove to be a fine vineyard soil. I have noticed a hill
13
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


of this nature at Minchinbury, on the Western Road, and I be-
lieve there is a continued chain or succession of such hills, along
tlie Devil’s Back to Game’s Hill, on the road between Liverpool
and Camden, and from thence extending through Lcppington,
Varroville, and Denham Court, into the Airds and Appin dis-
tricts ; and similar soil exists in the Bringelly district, on the
Orielton Estate, and at Herbert’s Hill, opposite Kirkham. To a
smaller extent, another species of soil may be met with, consist-
ing of a deep light red sandy loam, intermingled with very small
iron-stone gravel, gradually passing into a subsoil of iron-stone
gravel, intermingled with ferruginous sand, and, at the depth of
several feet, a stratum of clay. When the clay does not approach
within three or four feet of the surface, this is certainly an excel-
lent soil, both for quality and quantity of produce. The most
fragrant wine I have ever tasted was made in the colony, from
grapes grown in a soil of this description, and could such a wine
be made to any extent, the fame of the colony as a wine country
would be rapidly established.
Bordering the Rivers Hawkesbury and Nepean, banks of
very light sandy loam occur, of unknown depth, but at a few
feet from the surface, becoming gradually less porous, and inter-
mingled with ferruginous sand. These banks, though of alluvial
formation, are no longer subject to be flooded, and besides being
very porous, they are from their great depth tolerably fertile.
They are very favourable to the growth of the vine, and yield
large crops of wine of medium quality. I have known a produce
of as much as twelve hundred gallons to the acre from a vine-
yard in such a situation. But it must be borne in mind, that
such situations are in many respects less favorable to the vine
than those of moderate elevation, although they are much less
expensive to bring into cultivation, and are very suitable for
raising wine for common purposes.
Passing to the south, I may observe, that land admirably
adapted for the growth of fine wines exists upon the flanks, and
near the summits, of the chain of hills called Razorback, but
their extreme abruptness would seem to forbid their conversion
into vineyards, at least for some generations. The hill forming
the highest point over which the road passes, at the further end
14
LETTERS ON THE


of the Bargo Brush, appears, by the indications in several places
where the road is cut into it, to be favorable for the vine. About
a mile beyond the Kangaroo Inn, there is a small patch of land
entirely composed of a dark red decomposing iron stone. Were
it situated in one of the wine districts of France, I have little
doubt its produce would be a wine of some distinction. Near
Mr. Cordeaux’s (Bendouli), a mile or two on the Sydney side of
Berrlraa, I have noticed a hill, the subsoil of which has been used
by the road party for metalling the road. It would probably
prove to be excellent for a vineyard; and where could one hope
to find a more favourable aspect, or a more promising site ?
Throughout the Sutton Forest country, the hills abound with
sites and soils adapted to the vine, the former light, deep, dry,
with stoney subsoils either of trap (whinstone) or iron-stone, and
occasionally shale. Next we come to the Wombat Brush, with
first its deep light red earth, formed from decomposing iron-
stone, and farther on, consisting of poor gravelly soil, abounding
with fragments of quartzose rock and feldspar, more or less
rounded by the action of the water. At Towrang, on the range
of barren stoney hills, along the flanks of which the line of road
to Goulburn has been conducted, are numerous admirable sites
for vineyards. And moderately elevated as this range is above
the neighbouring valley of the Wollondilly, it is probable that
spring frosts would not affect the vine if planted in any of the
various sheltered sunny aspects which offer themselves on its
northern slopes. Beyond this, even to the other side of Goul-
burn, (and how much farther I know not,) are soils formed of
decomposing pudding-stone, granite, lime-stone, schistus, Sec.,
which offer so many of the most favourable indications for the
production of highly flavoured wines, that the inhabitants of the
south must indeed be blind to their own comfort and well
doing, if they longer neglect to avail themselves of the advantages
which nature has so bountifully placed at their command.
Upon the Hunter and its tributaries I have observed many
favorable sites, but particularly in the upper districts: in the
lower districts, consisting chiefly of poor gravelly soils, formed
of decomposed pudding-stone, and of a more fertile description
from decomposed trap; in the upper, of decomposed trap,
15
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


lime-stone, &c., but I am not sufficiently well acquainted
with this part of the colony to attempt to distinguish
them more particularly. I can only repeat, that in choos-
ing sites for vineyards, the strong tenacious clay subsoils should
be as much as possible avoided, however favorable may be the
surface soil. Those clays, however, which are much intermin-
gled with fragments of stone, and which besides become friable
after a few days exposure to the atmosphere, may be very suit-
able, especially if not of much thickness.
Having now. Sir, nearly exhausted the slender stock of
information I possess respecting the soils, well adapted for vine-
yards, which are to be found in various parts of the colony, I
will only further remark, upon the subject of soil, that, in Europe
it frequently happens, that although red wines and white wines
of the higher qualities may be grown in the same neighbourhood,
they are seldom produced from the same vineyard. Indeed, an
opinion prevails, whether founded on experience or not I am
unable to state, that the same soils are generally incapable of
producing both in perfection. It is even alleged by some
authors, that deep-coloured soils, whether from the presence of
oxide of iron, or from any other cause, should be planted with
red grapes, whilst those of very light colour, such as chalks,
light coloured marles, or other light calcareous soils, are better
adapted for white grapes.
LETTER III.
CHOICE OF VARIETIES OF THE VINE.
Olivier de Serres makes the selection of proper sorts of
grapes, the third requisite, in point of importance, in the forma-
tion of a good vineyard. The following passage is from a
modem French author, whom I have already quoted.
“ The varieties which yield the best wines, generally pro-
duce very little; besides it is only in certain favoured positions


that they furnish produce which becomes celebrated for its
quality. Sorts producing wine of a second class usually yield
more certainly and more abundantly; while those of an inferior
class produce, probably, still more abundantly, and the profits
derived from them are often greater and more certain.”
“ Whoever meditates the planting of a vineyard, ought first
to study well the nature of the soil he proposes to plant. If he
judges it to be well adapted for the production of fine wines; if
he is in a position to transport them without difficulty to a mar-
ket ; if, besides, his circumstances are such as not to oblige him
to press their early sale, he ought not to hesitate about choosing
varieties of the first class. Prudence, on the contrary, counsels
him to plant those of the second or third class, if the soil is not
of the most promising kind for quality, if he has no other opening
than the consumption of a neighbourhood not in affluent circum-
stances, or finally, distillation.” ;
The advice contained in the last paragraph is perfectly
sound. There are thousands of acres in the colony capable of
producing large crops of wine of middling quality, if planted
with some of the more fruitful varieties of the vine, but which, if
sorts of higher reputation are used, will not yield a wine of
greatly improved quality, while the quantity may be very much
reduced: or, in other words the improvement in the quality will
not be dearly commensurate with the diminution of the produce.
Therefore, besides studying well the nature of the soil, he who
plants should also possess some information with respect to the'
qualities of the vines he may have at command. Even where
there is abundant warmth to bring every sort to maturity, a dif-
ference of from five to six weeks occurs between the ripening of
the earliest and the latest. There are, besides, many sorts (some
of them common) which vegetate vigorously, but neitherproduce
abundantly, nor of a quality adapted for even a tolerable wine.
The principal object of this paper is to attempt to impart to
those colonists who may require it, the information requisite to
enable them to choose with judgment the sorts most likely to
answer their purpose. To this end I shall endeavour to describe
a limited number of the varieties of the vine, upon which 1 have
had more or less opportunity of making experiments. :
c
17
CULTIVATION OP THE VINE.


1 would beg, however, to impress upon your readers, that
the subject is one of so much difficulty, that to arrive at sound
conclusions upon it, would require not the experiments of a sin-
gle individual only, however carefully conducted, but the expe-
rience of whole districts, for a long series of years. The re-
marks I have to offer must therefore be very imperfect. Never-
theless my observations, limited as they, of necessity, have been,
are based, I believe, upon sound principles, and will probably
prove useful to the majority of your readers who take an interest
in the cultivation of the vine.
The number of sorts I have had in bearing amounts to more
than 170, selected chiefly, and not altogether at random, from
the immense collection of vines inported by Mr. James Busby,
and deposited by him in the Botanic Garden, at Sydney. This
collection (or rather collections, for there are three of them)
amounting originally to more than 500 varieties, all from France,
was procured, as many of your readers probably know, at Mr.
Busby’s expense, during a visit he made to that country, in the
year 1830, and was derived chiefly from the national collections
which exist in the Botanic Gardens of Montpelier, and of the
Luxembourg. But the most valuable portion, called his private
collection, was procured by Mr. Busby in person, in travelling
through the districts in which the greater part are cultivated.
Deeply as the colony is indebted to that gentleman for his
zeal and industry in providing so valuable an accession to its re-
sources, the obligation would, in my opinion, have been incal-
culably greater, had at least five-sixths of the number been
omitted, and none imported but those which are of known repu-
tation in the wine districts for some desirable quality. If the
colonists failed to make good wine from sonffi of the 60 or 80
valuable sorts, which might in this case have been brought out
in sufficient quantity to ensure their introduction, and their
identity, the attempt to make it from the 300 or 400 worthless,
or comparatively worthless, which might as well have been left
behind, would surely have been rather hopeless.
But as it has fallen out, owing to the great number of sorts,
but a very few cuttings (generally only one or two) of each could
be conveniently imported; and through the confusion, almost
18
LETTERS ON THE


unavoidable, in the transplantation and subsequent management
of such an extensive collection, many numbers have been mis-
placed. It has thus become impossible to identify a number of
valuable varieties, the names of which are in the catalogue, and
no doubt some (for they are frequently the most delicate) are
altogether lost. It deserves notice, that the sixty-five sorts col-
lected by Mr. Busby in person, comprise as many valuable varie-
ties, probably as the whole of the remainder; of which, as I have
before said, I consider a large portion comparatively worthless
for wine making.
In the following descriptions of wine grapes, I have included
all that I have hitherto ascertained to possess qualities which
promise to be valuable to the cultivation of vineyards, and it may
appear surprising that out of such abundance I should have
chosen so few.
That there are many more varieties of wine grapes in Mr.
Busby’s collections which merit cultivation there can be no ques-
tion, but it is a matter of considerable difficulty to distinguish
them. If the catalogue be adopted to choose by, it is so inaccu-
rate, that those plants which should produce white grapes very
frequently prove to bear black, and vice versa. If, on the other
hand, the flavor and general character of the grape be taken as
a guide, there is, owing to the ravages committed by the birds,
and the consequent necessity of putting the bunches into bags, a
difficulty, amounting almost to an impossibility, in obtaining the
fruit at the Botanic Gardens, in a state of sufficient perfection to
form any estimate of its qualities.
Out of one hundred and forty varieties which I procured
from thence, for the purpose of proving them and ascertaining
their qualities, after several years careful cultivation, I have only
been able to select, as likely to be good wine grapes, the twenty
sorts lam about to describe. The greater part of the remain-
der, excepting a few fine table grapes, I have destroyed, as being
inapplicable to any good purpose with me, and as affording little
hope of becoming valuable to other persons, who may possess
vineyards more favorably situated than the one which I have
had under my care, for bringing to complete perfection the fruit
of the latter ripening varieties.
C 2


Although there is ho doubt that in these extensive collec-
tions many are really the sorts specified in the catalogue, and
that the better varieties of those which are correctly named will
hereafter prove of extreme value to the colony, I much fear that
the majority are not to be depended upon. The immense assem-
-blage of.sorts introduced at once caused them to be planted much
too close together. The more vigorous (usually the least valua-
ble) had thus a tendency to starve, and ultimately to destroy,
their more precious, but less robust neighbours, and hence, pro-
bably, one cause that some of the latter are missing. Their
disappearance has also without doubt increased the confusion
which has existed, from the very first, amongst the numbers.
. It has proved an additional misfortune to this magnificent
assemblage of varieties of the vine, that the gentleman to whose
zeal and public spirit the colonists of N. S. Wales are indebted
for its existence, should, through his absence at New Zealand,
have been precluded from watching over its progress, and thus
to have prevented much of the mischief which has since accrued.
His original error consisted, as I think, in having attempted too
much, but it has been vastly aggravated by circumstances over
which he could have no control.
It may be advisable also to mention another circumstance
which has perhaps tended to create confusion amongst Mr.
Busby’s vines, I mean carelessness, and I fear I must add, occa-
sional want of good faith on the part of those persons who
originally supplied them. The same causes have, on previous
occasions, operated to dishearten, and greatly to impede the
efforts of those parsons amongst us, who were the first to attempt
the cultivation of the vine. Twice to my knowledge have col-
lections of vines which, many years since, were sent to the colony
from celebrated wine districts, as the host varieties cultivated in
them, proved, after the lapse of years, to be spurious; and on
another occasion, more than twenty-five years ago, a collection
made with great care, in a number of the best vineyards, from
the foot of the Pyrenees to the wine districts of Burgundy and
Champagne, and which were left for a year under the care of a
nursery-man near London, afforded after several years cultiva-
tion in the colony, only two wine grapes that were new to it.


The remainder consisting of common garden varieties cultivated
in England. What became of the numerous varieties of tine
wine grapes of which the collection should chiefly have consisted
was never known,
These facts are sufficient to shew that too much caution
cannot be used (“crede mihi experto") in extending the cultiva-
tion of any sort, whatever it may be described to be, until its
identity be proved, or its probable good qualities be tolerably
evident. In all, save the very best vineyards, there are worth-
less sorts, which the cultivators are either too indolent, or too
blind to their true interest to extirpate, and there is a disposi-
tion frequently to be met with on the part of vignerons to sub-
stitute these inferior varieties when they believe they are to bo
sent to a distance. In justice to the French people I ought to
add, that neither of the two spurious collections above mentioned
were from France. They were brought from other countries,
and passed in fact through the hands of British merchants.
Every person who has travelled in France in pursuit of informa-
tion connected with its agriculture, will, I am sure, bear testi-
mony to tho urbanity and obliging disposition commonly mani-
fested towards strangers by the people of the country, and their
.desire to communicate useful information.
VARIETIES OF THE VINE,
FIRST DIVISION.
Consisting of varieties from their hardiness of constitution
and the early maturity of their fruit, are considered to be best
adapted to the colder districts of the Colony, numbered, as nearly
as possible, in the order in which they ripen.
No. I.— Pinbau Gris (No. 50/1, of the Ist, or Mr. Busby’s
private collection in the Botanic Garden, but misnamed in the
catalogue Carbenet Sauvignen, which does not exist there).
Small pink or greyish grape, which sets in small close clusters ;
very early ripe, very sugary and sweet to the palate, bears little,
but is excellent for wine, a very hardy plant, but requiring
several years to attain sufficient vigour to produce fruit, requires
21
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


very little room, never exceeding 4ft. by 2ft. Gin., and in the
colder districts may be planted at 3ft. by 2ft. This is the most
promising wine grape I have been enabled to select for an ele-
vated cold region. It may be expected to yield under proper
management from 200 to 400 or 500 gallons to the acre, accord-
ing to the soil and season.
No. 2.— White Grape (No. 57/1, or No. 57 of Mr. Busby’s
private collection, misnamed in the catalogue Malbec, which is
not there). Tolerably well provided with saccharine matter, but
very sharp to the taste, very early ripe, bears rather better than
the preceding, and at an earlier age. Though of rather more
vigorous growth, may be planted at the same distance as No. 1.
Planted upon stony soils, it may contribute, mixed with others,
to produce a fine wine, but should never, I think, be used alone.
No. 3.—Dolcetto (85/3, or No. 85 of Mr. Busby’s 3rd or
Montpelier collection). Black grape, very early ripe, sugary,
generally very productive, but uncertain, yields an agreeably fla-
voured red wine of good body, but not of good colour. The clus-
ters large, with round berries loosely set. It is in very hot weather
subject to disease or accident, called by gardeners “shanking off,”
that is the stems, or portions of the stems, of the bunches become
withered after the berries change colour, but before they are ripe.
The latter in consequence remain quite acid and unfit for wine, and
usually but not always, drop off by the time the uninjured portions
attain perfect maturity. Such of the damaged berries as remain
should be carefully removed previously to crushing the grapes.
No. 4.—Australian White Cluster. Seedling raised at
Camden by the Messrs. Macarthur, a plant of vigorous growth,
very hardy, fruit very early ripe, bunches small, or of medium
size, berries small, very closely set, very juicy, and thin skinned:
very sweet to the palate; very liable to rot if much rain falls
after they begin to swell to maturity, produces well, and yields a
wine of good flavour and considerable body. This, and No. 3,
require about one-fourth more distance every way than No. 1.
No. s.— Australian Small White Cluster. Originated in
the same manner as the last; hardy plant, but of much less
vigorous growth than No. 4; may be planted at least as close
as No. 1; very small closely set bunches, very small berries,
22
lETTEUS ON THE


sweet; and yields very little wine, but of excellent quality.
No. 6.—Small Black Cluster, or Burgundy. Black grape
of the Pineau family, cultivated nearly thirty years since by Mr.
Gregory Blaxland, in his original Vineyard at the Brush Farm,
very early ripe, sweet, moderately productive; bears rather
better, perhaps, than No. X. The wine strong, but of rather
harsh flavour, and not usually of good colour.
No. 7 Miller’s Burgundy. Another variety of the Pineau
family, with very hoary leaves (also cultivated by Mr. Blaxland
in his original vineyard), fruit much resembling the preceding,
but rather larger, and scarcely so good; a very hardy plant. 1
should not, from choice, plant either this or the preceding,
although very strong sound good wine may be made from them.
No. B.— Small Pink Grape. I believe from Germany, very
early ripe, bears little, but is probably good for wine.
No. 9 Smallßlack Grape. Probably of the Pineau family,
also from Germany, bears little, but promising for wine. This
and the preceding are small hardy plants and would probably
succeed in cold elevated sites. I have never seen their produce
made into wine. They should be planted at least as close as
No. 1. The two previous numbers (6 and 7) require rather more
room.
No. 10.— Muscat Gris (Grizzly Frontignac). Reddish or
greyish brown; a remarkably sweet luscious grape (generally
considered to be the richest flavoured table grape in Europe),
excellent for wine, bears moderately well generally, but not with
certainty, grows usually with tolerable vigour, and requires as
much room as Nos. 3 and 4 : in some situations subject to the
blight, a disease I shall mention hereafter.
No. 11.— Muscat Noir (Black Frontignac). Imported from
France in 1817, dark purplish brown grape, very sweet and
highly flavoured, equally early, but not so rich in flavour as the
last, which it much resembles, bears more abundantly, and with
more certainty, but the bunches and berries are not usually so
fine. Is also subject to the blight, but not to the same extent.
An excellent wine grape, requires the same room.
No. 12 Tinta. Imported by the Australian Agricultural
Company, in 1825. Black, with deep red juice, sugary but very


austere, not fit to be used alone, but may be very valuable to
combine with other grapes for red wine, in the proportion of not
exceeding one-fourth (with Nos. 1,3, 9, and 13, for instance).
I have tasted very good wine, in the manufacture of which this
grape was used to about the above extent. The bunches are
tolerably large, berries small and crowded, produces moderately
well. It is said to be cultivated extensively at Madeira, for the
manufacture of the Tinta Madeira, and to be one of the seven
sorts which enter into the composition of the best white wines of
the island. A very hardy plant, requiring same room as Nos.
1 and 2.
No. 13.— Black Gkape. Of the Pineau family, from Mr. Bus-
by’s collections. (The No. lost, but supposed to be No. 60 or No.
61 of the private collection). Bears little bunches and very small
berries, but very sweet; has all the appearance of being a good
wine grape for cold districts.
No. 14.— Pineau Blanc (48/1,62/1,35/2, or Nos. 48 and 52 of
the private collection, and No. 35, of the Luxembourg). One of
the most celebrated wine grapes of the North of France, and
extensively cultivated in the best vineyards of Burgundy and
Champagne, Bunches very small, berries small, very sweet and
sugary, produces very little, but of excellent quality; requires
same distance as No. 1, and may ripen its crop perhaps from ten
to fourteen days later.
No. 15.— Meslteb Blanc (302/3 or No. 302 of the third or
Montpelier collection). More diminutive in every respect than
the preceding, bears very little, but of excellent quality; should
not exceed three feet by two feet in a vineyard.
SECOND DIVISION.
Comprising 17 varieties, ripening usually from 10 or 12 to
25 or 30 days later than No. 1. This group also contains varie-
ties better adapted, owing to their greater vigour and luxuri-
ance of growth, for cultivation in the warmer districts of tho
colony, than the majority of the plants in the first division.
No. 16.— Muscat Rouge (Tied Frontignac). Imported by tho
Australian Agricultural Company in 1825, more delicate in its


habit than either of the two varieties of Muscat described above,
and rather less productive. Fruit, when ripened in perfection, a
bright reddish brown, and very highly flavoured. Subject to
the blight.
No. 17.— Muscat Blanc. (White Frontignac, 7/1,35/1,307/3,
or Nos. 7 and 35 of the private collection, and No. 307 of the
Montpelier collection). Not so productive apparently sis either
of the three other varieties of Muscat, but considered to be pre-
ferable for wine, to which it imparts a most delicate perfume; is
cultivated at Rivesaltes, Lunel, Frontignac, and Constantia, and
probably at other vineyards where luscious sweet wines are made.
It is also calculated, as are the other varieties of the same family,
to make highly flavoured dry wines, and for this purpose may
be used alone or in combination with other kinds of grape; is
also subject to the blight.
No. 18. —Raisin Vebt (385/3, or No. 385 of the 3rd or Mont-
pelier collection). White grape, apparently a variety of the
Pineau family, more luxuriant in its growth, and more produc-
tive than Nos. 1 and 14, but not so rich in saccharine matter;
has the appearance of being a good wine grape.
No. 19.—Accaroi (29/2, or 29 of the Luxembourg collec-
tion), Hardy white grape, bears plentifully, and makes very
good wine. Where abundant produce, combined with medium
quality, is an object, this is a variety well worth attention; lam
inclined to think it may prove one of the most valuable of the
white wine grapes; requires the same room as No. 3.
No. 20. —Sauviqnon Cendbe (365/3, or No. 355 of the Mont-
pelier collection). White grape, bears occasionally immense
crops, but is in this respect very variable, is probably a good
wine grape. This and No. 18 require rather more room than
Nos. 1 and 14.
No. 21. —Epioieb (172/3, or No. 172 of the 3rd or Mont-
pelier collection). Black grape, round berries, bunches rather
large or of medium size, sweet, bears well, promising for wine.
Same room as No. 3.
No. 22.— White Grape (66/2, or No. 66 of the 2nd or Lux-
embourg collection, misnamed Chasselas Violet in the catalogue).
A remarkably sweet, juicy, thin skinned, delicately flavoured
25
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


grape, to my taste, the best table grape in the colony, not in
the least resembling the family of Chasselas in its habit, moder-
ately productive, but uncertain, the flowers being apt to become
abortive. Fruit very liable to burst and rot, if heavy rain falls
near the period of maturity, makes a delicately flavoured sum-
mer wine.
No. 23. —White Grape (295/3, or 295 of the Montpelier
collection). An excellent grape for wine of medium strength,
bearing considerable affinity to the preceding, but much more
productive; it bears large beautifully formed bunches, the ber-
ries moderately closely set, not liable to burst and rot, except-
ing under long continued rains. It has the peculiarity of being
from 10 to 14 days behind almost every other variety in burst-
ing into leaf, of being late before the fruit commences to swell
to maturity, and yet of ripening as early as the greater part of
the varieties in this division. Next to No. 19, it is considered to
be the best white grape to cultivate where produce combined
with medium strength is an object, and it may even prove to be
superior to it. Both this and the last are excellent table grapes.
No. 24.— Gouais (or La Folle, from which is manufactured
the finest Cognac Brandy). White grape, imported from France
in 1817, bunches large or medium size, berries large, round,
thin-skinned, juicy, and very closely set, moderately sweet.
Hardy vigorous plant, producing immense crops, and with toler-
able certainty. Has been known to yield as much as from 1200
to 1300 gallons to the acre of light agreeably flavoured wine.
In distillation, from C to 7J gallons appear to be required for
each gallon of spirit at about London proof. If cultivated for
distillation, an acre, by the abundant use of manure, could easily
be made to yield from 150 to 200 gallons of spirit. Requires
same room as No. 3, and in fertile land more.
No. 25.— Riesling, White Grape. Imported in 1838, by
Messrs. Maoarthur, from the Rhinegau. The only grape culti-
vated throughout the majority of the most celebrated vineyards
on the Rhine. Has not been sufficiently long introduced to esti-
mate the quality or quantity of its produce in the colony; but it
is said to produce well in Europe. The fruit has a peculiar spicy
flavour, and is not liable to rot during heavy rains.


No. 20. —Vekdeiuio or Madeira. Imported in 1825, by
the Australian Agricultural Company. Small, oblong or oval,
white grape. This, all its qualities considered, is the most valuable
grape for wine we have hitherto proved in the colony. It produces
with tolerable certainty, and more abundantly than any of the
varieties of the Pineau. Its crops may be estimated at from 300
to 600 gallons, and sometimes even 700 gallons to the acre.
The wine rich and generous, evidently capable of being kept for
a great number of years. It, however, does not appear to be-
come fit for use until past its fourth year, and even then it
improves greatly with age. The bunches are small, the berries
small and oval, and generally very thinly set on the bunch.
They seem to suffer little, either from excessive heat or long
continued rains. The whole of the skin of the berry will some-
times perish, without the slightest damage to the pulp. They,
besides, ripen more equally than the grapes of almost any other
variety we have. It is liable to have its young shoots broken
off during high winds, through their extreme tenderness or brit-
tleness ; and violent winds or rains, during the flowering, cause
a large proportion of the blossoms to become abortive. These
are the only accidents to which it seems to be liable; in other
respects it is a hardy variety, and begins to bear early; requires
rather more room than the varieties of Pineau, say four feet by
three feet. There is reason to suppose that this sort is identical
with the Pedro Ximenes, which is the variety chiefly cultivated
at Xeres for the finest descriptions of sherry.
No. 27.—Sctras (45/1 or No. 45 of the private collection,
but it is no longer to be found in the Botanic Garden, although
its name is in the catalogue). An excellent grape, and promises
to be at least equally as valuable for red wine as the Verdeilho
is for white. This is the sort stud to be chiefly cultivated on the
celebrated Hill of the Hermitage. It is a very hardy plant,
produces well, and seems to be liable to no accident or disease;
may be planted at same distance, or, as it grows with more
vigour, at a greater distance than the Verdeilho.
No. 28.—Malbec. Black grape, from the Medoc. (This,
and the three following sorts, were sent to the colony from one
of the best vineyards near Bordeaux, by Mr. Barton, of the
27
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


house of Barton and Guestier, under the care of ilonsr. D. N.
Joubert, of the firm of Joubert and Murphy, and they promise
to become great acquisitions.) Bunches small, berries rather
large, thinly set, a very sweet, richly flavoured grape; said to be
used to impart richness to the Claret wines.
No. 29. —Cakbehet Sauvionen. Black, larger bunches,
smaller berries, very austere, imparting a deep colour and deli-
cate perfume to the wine, produces more abundantly, and is of
more vigorous growth. This sort is said to compose the ma-
jority of the plants in the vineyards of first reputation near
Bordeaux.
No. 30.—Vebdot. Black, has borne for the first time this
year: its quality, therefore, cannot be well described.
The foregoing three, planted together, in certain propor-
tions, of which the Carbenet forms the largest, compose, it is
said, the vineyards of first character in the Medoc.
No. 31.— Sauviqnon Blanc. White grape, of great reputa-
tion in the vineyards near Bordeaux, in which are made the
wines of Barsac, Sauterne, &c. Hardy vigorous plant, fruit
oval, rather deficient in juice; only commenced bearing in 1841,
but appears to produce moderately well.
No. 32.— Black Gbape (62/2, or No. 62, of the Luxem-
bourg collection, misnamed Bon Blanc in the catalogue). A
vine of rather dwarfish habit, but very productive, bunches large,
berries of medium size, closely set, makes a good red wine of
tolerably good color; should be planted as closely as the varie-
ties of Pineau.
The above 17 sorts, although we possess several others
which may prove highly valuable, comprise all that I can at pre-
-sent class with the 2nd Division; and although generally speak-
ing, they ripen later than those I have classed with the first,
there are amongst them varieties which richly merit trial m the
more elevated districts of the colony, particularly if a situation
is chosen for them combining the advantages of a stony soil;
with a favorable aspect and sheltered site, such for instance, as
might be selected in the vicinity of the Towrang Stockade. I
would name more particularly Nos. 16, 19, 25,26, 27,28, 29,
and 30..


The 5 varieties which follow, and compose the 3rd Division,
might no doubt have several others appended to them, but as
they usually ripen too late to he of much use for w ine, (when com.
pared with those which I have already described), in the situa-
tion in which I have cultivated them, I have paid little attention
to them. None of these attain maturity with me until after the
end cf March, although in a more favorable site, they might, in
the same neighbourhood, become ripe two or three weeks
earlier. On the Hunter, they would prove to be still earlier,
and of more value.
THIRD DIVISION,
No. 33.—Carionan (1/1, or No. 1 of Mr. Busby’s private col-
lection). Black grape, bearing occasionally in great abundance,
and sometimes comparatively little, appears to be hardy, and
subject to no disease; ripens too late with me to estimate its
qualities as a wine grape.,
No. 34.— Grenache (2/1, or No. 2 of the private collec-
tion). Black grape, not so productive as the former, but equally
uncertain, ripens equally late.
No. 35. —Mataro (3/1, or No. 3 of the private collection).
Black grape, produces much more abundantly, and with more
certainty, than the preceding grapes, not so sweet, but ripens
earlier.
The foregoing three, with sometimes the addition of No. 36,-
are described by Mr. Busby, in his journal, and by French
authors, as the sorts used in making the wine of Boussillon; the
whole being usually planted together. Some of the wine made
from them, on decomposing schistus, is said to have been kept
more than 150 years, and to have continued to improve to the"
last.
No. 36.— Modhastell. Black grape, much resembling the
last, but although sweeter, scarcely so productive.
No. 37.— Blanquette (6/1, or No. 6 of the private collec-
tion). A very productive white grape, said to bo used to impart,
strength to the white wines of Languedoc, ripens later than any
Other sort I have named; a very hardy plant.
29
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


LETTER IV.
DISEASES OF THE VINE.
There is only one disease, properly so called, to which the Vino
is occasionally subject in New South Wales. I have mentioned
it in the preceding paper as being known by the name of “ the
blight.” It caused several small vineyards to be abandoned,
which in the earlier years of the colony were planted by the
officers and a few other individuals. These vineyards are said
to have prospered generally until their third or fourth year,
when the malady made its appearance in the form of dark brown
spots or blotches upon the young shoots, leaves, and bunches of
fruit, and became so destructive, that the culture of the vine was
discontinued as hopeless.
I have seen the disease in Europe, where it was pointed out
by a very skilful practical cultivator, an individual who had suc-
ceeded in establishing a vineyard on a considerable scale in the
United States of America. He stated that he had been baffled
there during several years by the same malady, and succeeded
in his object, at length, only by selecting two sorts (out of thirty-
five he had in cultivation) which were not subject to the disease.
These sorts, according to his description, appear to have been
the Verdeilho, and the Small Black Cluster, (No. 6). The same
individual had taken much pains to ascertain the cause of the
former failures to produce wine in America, and satisfied him-
self that, in various instances, the disease in question had attacked
the vines to such a degree, that they became useless as fruit bear-
ing plants. He said, that in his native country it was supposed
to make its appearance only on lands which had recently been
cleared from wood, but that in America, where it was so much
more destructive, and where no plantation of vines, that he had
heard of, appeared to have escaped it, some of them had, doubt-
less, been made upon land which had not recently been wooded.
In New South Wales, vines, upon old and upon newly cleared
lands appear to be equally subject to the malady. At first it
30
I.ETIEUS ON THE


was attributed to hot winds, which, after all, had perhaps never
blown. Subsequently a very clever practical cultivator was
equally positive that it was caused by the cold southerly winds,
which sometimes suddenly succeed a warm day. Others have
imagined that the peculiar appearances occasioned by the dis-
ease might be accounted for by the supposition that the drops of
dew or rain deposited upon the plant, acted during bright sun-
shine, as so many lenses, and thus scorched the parts within their
focus! forgetting, rather singularly it must be confessed, that
the drops of moisture themselves must form a tolerably safe pre-
ventive to any injury from burning which their lens-like form
might otherwise, perhaps, occasion.
Attentive observation, during a number of years, upon the
appearances of this disease, and the peculiar circumstances under
which it makes its appearance, have satisfied me that it can pro-
perly be attributed to none of the above causes. I believe it to
be the effect of a minute parasitical fungus, somewhat analogous
in its habits to the one commonly known by the name of “ the
rust” or “mildew” in wheat, and that if any person possessing
sufficient botanical knowledge of the history and general appear-
ances of this tribe of plants, will take the trouble to examine
carefully through a good microscope the portions of the vine
affected by the disease, particularly when it is in an incipient
state, he may be enabled to give as distinct and satisfactory an
account of its progress as other naturalists have given of the
mildew in wheat. Like the latter, it usually makes its first ap-
pearance in calm warm weather, shewing itself in small detached
portions usually nearer the ground, and frequently where it is
completely sheltered from sun and wind. If these diseased por-
tions be not carefully removed, it is soon found to have spread
considerably. I have no doubt that it increases by infection, or
rather by frequent renewals from seed, for it is well known that
in weather favourable for their re-production, generations of
some of these plants, do not last more than a few days. By care-
fully removing the infected portions as they make their appear-
ance, it has been ascertained, in most cases, that the disease may
be so much cheeked as to do very little injury. Out of 30 varie-
ties described in the preceding paper, only the 4 sorts of Muscat
31
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


appear to bo at all liable to it; and of these, the black and the
white appear to suffer least. Several of the fine table grapes
are greatly injured by it, inclose confined situations, and in par-
ticular seasons.*
The only enemies to the vine, which I have hitherto had an
opportunity of noticing, are the following.'
Ist. The larva or grub of a small insect which is commonly
bred in the sap wood of the acacias (wattles), casuarinas (swamp
and forest oak), and some other soft woods. If sapling stakes or
supports of these woods are introduced amongst the vines, the
grubs frequently pass from them into the stocks of the vines,
boring their way into the heart or pith, on which they continue
to live until they assume their perfect form. Vines, and other
* Phylleriacece is the name given by Fries to a tribe of minute
Fungi, which are parasitical on the living leaves of various
plants. They are all distinguished by presenting woolly fibres
with almost invisible sporidia contained in them. The type of
the tribe may be considered to be Persoon’s genus Erineum.
The Phyllerium vitis of Fries, is parasitical on vine leaves.
It appears on both sides of the leaf in superficial lax spots, which
at first are dark brown or black, and then of a rather lighter
colour. Finally, the flocciform peridia appear eating away, as
it were, the substance of the leaf, in the middle of the dark
spots. These peridia are white subdiaphanous tortuous filaments,
somewhat resembling very fine fibres of wool or cotton. They are
said to contain the sporules, which are so minute and difficult to be
seen as by some Mycologists to have been considered wanting.
The difficulty of detecting the sporules has induced Decandolle
and other Botanists to express doubts whether this Phyllerium
ought to be considered a fungus, or whether it may not be a
peculiar disease or cancer of the vine. Kunze who wrote a
monograph on the species of Erineum, of which Phyllerium may
be deemed a subgenus, placed all the species, of which he des-
cribed 45, among the Byssoidea, and made the absence of sporules
to be part of their generic character ! Dr. Greville has, how-
ever, repeatedly observed the sporules in Erineum aureum, a
species which infests the leaves of the Poplar, and has even
figured them in his beautiful work “ The Scottish Cryptogamic
Flora.” Since then, sporules have been detected in several
other species, and from analogy we may reckon them to exist in
the Phyllerium vitis, and to be enclosed in its flocciform peridia.
The proximate cause of this kind of blight does not appear
to be known; but it is rather singular that it does not seem to be
so prejudicial to the cultivators of the vine in Europe, as to those
in this. Colony. , ;


plants of similar habit, are sometimes nearly destroyed by this
insect; and in every case I have met with, supports, either of
the common wattle or swamp oak, have been attached to the
plant. In a vineyard, no stakes but those split from hardwood
should be used, but the Indian or Spanish reed, (generally, though
erroneously, called the bamboo,) sometimes, especially when the
vine shoots luxuriantly, proves extremely useful, to attach as a
light rail from stake to stake.
2ndly. The black and yellow larva, or caterpillar of a moth,
(Agarista Glycine,) black spotted with Orange. It feeds upon
the tender leaves and branches of flowers and young fruit, and
if neglected will sometimes do much damage. This insect ap-
pears to be produced far more abundantly in gardens and in
vineyards where trellices are used, than where the vines are sup-
ported by stakes, and I have been assured by an intelligent
cultivator, that a vineyard, in which no supports whatever are
used, is nearly, if not altogether, free from them. The inference
is, that the moth lays its eggs in the autumn, and in the early
spring, before the vine comes into leaf; that where no supports
are used, the greater part of the wood being removed at the
pruning, the eggs are carried out of the vineyard with it, but
that stakes, and more particularly trellises, with the old wood of
the vine which usually remains attached to the latter, form a
secure nidus for them.
When the caterpillars do make their appearance they should
be assiduously sought for early in the morning and late in the
evening, and on dark cool days. During bright warm sunshine
they do not feed, and, remaining concealed under the shelter of
a leaf, are not so easily detected.
Sdly. Birds of various kinds which prey upon the fruit, more
particularly a small species (Josterops Dorsalis,) which, from a
white circle round the eye, is generally known in the colony by
the name of the “ Silver Eye.” In some situations where gar-
dens are numerous, and brushes, or other cover near at hand,
these destructive little pests would seem almost to forbid the cul-
tivation of the vine; for they destroy twenty times as much as
they consume. They select the finest and ripest berries upon a
bunch, and having pierced them with their bills, suck out a little
D
33
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


of the richest juice, and then attack another bunch. Of course,
the greater part of the berries so injured either shrivel up, or,
what is worse, if rain comes on, rot, and the rottenness is usually
communicated to the rest of the bunch. The larger birds, of
which many will feed upon grapes, are not nearly so formidable,
as they are easily seen and shot or scared away. But the “ Sil-
ver Eyes” steal unperceived amongst the vines, and in a short
time, do an incredible amount of damage. The only methods I
have found effective in restraining, and, I may almost add, in
altogether preventing their ravages, are, to pursue and shoot
them, if possible, at all seasons of the year, and to seek out their
nests and destroy them. By keeping up this system at all times,
particularly when there is no fruit to tempt them, it is remark-
able what an impression may at length be made upon these little
marauders. Although for a time their numbers may not appear
to diminish, still, if the gun be constantly used, they become so
thinned, and the remnant so scared, that in the fruit season they
may be frequently seen passing over a well kept garden or vineyard
without venturing to alight within its precincts. I have found the
children of the Aborigines very serviceable in this Chaise aux
petits oiseaux; and as a stimulus, it is usual to give them some
trifling sura per dozen for all the birds they produce.
4thly. The night feeding animals (opossums, squirrels, and
native eats) : these occasionally make an inroad into a vineyard,
and devour the fruit; but they are easily traced to their haunts
by the Aborigines, besides they will not approach watchful dogs,
and may, by their means, be kept away. ,
I have said nothing of marauders of the human species, be-
cause I presume, no one possessing a vineyard will omit the pro-
tection of a formidable hedge fence, as well as a watchman with
a gun, assisted by faithful dogs, when the grapes are ripe. The
bloodhounds, imported from Cuba, are found to be excellent for
the purpose of guarding vineyards. Their vigilance and acute
sense of smell, added to their other formidable qualities, are suf-
ficient to deter the most adventurous fruit thieves from venturing
within the precincts of the enclosure they are placed to guard.
34
LETTERS ON THE


LETTER V.
FORMATION OF THE VINEYARD.
Supposing the site to have been selected comprising the
various requisites according to the object the cultivator has
in view, I purpose, in this paper, to explain what steps seem best
calculated to promote the successful formation of the vineyard,
at the least ultimate expense. I shall first describe the method
I consider preferable in situations which are level or of gentle
inclination (where the fall does not exceed one foot in 12 or 15
for instance), because, in such situations, no preliminary level-
ling for the terraces will be necessary.
Should the site occupy one of those deep dry banks of sandy
alluvium, such as in a preceding paper, under the head of Soil, I
have mentioned as common on the banks of the rivers Hawkes-
bury, Nepean, &c., nothing appears requisite but to trench to
the depth of two or three feet; and should the vineyard be of
any extent, to mark out roads or alleys wide enough for carts to
pass completely round the area, but within the enclosing fence,
and to intersect it at convenient distances. If, as an example,
we suppose this area to comprise 15 or 20 acres in the form of a
parallelogram, it willhe expedient to divide it by means of these
intersecting alleys into strips not exceeding 80 to 100 or 120
yards in breadth, by about double that length. The rows of
vines being afterwards planted across the breadth of the strips,
carts may thus be brought to receive the grapes during the vin-
tage, and to deposit manure opposite to the end of each row,
and within 50 or 60 yards of any part of it. Attention to this
precaution in laying out a vineyard of any considerable extent
will occasion a very material saving of labour in its subsequent
management.
Should the site be upon what is, in the colony, usually termed
“Forest land,” where the inclination of surface will probably be
greater, and an equal degree of porousness or permeability in
the subsoil rarely or never to be met with, it will be advisable
n s
35
CULTIVATION or THE VINE.


to take precautions to prevent the superfluous waters, which are
poured down during heavy rains, from doing mischief. To this
end, any little hollows or water courses, or, at all events, the
lines along which the surface waters can most readily be made
to flow, should be chosen for the alloys or cartways, sacrificing
to this object that regularity, which in a plain surface, or soil of
the description mentioned in the last paragraph, would be desira-
ble. The position of the alleys having been determined upon, a
drain, two feet wide at bottom, should be opened down the
centre of each, and 12 or 18 inches below the depth of the pro-
posed trenching. What that depth should be must depend upon
circumstances, and if the ground should not have been suffi-
ciently well examined previously, may, now that the drains are
opened, be decided upon. Should the surface soil prove to be
of a friable nature, with a loose open subsoil, offering no impedi-
ment to the roots of the vines for the depth of a yard or two,
two feet may suffice; but, in all cases, I should advise this to be
considered as the minimum depth; if, however, the subsoil should
be clay intermingled with stone, or clay resting upon shale or
some other rock, soft and frangible when turned up, but lying,
as is frequently the case, in tolerably compact layers until stirred,
3 feet, or 3 feet 6, may be advisable. Whatever depth then may
be adopted, the drains having been opened to a foot or 18 inches
below it, are to be filled up again as the trenching is pro-
ceeded with, to within 12 or 15 inches of the top, with any large
stones which may be turned up during the progress of the work;
or, should these be wanting, with logs of hard wood, smaller
pieces or brushwood being placed above; in either case to be
ultimately covered with a few inches of soil or gravel to form
the road way.
Secure hollow drains for any superfluous water, which may
percolate after long continued heavy rains, having thus been
constructed, whilst the alleys also are intended to serve as chan-
nels for the surface water, the trenching of any intermediate
Strip of ground may be proceeded with. For this purpose it will
be most convenient to commence at the lowest part of the ground
and there to open a trench three feet wide, extending across the
strip from alley to alley, quite to the edge of the drains, reserv


ing the material thrown out from the excavation to fill up the
last trench at the top of the strip, or any inequalities of surface.
Then to mark out another trench of equal width, and with its
contents to fill up the one first opened, taking care to place the
turf and surface mould at bottom, the clay intermingled as much
as possible with a portion of the stone next, and the lowest stra-
tum, presumed to be the most stony or gravelly at top.
There are several reasons, in addition to its being really the
easiest method, for reversing the natural position of the different
strata. First, by throwing all the turf and surface mould to the
bottom, the vine is at once encouraged to strike its roots deeply
where they will be supplied with the most abundant nourish-
ment, and become least liable to suffer from the vicissitudes of
the seasons, whilst the seeds of all weeds and plants, the growth
of which would be pernicious, by being buried so deep are pre-
vented from vegetating. Next, a sufficient quantity of the stony
or gravelly material having been mixed with the clay to.keep
it “ open,” the remainder should be placed to form the surface,
because it is less liable to favour the growth of weeds, it more
readily absorbs all the rain which falls, until the ground is satu-
rated, it neither cracks in dry weather, nor becomes miry during
rain, it tends to preserve a more uniform temperature and state
of moisture in the soil below, and finally, becomes of material use
at the period of the maturation of the crop, by increasing the
mean temperature, in absorbing heat during the day, and radi-
ating it upwards throughout the night, and by preventing the
bunches of grapes which hang low from being splashed with dirt
when it rains. The first trench having been filled up, a third
may be thrown into the second, and so on until the area between
any two of the alleys is finished.
I do not consider it advisable to reduce the ground too
minutely, a certain portion in lumps of two or three inches
diameter being advantageous. They increase the permeability
of the soil, and are useful in giving out the moisture they absorb
during rains more slowly than the finely pulverised soil. In dry
seasons, I may observe, most plants will retain their freshness
longer in a soil containing many lumps than where there are
none. It is likewise proper to leave the surface of newly trenched
37
CULTIVATION or THE VINE.


ground as rough as possible, until the period for planting
approaches, that a larger portion may be exposed to the action
of the atmosphere; and it is advantageous to have it so exposed
for several months previously, that it may receive the autumn
and winter rains, and settle down. This will be the means of
preventing any after-settlement in the soil, which, as I propose
that it should be formed into a series of flats or levels before it is
planted, would occasion additional trouble. These flats, which may
be made wider or narrower according to the inclination of the
ground, are intended to be supported by earthen banks, made
firm by compression with the back of the spade, each terrace
extending across the breadth of the strip, and having the slightest
possible inclination from the centre towards the alley or water
channel on either hand.
Having explained the mode I consider best to adopt in
trenching a slope of gentle inclination, in such a manner, I hope,
as to render the subject intelligible to those persons who may not
previously have been conversant with it, I shall now endeavour
to shew how an abrupt site may be effectually managed,
although, I apprehend, reference to two rough sketches which
I send you, will be required to make the explanation clear.
The alleys with their trenches, as in the former instance,
should be marked out and opened (following the direction by
which the water can be most easily conveyed out of the vineyard)
to be afterwards filled up again with stone or timber, as tho
trenching is proceeded with; with this difference, however, that
the more rapid the slope, the more broken and irregular the
ground is, the nearer to each other these channels for the water
will require to be formed. Where the descent is as much as
one foot in four or five, I will assume from twenty-five to forty
.yards as a proper distance, unless, indeed, some considerable
irregularity in the form of the ground should render it expe-
dient to have them closer. In all cases where the slope exceeds
one foot in seven or eight, the vineyard will probably be too
steep to admit carts, tho alleys may therefore be reduced to the
width of mere water channels, not exceeding four or five feet.
Even where the inclination is not too great for carts, it will not
be necessary to form roads for them nearer to each other than


eighty or one hundred yards, so that with a view to their free
passage, part only of the alleys needs be made of the requisite
width. The alleys having been fixed upon, the intervening
spaces should be carefully levelled, commencing at the bottom;
or, in other words, the rate of ascent for any given distance
should be accurately ascertained and noted down. For this pur-
pose a good strong light carpenter’s or stonemason’s plumb-line
level, and a quantity of pegs of hardwood should be provided.
Battens inch square, and cut into convenient lengths, answer
best for the last purpose. The object in levelling the ground at
this stage of proceeding, is to mark out the area between any
two of the alleys into convenient strips for terracing, as it is
necessary that the width of the terraces with the height of the
terrace walls should be fixed upon, previous to trenching the
ground. As a general rule, Ido not think it convenient to have
the terrace walls more than 2 feet 6 inches high, and although
they should not be put up until afterwards, I may here observe
that they may be built in a very rough manner of almost any
stones which may be turned up in trenching, and, providing that
they do not exceed the height above mentioned, need not exceed
18 inches wide at the bottom, tapering or “ battering” to about
a foot at top. Assuming 2 feet G inches then as a convenient
height for the walls, and 4 feet as the distance at which the rows
of vines are to be planted from each other, the following are the
spaces I should propose to allot for the terraces according to the
inclination of the ground:
At an ascent of one foot in four (the most rapid acclivity I
conceive any one will be likely to plant with the vine) I should
mark out the terraces 17 feet 0 inches wide: viz., 16 feet for
four rows of vines, and 18 inches to be occupied by the terrace
wall. In 17 feet 6 inches, at one in four, the perpendicular fall
will be rather more than 4 feet 4 inches. Of this, 2 feet 6
inches will be made up by the wall, whilst, by dividing the 16
feet of terrace into four smaller terraces, each supported by a
bank of earth (made firm by compression) about 7 inches high,
every row of vines may be planted on a site of its own, perfectly
level, except a very slight inclination which may be given to it
from the centre towards the alleys or water channels,’ which
39
CULTIVATION OF TUB VINE.


have been made perpendicular to them on either side. A refer-
ence to the accompanying sketches, Nos. 1 and 2, will, I trust,
render this sufficiently intelligible.
If the rise be one foot in five, 25 feet 6 inches will be a con-
venient width for the terraces: viz., 24 feet for six rows of vines,
with a rise of 6 inches to each row, and 18 inches for the wall.
At one foot in six, 33 feet 0 inches may be allowed, the interme-
diate spaces being divided into four smaller terraces, each
intended for two rows of vines, and supported by a bank of 11
inches in height. At one in seven, 41 feet 6 inches may bo
allowed for ten rows of vines, each double row occupying a level
supported by a bank little more than 10 inches in height. At
one in eight, they may be of the same width, with a rise of eight
inches to each little terrace of two rows; and so on, suiting
the space between the terrace walls and the height of the little
terraces to the inclination of the ground. At the inclination last
mentioned, it will be very practicable to dispense with the walls
altogether (by allowing 6 inches rise to every row, or 12 inches
to every double row), although I should perfer their occasional
adoption, if stone be at hand, until the slope diminishes to one
in eleven or twelve feet. It must be remembered that few situ-
ations of rapid declivity exist in which stone for the walls will
not be turned up in trenching, and that to form it into rough
walls will frequently be the readiest mode for its disposal. If
stone for the terrace wall be not readily procurable, sloping
banks of earth turfed outside, may be substituted, observing
simply that more room must be allowed for them, not less than
one foot for every foot in height. Logs of wood piled upon each
other, or split hardwood slabs, with their ends 12 or 18 inches in
the ground, may also be used.
The observant reader, assisted by a reference to the accom-
panying sketches, will, I trust, comprehend that the object in
reducing a bank or hill into a series of levels is twofold: viz.,
the absorption of the greatest possible quantity of rain during
periods of drought, which are not unfrcquently broken by very
heavy showers of short duration; and the safe conveyance out of
the vineyard, by means of the channels which are supposed to
have been formed at moderate intervals perpendicular to the
40
LKTTKIIS ON THE


a a. Terrace walls, each being carried along the face of the slope at the same level throughout its various windings,
b b. Lines to denote the earthen banks which support the little terraces, an additional number being introduced between any
two terrace walls when the slope becomes more gentle, the height of each earthen bank being proportionally diminished
c c. Dotted lines to denote the rows of vines.
E E. Alleys, or water channels, to carry off superfluous rain water.
D D. The part of the dope, of which a section is given. (See Sketch No. II.)




SECTION OF STEEP BANK, OR SLOPE, TO BE CONVERTED INTO VINEYARD.
a a a. Supposed natural surface of slope to he terraced.
b b b. Bottom of drain cut down the face of slope perpendicular to the terraces.
c c c. Form of slope after being trenched and made into terraces for planting. No. 1. Terrace for six rows of vines, four
feet apart, ascent at the rate of one foot in fire. No. 2. For four rows at four feet apart, ascent at the rate of one m
four. No. 3. For four rows of vines at three feet apart, ascent at the rate of one in three and half,
d d d. Bottom of trenched ground, the trenching being supposed to be to the depth of three and a half feet,
e e e. Position for rows of vines upon the terraces.
f f f. Dotted line to show surface of alley or wafer channel when filled up, cut into rough steps at g g.
h. Lower portion of hollow drain, as intended to befitted up with stones.




rows of vines, of all superfluous water at times when the rain is
in excess. In few words, to husband to the uttermost the mois-
ture which falls when rain is deficient, and to prevent any damage
when it is violent or of long continuance. None is to be allowed
to escape directly down the hill from terrace to terrace.
X can testify from personal observation made in Europe, in
an extensive district of vineyards, that the severest labour con-
nected with their management, although the slopes they occupied
were intersected by numerous terrace walls, consisted in the an-
nual removal to the top of the enclosure of the soil washed down
by the rains to the bottom. In the district in question, and in-
deed generally throughout France, where they are subject to
this disadvantage, I have little doubt they would gladly have
obviated it by converting the inclined planes of their vineyards
into a series of levels, were they not restrained by another con-
sideration which does not operate with us. I mean the necessity
which generally prevails to turn to the best account the degree
of heat which the summer affords, and, with this view, to preserve
the slope of the vineyard as nearly as possible perpendicular to
the meridian rays of the sun at the period of the year when their
fullinfluence is most required.
The position and height of the various terrace walls having
been determined upon by the use of the level, they should be
marked as the levelling is proceeded with, by driving to a se-
cure depth pegs of hardwood, their tops being made to indicate
the levels to which the summits of the terrace walls are to be
carried. The area marked may then be trenched, care being
taken, by leaving a shoulder of earth untrenched of 10 or 12
inches diameter around each, that the pegs are not disturbed.
A reference to the accompanying section. No. 2, will shew to
what extent the soil from the upper part of each terrace will be
required to be moved to the lower. It will only be requisite to
do this in a very rough manner at first, as the terrace walls
should not be built until the newly trenched ground has been
settled down again by rain.
For the information of those who may not be conversant with
manual operations of the kind, I may observe, that in tracing
out a line of any considerable length, either upon a level or any
41
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


angle of inclination, it is not necessary, unless the line be very wind-
ing, to use the levelling instrument throughout: but two or more
pegs having been inserted at moderate distances, with their tops
at the desired level (or angle of inclination, as the case may be)
the remainder of the line may be produced by taking sights over
them.
Although I so strongly advocate the formation of all slopes
in this climate which are to be planted with the vine (or con-
verted into gardens, orange orchards, &c.) into a series of level
terraces, I am quite aware that situations exist in which vine-
yards with considerable declivity may be successfully managed
without this preliminary expense. Those slopes which, after
being trenched, have their surfaces entirely composed of stones,
will of course not be likely to suffer nearly so much from the
action of running water, and will absorb it much more rapidly
than the situations where there are few or none. All I mean to
insist upon is, that if, without any considerable additional outlay,
the slope can in the first instance be properly terraced, its
ultimate success will be rendered much more certain, and the
outlay be amply repaid by more abundant crops and diminished
expense in the cultivation.
The plan of adopting low terrace walls even where the de-
clivity is great, and reducing the intermediate spaces into a
scries of smaller levels, supported by banks of earth, is probably
novel to the greater part of your readers, and may appear more
troublesome and expensive than where higher walls and broader
terraces are adopted. A reference to the section No. 2 will shew
however, that although by the adoption of this plan, the use of
the levelling instrument is much more frequently required, the
actual labour of moving the soil is greatly diminished, not to
mention the saving effected in the reduced height of the wails,
and I can assure them from personal experience, that the low
banks of compressed earth which support the intermediate little
terraces are neither troublesome to form, nor, being once settled
for a few weeks, of a nature to require any particular care to
keep them up. No water being permitted to flow over them
from above, they are subject to very little wear and tear. I
have some in view from 6 inches to 15 inches high, which were
42
LETTERS ON THE


formed five or six years ago, and althoufththey have never since
been touched, they continue to be in good preservation and fully to
answer their purpose. Any annual repairs whichthese little banks
might require would be of trifling consideration, comjSredtvini
their utility; and with regard to the trouble of levelling, I may
add, that two men, with a very little practice, will level and mark
out as much in one day as they can afterwards prepare for plant-
ing in a week. In conclusion X would observe, that the method I
recommend demands neither additional trouble nor skill on the
part of the workmen, but is rather calculated to diminish tho
fonfter: but in rapid declivities and surfaces of broken irregular
form, more attention and some little skill to turn them to the
best account are required, on the part of him who directs their
progress.
In the foregoing pages, I have minutely described the
modes I should prefer to adopt, in preparing portions of land
variously situated for planting with vines, being persuaded that
the expenses incurred in trenching, &c., will ultimately he amply
repaid by the more rapid progress of the vines, their greater
productiveness, and probably in the superior quality of the wine.
But although I so strongly advocate trenching, and trenching to
a great depth, I do not wish it to be understood that to form a
vineyard at all, particularly in soils naturally loose and friable it
is absolutely indispensable. lam aware that in some vineyards
of celebrity, even in the warmer districts of France, it is little
practised! The ground is merely ploughed or dug eight or nine
inches deep, and at the planting, holes are made in the undis-
turbed subsoil 15 or 20 inches deep, sometimes merely with an
iron bar, in which the cuttings are inserted. Planted in this
manner, the greater part of the cuttings strike root, but are said
usually to make little progress for several years, and to require
a much longer period, before they become sufficiently strong to
produce a full crop, than they would have done had the ground
been previously trenched. I am the more desirous to explain
this, because I believe that many persons have been deterred
from planting vineyards in consequence of the great preliminary
outlay required to trench the ground, an expense which many
are not in a condition to afford. To such I would say, rather


than have no vineyard, if your soil be suitable plant without
trenching, inserting the cuttings 15 or 18 inches deep in holes
made with a narrow spade, the ground having been previously
prepared by ploughing, &c.
LETTER VI.
PREPARING THE GROUND FOR PLANTING.
The site chosen for a vineyard having been trenched, the next
operation we have to consider is the preparation for planting.
Should the ground be naturally level, it will he necessary merely
to fill up such little inequalities of surface as may have been left
at the trenching, and to break any large lumps at or near the
surface. For this purpose the ground ought not to be wet from
recent rains, particularly if it contain clay, marie, or other earth
of a binding quality, neither should it be very dry; an inter-
mediate state is the most suitable.
If the vineyard is on a steep ascent and to be subdivided
between the terrace walls into little terraces, as described in the
last paper, it will be in the first instance necessary to level and
mark them out with hard wooden pegs, of which part may be left
in the ground (driven to a secure depth) as permanent marks.
Then, having gradually made up the outside with earth in a
damp state to the required level, compressing it well with the
feet and the back of the spade until sufficiently firm, a garden
line may be stretched from peg to peg, and the edge neatly
trimmed off at a moderate slope with the spade; should the soil
be too stoney, gravelly, or sandy, to enable a firm edge to be
made of earth alone, stones of small size may bo substituted; or
if it bo abundant, split hardwood timber. Stout shingles, from
9 or 10 to 15 or 10 inches long, according to the height of the
little terraces, placed close together, side by side, with their
thinner ends imbedded a few inches in the soil, would answer ex.
tremely well. At a tolerably steep inclination, with 4 feet tor-
44
LETTERS ON THE


races, from 15 to 20 thousand such shingles, of fair average width,
suffice for an acre, and they would last many years.
It will be proper to leave the surface of each little terrace
(particularly if the ground be porous) a little hollowed out, or
lower behind than at the front, so as to be certain of retaining
all the water until enough falls to be gradually carried off later-
ally to the regular water channels perpendicular to the terraces,
and thus to prevent the possibility of its ever flowing over from
terrace to terrace.
PLANTING THE VINEYARD.
The operation of, planting the vines is very important, and
requires to be carefully attended to. Great care should be taken
in the selection of the cuttings. Firstly, to procure them of
good sorts, each kind (if several are to be planted) being kept
apart to occupy separate rows. Much judgment and experience
is requisite to adapt the varieties to the best advantage, accord-
ing to the end the cultivator has in view. But, before we can
hope, in all cases, to effect this object, we must acquire more ex-
tensive experience upon the subject than unfortunately we now
possess. The sorts which may succeed best on one kind of soil
may not prove equally well adapted to another; besides, by the
admixture of certain varieties in the same vineyard, as is the
practice in many of the best wine districts of Europe, we should
probably combine the advantages of improved quality with
greater certainty in the produce. These are lessons which time
and attention alone can teach us. However, we may be sure that
we shall not greatly err, if we choose only known good sorts. Se-
condly : the cuttings ought to be made from none but thoroughly
well ripened wood, neither too slender nor too stout, and
with the buds plump and well developed. Cuttings from healthy,
full-bearing plants should always be preferred, and they usu-
ally succeed better if a small portion of last year’s wood is attached
to them. They ought never to be less than 15 inches long, and
it would often be advantageous to have them some inches longer.
They should be cut across horizontally just below the lower bud,
if there is no wood of the previous year attached to them, and a
45
CULTIVATION OP THE VINE.


little sloping, about 3 inch above the upper bud, the slope being
always on the side opposite to the bud.
A difference of opinion prevails amongst practical men, as
to the expediency of planting cuttings, or rooted plants. It has
been alleged that in the districts where the practice prevails of
planting vineyards with rooted plants (usually obtained by lay-
ing}, they are not of such long duration as in those districts in
which they are planted with cuttings. lam unable to offer any
conclusive facts upon this point; but it appears to be improbable
that in the propagation of a plant which has been increased from
time immemorial by extension (that is by other means than by
seeds), there can be any difference in the durability of indi-
viduals raised by laying, when carefully transplanted in a young
state, and from cuttings, without subsequent removal. I cer-
tainly prefer to plant a vineyard with rooted plants, not pro-
duced by laying, however, but by planting cuttings the year pre-
viously in a well prepared bed or plot of ground; and this
method is prevalent on the Rhine, and occasionally in the Medoc
and in other districts of France. I give this method
the preference, not on account of any material saving of
time in bringing the great majority of the stocks into full bear-
ing, but because there is a greater probability, amounting indeed
almost to a certainty, of their all starting into growth together,
and of their preserving greater uniformity afterwards. When
the vineyard is planted with cuttings, even under the best man-
agement, it sometimes happens that many of them fail. The
blanks thus occasioned require to be replanted the ensuing year,
and are even then sometimes not all filled up. These blanks
usually remain very perceptible during a number of years, for
the plants last introduced are frequently in a great measure
starved and stinted by their older and more vigorous neighbours,
so that the vineyard continues several years longer than it
might have been before it is brought into a state of full produc-
tiveness. An equal growth from the first is therefore one of the
disiderata in a young vineyard which some pains should betaken
to ensure. And by no means can the subject be so well effected
as by using healthy one-year-old roots.
To obtain these, properly prepared cuttings of the desired


sorts should be procured, and being neatly tied up in bundles of
from 100 to 200, they should be kept with their butt ends im-
mersed in water, for an inch or two only, until their upper buds
begin to swell, preparatory to their unfolding themselves. This
will usually happen a few days earlier than the appearance of
the first spring shoots of growing vines in the same locality.
Then, a plot of ground having been prepared by deep trenching,
and, if it be not in perfectly good heart, by turning in a consi-
derable quantity of well rotted manure, they should be planted
as follows:—Let the ground be marked out into beds of conve-
nient width, and a trench be opened across one of them, to the
depth of 14 or 15 inches, sloping gently at the back; spread
well decomposed manure a few inches thick, mixed with
fine mould or sand, at the bottom, and insert the cuttings,
resting against the back of the trench, at the distance of from 2
to 4 inches from each other, with their tops at the same level;
throw in gently a few inches more of a similar compost, and
press it down firmly, without trampling, against the butts of the
cuttings. Then, fill up the remainder of the trench with the
soil taken out of the next trench, in such manner that one bud
only of each cutting shall remain above the surface. The second
trench may be opened at the distance of from 12 to 18 inches
from the first, and so on, until the whole of the cuttings are
planted. If a coat of half rotted straw or litter be afterwards
shaken over the plot, to the depth of several inches, it will en-
sure their taking root, and greatly promote their vigorous
growth. Care should be taken that the water in which the cut-
tings are preserved does not become putrescent, and to this end,
if contained in vessels or small pools, it may require to be re-
peatedly changed; likewise that the cuttings are taken out only
as they are required for planting, as an hour’s exposure to the
hot sun or drying wind, when the buds are on the point of un-
folding, might destroy many of them. By the method above
described, from 25,000 to 50,000 rooted plants may be raised
upon a quarter of an acre of ground, and unless the season should
have proved exceedingly unpropitious, a growth of from one to
three or four feet in their tops, and a corresponding extension of
stout roots, be obtained.
47
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


To take them up properly and prepare them for planting,
open a trench across the bed, outside the first row, 18 or 20
inches deep, as if to trench the bed over, then with a pointed
stake work out the mould from amongst the roots into the ex-
cavation, and having cleared them, either cut them off with a
sharp instrument, when very long and rambling, or draw them
carefully out without bruising or splitting them up. As they
are taken out, cut close off all the roots which may have been
produced within 7 or 8 inches of the surface, and shorten the re-
mainder to 6 or 8 inches. It would be very desirable to leave
them longer, were it not for the increased trouble they would
give to replant them. Prune the top to the lowest shoot, if there
be more than one, and this shoot to one eye. The young plants
are now ready for their final situation, but may be kept until
wanted, “ laid in by the heels,” as it is termed, that is, packed
close together in trenches, with all but their tops covered, with
moist earth or sand pressed firmly over, and amongst their roots.
In re-planting, any favourable weather may be chosen, from
the time the leaves fall at the commencement of winter, until the
buds begin to swell in the spring; but the earlier in the winter,
and the sooner after they are taken up, the better. Should the
distances in the rows not exceed two feet or 2 feet 6 inches, con-
tinuous trenches may be opened for the whole length. If they
are greater, holes simply of the proper depth and width will suf-
fice. In all cases I would recommend a spadeful or two of well
decomposed manure to bo put into the bottom of the hole, and
the young plant, being inserted with its single bud just level with
the surface, should have the mould made gently firm about its
roots. In planting rooted plants, it will be expedient to use a
line to indicate the position of the row, with bits of cloth inserted
between the strands to mark the situation of each plant.
In planting a vineyard with cuttings, four different methods
are practised. The first and most troublesome, but most cer-
tain, is by opening a trench for the cuttings the whole length of
the row, and planting them as described above. The second
and next best method, but nearly as tedious, is by opening a
hole with the spade for each cutting, and planting in the same
manner. The third is by the use of an instrument very general
48
LETTEKS ON THE






throughout all wine countries. It is a flat bar or blade of iron
or steel about two inches broad, by i to J of an inch thick, ham-
mered rather thinner and pointed at the end. This blade is
about 2 feet long, and securely riveted into a cross handle of
wood about 20 inches long, giving the whole, the form of the
letter T. The surface of the ground having been levelled and
made fine, the position of the rows having been marked by
stakes, and of each individual plant by a mark on the ground,
and cuttings having been distributed to each by a boy in attend-
ance for the purpose, the vignerou proceeds first to scrape away,
with a very small hoe having a handle only G or 8 inches long,
the dry lumpy soil on the top, and indeed until he reaches the
moist earth, then inserting the bar nearly up to the handle, and
pressing the flat part forcibly once or twice against the earth on
each side, a hole is left after the instrument is withdrawn suffi-
ciently large to admit the cutting. The cutting is then inserted
with the left hand up to the uppermost bud, pouring in with the
right either moist wood ashes, sand, or fine light mould, the cut-
ting being frequently shaken and lifted up and down, to make
sure that it is solidly bedded in the finely divided material. The
instrument is then again inserted about two or three inches from
the cutting, and forcibly pressed with its flat side against the
mould which surrounds the cutting, particularly at the bottom.
It is very common to put in a second cutting into the hole thus
formed, and sometimes oven a third, to guard against failures.
It is a good practice to cover the bud, which is left above the
surface, with a little hillock of mould two or three inches high,
rubbed fine between the hands. It is in this manner protected,
until it has pushed forth a shoot, from extremes of heat or cold,
to which it might otherwise be exposed.
The fourth method is the most expeditious, but least certain
of any, excepting in light sandy lands, in which it commonly
answers very well. An instrument is used of the same length as
the last, and fixed into a handle of the same description, but
shorter. The instrument itself is a rod of | round iron, beaten
out for about 15 inches from its lower end upon a mandril
into the form of a hollow gouge, or small auger. [For
Diagram, see Plate 3, Fig. i.] In using it, the point in the
E
49
CULTIVATION OF HIE VINE.


centre is fixed into the lower end of the cutting, the top of which
is held in the left hand; whilst using the right, a hole is made
with the instrument which carries the cutting down with it to
the required depth. The cutting resting in the hollow part of
the instrument, offers no resistance to the soil as it is carried
down. The mere insertion by this mode is so expeditious, that
the marking out of the distances, and the distribution of the cut-
tings, occupies by far the greater proportion of the time con-
sumed in planting. It is used in light soils, which, from want of
rain, are very dry near the surface, but sufficiently moist below
for the vegetation of the cuttings.
LETTER VII.
MANAGEMENT OF VINEYARD AFTER PLANTING.
Tiinocanoci the Summer, after planting, the vineyard will re-
quire but little attention. The surface of the ground should be
chipped over once or twice, or oftener, if requisite, to keep down
the weeds; and early in the Autumn it should be carefully turned
over with the spade, or what is preferable, with a two-pronged
instrument, of which, as well as of several other useful tools, I
shall endeavour to send yon a sketch.
In districts not subject to late spring frosts, vines may
be pruned as soon as the leaves have all withered, and the wood
has ripened; but in colder situations this operation should be de-
ferred to as late a period as the ascending sap, and the other
labours of a vineyard, will permit; for it must be borne in mind
that (cseteris paribus) the earlier the vine is pruned, the earlier
its spring shoots may be expected; on no account, however,
should the pruning be commenced until vegetation is completely
suspended, nor deferred until the ascending sap causes them to
bleed after the knife. It is proper, in the first instance, to re-
move the soil to the depth of several inches from the stem of the
plant, and to cut close off all roots which may have been pro-
duced within that distance of the surface. Then, however vigor-
50
letters on tub


ous its shoots may have been, to prune the top clown to a single
bud, leaving it upon the lowest shoot if there be more than one ;
should the young plant, however, have grown feebly, it may be
left altogether unpruned until the next Winter. As soon as the
pruning is finished, such blanks as may have occurred through
the failure of the cuttings should be filled up with other cuttings,
or with rooted plants, which are of course preferable. It very
rarely happens that the first year’s growth produces shoots long
enough to lay into the vacant spots: I shall therefore defer any
description of the process until I come to the treatment during
the second Winter.
Before the buds begin to swell it is advisable to stake the
young vines: for this purpose stakes should be provided, split
from any durable hard wood, averaging not less than 1J inches
square in substance, and from 5 feet 0 inches to C feet long.
A very simple ingenious instrument is used to insert them, which
answers its purpose so completely, and saves so much labour,
that no vineyard should be without one. As it would be diffi-
cult to give an idea of it without a sketch, for the present I may
mention simply, that it is attached to the workman’s right heel
by means of leather straps and thongs. Standing in the row so
as to preserve the proper alignment, the vigneron places the stake
at the spot for insertion, then grasping it with the instrument
which is attached to his heel, a foot or 15 inches from the ground,
he throws himself entirely upon that leg, and thus with his weight
forces the stake into the ground up to the point at which it was
grasped. The stake docs not require to be pointed previously,
so that when the end in the ground, after the lapse of a num.
her of years, shows symptoms of decay, it is usually drawn out to
have its other end inserted in the same manner, and thus to pro-
long its duration.
As soon as possible afterwards, the vineyard should have
its spring dressing, with the two pronged tool above mentioned,
or with the spade. In performing this, care should be taken not
to wound the stems of the young vines. There is little danger
of injuring roots, those near the surface having been removed at
the pruning. When the young shoots have grown to a sufficient
length to enable them to be gathered together without snapping
E 2
51
CULTIVATION OP THE VINE.


from the stem at their point of junction with it, they should
be carefully attached to the stakes. In situations exposed to
blasts of wind, it will be prudent to commence doing this as soon
as there are any long enough to be safely secured to the stakes.
It is usual, in wine countries, to fasten them with small wisps of
rye-straw; in this country coarse wiry grass answers equally
well. The mode of using grass or straw is much more expedi-
tious than tying with bark, New Zealand flax, &c. A small
bundle of the straw or grass being attached in front, by means
of a strap passed round his waist, the vigneron proceeds to ga-
ther up as many of the young shoots as can be conveniently
brought to the stake at one spot without danger of breaking off,
then passing a small wisp about the thickness of a swan’s quill
round them, and twisting the two ends tightly together by a
rapid motion in one direction, they are laid together without
risk of untwisting by a sudden turn in the opposite, and the
shoots secured to the stakes for as long a period as requisite.
This operation of tying up the young shoots should be re-
peated as often as their growth may render it necessary. If
it be vigorous, those of neighbouring vines may be attached
together, bending them along from stake to stake. The Indian
or Spanish reed, at this period, proves to be a very useful ad-
junct to the stakes. It may be fastened to them, near their tops,
with strips of bark, but best with twigs of willow, in such man-
ner as to extend them as a light rail along the rows. On no ac-
count should any portion of the young shoots be broken off.
The greater the number of healthy leaves, and the longer the
period for which they continue to be produced upon the plant,
the greater will be the extension of the roots, and the conse-
quent enlargement of the stock. But it is often desirable to rub
off, soon after they appear, the lateral shoots which are pro-
duced at the axillae of the leaves, for the distance of two or three
buds up each growing shoot, as, if vigorous, they interfere with
the development of the buds for the next season; growing shoots
of the vine should never be tied up whilst the leaves are wet
from a recent shower or dew, they are much more liable to
snap off when thus moist, and the leaves which are unavoidably
pressed close together near the bandage are, if wet, liable to


become sickly and to drop off. As the shoots which push forth
above ground are tied up, those which come from beneath the
surface should be removed (unless required to replace the acci-
dental failure of those above), taking care to break them off
close to the stem.
Throughout the period of their growth, the soil amongst
the vines should be frequently stirred to the depth of two or
three inches, and the growth of all weeds prevented by the use of
the scuffling hoe. A few small bunches of grapes may be produced
during the second season; and although I do not think it desira-
ble that they should be permitted to do so, still, if they are re-
tained, they should be carefully protected from the birds, who,
if once allowed to feed upon the grapes of a vineyard with impu-
nity, will become infinitely more troublesome afterwards. In
March and April, after the extreme heats have passed, the vine-
yard should have its second deep digging, to prepare the ground
to receive the autumn and winter rains.
At the second pruning, the majority of the vines, in a toler-
ably fertile soil, will have two or three vigorous shoots. Unless
they should be exceedingly luxuriant, all but the one selected to
form the commencement of the future stem should be cut close
off. Upon this one, which should be the most upright and best
formed, one, two, three, or even four eyes may be left, according
to the state of the stock, It should be well understood, that
during the first three seasons, the object of the cultivator should
be chiefly directed to the creation of abundant deeply seated
roots, and the consequent enlargement of the stem at its junc-
tion with the roots, and that on no account should the stem be
extended, so as to form the commencement of the head, until at
the surface of the ground the stock has attained a diameter of
at least one and a-half inches, or nearly the thickness of a man’s
wrist. Almost every bearing vineyard I have seen in the colony
has been greatly injured by forming the stems of the vines too
early, and obtaining crops of fruit before they had become suffi-
ciently well established. Should the vine be exceedingly wild
and luxuriant in its growth, a side branch, or spur, with one or
two buds upon it to produce fruit, may be left, in addition to the
principal shoot which is destined to form the base of the future
53
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


stem, but with the intention of removing it entirely at the next
winter pruning. It is therefore best to avoid leaving this super-
numerary branch, unless the extreme luxuriance of the plant
points out the evident necessity of distributing its vigour through
a greater number of shoots.
I should have observed, that previous to pruning the vines,
it will be proper to look them over attentively, that such vacan-
cies as may occur near to a plant of vigorous growth may be
supplied by laying it down. In performing this operation with
young plants, it is usually better to open a trench down nearly
to the lowest (almost invariably the strongest) roots of the plant
to be laid, and to continue this trench in such manner that the
whole plant may be bent down into it to the depth of eighteen
inches, bringing up the end of a healthy branch at the spot the
original stem occupied, and another where the vacancy is to be
filled up. A luxuriant young vine may in this manner be formed
into as many distinct stocks as there are branches, and each will
sometimes bear several bunches of fruit the first season. Care
should be taken to dispose the branches in such manner that they
may be laid in fully eighteen inches deep, and be brought up to tho
surface from that depth, in a nearly perpendicular position, into
the spot they are to occupy. It will frequently be necessary to
use a little care to dispose the young shoots to the best advan-
tage, when several belonging to the same vine are laid. By
twisting them cautiously in the first instance, they may be ren-
dered more pliable, and the slight cracking of the bark thus pro-
duced, favors the protrusion of roots. If half a barrow load of
well decomposed manure be added to tho soil at the bottom of
the trenches in which the branches are laid, their growth will be
so much accelerated as in a year or two to leave them very little,
if at all, behind their older neighbours. When the rest of tho
vines are pruned, it is proper to cut off the ends of tho laid
branches two eyes above ground.
The vines being all pruned, the next part of the vino
dresser’s care is to adjust any stakes which may have been mis-
placed, and to attach firmly to them the stems of such of tho
young vines as may not be perfectly upright. However short
they may be, it is desirable to give them this direction in their
54
LETTERS ON THE


growth from the commencement. The first deep spring dressing
with the spade, or two-pronged instrument, should then be given.
To save unnecessary repetition, I will here observe, that every well
managed vineyard should annually have two deep dressings, and
two of a mere surface nature ; that the two former should be
given, the first early in the Autumn, and the second towards the
end of the Winter or commencement of Spring, and the two latter
as soon as the vines are out of flower, and just before the grapes
begin to swell to maturity. Besides these, such occasional use
of the scuffling hoe should be given as may be necessary to de-
stroy all weeds, which, when they are permitted to remain, not
only injure the growth of the plants, but are supposed frequently
to impart a disagreeable flavour to the Wine.
After the first spring dressing is given, the less trampling
there is among the vines, until the shoots are sufficiently long to
commence tying up, the better. This being the third season, if
the vineyard has prospered, a few bunches of grapes may be ex-
pected to shew themselves on the majority of the plants. Dur-
ing the period at which they are in flower, usually from four to
six weeks from the time the buds unfold themselves, it is not
considered proper to move about much amongst them. A sud-
den shake at this time will often, it is said, cause the blossoms to
become abortive. Although I cannot say that I have ever ob-
served damage to be thus produced, it is prudent not to neglect
a precaution, respecting the observance of which, experienced
vignerons are usually very particular.
After the flowering has passed, the young shoots should be
carefully tied up, laying them along the rows, from the summit
of one stake to another, and at the same time loosening some of
the lower bandages, should the foliage be too much crowded
together. As the second spring dressing is performed, which
as I have observed above, need only be of a mere sur-
face nature (unless indeed the soil has been set firm by heavy
rains), the vines should be examined, and any bunches of fruit
(by this time probably the size of large shot or small peas) which
hang near the ground, or rest upon it, should have holes exca-
vated under them to prevent their coming in contact with it.
All the fruit which continues to touch the ground becomes unfit


to make good wine. Sucker shoots should also be carefully re-
moved. The intelligent cultivator will readily comprehend, that
although I have specified two deep dressings and two of a sur-
face nature as the number which, under ordinary circumstances,
it will be necessary to bestow upon a vineyard, it is desirable to
repeat the latter operation as often as may be requisite, to keep
the soil during the growth of the fruit perfectly light and porous
for a few inches from the surface. It is not desirable to repeat
the deep digging during the seasons when extreme heat and
deficient moisture are prevalent.
The labors connected with the vintage I think it more con-
venient to treat of in a subsequent paper, I shall therefore at once
proceed to describe the third season’s pruning. Presuming all
vacancies to have been filled up, it is desirable to remove, in the
first instance, with their season’s growth, the side branches which
were left to bear fruit at the last pruning, cutting them close off
to the main stem; and of the remaining shoots, to select the
stoutest, best formed, and most upright, for the continuation of
the main stem. Upon this shoot three or four, and very rarely
five buds should be left, and unless the stem below has attained
considerable substance, not more than two. If, however, the
vine has become very luxuriant, one or two side branches, with
two buds each, may be left (to be cut away again next year) for
producing fruit; always remembering, however, that it is better
that the young vine should become a little wild and over luxu-
riant in its early growth, through close pruning, than be at all
checked by bearing fruit. From eight to twelve buds is tho
maximum I should assign to a vine at its third pruning, and if
not of vigorous growth, a fourth part of that number may suffice.
During the fourth and each succeeding year, the same pre-
cautions should be observed to rub off sucker and misplaced
shoots as they appear, to tie up the growing branches as they
require it, and besides its regular dressings, to keep the vineyard
quite free from weeds, and its surface loose and porous. A con-
siderable quantity of grapes may reasonably be expected this
season, which, as many of them will probably be produced near
the ground, must assiduously be prevented from touching it by
excavating under such branches as may require it. At the


fourth pruning, the majority of the vines will be furnished with
strong healthy shoots, well placed for the commencement of the
head or principal branches; two, three, or four may be selected,
observing that no shoot should be left for a permanent branch
which diverges from the stem nearer to the ground than nine or
ten inches. Although, if requisite, some to bear fruit for a sin-
gle season, may be left lower, with the intention of cutting them
away as soon as they can be replaced by others farther from the
ground. Upon each branch, from one to four eyes may be left;
and they should be so placed with reference to the stem as to
balance themselves upon it From 12 to 15 or 18 buds is the
maximum I should assign at the fourth pruning. The annual
dressings being of the same nature as those before described, I
may pass at once to the fifth year’s pruning.
Unless it has been subjected to some untoward accident to
retard its progress, this year the head of the vine ought to be
fully formed. The plant should consist of a stout upright stem,
at the height of from 10 or 12 to 16 inches, diverging into three,
four, or more principal branches; each of these after the prun-
ing, being furnished with two or three shoots of the preceding
season’s growth, pruned to from one to three buds each. As a
general rule, the strongest will be those placed the farthest from
the main stem: these should be pruned to three eyes; and the
weakest, usually the nearest, may be pruned to one. This sin-
gle bud will probably push very vigorously in the course of the
ensuing season, and its shoot may be pruned next Winter to three
eyes; whilst the best placed shoot of the longer branch (all the
others on the same principal branch being cut entirely away)
should be pruned to one. To return to the fifth year’s pruning,
the shoots of the last season’s growth selected to remain, should
be so placed upon the principal branches as to occupy, as nearly
as possible, the outer circumference of the circle described by
the head, and at moderate distances from each other; leaving
the inner portion tolerably free from bearing wood. If, in ad-
dition to this, the branches are so placed as to balance each other
upon the main stem, the young vine may be considered to have
taken the most perfect form it can receive for vineyard cultiva-
tion in this climate. It is even very possible after the lapse of a
57
CULTIVATION OF TIIU VINE.


few years, providing this form be carefully preserved, the stem
be quite upright, and the principal branches do not diverge from
the main stem too near the ground, that, in situations not ex-
posed to violent winds, stakes may be altogether dispensed with.
From 20 to 25 buds is the maximum I should assign to healthy
vines in full bearing, planted in rows four feet apart. Of course,
the quantity of bearing wood should vary according to the dis-
tance at which they are planted, the soil, the variety of the vine,
and the seasons. The skill to suit it to the exact condition of
the plant, is in all wine countries justly considered as that which
it is most difficult to find in the Vigneron. Very different modes
of pruning from the one I have Just described are practised in
some of the most celebrated wine districts of Europe. Near
Bordeaux, for instance, and on the Rhine, the branches destined
to bear fruit for the season, are trained out horizontally. I think
it unnecessary, however, to trouble your readers with any par-
ticular description of this and various other modes of pruning,
practised in colder countries, because it is quite certain that they
are not adapted to this climate. The object in a colder country
is to expose every part of the plant to the full influence of the
sun’s rays; ours should be, so to form it, that the whole of the
fruit may be produced within three feet of the ground, and that
it may hang without being crowded, perfectly sheltered by the
foliage above from the scorching rays of our summer sun; the
growing shoots being so disposed as to protect it, together with
the stem and principal branches of the plant, from its over-
powerful influence. I have seen every bunch of grapes on the
north-west side of a trellis scorched up during a hot wind; al-
though the immediate site was exceedingly well sheltered. I
may further remark, that the dwarf standard method, such as I
have above described, has of late years been strongly recom-
mended for adoption by intelligent practical cultivators in the
■neighbourhood of Bordeaux. Attentive observation, during a
number of years, leaves me not the slightest doubt of its advan-
tages over every other method.
In the foregoing account I have not alluded to several oper-
ations in the summer treatment of the vine, much practised in
wine districts of celebrity, particularly in the higher latitudes of


vine culture. They consist of three; pinching off the tops of the
growing shoots, or shortening them with the knife, breaking oif
all the lateral shoots produced at the axilla' of the leaves, and
removing a portion of the leaves themselves during the matura-
tion of the crop, to hasten the process. The whole of these are
said to be of very questionable benefit, even where they are most
strictly practised, and in this country, if of occasional advantage,
it must be considered as an exception to the general rule, that the
more healthy leaves the plant developes, the greater its capacity
(where the climate is warm enough) to bring a large crop to
perfection. For instance, should the branch be without fruit;
should it likewise be so placed as to require removal at the next
winter’s pruning, it may be very proper to cut it away in the
Summer, because its energies are misdirected: should it, how-
ever be desirable to retain it, it may be sufficient to pinch off the
top when it reaches the height of the stake. Again, if the vines
are overloaded with fruit, it will be proper to remove a portion,
and if the branches are much crowded, to cut away a part of
them with it, selecting the weakest and worst placed, that the
remainder may have more room to grow. For the same reason,
it may often be advisable to cut off that portion of the lateral
shoots which sometimes crowd the lower part of the vine amongst
the bunches of fruit, that the air and light may be more fully
admitted, but never to any greater extent. A very few of the
lower leaves also may sometimes be removed, should continued
moist weather come on during the maturation of the crop. The
necessity of obtaining a free circulation of air to prevent rotten-
ness, is of more importance than the loss of a few leaves to the
plant. But, in a dry season, I once made upon a few rows of
vines the experiment of exposing the bunches of grapes to the
full action of the weather, by stripping off a portion of the lower
leaves, and the result was a positive retardation in the ripening
of the fruit, to the extent of ten days or a fortnight.
Wherever then the Summer is warm and prolonged, and
subject to occasional days of excessive heat, the object should be
to encourage thick shade and shelter above, and to have free
circulation of air below amongst the bunches. Many varieties
of the vine have a tendency here to cast their lower leaves


naturally before their fruit is ripe, at all events, to a sufficient
extent for the latter object. But some sorts which do not
usually do so, the fruit of which is liable to burst and rot early
if rains come on when near maturity, do in such case require to
have a few of their lower leaves removed, but it should be done
with caution.
LETTER VIII.
UPON THE USE OF MANURES AND THE BEST
MODES OF RESTORING AN EXHAUSTED
VINEYARD.
There is no object connected with the cultivation of the vine
upon which there is greater diversity of opinion, or in some
instances, I might safely add, a greater difference between
theory and practice. The theorist alleges, that if manure, espe-
cially of animal origin, be employed, the quality of the wine will
be destroyed, whereas the practical man says, and truly, that
except in a few favoured localities, it would be vain to attempt
the production, year after year, of an exhausting crop, without
returning to the soil, by means of some enriching substance, a
portion at least, of that principle of fertility, which a crop of
grapes undoubtedly extracts from it. In some famous wine dis-
tricts, it is unquestionable that manure must be used with great
caution, lest the quality of the wine should suffer. But in others,
not less celebrated, it is applied in considerable quantities with-
out apparent injury. The wines of the Bordeaux districts appear
to be particularly susceptible of injury from this cause; on the
other hand, the vineyards of the Rhine are said to be ma-
nured highly and frequently, without producing any sensible
alteration in the quality of their produce. Whether we are to
attribute this difference to diversity of soil, or to the varieties of
the vine cultivated, I am unable to offer an opinion founded
60
LETTERS OX THE


upon sufficient data. It has been supposed by some writers,
that the aroma or peculiar fragrance, which is found more or
less in almost all wines, exists in the first instance chiefly in the
skin, or rather in the inner envelope of the berries, which also
contains the colouring matter of black grapes. Now I have
never heard of a vineyard producing red wine of much reputa-
tion which could be highly manured without injuring its quality,
but I have myself resided in an extensive wine district, the pro-
duce of which was all white wine, resembling, in its general
character, many of the Rhine wines, and where the practice was
to manure the vineyards abundantly, without any apparent injury
to the wine. In the manufacture of white wines it is well known
the must is separated from the skins previous to fermentation.
May not the disagreeable odour, which is said to be the princi-
pal evil consequence resulting from the injudicious use of manure
in those vineyards, which are susceptible of being injured by it,
be deposited chiefly in the skins! and, as a consequence, there-
fore, may it not be possible to manure vineyards which produce
white wines only, with more impunity than those which produce
red ? in which, I need not add, the skins are fermented to give
them their colour. I may observe, as another circumstance, which
happened within my knowledge, that wine of great body and
flavour, combined with the most delicate aroma, was made in this
colony from vines of two sorts of muscat, which had been abun-
dantly manured two years previously. To whatever cause these
apparent discrepancies may be attributed, the necessity of using
some means of renovating the soil is with reason insisted upon,
even where the wine is acknowledged to be most susceptible of
being injured. And for this purpose, those cultivators who have
had most experience, recommend the use of well decomposed
animal manure made into a compost, with scrapings of roads
and ditches, with vegetable mould, or with rotted surface soil
taken from waste places. And they allege that, if such compost
be applied in a properly reduced state, and with moderation,
there will be no risk of injuring the quality of the most deli-
cately flavoured wines.
As a general rule in the use of manures, we must not lose
sight of a law which appears to be of very universal prevalence,


although, in climates so favourable as that of New South Wales,
it may undoubtedly be to a certain extent modified; and that
law is, that the finer qualities of wine are rarely produced from
soils which afford any great degree of development either to the
vine or its fruit. There are, perhaps, very few vineyards of high
reputation in the world, in which the growth of the plants, the
size of the bunches and berries, and consequently the produce per
acre are not below the average. And, although it by no means
follows, that those vineyards which produce the least, yield the
best wine, it seems to be certain that very abundant produce in
wine is incompatible with the higher qualities.
If I were about to plant a vineyard in land of which the
surface to the depth of 12 or 18 inches consisted of soil of mo-
derate fertility, and the substratum of which was not unpro-
pitious to the vine, I should certainly consider the use of manure
in the first instance, or, indeed, until the vigour of the vines
materially declined, either superfluous or positively injurious.
But, if on the contrary, it should be of such an arid sterile
nature as to forbid its being advantageously devoted to any of
the ordinary operations of husbandry, I should not hesitate to
employ a considerable quantity of manure, the more decomposed
the better, at the period of trenching. I should consider
the vigour which would by such means be imparted to the vines
during their early growth of infinite consequence to the dura-
bility and future productiveness of the vineyard; whilst those
injurious influences which might possibly affect a vineyard in
full bearing, would have time to dissipate themselves before a
crop of grapes would be produced.
In soils also, of a nature to produce plants of luxuriant
growth, and largo crops of wine, of medium or even inferior
quality, so long as the fruit continued to be properly matured,
I should certainly endeavour to maintain their productiveness
by the use of manure ; because, any improvement in the quality
of the wine which might ensue as a consequence of their less
vigorous habit, would scarcely compensate for the loss of quan.
tity. There is a limit, however, to the quantity of grapes which
vines, however luxuriant, can bring to proper maturity. The
bunches and berries may be large and fully developed; but, at


the same time, deficient in those saccharine qualities which are
essential to the production of a tolerable beverage; and the latter
will certainly happen, be the vine vigorous or not, if it be allowed
to bear too much. Now, in highly manured soils of much fer-
tility, in which the vine grows with great luxuriance, it must bo
pruned so as to bear abundantly, or it will not bear at all. In
other words, you have your choice between a large crop of fruit,
capable only of making wretched wine, or no crop at all. It is
obviously the best plan therefore to refrain from manuring soils
in which the vine naturally grows with luxuriance, until their
vigour and productiveness, during more than one season, become
sensibly diminished, and then to do so with judgment, that the
quality of the produce may not be seriously injured. It is more
prudent in the first instance, to reduce the quantity of bearing
wood at the winter priming, rather than to be too hasty in the
application of manure. So long, therefore, as the vines produce
their shoots with moderate vigour, and without any very sensible
diminution in the quantity of the wine, any addition to the soil
should be forbidden; and when the necessity for its application
becomes apparent, it should be done with judgment, bearing in
mind that a little manure, given frequently, produces much bet-
ter effects than a large dose at once, and without risk of injury.
No vinedresser should be altogether trusted in this matter; for
all that I have ever met with consider the greatest possible pro-
ductiveness as their proper aim, and the quality of the crops as
of very secondary importance.
As there are probably some vineyards in the Colony which
have become exhausted as well by injudicious management in
pruning as by the want of manure, it may be well perhaps to
point out to the proprietors of such, that provided the sorts are
good, it may be very practicable to bring them into a properly
productive state without throwing them completely out of bear-
ing for a single season. The practice lam about to describe is
of very general prevalence in the north of France, where it is
said to be performed in most vineyards as often as every fifteen
or twenty years. An outside row is first grubbed up by the roots,
then a sufficient quantity of manure being laid into the bottom of
a trench, which should be opened on the site they occupied, the
vines of the adjoining row are laid into this trench, every part of


the old stem and branches being covered to the depth of full
eighteen inches, one healthy shoot only of the last season’s
growth from each vine being brought up perpendicularly from
the bottom of the trench, into the position the new vine is in-
tended to occupy, and cut off at two or three eyes above the
surface of the ground when the trench is filled up. This branch
becomes the future stock, and usually produces several bunches
(more or less), according to its strength, the first season. It can
at all events scarcely fail to grow with great vigour; so much so
that the vineyard ought to be in full bearing again, at the far-
thest, by the third year. It is usually quite practicable, in per-
forming this operation, to make any alteration in the spaces be-
tween the vines which may bethought expedient, one vine being
capable of being formed into several. lam desirous to impress
this last remark upon your readers, because the majority of the
old vineyards here are planted at distances far too wide for the
purpose, and in restoring an old vineyard, this evil may be reme-
died with very little extra labour.
After the whole vineyard has been thus treated, it is neces-
sary to put in a row of rooted plants, previously provided for
that purpose, in the vacant space left after laying down the last
row. I ought perhaps to remark, that in laying down an entire
plant into a deep trench, as above described, it is necessary to
cut off with a knife all the lateral roots, which would prevent its
being placed in a perfectly horizontal position at the bottom of
the trench.
When it is considered advisable to change any of the varie-
ties of vines in a vineyard, it can be usually accomplished, with
the least loss of time, by the operation commonly known amongst
gardeners as the “ common cleft grafting,” performed on the
root of the plant it is desired to change. To effect this pro-
perly, remove the earth from the stock to the depth of six or
eight inches, saw off the stock horizontally four to six inches
beneath the surface, smooth the surface with the priming knife,
cleave it directly down the middle with a mallet and broad
chisel to the depth of two or three inches, keep the cleft open as
the chisel is withdrawn with a small wooden wedge inserted in
the centre, take a well formed scion of the desired sort, of the


length of at least three buds, form the lower end into an acute
wedge, insert it in the cleft on one side, so that the inner bark
of the scion may be brought into the closest possible contact
with the inner bark of the stock, insert another scion in the same
manner in the opposite side of the cleft, withdraw the wedge
which kept the cleft open, apply a bandage of bark or other
appropriate material, so as to keep the scions firmly in their
places, cover the whole with well tempered clay for at least an
inch above and below the point of insertion, and return the soil
into the excavation in such manner, that one bud only of each
scion may be above the surface. Should the diameter of the
stock be small, one scion only may be used, but should it be very
large, a second cleft may be made, crossing the other at right
angles, into which two more scions may be inserted. A strong
stock can thus be made to bear a considerable quantity of fruit
the first season. The following season all the scions may be re-
moved, save the one which appears best calculated to form the
future plant, and this, if vigorous and well formed, may be pruned
to the height at which it is proposed to leave the future stem.
The method just described is usually very certain, and a
diligent workman will graft from 100 to 150 per day. It is said
that the scions are the better for having attached to them a por.
tion of the last year’s wood, sufficiently long to shape into the
wedge which is inserted into the cleft.
The methods above described, although more expensive
than the operation of grubbing up the old vines and replanting,
are nevertheless to be preferred in almost all cases where it is
not necessary that the level of the surface should be materially
changed, and the soil does not absolutely require to be trenched
over to a considerable depth, because at least two years is gained
in bringing the vineyard into a state of full productiveness.


LETTER IX.
Having in the preceding papers attempted a concise description
of the mode of culture which I consider it advisable to pursue in
this climate, I propose, before I enter upon the various details
connected with the vintage, to furnish you with a few papers
upon fermentation.
I consider a correct comprehension of the theory of this
important operation of nature, so indispensable to the successful
manufacture of wine, in a country where the practice may from
a variety of local causes require to he more or less modified,
that I shall without scruple devote considerable space to the
purpose. I beg in the first instance, to transmit to you for pub-
lication, portions of several chapters, extracted from a very
valuable article contained in Dr. Lardner’s Cabinet Cyclopoedia
(Vol. 1. Domestic Economy), by Professor Donovan, in which
the subject is treated in a manner at once so clear and compre-
hensive, as to render it familiar to any ordinary understanding.
I shall afterwards send you extracts from another portion of the
same volume, upon the art of wine mailing, and to this portion
I shall append a variety of information, partly derived from au-
thors of authority, and partly from the remarks which the expe-
rience of many years and attentive observation have enabled
me to make upon the practice, as applicable to this colony.
THEORY OF FERMENTATION.
Section I.— Fermentation in General.—Vinous Fermenta-
tion Test.
The ancient philosophers used the term fermentation in a
vague and often unintelligible sense. It was intended to convey


some mysterious, hypothetical, or latent process, more frequently
than to express the exhibition of palpable chemical changes,
such as the word is now understood to mean. In the modern ac-
ceptation, the word expresses the changes which vegetable or
animal matters spontaneously undergo, and which terminate in
the production either of a vinous liquor, an acid liquor, or of a
remarkable fetor.
Many chemists have considered these three different ter-
minations as constituting three different kinds of fermentation.
It is, however, more convenient to understand the whole series of
changes, as merely stages of one great process. And to this
simple view it will he no objection to urge, that the last stage
very often takes place without being preceded by any other;
and that all the stages may be brought about separately. For,
on the other hand, we have various instances in which they fol-
low each other, not only in succession, but in an unvarying suc-
cession ; the second following the first, and the third following
the second; thus evincing consecutive stages.
The following will serve as an illustration both of the process
of fermentation and of its stages: but the subject will bo resinned
hereafter. If some grape juice be left to itself, at the ordinary
temperature of summer, it soon begins to suffer remarkable
changes: the liquor becomes muddy; an internal motion takes
place; the temperature perhaps rises; a bubbling noise is heard,
owing to the breaking of minute air bubbles at the surface ; and
the whole appears not only to boil, but it tends to boil over, its
bulk being swollen by the envelopment of so many air bubbles.
On account of this resemblance to boiling, the process is called
fermentation, from fervere, to boil. Meanwhile a dense froth,
composed of these bubbles involved in viscid matter, rises to the
surface, and after remaining there some time, it parts with the
involved air which floated it, and the viscid matter subsides to
the bottom. At length the liquor remains tranquil, and soon
after becomes transparent. The viscid matter possesses the
property of exciting fermentation in certain other substances not
spontaneously disposed to such a change, and hence it is
called ferment, but commonly vest or barm.
At this period it is found that the grape juice has lost its
F a


natural sweetness; the taste becomes strong, stimulating, ami
aromatic; and it acquires the singular property of intoxicating
which it did not before possess. In short, it has become vinous ,
it is wine: and the whole series of phenomena constitute the
vinous fermentation. An ardent or burning tasted spirit may
be now extracted from vinous liquor, and the ardent spirit, when
very strong, is called by chemists alcohol.
After these changes, the fermented liquor being preserved
for some time, corked in bottles if weak, or partially exposed to
air if strong, and the temperature being maintained at about 75
degrees, a new set of phenomena will take place. Provided the
quantity is large, a hissing noise is heard, and the temperature
rises perhaps 13 or 15 degrees. A little gas is given out; the
liquid exhibits an intestine but inconsiderable motion ; floating
shreds make their appearance, and at length partly subside and
partly collect into a gelatinous cake, which continually thickens.
The liquor is now transparent; the vinous flavour and the alcohol
have disappeared; and the taste has become extremely sour: in
short, the wine is converted into vinegar, called in Latin acetum:
and although the obvious symptoms of fermentation are inconsi-
derable, the process is called the acetous fermentation.
If vinegar be kept for a length of time, its surface becomes
covered with a green mould which constantly increases; its
acidity gradually disappears; its peculiar pungent acid smell
gives place to a highly disagreeable odour; and, as this last
effect proceeds from the rottenness (putredoj of the vegetable
matter present, the whole change is called the putrefactive fer-
mentation.
Bodies in a state of complete dryness cannot be made to un-
dergo any kind of fermentation. A certain quantity of moisture
must be present in all cases; and where the fermentation con-
cerned is the vinous, the body must be in a state of actual
liquidity. A piece of meat containing all its natural juices will,
speedily putrefy; but if the water be expelled by drying, or
rendered solid by freezing, the meat may be preserved for an
almost unlimited period of time. A stiff dough made of flour
and water, although containing so little of the latter, will soon
turn sour, because it undergoes the acetous fermentation, and


vinegar will bo formed. Sugar will not ferment in any manner
unless it be dissolved in as much water as will make it liquid,
and then it is susceptible of the vinous fermentation; but not if
the solution contain so little water as to constitute a syrup. In
fact, the facility of exciting fermentation is in proportion to the
dilution of the liquid. If the dilution be very great, the vinous
stage commences, but is speedily followed by the acetous.
A certain temperature is necessary to support fermentation
of any kind: at 32 ° the vinous fermentation does not take
place; at 50° it is languid; at GO it is rapid; at 70° too rapid,
and there is danger that the acetous stage will set in; at a degree
much under boiling, it cannot exist or be excited. Thus a de-
gree much above or much below a medium temperature is equally
fatal to the process. Flesh will not putrefy at or near a boiling
water heat, nor at the freezing point. Wine and vinous liquids
will not acetify at or near either of these degrees. Nor are solu-
tions of sugar capable of undergoing the vinous fermentation,
unless at a medium temperature.
There are substances called ferments, which possess the
power of exciting the different kinds of fermentation in bodies.
This is more obviously true in the case of the vinous fermenta-
tion : for bodies susceptible of that change do not undergo it,
unless the proper ferment be present. Thus a solution of pure
sugar in water will not decidedly ferment unless yest be added;
nor will the juice of grapes or other fruits ferment, if they be
deprived of a substance which they naturally contain analogous to
yest. The acetous fermentation also is excited by its proper
ferment; but this substance has never been obtained in a separ-
ate form. In many instances the vinous and acetous ferments
seem to be modifications of the same thing. The matter depo-
sited from vinegar is capable of acting as an acetous ferment;
and there is a common practice, founded on this fact, of con-
ducting the acetification of a saccharine solution in a vessel which
had already served for making or holding vinegar. The putre-
faction of flesh is so well known to be promoted by the proximity
of flesh already putrid, that it need not be here insisted on; and
the fact is not easily explicable, unless we admit the existence of
some putrefactive ferment.


The question now occurs, What is the nature of the different
ferments which produce these changes ? No answer can be given
to the question put in this general form, as the researches of che-
mists have been particularly directed only to that one called yest-,
and this accordingly is the only one the nature of which is at all
understood, and our knowledge of it is still extremely imperfect.
Yest has been variously represented by different chemists who
investigated it. Fabroni considered it identical with gluten.
This is a substance contained in wheaten flour, which imparts to
it the property of forming a tough paste with water; and which
may be separated from the flour by kneading a handful of it un-
der water, until it no longer communicates whiteness to the liquid.
What then remains in the hand is a grey, tenacious, tough, elastic
mass, stretching out and collapsing again like Indian rubber.
The white matter which has mixed with the water soon subsides,
it is starch; and of this, along with the gluten, was the original
flour composed.
This gluten, or some modification of it, is what Fabroni
considered to be the true vinous ferment: and he supported his
opinion by some striking facts, which have been added to by the
researches of Thenard. It was found that solution of sugar, which
by itself docs not ferment, does so, although feebly, if some glu-
ten be added, and much better if the gluten be dissolved, as by
the addition of tartar. Without the presence of tartar, thejuico
of grapes refuses to ferment; and its effect is supposed to depend
on its power of holding the natural ferment of the grape in solu-
tion. Gluten is not only contained in the different kinds of grain
used for making fermented liquors, but also in different kinds of
fruits, especially those which readily enter into spontaneous fer-
mentation, as grapes and gooseberries. The juice of these fruits
may bo deprived of their yest by heating and filtering. What
remains on the filter is a tasteless substance, insoluble in water,
and decomposable by heat into the same ultimate elements as
yest from grain. Grape juice deprived of its yest refused to
ferment; but when its yest was restored, the juice fermented
freely. Fruit yest added to solution of sugar caused an abundant
fermentation; so also did wheat gluten in tills solution, or in
grape juice deprived of its natural yest.
70
I.ETTEUS ON THE


If common yest or barm bo allowed to stand for some time
undisturbed in a tall vessel, a whitish curdy matter rises to the
surface. This matter, if separated, will be found to be very
active in exciting fermentation in saccharine liquors; at tho
same time the yest remaining in the vessel has lost that power.
It therefore follows, that this curdy matter is the true ferment:
it is found to partake very much of tho nature of gluten; and
seems to differ very little from the yest of the grapes, or of other
fruits.
In some respects there are differences between the gluten of
wheat flour and that obtained from yest, or from the juice of
fruits; one of tho most important is, that gluten of grain is much
less efficacious in exciting fermentation, than that of fruits. As
a spontaneous fermentation takes place in the juice of grapes,
gooseberries, apples, and various other fruits, as well as in worts
drawn from the nutritive grains, although it is exceedingly feeble,
it would be sufficient evidence of the existence in these fruits
and grains of the principle which excites fermentation, be its
name and nature what they may. And all the facts seem to
prove that the gluten of wheat is either identical with, or a near
approximation to, the nature of yest. Most probably, the latter
is the truth: and, perhaps, ferment is as much a proximate prin-
ciple of vegetables, as sugar or starch, and extensively, diffused
throughout nature.
Seguin, however, has endeavoured to prove that the true
fermenting principle is albumen, which he found to exist in all
those vegetables, the juice of which readily runs into decompo-
sition. He even affirmed that animal albumen, as tho white of
an egg, is capable of exciting fermentation, —a fact which Fa-
broni had denied. The opinion of Seguin seems to be ill
supported.
Having thus considered tho nature of the ferment, the next
point to be determined is the nature of fermentable substances,
and whether or not there is any particular kind of matter on
which ferments exert their action peculiarly.
It had been observed that sugar in solution and other sac-
charine liquids are the most easily made to undergo the vinous
fermentation; that the fermentation so produced is the most
71
CULTIVATION OF THU VINE.


active and rapid of all others; and that the most saccharine
liquid produces the most alcoholic wine. It was even observed
that all the liquids which ferment well are invariably saccharine;
and, as the observations were extended, it was an opinion ad-
mitted by chemists, that no other than saccharine solutions can
be made to undergo the vinous fermentation.
This opinion of chemists as to the nature of the proper sub-
ject of the vinous fermentation is not contradicted by any
known fact. It appears that sugar, or at least some saccharine
matter, as we call the modifications of sugar, is the only substance
which supports the process in question; and that where sugar is
not palpably present, its elements are, as also some substance
which is the instrument by which they are arranged in such a
way as to produce sugar.
But although sugar thus appears to be the proper subject
of the vinous fermentation, we are not to infer that if sugar is
present it must necessarily be possible to induce fermentation on
it. On the contrary, we are acquainted with one kind of sugar,
namely manna, which, when purified from some common sugar
which it naturally contains, seems incapable of undergoing fer-
mentation : at least chemists have not succeeded in inducing it;
and there may be other kinds of sugar which refuse in the same
manner.
There is one other condition, essential to a successful fer-
mentation, which naturally flows from those already noticed, and
which has been previously adverted to under different heads.
This condition is the proportion of all the ingredients concerned
in the vinous fermentation. If there be too much sugar com-
pared with the water, the process is impeded in two ways, ac-
cording as the excess is great or very great. If very great, the
liquor is not sufficiently diluted to allow freedom of motion to
the acting particles; they are entangled, and their agency is
obstructed in the same way as we know other energetic agencies
to be by the viscidity. If the excess be not very great, the impedi-
ment to the process of fermentation arises from the too abundant
formation of alcohol, which, when concentrated, impedes the
fermentation of all bodies. The quantity of alcohol formed is
proportionate to the quantity of sugar which actually undergoes
72
LETIEUS ON THE


fermentation; and hence, if there be too much sugar in the act
of fermenting, there will be too much alcohol formed for the con-
tinuance of the process, and it must at length cease, the sugar
being actually preserved from further change by the abundance
of alcohol. Thus, a very great excess of sugar prevents the
fermentation from taking place at all, and a more limited excess
checks the process before it has been completed. Too little
sugar, or what is the same thing, too much water, produces
proportionately little alcohol; and the presence of that little,
far from preserving the liquor from further change, promotes by
means of the acetous fermentation, its transition to a new stage.
The ratio of the yest is equally important: if there be too
much, and the temperature be high, the vinous fermentation can
scarcely be prevented from running into the acetous. If there
be too much at a low temperature, the fermentation is languid,
and the liquor acquires a sickly taste, which it ever after retains.
An effect not very different from this last follows from the use
of too little yest at a high temperature.
From all that has been said, it now appears that there are
several conditions essential to the production of the vinous fer-
mentation ; they may be summed up as follows:
1. There must be water present, and in such ratio as produces
moderate dilution.
2. must be a moderate temperature; the process does
not go. on at either the freezing or boiling point of water;
at summer heat it is most active.
3. There must be a substance called a ferment present to com-
mence the process; and once commenced, it will go on
without the presence of the ferment.
4. Besides the ferment there must be fermentable matter, that
is, sugar, or some modification of it; and this is the subject
matter on which the change is effected, and which gives
rise to the new products.
During the vinous fermentation an immense quantity of car-
bonic acid gas is generated, and escapes by effervescence. Al-
cohol is at the same time gradually produced, and remains mixed
in the liquor. The taste of the liquor becomes less sweet, and
when the formation of Alcohol is complete, the sweetness has
73
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


totally disappeared. In short, the sugar is decomposed; and
the only products found resulting from it are carbonic acid and
alcohol. Such, then, is the whole of what takes place during
the vinous fermentation ; for so small a quantity of yest is de-
composed in the process that the consideration of it may bo
wholly neglected. For every hundred parts of sugar that dis-
appear, only one and a-half of yest is decomposed. The water
suffers no change.
It is now necessary to state some of the conditions under
which fermentation may be conducted, and the effects produced
by them.
The changes which take place during this kind of decom-
position are totally independent of the chemical agency of the
atmosphere; but they are considerably influenced by its me-
chanical agency. Fermentation will take place in close vessels,
or in vessels which have a free communication with the air. If
there is perfect facility of escape for the carbonic acid gas
evolved, the fermentation proceeds with freedom; if the vessel
is close on all sides, except where the tube enters it, the far end
of which is immersed in water, the carbonic acid escapes through
this; but there is pressure on the fermenting liquor equal to the
depth to which the tube is immersed, and the fermentation is
rendered proportionately slow. If the liquor is contained in a
perfect close vessel, as in the case of a well-corked bottle, the
fermentation still takes place as effectually, at length, as in any
other case; but the process is very slow. There is every reason
to believe that if the pressure of the atmosphere were removed,
or if it were increased, the chemical changes would be accele-
rated or retarded; and, in short, the mechanical pressure of the
atmosphere, or of any gas, acts as an antagonist to the decom-
position.
When the conditions are such that the fermentation pro-
ceeds rapidly, and that there is consequently free egress for the
evolved gas, there is a waste of some of the more valuable pro-
ducts, and the resulting liquor is less generous and less alcoholic,
and there is evidence that some of the alcohol escapes along with
the carbonic acid. It was found by M. Coste, that grapes which
had been exposed to the vapours issuing from a fermenting tun
74
LETTERS' ON THE


of wine, acquired such a taste of alcohol that they resembled
grapes preserved in brandy; and it is known to be possible to
convert the matter which escapes with the carbonic acid alto-
gether into vinegar. Chaptal effected it by causing water to
absorb the gas emitted, and exposing it for a length of time in
open vessels. Mr. Collier found, by comparative trials, that
close vessels always afford more alcoholic worts than open
ones. The best mode of preserving the strength of a fermenting
liquor is to conduct the process in a vessel into which the atmos-
phere cannot enter, yet from which the carbonic acid can freely
escape; as through a wide tube, having its other end immersed
one or two inches in water: such an arrangement, beside adding
to the strength of the wort, lessens the risk of its souring.
In some cases, however, access of air must be admitted, at
least for a short time, at the commencement of the fermentation.
Gay Lussao could not cause grape juice to ferment when the air
was completely excluded, although solution of sugar mixed with
yest did so easily under the same circumstances. On admitting
some oxygen to the grape juice the gas was absorbed; and then
a fermentation commenced, which continued independently of
further contact of oxygen. By boiling grape juice for a short
time, and secluding it from contact of air, it may be preserved
without fermenting; but as soon as communication of the air is
allowed, oxygen is absorbed, and the liquor ferments. As solu-
tion of sugar with yest of beer does not require access of air
during any period of the process. Gay Lussac inferred that the
yest of beer is different from the yest of grape, which at first
requires a little oxygen to commence the fermentation.
The quantity of a fermenting liquor has a considerable and
important effect on fermentation: the activity of the process is
in proportion to the quantity operated upon. M. Duportal ob-
serves, “M. Chaptal has seen must (grape juice), contained in a
cask, not finish its fermentation until the eleventh day ; while a
large tub, which contained twelve times the quantity, has com-
pletely fermented in four days. The heat of the liquor in the
cask never exceeded 74 °, while that in the largo tub reached
94 °. It will readily be conceived that the wine in the cask
could not bo so good as that in the largo vessel; that the
75
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


combination of the principles of the must could not be so perfect.
However, a very large tub has one disadvantage: as the heat pro-
duced is so much greater, there is a greater volatilisation of the
alcohol and aroma, upon which the goodness of the wine so much
depends.”
When yest has been added to a saccharine solution, the fer-
mentation is not observed to commence immediately. But very
shortly after, if the temperature be sufficient, very small air bub-
bles may be perceived forming in the bottom, and these become
a little larger as they rise to the surface. But it does not follow
from this that the fermentation did not really commence imme-
diately: it would appear more probable that it did, inasmuch
as all the conditions were present, at first, as well as at any sub-
sequent period. The truth in all probability is that the forma-
tion of carbonic acid gas took place immediately; that as fast as
formed it was absorbed by the liquid, and held dissolved; and
that no effervescence became visible until the liquid was satu-
rated, which it would soon be, where sugar was also held in
solution.
As during fermentation, the heavy saccharine matter gives
place to the production of so light a fluid as alcohol, the specific
gravity of the fermented liquor is continually lessening as the
process approaches completion. From being much heavier than
water, the liquor becomes sometimes even lighter, and this
lightness is made use of as a criterion to judge the completion of
the fermentation.
LETTER X.
In No. 7, of the Series of Papers upon the Vine already published,
the subject was followed down to the period when the young
vineyard was considered to have attained a state to produce full
crops of grapes. The art of converting this produce into good


wine, and of managing it to the best advantage, until it acquires
its full perfection, forms a distinct and more difficult branch of
the subject. In this, and the succeeding papers, I propose to
submit to those of your readers who may be desirous of learning
how to make and manage their own wine, such information, as,
with proper attention, will enable them to effect their object.
In the hope of rendering the process more intelligible, I
have already sent you copious extracts, on the Theory of Fer-
mentation, from Professor Donovan’s Ist Vol. on Domestic
Economy: and with the view of still further illustrating this
portion of the subject, I propose to complete this paper with
additional extracts from the same volume. They are not very
long, but contain so much valuable matter, so clearly and con-
cisely expressed, that I earnestly recommend their careful peru-
sal to all those persons who are desirous to acquire information
on the art of making wine.
WINE MAKING.
The grape is the most perfect of all fruits: its excellence is
equally conspicuous, whether we consider its delicious flavour or
the numerous uses to which it may be applied in the form of
wine, brandy, and vinegar. It depends on no external source
for any of the materials necessary to the elaboration of these
articles; its supplies are within itself, of the most perfect quality,
and in just proportion. Vinification is rightly considered the
model from which the brewing of all fermented liquors should be
copied.
In entering on the subject of wine-making, it is necessary to
consider the nature and composition of the grape, the only fruit
from which true wine is procurable.
Section I.— Nature and Constitution of the Grape.—•
Properties and Varieties of Must.
The vine grows in all the temperate regions of the world;
but it comes to perfection in warm climates only, and not equally
77
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


in these; for as wo approach the equator the quality of the
fruit deteriorates. The best grape is, therefore, producible in a
genial climate. “In cold countries,” says Neuman, “ the vine,
if it grows at all, never ripens its fruit; and even in France and
Italy I have observed that the grape produced on the south
sides of hills are notably sweeter than those which grow on plain
grounds.”
Even in so limited an area as that of France, we find that
differences of climate may materially affect the quality of the
grape, and the wine made from it. The southern provinces
afford the best and most spirituous wines; the middle provinces
afford worse; and the northern produce the worst of all. The
warmer the climate the more sugar is developed during matu-
rition.
The following are the chief causes which influence the ex-
cellence of grapes:—Their species, the climate, the soil, the
aspect, the goodness of the season, and the culture. Unless these
causes operate favourably, good wine cannot bo obtained from
the grape; and not even then, if the process for making the
wine be not skilfully conducted. In cold climates, the grape
never ripens so as to contain much sugar; in very hot climates
its flavour is not delicate. A soil not very rich is more condu-
cive to purity of flavour than one that is highly manured: the
latter kind produces quantity of juice, the former quality of
taste.
The grape consists of the following materials:—Vegetable
fibre; a peculiar ferment or yest; sugar in large quantity;
potash; lime; three acids—citric, malic, and tartaric; a small
quantity of an essential oil, to which the aroma and peculiar
flavour of wines is in a great degree attributable; much water;
a little mucilage; and, in some species, a red colouring matter
said to be of a resinous nature. The relative quantity of these
ingredients is influenced materially by a number of circum-
stances already mentioned.
The kind of weather in which grapes are collected greatly
affects the value of their juice. It is strongest when the grapes
have been gathered in dry weather, and after the morning dew
has been dissipated. It is said that adventitious moisture is
78
LETTEHS ON THE


capable of increasing the quantity of juice a twenty-fourth part.
A dry summer is sure to evaporate much of the water from tho
fruit still on the vine, and, therefore, to add to the sweetness, by
increasing the relative quantity of sugar. In dry seasons, the
sugar will be abundant, the juice deficient; in wet seasons, tho
juice will be abundant, and the sugar deficient.
Although the grape contains all the requisites for fermenta-
tion, as a ferment, a fermentable matter, and water, all in such
relative quantities as would ensure a perfect fermentation, it is
curious that grapes do not undergo that change while they re-
main whole. For the active ingredients are contained in separate
divisions of the fruit, the sugar being deposited in the cells, and
the ferment outside of them. Again, the red colouring matter is
contained in the husk, so that a purple grape affords colourless
juice. White Champagne, for instance, is made from a grape so
deep in colour, as to appear actually black; and sherry is indis-
criminately made from coloured and colourless grapes although
a white wine. This colouring matter is said to be of a resinous
nature; it is insoluble in watery liquids, but soluble in alcoholic.
When the husk is allowed to remain in the must during its fer-
mentation, until a sufficient quantity of alcohol has been formed
to render the liquor capable of dissolving the resinous colouring
matter, the wine produced will be red, although the original
juice had been white, or rather colourless. If the husks are not
digested in the fermenting liquor, the result will be a white wine.
Bed and white port are produced from the same grape, the
former with and the latter without the husk. If the colouring
matter bo really resinous, there must be some peculiarity in the
resin which prevents its being precipitated by water. Bed wino
mixed with water retains its transparency. The red colouring
matter is of an astringent nature; it communicates the same
quality to the wine, as well as a slight roughness. The husk is
capable of communicating but a light red colour; when the red
is deep, it is the effect of artificial colour imparted; and a deep
red colour is never a desirable quality. M. Duportal, however,
denies that the red colour of wines depends on the action of
alcohol on the husk.
Tho sugar, the most valuable of all the constituents of
79
CULTIViVTIOX OF THE VINE.


grapes, is first to be considered. We must not be misled by the
ordinary acception of the word sugar, so far as to suppose that
whenever it is mentioned it must necessarily mean common sugar,
whether hard or soft. There are many modifications of sugar,
or, in other words, there are several sweet substances which, by
chemists, are considered as species of sugar: or they pass under
the equivocal name saccharine matter. The two obvious divi-
sions are the hard and soft kinds. The latter of these cannot
be made to crystallise: it remains in the form of a syrup, and is
found in various fruits, and especially in the uncrystallisable
syrup called molasses or treacle, which remains after all the com-
mon sugar has been obtained from the juice of the sugar-cane.
Hard sugar is obtainable from various sources, and it differs
in its properties, according to the subject from which it has been
obtained. Common loaf sugar is an instance of this kind: so
also, notwithstanding the name, is what is called soft sugar, for
this consists of minute crystalline grains. East Indian soft
sugar is much whiter and more pure than West Indian; yet the
latter sweetens liquids more intensely, showing clearly that
quantity of sweetness is not commensurate with quantity of
sugar; or, in other words, that different kinds of sugar may pos-
sess different degrees of sweetness. Hard white sugar differs
from soft brown sugar only in being freed from the brown syrup
or molasses: alcohol will wash brown sugar white. Fig sugar
is the crystalline granular substance found on figs: it may be
separated by pouring hot alcohol on them, which dissolves the
sugar; the alcoholic solution being subjected to spontaneous
evaporation, crystals are thus formed. This sugar is different
from crystals of common sugar, or candy-sugar as it is called,
in the form of its crystals. Manna is a species of sugar; and
there are many other kinds, as beet-root and maple sugar; the
former of which is manufactured extensively in France, and the
latter in the northern and middle states of America, where it is
considered nearly equal to that of the sugar-cane. A sweet
matter may even be extracted from gentian root, one of the
bitterest, and from young nutgalls, one of the most astringent of
all substances. Lastly, the sugar of the grape may be obtained
in an insulated form; and it differs from common sugar in being
80
tETTEHS ON THE


much more easily crystallised, in havinjj-lcssj sweetening power,
and in undergoing tho vinous fermeKtatfcir without any other
addition than water.
In short, the measure of sugar is not sweetness! Molasses
will impress a more intense sweetness on the palate than the
purest sugar; and it is known to every one that the coarser the
sugar the better it sweetens. Yet hard white sugar will afford
much more alcohol than soft sugar or molasses. Hence the
quantity of alcohol procurable is the test of the quantity of real
sugar in a specimen, and not the sweetness of its taste. From
all this we derive an important practical remark, that those
grapes which have the sweetest taste are not necessarily the
best for affording wine: they may afford less alcohol than a less
sweet grape, and, therefore, a less generous wine. It is said
that an experienced taste will distinguish the really valuable
grape from the merely sweet-tasted one.
The tartaric acid and potash, contained in grape juice or
must, are of course combined, and they form what is called tartar.
This tartar is most abundant in verjuice, that is, juice of unripe
grapes; and its quantity is inversely as that of the sugar,
throughout the whole period of maturition. It is absolutely
essential to a good fermentation, perhaps because it holds the
ferment in solution: if it be totally withdrawn, the must will not
ferment; but fermentation commences when the tartar is re-
stored. While the must remains as such, the tartar continues in
solution. But when the solvent powers of the must are dimin-
ished by the evolution of alcohol in it during fermentation, tho
tartar becomes less soluble, and it is at length deposited in a
crystalline mass. Tartrate of lime is also deposited along with
the tartar, and adheres to it so obstinately, that even when the
tartar is recrystallised, tartrate of lime is found in the cream of
tartar. The presence of tartar in the must not only assists fer-
mentation, but adds to the quantity of alcohol. But the malic
acid is injurious; and when it exists in great quantity in tho
grape it is unfit for making good wine. Cider and perry, al-
though agreeable beverages, are not considered to rank as
wines, and this is mainly attributable to their containing such an
abundance of malic acid. Our domestic fruits all labour under
o


the same defects of containing a great quantity of malic acid,
and accordingly they all afford wines vastly inferior to those
procured from the grape, in which the acid is chiefly tartaric.
Lime is made use of to remove any inordinate quantity of malic
acid which the grape may happen to contain.
The quantity of alcohol producible from must is propor-
tionate to the quantity of sugar which the must contained.
Grapes of a very saccharine nature will afford the most alcoholic
or, in other words, generous wine; provided that the whole
sugar undergoes decomposition. But a part may escape decom-
position through the operation of a variety of causes. The
quantity of yest present may be insufficient to produce total de-
composition. This sometimes happens with grapes; hut it fre-
quently happens with other fruits; and when it does, the wine
will contain alcohol and unaltered sugar: their relative quantity
being determined by the quantity of yest. The same effects will
follow although the original quantity of yest had been sufficient,
but was withdrawn by racking off prematurely, leaving the yest
in the lees; or by throwing it down by premature fining. Or
the whole sugar will not be decomposed, should the tempera-
ture be reduced very much towards the end of the process; for
then the fermentation will cease. This will always happen when
the quantity of must under fermentation is so small that it does
not maintain its own heat, by the energy of the chemical action
going on: such ought to be occasionally invigorated by the addi-
tion of warm must to that which is fermenting feebly; or what is
much better, the process might be conducted in some apartment
kept sufficiently well aired. The consequence, in any of these
cases, will be, that the resulting wine will be sweet and less
alcoholic.
If there be a deficiency of yest present to decompose the
whole sugar, and the quantity of the sugar is considerable, com-
pared with that of the water, there will be a continued formation
of alcohol, until its quantity becomes superabundant. The fer-
mentation of a liquid may be extinguished by adding much alco-
hol to it: hence the abundant formation of it, in a fermenting
liquor, will have the same effect. The consequence in this," as in


the last case, will be that unaltered sugar will remain, and the
wine will be sweet.
Suppose the relative quantities of yest, sugar, and water be
such as will conduce to a perfect attenuation; then the ferment*
ation will proceed until the whole sugar is converted into alco-
hol. When this happens, the yest will also be exhausted: there
will be little fear that the acetous fermentation will set in; and
the wine will be full-bodied, spirituous, and sound, provided that
there had not been too much water present. This wine will
not be sweet; or, as it is technically expressed, it will be a dry
wine.
The last case is founded on the supposition that not only the
yest is so proportioned to the sugar as to decompose the whole
of it, but that the decomposition is suffered to proceed as far as
it can. A new case arises out of the possibility of checking the
fermentation before all the yest and sugar are exhausted, as may
be done by a variety of means already described. If these
means be employed, the energy of the fermentation will be
greatly diminished; unaltered sugar and yest will remain in a
state of little activity, yet continuing their mutual action in a
slow and gradual manner. This slow fermentation will go on
for a length of time, and if the extrication of the carbonic acid
is prevented by confining the wine, as in bottles, that gas will be
condensed and retained in the wine. But it will be ready to
escape by effervescence whenever the pressure is removed, as
by decanting the wine. These are the circumstances under
which sparkling or effervescing wines are produced. But it is
obvious that no wine can sparkle if its fermentation had been
actually completed in the tun.
After what has been said, it is scarcely necessary to observe,
that if the relative quantity of sugar contained in the must be
considerable, and that it is all attenuated, the wine will be spirit-
uous and strong. If the sugar be scanty, so will the alcohol, and
the wine will be poor and acescent.
When there is a deficiency of sugar in the grape, or as in
this instance it may otherwise be expressed, when there is a
redundancy of water, there are several modes of remedying the
defect. The first is to boil down the must so as to evaporate
o 2


the superfluous quantity of water. But no part of it should bo
boiled down so low as to approach the consistence of an extract,
as the ycst would then be deprived of its property of exciting
fermentation. The second mode is simply to add a due quantity
of sugar derived from some other source; and the purest will be
the best as least likely to impart any new or undesirable taste.
But the best mode is to use an additional quantity of sugar
actually derived from the grape. This is done by increasing
the ratio of sugar to the water in a quantity of grapes, and then
infusing them in the watery must which is intended to be im-
proved. To effect this change in the grapes three processes are
employed. The first is to spread out the grapes on straw, and
to dry them a little in the sun. The next is to allow the grapes
to wither or dry upon the vines; the watery part thus exhales,
and the sugar is virtually increased in quantity. The last me-
thod is the most ingenious. The stem which holds the cluster is
half cut through so as to intercept the supply of moisture on its
passage to the fruit. The cluster is then allowed to remain
hanging, in order that the water may transpire through the
husk, and the fruit become half dry; the juice thus becomes
greatly enriched.
It is indispensably necessary to enrich the juice of some
grapes by methods like these; otherwise they will rapidly run
into a hasty feeble fermentation, which would again pass quickly
into the acetous stage. The result would be a poor, spiritless,
acidulous wine. Those wines which have been strengthened by
evaporating the must are called vini cotti, or boiled wines: they
are not much prized. Sometimes, instead of enriching the must
with foreign saccharine matter, a practice which seems injurious
is adopted; brandy is added, to form which had been the object
of the saccharine additions. Sometimes the wine is altogether
made from grapes, the juice of which had been concentrated by
being half dried on the vine: of this kind is Tokay.
In order to ensure the greatest possible quantity of sugar
which grapes are capable of elaborating, they must be allowed
to ripen perfectly before they are pulled.
After a batch of wine has been finished, and it is found to
be too weak and watery, its concentration is sometimes effected


by congelation. The method is founded on the fact that alcohol
does not freeze in cold however intense; but that mixtures of
water and alcohol will freeze with facility in proportion as the
water is considerable in quantity.
It is possible that must may have the contrary fault; it may
be too saccharine, and may not contain the portion of water
necessary to a free fermentation. If a solution of common sugar
be too much concentrated, additions of yest, however consider-
able, will have very little effect in causing fermentation. The
same will happen in grape must, and the remedy is as easy as
obvious. Without the addition of water in such cases, the re-
sulting wine will be luscious and heavy. This fault in the grape
is more likely to occur in dry summers, and when the fruit has
been allowed to remain on the tree after the period of maturity.
As grape juice spontaneously enters into fermentation with-
out the addition of yest derived from a foreign source, it is ob-
vious that a yest exists naturally in it. The constitution of this
yest was explained in a former division of this volume, in which
the theory of fermentation was developed. Hence no artificial
yest is ever added to wine made from grape juice.
When the grape is crushed, and its juice is expressed, the
solution of its sugar is brought into contact with its yest, both
of which until this period were kept separate. The mixture
now therefore begins to ferment, provided that the temperature
is sufficient to maintain the decomposition.
Deficiency of yest in must is obviated by husbanding the
small quantity which it contains, and subjecting the whole volume
of fluid frequently to its action. This may be effected by beat-
ing down the head of yest which rises to the surface, and fre-
quently mixing it through the must. And when the fermenta-
tion goes on in casks, the object will be accomplished by not
filling up the casks entirely to the bung-holes so as to throw out
the yest, but leaving some vacant space for the yest to collect,
and frequently shaking up the whole, or rolling the cask. Rack-
ing off the wine from the lees should be avoided until the fer-
mentation is complete.
A redundancy as well as a deficiency of natural yest is a
fault, but not of so detrimental a kind; for it can be rendered


less active by slight boiling. But by this treatment its activity
is only suspended, not extinguished: after some time it will re-
cover its efficacy. Too great a quantity of yest is the fault of
grapes produced in a cold climate; and wine made from such is
apt to run beyond the vinous fermentation, and to pass into the
acetous. When this is threatened during vinification, some addi-
tional sugar may be added, derived from any of the supplies
already described, in order that the yest may exhaust itself in
forming alcohol rather than vinegar. Or if this mode be not
advisable, some solution of isinglass may be added; for thi s
affects the yest of wine as it does that of brewer’s wort; it pre-
cipitates it, and thus prevents its doing further mischief.
However essential to the perfect fermentation of wines a
proper quantity of tartar may be, an excess of it is injurious.
In some kinds of grapes this excess is found, and wine made from
such is acerb, sour, and rough. The remedy adopted in this
case, as well as in the case of an excess of malic acid, is to add
some alkaline substance, but not in such quantity as to neutralise
the whole of the tartaric acid.
Thus by proper management the natural deficiencies of cer-
tain qualities of grapes can be remedied by the wine maker in a
variety of ways; and from a very indifferent kind of grape a
good wine may be produced.
LETTER XI.
The extracts from Professor Donovan’s excellent chapter on the
constitution of the grape, &c., which I sent you in my last letter,
have, I trust, been perused with attention by those amongst your
readers who take interest in the progress of wine making
amongst us. These extracts on the theory of fermentation will
have prepared them to follow the subject without difficulty,
and to comprehend the details I am about to describe, as
well as the reasons for adopting them. My observations


being addressed to those persons who have never made wine,
as well as to those who have already acquired some expe-
rience in the process, it is requisite that I should now
proceed to describe what utensils and buildings are necessary to
conduct it on a small scale, reserving for a subsequent paper, a
few suggestions to the latter.
In making preparations for the vintage, it is above all things
necessary to be well provided with casks, of various capacity,
according to the probable extent of the crop. These casks
should either be made of new oak staves, and be prepared for
use as I shall hereafter describe, or what will be found to answer
equally well, consist of seasoned wine or brandy casks, which
are known to have contained only wine or brandy of good quality.
If any regard be paid to the quality of the wine to be made, on
no account should Cape wine casks, or those which have con-
tained rum, gin, or any other spirit but good French brandy, be
selected; but casks which have held this last spirit, provided it
has been of good quality, are perhaps the most proper of
any, and if made staunch, will require no other preparation.
If the expected crop be considerable, say 2000 gallons, 1
would recommend large casks, such as pipes or sherry butts,
more than sufficient to contain the entire crop to be provided,
besides a few of smaller sizes. For instance, say 24 or 25
butts or pipes—G or 8 hogsheads or half-pipes—6 or 8 quarter-
casks—6 or 8 from 4to 12 gallons. It is difficult to carry on
properly the various operations without abundance of casks, and
of various sizes, especially if different sorts of wine are to be
made.
The whole ought to he prepared some weeks before the
vintage is expected to commence; first, by being well coopered
and rendered perfectly staunch, all defects being carefully
ascertained and made good. For want of this timely precaution
much wine is lost by leakage; for when new it puts casks to a
severe test. “No man putteth new wine into old bottles (i. e.
wine skins,) else the new wine doth burst the old bottles,” is a
text familiar to all. Let every cask, therefore, be put into
the best possible condition, and be carefully “blown off.”
Next, let each cask be thoroughly cleansed; brandy casks.
87
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


however, if they have been applied to no other purpose, require
no cleansing as I have said above; but wine casks should bo
repeatedly scalded with clear boiling water, until it comes out
as pure as when put in, and then rinsed out with cold. A few
clear hard pebbles from the size of a marble to that of an egg,
if put in with the boiling water, very much assist the operation
of cleansing. In wine cellars an instrument is used for the pur-
pose, consisting of a chain, provided with a diamond-shaped iron
bead. [See Plate 3, Fig. ii.]
After being thoroughly purified, the casks should be placed
to drain with their bung-holes downwards, upon two saplings or
pieces of scantling to keep them off the ground until quite dry
inside; and then after having two or three square inches of sul-
phur match burnt in each, in the manner to be hereafter des-
cribed, they should be bunged up close and kept in the shade until
required. During the operation of scalding, it will be prudent to
examine each cask by putting the nose to the bung-hole, to ascer-
tain if it have any acid taint, or unpleasant odour. Any defect of
this kind the hot water will immediately discover. The acid
impregnation of the staves can easily be removed by the use of lime
water. To make this, add at the rate of two or three shovel fulls of
freshly burnt quick lime per 100 gallons, to any large vessel full
of pure cold water; stir it well, and then allow it to settle for
an hour or two. It will soon become clear, and when so, it
holds in solution all the lime the water is capable of dissolving.
Fill the suspected cask with the lime water, and allow it to re-
main for a day or more. Unless very strongly impregnated with
acid it will now have become quite sweet, and will only require
to be scalded, &c., as above described. Should any acid taint
remain, the lime water must be returned till it be altogether
removed. The same lime water, with the occasional addition of
a shovel full of fresh lime, will serve for many casks, but it is
better, when fresh lime is added, to allow it to settle and become
clear before it is used. Lime water when kept, should be pre-
served in casks tightly bunged up, its alkaline properties being
rapidly neutralized by the action of the atmosphere.
Casks which have any unpleasant odour which scalding does
not remove (besides acidity) should have their heads taken out by
88
LETTERS ON THE


the cooper, be thoroughly scraped and fired, and if this operation
fails to render them perfectly sweet, they should bo rejected as un-
fit for wine. It should be observed that the best casks arc often
coated with crystals of tartar; if they are bright andsparkling, they
should not be disturbed. Let me in conclusion impress upon the
makers of wine the necessity of paying the most scrupulous
attention to the purity and cleanliness of the casks, because the
wine will certainly acquire any evil odour or flavour they may con-
tain. The neglect of this precaution has, perhaps, as much as
any other circumstance, (one alone excepted,) caused so many
failures in making good wine in the colony.
About six buckets and two neat light pigginswill next have
to be provided, all to be made of the best material, and to have
a few inches in breadth of. the inner margin of the staves bevelled
off, to serve as a lip, and prevent waste in pouring. They should
also be provided with little rests or feet, made by leaving a por-
tion of three of the staves longer by an inch at the bottom, than the
rest. Two or three tubs of the capacity of Bto 10 gallons, made
narrow in proportion to their height, will also be necessary.
They are intended to receive the must from the treading-box or
press, and as it is to be conveyed in them to the fermenting vats
or casks, they should be furnished with two iron handles, so as
to be easily lifted and balanced by two men, whilst their contents
are being poured into the cask; and have the little rests or feet
as described in the last mentioned utensils. One or two very
shallow tubs, say 3 inches deep, by 16 or 18 inches wide, will
also be found desirable to place under the chime of every cask
whilst its contents are being drawn off to prevent waste.
A large oval funnel is the last of the utensils which it will
be necessary to procure from the cooper. It should be about
18 or 20 inches long, and about 9 or 10 inches deep, with the
delivering pipe to insert in the cask at one end. [See Plate 3,
Fig. iii.] This end should have a lid, to prevent the liquid
poured from dashing over the top, leaving uncovered space
enough merely to pour in by. A tin funnel of the capacity of
two or three quarts, will also be found very useful.
For crushing the grapes, various methods are practised
in wine countries, some of them very defective. The


most effectual with which I am acquainted, is to tread them
with men’s feet, upon a close grating of wood, placed over or in
a vessel, to receive the juice as it passes through the grating.
The following description of a treading-box used in the
colony, and by means of which 20 pipes of wine may be ex-
pressed in a day, may prove useful. It consists of a large box
or trough, of Clarence River pine, about 8 feet square, and 18
inches deep, perfectly water tight. In the inside a frame of
hard-wood light scantling is so fixed, about six inches from the
bottom of the trough, as to support a wooden grating, or grat-
ings rather—for there are six of them, fitting close together, so
as to cover the area, each grating being about 4 feet long, by
2 feet 8 inches wide. They consist each of a frame of light
wood, put together like that of a Venetian blind, and barred
across with light wooden bars, about J of an inch thick, by 2J
inches deep, placed quite close together on the upper side, but
bevelled off underneath, so as to leave wide insertions, and offer
no obstruction to any thing which may be forced through from
above. [See accompanying sketch of section of the bars of the
grating—Plate 3, Fig. iv.] Each of these gratings is provided
with two iron rings, countersunk into its frame, (so as not to
incommode the feet of the men who tread the grapes,) by means
of which any one of them may be lifted by a man from its place,
to enable him to clear away the mucilage which gradually accu-
mulates in the bottom of the trough, and impedes the free passage
of the must. The sides of the trough are nine or ten inches higher
than the gratings, and by a simple contrivance, light boards of
similar depth are easily fixed to those of the sides to make them
higher; by means of which, about two dray loads of grapes can be
placed upon the gratings at one time, and leave room for three
men to trample them out. The entire trough or treading-box
is supported upon solid blocks of wood, to the height of about 3
feet 6 inches from the floor; and on one side of it a sort of stage
or platform is erected, with room sufficient upon it for several
casks of grapes to stand. This stage is about 6 or 8 inches higher
than the bottom of the trough, so that the contents of the casks
can be easily emptied upon the gratings.
In crushing the grapes, a layer about three inches thick is


spread with a shovel over such part of the gratings as remain
unoccupied by the heap of uncrushed fruit. The men then pro-
ceed to trample them out with their naked feet, and the juice as
it is expressed flows through the gratings into the bottom of the
trough. As fast as it accumulates in this, it is drawn off by holes
(of which there is one about 1 \ inch in diameter on each of three
sides, furnished with a lip of tin or leather, with a sort of basket
of wire suspended from it, to catch any skins, &c., which may
be forced through the gratings,) into tubs of about ten gallons ;
and in these it is conveyed to the fermenting vats.
As the grapes are crushed, their skins are piled up
in one comer of the grating, and left to drain until they
accumulate sufficiently to take up too much room. With a
shovel they are then thrown into the box of an adjoining
press, provided with a powerful screw, worked by a wheel
and spokes; and when with this power the resistance be-
comes great, a rope is passed round the spokes of the wheel, to
which the additional purchase of a capstan close by is applied.
The skins are usually pressed with the screw at the close of each
day’s work, and being left under it all night, are perfectly dry by
morning.
The foregoing description may enable any of your
readers to construct a treading-box on the same principle,
but, if required, on a smaller scale. To those who have
extensive vineyards, I may remark, that were they to
construct one even of larger size, say 8 feet 6 inches or
9 feet square, it would enable them to save labour in crush-
ing the grapes to a considerable extent. But such a press,
to be conveniently placed, would require a spacious building.
No description of press can answer well, at all events, for
white wine, which does not provide for the free escape of the
must from the vessel in which the grapes are crushed as the
operation proceeds, because, as soon as a certain number arc
broken, the skins, mucilage, and juice, unless the latter be imme-
diately drained off, compose a slippery mass, in which the re-
maining berries escape being crushed. Simple pressure with a
screw or lever, even with great power, will not answer the pur-
pose, for many berries will be found whole in the mass of skins


after great force has been applied. Neither do casks or boxes
pierced with holes prove to be good; if the holes are large,
whole berries pass through or choke them, if small, the flow of
the juice is soon impeded by the skins and mucilage. I have
never seen any plan so good as that of a close barred grating of
some extent. In France it is common to place such a grating
over the large fermenting vat, in which the wine is to be made;
and if it be red, to shovel into the vat, through a sort of trap,
the whole of the skins and mucilage as fast as the workmen pro-
ceed with the crushing.
To operate on a small scale, it cannot in most cases be very
difficult to have a water-tight box, with a false bottom provided,
which should consist of a grating as above described, and
be strong enough to bear a man’s weight in trampling.
If the native hard woods are used, their astringent gum and
tannin ought to be extracted by soaking them in water, until the
latter ceases to be tinged in colour. I shallhereafter give the plan
of a simple machine for crushing grapes upon a very different
principle, but which appears from description as if it would suc-
ceed well, especially for red wine, but I have never seen one.
For the manufacture of Wine on an extensive scale, vats to
ferment in will be almost indispensable, but when the quantity is
not very large it may be made in casks, with their heads taken
out, and set upon end, if the skins are left in; but if left out, the
process may be carried on with the cask in its usual position
simply with the bung out.
The building necessary for the operations of crushing and
fermenting depends of course much upon the quantity of wine to
be made. If on a small scale, any outhouse will answer which
is capable of being well ventilated (but not exposed to have
a constant current of air through it,) with a cool aspect, shel-
tered as much as possible from the direct influence of the sun.
It should, however, be perfectly clean, and without any dis-
agreeable smells, especially of animal origin, in its vicinity. In
the building chosen, and round the sides of it should be
fixed, in a solid manner, logs of wood, squared on their upper
and under surfaces, to rest the casks upon, in such manner, that
free access may bo had to each, to fill it and draw off its con-
92
LETTERS ON THE


tents without necessarily interfering with the others. Each
cask, whether on its end with a head out, or on its side with the
bung-hole uppermost, should be so placed as to have its lower
chime raised about 10 or 12 inches from the ground, and pro-
jecting an inch or two over the log it rests upon; so that the
rim of the vessel used in drawing off its contents may be placed
right under it, and prevent waste. Each should also have a
hole of about 1 inch or l j inch diameter, pierced about 3 inches
from the bottom if on end, and 2 inches from the chime if on
its side, and fitted with a proper plug, of oak or other hard-wood.
Should the building in which the fermentation is con-
ducted, be too confined to permit the crushing of the
grapes to be carried on in it without interfering with the casks,
this operation may be performed in the open air, but as near at
hand as possible, with a cloth or tarpaulin to throw over in case it
should rain. It is very desirable, however, to have the whole
conducted under one roof.
For containing the wine after it has done fermenting, and
has been racked off into casks, a cellar of some description is
requisite. In this climate the cooler and more excluded from
air it is the better. Where logs of hard wood are abundant,
very cheap cellars may be constructed with them.
The ground being first excavated not less than three feet
deep, to the entire extent of the area of the proposed building,
logs of considerable diameter, roughly hewn on two sides, should
be laid one upon another, (the largest at the bottom,) like stones
in masonry, against the sides of the excavation, and above
ground, until the inside height of at least 7 feet is attained.
Upon these, a horizontal covering of similar logs should be
laid to form the ceiling, and upon them at least a foot thick of
earth, to keep out the heat. The whole to be surmounted with
such kind of roof as may be thought expedient. Then if the
earth of the excavation be laid up as a bank against the sides,
to the height of the eaves, a very cool cellar, of considerable
capacity, may, it is presumed, be constructed, where timber
is abundant, at moderate expense. It need have only one open-
ing, if possible, to the south or cast, sufficiently large how-
ever, to admit a cask; say nearly five feet. Should such


tv building be constructed with any considerable span, the
logs which form the ceiling will require one or more rows of
posts to support them, and in all cases, to prevent the earth from
falling through the interstices, a coat of plaster made of loam,
mixed with chopped grass or straw, and well tempered, will re-
quire to be spread over the logs before the earth is laid on.
In a future paper I shall describe a building of more com-
plete kind, with the space for the presses and vats over the cel-
lar. In the mean while, let me impress upon the beginner the
necessity, if it can by any means be accomplished, of having a
place for carrying on the fermentation distinct from the one in
which the wine of the previous vintage is stored, on account of
thegreat heat generated during the process. The wine cellar
ought to be kept at a cool and equable temperature, as near 55 °
or 60 ° as possible, and excluded as much as may be from the ex-
ternal air. The fermenting cellar on the contrary, should have the
means of being perfectly ventilated, and whilst the operations of
the vintage are going on, free access to the external air should
be given, whenever its temperature will permit, as well to cool
down the heat generated by the fermenting wine, as to drive off
the noxious gas, which otherwise might become very dangerous.
Previous to the commencement of the vintage, it would be
well to determine whether the skins are to be fermented in the
wine or not; because supposing casks to be used instead of vats,
it determines the necessity of taking the heads out or otherwise.
If the skins are not to be left in, the casks may be mounted
upon their supports in their usual position, with the bung-hole
uppermost. If they are to be left in, the casks must be placed on
end with the heads out.
The following remarks may assist the beginner to decide
which method he will adopt. Reference to the preceding
paper will show that to make red wine, the skins should
be left in the must, and that unless they are left in, a
white wine will be made from red grapes. But all red
grapes are not equally capable of making red wine of toler-
able colour, even if the skins are left in. And this is one of
those peculiarities of the grape depending upon the variety, the
season, the greater or less abundance of the crop, and frequently


upon the soil, which experience alone can enable him to decide
upon. He may rest assured, however, that as red wines cannot
always be made when the grapes are apparently deeply colored,
it is useless to expect a good red wine if they appear otherwise.
But the color and flavor of wines made from white grapes
are materially altered by fermenting the skins with the must,
and as a general rule it is considered advisable not to do so.
The effect produced is to render the wine stronger and of darker
color, but more harsh and bitter. If a delicate flavour be de-
sired, the skins should be left out; but if strength rather than
quality be the object, they should be left in. If the soil of the
vineyard be suitable, the season favorable, and the crop sound
and good, I should certainly adopt the former plan ; but if the
season has been unfavorable, if there has been much rain near
the vintage, spoiling much of the crop, and damaging the whole,
I should choose the latter.
Having determined then which of the two methods ho will
adopt; on the eve of the vintage, the casks required in ferment-
ing should all be mounted upon their supports, and every
utensil to be used prepared by cleansing and rinsing, at the same
time, observing that all are perfectly staunch. Nothing in short
should be neglected to render the whole of the premises to be
used free from filth, rubbish, or unpleasant effluvia, as well
as to make every vessel which is required for the vintage
as pure as possible. It is far better to have all these prepara-
tions made a day or two beforehand, for if put off until the
gathering of the crop commences, there will be no time to ar-
range every thing as it ought to be.
LETTER XII.
VINTAGE—GATHERING THE CROP.
In the preceding paper, the necessary preparations for the vin-
tage were described j we have now to treat of this important
95
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


operation itself. The first grand requisite, is that the crop should
be sound and fully matured. For the manufacture of good winej
it is necessary that every bunch should be ripe, and free from de-
fect, a few that are unripe or mouldy, may spoil a whole batch of
wine. Before the period for gathering is fixed upon, the vines
ought repeatedly to be looked over with care, and the less ripe
bunches examined as well as the ripest; for although I should
certainly not recommend that the vintage should be delayed on
account of a few unripe bunches, which may be otherwise dis-
posed of, it is necessary that all which are intended to make good
wine, as I have said above, should be perfectly ripe.
It is at this time that the advantages of a judicious selection
of sorts at the planting are manifest. The “Pineau Gris” will
be ripe four or five, perhaps six, weeks earlier than the “ Blan-
quette.” Both are good wine grapes, yet if they should
happen to be largely intermixed in a small vineyard, it would
be impracticable to crush them together with advantage,
and very inconvenient, without doubt, to use them separately.
The same objection applies in an inferior degree to the in-
termingling of various other sorts. In an early paper, I endea-
voured to guard against this error, by numbering the sorts
I described as nearly as possible, in their order of ripening.
Let the wine maker ever bear in mind that a very small
portion of unripe fruit will spoil what might otherwise have be-
come excellent wine; and in planting, he should endeavour to
combine those good sorts only, which ripen nearly at the same
time.
It requires observation and experience to decide when the
crop has reached the proper degree of maturity. In
less favorable climates, where it is of importance not to
lose a day after this point is attained, and still not to gather
prematurely, great precautions are taken not to err, and gener-
ally only persons of experience are allowed to decide. Here,
we are usually not so pressed by the season as to cause a day or
two to be of much importance, and we can wait until all the
signs of maturity, or the majority of them, are fully developed.
These signs are various, and none of them taken singly can
be relied upon. They are as follows:—When for twelve


or fifteen days there has been no perceptible increase in
the size or the transparency of the berries; when after
this they become flaccid and leathery to the touch, and are
detached from the stalk without the slightest effort; when the
bunches for several days have become altogether pendant, and
the upper portion of their foot stalks brown and hard; when the
seeds also become brown and hard and, upon pressing the berry,
separate themselves completely from the pulp, leaving no por-
tion of it whatever adhering to them ; when the juice has be-
come luscious and syrupy, so as to stick to the fingers like the
syrup of common sugar, and to impress upon the palate, in some
sorts, an intense sugary sweetness, accompanied by a sort of
glutinous fulness, and in others (often the best wine grapes) in
which the sweetness is masked by a sort of harsh astringent
quality, the glutinous fulness alone; when the majority of these
signs are observable throughout the bulk of the crop, the period
of its perfect maturity for the manufacture of a dry wine, has
certainly arrived. In certain varieties there will he many
bunches, the foot stalks and seeds of which will not be
brown and hard, although the fruit he quite ripe. In
such case the seeds will generally he found to be imperfect.
The high colour of black grapes must not be taken as one
of the signs of maturity, neither must an imperfect color in
some kinds be considered as a symptom of the reverse. Grapes
may have attained all the maturity of which they are susceptible,
even to the extent of shrivelling upon the vines, and yet be im-
perfectly colored; but when this happens, it is an almost
certain sign that the vine is producing too large a crop.
When it is proposed to make a sweet wine, the grapes must
be allowed to hang some weeks after they have attained the
ripeness above described, in fact, until they have shrunk consi-
derably. It will be found difficult to make a sweet wine, when
much rain falls towards the period of maturity, when the vines
are in a very vigorous state of growth, or when they are pro-
ducing a large crop. In average years the grapes will be
ripe in from five to seven weeks from the time when they first
colour or swell to maturity, but they may require two or three
weeks longer.
n
97
CULTIVATION OP THU VINE.


It will sometimes happen that the heavy autumnal rains set in
before the grapes are ripe, and this can never fail to produce seri-
ous injury. Even twenty-four hours or less, of hard rain, will cause
the berries of some sorts to burst, and when this evil occurs to any
considerable extent, (unless dry land winds immediately succeed
for several days so as to dry them up,) rottenness is sure to fol-
low. Should this misfortune take place, there is no remedy but
to begin gathering the grapes, taking first the most damaged,
and continuing until all the injured bunches are pulled.
There is no hope of making good wine from them; but by
adding to the must a large quantity of common sugar, (for this
purpose the commonest will answer, but the drier and more free
from molasses the better, as this substance will not dissolve rea-
dily in the must,) to the extent even of one pound per gallon, a
wine may be made which will keep with a little care, and serve
for common purposes.
In the wine districts of France and the more temperate por-
tions of Europe, the driest and warmest weather is considered
to be the most favorable for the vintage. There the au-
tumn is usually well advanced by the time the grapes
are ripe, and the weather is often cold before the vintage
is over. But here we are differently circumstanced. The per-
fect maturity of the grape is generally so much more early, fre-
quently occurring before the first heats are over, and its sac-
charine properties so much more fully developed, that I prefer
the coolest weather the season offers. Indeed, supposing the
crop to be perfectly sound and well matured, I consider cloudy
weather, accompanied by a few misty showers to be favorable.
It is a general law that other circumstances being the same,
the fermentation will be so much the more violent, as the wea-
ther is warmer when the grapes are gathered and pressed.
Now it is almost invariably more violent here than is advan-
tageous for the quality of the wine; the aroma is thus partly
lost, and, unless care be taken, there is a great loss of spirit also.
The best wines I have succeeded in making, have been those in
which the fermentation was comparatively gentle and long con-
tinued. It should therefore be an object with us to abate this ten-
denc}' to ferment with excessive violence by every means in our


power; and with this view, amongst other methods, to ehooso
the coolest weather for gathering the grapes the season offers
us. But it might be dangerous to delay after the crop is quite
ripe, lest heavy rains should occur, and blast the hopes of the wine
grower. In hot weather, then, I should not recommend the vin-
tage to be deferred, but rather to proceed with the gathering at
the earliest dawn, and to cease when the sun has acquired power,
resuming the work in the cool of the evening. If it should be
impracticable to adopt this plan, and the grapes become heated
by exposure to a hot sun, it may be partly remedied by con-
triving to spread them out thinly on cloths or some other clean
surface, and exposing them to the cool night air, taking care to
crush them the next morning while they are cool. When this
last plan is to be adopted, care mast be taken in gathering and
bringing them home, that they are not crushed or bruised un-
necessarily.
The period for gathering the crop having been fixed upon,
a sufficient number of hands should be provided as vintagers, se-
lecting those only who are likely to be attentive and obedient.
Each should be provided with a sharp knife, and each pair
should have a bucket or other convenient clean light vessel fur-
nished with a handle to carry it by when full. To each
pair a row of vines should be assigned, the whole to be
overlooked by an attentive trusty person. The gatherers
should be instructed to gather none but the grapes which
are fully ripe and sound. Those berries whi'-h are
rotten pr damaged, as well as any portions of withered
leaves attached to the bunches, they should be directed to
remove before they put them into their vessels. They
should be directed to be careful how they cut such bunches
as are attached to each other, or to the vine, by any
other means than the footstalk, lest they pull off and scatter on
the ground a number of the ripest berries. Where the crop is
valuable, it is usual in Europe for each person gathering to bp
provided with a pin, to use in picking off the ground such ber-
ries as are unavoidably dropped from the bunches.
As the buckets are filled, they should be carried out to the
ends of the rows, where a cart should be waiting to receive them,
n 2


In the cart should be placed, standing on end, with their heads
out, two or three moderately sized casks (from 30 to 60 gallons,)
or other convenient sized vessels to hold them. Larger sized
casks are apt to be inconvenient on account of their weight when
full. It is desirable to have it so managed, that on their arrival
at the cellar, the casks of grapes can be slung, and by means of a
tackle, hoisted from the cart to the stage on a level with the press,
and their contents shot into the treading box at once. With largo
sized casks, this would not be so easily practicable. As the buckets
are emptied into the casks, their contents should be examined
by a careful person, bunch by bunch, if the state of the crop
demands it, and all that is either unripe, or rotten and mouldy,
separated from the good, removing at the same time, any
foreign substances overlooked by the gatherers. In sorting them
it is necessary to distinguish the really rotten grapes from those
which merely have their skins injured, whilst their pulp is sugary
and rich, as well as from those which have dried on the bunch
like raisins. Observe that all which have commenced to shrivel
or decay before they were ripe are bad, and must be rejected to
be used for vinegar; if left in, they are very apt to spoil the
wine. A little experience will soon teach an observant per-
son to know by sight the good from the bad amongst the
shrivelled or rotting grapes. Their taste will do so at once.
If the weather be favorable for the gathering, and it is pro-
posed to express their juice at once, the grapes may be pounded
in the cask with a rammer of wood as they are poured in from
the buckets, so as to compress them as much as possible, and
save carriage to the cellar ; and when the cask is filled, a cloth
should be thrown over it to keep off the sun if there be any.
As one cart is loaded, another should be in readiness to take
its place, but one pair of horses will serve for both carts.
From what has been observed, the reader will comprehend
the importance of employing as gatherers, only such persons as
are old enough to understand the directions they may receive,
and willing to abide by them. Eating grapes amongst the rows
of vines should be absolutely forbidden; but all may be allowed
to partake freely when they are assembled from time to time to
rest at the ends of the rows. If the practice of eating grapes


at will, be not at once checked, the dirty habit of putting
every fine looking bunch to the mouth, and biting off - a few of
the best and ripest berries, will soon become prevalent, until many
of the workers become gorged past all power of exerting them-
selves. Let all be cautioned in this respect before they enter the
vineyard, and then let the first refractory person be immediately
turned out of it; the example will not be lost upon the rest. In
wine countries, where regularity is of course introduced into
this the most important business of the year, eating grapes is
only permitted at meals, and when the labour of the day is
finished.
I say nothing about the expediency of mixing or keeping
separate the various sorts of grapes which may have been planted
together in the same vineyard, because it is a point upon which,
at present, every one here must decide for himself, and in which
experience alone can guide him. I may remark that few vine-
yards of reputation contain less than two or three sorts, the
combination of which is considered necessary, or at all events
desirable, in the manufacture of their produce; but few of them
contain more than three or four varieties; and the confused
medley of sorts in the common vineyards of many vine districts,
is justly objected to as being one of the causes of the inferiority
of their produce. The combination of several kinds appears
to be more frequent in the manufacture of red wines of repu-
tation, than in the white. In an early paper I described
various sorts which are crushed together in vineyards of groat
celebrity.
LETTER XIII.
VINTAGE.—CRUSHING THE GRAPES.
The grapes having been brought home to the cellar or place for
expressing the juice, they may be forthwith crushed, if the wea-
ther at the time of gathering has been favorable; but if heated
101
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


by exposure to a powerful sun, or sultry atmosphere, (if it bo not
very inconvenient to do so,) I should prefer to allow them first
to be cooled, by being spread out thinly, and exposed to the fresh
night air. I have already described a box or trough to be used in
treading them out, and as my object at present is rather with
reference to operations upon a limited scale, I will suppose that
a small ' one of about sit feet square, has been constructed upon
the same principle. This would be sufficiently capacious to
Contain upon the gratings half a ton of grapes, and leave
room for two men to commence trampling them out. I
will suppose, also, that a sort of platform adjoining the
treading box has been erected large enough for three or four
casks of grapes to stand upon it. If this platform can be so
placed as to admit a cart to be backed against it, much trouble
in unloading the grapes will be saved.
To commence with the process of manufacturing white
Wine; the men to be employed in treading out the grapes having
taken off their shoes and thoroughly cleansed themselves, should
stand on the gratings, and having spread with a shovel a thin
layer of grapes over the surface unoccupied by the unorushed
fruit, proceed to tread them out by a rapid motion of the feet.
In this work they are very much assisted by having some sup-
port for the hands, without it, the labour of treading out grapes
for, perhaps, fourteen dr sixteen hours a day, becomes exces-
sively fatiguing. The thinner the layer of grapes is Spread
npon the gratings, the more rapidly and thoroughly will any
given quantity be crushed. As the first layer is finished, every
bunch having been thoroughly trodden, it should be shovelled up
into a corner to drain, and another layer spread and operated
upon until the skins and stalks (technically called the “ Marc")
have accumulated so as to occupy too much room, or no more
grapes are left. The marc should then be again spread over
the gratings, and well trampled for a few minutes the second
time; the longer it can be allowed to remaiii upon the gratings
to drain, the less trouble it will afterwards give in pressing.
Without some means of pressing the marc by the application
of considerable power, a large quantity of juice will be left in it,
which will be so much the more valuable and difficult to extract,
102
I.HTTHIIS ON Hit


as the grapes have been richer and more saccharine. Therefore,
although to make wine on a small scale, a screw or lever press
may not be absolutely requisite, no person possessing an acre
or two of vineyard should neglect to have one.
Of the simple presses, the screw answers best, and if it be
long enough to work through about two feet or two feet six
inches of space, it will be sufficient. I have been in the habit of
using an iron screw of a very powerful description, which, for
convenience in working, has the head where the leverage is ap-
plied, downwards. This head works completely through the
“ cap ” of the press, which is thus raised and lowered with the
screw. The cap is about eighteen inches broad in the centre,
and so long as to work at each end in grooves made for the
purpose in the cheeks, or uprights of the frames in which the
screw is fixed. The latter is thus always kept quite perpendicu-
lar, without which, it is exceedingly difficult, if not impossible,
to apply much pressure with the screw to a pile of marc; as
from its mucilaginous nature, it has a great tendency to slip out
at the bottom and sides. A wheel with spokes is used for turn-
ing the screw, and when very high pressure is required, addi-
tional power is obtained by passing a rope round the spokes, the
other end of which is attached to a windlass. By these means,
in a very strong shallow trough, about five feet square, the raaro
can be subjected to a pressure, which, in a few hours, renders it
perfectly dry. When the quantity to be pressed is considerable,
some little nicety is required on the part of the workmen.
The marc, after being removed from the treading box, is
built up in a perfectly square pile, of about three feet to three
feet six inches each side, and as upright as possible, but if any-
thing, tapering a little inwards, and placed exactly in the middle
of the trough, so as to have the screw directly over its centre ;
about every six inches in height, a layer of well combed straw
reed is introduced, (rye straw is the best,) to prevent the pile
from slipping, and it is thus continued until built up to the height
of four feet or more. A couple of stout planks are then placed
on the top, and the screw turned down, until, by simple leverage,
it can bo got no further. This is called the first pressing, and
the must obtained by it is usually added to (hat which flows
103
cultivation of the vine.


from the treading box. The screw being then turned up suffi-
ciently, the sides are pared off to the thickness of several inches
with a large sharp knife, and the-parings are built on the top :
the screw is again turned down, and the produce, if the grapes
have been very highly matured, again added to the first running.
The sides are then again pared down, and after the screw is
turned down by the simple leverage, the power of the vvindlas
is applied, and the marc left to drain as long as convenient.
Very little juice now remains in it, nevertheless, it may be
broken small by hand, water added to it, and then be left to fer-
ment ; to be afterwards distilled, or expressed for vinegar. The
must obtained from the last pressing should never be added to
the first running, unless the quality of the wine be a secondary
consideration. It is always more or less harsh and bitter from
the addition of some of the juice from the stalks, which quality,
it will, of course, communicate to the rest of the wine. As the
must is expressed, it should be conveyed to the vats or vessels
in which it is to ferment, each of which, it is desirable to com-
plete as quickly as possible, after it has been commenced, that
the process of fermentation may commence simultaneously in the
entire mass. It is not prudent to fill the vat or vessel used to
ferment in, to more than four-tilths or five-sixths of its capacity,
(unless, indeed, the plan be adopted of racking it into another
vessel just before the tumultuous fermentation is about to estab-
lish itself, as I shall describe underneath,) for during the height
of the process, the mass sometimes increases so much in volume
that, without this precaution, the wine would flow over and run
to waste.
If the process is to be carried on in vats, it is best to have a
cover of wood for each, made like the lid of a harness cask, (to
be put on either in one or two pieces, according to the size of
the vat,) and fitted quite close, every crevice being carefully
stopped, as soon as the fermentation becomes active, with a lut-
ing of dough, except an aperture of about three inches diameter,
to be left near the centre of the lid. This aperture should have
a piece of thick leather, rather larger than itself, attached to it
by nailing it on one side, with a slight weight upon it, that it
may act as a valve to open for the escape of the carbonic, acid
104
IETTKIIS ON THE


gas, and shut again as soon as the pressure against it ceases.
The object of having a cover of this description to a fermenting
vat, is to prevent the free escape of the aroma of the grape, and
the spirit, (the most valuable of the properties of wine) which,
during an active fermentation, are volatilized to a considerable
extent, and the portions so volatilized altogether dissipated, if
the vat be left quite uncovered.. When casks, with their heads
out, are used instead of vats, a substitute may be made with the
detached head of the cask, by nailing to its upper surface a
stout lath, something longer than the diameter of the head, to
prevent it from slipping, and drawing a square piece of clean
cloth, such as Osnaburg, quite across the month of the cask
before the head is put on. It is alleged by some practical men,
that a simple cover of canvass, or other similar material, is suffi-
cient to prevent the escape of those principles of the wine, which
it is desirable to retain, and still to admit the free passage of the
carbonic acid gas. Of this I have had no practical experience,
but I prefer the solid covers, with a valve. When the fermenta-
tion is carried on in casks, through the bung hole, a small piece
of leather can be attached to it by nailing, as above described, to
answer the same purpose. Another method is sometimes
adopted in Europe, viz., to fit to the bung-hole a tube of tin or
wood, to which is attached a leather hose, sufficiently long to be
passed into a tub of water. The aroma is said thus to be re-
tained in the wine, and the spirit caught by the water, which
permits the gas to escape; and it is alleged that if the ferment-
ing mass be large, and the process active, the water will become
impregnated with spirit, to such an extent, as to render it profit-
able to distil. Ido not, however, consider the quantity of
brandy to be thus obtained, likely to be sufficient to cover the
expense, at least such, upon trial, I have found to be the case.
105
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


LETTER XIV.
FERMENTATION OF THE MUST.—PRIMARY
FERMENTATION.
For convenience’ sake, the process of the vinous fermentation
has been divided into two stages, the first being termed the pri-
mary, violent, or tumultuous; the other, the secondary, gentle,
or insensible fermentation. The former being that which is
usually conducted in the vat. The latter, that which commonly
takes place after the new wine has been racked from the vat
into the cask. We have now to treat of the first, and of certain
methods before alluded to, of abating its violence, when the wine
maker has reason to apprehend that it may be such as to pro-
duce an injurious effect upon the quality of the wine.
In from one to fifty hours after the must has been expressed,
the fermentation will in this climate usually have established itself.
In colder countries the period is often much prolonged, here it
seldom exceeds thirty, six hours. It commences by the formation
of a slight scum on the surface of the must, which gradually, and
by insensible degrees increases, until it becomes of considerable
thickness; a circle of small bubbles then forms itself round the
margin; the scum continues to thicken, until at length it cracks
in various places, and bubbles of carbonic acid gas rise
and burst in various parts of the surface. This is the critical
moment for depriving the must of a large portion of its ferment,
and by this means to prevent the fermentation from rising to
that excessive degree of violence which is usual here in warm
weather, particularly if the grapes have not obtained a very
high degree of maturity. At this period a large proportion of
the ferment is collected at the surface, and forms, in fact, the
scum above-mentioned; and if it be carefully skimmed, or what
is better, if the contents of the vat be racked off into another
fermenting vessel, leaving this ferment with a small portion of
the lees behind, it is probable that the subsequent process will
proceed much more gently, and the temperature of the mass be
kept much lower than otherwise would have been the case. In


making experiments some years since, I ascertained this fact,
and I have since been informed that the practice of racking off
the must at the commencement of the fermentation, prevails in a
few districts in the south of France, where it is considered desir-
able to prevent perfect attenuation in the fermenting vat, that
the insensible fermentation in the cask may be prolonged. This
is precisely the result which has attended my experiments; and
although the untoward rainy weather, which, during the last
two seasons interfered with our operations in wine making, by
rotting the grapes, and compelling us to hasten the gathering of
the crop, prevented my carrying on these experiments in the
manner, ahd to the extent I desired, I have no doubt as to the
accuracy of my observations, and the soundness of the principle.
By subjecting equal portions of the same must to fermentation,
I ascertained, that when it had not been racked off from its fer-
ment, the temperature rose from 12° to 15° higher than it
did in those portions in which the separation had been made.
I recommend this fact to the attention of those wine makers
whose produce is liable to suffer from the excessive violence of
the first fermentation. If they desire to avail themselves of it, they
should have the process watched narrowly, and seize the moment
when the scum begins to crack, and the bubbles of gas to burst
in various parts of the surface ; if the racking be delayed ten or
fifteen minutes longer, the increasing agitation of the liquor will
have re-combined a portion of the ferment, and the same result
be no longer obtainable. When the grapes have become exceed-
ingly ripe, and the weather at the gathering is cool and temper-
ate,' I do not consider it expedient thus to deprive the must of
a portion of its ferment, particularly if the fermenting mass be
not of considerable volume. If, however, the wine maker de-
sires to make a sweet wine, he will find his object much more
easily attainable by the adoption of the means just described.
From the stage above-mentioned, the fermentation rapidly
passes into the tumultuous, and, if means have not been used to
check it, the temperature rises, sometimes to the extent of 96 ° to
98 °; a dense head of froth of several inches, and sometimes (if the
volume of the fermenting mass bo considerable) of several feet
in thickness, covers the vat, whilst a rapidinternalmotion, caused


by the escape of small bubbles of gas, pervades the entire mass,
which has now become greatly increased in volume. Large
quantities of. carbonic acid gas are now detached from the sur-
face, which being vastly heavier than the common air, flows over
the sides of the vat, and, unless means have been taken for its
dilution with the latter, by a free current, speedily fills the
apartment; the lower levels being, of course, first occupied.
No person should venture, without a light, into a closed building
in which there are considerable quantities of fermenting wine;
for unless freely ventilated from the bottom, there is danger cf
instant suffocation. Wherever the candle will not burn brightly
there is danger; and it should be understood, that. owing to
the weight of the gas, the danger is always greatest at the
lowest level. I have known a cellar situated underneath the
place where the wine was fermenting, and communicating with
it, by a large trap door, so filled with this dangerous gas, as to be
unsafe to enter until it was expelled. After a period, longer or
shorter, according to the violence of the fermentation, and the
quantity of sugar contained in the must, it begins to abate.
With me, this period usually varies from thirty-six to seventy or
eighty hours. The sweetness of the must has now probably
almost disappeared, and more or less gradually, the mass sub-
sides to nearly its original bulk. As soon as this is observed, it
should be watched, because it is desirable to rack it into casks
before the sweetness has altogether disappeared, or, at all events
before the wine has become perfectly still. The exact period
for racking off from the vat, there are in different countries
various rules for determining, but here we may safely reduce
them to two. First, the disappearance of sweetness; whenever
this takes place, although there may be, and indeed, almost in-
variably, is,, sugar remaining in the wine undecomposed, but
masked by the harsh roughness of the latter, there can be no
more than is absolutely requisite to feed the secondary fermenta-
tion in the cask. Secondly, when the fermentation subsides so
as to become comparatively gentle, it may still be quite sweet
to the taste, and have a considerable quantity of its sugar unde-
composed, nevertheless, it cannot gain by remaining in the vat.
Whenever, therefore, the fermenting mass attains either of these
108
LETTERS ON THE


two conditions, it should immediately be drawn off into casks.
As this brings us to the termination of the first or violent fer-
mentation, with reference to white wine, we may now retrace
our steps to describe what modifications of the process are re-
quisite in the manufacture of red wine.
To make this, as we have seen before, it is necessary that
the skins or marc should be fermented with the must, to ex-
tract the color, and the peculiar astringent principle which ac-
companies it. In France, when quality is an object, it is a
general, although not an universal, practice, to separate the
berries from the stalks, on account of the bitterness imparted
by the latter to the wine. Of various methods for performing
this, the most approved seems to be, to rub the bunches
of fruit over a coarse wire grating enclosed in a frame, under
which is placed a large vessel to catch the berries, which fall
through as they are detached; the stalks, as they are rubbed
bare, being collected and thrown on one side. I prefer, how-
ever, to crush the grapes in the usual way first, and to submit
the marc to the action of the screw, to render it dry enough
to handle. Then to spread it thinly upon any clean surface; a
floor or cloth for instance, and with a light wooden rake, having
fine teeth, set very close together, to rake out the stalks. This
method gives very little trouble. I then prefer to keep the
skins thinly spread out, and sometimes turned to prevent them
from heating, until the fermentation is about to commence in the
vat, and the must is drawn off from its yest as above described;
then to add them to the former. Sufficient allowance should, of
course, have been made in filling the vat for the space they oc-
cupy. Another method is also taken when we do not consider
it advisable to deprive the must of a portion of its ferment, and
are thus enabled to add the skins to it, without waiting for the
commencement of the fermentation; and this is, as soon as a
quantity of the grapes has been sufficiently crushed in tho
treading box, to pass their skins through a common riddle, with
meshes an inch square, which separates them from the stalks
sufficiently, and is performed without difficulty. As soon as the
fermentation is fairly established in the vat, the whole mass of
the marc is thrown up to tho surface in the form of a thick crust.


or head, the under portion of which is alone subjected to the
action of the fermenting must, so as to give out the whole of its
color. To remedy this it is usual, where a high colour is con-
sidered essential, to beat down the head of the marc frequently,
that it may be all acted upon. Still the action upon the marc
remains incomplete, because it is again immediately thrown up
to the surface; besides which, another evil is sometimes brought
about by this practice. The surface of the marc has a tendency
to run rapidly into the acetous stage of fermentation, and may
become quite acid in a few hours. If this be now beaten down
through the fermenting mass, an acid impregnation will bo
communicated to the whole, and the wine be more or less injured.
To obviate both difficulties, a simple and ingenious plan has been
devised, which appears well to merit adoption in the manufac-
ture of red wine. The object is to keep the whole body of the
marc some inches beneath the surface of the wine; and to effect
this, a sort of false lid is fitted to the inside of the vat, about 14
or 15 inches from its upper margin. This lid is composed of
loose boards, but made so as to fit closely together. After the
marc is put into the vat, a sufficient quantity of the liquid is
drawn pff from the bottom, to lower the upper surface to the
part to which the lid has been fitted. The boards of which it is
composed, are then laid on this surface; and to prevent them
from rising when the wine which was drawn off from the bottom
is returned to the vat, three cross pieces are laid upon them, at
equal distances from each other, and crossing the lid at right
angles. These cross pieces are confined to their places by hav-
ing each end slipped under a chock of wood, previously nailed
securely to the inside of the vat, at the required height
from the top. The lid being now securely fixed, the wine drawn
off is returned to the vat, and, of course, covers the marc and the
lid to the depth of several inches. The fermentation of the red
wine having proceeded until the moment for racking it into
casks has arrived, it will be more convenient that I should defer
to another paper the description of this part of the process, which
is similar to that adopted with white wine; except in one par-
ticular, viz., the disposal of that portion of the wine which is
contained in the marc: I shall, therefore, conclude this paper
with some account of the latter.
110
LUTXKUS OX Tin:


We will suppose the wine to have been drawn out of the
vat down to the lees, the marc is then usually taken out in tubs
and carried to the press, and then expressed much in the same
manner as I have described in a former paper, in treating of the
skins of white grapes. In the various wine districts, there are
different modes of disposing of the wine so obtained; sometimes
it is equally divided through the casks of wine drawn off from
the vat, to impart a higher color, and more body and astringency ;
and sometimes it is kept quite separate, as inferior in quality.
As a general rule, it is added to those wines which are chiefly
valued for their strength and full body, and is excluded from those
which are prized for their lightness and delicacy of flavour.
The wine maker here, must, therefore, decide for himself, ac-
cording to the nature of his wine, and the object he has in view.
He may be assured that the addition of the wine expressed from
the marc, will communicate a degree of harshness and astrin-
gency, which his vintage would not otherwise have possessed,
but these qualities are greatly modified by age, and generally
so much mellowed by long keeping in the cask, that the wine
which has received it, often finishes by becoming the best.
LETTER XV.
SECONDARY FERMENTATION.
In the preceding paper we brought to a close an account of the
primary or tumultuous fermentation, and we left the subject at
that point when the wine was considered to be in a fit condition
to rack into casks. The processes to be adopted in preparing
these for use have already been described, we will, therefore,
suppose that the wine maker is svell provided with a sufficient
number of various sizes, all in fit condition, and with properly
fitted bungs. It is not requisite, and perhaps not advisable, that
the casks should, in the first instance, be mounted up on their
proper stands in the cellar they are ultimately to be placed in.


on account of the increased temperature, greater or less, accord-
ing to its state, the still gently fermenting wine cannot fail to'
impart to any cool cellar. If the fermenting cellar be secure;
and not too much exposed to currents of air from without, it will
be better to keep the freshly filled casks there, in such manner
that free access may be had to each, to fill it up frequently. In
racking from the vat into the casks upon the ground, the most
convenient plan is by a tube, driven into the hole left within
three or four inches of the bottom of the cask or vat, which, for
this purpose ought to be one inch and a-half in diameter. This
tube is usually made of any tough close-grained wood, and has
attached to it a hose of well-seasoned leather, of suitable length,
with another tube attached to its extremity to drive into ano-
ther cask, or as in this case, to be inserted into the bung-holef
A little care in the use of this simple instrument, enables two, or
at most three men, to rack off a large quantity of wine in a short
time, without the least waste or loss of the aroma and spirit of
the wine, which must occur in drawing it off into buckets or
tubs, and pouring it through a funnel into the casks. In the
absence of the tubes and hose above mentioned, the wine may
be drawn off into buckets, and poured into the casks through a
large funnel. Previously to their, being filled, the casks, which
I will suppose to be ranged on the ground, as near as possible
to the vat from which they are to be filled, and securely chocked,
will require to undergo the following preparation. Let a quan-
tity of the wine to be drawn off, be heated to the boiling
point, in any clean convenient sized vessel, and the scum being
first removed, let about a quart be poured quite boiling into
each cask. Put the bung in tight, and have the cask well agi-
tated from end to end, turning it gradually round, until every
part has been brought into contact with the boiling wine. Then
take the bung out, and drain off the wine into a tub or bucket,
and return the cask to its former position. There are two ob-
jects in this; first, to prove if the cask be quite staunch; if it
have any faulty place, the hot liquid will be sure to discover it,
as every cobper knows; for this purpose boiling water would
have answered equally well; wine, however, is used because it is
desirable to saturate the inside of the cask with the same liquid
112
LETTERS ON TUB


Svith which it is to be filled, and by using it hot to drive out any
water which may have remained since the cask was cleansed,
and which may, and very often does, when left in, communicate
an unpleasant flavour to the wine. In France, they sometimes
use about a pint of good brandy for the same purpose, but that
interferes with sulphuring the cask, as X shall shortly point out.
The hot wine having been drained off for a few minutes, and the
cask returned into its position, take about three to six square
inches of sulphur match (made by dipping into melted brimstone
strips of linen or calico rag, and of which a sufficient stock should
always be ready for use in every wine maker’s cellar,) and hav-
ing suspended it upon a piece of crooked wire about a foot long,
light the end of the match, and insert it into the bung-hole; then
immediately put in the bung, and hold it forcibly down; while
the match is burning. The sulphurous acid gas generated by
the burning sulphur, drives out, with a loud hissing noise, the
atmospheric air, of which it takes the place. If the wine be now
added to the cask, it becomes more or less impregnated with
the vapour of the burning sulphur, which is said to cause the
precipitation of the ferment still suspended in large quantities in
it, and thus to hasten the period when it can be racked off from
the lees. But, whatever may be its mode of action, the burning
of the sulphur in the casks certainly operates as a great anti-
ferment, and checks effectually, if used with judgment, the
tendency to the acetous degeneration, as well as too violent a
fermentation in the cask. It is sometimes the practice to grate
down spices and aromatic herbs into the melted sulphur, but
I believe the simple match answers every good purpose ; and I
have never discovered the odour of the sulphur to remain, at all
events, after a few weeks. Observe, that no brandy cask, or
cask recently rinsed with brandy, should be prepared by burn-
ing a match in it. The probability is, that if any of the spirit
remain in the cask, which in the former it is almost sure to do,
the head of the cask would be blown out, sometimes with great
force, and a loud explosion. I have known the accident,
through carelessness, to happen repeatedly. The casks being
now properly prepared, may be filled with new wine. If the
quantity be considerable, several small casks of gradually
i
113
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


diminishing capacity should be filled, that a supply for keeping
the others constantly full may be always at hand, without touch-
ing the contents of one of the larger. It is not advisable, in most
cases, to mingle the thick wine, which remains at the bottom of
the vat, with the remainder of its contents: it is best to keep
it apart.
After it is drawn off from the vat, if the proper period
has been taken, the wine begins to ferment gently in the casks,
and in so doing, usually throws off a considerable quantity of
froth, together with such skins, seeds, &c., as may be floating in
it. The escape of these, as well as of such portion of the yest as
may be thrown up to the surface, should be promoted by keep-
ing the casks constantly full. To accomplish this, they will at
first require to be replenished, at least three or four times dur-
ing the twenty-four hours, diminishing gradually to once a day,
three times a week, and so on, until they can finally be bunged
up close. If during the process of filling up the casks, the seeds
or skins should be observed to be in such quantity that the fer-
mentation is insufficient to cast them forth, they should be re-
moved by hand. This gentle effervescence is termed, as we
have already seen, the secondary fermentation, and the longer it
is sustained, in a perceptible degree, the more rapidly will the
new wine meliorate itself, and the more generous will it become.
All the experience I have bad in the manufacture of wine in this
colony, has tended to confirm me in the opinion, that a tumul-
tuous fermentation, not over violent, and of not less than sixty
to eighty hours duration, followed by a distinctly perceptible
secondary fermentation of several weeks, (provided the grapes
have been rich in the saccharine principle, and without which
condition, it could scarcely be so prolonged,) is the modification of
the process, which in our climate it is desirable to attain, in or-
der to elaborate fully the qualities of the wine. If the first fer-
mentation be over violent, and the fermenting mass considera-
ble, it is probable that so much of the sugar will be decomposed
during this part of the process, as greatly to abbreviate the
duration of the secondary fermentation, for want of sugar to feed
it; and in this case I have usually found the wine, for a length
of time, difficult to fine and get into good order for use. Such


wine, though occasionally of considerable strength, has usually
been characterised by greater harshness and bitterness, by infe-
rior fragrance, and a want of that mellow flavour which is found
in all really good wine. I should always prefer to have the
sugar still distinctly perceptible to the taste, in fact, to bave.the
wine sweet when it is racked from the vat, and even to continue
so, in a slight degree, at the expiration of several weeks. The
necessity of keeping casks of new wine constantly full, is one of
the conditions which it is necessary to observe most rigorously
in its management; and I shall now proceed to explain the rea-
sons.
The wine fresh from the vat, still contains a large portion of
its ferment, in an unaltered state, a very small proportion (as we
have before seen) being decomposed by the vinous fermentation.
A portion of this ferment, the secondary fermentation has a ten-
dency to throw up to the surface, in the form of a head of froth,
from whence, if the cask be quite full, it escapes by the bung-hole.
If the wine be allowed gradually to subside in the cask through
neglect, this outlet for it is prevented, and it in part attaches
itself to the inside of the staves round the bung ; these having
been first saturated with wine, now become coated with that
very principle, which, as soon as all the sugar in a fermented
liquor has been decomposed by the vinous fermentation, becomes
the active agent in exciting the acetous stage, and converts it
into vinegar. Now the new wine contains a considerable quan-
tity of fixed air, which as it disengages itself through the bung-
hole, causes the former to diminish rapidly in volume, hence one
reason that, to keep them full, casks of new wine require to be
so frequently replenished; but, another cause is the high tem-
perature acquired during the violent fermentation, and the conse-
quent reduction of its volume as it cools down in the cask. If the
operation be neglected for a few days, sometimes even for a day,
the wine will have shrunk several inches, leaving a large portion
of the inner surface of the staves exposed to the action of the
atmosphere; the effect of which will almost infallibly be, to con-
vert into vinegar, by means of the ferment with which they are
coated, the wine they have previously absorbed. Persons who
have never witnessed it, would find it difficult to credit how
i t
115
CULTIVATION OP THE VINE.


rapidly this conversion sometimes takes place. If the cask, after
being for a longer or shorter period neglected, he now filled up,
an acid impregnation, more or less according to the extent of
this neglect, is imparted to the whole contents of the cask. It
may not at first be perceptible to the taste, and the wine, if
generous, may be enabled to resist the leavening of vinegar it
has received, in which case it will continue sound, but with the
flavour produced by mixing a small quantity of vinegar with a
considerable body of wine. But the chief danger consists in
this, that the acetic acid or vinegar,' being once introduced
into the wine, remains unchanged; unless destroyed by some
alkaline preparation, it cannot be reconverted into wine, aild its
natural tendency is to exert its agency upon the rest of the
wine, somi times by a slow and almost imperceptible process,'
until it converts it into vinegar also. lam persuaded that more
wine has been spoilt amongst us by neglecting to keep the casks
constantly full, than by all the other causes of failure put together.
To guard against this evil, therefore, as soon as the wine has
been racked off, let a portion be at hand, contained in bottles
and other small vessels, to keep the casks full, to overflowing.
If much froth be discharged from the bung-hole, it may at first
be left altogether uncovered ; hut, as soon as practicable, a bung
upside down, should be laid over the opening. As the effer-
vescence abates, the hung may be put into its place, and at
length, when the wine has become quite still, be gradually
tightened. Care, however, should be taken not to do this too
soon, lest the cask should be burst by the pressure of the disen-
gaged gas. If, as is usual, a cloth is placed under the bung, to
make it fit closely, until the latter is finally driven home, the
cloth should be frequently changed, or washed in lime-water.
At first, it may become quite acid in twenty-four hours. . All
vessels of wood, which are used to contain wine, but particu-
larly closed vessels, such as casks and kegs, should be rinsed
carefully, as soon as they are emptied, with hot water, and then
drained till dry. By causing this to be observed strictly as a
rule, the wine grower may be assured he will prevent much
wine from being spoiled.
After the wine has been in the cask a few days,
it will probably have become sufficiently still to remove


into the cellar, there to finish the process of the secondary
fermentation. For this purpose, the bungs may be temporarily
tightened, to be loosened again as soon as the casks are mounted
upon their supports, in the cellar. The supports ought to be
as solid as possible, to prevent unnecessary vibration, and suffi-
ciently high from the floor of the cellar (say from 11 to 12 in-
ches,) to admit a common pail under the lower chimes; logs of
wood, placed parallel to each other, about 12 or 15 inches apart,
and squared to the breadth of 5 or 6 inches on their upper sur-
faces, are the best. The under surface need not be squared,
but the log being gaged from the squared face, to the thickness
of Bor 10 inches, and marked with a chalk-line; notches should
be taken out at intervals of 4 to 5 feet, down to the chalk-mark.
These notches are intended to receive short pieces of 3 x 4
scantling crossing the logs at right angles, and serving as sup-
ports for them to rest upon. They are advantageous to block
up the logs to an uniform level, when there are inequalities in
the floor of the cellar, and to prevent the necessity of squaring
the under sides of the logs. [See Sketch, Plate 3, Fig v.]
Each cask should be kept firm in its place, without touching its
neighbours, and, if practicable, with room between it and the
wall, to admit a man to pass freely behind it, by four chocks of
wood. These chocks should be about G inches long, and 31 to
4 inches thick at the back, broad enough to fill up the space
between the hoops, [See Sketch, Plate 3, Figs vi. and vii.] and
hewn in such manner as to fit the curvature or bulge of the
casks. The casks of new wine having been firmly secured as
above described, a bung, of peculiar form, will now be advan-
tageous to use, provided that there is no longer any very sensi-
ble effervescence. These bungs are made about six inches long,
and taper, so that about one-half may be immersed in the wine,
and the other project above the staves outside. They are ser-
viceable in preventing so much waste by evaporation, as usually
takes place when the common bung is used, especially when not
driven tight, and they are much more easily taken out, without
disturbing the wine, when the casks are to be filled up. Even
when driven in hard, they are readily loosened by a few slight
taps on the sides with the “bung starter,” or a wooden mallet
117
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


They may be made of any close grained wood, but either by
boiling, for several hours, or long immersion in cold water,
should be freed from any astringent gum, &c., they may con-
tain, before they are used.
LETTER XVI.
SECONDARY FERMENTATION.
MANAGEMENT OF THE WINE IN THE CELLAR.
The process of the Secondary Fermentation, is of very various
duration; in some of the stronger wines, it may continue for
many years, in those of a lighter description, it may terminate in
a few months, or even weeks. As a general rule, it may be
observed, that so long as sugar remains in the wine, undecom-
posed, this gentle fermentation will continue, and until it ter-
minates by the conversion of the whole of the sugar into spirit,
the acetous fermentation cannot commence. But it should be
remembered, that when little sugar and much ferment was origin-
ally present in the must, the whole, or nearly the whole, of the
former will probably have been decomposed by the violent fer-
mentation, which may, in this case, almost immediately pass into
the acetous stage. Hence the importance of perfect maturity in
the grapes; for the riper they are, the more will the ratio be-
tween the sugar and the ferment be altered, by the increase
of the former, at the expense of the latter. Having made these
general observations upon the process, I shall now proceed to
describe the management of the wine in the cellar during its
continuance.
After a period varying according to circumstances from
a few days, to several weeks, the new wine will have become
sufficiently still to permit the bungs to be inserted in their
proper position, without risk of bursting the casks; but in the
first instance, without being driven with the mallet. At first
they should be taken out every day, and the space left void by
118
LETTERS ON THE


the subsiding or the evaporation of the wine be replenished.
Gradually the rate of the diminution decreases, and the filling
up will require to be less frequently performed, viz., every se-
cond day, once a week, once a fortnight, &c., driving the bungs
harder by degrees, until they can safely be made quite tight.
Great care should be taken to keep the casks constantly full, but
if through neglect or accident, a void of an inch or two should
have existed unobserved for several days, then, previously to its
being filled up, it will be prudent to try if a piece of paper
lighted, will burn in the void so left. If, as most probably will
be the case, it will not, the acid air should be expelled by blow-
ing with a pair of common bellows until the lighted paper will
burn. Then introduce a square inch of sulphur match, and when
this has burnt out, let the cask be immediately filled. Should
small specks of a greenish white substance, usually termed
“ motheriness,” appear on the surface of the wine, they must be
removed by filling up the cask repeatedly; pressing against the
head to make it overflow, and tapping frequently, all round the
bung with a mallet, to detach the portions adhering to the in-
side of the staves. This motheriness is considered to be a bad
symptom, and is frequently the fore-runner of the acetous de-
generation, unless means be taken to check it. The period
during which the secondary, but still perceptible, fermentation
continues, varies exceedingly, as I have before observed. Some
times it will cease for a few days, and then re-commence, until
it has ceased altogether, which may be known by the wine be-
ginning to become transparent. The casks should be frequently
examined all round, lest a leakage should have established
itself; this examination ought, in fact, to be made every day,
for the very best coopering is required to render casks contain-
ing new wine, perfectly staunch. Ordinary leaks may generally
be stopped by rubbing on a mixture of mutton suet and whiten-
ing ; and if serious, by then covering the spot with a small thin
plate of lead, tin, or zinc, neatly secured with small tacks.
Should this prove ineffectual, no time should be lost in trans-
ferring the wine into a fresh cask. Each time the cask is filled
up, the bung-cloths should be changed. It is most convenient
to have a double set, that one set may be washed in lime-water,
119
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


to destroy the acid, whilst the other is in use. The operation
of filling up the casks, is rendered much less troublesome by
the use of the long taper bungs, before described; the wine is
much less disturbed in taking them out, besides the saving in
the quantity necessary for replenishing, and bung cloths are not
requisite to make them fill up perfectly the opening of the bung.
By mid-winter, or shortly after, supposing the season
for ripening the grapes to have been favorable, and the
vinification, or wine making, properly conducted, the wine
will have deposited its gross lees. If held up at this time
in a wine glass before the eye, it will in the daylight,
probably appear tolerably bright, although it will certainly
appear more or less milky or turbid, if subjected to the
severe test of being held before the flame of a candle in a
dark place. The sooner it is now racked off into clean casks
the better; on no account would I advise the process to be
deferred after the commencement of August. In almost all
cases, whether the wine be bright or not, it will be prudent to
draw it off by this period from the lees it has deposited; for if
longer deferred, there is danger that the latter, by a tendency
in the wine to ferment, to be described presently, may be again
blended with the wine, which, if not of strong body, may by
means of this accident, run into the acetous fermentation. A
few clean casks, of suitable sizes, to commence with, should be
provided, and when these are filled, the casks which have been
emptied, having been well cleansed, may be used again. The
process of cleansing and preparing casks for use, I have before
described. To prevent future repetition, I now, again observe, that
on no account should any be used which have not been made per-
fectly pure; that if recently rinsed with water, it is proper to pass
through them carefully, a small quantity, either of good brandy,
or of wine boiling hot; and then, just as they are about ta be
filled, to burn in them from 4to 6 square inches of sulphur match
per 100 gallons; but if brandy has been used in rinsing, it should
be carefully drained off, lest in using the match, it should inflame
and blow out the heads of the casks. If the wine be in a good
state for racking, the lees will always be contained in the space
below the plug, which I have before mentioned as being proper
120
LETTERS ON THE


to have inserted about two inches from the lower chime: and,
even when drawn off to this point, several gallons additional of
clear wine may generally be obtained, by raising the cask
gently and carefully from behind. When much wine is racked
at the same time, it is best to put all the lees (which at the first
racking, amount usually to from 4 to 8 gallons per 100) together
into the same cask, and then, in a few weeks, to draw off from
it the clear wine, which will probably amount to more than half
the gross bulk. The wine so obtained, is rarely so good in
quality, and if possible to avoid it, should not be mixed with the
rest. lam informed that on the Rhine it is customary to strain
the lees carefully through linen bags, and that the clear wine so
obtained is termed the “ mother wine,” and carefully added to
the rest of the clear wine, upon which, it is said, gradually to
produce very beneficial effects.
The process of racking off is greatly facilitated by the
use of a simple apparatus. It consists of a bellows of par-
ticular construction, so contrived that the nozzle, which is
fixed on at right angles to the rest of the instrument, can
be made to fit tight into the bung of any cask; and of a
leather hose, comprising several lengths easily joined toge-
ther if required. Each end of the hose is provided with
wooden tubes, the one to drive into the aperture above men-
tioned in the full cask, the other to fit on to the end of a tap or
cock, which is driven into a similar aperture in the empty one:
the latter being first fixed. Now, supposing the empty cask to
be mounted upon the proper supports, on a level with the
full one, as soon as the cock is turned, the wine flows through
the tube of communication thus formed, until it attains the same
level in both. But to complete the operation, whilst the wine is
thus flowing from one cask to the other, the bung of the one to
bo emptied is taken out, and the nozzle of the bellows firmly
driven in its place. This instrument is so contrived as to
force at every stroke, several gallons of air into the cask, and to
prevent its return; so that by working it quite gently for a few
minutes, the air within the cask becomes so much compressed,
as, by its elastic force, to drive out the whole of the remaining
wine down to the level of the tube of communication. The mo-
121
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


raent it reaches this, the sound of the air rushing with violence
into the hose is heard, and the cock at the other end should be
turned. The channel of communication being thus stopped, the
end of the hose is removed from the cask, and the clear wine
remaining in it, and the cask, poured off into a bucket, and from
it into the cask which is being filled. The cock is next taken
out of the latter, and a plug, previously prepared, put into its
place. With a little practice, the mere transferring of the clear
wine from one large cask to another, can be performed by one
man, without the slightest waste, in 15 or 20 minutes, thus en-
abling him, supposing clean casks are supplied as he requires
them, to rack off from 15 to 20 in a day. In the ordinary mode
two men will be fully employed in racking off 8 or 9 such casks,
besides the waste which will take place to a greater or less ex-
tent. But the bellows and hose are possessed of another very
important advantage. By means of their use, the contents of
one cask are drawn off into another, without being exposed to
the atmosphere, and consequently without the loss of aroma and
strength which must take place when the wine dashes with vio-
lence into a bucket, and is then poured through a funnel into
another cask. Besides this, there is much less risk of disturbing
the lees when the bellows are used, an accident, which not un-
frequently takes place by the other method. I have used the
apparatus just described for the last twelve months, and it has
answered every expectation I had previously formed of it. I,
therefore, strongly recommend it for general adoption amongst
the makers of wine; the more so, because it can be made in the
colony, at moderate cost, and the model can be easily given. As
the old plan of racking will, however, still in many cases require
to be adopted, I may mention that for this purpose the aperture
to draw from, should not exceed j to | inch diameter, especially
if the cask be large, unless a cock or tap, made expressly for the
purpose, be used. It should be provided with a good plug of
hard wood, shaped so as to fit the hand readily, and be easily
put in or removed. A shallow tub should be placed under the
cask, to catch any wine which may drop; and if two persons are
employed, it is most convenient to have three light buckets to
draw off in, so that the plug once taken out, need not be put in
122
LETTEKS ON THE


again until the cask is drawn off, an empty bucket being thus
constantly ready to put under the spout as the full one is re-
moved. In this manner less wine will be spilt than when the
plug is frequently taken out and replaced. Drawing off by
means of a common cock is certainly less likely to create waste,
but it is a very tedious process, unless one of 1J to 1J inch bore
be obtained for the express purpose. In racking off, the conve-
nience of being well supplied with casks of various sizes will
soon be experienced, especially, if there are several kinds of
wine. A small portion of each sort should be reserved in bottles
or small kegs for the purpose of filling up, an operation which
will still require to be performed every month or six weeks.
After the first racking, the wine, however bright it may ap-
pear, has still a vast quantity of extraneous matter to deposit, part
of which, such as the tartar, frequently remains long in a state of
absolute solution. In some wines, often the very best, this
gradual deposition continues for many years, and it is not
until it has in a great measure ceased, that those of a generous
nature can be considered to be sufficiently mellowed and ripened
for use. The beginner will find it difficult to credit the vast
change which the process of mellowing in the cask at length
effects. All are probably aware that new wine, such as it is at
the termination of the violent fermentation, though highly intox-
icating from the quantity of fixed air it contains, is, for the most
part, absolutely nauseous to the taste. But it may not be so
generally known, that at six and twelve months old, and even
when it has been two or three y ears in the cask, little indication is
frequently given of the high flavour and quality a fine wine will
acquireby keeping, and proper treatment in wood. Withoutcxpe-
rience in the particular sort of wine, the very best judges may be
at fault. Some of the most delicate growths of Burgundy are ripe
in their first year, and must be consumed before they reach a
second. The rich generous wines of Rousillon, on the other
hand, require to be kept 15 or 20 years in the cask, before their
good qualities are developed. But, although time is, in the ma-
jority of cases, requisite to ripen a wine for use, it is generally
admitted that the process may be greatly modified by the treat-
ment it is subjected to. With this view, to all wines, except those,
123
CULTITATION OF THE VINE.


made up by being highly brandied for the English market, the most
perfect repose in the cellar is desirable. They should be kept
at a moderate and equable temperature, and be as little as possi-
ble subjected to any sudden shaking or vibration. Every pre-
caution should, therefore, be observed to secure the casks firmly
upon their supports, which cannot be too solid; and in filling
them up, not to disturb their contents unnecessarily. Also, to
exclude the external air as much as possible from the cellar,
preserving the temperature as nearly at 55 ° to 60 °, as cir-
cumstances will permit. The casks should frequently be ex,
amined all round, to detect leaks, and such measures taken to
stop them, as may be necessary. A cask of good wine may be
quite spoiled, by means of a leak, in a week or two; and there
are certain seasons of the year, at which they are much more
likely to occur than others; these I shall now proceed to men-
tion.
There are three periods, during which the wine,
until it has become thoroughly matured, has a tendency
to ferment, or to become turbid. During these, it ought never
to be bottled, nor racked off, if it can be avoided. These
periods are the season at which tho sap begins to rise in the
vine; the period of its flowering; and when its fruit begins to
color, or to swell to maturity. I do not pretend to explain the
causes of this very singular fact. All the European writers,
on the subject, whose works I have read, are agreed as to its
existence, and their testimony has seemed to me to be amply
confirmed by my own observations in the colony. It will bo
prudent, therefore, for two or three weeks during these periods,
to examine the wine daily, and should there be any effervescence,
to give vent to the fixed air by means of a spile hole near the
bung. I have known a cask to burst its hoops at the first of
these periods, for want of such a vent. Should the efferves-
cence be considerable, and little or no remains of sweetness in
the wine be perceptible to the taste, so as to indicate danger of
the commencement of the acetous fermentation, it should be
racked into a clean cask, in which double allowance of sulphur
match should be previously burnt. It may even be proper to
burn several other matches in the cask, while it is being filled
124
LETTERS ON THE


and to roll it well about, to impregnate the wine thoroughly
with the fumes. I am not aware of any other means, within
reach, by which this tendency to ferment may be effectually
checked, and I can testify, that if properly made use of, they
will prove effectual, without imparting any ultimate ill flavour
to the wine. The sulphate of potash has been highly recom-
mended for the same purpose, but it is not to be procured here,
andj is, I believe, rarely manufactured in Europe. Pulverised
animal charcoal will, to a certain extent, produce the same effect,
but care must be taken to have it thoroughly carbonized, and
to use it sparingly, because it will deprive all wines of their
color, and, in fact, if used abundantly, render them as colorless
as water. I prefer to use the sulphur match freely; I have
never experienced the slightest ill consequence from so using it,
whenever occasion seemed to require, although I have, at the
same time, always been particular in having the casks previously
rinsed out with boiling wine, in the manner before described.
Should there beany considerable degree of sweetness remaining
in the wine, when it commences to ferment, as above described,
I should not advise any steps to be taken to check it, at all
events, until this sweetness has disappeared. It' will, in such
case, probably cease of its own accord, and shortly afterwards,
become bright and greatly improved in quality. Care must be
taken, however, to give vent to.tlie fixed air in the cask as re-
quired, lest the hoops should be burst by its expansive force.
After the second of the two seasons above mentioned, (that
is, the flowering of the vines,) is over, an interval occurs previous
to the coloring of the grapes, which is usually very suitable for
the second racking. But previous to commencing this, it will,
in the generality of instances, be proper to accelerate the pre-
cipitation of the lees, and render the wine more bright by artifi-
cial fining. For red wines, the whites of perfectly fresh laid
eggs, at the rate of 12 to 14 per cask of 100 gallons, and well
beat up with a portion of the wine, to be drawn from the cask
for the purpose, will answer perfectly well. In putting them
into the cask, the bung being taken out, a rotatory motion should
be given to its contents, by introducing a clean round stick,
having four or five inches of its lower end split up into four : the


different portions being kept apart by slips of wood thrust in
between them, and firmly secured by twine. By moving this
rapidly round for a few seconds, the desired motion is given,
when the finings should be immediately poured in, and the agita-
tion of the wine continued for four or five minutes longer. The
finings will by this time have become thoroughly incorporated
with it, but it is better not to bung the cask up tightly for a few
hours, or even until the next day. After this, it should be kept
as still as possible, until the expiration of two or three weeks,
by which time the finings will, in clear weather, most probably
have settled to the bottom, carrying down with them a great
part of the impurities which the wine may have contained.
When this is accomplished, the sooner it is racked off into a
clean cask the better. Such is the mode commonly adopted for
fining red wines. It is customary to repeat the process every
six months, until the wine becomes perfectly “ candle bright”;
that is, until it will bear the test of being held up in a clear wine
glass, before the flame of a candle in a dark place, without dis-
covering the slightest impurity, and shewing the flame of the
candle as distinctly as if no medium existed. Red wines com-
monly attain this degree of brightness by the time they have
been twice subjected to the process above described. The
management of white wines is more troublesome; they usually re-
quire twice, and sometimes four.or five times as long a time as the
red, to render them perfectly bright. I have always found
isinglass to succeed best in fining wines of this class, but it should
never be used with the former, because it will enter into chemi-
cal combination with a portion of the coloring matter, and carry
it down. It may be prepared for use either by being dissolved in
water or in wine. For the former method, take 4 oz. of best cut
or staple isinglass, the latter is to be prefered, and is less expen-
sive, and oz. tartaric acid. Let the isinglass be well ham-
mered upon some hard surface, such as an anvil or cooper s
beak, or pounded a little at a time, in a mortar, with a heavy pes-
tle ; the more it is bruised and beaten into small fragments the
better; put it into a bucket or small tub with the tartaric acid,
pour on two or three quarts of boiling water, and cover it up
closely. In the course of a day or two, it will, if good, have set


tled, so as to have become quite soft, and to have absorbed all the
water; when it has done this, add about as much more boiling
water and cover it up again, until the whole is so far swelled as
to shew no whitish opaque portions; then with a whisk (made
like a small broom, but with clean tough lwigs)’beat it vigor-
ously up until it becomes a thick glutinous mass of uniform ap-
pearance, adding gradually, as much more boiling water as will
make the whole amount to three gallons. Care should he taken
not to commence beating it up with the whisk until it be
thoroughly softened, or it may always remain lumpy and imper-
fect. When properly prepared, it should have the consistence
and something of the appearance of a thick preparation of
arrowroot. In this state it may be put into bottles, tightly
corked up, and will thus keep good many months. In preparing
it with wine, the same quantity of isinglass should be thoroughly
reduced by pounding, for three gallons of any good sound wine,
but the tartaric acid may be omitted. In mixing, the wine may
be added in the same proportions (but cold,) as described above,
it must be carefully covered up while soaking, and, in cold wea-
ther, kept at a warm temperature, until it has become thoroughly
softened; when this takes place, it must be beaten up, &c., as
before described. The chief care requisite in both these pre-
parations, is first to hammer or bruise the raw isinglass into the
smallest possible fragments, then to let it soak thoroughly in a
small portion of liquid, until it has become quite soft, and lastly
by a vigorous, and somewhat rough application of the whisk, to
break the whole well down, adding the remaining fluid by slow
degrees. One bottle of the prepared isinglass is amply suffi-
cient for a cask of 100 imperial gallons at its first fining, and
half the quantity will probably be sufficient at any subsequent
period. It should be used in the same manner as the white of
eggs, that is, by first drawing off two or three quarts of wine
from the cask, of which two quarts may be well mixed with the
isinglass, then after giving a rotatory motion to the contents of
the cask with the split stick, to pour it in and thoroughly incor-
porate it with the wine, the remaining quart to be poured in
afterwards, to fill up the cask. If necessary, other substances
are sometimes added to assist by their mechanical weight in


the precipitation of the isinglass. Those which I have t ied,
are pounded marble, oyster shells, and animal charcoal. The
advantage of using these substances is questionable, the latter,
which should be used very sparingly, not exceeding a dessert
spoonful to a large cask, exercises a chemical action upon the
ferment, as well as upon the coloring matter of the wine, and
certainly appeared in some cases to be of benefit.
Much difference of opinion exists with regard to the
beneficial effects to be obtained by the use of finings; I
may, therefore, here, with propriety state, for the reader’s in-
formation, the view I have taken of the subject. Although I
have had little means of obtaining accurate information res-
pecting the processes adopted in preparing the strong wines of
the south of Europe, Madeira, &c., for the English market, we may
take it for granted that they contain a large quantity of brandy,
generally of inferior quality, and frequently other substances;
all of which are said to be added subsequently to the fermenta-
tion. They will consequently be contained in a state of mechan-
ical, not chemical, combination with the wine. The better
classes of these wines are supposed to be less “fortified” by the
addition of spirit, and are prized for a rich, and almost syrupy
fulness of flavour, which, to a certain extent, masks their exces-
sive strength. Such wines will not be improved by much fining, on
the contrary, they are preferred by many to be used in draught,
without being fined at all. The ordinary kinds, which alone find
their way into general consumption, are said to be all artificially
treated, as I have mentioned above, to impart softness and
flavour, as well as to increase their strength; and when unskil-
fully made use of, burnt sugar, liquorice, &c., may be distin-
guished by their flavour, as forming part of the substances so
added. They are, of course, in a state of mechanical combina-
tion only, and it is, therefore, probable, that the addition of
finings will carry down a considerable portion of them with the
lees, and make the wine, which proves to be the case in practice, so
much the more harsh and fiery, as it is rendered bright. But it
is very different with natural wines. They have not been forti-
fied by the addition of a harsh spirit, and run no risk of becom-
ing fiery as their lees are deposited. If strong, their strength


will almost invariably be accompanied by a certain fulness to
the taste, of which they are not to be deprived, except by great
mismanagement; and when light, they have frequently the re-
commendation of an agreeable fragrance, combined with a deli-
cate flavour. The more completely they are deprived of their
lees, the more will their agreeable qualities be developed. It
may be very true, that if left in a state of perfect repose, and
kept at a proper temperature, they will sooner or later become
us bright without assistance, as they can be made by the process
of fining. Experience, however, teaches us that by means of
this process, we can bring them to the same state at a much
earlier period, and without depriving them of any of their agree-
able qualities. But there is yet another argument in favor of
fining artificially, and the beginner should bear it in mind, that
with the lees is deposited that portion of the ferment which may
not have been destroyed during the conversion of the sugar of
the grape into spirit; that so long as this substance is contained
in tbe wine, unless there be sugar also in an unaltered state for
it to exert its agency upon, there is danger that its energies
may be employed in conducting the process of fermentation into
the acetous stage, but that when once it is completely deposited
and removed, this danger no longer exists, and the wine is capa-
ble, in all probability, of being kept sound for an indefinite
period. There is little doubt that the practice of dosing largely
with brandy, wines intended for exportation, had its origin
partly in the extensive losses sustained by its turning acid, a
degeneration which would rarely have taken place, had they
been of. good quality, sufficiently ripened by age, and deprived
of their lees by judicious racking and fining. The really fine
wines, which are well ripened by age and proper treatment, do
not need it, and I think it probable that it was only when the
demand for these exceeded the supply, that recourse was had
to the practices above alluded to. Nevertheless, in the use of
finings, the beginner must exercise a judicious caution, because
the very best wines may be injured by being too early, or too
frequently subjected to .their action. I should never recommend
their use until the wine acquires a certain degree of brightness
naturally. If by the month of December, succeeding the
K


vintage, the new wine still continues to be milky or turbid, if it be
still sensibly sweet to the palate, it will be better to abstain from
fining it, the insensible fermentation is probably still active, and
until it moderates, which may be known by the clearing of the
wine, it will be useless, if not injurious, to attempt to make it
bright by artificial means: it is a better plan to wait. If the
setting in of the acetous fermentation be feared, recourse may
be had to racking and sulphuring without fining. By the suffi-
cient impregnation of the wine with the vapour of burning sul-
phur, the whole of the ferment will be precipitated in a few days,
and if there be reason to apprehend its injurious influence upon
the wine, it can then be separated from it by racking. Some of
the colonial wines have a sharpness of flavour which an experi-
enced person will instantly distinguish from that produced by
the acetous fermentation. Sometimes this sharpness is accom-
panied by a sweetness equally sensible to the palate. Wines of
this description require only to be kept in the wood for a time,
to lose this acidulous flavour. It often arises from the quantity
of tartar they hold in solution, which they will probably
in great part deposit by the time the insensible fermentation is
completed. Fining such wines will probably injure them by
checking this fermentation, and thus delaying their progress to-
wards maturity. If they continue many months in this state,
without improvement, it is frequently a good plan to add to them
at the ensuing vintage, a fourth or fifth part of their bulk, or
even a smaller proportion, of sweet fresh must, so as to make
them undergo a gentle sensible fermentation, which will decom-
pose their sugar, and cause the tartar to be deposited with the lees.
Sometimes, however, this combined flavour of sweet and acid
results chiefly from the presence of carbonic acid with the
sugar, in consequence of the wine being actually in this state of
gentle fermentation. If the wine so affected has been produced
(as will probably be the case) from must originally rich in the
saccharine principle, and be attended to so as to keep the casks
constantly full, there is little doubt of its resulting in a generous
full bodied liquor. It is probable that this state is attributable
cither to an original deficiency of ferment in the must, to the
small volume of the fermenting mass, or to a low temperature
130
LETTERS ON THE


during the process; one or more of these causes operating to
prevent the ferment from acting with sufficient energy to effect
the sufficient conversion of the sugar into spirit: and that after-
wards, the wine being placed under circumstances more favora-
ble for the action of the vinous fermentation, the agency of the
ferment, which remains suspended in it, is renewed. The sharp
acidulous flavour is, in this case, as I have said above, an effect
of the presence of carbonic acid, and remains until the process
is terminated, when it altogether disappears. Chemists insist
upon it, as an invariable law, that the acetous stage of fermen-
tation cannot commence until the vinous stage has terminated,
by the conversion of the whole of the sugar into spirit. We
may rest assured, therefore, that when this process is complete,
the acidulous flavour will have disappeared also, and that any
gentle fermentation which a wine may undergo, until this effect
has taken place, can only result in its improvement.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to lay down rules of general
application as to the length of time wine ought to remain in the
wood. None of those of colonial growth, with which I have had
experience, could be bottled with propriety before they were three
years, and even then, might probably have been much improved
by being kept longer in the cask. Some that we have will not
be fit to bottle until they are twice that age. But there are
certain general principles, by attending to which, the wine
maker may be enabled in the course of time, to establish rules
for his own guidance. In the first place, no wine can be fit to
bottle, until, by keeping, or by fining, it has become perfectly
limpid, technically speaking, “candle bright.” The slightest
dimness, or appearance of any substance floating through it, is
sufficient to prove its unfitness. In holding it before the flame
of a candle, a plain wine glass is preferable, and it will show a
“cloud,” or what are technically termed “flyers,” (that is
minute substances of fibrous appearance) if any exist, much more
readily if it be gently agitated in the glass. Still, Ido not think
persons without experience will be quite prepared to judge whe-
ther it has or has not attained perfect limpidity, until they have
compared it with some pale brandy, or other pure spirit sub-
jected to the same test. The wine ought to appear as bright
li. a
131
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


and clear as the spirit. But although perfect limpidity is neces-
sary to render wine fit for bottling, it is no criterion of its hav-
ing attained sufficient age in the wood. There is a certain mel-
lowness and softness of flavour, which practice alone can teach
the wine maker to distinguish. We have seen in a former chap,
ter, that the juice of the grape comprises a variety of substances
besides its sugar; these substances, although chiefly deposited
in the form of lees, and removed at the first racking, do never-
theless in part remain, often in such a state of perfect solution,
as scarcely, if at all, to impair its limpidity. If time sufficient
be allowed, together with repose, the greater portion of these
salts will be deposited in the cask, in a crystallized form.
Nothing is more common, than to see casks which have con-
tained wine, perfectly coated with these crystals. The Ger-
mans call them “wine stone.” It is the chemical action, the
result of the prolonged insensible fermentation, which disen-
gages them; and how greatly sound good bodied wines are
improved by being thus purified, only those who have experi-
enced it, can readily conceive. I have been assured by a pro-
prietor of a vineyard, in one of the most celebrated districts on
the Rhine, that the best wine of his district is prized at first for
its lusciousness; that after three or four years, it becomes
scarcely drinkable, until it has passed twenty or twenty-five
years, when it begins to assume those high qualities which cause
it to produce the very highest price in the world; that at forty
or fifty years old, it is in its prime, and continues to be so for an
indefinite length of time. The wine of Rousillon, before men-
tioned, is known extensively in commerce as a rough strong
bodied red wine, and prized as such in the north of Europe, but
more so by the wine merchants of Paris, as affording them the
means of imparting strength, by mixing, to the poor tart wines
of the north of France. But we are told that this rough red
wine, if preserved carefully in the wood for fifteen or eighteen
years, becomes totally changed in character; that it assumes a
rich bright golden hue, and that this change of color is patiently
waited for by the large proprietors, as the sign of its having
acquired sufficient mellowness to bottle. In this state it has the
reputation of being one of the finest wines produced in
132
LETTERS ON THE


France: and, when left on ullage, either in the cask or in
bottle, it is not liable to suffer injury. Bousillon wine
of the year 1661, was lately said to be still in existence,
having continued to improve in quality to the last. These
are the extreme cases, of course, and I notice them as
such, to induce the growers of wine, to lay by in good years,
a portion of their produce in wood, to prove the effect of age
upon it. It is only by having old wane mellowed by keeping in
the cask, to compare with, that we shall by degrees attain the
experience necessary to determine how long our various growths
may be kept with advantage, before they are bottled for use.
But whether the period during which the wine is preserved in
the cask be long or short, it is in France recommended that so
long as it is so preserved, it should be racked into clean casks,
twice a year, that is before the rise of the sap in the spring, and
the coloring of the grapes in autumn, in order to free it from
the deposit it will constantly be found to have made. I have
adopted this practice here, as I believe, with the best results,
and I recommend it to the proprietors of vineyards, whenever
the quantity of the wine, and other circumstances will permit.
I do not consider it advisable to use finings, previous to each
racking, but until the wine became perfectly limpid, I should in
most cases fine once a year, at the commencement of summer,
for instance. After it has become quite bright, further fining
might be injurious, except when about to be bottled. I shall
subjoin, to complete this chapter, the translation of two short
extracts, from French works of great reputation,* premising
that at Bordeaux, as I am informed by an individual whose
authority is unquestionable, it is the practice to fine wines twice,
often three times, a year, and that by the adoption of this plan
they now succeed in giving to their wines the same degree of
mellowness in two or three years, as it formerly required seven
or eight years to impart.
“Not only is it necessary to rack off wines from their gross
lees previous to the vernal equinox which succeeds the vintage,
but to repeat the process previous to every equinox, so long as
it is preserved in casks.”
* Jullien Manuel du Sommelier, Cavolcau (Enologie Fran-
gaise.


“ However long the period that wine may have been allowed
to remain in the fermenting vat, when it is racked into the cask,
a portion of the lees will still be blended with it. Of this, the
greatest part is precipitated to the bottom, and a smaller por-
tion remains suspended in the fluid. These lees consist of that
part of the ferment which has not been decomposed during the
fermentation, probably even of the whole of the ferment,
and during hot weather, may render the wine liable to turn
sour; it is prudent then to separate them by racking. This
operation is always performed once or twice a year, with wines
of superior quality; at Bordeaux, finings are added previous to
each racking. Theory points out that there is still greater
reason to adopt this precaution with common wines, neverthe-
less in many wine districts it is dispensed with; at all events, it
is not usual to rack them unless immediately previous to their
being removed to a distance. Such is the practice in the de-
partments of the Basses-Alpes, Bouches-du-Rhone, Ardeche,
&c., &c., &c. In several of these wine districts it is a prevalent
belief that the lees in weak wines, act as a preservative, and
that such wines become more feeble and poor by being separated
from them; it would even appear that in la Meurthe and la
Marne, comparative experiments have been made, the results of
which confirm this opinion. AVe nevertheless remain perfectly
persuaded that the surest plan is to rack off.”
Upon the subject of racking off, it only remains for me to
remark that calm clear mild weather should be chosen for the
purpose; wines are seldom so bright in cloudy damp weather,
during the prevalence of violent gales of wind, or when there
are frosts.
LETTER XVII.
PREPARATION OF WINE FOR USE.
lx will not, perhaps, be thought superfluous that I should describe
in a short paper, for the benefit of the uninitiated, what methods
I would recommend, in order that colonial wine may be pro.
duced upon table in proper condition for use. As I conceive
that it will be rarely found expedient to use it in draught, I will
first describe the process of bottling, as I have seen it practiced,
and will afterwards point out what methods we have, upon trial.
134
LETTEItS ON TUE


found to succeed best when it is used on draught. We will sup-
pose the wine to have been sufficiently mellowed in the wood, by
age, that all harshness, bitterness, or acidity has been softened
down, and that the “bouquet” or fragrance is fully developed, in
short that it is ripe for bottling. If it has not been rendered
“ candle bright” by previous treatment, it is absolutely necessary
that this state of perfect limpidity should be produced without
loss of time. With this view, it is recommended by persons of
experience, that it should be first racked off into clean casks,
sufficiently sulphured, and then fined, as described in the pre-
ceding paper; the casks being mounted up on solid sup-
ports, as nearly as possible in a horizontal position, and never
inclined to the front. In a preceding paper I have remarked
upon the necessity of having casks of wine secured in such man-
ner that there shall be no risk of their being accidentally shaken,
this precaution is of still greater importance when the wine is
about to be put into bottles. If, at the expiration of two or
three weeks, supposing the wine to have been carefully pre-
served in a state of repose, and the weather not to have been
unfavourable, it has not attained perfect brightness, it is recom-
mended to rack it off again into other casks most carefully
cleansed, and slightly sulphured, taking the precaution in the
process of racking, to have it completely separated from such
lees as it may have deposited. In these fresh casks let it again
remain for two or three weeks; it can scarcely fail by the ex-
piration of this period to have attained the desired condition.
If, unfortunately, it should not have done so, it will probably be'
proper to fine it again, but with a different description of finings.
Should the wine after this still remain imperfectly cleared, it is
an almost certain symptom that it requires further mellowing in
the cask. In suitable weather, I have never experienced diffi-
culty in fining wine of sufficient age.
We will now suppose the requisite degree of brightness to
have been attained; let the utmost care, however, be taken
to have this point well ascertained. The existence of the least
cloudiness, or of the smallest portion of minute fibrous sub-
stances, is sufficient to render it unfit; it will, in such case, as-
suredly deposit more or less in bottle, and probably become
135
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


unfit to use, without being decanted. A sufficient number of bot-
tles should have been previously prepared, by carefully washing
them with small shot and warm water, and repeated rinsing iu
clean water until not the slightest stain or evil odour remains.
After washing, they require to be drained, by being placed in a
bottle rack, with their necks down, in such situation as not to be
exposed to dust. A little water left in a bottle, may, and fre-
quently does, give an unpleasant flavour to the whole of its
contents. To guard against this evil, it is advisable to pass a,
little wine through every bottle, just previous to its being used.
Another requisite is to be provided with a supply of new corks,,
all sound, and of the best quality. None are good which are
not soft and elastic to the touch, and free from holes or decayed
portions, commonly called “seediness;” if corks of the latter
description be used, much of the wine will be spoilt. Care, also,
must be taken that they have not become musty or mouldy by
having been kept in too damp a place. It is advisable to have
nets to hang them up in, about three or four gross together. In
every cellar there ought to be several bottling cocks; a suffi-
cient number of these should be prepared by boiling for ten or
fifteen minutes, and by wrapping a piece of paper round the
shank of each, just as it is about to be inserted in the cask. The
foregoing preparations having been made, the evening before
the wine is to be bottled, the cocks should be put into the casks.
In performing this, it is better to pierce a fresh hole with the
centre bit, about two inches from the lower chime, even although
there should have been one in the proper situation before.
Care must be taken not to shake the cask, and only to use the
instrument until a little of the wine begins to trickle through
the centre of the hole. The cock should then be inserted, if
possible, by a wrench with the hand, or, at all events, without
driving with the mallet; in doing this, observe that the cock is
open, so that the wine may run out as soon as it is fixed in the
cask, if the cock be put in closed, a quantity of air will escape
from it into the cask as soon as it is turned, which, passing up
through the wine, may disturb the lees, and render it foul. A
shallow tub should have been placed under the cask to catch the
wine, but as soon as a little has run off, the cock may be turned;


this wine will serve for steeping the corks, or for rinsing the
bottles. It is desirable to have the “nose” of the bottling cock
a little on one side, that the bottles may be held in the same ob-
lique position, and thus prevent the frothing of the wine as they
are filled. The next day, the weather being fine, and every
thing in preparation, the wine may be bottled. A spile hole
should first be made in the upper part of the cask, to admit air,
and sufficient wine drawn off through the cock to pass through
the bottles, and for the corks to be steeped in; a shallow tub,
about three inches deep, must also be placed under the chime of
the cask; the bottling may then be proceeded with.
Where the quantity of wine is considerable, and there is a
regular establishment, it is, I believe, usual to employ three per-
sons in the process, and they, I understand easily manage to,
bottle off 300 gallons (150 dozen) per day. The first man fills
the bottles, and he never turns the cock from the time he first
sets it running, until all be drawn off; to manage this, he has
always an empty bottle in hand, to replace the full one, a basket
being placed on either side of him, (one for the full, the other
for the empty bottles,) with twelve divisions, each to hold a
bottle. With practice he becomes so expert in shifting his hand,
that he never spills any of the wine, and by the sound he can
always tell when a bottle is sufficiently full, that is when it has
reached to within about two inches of the top. The secondman
is seated at a sort of bench, upon which is placed a vessel full of
corks in steep, and to which is attached a contrivance, usually
worked with the right foot, for compressing and softening the
end of every cork before it is inserted into the bottle. He has
a leather socket, called a “bottling boot,” strapped tightly
round just above his left knee, to hold the bottle he is corking,
and to catch the wine, in case the bottle should break. Having
the basket of bottles just filled at his right hand, he takes them
out in succession, fits a cork, the smaller end of which will barely
enter the neck, and having softened it with the instrument,
drives it quite home with a light bat. Observe that every cork
when tightly driven, should project an eighth of an inch beyond
the mouth of the bottle; it can thus be made to close the orifice
more perfectly, because the upper end will be a little flattened
137
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


out by the blows of the bat. When driven home, not more than
an inch of space should be left in the neck of the bottle, between
the cork and the wine. The third man is employed in carrying
off (a dozen basket in each hand) the wine as it is bottled; in
stowing it away in bins or in a pile, and in returning with the
baskets full of empty bottles. In stowing the wine it is usual
to invert the bottles so that no air bubbles may remain attached
to the corks, and then to bed them horizontally in a thin layer
of sand or saw-dust. When one layer is finished, a little more
saw-dust is sprinkled over it, to prevent the bottles from being
pressed against each other, and stout laths laid across to support
the next tier. In this manner it is usual to build them up to the
height of three or four feet, the laths between the different tiers
of bottles being the means of dividing the weight equally
amongst those below. When only one person is employed in
bottling, he first puts his corks in steep, and softens the ends of
a number of them with the machine, then, having provided him-
self with a supply of empty bottles on his right hand, he arranges
the shallow tub under the cock in such manner, that a bottle may
rest in it in a slightly inclined position, supported by having the
end of the cock just within the neck of the bottle. He then
turns the cock only so far as to give him time, whilst the bottle
under it is being filled, to cork the one which preceded it, place
it in the basket, which should be situated just behind him, and
take a fresh bottle in hand to replace the one under the cock.
He thus continues until his two baskets of one dozen each are
filled, he then stops the cock, and proceeds to stow them
away, and to return with a fresh supply of empty bottles. By
working constantly for twelve or fourteen hours, he may thus
contrive to bottle off from forty to fifty dozen. When the wine
is drawn off nearly to the level of the cock, the cask must be
very gently raised from behind, and supported, either by chocks
or by a stick with an iron fork, like a small stout pitch fork, at
each end. If the cask be large, the assistance of a second per-
son will be necessary, unless the cellar be provided with a sim.
pie instrument, not easily described without a figure, by means
of which, a single person with one hand, can raise into an in-
clined position, in the most gradual manner, a cask of large
138
LETTERS ON THE


dimensions. After the cask has been raised, the wine should be
examined, to ascertain if it continues to be in good condition,
and may be run off into bottles, gradually inclining the cask
more forward, so long as it continues to be unmixed with any
of the lees. As soon, however, as the least change is observed,
the bottling should be discontinued, and the remainder poured
off into a small keg, there to clear itself for immediate use.
To preserve bottled wine in good condition, it should be
allowed to remain undisturbed in a perfectly horizontal position,
that the corks may always be moistened with the wine, and that
the deposit, if there be any, may attach itself firmly to the under
side of the bottles. In this state, to have it in prime condition,
it ought to remain at least twelve months: and if, after that
time, it be transported to a distance, it should be allowed to rest
for several weeks before it is used. It is an almost universal
practice in France to cover the ends of the corks with wax; this
custom, I believe, is of no other use than to protect them from
the attacks of insects; it certainly cannot assist in retaining the
wine, because the latter dissolves it, by means of its alcohol, if
they come in contact with each other.
When it is proposed to use wine in draft, after having ren-
dered it perfectly bright, it is prudent, if the cask be large, first
to rack it off from its deposit, into several of smaller size, each
of which, should, of course, have been carefully purified and
sulphured. Then to insert a cock into the upper portion of the
head of one of them, to draw off the wine as it is required.
Each cask that is in draught should be provided with a long
taper bung, which can easily be taken out and made suffi-
ciently tight again; and a quantity of clean, hard, small sized
pebbles, (quartz pebbles are the best) sufficient to fill one of the
casks, should also be procured. In using the wine, it will be
advisable to draw off at one time all the wine required for the
day’s consumption, then the bung being taken out, to drop in
gently, a sufficient number of the pebbles to fill up the vacant
space so made, and to put it in again. By this method, with
ordinary care, a cask of light wine may be kept in draft,
without any sensible deterioration, until it be nearly all con-
sumed. The remainder may then be bottled, or put into a small


keg, according to its condition. Although a light wine may, in
this manner, be consumed in a family, without risk of its being •
spoiled by being on ullage, it is only the strong wines prepared
for the English market, which are thus to be treated with ad-
vantage. The lighter wines scarcely ever develop their flavor,
or their fragrance, to their full extent, until they have been a con-
siderable period in bottle. Until wine is produced in the colony
to a much greater extent than is now, unfortunately, the case, I
fear that Australian wines, in good condition for use, will rarely
be seen, except at the tables of the producers. People are apt
to forget, that a natural wine, unless it has been thoroughly
matured by being kept many years, so as to have been freed
from every principle which can have a tendency to excite fer-
mentation ; can never be removed over our rough roads without
being rendered altogether unfit to drink, until it has been
allowed time sufficient to re-establish itself. This period will be
longer or shorter, according to circumstances; it may be several
months, it can scarcely be less than two or three weeks. The
stronger wines, Sherry and Madeira, for instance, contain suffi-
cient spirit to counteract all tendency to ferment; any disturb-
ance of their lees, therefore, to which they may be subjected
by removal, will be purely mechanical, and a few days repose
will, consequently, in the majority of instances, be sufficient to
restore them. But the natural wine, not having been “ fortified”
by the addition of brandy, is in a different predicament, its state,
of disturbance will probably be chemical, as well as mechanical,
and unless sufficient timebe affordedfor it to subside,it will be vain
to form any opinion of its qualities. In receiving a cask of such
wine after a journey, the better plan will be to have it put up upon,
firm supports as soon as possible, and to put a spile in near the
bung, to allow the fixed air to escape, should any have been
evolved; then to let it remain quite undisturbed for twelve or
fifteen days. After this period, a little may be drawn off from a
spile hole, to be made in the upper part of one end, to ascertain
its condition, but on no account to commence its consumption,
until by time, or fining, it has become perfectly “ candle bright”
again.
140
LETTERS ON THE


LETTER XVIII.
DESCRIPTION OF CELLAR.
In a former paper 1 promised to describe a cellar more com-
plete inits design than the one there briefly mentioned. I propose,
therefore, to devote this, the last of the series, to a considera-
tion of the subject, cautioning the reader that I have not had so
much experience practically in the construction of this descrip-
tion of buildings, as with the majority of the details, upon which,
I have endeavoured to communicate information. The great
desiderata in the site and arrangement of a cellar for an exten-
sive vineyard, appear to be facility of access with the loads of
grapes to that portion of the building in which they are to be
crushed; immediate communication between this part and the
one in which the fermentation is to be conducted; and perfect
separation between this last and the cellars in which the wine of
preceding years is to be stored, the whole to be combined under
one roof, in such manner, that, without unnecessary sacrifice of
space, there may be sufficient room for the different requisite
-manipulations, free ventilation where it is required, and on the
other hand,perfect exclusion from the external air, and an equable
•temperature in those parts of the building where such conditions
are of importance.
With these objects in view, the most convenient site would
seem to be the side of a steep bank or hill (such in fact is the
description of site adopted at Camden) the declivity being, say
from one foot in five to one in ten ; and so circumstanced, that
a cart road can be formed without difficulty from the vineyard
to the upper side, or rather the upper end of the building. The
form I prefer for the ground plan, supposing the building to be
complete, and to be required for a very large extent of vineyard is
nearly that of the Greek cross, (see Plate 3, Fig.vii.)of which, the
centre limb A, I propose should consist of two floors, or rather a
floor over the cellar, and to be built with its length parallel to
the slope, or, in plain English, directly up and down hill. The
141
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


entrance to be at the upper end, the floor over the cellar, at this
end, being nearly flush with the natural level of the ground
As this is the portion of the building which will be the soonest
required, it may be first completed, leaving the construction of
the others until a later period. I will assume a length of from
sixty to seventy feet, with a breadth of thirty to thirty-five feet,
to comprise space sufficient in the area of the floor over the cel-
lar, for the different operations of the vintage, and if properly
husbanded, room for a very large quantity of wine, say from
twenty to thirty thousand gallons, in the cellar itself. In exca-
vating for this latter portion, it will be most convenient to com-
mence with the lower end, because a great part of the earth
may thus be removed down hill. Although it is desirable that a
height of at least eleven or twelve feet should be allowed from
the floor of the cellar, to the under side of the beams of the
floor above, it may be practicable, if the declivity be great to
obtain this depth, at the upper end, without commencing below
the level of the soil at the lower. In which case itys obvious
that only one half of the entire cubic space contained in the
cellar will require to be excavated, the soil which occupied this
portion, being banked up outside the lower half, as the walls are
built; so as when finished to render the whole cellar, for all pur-
poses of utility, as completely under ground, as if the entire
area had been excavated. Supposing such a building to be
built of stone 'or brick, the walls ought not to be less than
eighteen inches thick; and, a solid foundation for them having
been found, I would advise that the lower half should be com-
menced at the same time as the excavation, and be gradually
extended towards the upper end, as the latter is proceeded with,
care being taken that the mason or bricklayer always has his
“work racked back,” and not “toothed.” As I propose that a
large door-way should be left in each side-wall, about the centre
of its length, to serve as a communication with the other
portions of the building, which, when finished, will complete the
form of the cross above-mentioned, it may perhaps be more con-
venient to extend the walls, in the first instance, as far up
hill as the jambs of these door ways, and not to rack back until
the height of their lintels is attained. At; the bottom of the
142
LETTERS ON THE


lower end wall, near the centre, an opening should be left, closed
with a grating, to communicate with a drain, to be formed at
the commencement, and extending a sufficient distance down
hill, to project beyond the base of the embankment when com-
pleted. This drain may prove very serviceable, as well in car-
rying off moisture, as in providing for the escape of the carbonic
acid gas, in case it should occupy the cellar during the ferment-
ation ; the great weight of the latter, as we have seen in a for-
mer paper, rendering it more easy to expel it by means of open-
ings made at the lowest levels, than by any other methods.
The drain being completed, and a few feet in height of the
wall at the lower end finished, the earth of the excavation, as it
is brought out, should be placed against the outside of the latter ;
care should be taken to add it in thin layers, and to ram it
thoroughly, for the breadth of four or five feet, with properly
formed wooden rammers, shod with iron. This part of the busi-
ness must be carefully attended to, that there may be no danger
of an after settlement in the soil so embanked; which if not
carefully guarded against, might force in the wall. By proceed-
ing in this manner, the walls of the lower half of the cellar may
be completed by the time that the labourers have finished the
excavation of the upper end: and the wall of this half can then
be completed also, the door-ways above alluded to being bricked
up until required by the further extension of the building. In
carrying up this last portion of the walls, as they will be close to
a high bank of solid earth, I would recommend that a few inches
of space, sufficient to admit a rammer, should be left between
the wall and the bank, so that a little loose soil may be thrown
in from time to time, and made quite solid with the rammer as
the work is completed. Without this precaution, the security of
a high wall, built against a bank of earth, might be endangered,
during long continued rains. The walls of the under portion
being finished to the height of twelve feet: to support the floor,
stout beams should be thrown across, at short intervals, which,
for greater convenience, as the span is considerable, may be in
two lengths, scarfed in the middle; and, to render the floor
perfectly solid, should be supported by a row of stout uprights,
from the cellar below, down the centre, and parallel to its length.
143
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


The beams are to receive joists also framed at short intervals,
and these last battened over, to receive a floor of bricks or flags; a
counter ceiling having been previously formed of stout laths and
rough mortar, upon which is to be laid several inches thick of
dry saw-dust, so as to fill up the space between it and the
flagging. Above the floor, the walls may be again con-
tinued to the height of ten feet, but if of brick, with a sub-
stance diminished, say, to fourteen inches. In this upper story
a sufficient number of windows should be left to admit abundant
light and free ventilation; as well as a spacious door-way at the
end next the hill to receive the grapes when brought home to
be crushed; the whole to be surmounted with a carefully framed
roof, which, if the gable-ended form, which I prefer, be adopted,
should consist of about six pair of principal rafters, with king
and queen posts, purlines, &c. The tie beams, for greater con-
venience in obtaining the timber, to be scarfed in the middle,
and to be strengthened by diagonal horizontal braces, extending
from nearly the centre of the first tie beam, to the extremities of
the second, and from the ends of the second, to the centre of
the third, and thus to the other end. In cutting the rafters, I
think it desirable to allow for a considerable projection at the
eaves, as by this means, the rays of the mid-day sun are pre-
vented from acting upon the walls.
We shall now proceed to consider how the area of this ex-
tensive building may be most advantageously laid out; com-
mencing with the cellar. The great height allowed to this por-
tion is with the view to admit of the use of large vats or tuns.
The economy in the expense of construction, in the labour and
attention they require when full, in the loss of wine from evapo-
ration, but, chiefly in the space requisite for a given quantity of
wine when contained in them, being such, when compared with
ordinary casks, that no person possessing a large vineyard,
should omit to have them provided, if it be practicable without
too great an outlay. At the time the cellar at Camden was in
progress, not being able to procure either timber suitable for
such large vessels, or a workman conversant with their con-
struction, a more durable, but expensive, material for the vats
was substituted: viz., a compact, close grained sandstone*
144
LETTERS ON THE


impervious to moisture. These vats, of which I will not here enter
into a particular description, answer their purpose completely,
and require no trouble to preserve them in a fit state for use, a
few buckets of water with a brush being all that is necessary to
render them thoroughly clean after being emptied; and a coat
of thin white-wash to preserve them sweet until again required ;
besides which, they will probably endure without repairs for
generations. They are so constructed that wine can be pre-
served in them for an indefinite period, almost hermetically
sealed. Vats of masonry appear to have been frequently adopted
on large establishments in France, previous to the Revolution,
and are strongly recommended by Chaptal, from whose work the
idea of building them here was taken; but I cannot discover
that they are now to be met with in Europe. Ours are of two
sizes, which contain respectively, 900 and 1,700 gallons; and we
use them, as well to ferment in, as to store the wine in after-
wards. But although, from the experience acquired in making
those above mentioned, I could now undertake to construct rats
of stone, equally as good, at far less cost, I apprehend that ves-
sels of wood, will, in most cases, be more convenient to adopt;
I shall, therefore, confine myself to some account of their form
and construction.
In the first place, I propose that they should be erected
upon solid platforms, at least two feet six inches to three feet
high from the floor of the cellar, in order that common casks
may be filled from them by simply turning a cock. Those of
brick, supported upon arches, are the best, after these stone; but
timber may also be used, although not so suitable for the pur-
pose. These platforms may be erected all round the cellar, ex-
cepting in the centre of the side walls, where a vacant space
should be left opposite to each of the large door-ways above-
mentioned, which are to lead to the other wings of the cellar;
besides sufficient room for a stair to communicate with the floor
above. They may be built from seven to eight feet broad at the
sides of the building, and from five feet six inches, to six feet at
the ends. In this manner, room sufficient may be found for six-
teen vats, namely, twelve (six on each side) to contain from 1500
to 2000 gallons each, and four from 800 or 900 to 1200 gallons.
z.
145
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


The vats or tons of the larger size should be built of the best
two-inch oak, unless some colonial timber should be ascertained
to bo equally suitable for the purpose. The smaller size may be
built of timber one inch and a half in thickness. The most
convenient form, I apprehend to be that of a stout cask, such as
a rum puncheon, for instance, the diameter at the bung and the
length being about equal A length of about eight feet inside
measurement, with a similar diameter in the middle, will, after
allowing for the necessary diminution towards the ends, afford a
capacity of about 2000 gallons. Those of six to seven feet, with
corresponding diameters, from 900 or 1000 gallons, to 1200.
These large tuns are intended to be mounted up on their sides in
the position usual with common casks. They are to be suffi-
ciently bound with stout iron hoops, and to have their heads
Strengthened by pieces of scantling, crossing them at right
angles to the joints. Each is to be provided with a man hole, at
the bottom of the outermost end, to which is to be fitted a door
made cither to slide in grooves, and by means of thumb
screws, fixed closely to the opening, as in Germany, or on hinges,
opening inwards, and secured by a cross bar of wood on the out-
side, as in France; each method appearing to be effectual in
preventing leakage when the vessel is full. This aperture, which
need not exceed fourteen inches in height, by ten inches in width,
is to be used to admit a man into the interior of the vessel to
clean it out when requisite. Another opening, of several inches
diameter, is to be made in the usual place for the bung-hole. In
the tuns of the largest size above mentioned, supposing the cel-
lar to be twelve feet high, and the platform three feet, this
aperture will be within a few inches of the under side of the
floor above, through which it is proposed that a small opening
should be left, corresponding with the one in the tun. The com-
munication will be rendered more complete by having a stout
tube or pipe of wood, with a bore of not less than three inches in
diameter, fitted to the aperture in the tun, and of sufficient
length to project above the level of the upper floor. The tube
will, of course, be made the means of conveying the must into
the tun, as well as of carrying up the caibouic acid gas, during
the violent fermentation, into the apartment above, where it can


be at once freely diluted with the atmospheric air. A stout tap,
with a bore of one inch and a half, driven into the outer head,
about two inches above the lower part of the chime, will be all
that is requisite to complete the vessel. If we suppose it to have
been built of well seasoned wood, and secured in its proper posi-
tion upon the platform, by means of a cradle of stout timber, with
room sufficient for a workman to pass between it and the wall,
as well as the neighbouring vessels, so as to have access to every
part in the event of leakage, it may be considered as being in a
fit state for use. In France, for many years past, tuns of this
description (termed in French foudres to distinguish them from
the open fermenting vats cures) have been gradually coming
into use amongst the larger proprietors of vineyards. They
are frequently built with a capacity of four thousand gallons.
In a vessel of this size, the annual loss from evaporation is said
not to exceed one per cent; in ordinary casks it is rarely less
than tour, and sometimes as much as eight or ten per cent. Be-
sides, a little calculation will show, that although staves of double
the ordinary substance, aro to be used in the large tun ot two
thousand gallons; the number of cubic feet of wood requisite
for its construction, will be little more than half the quantity
required for twenty casks of one hundred gallons each. In hoops,
the saving will be still greater, so will the amount of labour in
building it, if the cooper has had experience in this branch of his
business. But the greatest saving is in cellar room, and were no
other advantages to be derivedfrom the adoption of vessels of large
capacity, this circumstance alone should determine us in their
favor. It is exceedingly inconvenient in the management of the
wine in the cellar to have one tier of casks stowed over another;
nothing but absolute necessity should induce this method to be
adopted. If ordinary casks, then, are used, it is necessary to have
room for them in a single tier, and consequently an immense extent
of cellarage when the crop is large. Another advantage will be
experienced in the operation of racking. This process is pi r-
formed with great ease, by means of the bellows and hose, but
as the former will require to be worked in the apartment above,
the tube above-mentioned to insert into the bung-hole, and to
reach to the level of the floor of the tun, will bo requisite


Supposing the necessary apparatus to he provided, and it is all
very simple, a man would transfer the contents of one large vat
into another in little more than three hours. Some difference of
opinion has been expressed by practical men with respect to the
comparative effect produced by vessels of large capacity, in
bringing wine to maturity. I think it probable that a generous
wine will ripen more rapidly, at all events after the first year, in
small vessels; hut that the same description of wine, stored, for
a considerable number of years, in large tuns, would ultimately
become the best. I should imagine that for the lighter descrip-
tions of wine, the latter must always be preferable. Ido not
consider it expedient to keep wine stored in ordinary casks in
the same cellar that contains the large tuns, although, in case of
necessity, there would be room for a row of casks. It is a better
plan to devote an adjoining cellar to this purpose.
The foregoing pages, I trust, will have given the reader a
general idea of the proposed arrangement of the cellar portion
of that part of the building marked A. I shall now, therefore,
proceed to describe the floor above. In the centre of this floor
it will be necessary to have a large trap, of six feet square, closed
by folding doors; over which, from the timbers of the roof,
should be suspended a proper tackle and fall, with some descrip-
tion of crane, or windlass, connected with it, to hoist up and
lower down casks between this floor and the one beneath. Near
the middle of its length, also, but close to a side wall, will be the
most convenient position for the stair of communication. This,
too, should be closed by folding doors. Exactly over the centre
of each of the large tuns, should be left the openings mentioned
in a foregoing page. They may be made six inches square,
trimmed with hard wood, and lined with Clarence River or New
Zealand pine, foreign oak, or other clean working wood, not
containing astringent sap, or resin. To each a close fitting lid
should be provided, capable of being locked.
The screw press which requires to be framed of very
stout timbers, may be so put together, without con-
nexion with the building, as to be taken to pieces and
set up again, without much labour, in a different posi-
tion. However, as the one I have in view, occupies with its
148
LETTERS OX THE


ground frame, a horizontal space of more than ten feet square,
the end opposite to the entrance appears to be the the most con-
venient position for it; in fact, just over the middle of the first
girder from that end, having one of the supports from the cellar
below, as before described, directly under the centre of the; box
or trough. Without a corresponding plan or sketch, it will be
useless to trouble the reader with the description of the press we
have adopted. It is of perfectly simple construction; possessing
immense power, the frame is of corresponding strength; it an-
swers its purpose effectually. The treading box has been before
described. It is convenient to have it fixed upon a strong frame
or tressel, about four feet or four feet six inches high, in such
manner, that the gratings being taken out, to diminish the
weight, the whole of the rest can be lifted with the tressel, by
five or six men, and removed as occasion may require, to any
part of the floor. The great height of the tressel or frame, will
prove to be convenient in practice whenever it is considered
advisable to separate the must from a portion of its ferment
previous to the commencement of the fermentation, as is de-
scribed at page 107. For instance, supposing a vat of the capa-
city of 1500 or 2000 gallons is to be filled with must, and that
the process just alluded to is to be adopted; let casks sufficient
to contain the entire quantity be ranged, with their heads out,
as near as convenient to the opening in the floor which leads to
the tun beneath. Lei a broad tub, to contain forty or fifty gal-
lons, be placed under the spout of the treading box, and be
raised upon some description of temporary support, suffi-
ciently high from the floor to place its bottom nearly upon the
same level as the tops of the casks ; and let a tap of size large
enough to suit the wooden tube attached to the hose (see Page
112) be fixed in it a few inches from the bottom. As fast as the
tub receives the must, (which should be freed from the seeds and
hulls by draining through a basket, containing a little clean
straw) from the treadlng-box, it can be made to flow at pleasure,
by means of the tap and hose, into each of the casks in succes-
sion, until all be full; and when the proper moment for separ-
ating it from the ferment has arrived, each cask full can be
drawn off into the tun below, by another hose, until all arc
149
CULTIVATION OF THE VINE.


emptied. The attention of one man is sufficient to carry on this
process, even when two thousand gallons or more of must are
expressed in one day. When it is not judged expedient to
separate the must from any portion of its ferment, the use
of the casks will, of course, be dispensed with, and the hose
be made to communicate direct from the tub under the treading-
box to the tun. A large bottle rack, to contain empty bottles,
is the only other addition I have to suggest to the arrangements
upon this floor, supposing the further extension of the cellar be
contemplated. But as the one beneath can at all times be kept
quite distinct by being locked, the upper floor can be made to
serve as a convenient cooperage. The remaining wings of the
cellar may be added or not, according to the views of the pro-
prietor ; but if the outlay for this purpose be considered inex-
pedient, the upper floor of the part I have just been describing,
may, in such case, be made to serve as a fermenting cellar.
With this view it will be requisite to provide a sufficient number
of fermenting vats or tuns, to be ranged round the walls. Whe-
ther the open vats or the tuns be preferred, it will be desirable
that neither should exceed six feet elevation from the floor: be-
cause it would probably become exceedingly inconvenient to
have the treading-box raised to a greater height than this, and
were the bottom of the latter not to be raised as high as the top
of the fermenting vessels, it would no longer be practicable to fill
them by means of the hose, and much additional labour would be
entailed. In determining the number of fermenting vessels re-
quisite, it should be remembered that each may be used to fer-
ment three or four successive batches of wine in the same season,
and that as fast as each batch passes from the tumultuous stage
of fermentation, it can be drawn off into the tuns beneath.
I will now proceed to describe the general form and dispo-
sition of the two wings, commencing with the one marked B.
This part is intended for the storing of wine after it has passed
its first or second year, either in ordinary casks, or, as we have
just seen, more economically in large tuns. Supposing the area
allotted to it, to be 72 feet by 27, sufficient horizontal space
would be afforded for sixteen tuns of 2000 gallons each, in two
rows; or about seventy-four or seventy-six casks, of 100 gallons
150
LETTERS ON THE


each, in four rows; in either case, with ample room for every
necessary operation connected with the management of the wine.
If the large vessels are to be employed, it will, however, be
necessary to have the walls of the cellar twelve feet high;
but, for ordinary casks, seven feet six inches or eight
feet will be sufficient. The wing marked Cis supposed
to be intended for the bottling department ; that is to
contain two rows of casks, (from thirty to thirty-two)
in the middle, in process of preparation for bottling, the
bins in two tiers, along the side walls. Supposing this wing
to be of similar length to the other, there would be room to stow
from 3,600 to 4000 dozen (7000 to 8000 gallons) a larger quan-
tity of bottled wine than we can hope to find in one grower’s
cellar, at least in our generation. Wine bins are most conve-
niently constructed of brick, laid in good roman cement. From
thirty-eight to forty-two inches is sufficient space to contain one
dozen bottles laid transversely, and thirty-six to thirty-eight
inches, affords breadth sufficient for four rows endwise, the bot-
tles being placed neck to neck : thus four dozen will compose
one tier. In height, they will occupy less room, because the
bottles in each succeeding tier, are stowed opposite to the inter-
vals in the layer below. It will not be prudent to exceed twelve
tiers in height: these will not require more than thirty-six
inches. Therefore, bins three feet six inches long, three feet
two inches broad, and three feet high, may be assumed to be a
convenient size; each will contain forty-eight dozen—the proba-
ble produce of clear wine from a cask of one hundred gallons.
A height of seven feet six inches will be amply sufficient for two
tiers of bins, the bottom of the lower one being raised from the
level of the floor, by the thickness of one brick. In construct-
ing them, the whole of the partitions should first be built four
and a half inches, or half brick, thick, each brick being well
soaked in water, and carefully bedded in cement. As soon as
these are carried up to the required height, (three feet to three
feet three inches) very flat arches of bricks, placed edge to edge
must be thrown across between the partitions, and filled up at
the spandrils with fragments of brick, bedded in cement, and
smoothed over with the trowel, to obtain level floors for the


upper range of bins. A rise of two or three inches will be suffi-
cient to render these arches, if laid in good cement, perfectly
capable of supporting the weight of the wine to be stowed over
them. Each of the wings, B. and C., are designed to have a
separate entrance door at the opposite extremity to their point
of junction with the centre. These separate entrances should
have each a vaulted porch, with an outer door, so as, in a great
degree, to prevent the access of the external air to the cellars.
I propose that the wall-plates of the two wings should be laid at
the same level, and consequently that the floor of the wing B.
should be sunk four feet deeper than the floor of C., in the event
of the former being occupied by large tuns. It is intended that
they should have rough ceilings, covered a foot thick with saw-
dust, or light dry earth, to intervene between them and their
roofs. And that the earth excavated from them, should be
banked up outside, up to the level of the ceiling. A vaulted
roof of brick, plastered with cement, and covered to the depth
of two or three feet, with earth, would form the most perfect
covering for a cellar, but this plan would involve great expense.
The suggestions which I have thrown out in the foregoing
pages, will probably prove serviceable to those who meditate the
cultivation of vineyards on a large scale: one or two additional
observations may perhaps be acceptable. Large open vats to
ferment in, even when provided with covers, are objected to by
many French cultivators, because a considerable expense is in-
curred in constructing vessels which are only serviceable during
two or three weeks of each year; whilst, by substituting tuns
built in the form of common casks, as above described, it is only
necessary to be provided with two or three over the number
requisite to contain the entire crop after the wine is made, as
they serve to store the wine in afterwards. The only substan-
tial objection to the latter description of vessel, appears to be,
when it is required for the manufacture of red wine ; because it
is very difficult to fit the sort of false lid, described at page 110,
which is used to keep the head of the skins beneath the surface
of the fermenting wine. A good supply of pure water is an
almost indispensable requisite in the vicinity of a cellar. Should
no spring or well be easily accessible, it will be advisable to
152
LETTERS ON THE


construct a tank, of brick and cement, to receive the water,
which, by means of gutters and pipes, may be collected from the
roof. I can testify by experience, that by such means an ample
supply of excellent water may be provided even in the driest
seasons.
J'JNIS.
Statham & Forster, Printers, Lower George-strect, Sydney.


RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY W. A. DUNCAN,
King-street, East.
An ESSAY ON THE MAKING OF WINE, collected from
Rozier, Gay Lussac, Chaptal, Olivier, Fabbroni, and all the
best authorities. Price Is.
A PRACTICAL TREATISE on the culture of the Olive-
tree, from the best authorities Ancient and Modern. Price 6d.
“ Olea prima omnium arborum est.”
Columella,
PERSONS who are desirous to be supplied with Vine Cuttings
of the best varieties for Wine and for the Table, arc in-
formed that they may be obtained from the Camden Vineyard,
at the following prices:
Fo " 6) t sau ■>-
Pineau Gris, from Burgundy
Ditto 6 GCape
Carbenet Sauvignon ) from
Malbec
20s. per 1000
Pineau blano
Meslier blanc
Scyras
Riesling
Raisin vert
Aucarot
Muscat Noir
.gris
rouge
blanc
| Bordeaux
Burgundy and
Champagne
Hermitage
Rhine
Ditto
Landes
30s. per 1000
40s. per 1000
And a variety of other excellent sorts, as well for the Table as
for Wine, ss. per 100.
Rooted plants of the greater part of the foregoing, may be
had at the additional charge of 2s. per 100.
The Cuttings will be formed out of the proper description
of wood, 18 inches in length, and neatly packed in bundles of
200 in each. Early application, in writing, addressed to the
Overseer, at Camden, is requested, as a limited number only of
some of the best sorts can be furnished.
Parties desirous of having Cuttings delivered in Sydney,
can have them forwarded at the additional charge of one
shilling per bundle of 200, or two shillings per 1000.
N. B.—A large collection of choice Fruit-trees, at from 12s.
to 30s. per dozen: and 80s. to 60s. per dozen for the Orange
Tribe Worked; and a great variety of useful and ornamental
Trees, shrubs, and Flowering Plants, may be had upon appli-
cation to the Gardener at Camden.


wmis ipm©s>iEs®‘a , ©iEg s is®ss3F.&Es'sr
©IF ©©®3JsA©o
THIS COMPANY, ESTABLISHED in 1838, with a Capital
of Two Million Francs, (.£'80,000), was founded for the
express purpose of exporting Cognac Brandy in its greatest
purity; the body of Shareholders including many of the British
Importers, but being chiefly Growers of the Wine strictly within
that particular portion of country immediately surrounding the
town of Cognac, known to produce that peculiar quality of Grape
from which results the full body, softness, general excellence,
and superiority, distinguishing the Brandy of that part of France.
It is a fact, well known to those upon the spot, and which
ought to be generally known, that many of the chief Exporters
of Brandy from Cognac—whatever profession they may make to
the contrary—have been of late years in the habit of travelling
out of that district of country producing the fine qualities above
described; and have purchased largely of the cheaper and infe-
rior products of other parts, to mix with, or ship in lieu of. Genuine
Cognac, for the supply of the British and other foreign markets;
relying, for their justification, upon the established reputation of
the brands.
The full knowledge of this practice, and the importance of
correcting the evil of such a state of things, were the considera-
tions which mainly led to the establishment of the Vinetaud
Pkopkietoks’ Company ; and it was laid down as a fundamental
law, embodied in the Deed in which the Company was enrolled,
that no Brandy should be shipped but that grown within the
defined district producing all the best qualities; which district was
accurately described in a map that forms part of the Company’s
records. That regulation has been rigidly adhered to; and no
shipments ever have been, or ever will be, made, other than of
the fine growths in question. Hence the high reputation of the
Company’s Brandy, and the rapid progress of their business, far
exceeding that of any establishment in existence; and, as evidence
of the reasonableness of their expectation of a further great ex-
tension of their trade, they boldly invite a test of its quality, by
comparison with all others; in no way apprehensive of the result.
The Company’s Brandy, which uniformly bears their peculiar
brand, as given below, is to be obtained from the Importers of
the chief ports of the United Kingdom, on equitable terms; and
combining, as the Establishment docs, in its Proprietary, many
highly respectable British Subjects, with the Growers of all the
finest qualities of Cognac—to the entire exclusion of inferior
cultivators or their products—the Vinetaud Propiuetoiis’ Com-
pany are justified in looking forward with lull confidence, to the
support of the consumers of Brandy throughout the British
Colonial Possessions.
lirutid Mark.
iiou-.*e Mark.
,jl*evar D
.V
.V
c
a
H
COGNAC. 2
Queen’s Place, June 30,1844.
For further particulars apply to
844. W. M'DONI.I.L.


®SS©ISASS©3I IL®lKn®©3Kr.
rnHE ROYAL BANK OF AUSTRALIA, HEREBY GIVE
J. NOTICE, that they will sell their Drafts, or Scotch Bank
acceptances, payable in London, at two per cent.
J. P. ROBINSON,
Resident Director.
Office, No. 2, Church Hill.
Royal bank of Australia.—office, n O . 2, church
Hill, Sydney, and 2, Moorgate-street, Lothbury, London.
Capital, One Million.
DißEcxons—Benjamin Boyd, Esq., Chairman; John W.
Sutherland, Esq., Vice-Chairman ; Thomas Meux, Esq.; George
Webster, Esq.; Alexander Cockburn, Esq.; Mark Boyd, Esq.;
William P. Crawford, Esq.; John Connell, Esq.; John Mitchell,
Esq.; and J. P. Robinson, Esq.
Standing Counsel Peter Laurie, Esq.
Solicitous —Messrs. Parken and Webster, 13, New Boswell
Court; and Messrs. Johnston and Farquhar, 32, New Broad-
street.
Managed.— George Henry Wray, Esq.
Bankers Union Bank of London.
Resident Director. —J. P. Robinson, Esq.
Agent at Hobart Town Mr. Richard Webb.
Agent at Launceston Mr. Thomas Crauford.
Agent at Port Phillip. —Mr. Robert Fennell.
*** Grant Bills upon London, Hobart Town, Launceston, and
Port Phillip.
<& aKK&ssa&t ~
LETTER-PRESS AND COPPER-PLATE PRINTERS,
AT THE OFFICE OF THE
“AUSTRALIAN DAILY JOURNAL,”
No. 575, LOWER OEOROE-STBEET,
SYDNEY.
BOOKS of every description Printed in a style equal to
Works published in Great Britain.
JOB WORK—such as Catalogues, Broadsides, Hand-bills,
Bill-heads, Cards, Cheque and Receipt Books, and Blank Forms
of every kind, —executed in a manner not to be excelled in the
Colony, either as respects the style or the price.
''l'Y • dJa
STATIONER, BOOKBINDER,
AND ACCOUNT-BOOK MAKER;
No. COO, LOWER GEORGE.STREET.






