

THE LEAGUE AND SOUMi INOAGi.M^NT
THE AUSTRALASIA N COION IBS.
MVX ' ' TT I v January, One Thousand Eight Hundred a.nct Fifty-One.
\\A\ QC*n the year One Thousand Eignt Hundred and Forty, by an Order in
- V yA, f*’- - _ WAX Connell, tte practice <ft rransporling Convicts to New Booth Wales was abandoned by the
Wei- ■ i/ I "'"si \\\ Crown: ft) ft fVW 3, by divers promises the Government of Great Britain engaged
/f|C / I V-*y\. , \A\ ino ' ( o send Convicts.from the United Kingdom to New Soutit Wales, Now Zealand Victoria
J/\ \ryy\ \ \\ or King George’s sound. <4W A»Ut? Vfao. by an Actof the British Parliament Ti-AtA
td Urw V l)lV \ . v\\ to Austell;! was positively prohibited. atl& l»h*tcaS. Licutcnant-
h) H X \ \A I Governor r»N<soN, «n the year One Thousand Field Huixlsed and Forty Seven declared to the*
nt u;.« V(|j\ V' \Y'‘- V \1 Colonists of Van Otcman’s Land Her Majesty's mosl%wcioij« purpose that Transportation to" *
M/Wwl I 'A I that l i Ul, ‘ d should br discontinued, ftftb aihcToWhy t.C Van Oilman's Land in*
]y I XVI At m' ■\ \ I SS?f deeply injured by the pouring Hi of enormous mafee? of .fwisbbrted Offenders. Stlt 6
\ / J I Wnf ir<»ai3 divers and repeated attempts have beCb mack: to detiai i front t.hejkUer and snirit
’ Q.l y R\ y I .?* ,licse promises. WIKX'CEIJJ,the avowed object of Her .f/ tiefty' Secieiarvof State
,} Xi \7H 'i] \ JJ is to transfuse the convicts disembarked in Van Dicuum’s band through the Australasian
A A | \ iff ) m' '“■(I Colonics, aiid thus to evade the spiritof the itrontise and/..t of rartiiimeof so mode 2tW it
\ Ik/ \ \l » Ml U>!)«Vfdo,larae tracts of land have been purchased by (he Colonists from the Crown
I. 7k \ v ,1 f 1 /Jf main rriilirons of capita! invested with improvements; and many thousands of Her Maiestv’s
% yf \ /I Ml /II subjects have sc tiled m Australasia, on the picked faith of the down, not to disturb ’their
I' y \ \ \i f\ I hyUte dxtO X»bcW&.#, Hie native Australa/an^e
\% \ j MfJ j// J 8 ''X F>vi> e »ps>of British subjects, and to tlie sympathy and
W I' \ vk/’m * Mf t pro.«,u(sn of he Ornish nation, sltn WIJCVC many and varied efforts have been
1 1 W m 'Jw iff made to h«hie--. Ilet Ministers and the British Parliament, to terminate the practice of
it X V\ JvMR -*\JS 1 ransportalion to «‘o<r < olouies, hut wUhonl success,, iiOftl.ihctClOrC , the n f
.1 ill \\B2wiy tvinmes, in confcretx-e assembled, So dftiate , ihrfr Kta
Ft )/ S 'ff Lngagcntent, to the effect following; 5 .
E\* ili/ I '.-Jw ftl.—lhat 'hey engage not to cuniloy any persons hereafter arriving uniter sentence of
|r I ■ 1 Tituisporwtion tot: d ime commiUecMft Europe.
\ I/ J.I 7t/v ‘Jncl.“*That they will use all the powers they poascas-official, electoral, and leoislaUve to
iFXft a prevent the establishincnt of English prisons, ordJcnat seUlements within their hounds;
r \ \ ,/■ ■*■ lluidhey will refuse nssent to any projects to facilitate the administration .of such
NXy pcna.l sysiwma, and that they will seek the rqKtal of all regulations, and the removal of
+ i 4 ; v ail establishments tor that purpose,
And'lastly, they solemnly engage with each other to support by their advice, their money and
CjV .* 1 heir counlenanoe,, alt who may suffer in the lawful promotion of this cause y
. oflr,c^s of lhe Kew S()U,h Wales Branch of the Auslralaslatl League,
ins'
N V y
v 'VA
./« u
LETTEE OF INSTRUCTIONS,
ISSUED BY THE
EXECUTIVE BOARD OF THE AUSTRALASIAN LEAGUE,
TO THE
LONDON DELEGATES
W tljc Colonics of &ustvalasia t
PURSUANT TO RESOLUTION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE LEAGUE,
HELD IN THE CITY OF SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
DURING THE MONTHS OF APRIL AND MAY, 1851.
UllJWtf t
PRINTED BY T. DANIEL, YORK. STREET
OPPOSITE THE WESLEYAN CENTENARY CHAPEL.
1851


Office of the Australasian League,
Sydney, May 4th, 1851.
Gentlemen, —
The Conference of the Australasian League, held in the City of Sydney, New South Wales, during the month of April,
and terminating the third May, 1851, having resolved, “That the Executive Board issue a Letter of Instructions to the
“ London Delegates, of the several Colonies of Australasia, in the name of the Conference, to he signed by the President of
“ the Australasian League”,—we propose, by way of preface, to state briefly the origin and present position of that great
Association, which you have been appointed to represent; the relation of the various bodies to each other, of which it is
composed,—the mode of action which it is intended to adopt,—and the duties confided to your intelligence and zeal, as
Delegates of the Australasian Colonies.
First, as to the origin of the Australasian League. You are aware that the Colonies of this Hemisphere
have been intensely agitated by the claim of Great Britain to collect, at pleasure, in their vicinity, or to
disperse within their several bounds, the criminals of the British Empire, wherever employers, influenced by personal
considerations, might be disposed to receive them. In some instances, the entire population have opposed the influx of
Criminals, with a spirit and an unanimity worthy of their British Origin, Such has been the case at South Australia and
New Zealand. In New South Wales, all, excepting a small minority of the employers of labour, and those chiefly flock-
masters, have strenuously resisted direct Transportation. In the Colony of Victoria, the feeling against it has been still
more intense and prevailing. In Van Diemen’s Land, the opposition has been marked by a perseverance and an earnestness
almost without example. Nor shall we mislead you if we assert, that the Advocates of Transportation, in the Australasian
Colonies, do not amount to one-tenth of the entire population ; and even this small proportion, for the most part avow, that
their views are determined by the labour question alone.
An analysis of public opinion would indicate, that, in proportion to the pressure of domestic claims, and of
religious responsibility, is the opposition to the continuance to Transportation. On this point, however, it is scarcely
necessary to insist. The people of Great Britain need not ne told that Ministers of every religious persuasion, and parents
of every rank, feel that no earthly consideration can, or ought to, reconcile them, to expose their families, or their flocks, to
the contagion of crime. It may, perhaps, be conceded, that a few indvlduals believe that Transportation is beneficial to the
criminal population of Great Britain, and are, therefore, willing to risk the moral safety of their families, and the honor
of their country. As human nature is constituted, however, you will not expect that a large number of Colonists share these
benevolent views.
It may be proper to remind you, that the Colonies have separately remonstrated with the British Government, upon
the subject of Transportation. The people of Van Diemen’s Land, during six years, addressed Petitions and Memorials,
without number, to Her Majesty and the Parliament. As Ministers of religion, as parents, as natives of the Colony, they
have reiterated both their complaints, and their prayers. Nothing, which it was possible to have accomplished by direct
appeals to the justice of British authorites, has been neglected ; and their fellow Colonists of this Hemisphere have beheld
them not only with pity, but with admiration. They have increased their efforts, in proportion to the oppression with which
it has been attempted to crush them.
The Inhabitants of New South Wales have acted with no less resolution, —some few persons, indeed, allured by
fallacious promises of pecuniary benefit, were, for a moment, induced to favor the projects of the Minister ; but the popular
voice has been decided, and has prevailed.
We have much pleasure in calling your attention to a series of public demonstrations, spreading over several years.
Their history is concisely stated in the Petition to the Legislative Council, adopted at the great Public Meeting, held in
Sydney on the 16th September, 1850. The published Report of the Proceedings of the late New South Wales Association,
formed at this Meeting, and since dissolved, by union with the Australasian League, will also be found to contain many most
valuable details.
The abatement of popular opposition on this question we believe to be utterly impossible ; and we refer you with
great satisfaction, to the letter of the Lord Bishop of Sydney, in proof, that the moral interests of this community can
never be reconciled to the system of Transportation, in any form whatever.
It is scarcely necessary to refer you to the petitions and memorials of South Australia, and New Zealand, on this
subject. Originally constituted under the sanction of specific engagements, to secure them from direct transportation, they
have felt themselves to be beyond the reach of convictism, excepting in its remoter consequences.
These appeals to the British Government have been attended with no satisfactory results.
In 1846 and 1847, Her Majesty’s Ministers indicated a total change in the penal policy of the Empire. It does not belong
to us to examine the changes proposed, except in their relation to the Australasian Colonies. The causes of opposition
to these projects are apparent, and may be stated once for all. It is sufficiently obvious, that the reasons which induce Great
Britain to expatriate offenders, are precisely those which influence the Colonies in rejecting them. In the reformatory plans
of theoretical benevolence, the Colonists have, of course, no confidence whatever. They believe that the instances in which
prisoners turn out, in the Colonies, to be good men, are precisely those in which they never were bad men, —Instances in
which crime has been rather accidental than habitual. In such cases, they believe, whatever State purposes may be answered
by imprisonment, the prisoner is, on the whole, injured by its discipline ; and thus, by ascertaining how many of those
transported are desirable members of Society, it will be possible, for Her Majesty’s Ministers, to reckon, beforehand, how
far they would be acceptable in this Hemisphere. In the official Address of the League, to the people of Great Britain, these
points are sufficiently explained.
The Australasian League is an Association formed to secure the abolition of Transportation, to the Australasian
Colonies. It originates in a sense of helplessness under the pressure of Imperial injustice, so long as a single Colony should
struggle alone. It was mooted by the Inhabitants of Van Diemen’s Land, on the arrival, in their Colony, of the speech of
Earl Grey, in the House of Lords, delivered the 12th of April, 1850, on the Prisons’ Bill.
London Delegates of the several Colonies of Australasia.


You will perceive, that his Lordship denied any pledge to have been given, on behalf of the Crown, to the
Inhabitants of Van Diemen’s Land, to stop Transportation to that Colony, and avowed a determination to disregard their
remonstrances and petitions.
Upon this the Colonists felt, that all reliance on Her Majesty’s Secretary of State was at an end; and that it became
them, either to yield to an irresistible fate, or to call to their aid their fellow-Countrymeu, who were witnesses of
their sufferings, and who were likely to share in the results of this continued oppression.
That a promise was made, to discontinue the sending of convicts to Van Diemen’s Land, is beyond all doubt; and its
solemn repudiation has inflicted serious damage on that confidence, with which such pledges are usually regarded.
We deem it right to direct your special attention to this part of the Colonial case:—
By reference to the Speeches of Earl Grey, and others of Her Majesty’s Ministers, you will observe, that they protest
against penal Colonization, or the collection of large numbers of convicts in any single Country. They assert, that wherever
the Convict element is perceptible, it is injurious ; and that wherever it is prevalent, it is destructive.—You will not forget
that it was in discussing the condition of Van Diemen’s Land that these sentiments were expressed ; and that, only four years
ago, Earl Grey himself declared, “ that while to the Mother Country the system had been expensive, to that Colony it had
“ been absolute ruin.”
The following is the chain of evidence demonstrating the fact, that Her Majesty’s Government has been pledged to
discontinue Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land :
Ist: —Earl Grey broke up the Establishment of North Australia, planned by his predecessor, because it was in
opposition to the views which he entertained, in reference to the concentration of Criminals.
2nd :—He announced, in the House of Lords, “ that the Government had resolved to make a change in the Penal
“ Policy of the Country, which amounted to nothing less than the total abolition of Transportation.”
3rd: —This change is described in an official letter, addressed by Sir George Grey to Earl Grey, in which it is stated,
“ that to send large numbers of Convicts, collectively, though they were to become free on their arrival, would only be to
“ perpetuate the evils of the existing systemand “ that the only restriction on the liberty of persons, holding a pardon,
“ should, in future, be, their not remaining in the Country “ and that the only character, in which they would appear in
“ the Colonies, should be as Emigrants.”
It was with this letter that Lord Grey expressed his concurrence, in 1847, asserting, at the same time, that the views
it expressed were confirmed by despatches received from the Lieutenant-Governor of Van Diemen’s Land, (the late Sir
Eardley Wilmot.)
4th:—lt is clear, that, in the year 1841, Earl Grey, and the Ministers had resolved, to attempt the dispersion of
tho Convicts of Great Britain, as Exiles, among all her Colonies indiscriminately. What he then proposed is evident enough,
from the following observations, made in the Speech, in the House of Lords, already cited. “ I see no difficulty, in having
“ the Exiles’ passage paid on board some of the usual Emigrant Ships, that he should thus be enabled to arrive at the
“ Colonies, undistinguished amid the general mass, and not recognized as a former Convict.”
sth :—ln that year the position taken up by the British G overnment, founded on their recent Parliamentary Report on
Transportation, and the prevailing public opinion of that day, was, that British Offenders ought only to be sent to the
Colonies, even after penal and reformatory discipline at home, in such numbers as to form a minute, and almost
imperceptible portion of the Society, into which they would be absorbed, and so as to be, in fair proportions, dispersed through
all the Colonial possessions of England.
It was, however, then admitted to be a SECOND and equally NECESSARY condition, that even this minute dose of prison
labour should be administered with the consent of each Colony, destined to receive it ; a just principle, possibly more
cheerfully conceded, than otherwise it might have been, under the impression that the demand for labour in all the important
Colonies would universally induce a ready consent.
Gth : —Acting, it may be presumed, under the instructions of Earl Grey, Lieutenant-Governor Sir William Deniscn
issued a series of Enquiries to the Colonists of Van Diemen’s Land, for the information of the Secretary of State, of which
the first was—“ Do you consider it desirable that the Transportation of Convicts to this Colony should cease altogether ?”
Long before the Report of Sir William Denison could reach Downing Street, Earl Grey, in a Despatch dated the very
day on which he replied, and expressed his concurrence, too, with Sir George Grey, in his plan for the change of system,
wrote to Sir William Denison as follows :—“ I have to inform you, that it is not the intention that Transportation to Van
“ Diemen’s Land should be resumed, at the expiration of the two years for which it has been already decided that it should
“ be discontinued.”
This decision of Earl Grey was formally announced by Sir William Denison, in the Legislative Council; and while
warned the Colonists that the loss of labour would affect their future prospects, he expressed his hope, that the results
which would follow would neither unduly elate nor depress them.
Again, in a Despatch by Sir William Denison, dated October, 1847, and when writing on another subject (the
question of free institutions,) he says, “ Previous to the receipt of your Lordship’s Despatch, No. 54, informing me that Her
“ Majesty’s Government had decided not to send out any more convicts to the Colony,” &c., &c.
Not a word need be added to show that her Majesty’s government has been most distinctly and unequivocally pledged
to the discontinuance of Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land; and no argument can henceforth avail, as against the
Colonists, founded on any circumstance or condition whatever, of a date prior to the royal promise.
Earl Grey thought proper to change this resolution, and, without the chance of adding a free individual to the labour-
ing class, proposed at once to forward 4000 Convicts annually to Van Diemen’s Land.
You are of course aware of the Correspondence between his Lordship and the various Colonies.
The treatment of Van Diemen’s Land became known to all the world, and when Earl Grey proposed that other
Colonies should receive a proportion of Convicts, he was every where met with a decided negative. It is with deep regret
that we find, that instead of candidly admitting this total change of his policy, and the consequent violation of his pledges,
his Lordship has thought proper to upbraid the Colonists of Van Diemen’s Land with their resistance to that gathering of
3


offenders in masses, which he himself denounced, and with their insisting on the fulfilment of promises, specific in themselves
and which w'ere the proper consequence of the principles avowed by His Lordship during the whole of his political life.
That the construction of Earl Grey’s promise to the people of Van Diemen’s Land is not distorted, is sufficiently
proved by independent testimony. It was so understood by Sir William Denison, who notices, incidentally, the receipt of
his Lordship’s despatch, informing him “that Her Majesty’s Government had decided not to send any more Convicts to the
Colonyand, still more pointedly, in a Despatch in which he reminds his Lordship “ that the feelings of a large portion of
“ the Community are so fully enlisted in the opposition which has been raised to the Convict system here, that any attempt
“to revive it, in any form, would be looked upon by the Colonists as a breach of faith.”
October 2, 1847.
August 20, 1847.
By reference to the Parliamentary debates, you will also observe, that Viscount Mahon reproaches Earl Grey
“ with fettering the discretion of his successor in Office,” by their promise to discontinue Transportation to Van Diemen’s
Land. The following are extracts from his speech. “He called the attention of the House to the instructions issued in the
“ years 1846, 1847, and 1848, with respect to the Transportation and discipline of Convicts * * * *
March 8, 1849.
Hansard, 3rd Series,
Yol. 103, Page 384.
“ The Noble Earl the Secretary for the Colonies had again and again declared that Transportation should be disused, and that
“we ought to provide for our Convicts by the use of Hulks, and by the construction of Penitentiaries at home. That was
“ the ground which the Noble Earl in former years, as a Member of this House, had been accustomed to assume.” *
“ * * * The concentration of Criminals into one Colony made it a loathsome sink of all pestilence and infection, —
“ Van Diemen’s Land, suffering from this importation, complained to this Country, and asked for a remedy. The complaints
“of the Colonists reached this Country early in the spring of 1846. At that time the Office of Secretary for the Colonies
“ was filled by the Right Honorable Gentleman the Member for the University of Oxford (Mr. Gladstone), and he, in
“ conjunction with the Right Honorable Baronet the Member for Ripon came to the conclusion, that it was necessary to
“ suspend the tide of Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land for two years. Transportation was accordingly checked.”
“ * * ♦ He (Lord Mahon) had now brought these affairs up to the time at which Earl Grey became Colonial
“ Secretary.” * * * *
“ Earl Grey on the Oth February, 1847, wrote to Sir W. Denison—
« I have to inform you, that it is not the intention of Her Majesty’s Government that Transportation to Van
« Diemen’s Land shall be resumed at the expiration of the two years for which it has been already decided it shall
“ be discontinued.”
« Now, was it right, by a decision of this kind, for Earl Grey to fetter a decision of a successor in his Office ? But he
“thought he could shew that the Noble Earl was himself bound and fettered, in the present change of views, by the
“ determination which he had expressed to Sir Charles Fltz Roy. On March 5, 1847, he found Earl Grey stating, in the
c ‘ House of Lords, that—
“ The change intended was of no less extent than ‘ a virtual abolition of the system of Transportation,’ which had for
“ so many years prevailed, under different regulations and modifications, as to the mode of punishment.”
“ A little further on, in the same speech, he found the Noble Earl adding—
“ I have already said, that the change which Government has considered ought to be introduced extends to no
“ less than a virtual abolition of Transportation ; because, when I speak of Transportation, Ido not include the
“ punishment of offenders at Gibraltar or Bermuda.”
“ Now, let it be remembered, these were words which were not addressed to the House of Lords alone. They were read in
“ the Colonies, they were read in Van Diemens Land, and were interpreted into a pledge and promise that the system should be
« discontinued. That view of the case was further confirmed by a Minute, dated January 20, 1847, from which it appeared
“that the Convicts were not to be sent out, on any account, collectively, but individually—that in individual cases
“ facilities to emigrate to other Countries, besides the late penal settlements, were to be afforded.
********
“ Now, in making these references, he (Lord Mahon), desired to be understood, that it was not in the way of taunt; but he
“ was of opinion, that it was most impolitic and perilous thus to make pledges to the Colonists which were not fulfilled.
“ To return to the pledge, most imprudently given by Earl Grey, that Transportation should not be renewed to Van Diemens Land,
“ what had been the consequence of that step ? In the papers last laid on the Table, the Colonists complained of the breach
«of faith committed by the Colonial Office, in not keeping its pledge. That there had been a breach of faith was shewn
“ from the words of their own officer. It was shewn by Sir William Denison s despatch of the 20th August, 1847. In this
“ despatch, Sir William acknowledged the receipt of a despatch of the sth February, 1847, in which, as he says—
« I was informed that it is not the intention of the Government that Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land shall be
renewed at the expiration of two years.”
We are not aware of anything that can be opposed to these evidences of a pledge on the part of Her Majesty s
Government, unless that the promise was not given in such formal language as is common in Mercantile transactions.
Her Majesty’s Government having received the petitions of the Colonists, praying that Transportation might cease,
when we find Earl Grey personally upholding those Petitions in his place in Parliament, arguing in their favour, on the
ground that dispersion of criminals, and not concentration, should be the policy of a wise and Christian Nation, —when we
find that, long before the expiration of the two years for which Transportation had been discontinued by Mr. Gladstone, Earl
Grey announced to the Colonists that he had determined to discontinue it altogether, that this announcement was understood
as a pledge by the Colonists, by the Governor, by Viscount Mahon, and that it was so treated by the Members of the British
Government in their replies, when their policy was questioned,—when we find such evidence in favour of the Colonial
construction, it is scarcely worth while, in the relative position of the parties, even to examine the verbal strictness of its
form.
It is obvious his Lordship has the power to enforce his own construction, until the Public opinion of Great Britain
shall summon him before it’s tribunal. We trust, however, that the time is still remote, when the duty of Great Britain to
her Colonies, —shall be made to depend on the verbal accuracy, or technical precision, oblivious of all those moral proofs which
command the assent of righteous men.


The condition of Van Diemen’s Land, and the intention of Earl Grey, have aroused a very general sympathy
throughout the Australasian Colonies. You will scarcely find any topic of more frequent reference in the Colonial Press. It
is well-known to you that the Colonies are closely connected by all the ties which can create a community of feeling and
interest, and, happily for their ultimate welfare, the shock of oppression extends far beyond the surface on which it is
inflicted. But these Colonies have all a direct and awful concern in the issue of this controversy. The landing of Convicts
in Van Diemen’s Land is only as a pause in their career, and the sacrifice of that Country increases the common danger.
You will judge with what feelings the Inhabitants of the Australasian Colonies look forward to the arrival among them of
Vide Questions of four thousand persons annually, who have spent upon an average seven and a half years in the condition of Convicts, and
Sir W. Denison, amidst almost exclusively Convict Associations. Had the Colonists of Van Diemen’s Land, influenced by any considerations
March, 1847. w l ia tever, consented to transmit this amount of mischief to their neighbours, still the adjacent Colonies would not have long
endured the annual addition of such burdens.
The resentment which these inflictions have aroused, and which are common to all the Colonies, has been aggravated
in New South Wales by the disallowance of the Vagrant Act; —an Act by the precautionary provisions of which, the
Despatch, July 4, mischiefs of indirect Transportation were sought to be mitigated ; and the vetoing of which Act is thus commented on by the
1850, No. 94. Leading Journal of Europe :—“ A large number of burglaries and highway robberies had been recently perpetrated in
“ Sydney by liberated convicts from Van Diemen’s Land, who, being unknown to the police, facilitated their depredations
“by passing themselves off as free emigrants. To check these growing disorders, the Legislature passed an Act requiring
“ these persons to register themselves, and placing them thus within the knowledge and surveillance of the police. Just as
“ this law had been put into working order, and its good effects began to be felt, the Colony receives from Earl Grey a
“ missive annulling the Act, and restoring matters to their former dangerous condition, on the ground that these necessary
London Times, “ measures of self-defence are an interference with her Majesty’s prerogative of pardon. Life and property on the one hand,
Jan. 21*#, 1851. “ and her Majesty’s prerogative on the other!—a prerogative which scatters corruption and danger over the Australian
“ Colonies, but against which they are not permitted to take the most ordinary and necessary precautions !”
As it is, all are united in a common interest, and have pronounced that “ The Australias are one.” To ensure the
proper representation of this resolve, it became necessary to seek a general organization of the Australasian Colonies, The
people of Van Diemen’s Land have successfully pursued this object, and it may be desirable to record the steps they have
taken, and which have resulted in the Australasian League.
Despairing of justice by a direct appeal to her Majesty’s Government, the inhabitants of Launceston passed
Appendix C a resolution on the 9th of August last, in pursuance of which a Circular, signed W. H. Browne, L.L.D., was addressed to the
leading members of the Australasian public.
A meeting of the gentlemen who had taken a prominent part in this patriotic movement met the Rev. John West,
deputed for that purpose, at Hobart Town, where, during several weeks, the whole question of Transportation was discussed
in reference to the Australasian Colonies, and the following basis of a Union was adopted on the motion of Robert Pitcairn,
Esq.;—
“ We, the undersigned, deeply impressed with the evils which have arisen from the Transportation of criminals from
October 1, 1850. Great Britain to the Australasian Colonies, declare that transportation to any of the Colonies ought for ever to cease.
(Signed) Robert Pitcairn, F. Haller,
Thomas D. Chapman, G. W. Walker,
Henry Hopkins, W. N. Rout,
G. C. Clarke, Henry Smith,
Joseph Allport, J, P. Smith,
John West, Robert Officer.
The establishment of a League upon this basis was referred to the Launceston Association, and at an adjourned
Meeting of the Committee, held October 10th, 1850, the Secretary was directed to propose a Conference of Delegates in the
Colony of Victoria. This proposition was accepted, and on the invitation of William Nicholson, Esq., Mayor of Melbourne,
the Rev. John West, W. P. Weston, William Nicholson, William Westgarth, William M. Bell, Dr. Alexander Thomson,
having been chosen Delegates, the Delegates assembled in that City on the Ist February, 1851, and promulgated the Solemn
Appendix D. Engagement, and Organization of the Australasian League.
On returning to their respective constituents, active measures were taken to hold a conference in the City of Sydney,
in accordance with the constitution of the League. Councils were constituted in Melbourne, Geelong, Hobart Town,
Launceston, and Sydney ; and, at length, the following Delegates, accompanied by every demonstration of popular interest,
Appendix E. assembled in this City, and concurred in the various resolutions which I have now the honor to transmit, namely—Charles
Cowper, Esq, ; Robert Campbell, Esq.; Gilbert Wright, Esq. ; Reverend John West; W. P. Weston, Esq. ; William
Westgarth, Esq., M.L.C.; Henry Moore, Esq., M.L.C. ; Dr. Alexander Thomson.
Thus, you will perceive, that every step taken by the Colonists has been attended with caution, and that ten months
have elapsed between the commencement and the consummation of this great organization.
3rd. We are now to describe the relation and powers of the various bodies which constitute the League. You will
perceive, that the Colonists become members of this Association by signing the League and Solemn Engagement. They are
pledged to all lawful resistance of Transportation, in every form; they bind themselves to discontinue the employment of
prisoners arriving after this time. They engage to support such candidates only, as will exercise their representative powers
in furtherance of the cause ; and they promise to assist all who shall suffer in its lawful promotion.
The members of the League, so enrolled, choose, mostly by ballot, the members of the Local Councils.
The powers of these bodies are highly important. They have the control of all the funds collected within their
bounds—and the nomination of Delegates, and the entire business of the League, so far as relates to matters of a local
nature is entrusted to them.
Thus each London Delegate of the Australasian League is appointed and paid by his own Colony, and is authorised
to carry out the instructions of his immediate constituents, so far as it can be done without damage to the general body.


The Local Councils appoint the Colonial Delegates, who compose the Conference tor the Colonies.
The Conference is the Supreme power, and is authorised to appoint representatives of the League m London, under
the denomination of the London Board. 1 ,• j
The Executive Board o£ the Conference is chosen out of the Colonists resident at the place of its last meeting, and
is the business of the Executive Board to correspond with the London Board. _
Thus you will observe that the Members of the League constitute the Councils, the Councils constitute the Conference,
the Conference the Executive Board, and the Executive Board the London Board, by virtue of the powers conferred by
plans, it was necessary to obtain contributions in amounts, sufficiently large to render their
collection easy and prompt. With a liberality altogether unprecedented, our higher classes have taken the mone ary
burden upon than £13j500 contributed, upwards of £B,OOO have been subscribed by 80 persons,
and the character of the subscribers, and their position in life, are sufficient guarantees for the fulfilment of eir
promises. _ ,
4th We have now to state to you the mode of co-operation you are expected to adop .
It is supposed that your appeal will be made to the British public chiefly through public meetings and the periodical
FeSS ' We hope that you will be enabled, in conjunction with your colleagues, to visit every principal Town in the United
Kl " S<lo We expect that you will find some difficulty in arresting the attention of the British public, but we are confident that,
with the facilities of communication that must soon exist, the object of your mission will be speedily and extensively knowm
You will bear in mind that yours is the work of testimony, that we do not hold you responsible for the result We
are discharging by you a duty we owe to the Parent Country. We wish you to state our case ; to deprecate the evils we
suffer. We wish you to depict the vast resources and unrivalled beauty of these Colonies, and to insist on the injustice and
follv of degrading them to the purposes of a prison.
We are anxious that you should tell our Countrymen at home, that here is a land capable of boundless prosperity,
that our whalers fish upon our Coasts, that we number our sheep by millions, that our wheat ,s famed in every market m
Z world, that there are millions of acres over which the plough may be driven, and where the axe is not required a.
P You will tell them that we love our native country, and rejoice in our share of her heritage of glory, that we offer
our filial duty and manly affiance, but, that we offer them on this condition, that we, and our children, and their country, shall
be free. TMs granted, every hour will strengthen the relations already established between us ; but should the object of on
Leagu so nem- to our hear*, fail us, should the British Public prove deaf or indifferent, or the Minister prove inexorable,
Vision will have been discharged; and we must await, as we may, the developement of those Providential purposes
which are often most obscure when they are nearest the dawn. ... , ,
-Engtand has no right to cast out amongst other nations, or upon naked shores, either her poverty or her crime.
« This is not the way in which a great and wealthy People, a Mother of Nations, ought to colonize.
For our partf we know of no advantages conferred by our connection with England which can compensate for
To aLst you in this appeal, it is hoped that many thousand private letters, addressed to your care for influential
inhabitants of Great Britain, from their friends and Correspondents in these Colonies, will mainly contribute
By forwarding them at the favorable moment, you will collect in almost every principal district a body of persons
already interested in your favor, and who, by their Petitions, may largely promote your success. , A
A considerable sum of money will be placed at the disposal of the London Board, of which you are ex-offico a Member
The friends of the Colony, resident in Great Britain, will assist you by their countenance and advice, and we tiust
that you will ever be found co-operating heartily with your Colleagues who have embarked in the same good cause.
} While the stoppage of Transportation is the great object of your delegation, and to which all others must b
n tliat vou maY in various ways greatly advance the prosperity of this Hemisphere. It may not be
inconsistent w"ith your primary duties, to extend the knowledge of these Colonies in Great Britain as fields for enterprise and
populal, and we shall not consider your time ill spent in facilitating the efforts of parties interested in Emigration.
Never has the question of Transportation assumed a greater importance than at the present momen .
The Colonists are fretted by the vacillation of Her Majesty’s Government, but they are anxious to know that then
honor and happiness are compatible with their present political relations. . . . ,
The plantation of New Colonies in our vicinity, the now constant intercourse with the American Continent, the
discovery of Gold Fields, large in extent and abundant in production, on the Western Cordilleras of New South Wales, and
the thence certain rapid influx of population, all make the future an object of solicitude.
It may be your happiness to contribute to the achieyement of this great moral yietory, to the removal of those
intolerable burdens imposed by a despotic Minister, and permitted by the indifference of the British Nation,-and thus to the
establishment of a closer union between these Colonies and the Parent State.
(Signed) CHARLES COWPER,
President of the Australasian League.
6


APPENDIX
APPENDIX A.
Letter addressed hy the Bight Reverend the Lord Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan Bishop of Australasia, to a Deputation from
the New South Wales Council of the Australasian League.
Darlinghurst, April 30, 1851.
Gentlemen, — _ . .
Subsequently to our interview, yesterday, when you did me the honor to wait upon me as a deputation from the Anti-Transportation Associa-
tion, I had an opportunity of bestowing more mature consideration upon the subject; the result of which has been to satisfy me, that my reply to such
an application ought not to be limited to the few words which I was enabled to address you personally, aud which at the moment you were so kind as
to accept. It is unnecessary to recapitulate the reasons which compelled me, I thought, to decline granting the use of one of our School Rooms for the
purpose of holding in it a Public Meeting of the friends of the Society which you represented ; and, also, to absent myself from such Meeting held in
any other place. If, in making these decisions, I erred on the side of caution, it is an error, I trust, on the right side, But ray anxiety now is, to
reiterate and give permanency to the assurance, that my determination originated not in any feeling of insensibility, or indifference, towards the noble
object in which you are engaged. No man, who feels as he ought to do for the Country in which not only himself but his children and grandchildren
are established, (which is my case), but must, from his heart, desire and pray for the success of your endeavours. As having once held the spiritual
charge over all the Colonies to which your League extends, and, in a certain sense, continuing still to do so, I hope my feelings towards them are
such as become that relation ; and my persuasion is, that to extend, or resume, or continue the practice of Transportation to any one of them, must be
injurious to all. Neither would I forget, in making these observations, the duty and affection which every British subject owes to the British Nation
and Government,—l am fully persuaded, that Transportation, carried on, as it must now be, in the face of so strenuous and general an opposition,
must defeat its own object, which is to repress the growth of crime ; and that, thus, its continuance will prove injurious, and not beneficial, to British
interests. A perseverance in this policy would tend more than almost any other cause that could be mentioned, to weaken the respect which is now so
generally entertained for the name of England. It cannot be supported if England cause herself to be regarded as the author of a continual wrong ;
and if respect be forfeited, the principle tie of love and obedience will be severed. It is impossible to believe that any British Statesman will be found,
who, upon the ground of policy, and, still less, upon a principle of Justice, will recommend the continuance of the practice against which you are united
in petitioning.
Most sincerely desiring that your respectful remonstrances may meet with deserved success,
I am, Gentlemen,
Your very faithful and obedient Servant,
W. G. SYDNEY.
To CHARLES COWPER, Esq., and CHARLES KEMP, Esq.
APPENDIX B.
Address from the Anti-Transportation Delegates to the Colonists of Australasia.
rell ° V We now address you under a deep sense of the importance, to these the promising lands of our adoption, of the great objects that have called
us •
° The moral warfare that has long been raging throughout these Colonies now approaches to a crisis. Our parent state sees fit to continue, as
before to transport to Yan Diemen’s Land the annual thousands of her malefactors. Sad it is to reflect upon such proceedings at the hands o a
parent after her own experience, and the long and earnest cry of her children, have demonstrated the ruin with which she overwhelms therm
Representations, as you are aware, were made several years since to the Home Government, of the frightful state to which Tasmania has been
reduced by the influx of British crime. Year succeeding year, heedless of consequences, the Government had ejected their bands of criminals, upon e
far off shores of Australasia. In all penitence they arrested the vicious stream, and the Governor of Yan Diemen’s Land, in 1847, intimated to le
inhabitants of that Colony, that her Majesty’s Government had apprized him of their purpose that Transportation to that Island should cease.
Fellow-Colonists, you are aware also, that this pledge on the part of the Government, has been utterly disregarded. Transportation, in all its
appalling extent, is again directed to the devoted shores of Tasmania. It is on this account that her Delegates, in conjunction with those appointed
by Victoria, now address you. . , , 7 . . , , T
We are all bound together by one great moral interest in this question. It is true that the Convicts are transmitted direct only to Van
Diemen’s Land • but thence, aided by the policy of the Government, they are quickly spread over the adjacent colonies ; and all experience tells us,
that, after a few years preliminary residence amidst society exclusively convict, and in a Colony which these criminals themselves have reduced to a
state of moral ruin, they emerge from such probation worse than before. . .
To us it is cheering in the highest degree, to mark around us the unanimity of public opinion upon this question. Tasmania and Aictona
now address you, and from Sydney, South Australia, and even New Zealand, we have satisfactory evidence of a'state of preparation for the conflict
which may yet be necessary in defence of our common welfare. .
Sorrowful are we to observe, however, as we range among Australasia’s States, that all have not sided with the cause of virtue and of society.
The eye meets one defaulter. Shall we plead for Western Australia, that her comparatively slow and sickly growth has at length discouraged her
or shall we more happily, and with more reason, assume that, previously untainted with the presence of convicted British felons, she surmised not
her awful calamity, as regards either the present time, or the long vista of the future, when she consented to the importation of criminals .


Deeply does it concern us, Follow-Colonists, that Australasia should, in a new and hitherto uninfected locality, be thus additionally dishonored.
But still more immediately does it concern us, when we reflect that the rapid progress of the settlements throughout this vast Territory, and the
anticipated early introduction of steam communication along its shores, will shortly unite us, in much more intimate association, with our present
remote and isolated neighbour, and thus interpose a new and powerful hindrance to the earnest efforts we are now making for the welfare of our Country.
But her day of retribution is sure. Her future historian may dilate upon roads, bridges, and public edifices, and the flocks and herds roaming
upon a thousand hills; but he may also mourn a moral bankruptcy of society; the daily recurring tragedies upon these roads, and among those
pastures • robbery, violence, and murder, and every abomination that disgraces human nature.
It may, perhaps, be deemed presumptuous, that Britain should be dictated toby her Colonial offspring; that she should be assured by their
repeated experience, that, in respect to Transportation, her penal system is radically injurious ; that it is unequal in its operation, and not reformatory
of the offender; that it pollutes to the very core, by overwhelming proportions and numbers, the young and interesting societies that are rising up
in the Southern Hemisphere ; and, that by the factitious facility of thus ridding a Country of her Criminals, the wise purposes of Providence are thwarted,
which, in the difliculty of dealing with criminals, would enforce more earnest attention to methods of prevention and cure.
But if her Colonies venture thus to address her, they do so from a sense of the most urgent necessity ; and from no desire to intermeddle with
any part of the Imperial policy of that great Nation. Experience has however shown that for these Colonies there is no real or permanent safety,
short of such a change. It is to the pressure of this accursed system on the Home Government, that we must attribute its broken promises; and we
have, further, that Government itself declaring, that if the Colonies now established persist in rejecting the convicts, other settlements of a penal
character must be formed in their neighbourhood ; that, in short, if criminals cannot be sent to Yan Diemen’s Land, they must go to Moreton Bay.
Earnestly do we impress upon you that nothing is gained, to us, by a shift like this. In a different condition of the Southern Hemisphere,
Great Britain ejected her bands of criminals upon a vast and desolate sea coast, at that time but imperfectly known, even to geographical science.
But, during the last sixty years, in the rapid progress of the world, and the necessities of over-crowded Europe, there is now exhibited over that great
expanse the pioneering outposts of commercial enterprise, and the foundations of society and civilization, destined to re-produce, with the energy and
rapidity that characterises our progress, the name, and the language, and the free institutions, of our Fatherland.
Let us quit for an instant the bounds of Australasia, to cast the eye over the adjacent expanse of the great Pacific. The richest fancy of the
poet, as he ranges through its innumerable Islands, can scarcely overtake the realities of nature, while he depicts with all the enthusiasm of truth
everything that is beautiful upon the face of the earth. Reflect, Fellow-Colonists, that these surpassing regions of the world are already infested by
bands of Convict adventurers; that in many cases the interesting races of these Islands have been utterly corrupted by such associations ; and that, with
their simple and inexperienced minds, as they glanced alternately at the missionary, and the ruffian, they have even now acquired an incurable
impression, both of the inconsistency of our character, and of the unprincipled depravity of white and civilized man.
Let us further direct your attention, and arouse your fears, as to the danger that threatens us, from the force of British example on other
European States. It is an honour to our great Nation, that she should serve as an example to surrounding Countries. But, in regard to Transportation,
her authority in this respect may prove fatal to our welfare. Has not France more than hinted an intention of founding penal settlements upon the
Marquesas? The temporary facilities of this ruinous policy may induce other European Governments, to bring amongst us, during each succeeding
year, their tens of thousands of criminals, to give additional and ineffaceable pollution to the waters of the Pacific. How should the wrongs of Australasia
find redress at foreign hands, when so many appeals have been made in vain to our own Government, and our own Countrymen ? And what but asso-
ciations of discord, of crime, and of profligacy, can be reared from such elements, to occupy the fairest portions of the earth ?
Listen to the evidence of our own Government, as to the results of the Transportation system,—of that Government, we say, which, in the face
of the deepest self-conviction, still overwhelms us with this social ruin. When the horrifying intelligence to which we have already alluded, arrived
from Yan Diemen’s Land, when the Home Authorities were in the first throes of surprise and contrition, and were framing those shadowy pledges, that
have already so miserably deceived Tasmania ;—listen to the expression of strong, but alas! of evanescent, penitence on the part of the Colonial
Minister: On the sth March, 1847, Earl Grey said in his place in the House of Lords, —“the Government had resolved to make a change that
“ amounted to nothing less than the total abolition of transportation. There was all the evidence it was possible to have that the system worked badly.
“He would not disgust their Lordships by going into the horrible, the monstrous details. The system was frightful, and it was a disgrace to the
“British Nation that such a system should have existed under the British flag.” Fellow-Colonists, no language, not even our own, could be a stronger
condemnation than this.
In conclusion, Fellow-Colonists, with reference to the momentous question, let us not argue with the Home Government, either on the law of
the case, whether that be with them or with us, or on the relative power of the contending parties. The accidents of law or force, which ever way they
may prevail, can never remedy the social disorders we complain of. Let us then represent to the British Government, to the British Parliament, and
to the British Public, that, in the present state and prospeots of the world, it is a great moral obligation on tbe part of the Parent State, not to eject
her criminals into other Societies, already charged with their own, but to retain and manage them within herself.
Ponder deeply, Fellow-Colonists of Australasia, the prospect that lies before you. Consider well the moral, and even the merely economical,
relations of the question. Reflect on the subject of the administration of justice, not only with reference to its enormous expense, but also as to the
social effect of the ceaseless, and weary labours, of our Criminal Courts. Reflect on the vast and gloomy gaols, that must meet our eyes, in a noble and
fruitful land, where prosperity should have banished almost the remembrance of crime ; on the arrays of our Police, that ever remind us of the noxious
elements of our communities ; and think, too, of onr daily press, that might edify a virtuous public, by accounts of incessant progress and well doing,
but which, faithful to the cause of truth, must ever teem with the harrowing evidence of the depravity of our fellow-beings. And, again, turn to the
scene that so frequently closes upon the career of the Convict. Consider the helpless pauperism of improvidence ; constitutions ruined by vice and
profligacy; asylums and hospitals overflowing with degraded and wretched outcasts, descending to the grave without respect, and without sympathy,
quitting a world which they had only dishonoured, and abused.
Fellow-Colonists, if we are to regard our best and dearest interests ; if we are to consider not only ourselves, but those who are to come after
us ; if we are to perform our duty to these incipient Nations and Empires of the British race, Transportation to our shores must for ever cease.
We repeat, Transportation must cease, and having so resolved, it becomes us to consider the means.
We have seen, that mere representations to the Home Government, however strong, however true, however affecting, will serve no efficient end;
and we have seen, too, that on this subject, even the pledges of the Government are utterly worthless.
We propose to you, Fellow-Colonists, the formation of a Great League—a Solemn Covenant on the part of the Australasian Colonists, in order
to carry out this grand object.
We contemplate, in all our proceedings, a legal and moral resistance, even should the Government persist in its destructive course ; but we
must also keep in view, that our course is itself that of law and order, and that we contend for interests and principles sacred in the highest degree to
civilized man. We are not, therefore, assembled here, as advocates for violence, disloyalty, or rebellion ; and it is gratifying to have experienced,
in the issue of the noble example set us at the Colony of the Cape, that a British Parliament, and a British Public, will not regard, in such a light
our uncompromising efforts to avert from our Society the pollution of crime.
Address from the Anti-Transportation Delegates to the Inhabitants of the United Kingdom.
The Delegates of certain of the Australasian Colonies, assembled in the City of Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria, present their earnest
Remonstrance and Appeal to the Inhabitants of the United Kingdom.
A sense of common grievances, created by the Transportation of British offenders to this portion of the world, having brought the Delegates
together, they resolve to appeal to the justice and humanity of their fellow-subjects.


They are convinced, that the injury inflicted on these rising communities, is unknown to the people of Great Britain, and that nothing is more
likely to secure redress, than a calm exposition of their wrongs.
It is due, however, to the Colonists, that the fact should be stated, that, for a series of years, they have presented Petitions and Memorials
to the British Parliament, and to the Secretaries of State.
They have employed the strongest language authorised by the forms of constitutional liberty, and they have furnished in detail the statistical
evidence requisite to support their prayers. The main facts by which they have demonstrated the truth and justice of their remonstrances, have been
repeatedly admitted by the Ministers of the Crown. Promises of relief have been renewed from year to year, and principles have been avowed by Her
Majesty’s servants, but in direct variance with the policy pursued.
The Colonists are now compelled to regard assurances from Ministers with invincible distrust. Belying on the equity of the British public,
they implore liberation through its generous interposition; but meanwhile they are resolved to combine with every Colony of Australasia, to avert the
Penal projects which threaten their honour, safety, happiness, and freedom.
The Imperial Ministers have hitherto justified their course, by alledging a prejudice in favour of Transportation amongst British Judges and
Magistrates, and the preference for that method of punishment, expressed by a section of the Legislature. The Colonies are anxious that the form
which this question must now assume, may be early understood by the people of Great Britain.
The vast extent of Australasia, may seem to English gentlemen a boundless field for Penal experiments; yet even they might remember that
crime does not retire to solitude, but ever crowds into cities ; and that the result of Transportation is not to disperse, but to collect together, the idle
and incorrigible.
If nothing could reconcile a British Country to bear this concentration of National crime, we beg you to believe, that the Australasian Colonies
will neither endure the burthen, nor brook the infamy.
It has yet to be determined, whether the interests of Communities, sixteen thousand miles from the Parent State, are at the absolute disposal
of a Minister; whether, in short, the Anglo-Australasians, possessing in full average, the intelligence and spirit of their race, shall be compelled
to suffer evils, which the United Kingdom, with all its opulence and population, is unwilling to endure.
The opinions of Lord John Bussell, Earl Grey, and other Statesmen, have been repeatedly expressed against the Establishment of Penal
Communities. No language can be more forcible than the language they have frequently employed, to show that Colonisation, dependent on crime,
is disgraceful to a Christian nation, and destructive to the moral and political welfare of both the Colonists, and the Convicts. Yet, during the last
ten years, between thirty and forty thousand prisoners of the Crown have been landed in Yan Diemen’s Land ; not restrained by the precautions
deemed necessary in the smallest prisons in England, but distributed, without the slightest notice of their characters, or offences, among the Free
Inhabitants. It is scarcely necessary to glance at the effects of such an inundation ; they have been repeatedly exposed and lamented by the Tasmanian
Colonists. They assert, that the policy of the Crown not only cuts off all hope of social elevation, but will ultimately compel the settlers to abandon
their capital and estates, and to quit an Island, richly endowed by nature, and capable of awakening the strongest sentiment of patriotism. That
such effects would follow', were predicted by Earl Grey ; and yet, under his auspices, the harbours of Van Diemen’s Land have been constantly visited
by prison ships, from winch hundreds of men have been discharged together, to loiter in the capital, and to roam over the Island, obtaining from the
compassion, or fears, of the settlers, a night’s shelter, or a morsel of bread.
For many years the Colonists of Yan Diemen’s Land have patiently implored the commiseration of Her Majesty’s Ministers ; nor did they
despair, until they found that the Secretary of State had vindicated the policy he formerly denounced, and avowed a settled purpose to continue
Transportation to Yan Diemen’s Laud,
The Inhabitants confided in the Boyal Promise, communicated by Earl Grey, and officially promulgated by Sir William Denison, that
Transportation to Yan Diemen’s Land should cease. But, this assurance, hailed with gratitude and joy, had scarcely arrived, when Earl Grey did not
disdain to present to the Colonies an instance of bad faith, (it is hoped, rarely exemplified,) and announced his purpose to transmit all the Convicts of
the British Empire to that unfortunate Country.
The moment the people of Yan Diemen’s Land despaired of the protection of the Crown, their eyes were turned to their Colonial Brethren.
Communities, settled in New Holland, heard and pitied them. One voice of encouragement and promise responded to their complaints, and a fixed
determination has been proclaimed, that Tasmania shall be liberated from the yoke of the oppressor.
This resolution is strengthened by the avowed purpose of Earl Grey to reach all the Australasian Colonies through Van Diemen’s Land ; and,
in effect, during the next twenty years, to land 80,000 British criminals on these shores ; and to impose on these rising Communities, the pauperism,
decrepitude, insanity, and crime, cast out from Great Britain; to load us with the expense, and to expose us to the dangers, of these growing
accumulations.
There are Moral Laws which limit Imperial Authority; nor will the British Parliament assert its Omnipotence against the determined
resistance of these Colonies. The British Nation will not disgrace itself in the eyes of the World, by the sacrifice of the weak, and the corruption of
the innocent; by an invasion more terrible than foreign conquest,—lt will not appeal to pow'er to justify oppression. The natural equity of Britons,
the mortal struggle of the Colonies, and the indignation of the Almighty, would assuredly cover the attempt with confusion and defeat.
It w'as asserted by Mr. Secretary Gladstone that the chief value attached to the Sovereignty of these regions is in the sphere they afford for
the penal policy of the Crown. We confide in the good sense of our Fellow-Countrymen to repudiate a doctrine so false and detestable. We can owe
no affection to a State, pronouncing upon us this sentence of excision from the common interests and rights of the Nation. With what Horror such
sentiments have been received, your own hearts will tell you !
When the American States reached the era of their Independence, their Commerce with Britain was no greater than our own. We rely upon
a fair appreciation of those advantages England derives from our capital and industry, which have formed all the productive wealth of these Colonies,
and that the middle classes of the United Kingdom will recognize in a boundless sphere for Emigration and Commerce, a better destiny, than the
degradation of a Gaol.
The people of these Colonies cannot consent to the structure of societies within their borders such as her Majesty’s ministers have pronounced
to be the opprobium of the World ; where the press shall be the organ of convictism; the Jury box the sanctuary of guilt; or where the whole
population, in motion to and from the courts of justice, shall devote their whole thoughts to the commission, or to the punishment of crime.
If such are the liabilities of constitutional subordination, and such the sole interests of it’s ministers in its permanence, can England expect
that the Colonists will cherish, and uphold, a domination so disgraceful and oppressive ?
We will not, however, abandon a better hope, A Nation which a few years ago devoted twenty millions to redeem the negro from bondage,
will not refuse to bear the burthen of its own crime; nor will it meanly pour out upon a young world, a perennial stream of pollution.
We ask our fellow-countrymen to look at the Map ; to measure the distance between England, and her Australasian Dependencies ; to mark
their geographical relations with gigantic Empires; and to estimate aright their future importance as elements of her wealth, greatness and glory.
If the Colonists are compelled to own that their interests may be ruined by an Official Despatch—that their name and fame may be dishonored, to
relieve the gaols of Great Britain—if their youth cannot visit any country under an Australasian flag, without being made to feel that they were born
in a degraded section of the globe, we are at a loss to imagine what advantages conferred by the sovereignty of Great Britain can compensate for the
stigma of it’s brand. For our part, it only remains for us to pronounce the unchangeable resolve of the Australasian People, that they will not suffer
the setting up of European gaols within these bounds, or wear fetters imposed by foreign hands.
We address words of supplication, not of threatening. A few short years, and that which is now a grievance, will grow into a quarrel; but
those eternal laws which justify our appeal must secure our triumph ! By instant concession an act of Justice will become a monument of Imperial
Clemency. But these Colonies are solemnly pledged, each to the other, by their mutual interests—their future destinies, —their fellowship of weal and
woe, —and now by their League and Solemn Engagement, to achieve the freedom of their Common Country.
9


10
APPENDIX 0.
(Circular,)
Launceston Association for Promoting Cessation of Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land,
August 25th, 1850.
Sir, —-
At a Public Meeting of the Colonists of Van Diemen’s Land, held in the town of Launceston, on the 9th day of August last, the following
Resolution was unanimously adopted :
“ That the whole of the Australasian Colonies are deeply interested in preventing the continuance of Transportation to this Island. That the
Launceston Association for Promoting the Cessation of Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land is hereby requested to address a letter to the respective
Colonial Secretaries, Speakers of Legislative bodies, Municipal authorities, and other influential parties in those Colonies, earnestly requesting their
co-operation to ensure the attainment of the great object we have in view.”
In addressing you, on the all important subject to which the resolution refers, we rely on a candid construction of it’s spirit and design.
The principles of humanity will appear to demand that a hearing should be given to the complaints of your fellow-countrymen. Their
unexampled wrongs have been alike acknowledged, by those who have inflicted, and by those who have been so fortunate as to escape them. The
subject of the same Sovereign, dependent on the equity and good faith of the Minister for the prosperity you enjoy, you will recognise in a great and
deliberate injustice, although perpetrated on one Colony, an injury inflicted upon all. The oppression of even a distant dependency, if unresisted by
the o-eneral voice, would prove pernicious as an example,—how much more then when the victim of misrule exists at your very doors !
A reliance on the influence of these obvious considerations, has induced the people of this Island to turn their eyes towards you, and to invoke
vour assistance in averting calamities which you are liable to share.
The universal excitement on the subject of Transportation, and the numerous discussions in the British Parliament, must have brought under
your notice the treatment and the condition of this Country.
Notwithstanding the rapid variation of details, the conduct of her Majesty’s Ministers has exhibited the same spirit, and has been followed by
uniform results.
A few leading facts may, however, be selected for your consideration ; and which you may accept as characteristic of the whole.
Were we addressing the Home Government, or the British people, we should deem it necessary to combat the plea, recently adopted by Earl
Grey, that because this country has been accustomed to receive prisoners of the Crown, (and is designated for that purpose by an order in Council,)
that the wrong inflicted is capable of justification.
We merely refer you to the history of the American Colonies, New South Wales, the Cape of Good Hope, and other Dependencies. To these,
in succession, prisoners of the Crown have been sent by the authority of the British Government, and for many years together; but their free
inhabitants were never supposed, in consequence, to be deprived of the right of complaint and remonstrance. Such is, notwithstanding, the sole argu-
ment employed to extenuate the course of her Majesty’s Ministers, in their late unrighteous dealing with this Country.
We beg, however, to remind you, that until 1840 the vast regions of New South Wales received the greater part of the transported offenders.
Two years before, a Committee of the House of Commons declared that the accumulation of convicts in that Colony had generated a social corruption
unparalleled in the annals of the world, —ruinous to the moral prospects of this Hemphisphere, and disgraceful to the British Empire.
In consequence, Transportation thither suddenly ceased, and her Majesty’s Ministers determined that convicts should be sent no longer to any
settled country ; and particularly, that from 2000 to 4000 should be located in Norfolk Island,—there to remain till eligible for dispersion over the
Australasian Colonies, in the enjoyment of comparative freedom. Against this last part of the plan, the Legislative Council of New South Wales
protested in 1840; and it became necessary to devise another scheme, exclusive of New South Wales. Thus, when political changes at home
tranferred power to the hands of Lord Stanley, this Colony was devoted to the fatal experiment of Probationism. During seven years, ending 1847,
23,000 prisoners of the Crown were transported to this Island; for the most part distributed in gangs, within reach of the settled districts; and
subject to discipline described by Acting Lieutenant-Governor Latrobe, as an extraordinary example of laxity, indolence, and vice—exhibited “not as
an isolated spot, but as a pervading stain !”*
The effect of this scheme may be inferred from the elements. The men were discharged from the stations, commonly useless for every purpose
of Society, and morally deteriorated. The pressure of their numbers expelled all those classes of freemen who depend upon their own labour. This
Colonv, once rapidly advancing, was stopped in its career of prosperity. These are, however, considerations of minor moment. We are accustomed to
regard the depression of property—the increase of taxation—the decline of trade—and all the consequences of ordinary misgovernment,—which are
grievances elsewhere,—as here of little importance. The peril to higher interests, and the experience of effects of more serious concern, will permit us
no leisure to lament material losses, and financial exactions.
We remind vou that, in these great changes, the people of this Colony have never been consulted. That the Local Legislature has not even
pretended to listen to their voice. That they have no power to resist whatever the Ministers may propose ; no resource but supplication ; no refuge
but in the justice of the Sovereign, and the indignant protest of mankind.
The opinions expressed by her Majesty’s Ministers, and the practice they have pursued, are in utter contradiction. They have employed the
strongest terms to depict the injustice of their predecessors, and to deprecate the creation of a penal community. “To insist upon maintaining
Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land, would be to drive away the free colonists, at whatever pecuniary sacrifice to themselves.”.. .. “ Van Diemen’s
Land will become what Norfolk Island was, a vast horde of criminals, with nothing but their keepers !"+
“ It has been too much the custom to consult the convenience of Great Britain by getting rid of persons of evil habits, and to take that view
of the question alone. In planting provinces which might become Empires, they should endeavour to make them not seats of malefactors and convicts,
but communities which may set examples of virtue and happiness.”!
By consulting the Despatches which followed the announcement of these noble principles by her Majesty’s Ministers, you will find that they
proposed to send out silently, among other emigrants, the reformed Prisoners of the Crown— in order, as thev expressly said, to conceal their past
misfortunes, and secure them an opportunity of maintaining a reputation for honesty, where their history would be unknown.§
These views, adopted by Lord Grey, were formally announced to the British Parliament. They were communicated to Sir William Denison ;
accompanied with directions to inform the inhabitants of this Island, that Transportation “ would not be resumed .”
Prior to the reception of this distinct pledge, given in the Royal Name, Sir W. Denison issued enquiries in reference to the desirableness
of Transportation. The reply of the Colony was prompt, and singularly unanimous. The appalling results of Transportation—its threatening aspect
—its mischief to the rising generation—its disgrace to the Nation, and to the Colony,—admitted but one answer ; unhappily, rendered unavailing by
the views of the Lieutenant-Governor, In harmony with the principles he had propounded, Lord Grey forwarded applications to the Colonies in
general; requesting them to receive a portion of British Convicts. The reply, as you are aware, was accompanied with strong marks of disapprobation
aud resentment. The Colonial answers, unfortunately for us, met the Despatch of Sir W. Denison, in favour of Transportation, at the Colonial Office.
Lord Grey abandoned the opinions he had cherished through his political life ; he cast aside his promise as a Minister ; and in spite of our earnest
prayers turned the whole stream on this Island, with the avowed purpose of reaching those Colonies which rejected direct Transportation.
* Mr. La Trobe's Despatch to Earl Grey, 1847.
t Earl Grey’s Speech in House of Lords, March, 1847.
X Lord John Eussell. —Speech in the House of Commons, June 10, 1847,
§ Correspondence between Secretaries of Home and Colonial Departments, 1847.


Sucli then is a brief view of the unjust and unfeeling policy of her Majesty’s Ministers. Had a peremptory mandate bidden us to depart, —-had
our property been confiscated at once, —we should not have more clearly suffered a tyrannical exercise of Imperial domination.
We will not trespass on your patience by even reciting the Petitions and Protests which have been presented to the Queen, the Parliament,
and the Nation. At considerable expense and toil, we have placed our whole case in the hands of the British Legislature,—and laid our supplications
at the foot of the Throne.
As a last resource we turn to our Fellow-Colonists, who, united to us by the strictest ties, are liable to the same wrongs; and who will not be
indifferent spectators of sufferings which they may ultimately share.
If you look at the chart of Van Diemen’s Land you will perceive her geographical position establishes a relation to the adjacent Colonies, which
no laws can disown, and no time dissolve. A few hours convey vessels from our shores to the ports of Victoria, New South Wales, and South Australia,
and a few days’ sail to New Zealand, and thence to the Islands that crowd the Pacific Ocean.
The Constitution lately proposed to the Parliament of Great Britain will tend to consolidate the Australasian Colonies, Her Majesty’s Ministers
have taught the Communities established in this portion of the Empire, that their ultimate interests are one : that upon the public spirit*
intelligence, and virtue of each, in no small measure depend the happiness and prosperity of all.
We remind you, that in twenty year's from the present moment, should Transportation continue, and the annual number remain stationary,
seventy thousand, or eighty thousand convicted persons will have passed through Yan Diemen’s Land into the neighbouring Colonies. They will
consist of men not only originally depraved—all will have gone through the demoralizing probation of public gangs : they will all have dwelt for
several years in exclusively convict society, where every prevailing sympathy must be tainted with the habits of crime.
This island will not be a filter; but the accumulation of moral wretchedness will unavoidably contaminate every mind, and stamp on every
character the impression of its peculiar constitution.
The sacrifice of this Colony will not, therefore, exempt the neighbouring settlements from any portion of the mischief to direct
Transportation. They will receive the prisoners later in life, but deteriorated in character. Evil associations and evil men become worse and worse ;
such is the dictate of reason ; and such is the solemn warning written in the oracles of God.
If, then, your Colony had cause to protest against the infliction of this evil in a limited degree, how much stronger must be your opposition to a
system which will bring into your streets, your houses, your hospitals and prisons, the crime, insanity, decrepitude, and pauperism, ever consequent on
Transportation, aggravated by transmission through a Country in moral ruin.
Were we to appeal to a principle of selfishness in addressing our Countrymen, we might remind you, that the reputation of this entire Hemis-
phere is compromised by the condition of Yan Diemen’s Land. The nice geographical distinctions which Colonists make are lost in the distance. As
your vessels enter foreign ports, the line which divides your population from ours, fails to distinguish them. We have heard with regret, and not
without humiliation, that the British Name, every where respectable until now, has ceased to insure to many, who have never forfeited its sanction, the
common confidence of Foreign Nations. That a petty state, but of yesterday, has initiated laws intended to stigmatise all the inhabitants of the
Southern World, and attributing to the whole the character of Convictism.
We submit, Sir, to your humanity as a British fellow-subject, and to your discretion as a Christian Magistrate, the case of this Country.
In the mutation of human affairs, the arm of oppression, which has smitten us with desolation, may strike at your social well-being.
Communities allied by blood, language, and commerce, cannot long suffer alone:
We conjure you, therefore, by the unity of Colonial interests, —as well as by the obligations which bind all men, —to intercede with the strong
and unjust, on behalf of the feeble and the oppressed : to exert your influence to the intent that Transportation to Yan Diemen’s Land may for ever
cease.
I have the honor to be,
Your obedient humble servant,
W. H. BROWNE,
Chairman.
CHARLES COWPER, Esq.,
Chairman of the New South Wales Association for Preventing the Revival of Transportation.
APPENDIX D.
CONSTITUTION OF THE LEAGUE.
The object of the League is to secure, by moral means only, the abolition of Transportation to the Australasian Colonies.
All who sign the League and Solemn Engagement to be Members.
ORGANIZATION.
The Governing body of the League to be constituted by Delegates assembled in Conference, and appointed by the several Colonies as
hereinafter provided.
The Conference to appoint and approve of the various measures to be adopted during the year following their Meeting.
The Conference to appoint annually an Executive Board; also, a permanent paid Agent to travel through the Colonies, and under the
direction of the Local Councils, to hold meetings, and otherwise to promote the business of the League.
On the nomination of the Councils, the Conference to appoint Representatives of the League in London, who shall be authorised to employ
agents, who, by means of the Press, public meetings, and all other lawful methods, shall concentrate public opinion in the United Kingdom, on the
object of the League.
The Conference before separating to determine the next place of meeting at which the Executive Board shall report. The Board for the year
to be composed of residents in the Colony where the last meeting of the Conference was held.
In the several Colonies Councils shall be chosen by the Members, to consist of nine persons.
The Councils shall appoint the Delegates to the Conference. Non-Residents may be chosen as the Delegates.
The money contributed in a Colony shall be under the exclusive control of the Local Councils. The Local Councils may appropriate money for
the disposal of the Conference, to be expended in general and special purposes. Money so appropriated shall be remitted before the meeting of Conference
to the Bank of Australasia, there to be placed at the credit of the Treasurer of the Delegates.
The Council may grant money to the Executive Board of the Conference in any emergency.
Each Council shall appoint Representatives in England, consisting of gentlemen resident in the United Kingdom, to be called the London
Board of the Australasian League, with whom the Colonial Executive Board of Conference shall correspond.
To secure the objects of the League, £20,000 shall be raised in five instalments, the first payable immediately, and the rest in equal sums on
the first day of January in each following year.
11


TAff
t J
12
APPENDIX E
The Proceedings of the Conference of the Australasian League, held in the City of Sydney, New South Wales, during the Month
of April, and terminating the Third Day of May, 1851.
AT THE CONFERENCE:
PRESENT
Charles Cowper, Esq.,
Robert Campbell, Esq.,
Gilbert Weight, Esq.,
The Rev. John West,
W. P. Weston, Esq.,
|- Delegates for New South Wales.
1 Delegates for Van Diemen’s Laud.
Wm. Wmtmeih, Em, M.L.C, 1 Me for victoria.
Henry Moore, Esq., M.L C., J
Dr. Alexander Thomson, Mayor of Geelong, and Delegate for Geelong.
Resolved :
Ist.—That the President of this Conference he the President of the Australasian League, and that Charles Cowper, Esq., be President.
2nd.—That the President be the Convener of the Conference.
3rd.—That in case of death, or Resignation of the President, a Convener of the Conference he appointed by the Executive Board.
4th. —That all Official Documents addressed on behalf of the Conference of the Australasian League be signed by the President, and that such
Documents he taken as the Act of the Conference.
sth. That the President address letters at his discretion to Public Bodies, Ecclesiastical and Secular, requesting their co-operation in furthering the
objects of the League.
6th. That Gilbert Wright, Esq., be requested to act as Secretary to the Conference during this Session.
7th. That the proceedings of the Conference he duly recorded in a hook to be.provided for that purpose, and in such book there shall be inserted ait
account of the origin and past proceedings of the Australasian League, and Minutes shall be entered of all business transacted at its future
sittings, and such book shall reman in the custody of the President.
gth. That the Executive Board of the Australasian League shall consist of the Councillors of the New South Wales Branch of the League, with
power to appoint Committees as occasion shall require.
9th.—That all appointments made by the Conference shall continue until superseded.
10th. That twenty per cent, of the subscriptions collected by the Local Councils of the Australasian League, shall be placed at the disposal of the
Executive Board; and that the Board be authorised to call upon the said Councils for their contributions.
1 ith. That a sum, not exceeding one hundred pounds, be placed at the disposal of the Honorary Secretary, to be appointed by the Executive Board, to
indemnify him against the Clerical cost of that department.
12th. That the following gentlemen having been respectively nominated the Representatives of the Local Councils, do constitute the London Board of
the League :
Robert Lowe, Esq., i
Archibald Michie, Esq., V Nominees for New South Wales.
C. B. Adderley, Esq., M.P. J
John Alexander Jackson, Esq., v
William Jackson, Esq., V Nominees for Van Diemen’s Land.
Charles M'Lachlan. Esq., )
Charles M'Lachlan, Esq.,
The Right Hon. Lord Ashley, M.P., x
Sir William Molesworth, M.P., [■ Nominees for Victoria,
William Ewart, Esq., M.P., J
13th.—That the Executive Board be authorised to appoint Members of the London Board in the room of any one or more of the gentlemen above
mentioned, who may decline to act, or who may resign.
14th.—That the London Board be empowered to add to their number.
15th.—That the Delegates of the Colonies in London be ex-officio members of the London Board.
16th, —That the London Board be authorised to employ a Secretary, and that each of the Colonies contribute one hundred pounds towards his salary.
17th. That the Executive Board may place funds at the disposal of the London Board, which the latter shall expend as directed, or according to their
discretion, in the employment of the public press, in the holding of meetings, or otherwise in aiding the Delegates from the several Colonies
in their appeals to public opinion, and generally in promoting the objects of the League.
18th.—That the Executive Board shall conduct all correspondence with the London Board.
19th.—That if occasion shall require, the Local Councils of the several Colonies may communicate with the London Board, and the London Board with
them ; but that the Local Councils are requested in any such case to forward copies of their communications to the Executive Board.
20th. —That the Delegates of each Colony shall be considered Delegates of the whole League, and be designated Delegates of the Australasian League
for the Colony of New South Wales, (or as the case may he.)
gist.—That the Executive Board issue a Letter of Instructions to the London Delegates of the several Colonies, in the name of the Conference, to be
signed by the President of the League.
22nd.—That the London Delegates be requested to keep journals, and to forward copies of them quarterly to the London Board, to the Constituent
Colony, and to the Executive Board.
23rd.—That the Conference request the Rev. John West and W. P. Weston, Esq., to represent them as Delegates throughout the Australasian Colonies,
and that the Executive Board have power to add to their number.
24th.—That the Conference for the year 1852 be held at Hobart Town, at a time to be fixed by the President, when the Executive Board shall report
according to the Constitution.
26th.—That no provision in the Constitution of the Australasian League shall be considered to be prohibitory, unless such be its direct import.
CHARLES COWPER,
.President of the Australasian League.
Gilbert Wright,
Honorary Secretary.
T. DANIEL, PRINTER, YORK-STREET, SYDNEY.
VP-
