

LETTERS
BY
COLONEL AHEARNE V.D
TO
WESTIMNSTER GAZETTE
ON
SALONICA SERBIA-MaRSEILLES
WITH
FOREWORD BY
HER, EXCELLENCY
LADY HELEMUNRO FURCUSON
ILLUSTRATED




HOUSE.
Melbourne ,
16 th february,. 19X6*
Dear Colonel Ahaarna,
I thank you for letting ma read
the letters in which you describe your resent experien-
ces with a Red Croaa Unit In Eastern Europe.
These sketches of placae which the turn of
events has brought so prominently before the public
will prove moat interesting to those whose relatives
have bean especially identified with fighting in the.
East; be welcomed by those who, having worked,
so long and faithfully for the Hed Cross Society, are
naturally keen to know something of the practical work
la the fleid l of that great organisation.
It ia very good of you to say that you have
undertaken this publication in order to be in a
position to give further assistance to Red Cross fixnda.
Youra sincerely,
Menzies'Hotel, I /I
MELBOURNE.




LETTERS
BY
COLONEL AHEARNE V.D.
TO
WESTMINSTER GAZETTE
ON
SALONICA SERBIA
MARSEILLES
SYDNEY
SYD. DAY, PRINTER LTD,
1916


“I saw it cornin’” (torpedo) “and I just pops over the side, I puts her little helm to
starboard, and she sheers off round our stern, and, of course, never touched us.”
For letterpress see page 55.


THE PEACEFUL PENETRATION OF
SERBIA
is a phrase, the mild alliteration of which
may find excuse, since it comes to me bor-
rowed from a bright woman, with whom I
have lately had pleasant conversation. It
is appropriately applicable to the merciful
work that is in performance by Lady Paget
and numbers of other benevolent people.
The unfortunate country to which I find
myself voyaging has been a theatre of deso-
lation from three years’ warfare and of
appalling mortality from the scourges of
rabidly infectious diseases. To help in re-
lieving the widespread distress, thirty-six
men and eighty women are proceeding in
H.M. Transport Abhassieh, bound for
Salonica, in Greece. Eight British organi-
zations are represented. They are sending
surgical instruments, medical stores, dress-
ings for the wounded, foodstuffs for the
sick in abundance, material for kitchens;


and landing eight motor ambulance wag-
gons, four touring cars, one complete field
hospital of two hundred beds for the front
up at Belgrade, and another one with
every requirement to establish two hos-
pitals, each of one hundred patients, in
Montenegro. The struggle that lies in front
of this unit before it reaches the chosen
spot at Ipee will be arduous. The route
from Mitrovitza railway terminus follows
rough tracks, over mountain ranges that
must be negotiated by the means of small
bullock carts and mules. All members of
the expedition are prepared to meet bravely
any difficulty that may occur while engaged
in the dutiful erramd. British all, they hail
from every part—if not from China to
Peru, I am correct in writing from the
States of Malay to far-away Chili.
There are two ladies, one who lived in
Penang, the other in Valparaiso. As we
pass along the African coast, a young sur-
ON H.M, TRANSPOET ABBASSIEH.


geon discloses a knowledge of Tripoli,
where he, when a student, served during the
Italian invasion with a Red Cross Corps
sent out to the Arabs by a Mohammedan
gentleman residing in London. He tells me
there are three Cyrenaicas eastern,
middle, western. Communication from
Eastern to Western Cyrenaica goes by
Cairo and London, as the inhabitants of
the middle division are the most accom-
plished brigands that exist. From each of
my companions one may learn some useful
information. The Doctor, who was
physician at the Court of the Amir of
Afghanistan, is in our party. We have
lady motor drivers, dressed most suitably
in khaki from helmet to puttee, their short
skirts being practically long kilts, and
wearing “Sam Browne” belts. The Sister
in charge, until the day before we left, of
the Medical Out-patients’ Department in
the London Hospital, has quite won my ad-
ON H.M, TRANSPORT ABBASSIEH.


miration for affectionate championship, in
my hearing, of her poor people. “Fifteen
hundred (the daily average seen) are
nearly all good,’’ she declares, with mois-
tened eyes. This, in answer to a criticism
unfavorable to their honesty. “I know
them,” she says, “you would think dif-
ferently if you knew, what sacrifices they
are making—my poor old women, they are
such dears!” I gain from her they com-
bine to provide, out of their scanty means,
useful articles in shirts and jackets and
stockings. Those who can sew extend their
hours of toil; those who cannot also work
longer hours on slawe wages for a modest
fund, from which they make their pur-
chases. She tells of an old woman whose
income is three shillings a week, parish
relief, and two shillings from her son to
pay the rent. She came one day, proudly
carrying a little parcel; it contained pat-
terns of shirts, and she achieved her
ON H.M. TRANSPOET ABBASBIEH.


H.M. Transport, “Abbassieh.”
Malta.
Coal lighters, Malta.




triumph in this wise: She wrote to the
Daily Mail for the pattern, she begged for
old newspapers, and cut out twelve copies,
which might be handed to persons able to
buy material, but ignorant of the way to
make it up. This effort cost her fourpence
halfpenny—a penny the letter, threepence
the pattern, a halfpenny for posting from
the office—the Widow’s Mite, truly!
MALTA.
At Malta we spent the greater part of a
day. I met, at the Club, two men I had not
seen, one for twenty years, the other for
fifteen; but such incidents are not odd in
these stirring times. After lunch there,
when in St. John’s Cathedral, the London
Sister came excitedly to say, ‘ ‘ Oh, the Aus-
tralian soldiers at the Hospital are longing
to see yon, since I told them you are here. ’ ’
Immediately I hurried off. Through a nar-
row passage a high-vaulted doorway ad-
MALTA.


View showing half the length of the ward.
MALTA.


mits one to a large quadrangle, around
which, in two stories, the wards are
grouped. A nurse in an operating room
was cleaning up, and of her I asked the
way. She left her job and presently said,
“You and I had tea together with Colonel
and Nurse Eeay in the National Liberal
Club.” Again an incident! How the dear
fellows brightened with the recognition of
the Commonwealth buttons! I saw them
from all States. One from Burwood, Syd-
ney; his name? “Dewley, sir.” “That’s
very near Dooley,” I said. “That’s what
they call me, sir.”
There are some cases of convalescing
pneumonia, and one of pleurisy; these
medical cases showed greater evidence of
sickness than the surgical ones. Many of
these latter had been wounded in the legs
by bullets passing through or lodging in the
fleshy parts, without hitting the bone. They
were lodged in a lofty ward wherein two
MALTA.


hundred and fifty beds are comfortably
placed along the walls, and fifty down the
centre of the floor. As I walked away with
the Sister in charge, I told her of a Lanca-
shire soldier I had been talking to in a bed
next an Australian. “He never said a
word about himself; it was all about what
the Australians had done.” “Oh,” she
said, “he’s a Manchester; they’re just like
that, and yet they think themselves the salt
of the earth.” I left this fine building,
founded by the Knights in the days of their
beneficent activity. Unused for long, long
time past, it was providentially to hand,
and was speedily prepared in the urgent
necessity that has arisen to us in our un-
fortunate circumstance. Noble work is be
ing done in this noble structure; noble men
are enduring their troubles unmurmuring.
1 ‘ Turn on the gramophone, and hand him a
cigarette, that’s all the worry he gives,”
were the last words from the Sister, as she
MALTA.


In the valley of the vardar.
The white tower.
Crossing the river.
The Salon, Hotel Splendide.




bade her good-bye at the door of her ward.
After tea at Blackley’s, on returning to
the steamer which had been coaling, from
the Strada Reale came band music, sound-
ing down the narrow street in attractive
chords, prompting one to hurry nearer.
’Twas a soldier's funeral ahead. To
Chopin’s weird strains, the khakied party,
with the deliberate step of the impressive
function, slowly marched. Elevated be-
yond, above his men’s heads, the straight
back and helmet of a mounted officer moved
rythmically with those on foot, resulting
from the cadenced pace of his intelligent,
sympathetic horse. Thus another went to
his grave in Malta cemetery, escorted in
honor, when the sun’s heat was yielding to
the advancing evening, and followed in the
rearmost rank by mourners who had made
his last hours peaceful, the uniformed
nurses of that best of all Corps—the
R.A.M.C.
MALTA.


SERBIA.
From Salonica, going north towards
Guevgueli, on the Serbian border, the
ground is swampy clay and sand, having
little allevium yet. It has been only two
or three million years emerging from the
sea. After journeying through some wild
gorges, one reaches the wide valley of the
Vardar River. Here the land is fertile
enough to please that most difficult person
in the world to satisfy—the British farmer.
It is sinful that this garden beautiful
should be left untilled. In the morning
early, on the sky-line far off, a solitary man
is outlined into view; as the slow train
nears him, you find a peasant, with Ameri-
can rifle slung across either shoulder,
watching for an enemy; in the late evening
you may see another, as the day declines.
A rare husbandman at mid-day leaves his
little plough, takes up his rifle from the
handle, and comes to the railway side to be
assured that all is well. How, under these


conditions, can the fruits of the soil be ex-
tracted to its capacity?
The green hills flank the plain and slope
down gently. The trees upon them, in the
distance, are like the toy trees of childhood;
they please the eye, arranged by nature in
orderly rows, from the summits descending,
until they have been made to disappear in
cleared fields, whereon white square houses,
roofed with brown, and neat little hay-
ricks provide a general resemblance to
model farms. But the men are absent; they
have been warring for three years past.
I have heard of one old man who is now in
his sixth war.
The great product of the country is pigs.
Their only traffic was with Austria before
the line was made to Salonica, so when
Austria had to put pressure on to gain a
political advantage, she simply declared the
Serbian pigs were infected with swine
fever, causing them to be quarantined and
SERBIA.


unmarketable. This was known as
‘ ‘ Schwein Politik.”
Thus the Serbs have been hampered and
exploited by the Germans, into whose
hands the Obrenovich dynasty played. It
was really his subservience to Austria,
against the interests of his country, that
brought the murders of Alexander and his
Queen Draga some years ago, when they
were butchered and thrown out of the
window.
The present King Peter, of the rival
Karageorge family, was then led from the
Paris Boulevards and given the throne. A
wise ruler, he has placed the State on a
firm foundation.
All Serbians have nice manners—peas-
ant men, and peasant women too, seize one
by the hand to kiss it, in showing gratitude
for little services. The educated are most
courteous, performing their parts in social
life with natural grace and just enough
SERBIA.


Outside the Greek Hospital, Salonica.
‘From trendies.”
The Front, Salonica.




ceremonial gesture. But there is a failing,
they talk too much; they talk for talk’s sake
—just as in Greece (that land of polyglot
tongues, or perhaps more so in Greece),
every person is capable of saying much
without any particular result. It makes a
quiet Englishman bored.
The Bulgar man is very different. I can-
not answer for the women. He uses few
words, but means them.
The gravest infliction on the traveller in
Serbia is the absence of any improvement
in sanitary detail since the days of Adam.
In the best hotels I found conditions which
I must describe as impossible and disgust-
ing. In hospitals primitive habits existed.
I cannot touch on peasant methods.
Much good work in reforming this vital
concern has been done through the winter
and the spring by Colonel Hunter, Sir
Alexander Ogston, and an American Sani-
tary Corps, but we fear the Serb will revert
SERBIA.


to his ancient habits when the foreign in-
fluence is no longer with him. As a conse-
quence of the energy of our people, typhus
has been beaten for the time. We have on
our side also the coming of the sun’s heat
of summer.
The wounded from the Austrian invasion
are all disposed of except some incurables,
and the hospitals are nearly empty, but for
some victims to the sequences that follow
typhus. These are heart muscle weakness
and gangrene of the limbs. In No. 6 Hospi-
tal at Kragujevatz is a man whose both
thighs were amputated. Certainly he was
not so dismembered as the poor fellow cry-
ing at Malta, whom I heard when passing
through some time ago. He had been
mangled extensively. His weeping was
after the removal of his second arm, so re-
maining a trunk only, as the thighs had
been taken earlier. I wonder how such a
case can be reconciled to his future exist-
SERBIA.


ence. Those of my age will remember an
M.P. for his County, who was capable of
fishing and riding to hounds, who became
married and had a family, but his depriva-
tion of arms and legs was from birth, and
therefore practically unfelt.
I trust our country will not neglect, as
she did after the Crimea, those who in this
great war have become pitifully disabled
in the service of our Empire.
Much gangrene mortality has been
avoided through the strenuous massage
work put in by our devoted nurses, who
have been unremitting in their potential
efforts. These dear women are Russian,
French and English; all deserve the highest
praise, and will doubtless get their rewards
hereafter.
On some of my inspections I pleased
them by taking cinema pictures in which
they are included. I led a party of them
one afternoon into a Serbian Orthodox
SERBIA.


Church, when we were just in time to hear
the Antiphon delivered from behind the
veil. Presently a grey-bearded priest is-
sued from the middle altar through a door
in the screen; he placed himself in the
centre, with his back, of course, to us
observers, and chanted the words of his
psalm. The verses were replied to alter-
nately by his servitor, who had been sweep-
ing the floor and continued to sweep, while
he mechanically responded.
Now that the warmth of the sun is com-
ing, I hail him gladly for his brightness
and heat. Ido not wonder at the fire-wor-
shippers, who established the religion of
His Majesty the Sun; that is a symbolic,
definite, active opponent to the darkness of
night—night associated with crime, when
misery grows more miserable in the gloom,
and despair becomes more desperate.
SERBIA.


A street in Nish.
Gevgelitja Railway Station.
“Are most courteous.”
At the hospital, Nish.




SALONICA.
“I have my place once more in the Sun, ’*
a saying invented by the ambitious creature
who too hurriedly demanded to be shone
on in glittering armour. “Soutra” is Ser-
bian for the Spanish “Hasta Manyana.”
meaning, ‘ ‘ Oh, to-morrow will do. ’ 1 There
is a deal of “Soutra” about in these parts.
It is hard to decide, if the semi-Oriental has
not got the choicer way! lam sure I
should prefer to be the bare-headed gamin
who sells fresh beer at Guevgueli Sailway
Station rather than his counterpart in Eng-
land’s harshest of climates. The virile
Ottomans, who conquered these Balkans,
left descendants to live on the fat of the
land, even up to very recent times. This
house in which I write, the Splendide Hotel,
was built in 1905 to the order of Chakir
Pasha. It has sixty rooms, designed for
the luxurious residence of his ladies. The
centre of the first floor is a large circular
chamber, in diameter sixty feet, whose


dome rises gracefully to the roof, thirty-
six feet high, lighting efficiently the salon
by day, and from which depends the largest
of ornamental chandeliers for night. The
floor is of the most perfect circular tessela-
tion to be anywhere seen. Here His High-
ness held receptions and entertainments,
which could be witnessed from the second
floor, in separate marble boxes, by ladies
of the harem comfortably looking down.
Marble steps, stairways, pillars have be-
come common as bricks to a cockney in all
public offices and hospitals.
Here perhaps they are accentuated, be-
cause of the completeness of the superb
design in floor, in stairway, in contour of
the reception salon. It is unfortunately
furnished with the Third Napoleon’s time
of Plushette. This tawdry material of
Eugenie’s influence still prevails. If it had
not these dust accumulating, Maida Yale
upholsteries, the room would be very
SALONICA.


noble. How it would have been distin-
guished if it were hung with Rose du Barri
brocade!
We have endless worries over stores and
all material. Many things have been
stupidly sent out; for instance, by one ship,
two hundred upholstered mattresses for
Montenegro. Of course these could not
have been conveyed to that mountain State
by any means at our disposal. The question
was solved by the greater number of them
being sunk in a lighter, and the balance car-
ried on to Alexandria, whence they never
returned. Bed ticking would have been the
needed article, which, filled with hay, was
my bed in places.
On another occasion I made the acquaint-
ance of a Quartermaster, whose story to
me is: He had been selected by a Duchess
in a moment, although he had vainly sought
employment of any sort, in anything. After
his appeal to her had been also hopeless, he
SALONICA.


War Office said Shipped by
Received by Quarter-
Transport for Salonique.
master at
Salonique.
80
Bundles of tents
Three
160
Loose upright poles
Three
13
Bundles of door poles
None
160
Tent pegs
Some
160 Loose mallets
All
160
Bundles of tent walls
Three
or four
8
Bundles of ridge poles
None
4
Bundles or arm racks
None
plunged, and said, “I have Slav blood in
me, your Grace.” “You are a Quarter-
master,” she promptly replied. Thereupon
he was commissioned. Continuing, he said,
44 1 knew nothing about stores, or books, or
money. I have been an accompanist to
musicians, and have been in Austria and
Hungary pursuing my calling.” I regard
him as 4 4 the Wandering Minstrel.”
Bearded, with a cigarette unsmoked droop-
ing down from the lower lip almost always,
he is spasmodic, freaky, and futile. He
submitted to me a list of stores, as sent
from the War Office by a certain transport.
There is amazing discrepancy between that
list and the statement of what he tallied at
Salonica—
SALONICA.


Nish, from the hospital.
Serbian children.




Tis a pity there should be so much waste
ol valuable things. Servia is well on her
feet again, and does not require fresh as-
sistance at present. Indeed, one has re-
liable information that unpacked stocks of
good dressings in some depots have been
destroyed by rats. And our nurses are
without patients. I have reported to the
War Office that in some places their day’s
occupation is finished when they have re-
turned from a morning ride with Serbian
officers. I have cabled that if no fighting
was imminent, nurses desiring active work
should be disposed for service at Cairo,
Alexandria, Malta, or Dardanelles Hospital
Ship. Therefore, I felt justified when Cap-
tain Brodrick, A.D.C. to Sir lan Hamilton,
came up from Athens to see me on behalf
of his General, regarding a transfer of
nurses for duty at Lemnos, where it was
intended to establish a hospital, to say I
could let him have a dozen.
SALONICA.


If we had not so very much need our
selves of all our possible resources, I could
recommend for assistance, but do not, the
crowds of refugees that have been driven
penniless to Greece out of Asia Minor, Con-
stantinople and Bulgaria. Up to 9th July, in
Macedonia alone, 121,365 persons of this
description tumbled in by all steamers, just
as they stood up, without spare clothing or
baggage of any sort. There is a special
department, ably administered, for dealing
with them. Six thousand two hundred and
forty-six families have been settled on the
land; these cease to have relief. There re-
main 91,631 persons; or to put it another
way, 23,420 families are still provided will)
daily bread, for it may only be bread alone,
when the allowance is two pennies per head
per day. The monthly cost of this allow-
ance is 475,000 francs. This does not in-
clude medical attendance and rent of roof
covering. The total charge for relief of ah
kinds is 600,000 francs per month.
SALONICA.


Greece will get into a tight place, I am
inclined to think, notwithstanding the re-
turn of Venezelos to power. The people in
the street seem jubilant at this, and the
army officers I have spoken to seem eager to
join the war on our side. But nothing is
genuine here. 1 feel they are opportunists.
The place is full of spies. No one can be
trusted. A fine type of Englishwoman, a
Sister of St. Paul, Matron of the French
Hospital, tells me of her experience lately.
She has been in Salonica and Bulgaria 25
years. When the Bulgar population had to
withdraw from here on the occupation by
Greece three years since, a Bulgar man en-
trusted his property in a house to Sister
Augustine for collection of rents. A Greek
lias been living in it. He would not pay,
and he would not leave. Exercising long
patience, she at length attempted to put
the law in operation. After excessive post-
ponement, there was an order of ejectment,
SALONICA.


and a bailiff proceeded to leisurely eject.
Some few things were on the outside by 11
a.m., but was the time for rest and
coffee and other necessary comforts. So
what more natural for the friendly bailiff
than to accept the hospitality of the poor
Greek family, and sympathise with them
in being the victims of Bulgarian rapacity.
The conduct of the bailiff vitiated the whole
procedure, as was intended, and the case
of the Sister was “as you were.” Speak-
ing of justice, she said to me, “In the Turk
days, you had to pay for it, certainly; if yon
paid enough, you got it; but with the Greek
now, although one pays, one does not get it.
They’re cheats.”
Undoubtedly, the King hates Yenezelos,
who, if any of them can be straight, is a
special friend of the Allies, because he is
confident of our ultimate victory. The
Entourage of the Palace is German, I
wonder if Shinas, assassin of the late King
SALONICA.


Salonica.
To show an Australian colonel and his friends”
Villa Allatina.




George, were a hireling. Queen Alex-
andra’s brother was not pro-German. One
may judge why Venezelos was not per-
mitted to pursue his policy. I wonder if,
now he has returned to office, the German
influence can beat him again. The odds
against him are very considerable, for the
Germans stop at nothing to gain their ends.
Of course Venezelos is right, and Greece
will find, if his advice is not followed, she
will have taken the wrong road. She is one
great coast-line exposed to our naval might.
The Court must be blind to doubt on which
side the alliance of Greece should be.
Nothing active remains to be done; and I
sit on the balcony of my hotel in Salonica,
looking at the mill pond of harbor, with its
awakening life. The sea-gulls rest on the
quiet surface, unstirring yet to search in
rivalry for their early breakfasts. Here
and there lazy boatmen are just astir to
begin their paddling art.
As I look to my left, on the sea-wall front,
SALONICA..


a short mile away stands out what is knowi
now as “The White Tower.” The title t(
white has been changed in quite recent
times, for it bore the significant name oj
Eed, or to be explicit “Bloody.” Th
reason why! Those who entered as prison
ers were cut up and pitched through tin
embrasures into the water at its base. Th
Turkish residents never promenaded fur
ther afield eastward than this prominent
spot on their feast days or Sunday walks
It was accepted to be the boundary stone ol
old Salonica. New Salonica, wherein th(
Consuls live, stretches beyond. The prompi
method of disposing undesirables was *
privilege of the Sovereign in most coun
tries during the middle ages, and was re
tained and continued and practised b}
Abdul Hamid until his deposition by the
Young Turk Party in 1909.
There was no young man who could be
induced willingly to go inside his Palace in
SALONICA.


Stamboul, as anyone so dariing never came
out. In Salonica, to whichi place he was
sent, with harem reduced tco eighteen, im-
prisoned in Villa Allatini, amd guarded by
250 soldiers, his powers in this direction
ceased. How he chafed cm tine higher story
in a chamber the window of which is to the
right. To the master of life and death,
privileged to coddle and indulge in hun-
dreds of concubines, whatt a descent!
Shorn of all authority and only eighteen
women left him! And he had in his Sultan-
ship days a corps of pearl seekers, which
meant men on the search for pretty, attrac-
tive women. These he debauched lascivious-
ly, while those he discarded were handed
over to officers as wives, their dowry being
his silken clothing that he had worn once,
and other things discarded, for he never
used a garment a second time, or a table-
cloth twice, or sheets or cups or plates; and
now that Salonica has become Grecian ter-
ritory, he has been shifted to Brussa in
SALONICA..


Asia Minor, with his limited wifedom and
his abstracted dominance.
While referring to Salonica as Grecian
now, it is worth while to regard the map
illustration I attach. It will be seen that
Serbia has not got her exit to the sea. Bel-
gium, as she is near us, our neighbour, is
voted a martyr, as she has been, and is, and
SALONICA.


“There was a parade for me.”
“And a fanfare of trumpets.”
The Royal Engineers of Greece.




oMains our rightfully. But
lit( le Serbia has suffered and been true like-
wise, as the following miemorandum of an
authoritative elderly gemtleman puts the
case for me in his own words:—
“D’apres mon opiniom la Serbie a de-
pensee 350,000,000 frames et a perdue
150.000 citoyens pendantt la guerre Serbo-
turque et Serbo-bulgare. La Serbie a de-
pensee 450,000,000 frames et a perdue
250.000 citoyens depuis de commencement
de la guerre Serbo-autriichienne jesqu’ a
present—l Juillet 1915 —Comme on voit,
ces, sont les tres grandes sacrifies pour un
petit Etat de 4,000,000 citoyens.
“La Serbie est seule de L’Etats bal-
caniques, qui a ete restee fidele aux Allies
et qui a jointe son sort avec la destinee des
Allies. La preuve pour cette affirmation
est la circonstance, que PAutriche-Hongrie
a offert trois fois la paix iseparee a Serbie.
et la Serbie a refusee cette proposition dans
toutes fois.
SALONIKA.


“La deniere ville serbe ‘Gievgieli’ est 60
kilometres eloignee de Salonique et de la
mer Eggee.
“II est juste que la Serbie doit gagner
I’issue surla mer, parce que la mer est
necessaire pour un Etat comme les
poumons pour un organisme humain, et
parce qu ’un Etat ne pent exister sans la
mer.
“Les autres Etats balcaniques; Eou-
manie, Bulgarie et la Grece ne peuvent
jamais etre les amis des allies, parce que
sur les trones des Etats mentiones, asseyent
les djmasties allemandes. Us n’ont rien
sacrifies dans cette guerre, suivant ils n ? out
aucun droit a’prendre part au partage des
gains militaires, ’ ’
TRANSLATION.
It is my opinion that Serbia has spent
350,000,000 francs and lost 150,000 citizens,
during the Serbo-Turkish and Serbo-Bul-
garian wars.
SALONICA.


Serbia has spent 4450,000,000 francs and
lias had 250,000 casualties and sick, of her
people, since the beginning of this present
Serbo-Anstrian war: down to the present
date (Ist July, 1915)).
It is plain these arre very great sacrifices
for a little State of 4,-,000,000 in population.
Serbia is the onlyr state of the Balkans
which has been stauinch to the Allies, and
which has joined her;* lot with the destiny of
the Allies. The pro»of of this statement is
in the fact that Austro-Hungary has
offered separate pernce to Serbia on three
occasions, and Serbiia has refused to enter-
tain the proposition each time.
The border town of Serbia, Gievgieli, is
fifty miles distant ffrom Salonica and the
Aegean Sea.
It is only fair thait Serbia should be per-
mitted to obtain a sceaport, for the right of
entrance to the oceam is as necessary for a
producing country as lungs are for man
SALOONIGA.


and woman, and becanse a State cannot
grow without the sea.
The other Balkan States, Eoumania,
Bulgaria, and Greece, are never able to be
true friends of the Allies, because, on the
thrones of these States mentioned, sit
rulers who are Germans.
They have made no sacrifices in this war,
therefore it follows they should have no
right to any advantages in the settlements
when peace measures are arranged.
Greece cannot hold this place. She knows
it. The port is the natural outlet for
Serbia. Here I saw barges full of Lip-
ton’s Tea, ex the “Memphis” of Mar-
seilles, for up country. Its primary cost, I
do not know. It sells in London for 1/6;
here it is priced at 10 francs per pound—
say, 8 shillings— not bad speculation, the
voyages of the 4 ‘Erin,”
SALONIOA.


“All were explained.”
“Soldiers entering cavern.”
“Ropes controlled the tops.”




I have already endeaavoured to convey
that Serbia is a fertile garden. Of what
is that generous possession if she is
barred from the sea unreasonably by Greek
occupation of that strip <of land which cuts
off Serbia from the Aegean.
I f we do not arrange ifairly this Balkan
question now, it will eve3r continue to be a
hornet’s nest of disconttent. The Bulgar
has already a strip of ccoast-line between
K aval a and Enos, but he does not own
either of those sites. Venezelos, I think,
was prepared to give to Bulgaria Kavala,
which might easily be made into a good
working port. Dedeagacih is no good; it is
an open roadstead, wiith very shallow
water. That was good pcolicy. Greece has
waterways in surplus. Itf we do not estab-
lish Serbia at Saloniqme, which is her
right, and place Kavala in Bulgaria, the
Bulgar will come over tHie mountains and
seize Salonique, sure.
SALONIKA.


He tried it not long since, within three
months only, hut he did not come in force,
and Greece was prepared for the surprise.
This brings me to the Greek soldier. He
is paid y 2 d. daily and gets a loaf every two
days. He is shabby and is poorly shod. I
met amongst them Spiros Calligeros, who
comes from Temora and Wyalong, N.S.
Wales. He was pleased, as well as I. How
he longs to return to Australia! He says,
“There’s too much war in this country.”
Very different the officers. Smart, neat,
their uniforms well cut, they are a fine lot
of men; inclined to swagger in the late
afternoon, always with clanking sword.
His pay as lieutenant is only £4 a month;
with each step of promotion, as indicated
by another star, he receives an additional
£4. The consequence is there is “pinching”
as a practice. For instance, if a soldier
becomes a hospital orderly, his pay would
be 3y 2 d. a day, but if he gets confined to
SALONICA.


hospital grounds for punishment, which is
frequently imposed, he is deprived of his
allowance, and it does not go back to
\ r enezelos.
There is a Tammany system of ordering
supplies. The soldier is supposed to be
served out with two pairs of boots each
year. He is lucky if he gets one. A £2O
voucher means £lO in stores.
The officer rarely marries until forty or
over. The marriage custom is entirely
based upon Dot, and that has to be settled
on the man always, for all time. The un-
married Grecian girl has no liberty, no
freedom of action, seldom knows the man
to whom she is disposed in marriage. When
the agency entrusted with the contract has
effected an agreement, the binding cere-
mony takes place quite quickly, in two
hours sometimes, or in no longer than
fourteen days at the further extreme.
SALONICA.


Whether it is worth our while to bother
ourselves overmuch in the affairs of these
unreliable peoples, asserts itself on the
negative side, after a consultation with a
knowledgeable authority this morning. Hig
fixed belief is that they should be left as
Kilkenny eats.
I have met citizens from America who
are all enthusiastic and desire speedy
transit to the place of distress. I informed
them in the Piazza, outside the cafes, of
the true state of things. They looked
doubtfully at me, who speaks with know-
ledge, having gained it, that there is no
necessity now for their coming. I struck
amongst the first lot, strange to say, Serbs
born in the United States of America, who
do not yet speak freely English. I tell them
of their beautiful country, which they are
to visit for the first time, and describe the
attractive landscape they are to witness.
Of course, this communication was pleasur-
SALONICA.


"Descends to the bottom quickly.”
“Up which they were able to climb.”
“Part of the men paraded.”




able to them. They have brought forty-five
motor cars and waggons to shift here and
shift there, material Which might be wanted
in the various localities. These vehicles are
not landed yet, on the fourth day of their
entering this port, Salonica, as the wharf
management plays into the hands of the
hotels, which are thronged with relief
units.
As well as the Serb contingent, are de-
tails from the Eastern States, including
boys from Princeton, Yale and Harvard.
Astonished am I to find myself talking to
a young fellow from New Hampshire, who
knows the name of Chesney, a household
word in Manchester of that State. Arthur
Chesney was an intimate friend in the long
days back. He had a delightful father-in-
law, a member of my profession, called
Lewis. If this meets the eye of people
around Boston, they will remember the
Globe Theatre, which he ran for amuse-
SALONICA.


ment. Some may be privileged also to have
recollection of Ms comfortable yacht,
“Juanita.” The captain, in the winter
time, when his ship was ont of commission,
held the door at the front of the theatre.
What memories the association with these
boys has awakened! I did my best for
them, and having special inside privileges,
I gathered together a few to come in com-
pany with me to Petit Cap, Carabonla.
This is a peninsular piece of land, semi-cir-
cular by itself, distant from the centre of
the town perhaps three miles. A white
road leads ns to buildings that are bar-
racks, which were Tnrqne. They have on
their walls the impress of the crescent nn-
removed still.
Two cavalry officers ride np in neat
white, saluting, who at once disposed them-
selves, with all kindness, to present every-
thing it was possible to show an Australian
Colonel and his American friends. Cavalry
SALONICA.


stalls were inspected; they were amazingly
clean; dear horses, all of them imported,
waited one’s caress. From America, from
Canada, from Hungary, and from Ireland,
they had come; bnt the smart cavalry officer
said the sweetest and best, the most good
tempered and tractable are those from Ire-
land. He gave ns, as evidence of his appre-
ciation, an exhibition, riding his own
charger over the exercise practice ground,
whereon were certainly jumps, but hardly
obstacles that would count with a cross-
country hunter. She took them like a
graceful bird. At the end, in the distance,
seemed a five-barred gate, painted pink,
and again over—never touching.
He returned, smiling, from his display,
for he rode well, and I am sure the dear
horse was as pleased as himself to obtain
our approval.
There was a parade for me, and a fanfare
of trumpets that will linger in my ears for
SALONIOA.


ever and ever; the higher notes of the
strain were delightfully accentuated in the
silver bugles, which were arranged to ob-
tain the purest effect and impression of
themselves. We did not depart until we
had received hospitality from this friendly
gentleman, Captain Nicholas Varthis, and
a Lieutenant of Artillery, Takis. D. Cam-
pouroglous, whose father is a Surgeon-
Colonel in the Greek Army.
The last visit was to the artillery depot,
where we saw handy little guns, with the
Turkish brand stamped upon the barrels,
but they were made in Krupps. They were
so clean, no brighter could their interiors
be, deserving a pat of approval on the
breech. Strange to say, the men who were
ordered to disclose their ways of action are
from Sacramento and Oaklands, California,
and Seattle, Washington State, about which
I could talk to them familiarly. They were
so glad, and like my friend of Australia.
SALONICA.


"I saw the distribution of
rations.”
“As I look at her.”
“He returned smiling.”
"I accompanied Charlie.”




Spiros Calligeros, they, too, longed for the
country where there is no war.
Just before saying good-bye to my de-
lightful host and guide, the Captain, whose
father was Ambassador in London for five
years, and whose mother was a personal
friend of Queen Alexandra when she was
Princess of Wales, I discovered, not from
himself, that he had been already wounded
twice in the recent wars, once in the thigh
and once in the chest. I expressed hope
that he would not be wounded again, and
he replied, like a soldier and a man, “We
are born to die, that is the destiny of our
birth. ’’
I was especially invited to inspect at
Villa Allatini the Royal Engineers of
Greece. As is my custom when on duty, I
was prompt to time, at 10 a.m., next day.
In the orderly room where I had been ex-
pected, coffee was provided; meantime, the
officer who had invited me was delayed at
SALONIOA.


a bathing parade on the beach, necessary
for the training of soldiers from the in-
terior. Most of these recrnits are from
Macedonia, who are regarded as Greeks
through the ages, bnt have been under con-
quered rule, and do not know their mother
tongue. They being from inland, cannot
swim, so they have to be taught, taught by
my officer, which is sufficient to say they
must learn. If any Queenslander or Indian
sees this, I wish to recall the personality of
the late General des Veoux, who dis-
tinguished himself by defending a fort in
the Khyber Pass, which won for him the
K.C.B. If reincarnation is possible, then
Lieutenant P. Apostolides is des Yeoux.
His mother, adoring him, is English; he is
thoroughly in accord with English methods
and, like his prototype, des Yeoux, has the
same alertness, from mixture with another
race.
Everything of fresh fortifications, of
camp movement, of provisioning was
SALONICA.


shown me; the newest kind of trench, the
speediest made field oven, the best form of
latrine; the well descent into the ground
for sapping, concealed pits for tripping
cavalry, all were explained in the most in-
telligent bright manner. As we passed a
deeply hollowed cavern, he remarked, “I
will show you later the men jumping over
this.” It occurred to me that it might be
done with the aid of a pole, but as there
was so much to interest as we proceeded, I
did not speculate further on the method,
and so, when the time came, a sudden order
rose from the officer, and from trenches,
where soldiers were hidden, eight men ap-
peared carrying hurriedly, what on their
approach looked like two long ladders, as
if of firemen. I may describe the cavern
fairly accurately as being at least 15 ft.
deep, twenty yards long, and fifteen wide
at the top; their implements were speedily
hurled to the bottom. I had noticed they
SALONICA,


were spiked on the lowered ends, so that
they would hold the ground; ropes con-
trolled the tops, one turned out to be two
sliding poles down which the soldier slid,
being cursed and sworn at if they hesitated
to descend to the bottom quickly; the
further one, already in place, developed
into a real ladder up which they were able
to climb, then they ran away to take cover
and as each little unit rushed along, to suc-
ceed the other before it, the art of present-
ing the smallest surface possible to the
enemy was practically carried out.
I saw the distribution of rations at the
dinner parade. Most orderly, most effec-
tively, each man was ticked off as he ob-
tained his loaf of about three pounds for
two days. We saw the serving out of soup,
a ladle to each man of about half a pint,
some of which was presented to me for tast-
ing. I can say with confidence it would not
in flavor or in essence do discredit to
Claridge’s Hotel.
SALONICA.


Pireaus (the port of Athens).
A scene at Mudros.
(Greeks on their way to embark for their army)
Greek Gunboat “Pireaus.”




There remained prisoners to be ex-
hibited, but I declined to have distress in-
troduced on such a cheery morning and it
was brought to a termination in hospitable
style by my Greek Britisher under the
shady trees where he and his brother offi-
cers, in cold lager, drank to me, “Bon
Voyage.”. This particular location is used
as a place where lectures are given to the
new recruits, some who do not know their
A.8.C.; those who are further advanced
are taught arithmetic; those still further
knowledgeable are led into deeper ways
of scientific engineering. The blackboard
and chalk were there to show that this work
is done. In the barrack hall is a series of
sketches made by a corporal, an illustra-
tion of trench life that would do credit to
any engineer in the British Army. In
the barrack room one finds that the new
soldier has to sleep on the floor to harden
him, and not for three months is he per-
mitted a mattress.
SALONICA.


If the rank soldier could come up in
parallel standard to his officer I consider
the Grecian Army would be equal to most.
My American friends and I had passed a
most instructive morning.
We enter Mudros in the early morning,
past the lighthouse followed by two ships
in line. A watchdog of the sea was on the
lookout to guard us. By this I mean a tor-
pedo destroyer; I had made their acquaint-
ance early in the beginning of the war, on
the way in the Mediterranean. These effec-
tive craft suddenly appeared out of the
blue, to make enquiry as to who we were.
Satisfied, they disappeared to the horizon,
quickly hull down. In Plymouth, of course,
one saw many. Yesterday at Dedeagach,
she was English; this morning, she is
French. And when we pass into the inner
area, where mines are laid thick beyond
MUDROS.


conception, another torpedo boat awaits,
to pilot ns through the danger zone. Again!
Troopships, the nearest one French, for
here is “Pilou” recognised by his cap.
Further away to port, beyond the French-
man is Transport ‘ ‘ 6180 and hard by is
“A. 29” on our starboard side. Nine
months ago I was on “A. 28,” but “29”
was not with our fleet of the first Aus-
tralian Expedition, as the other ten of
thirty-eight, were made up by the New
Zealanders, who had their own numerals
from Ito 10. “No. 6180.” Will this help
to convey what the business of transport in
war isf Of course, I cannot say to what
further figures in Admiralty charter the
ships employed may have grown. As I
look at her she is packed like sardines with
khaki-helmeted Tommies; Australian, I
know by instinct. And presently midway
in the distance—% mile—-between the Mes-
sagerie steamer “Yana,” on which I am,
MUDROS.


and “No. 6180,” a man is swimming to-
wards ns. I ventnre on a Cooee! Out of
the sea an arm goes up high, and a respon-
sive Cooee comes back. Of course, he is
from my dear adopted country. I direct
my servant to take my dressing gown and
meet him at the lowest step of the accom-
modation ladder. Meantime, he comes
with overhead strokes rapidly within hail.
I tell him to proceed around the stern and
he comes to the starboard side. My ar-
rangements have been carried out, and I
meet him at the gangway. He is fatigued,
of course, and puffed. I take him into the
saloon, and give Mm a big tumbler of good
red wine, and then I ask questions.
Wounds? “Oh, a few,” and he shows me
the scars on his left arm about the elbow,
and there are others, I believe, lower down.
I need hardly mention they are all in front.
From Victoria. His name. “Charlie.”
But the other ? ‘ ‘ Quinn. ’ ’ Why, you ’re an
MUDEOS.


“They looked doubtfully at
me.”
Where King George was
Assassinated.
Field oven.
A Street Scene, Salonica.




Irishman, yon rascal. “I believe I mnst
have been, sir; but there's no Irishman
about me now, we're all in the swim, and
all our boys are like that.” Well, Charlie,
you’re very much in the swim this morning,
you can't swim back, that's sure. “Oh, I
think I could, sir”—Have you got a mother
still? “Yes, sir, thank God!” And what
would she think of me if I allowed you to
return that way? And so I sent for the
commissaire, and he quickly obtained, to
be placed at my disposal, a man-of-war
French launch that was alongside. I ac-
companied Charlie en route for his steamer.
She had already a move on, about five
knots, I should reckon, and there was no
easy job to get Charlie aboard his lugger.
From main deck and upper deck, on bridges
grouped, out of port holes and ash shoots,
came cries of ‘ ‘ Charlie' ’ in welcome back —
for he is clearly popular, and they thought
he had missed his 'bus. And then there
MUDROS.


was loud, prolonged cooeeing, as they
stood to attention all, and saluted the Aus-
tralian colonel, who had brought their
Charlie amongst them once more.
ATHENS.
Yes—we cheer as we go along this new
life; but the melancholy of it is the depre-
ciation that has come in the value of life.
To-day, to-morrow, next year? What does
it matter! Torpedoes ? Pooh! Silly nervous
people buy life waistcoats in London, which
require inflating to be of service. They be-
come so careless, as if they would not waste
breath in blowing through the mouthpiece,
to make these useful. And yet there are
delectable people to be separated from. A
comedian parson, author of “Should a
Woman Tell?” is a shipmate. He is the
master of the art of tale. Vivid, tragic,
sad, many, of his experiences. What stories
are hidden behind the veil of the daily pre-
sented smile?
ATHENS.


And here we are at Athens, where Min-
erva’s Temple stands. Nothing is curious
now; hut a fellow passenger from Salon-
ique was an ideal petty officer, on the way
to join H.M.S. Minerva. To describe
him, I only have to refer one to that very
best of recent good Punches, in which a
puny pressman is obtaining information
from a stalwart sailor, seated on a locker
enjoying his pipe. “Yes,” he is saying,
“I saw it cornin’ ” (torpedo) “and I just
pops over the side, I puts her little helm to
starboard, and she sheers off round our
stern, and, of course, never touched us.”
And this is the town of Sappho, whose
romantic story of unrequitted love, B.C.
611, she told in lyric poem. We all remem-
ber Byron’s line “where Sappho sang in
his Isles of Greece.
The Times of July 9th, in its admirable
article on Sir lan Hamilton’s dispatch,
touches the fringe only, as it said of the
ATHENS.


deplorable situation. One’s pity arises for
the misery of the wounded Turkish sol-
diers. X have it first hand that they reach
Constantinople, many without shoes or
boots, most without a second shirt. There
are no dressings, no bandages, no organ-
ised nursing staff. Disposed here, hap-
hazardly there, no sheets for change, no
baths, only amateur women to take on their
friendly care. Soon these retire, “full
up” of their incompetence, leaving the
sorrowing men to bear their sufferings
alone. There are no supplies for neces-
sities, as Eoumania has stuck up 600 wag-
gons, which she does not permit to go for-
ward. And the fate that brought all this
upon them has been due to the escape of
the Goehen and the Breslau, out of
the Mediterranean early in the war. Their
arrival and presence in Turkish waters de-
termined the Young Turk party to take
sides against us.
ATHENS.


9 - Marseille - Le Cours Belsunce




The turbulent Bulgar is about to go the
wrong way. I can almost find excuses for
him. Dedeagach is an open roadstead on
the strip of coast line he possesses. Ships
anchor one and a half miles from the shore,
in less than five fathoms of water. I re-
iterate my opinion, that Bulgaria’s boun-
dary should extend beyond Kavala. Serbia
should have Salonique, and Constantinople,
I suppose, must go to Eiussia.
We want strong Englishmen in this part
of the world, like Strafford de Eedcliffe,
and Lord Dufferin, later. The Englishman
is expected to be strong, and get what he
wants. A strong man can get it every
time.
The World’s Work, Nov., 1915, p. 204,
says
11 Since Stratford de Eedcliffe, great am-
bassadors at the British Embassy in Pera,
have been few and far between. One by
one they have dribbled away our just
inheritance.
ATHENS.


“Lord Dufferin was probably the last
ambassador of the first rank.”
I have never been able to comprehend
the Russian retirement from San Stefano,
and evacuation of what they had then
won, despite the strength behind us of
Bismarck and his gang. Such a thing
could not happen with us. I believe that
Russia must get Constantinople, although
people here say it would mean Roumanians
grave. Russia has been too long kept
from the Ocean. She is a great power,
and we can gain always, by strengthen-
ing her friendship, this should be last-
ingly established; so we three nations,
France being our natural ally, can face the
world and preserve peace.
MARSEILLES.
It is many centuries ago, long before
the Christian era. since the mathematician,
Pythias, started out from the Greek Colony
at Marseilles to explore the West and
MARSEILLES,


North, and bring the world news of the
British Isles. He struck the coast of Kent,
and made journeys into the interior, where
he tells ns, “the inhabitants drink meade,
and there is abundance of wheat in the
fields. The natives collect the sheaves in
great barns and thrash out the corn there,
because they have so little sunshine that
an open thrashing place would be of little
use in that land of clouds and rain. ,,
Out of that land, to wMch his descrip-
tion of climate as aptly applies to-day,
have come its natives to mix in the swarm
of white and black and brown and tawny
soldiers that crowd the wide boulevards in
this ancient port of the Mediterranean Sea.
Prominent on view is khaki, though not
exclusively the fair Englisman’s now. Our
Indians, similarly clad, are here in num-
bers, convalescing from sickness and
casualties of the campaign. One is con-
stantly returning salutes while passing
along the side-walks.
MARSEILLES.


Many French regiments are being uni-
formed in our colour; the army tailors, as
in London, display ready made in their
windows the new pattern of dress. But
the brightest of hues still hold their own in
the Republican forces. Yellow and blue of
all shades, and green, and grey, and red,
mostly in pantaloons, are retained in many
distinguished corps. The numerous varie-
ties of combination are generally har-
monious and appear cheerful in the gay
throng; but how woefully they contrast
with the long dark coat of the poor Pilou
on crutches, picking his troubled way along,
with grave pale face and bandaged head.,
who has learnt the terribly serious meaning
of war.
If we are recognised outside as Anglaise,
this inside the Splendide Hotel is surely
a bit of England. A characteristic meet-
ing of two men, one in the hall, the other
just arrived from the Paris train, leaves
no doubt.
MARSEILLES.


14 - Marseille - Les Ascensseurs de N.-D, de la Garde




“Hello, how’s London?”
“All right—
‘ ‘ Whom did you see ? ’ ’
“The dentist —”
Here are in residence most of our staff,
many of them “dug-outs.” The senior
transport officer amuses me with his
troubles. At the knocking-off time for the
evening all is arranged with the harbor
authorities that a berth, urgently needed,
shall be ready to receive a ship hourly ex-
pected during the night. Next morning a
most polite official presents himself at the
office. With helmet held in both hands, bow-
ing he expresses regrets. “Je vous pre-
sente mes hommages. J’ai me trouve dans
Vimpossibilite le plus complet ( Piff) de
vous donner satisfaction!”
TEAXSLATIOX.
I present my sincere respects. I regret
humbly to find myself utterly unable to
carry out the arrangement of last evening.
MARSEILLES.


And here, on his journey somewhere, I
meet a flying major. During a talk after
dinner he said: “I shall never go near an
aeroplane after the war. It’s a very differ-
ent thing choosing a nice day for going up
and having to rise in all weathers, and at
any time”—and again he told me, he be-
lieved he would never shoot again, “It’s
an awful feeling to be shot at like a bird. ’ ’
The D.D.M.S., Colonel Hickson, C. 8.,
R.A.M.C., took me everywhere in his com-
mand. I made acquaintance through him
with the officers of the Indian Medical Ser-
vice on the station. Hardworking, able,
devoted to their jobs, I question if there
be men in the services superior to them in
organising power and daily routine. It
takes much application and time to become
fitted for their complex duties.
The varieties of race and caste among
their men demand special aptitude to
acquire the knowledge for dealing smoothly
MARSEILLES.


with the different customs and religious
limitations of those among whom they
spend their lives.
The Sikh will drink, but not smoke—a
Mahommedan will smoke, but not drink—
the Goorkha will do both, and does both
well. A native sub-lieutenant, in attendance
on the major deputed to accompany me on
my inspection, speaking in excellent Eng-
lish, stated: “the Goorkha follows any
fashion of religion in his neighbourhood,
and is not particular. ’ ’ He kills his goat by
knocking it on the head, and does not bleed.
The Mussulman must kill for himself by
cutting the throat, and bleeds to the last
drop—he will eat sheep, but prefers goat,
because of the stronger urinary flavor. The
Hindoo or Brahmin eats only vegetables;
he will not touch the food if you go into
his kitchen, or even throw your shadow
across it in preparation. All of it in such
case would be cast out.
MARSEILLES.


Water in the general Marseilles scheme
is conveyed in open channels from its
source, so the closest care is given by the
medical officers to guard against impurities.
They sterilise it in reservoirs. At the
Indian military base depot camps—Mous-
sot —the convalescent camp (No. 9 Indian)
and the Meerut General Hospital, Santi,
the water is treated bulkily in tanks. The
procedure is simple enough to be fool-
proof, and had worked excellently for
months. Bacteriological examination is
made daily. The water does not taste; a
constant, liberal supply of pure water is
ensured for all purposes—drinking, wash-
ing and cooking. It is distributed through-
out the camps by means of pipes and stand-
posts fitted with push-taps, placed at con-
venient spots.
Moussot is on the Eastern outskirts of the
city, where the soil is sandy. Perfect in-
cinerators, of rudimentary design, are con-
MARSEILLES.


13 - Marseille - N. -D, de la Garde




stantly in use. All waste solid matter of
every kind is burnt, leaving no odour, as
the chimneys carry the resulting smoke
high into the air. All fluids and slops pass
through buckets sunk in ground pits, where
stones have been loosely thrown in. The
buckets are perforated in bottom, and con-
tain loose straw, sprinkled with turpentine
as disinfectant and deodoriser. There are
no flies to be seen! Therefore, there is no
dirt.
The Meerut General Hospital, Santi, has
a fine location in the grounds of a chateau
close to, overlooking the sea in the West of
Marseilles. From the terrace where after-
noon tea of the mess is served, an orchard
covers a gentle decline. The trees have
been but little cut down. Tents lie among
them picturesquely; inviting interiors with
floor boards, and neat bedsteads of iron,
for four occupants only, are exposed, the
sides being folded for my better observa-
tion.
MARSEILLES.


Tis a beautiful place which the men do
not clamour to leave.
The most elevated site in Marseilles is
given to the church of Notre Dame de la
Garde.
The first vision on approach to the coast
is the shrine of Our Lady. The last object
seen as we go down in ships is the great
gilded figure, symbol of protection,
watcher, perpetually over “Those in peril
on the sea.”
The acenseur, which takes one up, is an
almost perpendicular funicular railway.
At the top landing it is possible by craning
the neck, to somewhat conceive the dimen-
sion of the statue, and admire its grace,
erect on the dome facing the far off horizon.
Up flights of tiring steps, several series to
be conquered, ere arrival at the porch, one
rests outside the entrance, to behold a vast
panorama of land and water.
A continuous range of hills behind, en-
MARSEILLES.


closing a flat plain, perhaps near twenty
miles across, forms what would have been
considered, before we began to learn new
things, an impregnable barrier of defence.
On the right looking towards Africa a high
coast bears somewhat to the South West,
so sheltering the shipping from the North-
West storms that cross France on their
way to blow in the Gulf of Lyons, while
below are Monte Christo’s Isle and others
adjacent, establishing natural breakwaters
against heavy seas from the Eastward; and
immediately around is widespread Mar-
seilles en entiere.
Truly the seaman’s church, this! Hang-
ing suspended from the roof by almost in-
visible wires, above reach, are ship’s
models of every conceivable type afloat.
Captains of the port pay a visit immedi-
ately after home-coming to thank Our Lady
for the safe return. Even in the careless
days before the war, this ideal duty did not
MARSEILLES.


cease, but was honorably, if not piously
performed.
I doubt if sailors could be induced to
voyage with a man who would neglect this
beautiful custom. All around the walls
are marble tablets close packed, innumer-
able by a visitor, on each of which testi-
mony is offered to whom may read, of the
favours obtained through the powerful in-
tercession of “The Star of the Sea.” Not-
ably fresher, among older companions to
the right of it, left of it, above it, below it, is
one charmingly simple in words, that are
a volume of faith from a queen:
“To Notre Dame de la Garde.
In gratitude for a great mercy.
Alexandra.
% Jan. 31st., 1905.”
Std. Day, The Puijntse, Ltd., Sydney
MARSEILLES.


1 - Marseille- La Rue de la Republique.
