

MICHAEL HINDMARSH
OF
ALNE BANK


~^~&uo^a*
**\<Laaj L>tA-^cT^-^


Wholly set up and printed by The Suburban Herald Printery,
390 Pacific Highway, Crows Nest New South Wales.


W>ith the CampCimentA
af,
Mt and M%& Chatted tZhamaa Siindmatdh
af
CUne Qetting.ang.


Letters written by
Michael Hindmarsh
of Alne Bank
Af/C'*
They are the property of his great-grand-daughter,
Miss Mabel Wilson
to whose grandmother, Hannah Isabelle Wilson (nee Hindmarsh), they
were given by her Aunt, Hannah Hindmarsh, the sister
of the author of these letters.
Also, a Brief Story of
Mr & Mrs
Michael Hindmarsh
With Names of their Descendants
1945




The Hindmarsh Family of Alnwick
HINDMARSH was the sixth child of George Hindtnarsh, of
Alnwick, Northumberland, England. Below is a copy of a page in his
father’s Family Bible, a quaint document, beginning in the eighteenth cen-
tury:
"Geo.: Son of Andw.: Hindmarsh was Born the Ist Aug,, 1739, And. was Mar-
ried the 3rd Jany., 1791, to Alice, Daughter of Christopher Urpeth,
who was Born the 1 7th Sep., 1 767.
Eleanor, Daughter of Geo: Hindmarsh was Born on Friday Morning at two
O’clock, being the 21st Oct,. 1791.
Robert, Son of Geo: Hindmarsh, was Born on Sunday Morning at Eight
O’clock, being the 7th April, 1 793, And Died the sth April, 1 794.
Sarah, Daughter of Geo: Hindmarsh, was Born on Monday Afternoon at One
O’clock, being the 29th Dec., 1 794, And Died the 12th July, 1796.
George, Son of Geo: Hindmarsh, was Born on Friday Morning, being the
7th Oct., 1 796, at Two O’clock.
Sarah, Daughter of Geo: Hindmarsh, was Born on Monday Afternoon, at
two O’clock, being 10th July, 1798, and Died 24th Nov., 1802.
Michael, Son of Geo; Hindmarsh, was born on Wednesday Morning at two
O’clock, 12th March, 1800.
Hannah, Daughter of Geo: Hindmarsh, was Born on Wednesday Night at
1 1 O’clock, 23rd Deer., 1801 .
Isabel, Daughter of Geo: Hindmarsh, was Born 21st Dec., 1803.
My Dear Husband Died 16th of Feb., 1805, being a Saturday Afternoon, at
half-past 2 O’clock.
William Hindmarsh was Born on Tues. Afternoon at half-past 3 O’clock,
April 2nd, 1805, was baptised by the Rev. Tate on 23rd.
Alice Hindmarsh, Mother of the before mentioned Children, died on the 6th
Sept.—at half-past 2 O’clock Afternoon—lBoB.’’
All the above entries, except the last one, were made in one hand-
writing, that of Alice, wife of George Hindmarsh, of Alnwick,
Three of the above children—Michael, George and Hannah—came to
Australia.


Michael Hindmarsh’s Education, Training,
and Arrival in Australia
A s seen from the above entries, when Michael Hinclmarsh was 5 years old,
he lost his father, and the widowed mother was left with five children.
A sixth child, William, was born two months after the father’s death. At
the time of the father’s death, the eldest child, Eleanor, was 1 4 years old.
It was then that Michael's uncle, John iNisbet, of Essington Grange,
took the little five-year-old lad, and had him educated and trained in farm
work at The Grange, where he remained until his departure for Australia.
Some idea of the scope of Michael's schooling may be gathered from
an old exercise book of his, now in the possession of his grandson, Mr.
Charles T. Hindmarsh, of Alne Bank. This book deals in mathematics, from
easy problems in geometry and mensuration to field survey work of irregu-
lar pieces of land, and contains some problems worked by duodecimals.
Ihe book throughout is well kept. The writing is good, the work tidy and
well arranged, and typical of Michael Hindmarsh's thoroughness.
When 22 years old he decided to migrate to Australia. So he left Leith
on Ist May, 182 2, by the brig Mimosa (Captain Bell), with 40 passengers,
and arrived at Hobart Town, 1 Btlr October, 1822 (“Sydney Gazette”).
Before leaving England, however, he received two valuable references
to take with him, as well as some excellent advice from his pastor, the Rev.
Marcus Dods. One of the references was from his uncle, John Nisbet, the
other from 18 of his neighbours. Copies of these are below as well as an
illustration of the first page of the reference from his neighbours (some of
the signatures were on back of the page) .
February 18th, 1822.
Below are copies of the references and the admonition;
I. “The bearer Michael Hindmarsh has been brought up in my family since
he was 3 yrs. of age and has had a very good plain education, much better
than most young men in his situation in life. He has been regularly instructed


in the knowledge of husbandry and is able to do all kinds of country work.
He has had the entire charge and management of the workmen upon my
farm, which consists of six hundred acres and has attended markets for in-
struction in buying and selling stock. The bearer’s character for Honesty,
Sobriety, Activity and Industry is altogether unexceptionable and in my
opinion he is quite competent to take the management of any gentleman's
estate. He has always conducted himself in my service entirely to my satis-
faction, and is leaving my service and his country from no impropriety of
conduct, but from a wish to go abroad. He bears a testimonial from all
my most reputable neighbours, to whom he is well known, and which 1 have
been instrumental in procuring for him, and in which I met with the greatest
readiness and in no instance met with a refusal.
Easington Grainge,
near Belford,
Northumberland.
John Nisbet,
11. “We the undersigned do hereby certify that the bearer, Michael Hind-
marsh, is an honest, industrious, sober young man, and that he has been
brought up to farming under Mr. Jno. Nlsbet, of Easington Grainge, where
he has had an opportunity of acquiring knowledge of the Northumberland
System of Husbandry.
Jno. James, Minister of Belford.
Jno. Patterson, Farmer. R. W. Smith.
Jno. Arthur, Holywell. M. H. W. Culley,
Joseph Brews Hopper. Andw. Potts.
Thos. Taylor, Callaly H. Houses. Philip Nairn, Junr.
John Hopper, Glaxton. James Young, Farmer.
Wm. Nelson, East Lilburn . John Embleton, Farmer.
Robert Thompson. Anthony Davison, Farmer.
Robert Wade. Wm. Embleton, Farmer.
M. W, Younghusbande, Farmer.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH'S EDUCATION, ETC.


HI. Belford,
My Dear Sir, 28th Dec., 1821 .
My best wishes attend you on leaving your native soil. Since the period
of your becoming a member of the Scotch Church under my care, your
conduct has been such as to give me a warm interest in your welfare; and I
hope you will meet with abundant success in the object of your voyage. But
you are aware that to secure your welfare, another object is equally neces-
sary—l mean Religion: the means of cultivating which, I am afraid, are but
sparingly to be met with in the land to which you are bound. But though
public worship, and pious friends are powerful means of promoting Religion,
yet a sincere intention to please God in all our ways which is its essence—a
conviction of God’s superintending care, and a reliance on His protection,
which constitute its pleasure—may be cultivated and enjoyed in New Hol-
land, as well as in England. Only as you have fewer assistances you trust be
the more attentive to yourself. If you can find any means of introduction to
the Reverend Mr. Marsden, his advice, I have no doubt, will prove highly
useful to you in every respect.
The period when you may return to your native land is too remote to
authorise you to look forward to it with any degree of certainty. But in what
quarter of the globe a man’s bones may lie is a matter of no consequence.
The Spirit is equally near to Heaven everywhere— to fit it for the employments
and pleasures of that place is the object of importance—which I hope will
daily occupy your attention.
I am, My Dr. Sir, truly yours,
Marcus Dods.
(The originals of the three above documents are in the hands of Mr.
Charles T. Hindmarsh, Alne Bank, Gerringong, who also holds the original
sheet of the Births and Deaths of the family of George Hindmarsh, of Aln-
wick, as quoted above,)
Michael Hindmarsh did not stay long in Van Diemen’s Land, but soon
came on to New South Wales, where he obtained employment with John
McArthur, of whom he did not have a good opinion. But his opinion of Mc-
Arthur’s brother Hannibal was much worse. Soon he left McArthur’s em-
ployment for that of Jonathan Hassall, who lived at “Matavie Farm,” at the
junction of Cobbity Creek and the Nepean River.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK






The following letters, although evidently several are missing, give a
good picture of his life in Australia to 1843:
Soon after his arrival in N.S.W. he commenced writing to his own folk at
Alnwick and Essington Grange (John Nisbet writes Easington Grainge) .
Fourteen of these letters are here. They were brought to Australia by
his sister Hannah who, apparently, gave them to her niece and namesake
Hannah Isabelle Hindmarsh, who married the Rev. Robert Wilson, of the
Congregational Church, Gerringong, and now are in the possession of Mrs.
Wilson’s granddaughter. Miss Mabel Wilson.
He must have written many more letters, which would have been very
interesting and helpful. The fourteen include five written to his uncle, John
Nisbet, of Essington Grange, one addressed to his brother George, and the
other eight to his sister Hannah. Six letters are written from Mattivie, District
of Cook, which appears in the map of Cook Parish as "Matavie Farm,” the
property of Jonathan Hassall, at the junction of Cobbitty Creek and the
Nepean. One is written from Campbelltown; one from New South Wales with
instruction to write the reply to Mr. Chapman, Pitt Street, Sydney.
Three gave Michael Hindmarsh’s address as Illawarra, and the last
three as “Alne Bank,” which name first appears in 1838.
In one of his letters Michael Hindmarsh refers to two and a half bolls
of wheat per acre. A boll is an old Scotch measure —for wheat four Winches-
ter bushels, for oats or potatoes six Winchester bushels. A Winchester bushel
was a cylinder I Bjin. diameter, 8 inches deep.
All but two of the letters were written on foolscap size paper, both sides
being used on all sheets but one. After filling the pages, in the usual way, the
writer turned to the beginning and filled them again, writing across what had
previously been written. Then the letter was folded over and over, leaving
the blank page on the outside, and it was sealed on the centre of one edge.
(Note where the seal has caused a hole to be made in the letter.) There were
no postage stamps in those days . The letter here depicted was written at Alne
Bank, 1 Ith May, 1 842, and posted in Kiama, where the Post Master, George
Hindmarsh, stamped it paid. Then on 22nd May, at the General Post Office,
it was stamped. Paid Ship Letter, May 22, 1842.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH'S EDUCATION, ETC.


Letters of Michael Hindmarsh
To Mr. Nisbet, Essington Grange, near Belford, Northumberland.
Mattivie, District of Cook,
N. S. Wales,
May 22nd, 1824.
Dear Cousin,
! embrace the opportunity of writing you by the Revd. Mr. Lawrey,
Brother-in-law to Mr. Hassall, the gentleman with whom I am now living.
Mr. L . will probably call on you, as it is his intention, I believe, to visit Nor-
thumberland. You will find him a very intelligent gentleman, especially with
respect to this Colony and the adjacent Islands, where he has been living
these six years . He and his brother-in-law having very extensive herds of
cattle, and being wishful to improve them, are thinking of having an English
Bull or two out for that purpose, the Shorthorns being recommended. It is
his intention to see Mr. Smith’s cattle of Grinden as well as others, but your
advice, if asked, will be of use, as you know where the best are to be had.
I have been anxiously waiting to hear from you, never having had a letter
from you or any of the Family since my arrival in this country, but am happy
to hear from my sister that you all enjoy good health, which blessing I have
enjoyed since my arrival in this distant part of the globe. The last letters
that I received from Alnwick were dated April, 1823, but in Feby. last I
received one from my sister dated June, 1823, which 1 have never been able
to answer, as I have been over the Blue Mountains inspecting my master’s
stock these two months, and since my arrival I have been so deeply engaged
with the wheat seed and maize harvest that 1 can scarcely find time to write
th ese few lines. I have 130 acres of wheat to put in this season, 30 of which
is finished. Our maize crops are indifferent this season owing to the un-
common dry weather we have experienced this Summer and Autumn. I in-
tend keeping a journal for the future, when I will be able to give you an ac-
count of the climate, culture and any other remarks that come under my ob-
servation . This Country is very much altered for the worse since this Gover-
nor and Secretary came. Wheat is as low now as 3/- per Bushel, Maize 2/6,
Beef 3d, Mutton 5d and 6d per lb, and everything in proportion. Still the
settler obtains a very comfortable living by industry and frugality, which,
characters are but rarely to be met with here. People coming out here to


make fortunes will find their mistake out as these times are past now, as new-
comers are a few years too late. Sheep are the only things that pay well, the
wool having risen to such repute in England. Mr. Oxley has discovered an
extensive river to the North, about 600 miles. The climate is such as to grow
Tea Tree, Sugar Cane, &c . It is said that the Government here are going to'
make a settlement of it immediately. He went by water. They were 50 miles
up it and found anchorage for the largest vessels. He states that the country
near the River is thinly timbered, fine land, and not so mountainous as this
part of N.S. Wales. He supposes it to be the same River which he men-
tioned in his travels that ran into large swamps. I must conclude by sending
my friends my best wishes and kind love.
I am,
Dear Cousin,
Yours affectionately,
M. Hindmarsh,
Please to address me to the care of Mr. Hankinson,
CastlereagK Street, Sydney.
To Mr. Nisbet, Essington Grange, near Belford, Northumberland.
Mattivie, District of Cook,
N.S.W., Sept. 21st, 1824.
Dear Cousin,
1 duly received your letter of Augt. 1823, in June last, for which, with
the seeds, &c., I kindly thank you. Your letters with the many 1 received
afforded me much pleasure, being the first received from the Grange since 1
left England and am happy to hear that the Markets are so high, having heard
by late arrivals that Agriculture was completely at a stand. The seeds you
sent me are in good order; the Beans and Peas were a month too late, so that
I only have sown the one half of them this year and will keep the rest until
next season in case these fail. There are two seasons for Grass seeds, namely
Sept, and Apl. or My., the former month is the first of spring and the latter
in autumn. Spring, which seasons are very salubrious to the European consti-
tution, Summer I think is very injurious, at least 1 have found it so. I am now
subject to very severe headaches, v/hich 1 never experienced in England, but
upon the whole I think this a very healthy climate. The Thermometer in this
neighbourhood last Summer was one day as high as I 1 2 Degs,. of heat in
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


the shade, and seldom less than 80 Degs,, which I assure you is hot work,
and worst of all harvest comes in the middle of Summer. In the height of the
day the straw is so brittle that we cannot bind the sheaves, which is generally
done mornings and evenings. The crops of wheat were very light here last
year. J suppose the average would not be more than 18 or 20 Bushels per
acre, which is considered a fair crop here, which sold at the former part of
the season as low as 2 y 6 to 3/- per Bushel, has risen gradually to 10/6 and 1
1 I /-, owing to the exportation to the Cape of Good Hope, Isle of France,
Batavia and other Islands. Distillation has commenced, which will be an ac-
quisition to settlers as it will in some measure take part of the surplus grain
off their hands and likewise will keep the species in the Colony. There are
immense quantities of spirituous liquors used in this country, but I am happy
to say not by me. Some of the settlers think nothing of drinking their Farms
at one sitting or bouse, and get a Lease of it home in their pockets. It is by
these means that merchants accumulate their fortunes. Grazing land, especi-
ally for Sheep, will always be an object worthy of attention, Wool being the
principal staple of Exportation of the Colony, the Climate being so well
adapted to the growth of it and the animal being subject to few Diseases,
making it highly beneficial. The only enemy that attends it is the Native
Dog, which commits great havock. Betimes 1 have known 100 sheep to have
been killed or bitten so as to occasion their death in one night. The bites of
these animals are almost sure death to sheep, The Flock generally consists of
250 to 300, which is attended by a shepherd by day and one watchman to
two or three Flocks by night. The yards they are folded in are generally
stationary and made of stakes intertwined with wattles, &c. 1 have had very
little to do with sheep since 1 came to the Colony, being in an Agricultural
Concern at Mr. McArthur's, and the one 1 now hold under Mr. John Hassall
being in the same line . My Master’s Sheep & Cattle are grazed in the Bathurst
country, 120 miles off, so that I have had but little experience in sheep since
my arrival. 1 intend either beginning on my own account in farming or get-
ting into a grazing concern, as I find an Agricultural establishment so diffi-
cult to carry on, both on account of the Labourers and Climate, the former
being all the scourings of the nation, their work being all forced and often
by the infliction of flogging, which is often had recourse to by making a com-
plaint upon Oath before a Magistrate, which makes such a situation as mine
truly disagreeable, but being the custom of the country in some measure com-
forts me, I often think; and my master tells me I am too lenient with them.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


I have only had one man flogged these two months, which is a very uncom-
mon thing here. The latter difficulty, viz. the climate, is very precarious owing
to extremes in wet and dry weather . We have not had six wet days for these
14 months. When it does rain it is generally in extremes and sometimes
keeps on for a fortnight together. 1 have been informed by people that have
been in the colony for many years that the droughts and wet seasons prevail
for 5 or 7 years in succession, and I am inclined to believe it, as 1 have ex-
perienced two years of very dry weather. In the dry seasons, if it was not for
the heavy dews which generally last till about eight in the morning, vegeta-
tion would be completely at a stand. 1 have been a journey with my Master
to Bathurst, the Country to the West of the Blue Mountains, which is men-
tioned in Wentworth's history of the Colony. It has a better name than it
really deserves, with the exception of the McQuarry plains, which consist of
from fifteen to twenty thousand acres, and other small patches, it is a Barren
and Mountainous Country, but is better adapted for Grazing than to the East
of the Blue Mountains being a milder climate than this. It is not uncommon
for them to have inches of snow on the ground, which is in no instance to
be seen on the East side. It is well watered and generally well stocked with
Sheep, Cattle, and Horses for many miles round the Small Town of Bathurst.
My Master, six other Gentlemen and 1, with 3 Servants and two Black guides
went an unusual road to Bathurst. On this journey, by heading the Blue
Mountains to the S. West, making the journey 300 miles at the least instead
of 120 miles by the usual way. The Commissioner Briggs and a few indivi-
duals have crossed the country this way. But it is rarely undertaken . We
completed the journey in eight days, one of which we rested. Our Horses,
though small, are very durable. On such journeys as this we are obliged to
carry a great load of Provisions, Great Coat, Blankets &c. The first 90 miles
we went over is mostly located to Individuals for Grazing, which is generally
good for that purpose, and is named Argyleshire, which terminated at Cock-
bundoon Mountain, where we left the beaten road and crossed upwards of
1 50 Miles of very Barren Country, which is well supplied with Kangaroos,
Emues, wild ducks, &c., which we got plenty of with our dogs and guns.
The Kangaroos and Emues, when well cooked, eat as vVell and as wholesome
as any Beef I ever tasted, and offered us a deal of sport to them that liked
hunting. When i arrived at Bathurst I found my Master, as well as his Brothers
and Sisters, posessed of considerable stock of all kinds, which was left them
by their Father, who died four years ago and was much respected in the
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HIMDMARSH


Colony . He came to the South Sea Islands as a Missionary about 30 years
ago . Fhe natives of these islands being at war, he left them for this Country
and by his Industry he accumulated a great Stock as well as other Property'
before his Death, and has left a Widow and eight children in opulence. I
have to apologise for my remissness in not mentioning Dr. Hudspeth in my
former letters . He and I were very friendly on the whole way out and like-
wise after our arrival at Hobart Town. Before 1 left the latter place he had
been robbed of certain property. He likewise has got a grant of 600 acres of
Land, and the first of J. Hiddlestone’s, of April, i 923, he writes that the Doctr.
and family are well, and that he received two appointments, viz. Colonial
Surgeon and Chief Constable, which situations with other business I think he
might do well, but the most people that come out to this Country expect to
make their Fortune in a short time and return home again . But it is a mistaken
idea. Money is as scarce in this Colony as it is in England and I think the
Doctr. was tinctured in some measure with these ideas, i am not afraid but
I can make a pretty good living here, but my letter from Cousin Hiddleston,
the results of which I wrote home in a former letter to Alnwick, if 1 mistake
rot. 1 have written two or three times to John and never having received
any answer 1 think the letters have miscarried. 1 he first letter I receive I will
write you the particulars. I was extremely obliged to Mr. and Mrs. Dods for
their kind admonition and I am only sorry 1 have not time to write to him at
this period. 1 hope my kind correspondents will not be offended at my not
answering their letters, 1 having received so many by the last conveyance, 1
find a want of time to answer them. With respect to Explorer Briggs. He had
not a grant of land when 1 left Van Diemen's Land, but I make not the least
doubt but he has got it, as land may be had by any person that has the
means of cultivation or stock to graze on it. I intend to apply for my land
and I make not the least doubt but 1 will get six or eight hundred acres. I
must here conclude by sending my kindest love to my much respected Aunt
and Cousins and all friends.
I am. Dear Sir, Your Affect. Cousin,
M. Hindmarsh.
To Mr. George Hindmaisli, Alnwick, Northumberland.
New South Wales, Dist. Cook,
April 30th, 1825.
Vly Dear Sister and Brother,
I received yours, Hannah, of June, 1824, last week and have to apolo-
MICHAEL HJNDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


gise for being so remiss in not answering your letters before now, besides
many others I have received by the boxes my cousin sent, the latter Box I
received in Deer, last, which conveyed the doleful news of the death of my
much lamented uncle. The letter that was sent to me at that period I never
have received. In your last you complain that it is a long time since you have
heard from me. I have written twice to you and thrice to my cousin, J.N.,
since I left Mr. McArthur, which is twelve months gone Novr. I wrote a long
letter to the Grange last Septr. by the ship Meongles, which I hope you have
had the satisfaction of reading long ere this reaches you. As it would appear
that you have not received my former letters, it will perhaps be satisfactory
to let you know where 1 have lived since I left my first situation, which Gen-
tleman, Mr. McA., I left completely disgusted on account of the tyranny
from a Brother of his, a Lieutenant of the Navy that was over me, and like-
wise the salary he allowed me would do little more than keep me in clothes
in this country. 1 have since been living with a Mr. Jonathan Hassall, whom
I have found a great friend, ever since I arrived in this country. He allowed
me £3O the first year and an advance of £7/10/ - for two years if 1 chose
to stop with him, likewise a depasturing for as many cattle as 1 can purchase
and to live as they do, and further, if 1 can get a grant of Land 1 am to be
allowed time to see after the management of it which I am now on the point
of receiving. I hope before this is closed to have an answer to my memorial
from the Governor which I will intimate to you if I am successful. 1 intend
beginning farming immediately. I suppose you will be calculating upon me
making a fortune, but I see no prospect of it as yet. I am not afraid but I can
make with industry a good and respectable livelihood, which I am perfectly
satisfied with. I had the misfortune about twelve months ago of having nearly
the whole of my clothes stolen from my bed room which is attached to the
stores, which I slept in for the safety thereof. They took the whole of my
stock except the best of mj outer garments. I fortunately, a few weeks pre-
vious paid £4O for a Breeding Mare, which would have gone likewise if I
had not thus disposed of it. The same mare, with a foal by her side, a few
months ago brought me £73/ 10/-. So that in some measure I have made up
my loss. My whole stock comprises of two horses, seven head of Horned
Cattle and upwards of £3O of salary due me. So that I can make a pretty
good beginning. I am kept very busy; wc employ a great many men on the
Farm, which is very extensive for this country. 1 have put in 130 acres of
Wheat and have 30 more to do (June 12th), which is the latter end of our
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


■wheat seed season, which begins in April and finishes in the middle of June.
Our harvest begins in the middle of November, which is the best month of
Spring, and is generally over by New Year’s Day. Our men being nearly all
Prisoners we are obliged to provide the weekly provisions which consists of
(by Government Orders) one Peck of Wheat and four lbs. Salt Pork or 7 lbs
Fresh Beef or Mutton per week, exclusive of their yearly wage of £ I 0 per
year, which they can only demand in clothing, tea, sugar, tobacco, &c., which
1 am as expert at weighing as any grocer you have about your town. But if I
was to come and turn shopkeeper amongst you I am afraid my manner and
address would not suit, Free subjects being so accustomed to Prisoners
these few years. They are shocking creatures to deal with. I have detected
some of them stealing about 4 bushels of wheat this last week. Thieving is
their whole study. (Dear William) 1 suppose it is still your intention to follow
me. If it is you must make yourself as proficient in your own business as
possible. You must not think to meet with a few bungling workmen. The
best of mechanics are in the country. The State Buildings that are in Sydney
would astonish you. Although the Buildings are not regular yet it astonishes
many new comers to see such a Town in such an Infant Colony as this. 1
wrote by a former letter stating how John Hiddlestone is getting on, and
that he had stated to me that he would give you £3 per week on your arrival
if you were a good workman. But I have not had a letter from him for nearly
two years. But you must not think of coming out as a common workman.
You must study Architecture, which if you properly understand you will make
your Fortune in this country and whatever you do do not come out without
a Grant of Land from Lord Bathurst or you will find great difficulty in get-
ting it here. You must make a regular application to the Colonial Secretary’s
Office for it, stating that you are possessed of the Capital stipulated by Gov-
ernment and you will immediately get an order on the Governor here. Had
I got my order before I left home I would have been in different circum-
stances now. People will tell you what you have to do with Land. Land is
now becoming very valuable and get it if you possibly can. They will again
say where is your property required by Government for you to be possessed
of. There were individuals that came out in the same vessel with me that,
■were not worth the number of dollars instead of pounds. But when it comes
to the point I will give you my property for the time being. If you cannot
come out as a cabin passenger do not come as a steerage one. London is the
best place to embark from . But whatever you do learn well your Business
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


PART OF LETTER (greatly reduced) written by Michael Hindmarsh on
11th May, 1842, to his sister Hannah. Note: (a) The folds. (b) The
cross writing, (c) The hole in the centre, where the seal was,




and try to put something in your Pocket before you think of starting. It is
only from your determined wish before 1 left home and by your letters since
that I thus advise you as I should not wish to be the means of any person
leaving their Native land and tender Friends to come to a Foreign Country
like this although, thank God, I have had good health, which certainly is one
of the greatest blessings that can be bestowed on man, yet 1 never have felt
satisfied since I left home. Therefore you may choose yourself. Be not led by
me. There are three Newspapers printed weekly in Sydney now, so we have
plenty of English news. Every ship that arrives and likewise four stage coaches
start from Sydney every day for Parramatta, distance of 1 3 miles and from
thence to Windsor, which is upwards of 20 miles iurther, which is a great
convenience to new comers especially. Perhaps some of you will remember
Mr, Robert Rain. He was Steward to Mr. Selby, Twizle House. He is in
the country and his Brother is one of the Proprietors of two of the stage
coaches that start from Sydney. He is erecting a very large steam mill in the
vicinity of Parramatta, which he will undoubtedly made a rapid fortune by.
You will find by the different dates which are in this letter that I have written
it piece by piece, which I hope you will excuse . 1 cannot settle to write, hav-
ing a deal or Business to attend to and likewise a deal of anxiety on my mind.
I mean with respect to the Prisoners 1 have under my charge. I seldom have
less than 30 of them and I assure you it is a laborious task to manage them.
(12 July). I received two letters last week favoured by a Person from Les-
berry whom i have not yet had the pleasure of seeing. The Parcel sent by him
1 understand is in Sydney, which I expect to receive shortly, when 1 will have
all the news of that place called Alnwick which 1 often think of. There is an
Archdeacon come out to this colony within these few months, who is already
doing a deal of good. There are several Churches ordered to be built imme-
diately. Since his arrival we have had Divine Service every Sunday in the
District 1 live in where a Church is now about being built. I received a letter
from the Governor a rev/ days ago wanting to know what property I was
possessed of &c., and through a friend I was enabled to say that I was worth
between £7OO and £BOO. Consequently I may expect at least 800 acres of
land which will be worth as many pounds to me if I can get it, which there is
little doubt of. Hannah wrote to me that she wished me to send some Syd-
ney newspapers, which I will do when 1 can have an opportunity without
putting you to much expense. I am happy to hear that so many of my rela-
tions are going to be married, and hope that they will be happy in that
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


honoured state. 1 would come to my own country for a wife but it would be
too expensive a journey for me. Agricultural produce fluctuates very much.
Wheat is now selling from I 0/ - to 1 4/- per Bushel Winchester measure after
harvest . It perhaps will be as low as 4/- but that depends much upon the
season . If the hot winds set in by the beginning of Harvest as it did last
year there will be no superabundance. Beef is selling at 3d, mutton 5d per
lb, and other things are in proportion. If opportunity should afford I would
thank you to send me a small investment of clothing and more especially
shirting or shirts out, when I will make a remittance for the same. The latter
article is thribble the price here that it is at home. I intend writing a long
letter to the Grange immediately. Please to give my kindest and sincerest
thanks in the same time, I must conclude, sending kindest love to all my
friends and may rhe Blessing of God rest upon the whole of them.
Your affect. Brother,
M. Hindmarsh.
Please address me at Mr. Hankinson, George St., Sydney.
To Mr. Nisbet.
August 22nd, 1825.
New South Wales, Dist. Cook.
Dear Cousin,
I have been very remiss in not answering your many kind letters before
now, but I hope it is not too late. I duly received the Box of seeds you sent
in Deer, last and likewise your letter by Mr. Hale’s friends whom I have not
had the pleasure of meeting with yet. 1 wrote a long letter to you by the ship
Meongles. It was dated Sept. It was detained in Sydney until the aforesaid
vessel sailed, which I believe was in January last, which I hope you have
received long before this date. I sowed the seed about a month ago. 1 am
afraid they will not vegetate as they were not in very good state on their ar-
rival . I have a pretty good return from the Beans you sent me, but the Peas
failed , Owing to the failure of the late wheats of last year the market has
been better than ever it had been since I came to the Colony. Wheat is now
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


selling from 13/- to 15/- Pr. Bushel Win chester, Maize 5/- Pr. Do. and
other grain in proportion. I suppose the average of the wheat crops would
not exceed 14 Bushels per acre throughout the Colony; the failure was occa-
sioned by the Hot Winds which are very prevalent in the latter end of Novr.
and Deer. We had bulk for six or seven Bolls per acre and I am sure we will
not exceed two and a half. This is a very precarious climate for agriculture.
The Maize Crop had only yielded one half of what it generally does in a good
season . It is a grain that requires fine culture although it is generally very
roughly cultivated . It is generally planted on land as the first crop and leaves
the land in a very good state for the Wheat Crop except that it is rather late.
It is not fit to pull until the middle of wheat sowing. The stalks are very
troublesome to get off the ground, My Master has only been five years on
his Farm and he has I 00 Acres totally cleared and nearly 200 with the Stumps
of the Timber that grew on it. These Stumps, which are generally left about
three feet high, are a great impediment to the Plough &c. I have sown with
my own hands on the same Farm this year I 45 Acres of Wheat, which is now
looking beautiful. 1 have likewise between 20 and 30 Acres of Rye and Bar-
ley in, besides 90 Acres of Maize to put in, in the months of Sept, and Octr.
Wheat sowing generally commences in April and ends by the middle of June.
Harvest generally commences in the beginning or the middle of Novr. and
is all into the Stack by the latter end of Deer., so that you observe that we
have from the middle of Deer, until April to summer fallow the same land
that was wheat the year previous. I sowed about 7 Acres of Turnips March,
which is the best month for sowing, and had an excellent crop. I seldom ever
saw a better at home. I think they might be cultivated with success here as
the winter does not in the least check their growth. 1 memorialized the Gover-
nor for Land lately. They wrote to me to know my means and I now am
anxiously waiting an answer. I acted very foolishly in leaving home without
getting an order from Earl Bathurst, although I had not the sum required to
entitle me to have it. Yet there were many passengers that came in the same
vessel with me, that had not as much as 1 had, got their orders for I 000 Acres
and are doing very well. If I had got land when I came first to the Colony
I would not have to be an Overseer today, and further I will have to go 60
or 80 miles further in to the interior now than I would have had to do when
1 arrived . It is astonishing what a distance people are getting into the In-
terior. I was on a journey to the Five Island or rather Illawarra, which you
read of in Wentworth’s treatise of this country. It is, as to the quality of the
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


Land, the finest part of the Country 1 have yet seen. It is on the Sea Coast
and bounded on the back by a cr ain of almost inaccessible mountains, so that
■water carriage is the only means settlers have of sending their produce to mar-
ket. People are beginning to Emigrate to it, and 1 intend taking my land there,
if I should be favoured with any which I am in some measure doubtful of.
The Five Islands, as the place is generally called from five small Islands that
are about one Mile from the Coast, is a narrow strip of land, varying from
two miles to perhaps ten to fifteen, and bounded on the one side by the Sea and
the other by a chain of Mountains. The length I cannot pretend to state.
The Land in general is a rich Vegetable Mould, and abounds with plenty of
Cedar, Beefwood, and many other valuable kinds of Timber. There is plenty
of sassafras to be had there, the Musk Shrub, and others too numerous to men-
tion. The different Lakes and inlets of the sea abound with plenty of delicious
Fish, Black Swans, Ducks &c., and the Forest with Turkeys, Pheasants, Bush
Kangaroos &c., and worst of all plenty of Huge Trees for the poor Settlers
to Fell, burn off, &c. I would be thankful if you would endeavour to get a
little Interest with some of the Great People in Northumberland and try to get
me an order for Land from Earl Bathurst. 1 think it might be done with suc-
cess, and if you would only try would be very thankful indeed. Land is be-
coming very valuable. Government is now about selling all the Crown Lands
in the Located Districts which is mostly the choice Land, My Brother William,
from the letters that 1 have received, seems determined to follow me out to
this Country . If he is clever at his business and studies architecture he would
do very well in this Country, provided that he keeps himself steady. He must
by no means think of coming out without he had a grant of Land, which he
will get if he goes the right way about it. I would advise him to learn ' "ell his
Business and try if he can put a little money in his pocket before he sets out,
and if he could get married to a respectable person he would feel himself
greatly benefited by it on his arrival here. I suppose Christopher and some of
you will laugh at this last advice, but it is good and sound Doctrine. If I
could afford to cross and recross the wide ocean I would come and try if I
could make choice of a Wife out amongst my old acquaintances, but I am
afraid they would not venture so far from their own dear Country. I think
1 must have you to canvass for me and that will save me the trouble and ex-
pense of coming myself. 1 was in Sydney last week and heard very good
news of your Cousin Hiddlestone from a Gentleman, the name Cobb, who
is a Merchant and occasionally takes a trip to Van Diemen's Land in his own
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


Vessel ■which he keeps trading to the different Islands. He was talking of
Hobart Town when I stated that I had a cousin lived there. On telling his name
it so happened that he, for the last two trips, took Lodgings with my Cousin.
He tells me that he is doing uncommonly well. He and his Father-in-Law have
built two Beautiful Cottages, Workshop &c., and is in a fair way of doing
well. I have written two or three times and never have received any answer.
I wrote by the Captain of Mr. Cobb’s vessel so that 1 may rely on an answer.
I will let you know the result the next time 1 write. 1 am sorry to inform you
through the same Gentleman that Doctr. Hudspeth has been plundered lately
almost to his ruin. Mr. C. tells me he is very industrious and deserving of
better fortune. He has got his Farm in a forward state and would be well if
left alone. I have a similar tale to tell of myself. About eighteen monhs ago
I was plundered of nearly the whole of my clothes and every other little
article I had, and since that period 1 have had the best Cow 1 had killed by
the Bushrangers and just at the calving. But I have in great measure got the
better of my loss, thank God, and am in a fair way of doing well in the
course of Fifteen Months, at the expiration of which I will have completed
my agreement of three years with my present Master whom 1 wrote to you
I was going to about two years ago. He is very kind to me and promised
to render me every assistance when I leave and begin on my own account.
Sheep keep their price better than any other stock here. Good crossbred
Ewes bring from 35/- to £2. There have been a great many Saxony sheep
Imported to this Country within the last eight months, I suppose not less than
150 to 200, which are the only ones in the Colony. Some of the Rams sold
as high as £6O to £7O. My Master’s Brother has bought two at the former
price. The Ewes the owners will not take money for. Horses likewise main-
tain their price well. A Horse that would cost £1 8 in England when 1 left
would bring £45 to £5 0 here. Beef is selling at 3-|-d, Mutton 3d, but is likely
in the course of another year to be very low indeed. A Bullock in the course
of a few years may be had for a song. It is astonishing what an immense
quantity of Horned Cattle there are in the Colony, being allowed to breed
so young and never any of the Females destroyed until death comes in the
way. I expect you will receive this fav’d. by Mrs. Dixon that was May Oxley
per ship Phoenix. They returned about four weeks ago after being three
weeks at sea, almost a wreck, with four feet of water in their hold. 1 wrote
to Alnwick by her the last time she left port so that you will receive this by
the same conveyance and two months shorter date than their letter. If I
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


should not have time to write to Alnwick by the sailing of the Phoenix tell
them not to send the clothes I wrote for until 1 write again. Having nearly
finished my paper I must likewise finish my Epistle by sending my best wishes
and sincerest love to all my Friends, not forgetting Mr. and Mrs. Dods.
I am. Dear John,
Your Affect. Cousin,
M. Hindmarsh.
Please address me at Mr. Hankinson’s, George Street, Sydney.
To Miss Hindmarsh, Market Place Alnwick, Northumberland.
New South Wales,
Novr. 6th, 1 825.
Dear Sister
1 received yours of March in Sept, last, which was the shortest dated
letter that I have yet received by Post, the best conveyance. When letters are
sent by Individuals, they are sometimes not punctual in delivering them,
The letter my Brother wrote me when my much lamented Uncle died I never
received nor did 1 know of his death for nearly 1 8 months after. I am sorry
to hear of poor Amy Patterson’s death. Pray how does the family do and
where are they all living. You go through a pretty long detail of my friends
but forgot to tell me how Michael H— and Cousin J. Robson were. lam
very sorry to say that person whom you and Cousin J. N. wrote to me by has
turned out an unworthy subject. I think his name is Davidson. 1 was in Syd-
ney a few months ago and heard he was in Gaol for Debt, having expended
the whole of his property in drinking. This is one of the worst countries he
could have come to if such are his habits. His wife is charitably supported by
a Lady, the name (Wemes), the Commissary’s wife, who allowed her £1 per
week as long as she excluded herself from going near her husband, such is his
unworthiness. 1 have never seen him nor do I intend going near him. He came
out with a Gentleman the name of Macintyre. You astonish me when you write
of so many weddings taking place amongst my friends. I suppose you will be
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


slipping off next. Please to give me sufficient warning and I will take a Coach
and come to the wedding. I wrote a long letter both to you and my cousin, J.
Nisbet, a few months ago. Tell him I will write him after harvest. We have
commenced reaping barley and will have a general harvest by the middle of
this month. Throughout this part of the Colony the crops in general are very
indifferent, being much blighted by the hot winds, which already have visited
us. Wheat is selling from 8/- to 10/- per Winchester bushel. Beef 3d,
Mutton sd, and other produce in proportion. Our Governor leaves the Colony
in the course of a month. His government by many is considered to have been
pretty good and impartial. Since his arrival the expenditure in the Colony has
been diminished nearly one half. I expected he would have favoured me with
a Grant of Land before his departure but I see no likelihood of it now. I wrote
to my cousin, J. N., to make application to Earl Bathurst’s Office for an order
for me, which he is sure to get if he will make application. I would have got a
grant here but the Revd. Gentleman who handed in my memorial tells me
there is some person opposing me. The only person I can think of is McAr-
thur. He told me when I left him I would regret of it, and I think he is trying
his vengeance in this way, for such is his disposition. I will be at the bottom
of it by the arrival of the new Governor, when I shall send in another memorial
I intend summoning him to the Court of Requests for six weeks’ salary which
he refused to pay me. You may tell R. Dunn he may think his old master a
gentleman if he chooses. But he is only a Botany Bay one. He has got his char-
acter displayed in the Newspaper in its Proper light lately. Now that we have
got a free Press such characters will often get well picked at. He gets the title
of Stay Maker, which he was in England. Novr. 13th. Being in Liverpool last
week 1 called on Mr. Moore, who is from Lesberry, when 1 informed him of
the Death of his Nephew, Mr. Clark, who died last week. He was the person
whom you sent a number of letters by, two of which I only received. They
were No. I 3 and 1 7. He had his boxes plundered, when the parcel you sent
and the letters were lost. Mr. M. I understand is very rich. He had often told
me he was going to England, but I don’t think he will ever leave this Colony.
There are not a great many steps between him and the Grave if Nature calls
on him as it does on other aged people. You write that Willm. is still anxious
to follow me, but he must peruse my former letters as well as this and bear in
mind I do not advise him to follow me. I think I stated and now state that if
he studied Architecture and was clever at his Business that he would do well
provided he was steady, which I assure you is much wanted here. I give these
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


hints that in case he should come and feels disappointed that there may be no
reflections on my part. I consider that any man of good character and of solid
habits can make a comfortable living and perhaps might save a little, but to
make a fortune is quite out of the question. But on the other hand, and especi-
ally people that have to hold a situation where he had many Government
men as we call them under his charge, such people never like the Colony. 1
would sooner go to the West Indies and be a Negro Driver than be a Superin-
tendent three years more over such depraved creatures as the generality of
them are. and if I cannot make a beginning for myself and have a little more
satisfaction and comfort than 1 have had for the last three years, in the course
of twelve months, you need not be surprised to hear of my arrival in England
or some other country. I cannot say that I dislike the Country, only for that
reason . I have, as I have stated before, got a good master. I have been just 2
years with him, but in all probability the next time you hear from me I will
have turned a Botany Bay Farmer, as I am making preparation for a begin-
ning. Novr. 14th. I have this Evening received by the ship “Triton” two let-
ters, one from you and one from rny cousin, J.N., for which I return my
sincerest thanks to you both and likewise many more of my friends for the
marked attention they have shown towards me in writing so often. I am happy
to hear by my Cousin’s letter of the flourishing state that England is in and
that all relations & friends are well. My Cousin wishes to know the difference
that took place between Dr. Hudspeth and me. On the contrary he and I were
on the most friendly terms on the voyage and friends we parted. If 1 have not
mentioned the Doctor in my former letters it was remissness of me. I never
have had any correspondence with him. I have written several letters to J.
Hiddlestone; the last letter 1 sent was by a Captain of a vessel who knew him
and was to deliver the letter personally, but I have received no answer. I have
had only one letter from him, that was 2 years ago, although there are vessels
arriving from there several times in the course of a month. If you reed, my
last you would have the last accounts I have heard of him, when he was
succeeding pretty well. 1 think that intelligence was in my cousin’s letter I wrote
him a few months ago. I have often wished that Dr. H. had come to this
country instead of Van Diemen’s Land, as I am sure he would have done
much better here. I understand that Colony is rather in a depressed state. I
would feel particularly obliged if George would advance a small sum to pur-
chase me a good stock of shirts. Since I lost the stock I brought with me I
bought some cotton ones, which last but a short time with me. Linen is very
dear here. It is very poor stuff. You pay 5/- and 6/- per yard for it, and as
you will have to send a box with them I would thank you to get a small stock
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


of neck cloths, stockings, &c., and if George would be kind enough to have a
fine pair of double milled Kersemere Trousers and a couple of round cloth
Jackets, the latter of blue cloth. I am about the same size as when I left home,
only a little taller. Please to send the Bill with the articles and I will send In-
terest to George for the time he lays out of his cash, and likewise a Pr. or two
of Shoes and a Pr. of Wellington Boots with Tops to fit them. Whenever you
write address to the care of (Mr. Hankinson), George Street, Sydney, or (Mr.
Fraser), Colonial Gardens, Sydney, when I will be sure of receiving what is
sent, as they have been very punctual in sending my letters. You may tell Mr.
Rattery the last time I saw his cousin he was well and is as fat as a Porpoise
and is still single. He has had his arm broken lately, but has got quite better.
As my paper is nearly exhausted I must conclude by sending my fondest love
to all Friends, not forgetting my new cousins, and may the Blessing of that All-
seeing Being who guards and protects remain with you all is the prayer of
Your affec. & loving Brother,
M. Hindmarah.
To John Nisbet, Esq., Essinglon Grange, by Belford, Northumberland.
District of Cook,
New South Wales,
February 12th, 1826.
Dear Cousin,
I duly received your kind and interesting letter of I 2th May in November
last. I suppose it will not be out of place for me to congratulate you on the
late addition to that family which I ever hold in the highest estimation
and hope that such a change of life will prove a Blessing to you and Sarah. I
suppose my brother has followed your example by this time. 1 dare say it is
old news to inform you that we have got General Darling as New Governor.
He does not follow Sir Thomas’s example, but is determined to stand in his
own shoes. He is putting the Official Gentlemen to their right abouts, which
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


1 assure is not before it is wanted. He, through the Legislative Council, is mak-
ing a great many new regulations which I hope will prove useful. It is gen-
erally thought he will make a good Governor, but a new Broom always sweeps
clean . I am happy to see by your letter that times have altered so much for
the better. I suppose your Farmers have got as rich as Jews with your good
crops and high prices. In a general way we have had pretty good crops of
wheat this year, on this side of the Water. But owing to the very wet weather
we experienced immediately after harvest there has been great losses. With
the exception of two or three days we have had continued rain since Christmas,
which terminated in flooding the low lands of the Hawkesbury. The heavy
rains that we experience here would astonish you. The rain has put us very
much back with our ploughing &c. this year. The Maize crops will be very
great this year, owing to the wetness of the season. Wheat is selling from 8/-
to 10/-, Maize 3/- to 5/-, Beef 3id. Mutton 5d to 6d per lb. Wool sells well
in Sydney for shipment. I understand the Country’s wool has got into great
repute with the Manufacturers in England . Sheep have got to a great price.
Within these twelve months they have risen 100% at least. Half-bred Sheep
have been selling lately at £3/10/- and £4, I mean breeding ewes and these
of a very indifferent sort, This rapid rise in Sheep is occasioned by this Agri-
cultural Company and other Emigrants being in want of them. I suppose this
Company will be doing great deeds here, They are stationed not many miles
from where I live. I was there on Christmas day and saw some Short horned
Cattle they imported here, which I thought indifferent with the exception of
one cow, which is well worthy of the attention of our Botany Bay gentlemen,
as few of them ever saw such a beast. In case I did not thank you in any of my
former letters for the seeds &c. you sent me I must now do it in this and I feel
very much obliged to you and other friends for your kindness since my arrival
on this side of the Globe. In my last 1 wrote you at your request what I knew
of John Hiddlestone. I have never heard from him since. I saw his brother-
in-law a few weeks ago in Sydney and he informed me that he had heard from
them a few weeks ago and they were well but their business was much duller
than it had been. Mechanics in general do not meet with as much encourage-
ment here as they did two or three years ago owing to the great number that
emigrate yearly to this and Van Diemen’s Land. So that if my brother Willm.
can get a good situation in England I would advise him to stop where he is,
but if he should still wish to follow me and take what luck there is going, he
can do as he chooses. I have not got any land yet, and if you can possibly do
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


anything for me I would be thankful. I understand this new Governor is a re-
lation of Esqr. Craster of Craster. If he is the Esquire knows our Family well.
It is in contemplation between my master and me at present for me to Rent a
Farm I am now superintending. It consists of 5 70 acres, the one half of which
is under Tillage. If 1 should take it you may be sure it will be in safe terms,
which I will let you know in my next. 1 have written to Alnwick for a small
investment of clothes and if you would be kind enough to send by the same
conveyance six sets of cast iron plough mountings, with at least three shares or
socks to each set I would feel obliged. Please to have the mould board fuller
in the Breast than those sent out to Mr. McArthur. 1 think Trench’s mould
Board would suit the soil much better than Small’s, the soil cultivated being
mostly alluvial. Please to have the mould board to fix to the sheaths the same
way as the last and the socks made of good iron. They charge £ I in th is Coun-
try for the latter article and that made out of bar iron. The one half of this
order is for Mr. Tate, Miss Kell’s husband, that was. I would likewise thank
you to send out two girdles for baking on as they are not to be had in this
Country. Mrs. Tate has often applied to me to send for one and as I will be
obliged to set up house when I turn Farmer I will want one myself. Please to
send the Bill of the different articles and I will send you and the Alnwick
friends an order for the Moneys on Mr. Hassall’s agent in London and Interest
for the same if required. If you should double the quantity of Plough Mount-
ings I would rather as it will help to clear my own. I can dispose of them to
advantage. Please to address them or letters to the care of Mr. J. Hankin-
son, George Street, Sydney. If any person should enquire after Mr. Tate,
they are doing remarkably well. He has got a grant of 500 acres of land. He
is possessed of 300 Head of Cattle and rents another farm besides. They talk
of returning to England when they get rich, which I do not think will be long.
As you have been at the courting trade lately I wish you would set to work for
me and send me a respectable farmer’s daughter with plenty cash. The Native
girls of the Country or Currency Girls are so very pert that I do not think 1
will ever have one of them for a wife. If my solicitations do not take effect
I must only follow the example of the bearer of this, Mr. Edward Sparks, who
is proceeding home to Devonshire for that purpose. There have been two
Banks established in Sydney within this fortnight, namely the Australian and
Sydney Banks. The New South Wales Bank has been established this some
years. It has paid the proprietors so well that it has induced people to establish
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


the former. The Old Bank’s last dividend paid the proprietors 50%. If any of
my old acquaintances should ask after me tell them that I am well but look
very brown. Please to give my kindest love to my aunt and cousins and all
Friends.
Believe me to be.
Dear Sir,
Yours Affectionately,
M. Hindmarsh.
P,S, Please to excuse the scrawl. I have had but little time to write it.
To Miss Hindmarsh, Mr. Liddle’s, No. 2 Albany Street, North Leith.
Campbelltown,
Octr. 3rd, 1 826.
My Dear Sister,
I duly recvd. your kind letters of Septr. and Octr. last in May and July,
1826, and feel much interested in reading them. 1 think you must have had
merry times of it lately, having had so many of our friends married. I would
have written you some months ago, but to tell you the truth I could not pos-
sibly set about, having been ever head and ears in Love these many months
past and now that I have got married 1 have ventured to take up the pen once
more. Which part of the subject to tell you of first I am quite at a loss. I left
my situation in June last and commenced farming on my own account. Conse-
quently towards housekeeping I must have a wife, and was married, August
1 sth/26, to a young lady born in the Colony. Her name was Cecilia Sophia
Rutter, so that you have got another Sister, and I may say without flattery,
that I have got an industrious and excellent wife. She was Housekeeper in the
family that I lived with, viz. Mr. Hassall. Her mother came to this Country
about 21 years ago as Governess to a Gentleman’s Family, the name of
Blacksland (Blaxland) and her father came as Superintendent to the above
gentleman. Like ourselves this Family was left orphans about six years ago,
when my wife went as teacher to the Female Orphan School. I have got one
third of the Property that her Parents left, which is between three and four
hundred Pounds in Stock and Landed Property, which is a great assistance to
me . Octr. 21st. I was in Sydney a few days ago when 1 received another letter
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


from you dated Leith, which 1 must say I was rather surprised to see, but hope
your going to Miss D. will prove an acquisition to you. I likewise at the same
time had a letter from Brother Willm., but when it was written I know not, he
having forgotten to date it. He seems determined to follow me out here. I
shall write to advise him not to come as trade of his kind is now very dull.
There are so many Mechanics come out here as Prisoners. When they become
Free they generally begin business. I think he must not have read the letters I
wrote you on that subject. If he should come out, as long as I have a house
he shall always make it his home. He seems not to like London. He as well
as yourself informs me of the death of my much regretted cousin Eliza Bell
and the intended removal of my Aunt and Cousins to London, which I think
will be a good thing for James and Willm. I never have received any tidings
of J. Hiddlestone and am now tired of writing to him as my letters are never
answered. I am happy to think you have got so many Friends near you. I sup-
pose you are frequently at Mr. Q’s. Please to tell Mrs. Q e to excuse my not
answering her letter before now, having been in Love as I before stated and
as Harvest is so near I will be all bustle. This is the first Crop for me. 1 have
about 40 Acres of Wheat to harvest. The Farm I rent is beautifully situated
at the one end of the Township and in sight of the Church we were married at.
You enquire when I am going to return. That is impossible for me to say. You
must give me time to realize a little cash. Then perhaps you may see me and
my Rib on your side of the immense Ocean. If Willm. should come out I
should feel much happier. 1 have been much more comfortable since 1 got mar-
ried and into business for myself. It is a shocking life to be a Superintendent
over Prisoners . No person can have any idea of the depravity of these charac-
ters until they have experienced it. lam sorry to inform you that Mr. Thieus
that brought out letters to me was drowned last Month in either going to or
from Sydney to Newcastle . He was in a small craft which was wrecked in a
dreadful gale we experienced on the 18th Sept. You can have very little idea
of the Gales we sometimes have . On the above date an innumerable quantity
of Trees were blown up by the roots and two days’ rain caused a flood in the
Hawkesbury of about 36 feet; when a fresh like the former happens it lays
many thousands of Acres of cultivated Land under water. I suppose now that
you have left Alnwick the News from that quarter will cease coming on this
side of the water. I never have had a single letter from George and it is fast
approaching to Five years since I left home. William writes me that George has
become quite a Public character, viz. Chamberlain &c. I received the letter
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


favoured by Mr. Howey and likewise the Gloves and Ribbon which you were
so kind as to send me, and am sorry that we have it not in our power to return
the compliment, as they are very scarce articles in this Colony. I wrote to Aln-
wick about twelve months ago for a small investment in clothing, but I suppose
you have not got the letter. If you have not received it it is of little conse-
quence as I have got a pair of willing hands that can ply the needle well. My
dear Hannah, I must conclude by wishing you may be happy, comfortable and
prosperous in your setting out in the wide world, and would be happy to hear
of you next in your getting settled either in a single or double life, as I think
Miss Duncan's will not do much for you. My Dear partner joins in kindest
Love to you and all Friends and may that Great and Almighty Being be your
guide and Keeper is the Prayer of
Your ever affectionate Brother,
M. Hindmarsh.
Please address me at
Mr. Hankinson,
George Street,
Sydney,
N. S. Wales.
To John Nisbet, Essington Grange, by Bedford, Northumberland.
New South Wales,
14th May, 1827.
D-ear Cousin,
1 embrace the opportunity of writing you by a person who I expect will
in all probability deliver this himself. His name is Captain Farmer, who has
frequently visited these Colonies. He has a Farm within a mile of mine. I
have only had the pleasure of seeing him once, so I know but little of him.
But if he should call he will be able to give you some idea of the land we
live in. I understand he is going to call on Mr. Smith, of Grinden, to pur-
chase a Shorthorn Bull to bring out with him next voyage. I intend writing
to him before he leaves the Harbour to be kind enough to call on you and
deliver this personally, and if he should do that, he will find you of use to
him in making his selection. I have now the pleasure of informing you that
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


I have a grant of a Square Mile of Land, viz. 640 Acres, after much trouble
and expense, and many long journeys to Sydney. I have not got it so good
as I would have done had I got it when I came to the Country first. It is
situated on a part of the country commonly called the Five Island district,
from Sydney about 100 miles by Land and about nine Hours sail by water,
and within two miles of the coast, so that I can send all my Produce to
market at little expense. It is likewise situated in the Midst of plenty of
Cedar. On a moderate calculation there is Sixty Thousand feet of the above
valuable Timber on my farm, which sells in Sydney from £ i 3s. to £ I 6s. per
100 feet superficial with all the expenses of sawing and other labour attached.
If my brother Willm. should come out as he has always v/ritten me he would,
1 will be able to begin a lucrative Trade in that way. I began farming on my
own account last April gone twelve months and was Married about Nine
months ago, of which I wrote my Sister and Willm. the particulars. The Farm-
ing trade has turned out very bad. Last year, owing to the very bad crops and
low prices that have been given, Van Diemen’s Land can outsell us here. The
climate is so favourable to wheat growing. I am on a farm about 300 Acres
for which 1 pay a rent of £6O. I grew 40 acres of wheat last year, and, owing
to the very dry season had not more than 6 bushels per acre and wheat selling
at 5/- per Winchester Bushel. In better hopes I am putting in 60 acres this
year, and expect to make up my last year’s loss, which upon fair calculation
was £l4O, this being last crop. I intend removing to my own land as soon as
possible. I only got possession of it last month, and with a herd consisting of
50 Head and Crop in the Ground 1 expect to go to my own Farm pretty
strong. 1 have been much happier and more comfortable since I got married
and commenced on my own account than I was when holding a situation, even
although it has been a losing concern with me. I expect it will be better next
year. General Darling is very unpopular in his Government here, so much so
that high and low, rich and poor, wishes him out of the Government again. He
is little better than a Tyrant, His proceedings are most odious. In fact the
Colony, every one admits, is materially altered since he reigned. The different
Editors of the Newspapers have almost driven him out of his senses in telling
him his errors so often. I have sent you a few newspapers which 1 dare say will
amuse you. I forgot to tell you upon what conditions Land is given to me and
others. In the course of seven years there has to be expended on the land one
fourth of its value, which value is estimated by commissioners for the purpose,
and if such improvements are not made your grant is cancelled. Second, at the
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


expiration of seven years you have to pay 5 per cent, per annum to the Crown
as Quit Rent on the Value of the Land fixed by the said Commissioners. But
you can Redeem the Quit Rent as a Twenty years’ purchase, provided the pay-
ment be made within Twenty years after the date and Execution of the grant.
You are not allowed to Alienate the Land under any pretence whatever until
the expiration of Seven years, or until the Sum above stipulated be laid out in
improvements. So that you see they are very particular now always. These are
new regulations. The Quit Rent used to be very trifling. But 5 per cent, of the
value of the Land is too severe . There are but few Parishes that will be valued
less than 7/6 per acre and none less than 5/-, some perhaps 10/-. Suppose
my land was 7/6 and 1 wished to buy the Quit Rent. It would at twenty years’
purchase cost £240. So that it would be cheaper to purchase land of Govern-
ment at the estimated value of the Parish at a Peppercorn Rent, which will be
done as soon as His Majesty’s Pleasure is made known, the Governor having
written him on the subject. This Colony is very much altered now. In fact it is
scarcely worth while people emigrating. Money making is quite knocked in
the Head . 1 have had very few letters from your side of the water these last
I 2 months. 1 wrote to you about eighteen months ago to send out a few sets
of Plough Mountings, but I suppose 3 r ou did not receive the letter. I wrote to
Hannah and William a few months ago. As for George, I will not write him
as he seems to have forgot he has a second Brother. He has never wrote me
since I left home, which is Five years last Feby. I suppose his letters get all
shipwrecked as none of them ever reached me. Mr, Howey has followed my
example. He has got married since his arrival here. The young lady’s name
I have forgot at present. 1 have never had the pleasure of seeing him yet. I
must conclude by sending my kindest love to my much resptd. Aunt, Cousins
and all my Friends.
Your Affect. Cousin,
M. Hindmarsh.
Please to address my letters to the care of Mr. Chapman, Pitt Street
Sydney. He is Brother-in-law to J. Hiddleslone. I have never heard from him.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


To Miss H. Hindmarsh, Robt. Fiddle's, Esq., North Leith, Scotland.
lllawarra,
I Oth Septr., 1833.
My Dear Sister,
1 wrote to you three months ago in answer to your letter wherein you
wish to know whether 1 would have the £2O sent out in Cash or Property, but
begged you not to send it as I am now in much better circumstances than ever
1 have been since I commenced on my own account. In fact I should think my-
self covetous to accept your kind offer of such an amount of your little sav-
ings. My advice to you is to lay your spare money in store in case of sickness.
You might be out of a situation and then you will find the good of it. 1 dare
say you have many dear friends that would not see you want. But a little such
help as money will afford will be no sore to you, and at the same time I am
very grateful to you for your kind offer. In fact I am proud of such an affec-
tionate and good hearted Sister. I have to thank you for the seal you were so
kind to send, which I received a few weeks ago by Captn. Petre, but no letters.
I received it in good condition and will take care of it as a keepsake, not only
of yours but poor Willm. As you say he brought the stone from the East Indies
to you. In case you should not have received my last letters, viz. two since
Jany., I have to inform you that we, on the Mth Jany., had an addition to
our Family of another boy. His name is Michael Nisbet. He is now grown a
lovely Boy. He being the fourth child, as well as getting Gray headed, makes
me begin to look very Old. 1 have for the present almost given up farming.
It pays so badly. The average price of Wheat this season has not exceeded 3/-
per Bushel and other Grain equally low. I am at present entirely depending
upon carting cedar from the Mountains to the Coast for hire and likewise cut-
ting a little off my own Farm. I would thank you to ask Mr. Liddle how Cedar
of a good quality would sell in Leith per superficial foot. If it will pay and as
soon as I can lay out of my money I will send a little home. I see by the Lon-
don papers that as high as 7d per foot can be obtained but less than that would
pay. Septr. 30th. The day after I wrote the above I had the misfortune to have
my right hand bitten by a Pig. The inflammation got to such a pitch that I
thought I should lose my hand. It is now very weak, but is gradually mending.
Please let (Mr. Robt. Patterson's friends know that I saw him about a month
ago when he was well and in good spirits. He is still in the same situation and
I should imagine he is Ikely to remain in it for some time. You enquired in one
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


of your last letters respecting John Caxton. The last accounts I heard of him
was that he left this Colony for Swan River, or as it is generally called Western
Australia. He was in an excellent situation, but what made him leave it I don't
know. I cannot imagine what makes George so very remiss in writing. 1 never
have had but two letters from him. My other friends must excuse me in writing
them, as it is impossible for me to find matter to write about in the wild Forest,
The welfare of my own Family and Mr. Patterson are the only people 1 should
think they can be interested about. 1 have found Mr. R. Hindmarsh from New-
castle a sincere friend. He acts as agent for me in Sydney. He has an excel-
lent situation in the Commissariat Department. He was married about twelve
months ago to the Daughter of an opulent Ironmonger in Sydney, at whose
death he will get a large fortune. Your sister has curiosities to send you, but
is waiting to make some additions to them. I promised my late Cousin, J,
Nisbet, that I would make a collection of Bird skins for Mr. Selby. But I cannot
manage it myself. I will try to get an experienced person to make a collection
when I will not forget my friends. Your Sister, Nephews and Niece join in kind
love to you and all our friends and hope that this will reach you in safety.
1 am,
My Dear Sister,
Yours affectionately,
M. Hindmarsh.
To Miss H. Hindmarsh, at John Borthwick’s Esq., 26 Queen St., Edinburgh.
Illawarra, New South Wales,
Augt. 31 st, 1835.
My Dear Sister,
It is nearly two years since I had the pleasure of hearing from you or any of
my Friends. I think ft is now time for me to break silence. The only reason I
can assign for not having had any letter is the many Shipwrecks that have hap-
pened these last two years. No less than eleven or twelve have met that fate
bound for these Colonies which I dare say will deter many people from Emi-
grating here. It is now in contemplation by the Legislative Council to encourage
Agricultural Labourers to emigrate here on a very large scale instead of young
Females, which has not been found to answer as there are so many of them
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


such abandoned wretches which our Towns are already teeming with. I hope
there will be some of my Countrymen coming out as I should like to have two
or three of them. It is so long since I wrote to you that I don’t know what
part of my story to begin with first. I suppose it must be about the Bairns. 1
have now a large family. I think we have had an augmentation of another Girl
since I last wrote you. She was born on the Bth of Deer, last and is a name-
sake of her mother’s. I have engaged a respectable person as Tutor to the
Boys. We have had the benefit of Church service in our own house estab-
lished lately by the District Chaplain. He visits the Establishment that Mr.
Robert Patterson is engaged in once in two Months and gives us a call the same
afternoon. It has a salutary effect on the youngsters and the more so as they
were never in a Church in their lives . If you have an opportunity of seeing
any of Mr. Patterson’s friends you may inform them that he keeps steady to
his old situation. I saw him a few months ago and heard of his welfare today.
Ist Septr. I saw Sarah Hiddlestone, now Mrs. Kains, the last time 1 was at
Sydney. Mr. K. I think is a very respectable steady young man. He came out
to this Colony as first Mate of a vessel and got command of a Coasting Ves-
sel at Van Diemen’s Land, and unfortunately got wrecked in Bass’s Straits
when Sarah was with him, and escaped with their lives, but lost all the Pro-
perty they had. Consequently Mr. K. left the sea and is now Superintendent
in a large Farm near Sydney, for which he receives £5 0 per year. 1 must con-
clude by wishing to hear from you before this reaches you. Cecilia writes in
love to you and all,
I am,
My Dear Sister,
Your ever affet. Brother,
M. Hindmarsh.
Please address me at
Illawarra,
&c., &c.
as we now have a post office established in the District. Septr. 7. Mr. Pat-
terson is on a visit here tonight and desires me to say that he has not received
a letter from any of his friends this two years.
M.H.
(The establishment referred to above is Coolangatta.)
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


To Miss H. Hindmarsh, 22 Queen St., Edinburgh, 2 George’s Place,
Leith Walk.
New South Wales,
Dt. Illawarra,
26th Octr., 183 7 .
Dear Hannah,
In my last letter, dated about two Months ago, I mentioned that I had
received the Bill of Lading of the Box, but I received the Box itself about a
month ago, and have to return you many thanks not only for myself but for
Cecilia and the Children. They were all quite delighted with the many books
and other things, and I am very much Obliged to you for the Commentary as
well as other Books. But your Portrait was injured a little in passing through
the Tropical or warm part of the voyage . The Children are constantly talking
of their Aunt Hannah since your Portrait was hung up, and I have only to
state that it is the united wish of us both that you would come out and live
amongst us in reality. I mentioned in my last letter that I wished you to come
and spend the remainder of your days with us, and I now have only to state
that if you will join us here, as long as I have a House and property you shall
be a participator of it with us. I have now a large Family and the true and
lively interest you seemingly take in our Spiritual welfare makes me the more
anxious to have you amongst us. I had a long letter ready to send you, but
there was a Minister of the Church of Scotland, a Mr. Tait, who has only been
in the Colony a month, sent to our District to Canvas for Adult hearers. He
stopped at my house two nights and I have no doubt but he will get many
more than is required, viz. 100 persons, when the Government will then give
him £IOO as a salary, or if more than that number, a proportionate sum
agreeable to the late Act of Council here for the provision of the different
Churches, I hailed the arrival of Mr. Tait with inward iov. We had familv
worship both nights by Mr. T. and he promises to preach here twice a month
and visit us conditionally if he is appointed, which there is no doubt of. I duly
received your letter respecting a Minister and Tutor, but your plan would not
only he very expensive, much more so than you might expect, but Mr. Tait
informs me that he would not be recognized by the Presbytery and the Gov-
ernment, Consequently he would have to be supported by private individuals
which is ouite unnecessary as the Government is now holding out more en-
couragement to all denominations of Christians now, viz., in appropriating
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


parts of the Revenue towards building churches and the Ministers' salaries.
Respecting a Tutor for my Family, I expect the Revd. Doctor Lang, who k
the head of the Presbytery here, will return to the Colony in a few weeks from
England and Scotland, where he has been to select Ministers and School Mas-
ters for the Presbyterian Establishment of the Colony, when I will be able t<
get a competent person to educate my children. When I wrote to you last 1
was advertising for a person, but did not succeed in getting one . 1 have been
laid up these six weeks from a kick on the ankle from a pony, and obliged to
use a crutch. But I can now walk a little. 1 now close this letter until Igo to
Sydney.
Sydney, Novr. 1 Ith. As I am just on my return home and nothing hav-
ing transpired except that Mr. Tait has been appointed to our District, which
I hope will prove a Blessing, I have only to state that I hope you will accede
to my wishes in accepting of my house as a home which would give great
satisfaction. Please to give my kind love to all my Friends and may every
Blessing attend you all is the prayer of your
Affectionate and loving Brother,
M. Hindmarsh.
P.S. I forgot to send a great many kind loves, wishes, &c. from Cecilia
and the children.
M.H.
To Miss Hindmarsh, John Botherwick, Esq., of Crookstone, Edinburgh.
Alne Bank, 2nd Deer., 1838.
My Dear Sister,
1 received your letter of the Ist June a week or two ago and was happy
to hear that all my Friends were well. This is the third letter I have received
since I wrote you, but you know that I am a bad letter writer and what I de-
test. I am sorry to inform you that I met with a heavy loss in my Cash af-
fairs last Deer., the parties that 1 had been supplying with timber, and had half
the little vessel with, stopped payment. They owed me £2BO, but I got the
vessel into my own hands which reduced the debt to £2OO. In Aprl. last the
vessel was wrecked. My Attorney told me when was in Sydney last that he
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


thought I would get 1 5/- in the Pound, but as yet I have got nothing. All the
Cash that I was possessed of at the time was in their hands, which occurrence
annoyed me very much as it took me from home a great deal and puzzled me
a short time how to pay my debts, but am happy to say 1 have got fairly afloat
again. Mr. Patterson and I went to Sydney in Octr. last to see Captn. Howie,
but Mr. P. delayed so long after receiving the Captn’s letter that when we
reached Sydney the Captn. had sailed the day previous. You will have heard
of the fate of Mr. Howie and family before this reaches you. There has been
no intelligence of them. Mr. Patterson leaves his situation immediately to join*
me in my cattle. He will, I expect, start for Port Phillip in six weeks or two
months. He would have gone much sooner but he could not get the charge
at Shoal Haven off his hands so soon as he anticipated. Please to tell his
friends that he is well. 1 must beg of you to apologise to Mr. Liddle for not
writing him. This letter will be a long one. Please to tell him that the Gov-
ernment prohibited the cutting of Cedar on Crown Lands some time ago.
What is left on my own Farm is not worth while sending, and as for Wool, 1
never was possessed of a Sheep in my life, which 1 have reason to be sorry
for. Our District is not fitted for them. I expect when Mr. Patterson gets
fairly into the Interior that 1 will then be able to get some. I have made great
improvement on my Farm since I left, off the Timber business. I have got 40
Acres of Alluvial Brush (Thicket) land in a forward state for cultivating,
which is very expensive. It would cost from £lO to £l4 per Acre if I had to
employ free men. But this 1 did with prisoners, but will soon have to depend
on Immigrants as the Assignment of Prisoners is to be done away with.
Labour is very high here at present. 1 have built a new Barn since 1 wrote you
last, 51x19 feet. I will start to build a New House next as the old one is
much too small for the family. We had an augmentation of Family on 20th
June of another Girl. She is named Cathrine after my sister-in-law. She was
a seven months child . She is very healthy. We all were ill of the Influenza in
Octr. last. It is raging over the Country. It generally makes great havoc
amongst the Drunkards, Young Children and Old People. You made an en-
quiry in one of your late letters whether there was any encouragement in Syd-
ney for a Music Master. I should think there was, but I am so little in Sydney
that I am not competent to give a decided answer on that point. There are
immense numbers of all sorts and professions landing on our shores weekly,
and it will be the means, I hope, of improving the Moral condition of the
country. It is a great pity that it had ever been made a Penal Colony. Mr.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


Liddle wrote me that he had a Nephew that was anxious to come out. All I
have got to say on such a subject is that I will never be the means of enticing
any one out, as I have found many people on their arrival here have been
very much disappointed. There is plenty of employment for operatives of all
sorts. Farm Labourers and Shepherds are very much wanted. A good Farm
Servant with a Wife will get from £25 to £35 per year with Rations, viz. food.
I have commenced Tobacco growing this year and intend entering into it
largely as my land is very suitable for it. I have engaged a person for four
years to superintend it. I have been very fortunate with my Horses this year.
I will have Six Foals. As for my Cattle I fear I will have great loss in them.
A great many are gone Wild, which I may say are lost. They are in a wild
part of the Country. What I can get Mr. Patterson takes to Port Phillip with
him, I suppose from 400 or 500 head. If Capt. Howie has not left before
you get this please to write him and beg of him to fetch me 2 or 3 Bushels of
Pace’s perennial Rye Grass Seed and as much White Clover and I will pay
him for it on his arrival here. I must now conclude by sending a whole host
of loves from the children, Cecilia, united with me in love to you and all our
Friends, not forgetting my Worthy Aunt Nisbet.
I remain, My Dear Hannah,
Your loving and Affct. Brother,
M. Hindmarsh.
P.S. I will give you an account of the Rev. Mr. Tail’s proceedings in my
next. He is a Worthy Man and I hope will prove a great Blessing amongst us.
His Ministry I am sorry to say is neglected by many of my Neighbours that
ought to set a better example.
To Miss Hindmarsh.
Alne Bank,
1 Ith May, 1842.
Dear Hannah,
I duly received your letter of 13th Deer, on Aprl. 23rd, but deferred
writing as we were daily expecting another addition to our large family and
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


air. happy to inform you that Cecilia was safely delivered of a Son on the
3 0 of last month, and both are doing well. Since I received my letter George
has received two letters from you dated 2nd and 31st of Deer. We were
happy to hear that most of onr relations were well. We never had so many
letters in such a short time, three in three weeks. With respect to your com-
ing out I now state as I have done in my former letters that we will do every-
thing in our power to make you as comfortable as we can
(Erasures made).
I have made a mistake in turning over once to look at the Numbers. The
education we wish our Girls to have is plain English education. Our eldest is
still with her Aunt in the neighbourhood of Sydney and is very much im-
proved . She is learning Music, Dancing &c. and as the other Girls are all
young perhaps it would be more agreeable to you to stop for twelve months
longer, but you can please yourself in that respect. We are quite agreeable to
your proposals and whenever you make up your mind to come out, write me
and 1 will prepare for your arrival. I would advise you to come in an English
or London vessel. The Scotch ships are never so well stored as the English;
but George is going to write you and I dare say he will give you the same
advice. I know there are often complaints of Scotch Commanders and Ships.
George and 1 had reason to complain. But perhaps you may meet with some
family that you know that may be coming from Scotland and in that case it
might be more agreeable to you to come in a Scotch Ship. When you come
fetch me a few pairs of worsted Socks and Stockings, likewise a few pairs for
Cecilia, as we cannot get good ones here, likewise one or two feather beds.
You will find one of them very useful on the voyage. As to other goods the
Sydney Market is so overstocked at present that most of goods are to be had
cheaper than at home. The Colony is in a dreadful depressed state. Land, all
kinds of Stocks, in fact everything, within the last two years has depreciated
from 30 to 50 per cent, owing principally to over speculation. There have been
some very heavy losses and likely to be many more. When I last wrote you
by George’s request, 1 stated the views he had, but I am sorry to say his views
have not been realized. The person he was with as assistant store keeper
failed and he consequently lost his Salary, and the last situation he had with
Captain Collins in a Timber Concern at Kiama has become an Insolvent and
therefore was discharged. He has been living with us since last June. I built
a small cottage for him at Kiama, where he has been residing the last three
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


LETTER written by Michael Hindmarsh at Alne Bank on 11th May, 1842, and posted
in Kiama, where George Hindmarsh was Post Master. There were then no envelopes, no
postage stamps. It is stamped a s “Paid at Kiama” and later in Sydney "Paid Ship
Letter.”




weeks. He is still attending to the Post Office, and is collector for the Road I
mentioned in my last. Consequently he has been very badly off and has been
dependent on us in great measure ever since he came to the Colony for his
board and lodgings respectively. Situations are very bad to be had at present.
There are between two and three hundred young men in Sydney out of Situa-
tions . In fact I may say that everything is at a standstill in the Colony at pre-
sent, but there are immediate hopes of a reaction. Farming has been a very
poor specn. as well as others. There have been immense quantities of Grain
and Flour imported from South America and elsewhere, the last three years.
Labour has been so Very high that Colonial Farmers could not compete with
the importer. Owing to the depressed state of the Colony our Town of Kiama
has made little progress. There have been only five or six houses built since
I wrote you last and from the same reason we have been kept from getting a
Scotch Church built. The Government will hold out no encouragement unless
£3OO is actually in hand and as we had only about £l2O of that sum sub-
scribed we are dependent on the Wollongong Minister’s monthly visit, when
he usually preaches in our verandah. The Episcopalian Minister preaches at
Kiama once in two Months. We had Mr. McFee there a few days ago. He
had got a call to Portland Head a little North of Sydney, which he has ac-
cepted. We have a Mr. Atcheson at present in our District. He is not gener-
ally liked. You were inquiring in one of George’s letters if we had a Doctor
Menzies in our neighbourhood. We are very intimate with him and Mrs. M.
They are highly respectable . He attends on our family when we require medi-
cal advice, which I am happy to say is not often. I have now got pretty well
again. But am obliged to be careful in my diet. Our Orange Trees have be-
gun to bear. We have had from 40 to 5 0 Dozen off them this year. They will
of course improve every year. Please to present our united love to all our
Friends, not forgetting my worthy Aunt Nisbet. 1 should think she must be
getting very infirm now. It is not likely that ever I will be able to visit my
native land, having so many ties. I think I am the most prolific branch in the
whole of my family relations. We are now eleven in family.
1 remain,
Dear Hannah,
Your very affe. Brother,
M. Hindmarsh.
P.S. I forgot to tell you that Cecilia purchased a Piano Forte last Septr.
when she was in Sydney.
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


To Miss Hindmarsh, c/- Robert Licldle Ecq., North Leith, Scotland.
Alne Bank,
2nd August, 1843.
Dear Hannah,
I duly received yours of the I 7th Feby. (last week). I am sorry you
should have thought me indifferent as to your coming out. So far from that 1
made sure of your being out in the Clarendon. My Agent in Sydney boarded
that vessel immediately on her arrival thinking you would be in her. At your
own request or wish stated that it would make little difference to our children
as the latest was being educated and the other younger ones could very well
wait that time, viz. twelve months. But I hope you will be with us as soon as
you can make it convenient. 1 here is a Mrs, Dymock expected out from Edin-
burgh, whose father and mother (Mr. and Mrs. J. Waugh, father and mother
of D. L. Waugh of Waughope) lives in our neighbourhood. Their name
is Waugh. There is a Miss Tindall from Perth expected with her sister, Mrs.
Dr. Menzies, who likewise lives near us . We are very intimate with both fami-
lies. You write me to inform you the ages, &c., of cur children. Ist, George
John, born Sept. 22nd, 1827, William Rutter, born 28th June, 1829, Char-
lotte Alis, born 22nd Aph, 1831, Michl. Nisbet, born 14th Jany., 1833,
Cecilia Sophia, born Bth Deer., 1834, Hannah Isabella, born sth February,
183 7, Cathrine Newel, born 20th June, 1838, Robert, born 1 7th Feby., 1840,
Thomas Alfred, born 30th Aph, 1 342. With respect to a Minister being sanc-
tioned amongst us am happy to inform you that a letter signed by a few of
the heads of the most respectable families has been sent to the Revd. Mr . Jef-
fray, of Edinburgh, where it appears there are a few friendly ladies getting up
a subscription for the purpose, and likewise at Perth by the friends of Dr.
Menzie,s. Therefore we may depend upon having a minister amongst us
shortly. I am sorry to say the Revd. Mr. Atchison of Wollongong in this Dis-
trict is now nearly deserted by his people 2 out of 3 of his Elders have left his
church . It is expected he will be removed after the meeting of Synod in Octr,
We miss the Revd. Mr. Tait. He is a very worthy man. I am sorry to give a
lamentable state of things in the colony at present. There is scarcely a day
passes without some insolvent being declared. In fact, all confidence is lost.
Since 1 commenced this letter the other day 1 have received yours of 28th
March last and have only to state that my indifference to your coming out to
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


us, I am happy to say, is quite groundless. I must candidly state I think you
have been wavering yourself for the last four years. When you arrive enquire
for Mr. R. Hindmarsh at Mr. Iredale, ironmonger, George St., and from thence
my brother-in-law, Mr. R. Cooper, Junr., will drive you to his residence in the
neighbourhood of Sydney until I can reach Sydney myself. There you will
see our eldest Daughter. I am sorry to hear of my worthy Aunt, 1 may say
my Mother, declining. It must be a great comfort to her to have such a kind
daughter as Margaret. I hope when you embark on ship board you will meet
pleasant passengers and a good Captain, which is the main point on such a long
voyage. But perhaps you might have a chance of a trial carriage. I am sorry
to say it is very bad times for Farmers here now. Wheat has been selling as low
as 3/- per bushel and all other produce equally low. Horses have fallen from
£6O each to £i 0 or £5 each. Other stock equally low. When in Sydney last
May good beef and mutton was selling at 1 \ d per lb, and sheep are now being
boiled down by thousands for to extract the tallow from their carcases. George
still lives at Kiama. He is trying for a situation as Collector under the new Act
of Parliament which was put in force ibis month. I hope he may get it. He has
4or 5 acres of land rented which he is cultivating besides the acre of mine
he is living on. He still keeps the Post Office, hut gets very little for his trouble.
I am happy to say he is remarkable steady and attentive to his business. I am
happy to learn from your last letter that Michael's eye was better. 1 suppose
he has a large family now. Before you start or when you engage your passage
write me, as some vessels make much shorter voyages than others. Cecilia and
the children write in kind love and
1 am,
Dear Hannah,
Your Affe. Brother,
M. Hindmarsh.
P.S. I will be in Sydney in the course of a month when I will post an
other letter to you .
LETTERS OF MICHAEL HINDMARSH


The above letters tell much of the life and work of Michael Hindmarsh
in Australia from 1822 to 1843. They tell of his short experience with John
Macarthur, of his three years as Superintendent of Convicts and Farm Mana-
ger with Jonathan Hassall and of his detestation of the convict system. They
also tell of his one year s experience as a tenant farmer near Campbelltown, of
his romance and marriage, and of his first sixteen years at Alne Bank. They
specify the conditions under which Alne Bank was bought. They plainly indi-
cate that for about ten years, most of his energy was devoted to the cedar in-
dustry—it would seem that he had several teams at work—and in the
conveyance of the cedar to Sydney in a little sailing craft of which he was part
owner. Probably he was buying cedar locally for Sydney merchants. He really
tried to establish a trade with England, when new regulations in the industry
so interfered with the business as to place the trade altogether in the hands of
the Sydney merchants. Michael Hindmarsh does not write much of his activi-
ties as a grazier, but the mention of his having 400 to 5 00 head of cattle, some
of which were lost in the bush, indicates that, like most early settlers, he was
using the “open range"—all neighbouring unoccupied land—for his stock,
which he must have had rounded up for branding and other purposes. The
letters tell of the difficulties facing him in clearing the land when the cedar was
cut out, and the stoppages of the convict system made employment of labour
so expensive. They tell us, too, of how he welcomed to Alne Bank both
Presbyterian and Episcopalian ministers to conduct religious services at the
homestead, long before there was any church in Gerringong, Kiama or Jam-
beroo.
“Mattivie, District Cook,” his address as given in the opening letters,
appears on the map of Cook Parish at "Matavie Farm,” at the junction of
Cobbity Creek and the Nepean, standing in the name of Jonathan Hassall.
Probably it was so named after one of the mission stations of the Rev. Mr.
Hassall, Jonathan’s father, Michael Hindmarsh always addressed letters for
his uncle to Essington Grange, while Mr. Nisbet adheres to the provincial
spelling Easington Grainge.
The letters have considerable historic value, particularly as regards the
floods and droughts, rise and fall of prices of commodities, his roundabout
Michael Hindmarsh at Alne Bank


journey to Bathurst via Cookbundoon, the Crookwell River, &c., and the
reference in the first letter to the discovery of the Brisbane River, which
Mr. John Oxley believed was the Macquarie, previously traced by him to
the Macquarie Marshes.
A HARDY PIONEER WOMAN.
It is a pity that the letters do not tell how Michael Hindmarsh brought
his wife and infant son, George, from Campbelltown to Alne Bank. Prob-
ably in one of his letters Michael Hindmarsh described this journey. At the
time there were neither roads nor bridges in Illawarra, and travellers were
compelled to use bridle tracks or timber tracks. At that time there was no
Wollongong, Government Headquarters were at Red Point, near Port
Kembla. Cornelius O’Brien had a grant at Bulli and Charles Throsby Smith
had established “Bustle Farm,” where Wollongong now stands. The only
means of transport was on horseback, Mrs. Hindmarsh using a side-saddle,
and probably sharing with her husband the task of carrying George on the
saddle. Apparently the first part of the journey was via the cedar track lead-
ing from Campbelltown to the top of Bulli Mountain, and then down that
rugged path discovered by Cornelius O’Brien, known as the Subscription
Road, for the cost of its construction was paid by public subscription. Most
likely the first halt was made at the home of Mr. and Mrs. George Tate, at
Spring Hill, south of Wollongong, later the home of Captain Charles Wal-
dron, and the scene of Captain Waldron’s tragic death in January, 1834.
Mrs. Tate (nee Kell) was known to the Hindmarshes of Alnwick, and
in the above letters, Michael Hindmarsh had asked for plough parts, a girdle
iron, and some grass seed for Mr. Tate. The name Kell still appears with
the Tate family in Illawarra.
South of Spring Hill most of the located land through which the trav-
ellers had to pass was in the hands of absentees, who had stockmen in their
huts looking after the properties—Mrs. Jenkins’ “Berkeley” estate, Captain
Brook’s property, William Browne's “Yallah,” Johnston’s “Johnstons
Meadows” and “Macquarie Gift,” Samuel Terry’s “Terry’s Meadows” (later
Albion Park). Henry Osborne and his brothers had not arrived; nor had
Michael Hyam come to Jamberoo. But George Brown was in Illawarra and
MICHAEL HINDMARSH AT ALNE BANK


John Ritchie was taking cedar from Poplar Vale, north of the Minnamurra,
where Woodstock was later established.
Most of the journey was decidedly rough, partly through such dense
cedar brushes as Longbrush and the brush north of Dapto . Two very steep
mountains had to be crossed, Mount Terry and Saddleback. There were also
such awkward streams to be forded as —Mullet Creek, Macquarie Rivulet,
Turpentine Creek and the Minnamurra, besides many smaller streams. It
certainly was a long and lonely ride. If the travellers met anyone after leav-
ing Mr. Tate’s it would be, perhaps, George Brown or some member of his
family, perhaps John Ritchie, or perhaps some solitary stockman or cedar
getter.
‘Lonely and weary though Mr. and Mrs. Hlndmarsh must have been,
Mrs. Hindmarsh must have been keenly interested in the country through
which she passed, country altogether different to any she had previously
seen. What a pity there is no letter extant to describe this wonderful journey.
So Michael Hindmarsh brought his wife and little son to his modest
home on the edge of the brush lands. There was the great hill closely covered
with brush to the north, with similar hills to the west and south, covered,
some with brush, others with hardwood, while to the east was the swamp
land then owned by William Smith and later purchased by Robert Miller at
five shillings an acre . Michael Hindmarsh could have had this swamp but
he preferred the rich cedar lands so well watered by Rose Valley Creek and
Ooaree Creek .
The furniture and cooking utensils were of the simplest kinds, the light
was got from home made candles, the water was drawn from the neigh-
bouring creek. But Mrs. Michael Hindmarsh was Australian born and
Michael had become used to roughing it. With him it was not simply
“roughing it.” Very soon he had land under cultivation, and apparently he
had several teams always busy hauling cedar, his own and other people s to
the little Gerringong Boatharbour. Some idea of this business may be had
from a bill, now in the possession of Mr. C. T. Hindmarsh, of Alne Bank.
This was sent by Alexander Berry of Coolangatta to Michael Hindmarsh, in
1029, and it shows that even then, twenty years before Alexander Berry
had any tenants, he ground flour, and supplied settlers with goods. It was
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


to Coolangatta that Michael Hindmarsh sent his wheat to be ground and his
ploughs and wheels to be repaired . It was from Coolangatta that he got his
sugar, leather, horseshoes, meat and other supplies.
During these early days Mrs. Hindmarsh must have been lonely when
she had a little time to rest. But she was a very busy woman. For years the
only way she had of getting about was on horseback . Even in the early days,
however, she seems to have had a visitor in the person of her sister, Caro-
line Blake Rutter. Apparently there was another occasional visitor, Thomas
Surfleet Kendall, who rode up and down those step hillsides, and through
the dense brush between '‘Burrool" and Alne Bank, with such effect that
in 1830 Alne Bank became the scene of the wedding of these two young
folk.
When Michael Hindmarsh wrote in December, 1838, of his having 40
acres of land cleared, and of the difficulty and expense of having the rest of
his property cleared, he also mentioned the erection of a barn 5 I feet long.
A few years later he adopted the custom of most Illawarra settlers and had
the property cleared by the clearing lease system, allowing the lessees the
use of about 50 acres for 3 years on condition that the land was cleared in
that time.
In 1 838 the flour mill at Woodstock, Jamberoo, was established by
Captain John Gunn Collins, with money sent to him from England by Mr.
Hart. His neighbour James Mackey Gray, of Omega, had just about com-
pleted his contract of clearing the road from the Minnamurra to Saddleback.
So Michael Hindmarsh was able to send his wheat by pachhorse to Wood-
stock instead of Coolangatta.
In the early forties he made friends with new arrivals in Jamberoo,
the Waughs, Dymocks and Menzies .
With some of his neighbours he had helped to make a road from Alne
Bank to Kiama, and in 1841 he and Mackey Gray were appointed assessors
to assist Captain Collins in arranging for a parish road to be constructed
from Kiama to Gerringong. In 1840 he had bought two half-acre allotments
at that record breaking first landsaie at Kiama township, building a cottage
on the one in Shoalhaven Street, where his brother George, recently arrived
from England, established Kiama’s first post office.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH AT ALNE BANK


In 1844, when the Illawarra Agricultural Society was formed, he was
elected to the committee, and he, Mackey Gray and Dr. Menzies rode to
Wollongong to attend the committee meetings, the ploughing matches and
the Show.
Michael Hindmarsh was certainly a prominent citizen in those earl
days, and it was not long before he became a Justice of the Peace at a time
when there were fewer such men, even relatively than these are now, and
when they carried more responsibility than those of today. He not only sat
on the bench at Kiama, but also, for years, travelled to Shoalhaven with
Mr. Mackey Gray and Dr. Menzies for the same purpose.
He mentions meeting Robert Hindmarsh, of the Commissariat Depart-
ment. Robert, like Michael Hindmarsh, came from Northumberland. About
I 00 years after the writing of the above mentioned letter, Robert Hindmarsh’s
granddaughter Kate was, at Moree, greeted by a lady from Illawarra, who
mistook her for Michael Hindmarsh's granddaughter, Kate Hindmarsh, of
Kiama. The strong resemblance of the two Kate Hindmarshes, and the fact
that in each case the grandfather came from Northumberland, would make
one inclined to believe that some relationship existed between the families,
although such relationship is not hinted at by Michael Hindmarsh.
In the early fifties, when the suburban lots of Gerringong were
sold, Michael Hindmarsh and his sons, George John and William Rutter,
bought 13 lots, with a total area of about 296 acres, and Michael also bought
a block of 158 acres in the hill country north-west of Alne Bank.
In the fifties, also, he sent his wheat by bullock dray to Bushbank, be-
tween Kiama and Mount Pleasant, a much shorter journey than the one to
Woodstock.
ALNE BANK HOUSE IS BUILT.
In the early fifties (1851-2), Michael Hindmarsh built his permanent
home, a house that still stands (1944), well preserved, after being the family
home for 92 years. It is certainly a monument to the courage, faith and abil-
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


Alne Bank
Upper: As in 1851. Lower: As now (1943)




ity of the young orphan who, at the age of 22, left home and relations and
sailed half way round the world to establish a home for himself. It is also a
monument to the faithful workmanship of its builders.
The original home had been built on the north-east corner of the pro-
perty, the most convenient site when the land was covered with brush and
forest. But with the clearing of the brush the place proved rather exposed.
So, after careful examination, Michael Hindmarsh chose as his home site a
position on the hillside, near the southern boundary of the property, where
the hills form an arc protecting the house from most winds.
So placed, the house is a prominent landmark for travellers along the
Prince’s Highway or the South Coast Railway, between Mount Pleasant
and Gerringong. The house, by no means ornate, is typical of the man who
had it built—a house of simple dignity and strength—a comfortable home.
The dignity of the house is added to by the two magnificent pines which
stand like sentinels before it. As the illustrations show, the house, as built
by Michael Hindmarsh, was not exactly as it now is. The verandahs as built by
him have been extended upwards to form balconies and modern improve-
ments of a kind unknown in Michael Hindmarsh’s days, have been effected,
as he would have done, had these improvements come in his day.
One day in 1851, therefore, the contractors, Messrs. Day and Knight,
came along, in a bullock dray, with their simple tool equipment. Probably
the cedar, all grown at Alne Bank, had already been cut by pit saw, and
had been well seasoned. Stones had to be hauled from the hillside and
sand had to be carted from the sea side. Dray loads of shells had to be
brought from the Minnamurra River, to be burned on the premises and
converted into lime. A messenger had to go to a blacksmith in Wollongong
to have the nails made —6 inch, 4 inch, 3 inch, 2 inch, 1 j inch. At that
time there were no wire nails. So the square nails or brads had to be made
and headed. On one occasion, while the messenger was waiting for his nails
to be made, the blacksmith was much hampered by inquisitive aborigines.
So the smith took a bar of red hot iron from the forge and applied it to
the tails of the black king’s coat. (The king had been presented with a long
tailed coat, which he proudly wore as a symbol of his royalty.) The coat
tails caught fire and the king and his subjects, all scared, rushed away, giv-.
ing the blacksmith room to work.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH AT ALNE BANK


All the doors, window frames and sashes, mantel pieces and stairs
we're patiently and well made by hand, and are well preserved today. The
walls are 22 inches thick. The roof was of shingles, which have since been
covered by galvanized iron.
The cedar and cattle trade was a thing of the past, rust destroyed wheat,
pests ruined both tobacco and potatoes. So Alne Bank turned to dairying
and horse breeding. The property was divided, Frederick living at the pre-
sent homestead with his father, Thomas Alfred having the western part,
where he built a single story home having the same ground plan as the Alne
Bank homestead, and Robert had the original home site on the north-east
of the property. George and William were established on properties south
of Alne Bank. (Some of the latter property is now occupied by the Gerrin-
gong Railway Station.) Michael Nesbit was later established in Kiama.
Michael Hindmarsh continued to take an active part in public affairs.
In church matters he was always pleased to allow Alne Bank to be used for
religious services, and when the Congregational Church was being estab-
lished in Gerringong by the Rev. Robert Wilson, who became his son-in-
law, he gave a portion of one of his suburban lots as a site, and also helped
materially with funds for the building of the first church there, a wooden
one.
On Friday, 25th January, 1867, Michael Hindmarsh “stepped out of
his house to interrupt an intruder when he was suddenly overtaken by the
hand of death, and borne back lifeless to his bereaved homestead.” He had
never spared himself, always living a strenuous life, which evidently affected
his heart.
“Having been so many years identified with the Kiama district, he was
familiarly known to old and young within a wide circuit; and only 24 hours
before his decease, his well remembered features and snowy beard might
have been seen in Kiama. On that day he replied to several friends inquir-
ing about his health that he never felt better; and yet, before another sun
had set, he had been called hence, and the tender ties of all earthly endear-
ments had been for ever severed .
MICHAEL HINDMARSH OF ALNE BANK


A man truly honourable and just ... a magistrate upright and intel-
ligent ... a father and husband most affectionate and kind ... a good
citizen and just man.
Death has thus suddenly widowed one who had for more than forty
years shared the joys and sorows of wedded companionship. . .” (“Kiama
Independent” ).
His widow did not long survive him, for she died at Alne Bank on Ist
October, 1869.
Both Michael Hindmarsh and his wife were buried in the little private
cemetery a little higher up the hill than their beautiful home, a cemetery that
also holds the remains of two of their children, Ellen Caroline and Mar
garet, as well as Michael's brother and sister, George and Hannah.
So passed away these two wonderful people, the first real home makers
of Gerringong, wonderful pioneers who did very much more than pioneering
work, and moved forward in the very best sense of the word.
Twelve members of their large family remained. Although most of the
descendants scattered to different parts of New South Wales, they generally
maintained their allegiance to land occupation and all lived up to the high
standard set by Michael and Cecilia Sophia Hindmarsh.
MICHAEL HINDMARSH AT ALNE BANK


Mrs Michael Hindmarsh
As the letter of 3rd October, 1826, says, Mrs. Michael Hindmarsh
was, before marriage, Cecilia Sophia. She was the daughter of William
Rutter, superintendent of the salt works of Mr. Blaxland. She had two sisters,
Caroline Blake Rutter, who married Thomas Surfleet Kendall at Alne Bank,
and Catharine Newell Rutter, who married the Robert Cooper mentioned
in the letter of 2nd August, 1843, and some time after Mr. Cooper’s death
married Thomas Chapman of Hartwell, Kiama.
Mrs. Hindmarsh's mother had come to Australia to be governess in
Mr. Blaxland’s family, and Cecilia Sophia had been a teacher at Parra-
matta, and later was housekeeper for Mr. Hassall, quite a responsible posi-
tion.
Being born in Australia and the daughter of respectable parents, she
received a grant of 1 00 acres. This, however, was not high quality land. It
was on Currumbine Creek, south of the Shoalhaven River.
She proved a tremendous help to Michael Hindmarsh, right through
their long married life, and played a very important part in the making and
maintaining of the home at Alne Bank, and also the excellent training of
her large family.
She died on Ist October, 1869, after an illness of about six weeks, and
was buried beside her husband at Alne Bank.


Another Michael Hindmarsh
One hundred and fourteen years after the original Michael Hindmarsh
came to Alne Bank, another Michael Hindmarsh arrived on the scene, where
he, too, it is hoped, will some day take possession, and maintain the highest
tradition of his distinguished great-great-grandfather.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Alfred Hindmarsh, and the
grandson of the present owners and occupants of Alne Bank, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Thomas Hindmarsh.
On 12th September, 1943, when the newcomer was three months old,
he was christened by the Rev. W. Hooker at the Gerringong Congregational
Church, where the first Michael Hindmarsh and so many of his descendants
worshipped and where both the father and mother of the new Michael
Hindmarsh were christened and also married.


George Hindmarsh
George Hindmarsh was born 7th October, 1 796, and arrived in Aus-
tralia in 1839. For a time he was Michael’s guest at Alne Bank. He became
an assistant store keeper, but his employer failed. Then he became agent in
Kiama for Captain John Gunn Collins, of the Woodstock saw and flour mill
at Jamberoo. This venture, too, failed. But on Ist January, 1841, he became
Kiama’s first postmaster, the post office being in Shoalhaven Street, a little
north of where the “Independent” office now stands. There was very little
work at this office—mails from Sydney twice a week with the same number
of despatches, and the same number of mails from and to Shoalhaven. Be-
sides he did some farming on the five-acre block where Rosebank is.
In 1842 he was appointed Collector for the new parish road, Kiama to
Gerringong, and in 1843 he applied for the position of Collector of rates for
the newly-formed lllawarra District Council.
He also became a trader, owning the small sailing craft “Vision” (Wil-
liam Geoghegan, master), many years before any steamer came to Kiama
or there was any wharfage accommodation.
He continued in business in Kiama for many years, and for some time
was one of Kiama’s aldermen.
He died on 26th February, 1871, in his 75th year, and was buried in
the family cemetery at Alne Bank.


Hannah Hindmarsh
Hannah Hindmarsh was bom at Alnwick, 23rd December, 1801,
After many invitations to Australia by her brother, Michael, she left the
Downs on 3rd December, 1844, on the barque “Caledonia,’’ 405 tons (Cap-
tain Hawxwell). The ship was not overcrowded, Miss Hindmarsh's fellow
passengers being—two Misses Bothers, Mr. Taylor, Mr. Thomas, and three
French priests—Rev. Mons. Dubreul, Rev. Mons. Rochea, and Rev. Mens.
Le Blanc.
She arrived in Sydney, 12th April 1845, and, if she followed instruc-
tions, proceeded from the ship to Mr. Iredale’s ironmongery store
in George Street, Sydney, to meet Mr. Robert Hindmarsh, who would
take her to the home of Robert Cooper, Junr., a brother-in-law of Michael
Hindmarsh.
This Robert Hindmarsh was mentioned in the letter dated 1 oth Sep-
tember, 1833, for Hannah, and is described as a son-in-law of Mr. Iredale,
an officer in the Commissariat Department, and Michael Hindmarsh’s good
friend and Sydney agent.
She brought with her the letters, pages 10-43 herein, which eventually
became the property of her niece and namesake, Hannah Isabelle Hind-
marsh, who married the Rev. Robert Wilson, the first Congregational Minister
of Gerringong.
After staying at Alne Bank for some time with her brother, she opened
a school for young ladies at “Rosebank,” Kiama.
This school became very popular, attracting young ladies, not only
from Southern Illawarra, but also from Wollongong, and even from Sydney.
Amongst the Wollongong students were two daughters of Mr. Charles
Throsby Smith, on whose estate Wollongong was built, and from Sydney
came three daughters of Mr. Newnham Tooth.
Miss Hannah Hindmarsh died on 9th April, 1860, and was buried in
the family cemetery at Alne Bank.


Family of Michael Hindmarsh
MICHAEL HINDMARSH. Born at Alnwick, Northumberland, Eng-
land, 12th March, 1800. Arrived in Tasmania 18th October, 1822, and
shortly after came to Sydney. Married Cecilia Sophia Rutter at Campbell-
town, I sth August, 1826. Received Alne Bank as a Grant in January, 182 7.
Took wife and infant son George John to Alne Bank later in 1827. Died
suddenly at Alne Bank 25th January, 1867. Buried in Family Cemetery
there.
CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH, daughter of William Rutter. Born
15th June, 1807. Died at Alne Bank, Ist October, 1869. Buried in Family
Cemetery, Alne Bank.
CHILDREN.
GEORGE JOHN HINDMARSH. Bom at Campbelltown, 22nd Sep-
tember, 182 7. Married Jane Potter, of Kent, England. A successful farmer
on bis property, “Ivy Mount," south of Alne Bank.
WILLIAM RUTTER HINDMARSH (Senior). Born at Alne Bank,
28th June, 1829. Married Ann Evans at Dapto in April, 1861. A successful
farmer on his property south of Alne Bank and later at Robertson. Member
of Committee of Kiama A. & H. Society. Won many prizes for draught
stallions and short horn cattle at district shows .
William Rutter Hindmarsh died at Robertson, 6th May, 1914.
Ann Hindmarsh died at Robertson 21st March, 1893.
CHARLOTTE ALICE HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 22nd April,
1831. Married Thomas Black.
Thomas Black died 19th February, 1875.
Charlotte Alice Black died 28th July, 1914,


MICHAEL HINDMARSH
Born March 12,
1800
CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH
(nee RUTTER).
Born June 15, 1807
Married at Campbelltown, August 15, 1826.
Arrived at Alne Bank late in 1 82 7.
Buried in private cemetery at Alne Bank.




MICHAEL NESBIT HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 14th January
1833. Married Sarah Evans.
A successful farmer and business man at Kiama. In partnership with
his brother, Thomas Alfred, imported and bred coaching and draught horses,
winning many prizes with them at the Royal Show, Sydney, and at District
Shows. Also a successful exhibitor of dairy cattle. Balance of stud bought by
Philip Charley. Alderman at Kiama from 1891 to 1908 inclusive, and Mayor
six times. A Justice of the Peace for many years.
Died at Kiama Bih January, 1912.
CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, Bth December,
1834. Married William Walter Ewin .
HANNAH ISABELLE HINDMARSH. Bom at Alne Bank, sth Febru-
ary, 1837. Married the Rev. Robert Wilson, Congregational Minister at
Gerringong from 1861 to 1881, later at Milton and finally at Dulwich
Hill. Robert Wilson died in 1908, Mrs. Wilson in July, 1919.
CATHRINE NEWEL HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 20th June,
1838. Married Henry George Wilford.
ROBERT HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 14th February, 1840.
Married (I.) Mary Jane Kendall, 22nd November, 1865. (II.) Mary Mar-
tha Prescott, in 1873. (111.) Annie Bones, in 1899.
Inherited the north-eastern part of the estate, where the original Alne
Bank home was built. A successful dairy farmer for years, winning many
prizes at the District Shows.
Died at Kiama 26th October, 1920.
THOMAS ALFRED HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 30th April,
1843. Married Anna Maria Roberts, of Lower Boro, Braidwood District.
Inherited western half of Alne Bank estate. Built there a replica of the stone
Alne Bank house, but with single story. This completed, he went to Forbes,
but later bought Alne Bank with the old stone homestead, now (1944) oc-
cupied by Charles Thomas Hindmarsh. For several years in partnership
with Michael Nesbit Hindmarsh, of Kiama, importing and breeding coach-
ing and draught horses, winning with them, and with dairy cattle, valuable
prizes at Royal Sydney and local Shows.
Died 25th July, 1908.
Family of Michael Hindmarsh


ELLEN CAROLINE HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 20th Febru-
ary, 1846. Died Ist October, 1847. Buried at Alne Bank.
MARGARET HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 15th September,
1847. Died Bth October, 1847. Buried at Alne Bank.
JANE ELIZABETH HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank. 1 sth Septem-
ber, 184 7 (Twin sister of Margaret). Married Henry Rudolph Allerding .
FREDERICK JAMES HINDMARSH. Bom at Alne Bank, I 6th June,
1850. Married Ist January, 1873, Jane Ann Davis. Inherited the portion
of Alne Bank containing the r.tone homestead. This he sold later to his bro-
ther, Thomas Alfred, and removed to Jinden, near Braidwood, where he bred
sheep, cattle, and ponies.
Died at Jinden, sth July, 1911.
EMMA LEE HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 23rd June. 1853.
Married James Comrie Lloyd, 12th December, 18 72.
Died 14th April, 1921 .
Family of Michael Hindmarsh


MICHAEL JOHN HINDMARSH. Born 21st November, 1859.
GEORGE THOMAS HINDMARSH. Born 26th June, 1861. Farmer
and Auctioneer of Richmond River. For many years M.L . A . for Lismore.
ISABELLA FANNY HINDMARSH. Born 24th July, 1 864 .
CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH. Born I Bth July, 1866.
JANE FRANCIS HINDMARSH. Born 19th June, 1868.
SARA ANN HINDMARSH (Deceased). Born 29th September. 1870.
ALICE ADA HINDMARSH. Born 9th February, 1873.
MARRIAGES.
(A) GEORGE THOMAS HINDMARSH married ISABEL MARY BAR-
RIE, of Lismore, 1885.
(B) MICHAEL JOHN HINDMARSH married MARY CECILIA LLOYD.
21st November, 1906.
(C) ISABELLA FANNY HINDMARSH married DAVID GALLOWAY
RICHARDSON (School Teacher), 1892, who was Head Teacher at
many schools, including Jamberoo, Kiama, and finally Auburn.
(D) CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH married WILLIAM NELSON, 21st
November, 1888.
(E) JANE FRANCIS HINDMARSH married STUART C. POTTIE (Vet-
erinary Surgeon), 30th October, 1895, who died 3rd September,
1943.
(F) ALICE ADA HINDMARSH married DAVID FRANCIS BAILEY,
21st April, 1909.
(A) Children of GEORGE THOMAS and ISABEL MARY HINDMARSH.
MARY BARRIE HINDMARSH. Born 4th April, 1887. Married
PERCY PEDDER SCRIVENER.
(Children: Percy Scrivener, Barrie Scrivener.)
JEAN ISABEL HINDMARSH. Born sth July, 1889. Married GUY
BLOOMFIELD HAYDON.
(Children: Patricia Bloomfield Haydon, John Bloomfield Haydon
(Married Elizabeth Payne), Isabel Mary Haydon.)
Family of George John and Jane Hindmarsh.


GRACE McMASTER HINDMARSH. Born 19th June, 1891. Married
FAIRLIE ALEXANDER PATERSON.
(Children: Helen Fairlie Paterson, James Fairlie Paterson, Jean Fairlie
Paterson.)
JAMES GEORGE HINDMARSH. Born 29th July, 1893. Served in Ist
World War as Trooper 6th A.L.H. at Gallipoli, Egypt, and Palestine, and
in 2nd World War as Lt.-Colonel at H.Q. Victoria Barracks. Sydney. Mar-
ried ELSIE MAY EXTON, who died in 1934.
(Children: Mary Maclean Hindmarsh. Born 21st July, 1921. Barbara
Bonnie Hindmarsh. Born 10th April, 1923. Nea Barrie Hindmarsh. Born 4th
September, 1925. Annie Milne Hindmarsh. Born 28th December, 1927.)
RONALD ERSKINE HINDMARSH. Born, February, 1895. (Not mar-
ried.)
JOHN ALEXANDER HINDMARSH. Born 21 st November, 1898.
Served in R.A.A.F. Married NINA WILSON.
BARRIE RICHMOND HINDMARSH. Born 14th March, 1900. Mar
ried MARJORIE ADA POOLMAN, I 3th December, 1936.
ALFRED McINTOSH HINDMARSH. Born 25th December,] 1904.
(Not Married.)
MARGARET ROBERTSON HINDMARSH. Born 2nd Feebruary, 1906.
Married GEORGE BROWNLOW DOWNES.
(Children: George Thomas Brownlow DoWnes, Robin Brownlow
Downes, Margaret Brownlow Downes, Caroline Brownlow Downes.)
DEATHS.
George Thomas Hindmarsh. Died 6th June, 1916.
Isabel Mary Hindmarsh . Died 4th July, 1 942 .
Elsie May Hindmarsh Died 1934.
(B) Children of MICHAEL JOHN and MARY CECILIA HINDMARSH.
JOHN LLOYD HINDMARSH. Born 19th September, 1911.
Family of George John and Jane Hindmarsh


WERNA MARY CECILIA HINDMARSH. Born 12th October, 1913.
Married JACK HUGH ROBSON RICHARDSON.
(Children: Neil Hindmarsh Richardson. Born 19th November, 1939.
Graeme Lloyd Richardson. Born Ist July, 1942.)
(C) Child of DAVID GALLOWAY and ISABELLA FANNY
RICHARDSON.
EDNA RICHARDSON. Born 1894. Married HAROLD CHARLES
WHALAN, 1928.
(Child: David Hindmarsh Whalan.)
(D) Children of WILLIAM and CECILIA SOPHIA NELSON.
IVY MURIEL NELSON. Born Ist October, 1889.
HILDA JANE CATHERINE NELSON. Born 18th March, 1891.
ELSIE ISABEL NELSON. Born 19th April, 1894. Married HARRY
GORDON MILLER.
DEATHS.
Cecilia Sophia Nelson. Died 1 7th November, 1927.
Ivy Muriel Nelson. Died Ist May, 1898.
Hilda Jane Catherine Nelson. Died 28th April, 1892.
(E) Children of STUART and JANE F. POTTIE.
JOHN HINDMARSH POTTIE.
STUART HINDMARSH POTTIE (Deceased).
DORIS ISABEL POTTIE.
BRUCE HINDMARSH POTTIE.
JEAN ALICE POTTIE.
Family of George John and Jane Hindmarsh


RUTH POTTIE.
EDNA ELSIE POTTIE (Deceased).
GEORGE HINDMARSH POTTIE (Deceased).
MARRIAGES.
DORIS ISABEL POTTIE married STUART McINTOSH, of Cobbity.
JEAN ALICE POTTIE married FREDERICK McINTOSH, of Berry.
RUTH POTTIE married ALLEN BIRDSALL.
(F) Children of DAVID FRANCIS and ALICE ADA BAILEY.
MEDLEY DAVID BAILEY. Born 7th February, 1910.
WINSTON HINDMARSH BAILEY. Born 24th March, 1911.
And Two daughters deceased.
Family of William Rutter and Ann Hindmarsh.
WILLIAM RUTTER HINDMARSH, Junr. Born at Alne Bank, 15th
January, 1 862.
MICHAEL EVAN HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 3rd August,
1865.
CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH. Born at Milton.
ANNE ISABELLA HINDMARSH. Born at Milton, 26th December,
1870.
SYDNEY STEPHEN HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 21st Novem-
ber, 1875.
ESSIE ELIZABETH HINDMARSH. Born at Alne Bank, 26th June.
1884.
Family of George John and Jane Hindmarsh


MARRIAGES.
(A) WILLIAM RUTTER HINDMARSH, Junr., married EVA MILLER,
20th April, 1 884 .
(B) MICHAEL EVAN HINDMARSH married KATE FLORENCE
AYERS, Ist February, 1899.
(C) ANNE ISABELLA HINDMARSH married WILLIAM ROBERT
GOULDING, 9th October, 1895.
(D) SYDNEY STEPHEN HINDMARSH married MARY JANE PALMER.
23rd January, 1901 .
(E) CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH married WALTER COCKS, 1914,
who died in 1933—n0 children.
(A) Children of WILLIAM RUTTER (Junr.) and EVA HINDMARSH.
CHARLES EDWY HINDMARSH. Born at Robertson, 6th March, 1885.
Died at Robertson, 1889.
ARTHUR WILLIAM HINDMARSH. Born at Robertson. 29th October,
1886. Married EMMA MOSES at Clunes. Died at Bowral, 28th July, 1939.
Children (1) Richard Miller Hindmarsh. Born 2nd November, 1912.
Married Dorothy .
(Children: Janice May Hindmarsh. Born 23th November, 1940. Ross
William Hindmarsh. Born 30th April, 1944.)
(2) Muriel Morrow Hindmarsh. Born 6th June, 1914. Married Wil-
liam Francis Jackson (now Prisoner of War).
(Child; Arthur William Jackson. Born Bth April, 1942.)
(3) Betty Evans Hindmarsh. Born 27th December, 1916. Married
Allan A. Knox, 20th April, 1938 .
(Children: Barbara Ann Knox. Born 20th January, 1939. Essie Eliza-
beth Knox, Born 9th April, 1941. Mary Eva Knox. Born 15th, October,
1942.)
Family of William Rutter and Ann Hindmarsh


(4) William Edward Hinclmarsh. Born 12th April, 1920. Died 2nd
March, 1942.
ALECK JAMES HINDMARSH. Born at Robertson, 2nd August, 1888.
Married MILLICENT CLARKE at Burrawang, 2 Ist June, 1920.
(Children: Millie Hindmarsh. Died at infancy. Warren Alexander Hind-
marsh. Born 28th April, 1923 .
STANLEY ROBERT HINDMARSH. Born at Robertson, 2nd May,
1890. Married JESSIE MAY MOSES at Burrawang, 10th December, 1919.
(Children; Robert Ryrie Hindmarsh. Born Sept. 6, 1920. Gunner, A.I.F.
Nance Muriel Hindmarsh. Born 24th September, 1922. Mollie Hindmarsh.
Born 2nd June, 1925. James Edward Hindmarsh. Born 13th April, 1928.)
MURIEL AGNES HINDMARSH. Born at Robertson, sth October,
1891. Died at Robertson, 7th January, 1914.
DORIS ANN HINDMARSH. Born at Robertson, 28th June, 1897.
Married ALBERT PERCIVAL SCHOFIELD, at Robertson, 1 Ith January,
1922.
(Children: Margaret Eva Schofield. Born 22nd April, 1923. Wilfred
William Schofield . Born 14th March, 1923. Muriel Jean Schofield. Born 14th
August, 1926. George Schofield. Born 31st October, 1928. Joyce Isabel
Schofield. Born 12th August, 1932. Arthur James Schofield. Born 28th Janu-
ary, 1939.) '
COLIN HINDMARSH. Born 29th January, 1899. Died 20th May, 1 899.
(B) Children of MICHAEL EVAN and KATE FLORENCE HINDMARSH.
CLAUDE WILLIAM HINDMARSH. Born at Robertson, 1 Bth Novem-
ber, 1899.
HARLEIGH EVANS HINDMARSH. Born Bth October, 1901, at Rob-
ertson.
GWENNETH ALICE HINDMARSH. Born 31st May, 1904, at Rob-
ertson.
AMICE EVAN HINDMARSH. Born 14th July, 1906, at Lindendale.
EVER ITT SAMPSON HINDMARSH. Born 26th August, 1908, at Lin-
dendale .
Family of William Rutter and Ann Hindrnarsh


MARRIAGES.
CLAUDE WILLIAM HINDMARSH married IVA VALIE ARM-
STRONG, Ist June, 1925.
HARLEIGH EVANS HINDMARSH married THELMA RUBY McIN-
TOSH, 3 Ist December, 1927.
GWENNETH ALICE HINDMARSH married JOHN BOTH NICHOL-
SON, 21st February, 1925.
AMICE EVAN HINDMARSH married JAMES DUGUID, Ist October,
1938.
EVERITT SAMPSON HINDMARSH married DOROTHY FRANCES
DYER, 1 Oth September, 1938.
DEATHS.
Michael Evan Hindmarsh died at Drummoyne, 27th June, 1937.
Kate Florence Hindmarsh, died at Moss Vale, 28th March, 1 940.
(C) Children of WILLIAM ROBERT and ANNE ISABELLA GOULDING.
PHYLLIS EVANS GOULDING. Born at Annandale, July, 1897.
GWENDOLINE MARY GOULDING. Born at Lewisham. August, 1 899.
ROBERT NELSON GOULDING. Born October, 1905.
HAROLD LINDSAY GOULDING. Born December, 1910.
MARRIAGES.
PHYLLIS EVANS GOULDING married LYLE MOORE, 16th Sep-
tember, 1922.
GWENDOLINE MARY GOULDING married LESLIE W. HAWLEY,
14th April, 1927.
Family of William Rutter and Ann Hindmarsh


ROBERT NELSON GOULDING married EILEEN WEBB in January,
1928.
LINDSAY GOULDING married RENE McDICKEN, 3rd February,
1938.
DEATHS.
Anne Isabelle Goulding died at Cronulla, sth May, 1937.
William Robert Goulding died at Cronulla, 2 7th July, 1943.
(D) Children of SYDNEY STEPHEN and MARY JANE HINDMARSH,
GLADYS MAY HINDMARSH.
HOUSTON STEPHEN HINDMARSH.
RITA ADA HINDMARSH.
ALMA EVANS HINDMARSH.
MARRIAGE.
GLADYS MAY HINDMARSH married GEORGE T. DATE.
DEATH.
Rita Ada Hindmarsh.
Family of Thomas and Charlotte Alice Black.
JOHN BLACK. Born 31st January, 1852.
MARGARET JANE BLACK. Born 3th February, 1854.
CECILIA ANN BLACK. Born 1 7th May, 1856.
CHARLOTTE ALICE BLACK. Born 7th April, 1858 .
MARY ANN BLACK. Born 2nd March, 1860.
Family ol William Rutter and Ann Hindmarsh


ROBERT BLACK. Born 25th May, 1862.
ELIZABETH BLACK. Born 21st April, 1864,
ISABELLA BLACK. Born 2nd April, 1866.
WILLIAM BLACK. Born 25th June, 1868.
ANNIE AMELIA BLACK. Born 13th April, 1870.
MARRIAGES.
(A) JOHN BLACK married (MARY BUCHANAN.
(B) MARGARET JANE BLACK marired DAVID JOHNSTON.
(C) CECILIA ANN BLACK married MATTHEW JAMES DINNING.
(D) MARY ANN BLACK married WILLIAM HENRY EAST.
(E) ROBERT BLACK married ELIZABETH MOFF1T.
(F) ELIZABETH BLACK married GEORGE MORROW.
(G) WILLIAM BLACK married EMMA JOHNSTON.
(H) ANNIE AMELIA BLACK married DR. WESLEY JOHN JENNER
(A) Children of JOHN and MARY BUCHANAN BLACK.
George Buchanan Black married Nellie Roberts.
Thomas Black married Alice Bembrick.
Bessie Evelyn Mary Black married Rowland Southwell.
William Henderson Black married Lucy Quiddington .
Oswald Black (deceased).
Leslie Black.
(B) Children of DAVID and MARGARET JANE JOHNSTON.
Maud Johnston married James Maher.
Amy Johnston married Samuel Stainer.
John Johnston (deceased) married Ella Stephens,
Family of Thomas and Charlotte Alice Black


Thomas Johnston.
Noman Johnston.
Cyril Johnston.
George Johnston.
Ralph Johnston.
James Johnston.
(C) Children of MATTHEW JAMES and CECILIA ANN DINNING.
Elizabeth Alice Dinning.
Mabel Amelia Dinning married Rev. Claude Lionel Connor (Methodist
Minister).
Gertrude Florence Dinning (deceased).
Charlotte Maude Dinning (deceased).
Ellen Mary Dinning
Rose Maude Dinning (deceased).
(D) Children of WILLIAM HENRY and MARY ANN EAST.
Alice Mary East married Victor S. Medcalf.
Millicent Isabel East married Rodgers.
Alfred Henry East (deceased).
Thomas James East married Sadie Wilson.
Muriel East married George Elliot.
(E) Children of ROBERT and ELIZABETH BLACK.
Thomas Robert Black married Lucy Bennett.
Cecilia Louise Black.
William Black.
Jack Black married Elizabeth O’Brien.
(F) Children of GEORGE and ELIZABETH MORROW.
Stella Morrow married Charles Northcott.
Thomas Morrow married Selina Plows,
Family of Thomas and Charlotte Alice Black


Ula Heath Alice Morrow married Eric Priestly Lee.
Essie Morrow married Arthur Grainger.
Myra Morrow.
John Morrow married May Yates.
(G) Children of WILLIAM and EMMA BLACK,
Alice M. Black (unmarried).
Nesbit Black (deceased).
Victor Black (married).
Leslie Black (deceased).
Harmon Black married Joan Braid.
David Black (unmarried).
Margaret Black married Alan Bonamy.
Wesley Black (married).
(H) Children of WESLEY JOHN and ANNE AMELIA JENNER
Dorothea Cora Jenner (unmarried).
Constance Alice Jenner (unmarried).
Ella Emma Jenner married George Hinkley.
DEATHS.
Thomas Black died I 9th February, 1875.
Charlotte Alice Black died 28th July, 1914.
Margaret Jane Johnston died 12th May, 1932.
Anne Amelia Jenner died 22nd December, 1932.
Isabella Black died 3rd December, 1933.
Mary Ann East died 14th June, 1938.
John Black died 12th July, 1938.
Elizabeth Morrow died 27th April, 1939.
Robert Black died 1 6th December, 1941.
Cecilia Ann Dinning died 10th October, 1942.
William Black.
Family of Thomas and Charlotte Alice Black


ALFRED NESBIT HINDMARSH. Born 6th December, 1873.
NESBIT EVANS HINDMARSH. Born 21st December, 1881.
MARRIAGE.
NESBIT EVANS HINDMARSH married MARGARET BAILEY, 29th
November, 1905.
Children of NESBIT EVANS and MARGARET HINDMARSH.
ALFRED NEIL HINDMARSH. Born 3rd April, 1907. Married MAR-
GARET THOMPSON.
(Children: Janet Hindmarsh. Born 9th December, 1936. Judith Hind-
marsh. ,Born 9th April, 1940. Nesbit John Hindmarsh. Born 16th August,
1944.)
DOUGLAS NESBIT HINDMARSH. Born 3th June, 1910. Married
CHRISTINA STIRLING LAMB.
(Children: lan Douglas Hindmarsh. Born 23rd May, 1937. Wendy
Louise Hindmarsh. Born 2nd September, 1941.)
MARGARET SARAH HINDMARSH. Bom 24th July, 1911. Married
DONALD McLEAN STEELE.
(Child: Ross McLean Steele.)
DEATHS.
Alfred Nesbit Hindmarsh. Died at Kiama, 6th May, 1876.
Sarah Evans Hindmarsh. Died at Kiama.
Michael Nesbit Hindmarsh. Died at Kiama, Bth July, 1912.
Family of Michael Nesbit and Sarah Hindmarsh.


WILLIAM WALTER EWIN.
EMMA LEE EWIN.
JANE ELIZABETH EWIN.
GEORGE EWIN.
ARTHUR EWIN.
DAVID EWIN,
FLORENCE ADA EWIN.
ALICE GERTRUDE EWIN.
MARRIAGES.
(A) WILLIAM WALTER EWIN married CAROLINE SECCOMBE.
(B) EMMA LEE EWIN married FRANCIS JOHN McMAHON.
(C) JANE ELIZABETH EWIN married IRVINE RICHARDSON.
(D) ARTHUR EWIN married AMY BUSHBY.
(E) DAVID EWIN married HYAM.
(G) ALICE GERTRUDE EWIN married WILLIAM WALKER.
(A) Children of WILLIAM WALTER and CAROLINE EWIN.
FLORENCE EWIN (deceased).
WALTER EWIN (deceased).
FREDA EWIN.
(B) Children of FRANCIS JOHN and EMMA LEE McMAHON.
CECILIA SOPHIA McMAHON. Born 1883.
FRANCIS McMAHON. Born 1885.
EDWARD McMAHON. Born 1886.
VIVIAN McMAHON. Born 1890.
DOROTHY McMAHON. Born 1893.
Family of William Walter and Cecilia Sophia Ewin,


(C) Children of IRVINE and JANE ELIZABETH RICHARDSON.
CECILIA SOPHIA RICHARDSON married ARTHUR COPELAND
BASTIAN.
BEATRICE ELIZABETH RICHARDSON married GEORGE EVERY.
WALTER GEORGE RICHARDSON. Killed in Ist World War.
JOHN SAMUEL RICHARDSON married LESLIE HYAM.
(D) Children of ARTHUR and AMY EWIN.
ARTHUR EWIN married MAUD MAGUIRE.
MYRA EWIN.
Family of the Rev. Robert and Hannah Isabelle Wilson
(A) CECILIA WILSON married GEORGE VALLANCE.
(B) MICHAEL JAMES WILSON married EDITH M. GREEN.
(C) ELEANOR WILSON married A. WARDEN.
FLORENCE WILSON died in childhood.
(D) HORATIUS ROBERT WILSON married (1) BESSIE CORDON
(2) MEL GRIFFITHS.
(E) AMY WILSON married CHARLES GIBB.
HANNAH WILSON (deceased).
(F) ALBERT DAVID WILSON married FLORENCE .
(A) Children of GEORGE and CECILIA VALLANCE.
VICTOR VALLANCE (married. Two children—boys).
SIDNEY VALLANCE (married. Two children—boys).
(B) Children of MICHAEL JAMES and EDITH WILSON,
DOROTHY WILSON married THOMAS LEE.
(Children; Michael George Lee, Robert James Lee.)
EDITH WILSON married CHARLES OAKDEN HARRISON, B.Sc.,
8.E., Lieutenant, A.F.C., Ist World War, Mentioned in Despatches.
(Children; David A. W. Harrison, James Oakden Harrison.)
MABEL WILSON (owner of above letters).
Family of William Walter and Cecilia Sophia Ewin


(C) Child of A. and ELEANOR WARDEN.
MADGE WARDEN.
(D) Children of HORATIUS ROBERT and BESSIE WILSON.
HOPE WILSON married MAX BOARDMAN.
(Two children.)
(F) Children of ALFRED DAVID and FLORENCE WILSON.
JEAN WILSON married BRIDGE.
(2 children—boys.)
JOAN WILSON. Married (one child).
JOYCE WILSON. Married (one child).
Family of Henry George and Catherine Newell Wilford.
WILLIAiM WILFORD. Born 1854. Died 1854.
BENJAMIN WILFORD. Born 20th October, 1856 (Deceased).
GEORGE FREDERICK WILFORD. Born 3rd December, 1860.
CECILIA SQPHIA RUTTER WILFORD. Born 30th May, 1862.
JOHN ARTHUR WILFORD. Born 2 7th September, 186 7.
WALTER HENRY WILFORD. Born 29th July, 1870.
HANNAH PRISCILLA WILFORD. Born 6th May, 18 72 (Deceased).
MARRIAGES.
(A) GEORGE FREDERICK WILFORD married LUCY MILLER.
(B) CECILIA SOPHIA WILFORD married ALEXANDER FIRTH
WARDEN.
(C) JOHN ARTHUR WILFORD married ISABELLA CONSTANCE
OTTON.
(D) WALTER HENRY WILFORD married FRANCES ISABEL TURN-
BULL.
(A) Children of GEORGE FREDERICK and LUCY WILFORD.
LUCY NEWELL WILFORD. Bom 20th December, 1900.
Family of the Rev. Robert and Hannah Isabelle Wilson


HENRY JOHN WILFORD. Born 23rd April, 1905, married LEILA
EVELYN SCOTT.
ANNE ELIZABETH WILFORD.
(B) Children of ALEXANDER FIRTH and CECILIA SOPHIA RUTTER
WARDEN.
HENRY DAVID WARDEN. Bom 1883. Married RUBY ETHEL
CORK.
(Children: Dudley Wilford Warden, Rita Beryl Warden.)
LILY ROSALIND WARDEN. Bom 17th October, 1886.
WILFRID LESLIE WARDEN. Born 14th November, 1890. Married
RITA LOUISA McKELLAR.
(Child: Barton Warden. Born 8th August, 1915.)
(C) Children of JOHN ARTHUR and ISABELLA CONSTANCE
WILFORD.
CATHERINE MARY WILFORD.
JOHN WILLIAM WILFORD. Married ETHEL NAOMI MATTRAM.
(Children: Alfred John Wilford, Barry Gordon Wilford.)
CONSTANCE NEWELL WILFORD.
(D) Children of WALTER HENRY and FRANCES ISABEL WILFORD.
MARY CATHERINE WILFORD. Bom 7th March, 1915.
COLIN FREDERICK WILFORD. Bom 29th January, 1923.
Robert Hindmarsh
Married I. 22nd November, 1863, MARY JANE KENDALL, who died 2nd
May, 1872.
II. In 1873 MARY MARTHA PRESCOTT, who died in April,
1897.
III. ANNIE BONES, who died in 1900.
Robert Hindmarsh died at Kiama, 26th October, 1920.
Family of Henry George and Catherine Newell Wilford


CATHERINE CECILIA HINDMARSH. Bom Bth May, 1868.
MARY EDITH HINDMARSH. Born 12th January, 1870.
ROBERT WALTER HINDMARSH. Born 28th May, 1871.
MARRIAGES.
(A) MARY EDITH HINDMARSH married 6th August, 1919, to LEIGH-
TON BARBOUR, who died 7th May, 1944.
(B) ROBERT WALTER HINDMARSH married HELEN MURIEL
BAILEY.
(A) Children of LEIGHTON and MARY EDITH BARBOUR.
MARY LEIGHTON BARBOUR. Born 9th May, 1912.
ROBERT LEIGHTON BARBOUR. Born 1 oth November, 1913. Married
OLIVE McGREGOR.
(Children: Anne Leighton Barbour. Born 16th March, 1938. Jean Leigh-
ton Barbour. Born 28th October, 1941. Nancy Leighton Barbour. Born 24th
February, 1944.)
(B) Children of ROBERT WALTER and HELEN MURIEL HINDMARSH.
KATHLEEN MURIEL HINDMARSH. Bom 18th January, 1903,
NORMA WINSOME HINDMARSH. Born 20th July, 1 904.
JOHN HINDMARSH. Bom 2nd June, 1907.
MARK RAWSON HINDMARSH. Born 1 7th December, I 909.
ETHEL HELENA HINDMARSH. Born 1 9th September, 1911.
MICHAEL NESBIT HINDMARSH. Bom 20th June, 1914.
DOROTHY KENDALL HINDMARSH. Born 30th December, 1916.
Family of Robert and Mary Martha Hindmarsh.
HENRY ERNEST HINDMARSH. Born 30th November, 1876. (Served
as Lieutenant, Ist Regt., Mounted Rifles, in Boer War, 1900-1). Died, 29th
April, 1941.
WILLIAM NESBIT HINDMARSH. Born Bth July, 1 878.
Family of Robert and Mary Jane Hindmarsh


PERCIVAL PRESCOTT HINDMARSH. Born 29th June, I 880. Died in
1915.
ELIZABETH EMMA HINDMARSH. Born 26th November, 1882.
MARY ESTELLA HINDMARSH. Bom 6th April, I 885.
MARRIAGES.
(A) HENRY ERNEST HINDMARSH married PEARL ALFREDA ZIEMS
in 1910.
(B) WILLIAM NESBIT HINDMARSH married NORRIE HALLORAN in
1912.
(C) ELIZABETH EMMA HINDMARSH married SAMUEL COCKS, 24th
April, 1912.
(D) MARY ESTELLA HINDMARSH married FREDERICK SIDNEY
MORTON in 1912, who died in 1941.
(A) Children of HENRY ERNEST and PEARL ALFREDA HINDMARSH.
LOLA MARY HINDMARSH. Bom 2nd May, 1911.
RALPH lAN HINDMARSH. Born 17th November, 1913. (Captain
in 2nd A.1.F.)
BESSIE HINDMARSH. Born 14th August, 1918.
TREVOR HINDMARSH. Born 24th August, 1919.
(B) Children of WILLIAM NESBIT and NORRIE HINDMARSH.
lAN HINDMARSH. Born 27th January, 1914. (Served with 2nd A.I.F.
in Middle East and New Guinea. Killed in Action, New Guinea, December,
1942.)
NORRIE HINDMARSH. Born 19th May, 1915. (Served with
W.A.A.A.F. for two years. )
RONALD HINDMARSH. Born 10th January, 1918. (Served with 2nd
A.I.F. four years in Middle East and Greece, where wounded.)
KEITH HINDMARSH. Bom 12th August, 1922. (Pilot Officer in
R.A.A.F.)
Family ol Robert and Mary Martha Hindmarsh


ROBERT J. HINDMARSH. Born 6th November, 1928.
(C) Child of SAMUEL and ELIZABETH EMMA COCKS.
CARYL SELDON COCKS. Born 20th October, 1913. (Served with
A. 1. F . for 20 months, and discharged, Medically Unfit, in September, 1 943.)
(D) Children of FREDERICK SIDNEY and MARY ESTELLA MORTON.
MARY FAIRLESS MORTON. Born 31st May, 1913. (Served with
A.W.A.S.)
ALISON FAIRLESS MORTON. Born 29th January, 1916.
Family of Thomas Alfred and Anna Maria Hindmarsh.
CHARLES THOMAS HINDMARSH. Born 22nd September, 1886.
Owner and occupant of the old home, Alne Bank. Trained at Hawkesbury
College. A recognised breeder of Friesian Stud Cattle. Alderman of Gerrin-
gong Municipal Council.
ETHEL MAY HINDMARSH. Born 15th May, 1889.
CLARICE ANNA HINDMARSH. Born 30th January, 1891.
OLIVE KATHLEEN HINDMARSH. Born 2nd April, 1893.
MAUDE MARY HINDMARSH. Born 31st March, 1897.
MARRIAGES.
(A) CHARLES THOMAS HINDMARSH married ROSE CORALIE SAN-
DERS.
(B) ETHEL MAY HINDMARSH married EDWARD LLOYD SANDERS,
M.L.A. for Willoughby for many years, who died 10th July, 1943.
C) CLARICE ANNA HINDMARSH married REGINALD RAE GREEN.
(D) OLIVE KATHLEEN HINDMARSH married ALFRED BARRETT
JAMESON, M.Sc., M. 8., Ch.B., at Hong Kong Cathedral, 25-5-20,
who served in Ist Great War at Gallipoli.
(E) MAUDE MARY HINDMARSH married ERIC STANLEY CORN-
WELL, who served in France during Ist World War.
Family of Robert and Mary Martha Hindmarsh


(A) Child of CHARLES THOMAS and ROSE CORALIE HINDMARSH.
CHARLES ALFRED HINDMARSH, H.D.A. Born 13th April, 1917.'
Married GWENYTH JOAN SHARPE, I Ith April, 1942.
(Child: MICHAEL HINDMARSH.)
(B) Children of EDWARD LLOYD and ETHEL MAY SANDERS.
NOELEEN MARIE SANDERS. Bom 2 7th December, 1912.
EDWARD HINDMARSH SANDERS. Born 23rd October, 1915. Served
with A.I.F. in New Guinea, where promoted Major in the Field.
JESSIE MAY (MAISIE) SANDERS. Born 4th January, 1919.
(C) Children of REGINALD and CLARICE ANNA RAE GREEN.
HENRY RAE GREEN. Born 28th February, 1915. Married PHYLLIS
B. AUCHER, 13th August, 1942.
(Child; Barbara Phyllis Rae Green. Born 29th January, 1944.)
JOAN RAE GREEN. Born 1 Oth August, 1917. Married COLIN R, DUI-
VENBODE (since deceased), 22nd September, 1939.
ROBERT RAE GREEN. Born 21st April, 1919.
JUDITH RAE GREEN. Born 21st October, 1920. Married JOHN W.
D. ST. CLAIR, 6th October, 1943.
ALAN RAE GREEN. Born 14th June, 1924.
PATRICIA ANN RAE GREEN. Born Ist December, 1930.
(D) Child of BARRETT and OLIVE KATHLEEN
JAMESON.
MALCOLM HINDMARSH JAMESON. Born 3rd June, 1923.
(E) Children of ERIC STANLEY and MAUDE MARY CORNWELL.
KENNETH HINDMARSH CORNWELL. Born 7th November, 1927.
JOHN HINDMARSH CORNWELL. Born Bth June, 1930.
DEATHS.
Thomas Alfred Hindmarsh. Died July, 1908.
Anna Maria Hindmarsh. Died 2nd December, 1939.
Family of Thomas Alfred and Anna Maria Hindmarsh


FREDERICK JAMES ERNEST ALLERDING. Born 9th February, 1871.
HENRY RUDOLPH NESBIT ALLERDING. Born 2nd July, 1875.
ALICE MAUD JESSEY ALLERDING. Born 1 7th February, 1877. (Died
young.)
THOMAS ALFRED HINDMARSH ALLERDING. Born Nth Decem-
ber, 1882. (Died young) .
MARRIAGES.
FREDERICK JAMES ERNEST ALLERDING married IDA LEICH.
HENRY RUDOLPH NESBIT ALLERDING married STELLA SULLI-
VAN.
Children of FREDERICK JAMES ERNEST and IDA ALLERDING.
Son who died at birth.
ALICE AUGUSTA ALLERDING.
VESTA JEAN ALLERDING.
Children of HENRY RUDOLPH NESBIT and STELLA ALLERDING.
SYBIL ALLERDING.
JEAN ALLERDING.
JACK ALLERDING.
Family of Frederick James and Jane Ann Hindmarsh.
LILLY EMELINE HINDMARSH. Born 3rd March, 1 874.
HERBERT EDWARD HINDMARSH. Born 16th November, 1875.
ELSIE MAUD HINDMARSH. Born 7th December, 1877.
ETHEL CECILIA ELLEN HINDMARSH. Born 23rd July, 1880.
FLORENCE GERTRUDE HINDMARSH. Born 28th April, 1883.
JOSEPH FREDERICK HINDMARSH. Born 29th November, 1885.
MILLICENT AMY HINDMARSH. Born 25th November, 1890.
WALTER RUTTER HINDMARSH. Born 17th September, 1897.
MARRIAGES.
(A) LILLY EMELINE HINDMARSH married JOHN DAVIES, 29-12-97.
Family of Henry Rudolph and Jane Elizabeth Allerding.


(B) HERBERT EDWARD HINDMARSH married ESTHER MARY
MYLAN, 4-2-03.
(C) ELSIE MAUD HINDMARSH married ROBERT HASTINGS TAY-
LOR, 17-4-00.
(D) ETHEL CECILIA HINDMARSH married JOHN McKINNEY, 16-1-07.
(E) FLORENCE GERTRUDE HINDMARSH married CORNELIUS
JAMES DEMPSEY, 16-6-10.
(F) JOSEPH FREDERICK HINDMARSH married FLORENCE MAY
GALL, November, 1907.
(G) MILLICENT AMY HINDMARSH married MICHAEL JAMES KAIN,
7-10-16.
(H) WALTER RUTTER HINDMARSH married VICTORIA PITT DAVIS,
26-4-22.
(A) Children of JOHN and LILLY EMELINE DAVIES.
EDNA LILLY DAVIES. Born 13th September, 1899. Died in 1899.
WALTER LESLIE DAVIES, Born Ist May, 1901. Married. One child.
RONALD HINDMARSH DAVIES. Born 15th May, 1904. Married. No
children.
(B) Children of HERBERT EDWARD and ESTHER MARY
HINDMARSH.
NELLIE HINDMARSH. Married. 2 children.
FREDERICK HINDMARSH. Married. 2 children.
BERTIE HINDMARSH. Married. No children.
VALERIE HINDMARSH . Married. 4 children .
LORNA HINDMARSH. Married. No children.
WALTER HINDMARSH. Married. 2 children.
LILA HINDMARSH. Not married .
JACK HINDMARSH (Deceased).
(C) Children of ROBERT HASTINGS and ELSIE MAUD TAYLOR.
NELLIE HINDMARSH TAYLOR. Married. Two children.
Family of Frederick James and Jane Ann Hindmarsh


LORNA TAYLOR.
LYLA TAYLOR.
VALERIE TAYLOR. Married. Four children.
WALTER TAYLOR. Married. One child.
HERBERT TAYLOR. Married . No child.
FRED TAYLOR. Married. One child.
(D) Children of JOHN and ETHEL CECILIA McKINNEY.
NELLIE McKINNEY. Married. Two children.
GLADYS McKINNEY. Married. Two children.
(E) Children of CORNELIUS JAMES and FLORENCE GERTRUDE
DEMPSEY.
JAMES WILFRED DEMPSEY. Born 6th October, 1911. Married. Two
children.
FLORENCE MAY DEMPSEY. Born 12th October, 1913.
CORNELIUS JOHN DEMPSEY. Born 30th October, 1916.
(F) Children of JOSEPH FREDERICK and FLORENCE MAY HIND-
MARSH.
FREDERICK GALL HINDMARSH. Born 1 6th April, 1909.
DOROTHY JEAN HINDMARSH. Born 15th July, 1915.
JACK BIRD WOOD HINDMARSH. Born Bth October, 1917.
RITA IRENE HINDMARSH. Born 2nd February, 1920.
(H) Children of WALTER RUTTER and VICTORIA PITT
HINDMARSH.
FLORENCE JUNE HINDMARSH. Born 2 Ist February, 1923.
GWENDOLIN HINDMARSH. Born 31st December, 1924.
DOROTHY MAY HINDMARSH. Born 4th May, 1928.
YVONNE LILLY HINDMARSH. Born 22 nd March. 1930.
NELLIE VICTORIA HINDMARSH. Born I 6th April, 1932.
ROBERT WALTER HINDMARSH. Born 20th August, 1935.
JOHN MALCOLM HINDMARSH. Born 28th August, 1937.
Family of Frederick James and Jane Ann Hindmarsh


MARY CECILIA LLOYD. Born 6th September, 1874. Married
MICHAEL JOHN HINDMARSH.
Further information under name of MICHAEL JOHN, son of GEORGE
JOHN HINDMARSH.
Family of James Comrie and Emma Lee Lloyd.


The Rutter Family
WILLIAM RUTTER, son of JOHN RUTTER married
I. ELIZABETH KITCHINGHAM,
One son, William Rutter.
11. SARAH JEWELL,
One son, John Obadiah Jewell Rutter.
111. CHARLOTTE FLOWERS.
Three daughters
(A) CECILIA SOPHIA RUTTER married MICHAEL HINDMARSH.
(B) CAROLINE BLAKE RUTTER married THOMAS SURFLEET
KENDALL.
(C) CATHARINE NEWELL RUTTER married
I. ROBERT COOPER.
11. THOMAS CHAPMAN.
Children of MICHAEL and CECILIA SOPHIA HINDMARSH (see above).
Family of Thomas Surfleet and Caroline Blake Kendall.
THOMAS ROBERT KENDALL married MARGARET ALLEN.
(Children: Wesley, Stanley, Theodore, Alfred, Frederick, Mary, Mar-
garet, George Kendall, and five others who died young.)
WILLIAM RUTTER KENDALL married CHARLOTTE FRANCES
RUTTER COOPER.
ROBERT OSCAR KENDALL married EMMA HUNT.
(Children: Mabel, Caroline, Ruby, Robin Kendall.)
JANE CATHERINE KENDALL married ROBERT MARKS.
(Children: James, Caroline, Margaret, Charlotte, Mary Marks.)
CHARLOTTE ELIZABETH KENDALL married MAJOR JOHN
BLACK.
(Children: James, John, Caroline Black.)


Family of Thomas Surfleet and Caroline Blake Kendall
CATHERINE NEWELL KENDALL married the REV. JOHN HERMAN
LEOPOLD ZILLMAN, D.D.
(Children: Kendall, Herman, Jane, Robert Zillman.)
MARY CECILIA KENDALL married THOMAS JOHN FULLER.
(Children: Edwin, Ethel, Elizabeth, Charles, John, Leslie, Cecil, Rita
Fuller.)
Family of Robert and Catherine Newell Cooper.
ROBERT JAMES COOPER (1830-1910) married MARY ANN ILETT.
(Children: Robert Thomas Walter Cooper. Born 23rd June, 1 878. Sarah
Catherine Cecile Cooper. Born 2nd October, 1879. Volney Oscar Cooper.
Born 26th February, 1883. Died Ist August, 1943.)
CHARLOTTE FRANCIS RUTTER COOPER (1832-1890) married
WILLIAM RUTTER KENDALL.
(Children: Robert Chapman Kendall. Catherine Jane Kendall. Ann
Kendall.)
WILLIAM OSCAR COOPER (1835-1915) married ANN DEAN.
(Children: Catherine Newell Cooper. Born 1853. Died 193 7. Charlotte
Francis Cooper. Born 1858. Died 1934. Sarah Ann Augusta Cooper. Born
1861. Died 1932. William Oscar Cooper. Born 1863. Died 1942.)
CECILIA SOPHIA COOPER (1838-1902) married JOHN JEWELL
RUTTER,
(Children: William Walter Leopold Rutter. Born 1864. Died 1939.
Charlotte Francis Elizabeth Rutter. Born 1867. Died 1941. Charles Allen
Gainsborough Cooper Rutter. Born 1872, Died 1941. Also Robert, John,
Catherine, who died in infancy.)
CAROLINE SELINA COOPER (1846-189!) married WILLIAM
COOPER BROWN.
(Children; Cecilia Catherine Newell Cooper Brown, Ethel Cooper Brown,
Edgar Cooper Brown, Mabel Selina Cooper Brown.)






