

[PEICE, SIXPENCE.]
LETTERS
PUBLIC EDUCATION
NEW SOUTH WALES.
dedicated f ivithout his permission J to
EIGHT LEW BE- EOGEE BEDE YAUGHAN,
Roman Catholic Archbishop.
REV. DR. WAZIR BEG,
Protestant Catholic Minister.
“ Here are a few of the unpleasant’st words
That ever blotted paper ? ”
Merchant ofYenice, Act 111., Sc. 2*
“ Why, what read you there,
That hath so cowarded and chas’ed your blood,
Out of appearance ?”
Henry Y., Act 11., Sc. 2.
ifliil:
FREDERICK WHITE, PRINTER, 39, MARKET STREET,
1880.




[PRICE, SIXPENCE.]
LETTERS
PUBLIC EDUCATION
NEW SOUTH WALES.
dedicated (ivithout his permission) to
EIGHT EET. DR. ROGER BEDE YAUGHAN,
Roman Catholic Archbishop.
REV. DR. WAZIR BEG,
Protestant Catholic Minister.
“ Here are a few of the unpleasant’st words
That ever blotted paper ? ”
Merchant of Venice, Act 111., Sc. 2.
“ Why, what read you there,
That hath so cowarded and chas’ed your blood,
Out of appearance ?”
Henry Y., Act 11., Sc. 2.
ifliil:
FREDERICK WHITE, PRINTER, 39, MARKET STREET,
1880.




pij|HE following letters have appeared in the Sydney
ilil Morning Herald. They contain statistics and “ facts ”
which are in diametrical opposition to the statements
recklessly, though pompously, made by Dr. Yaughan, the
Roman Catholic Archbishop. They have already “ done
good service,” as the writer has been informed, in the
cause of Public Education in New South Wales, and are,
therefore, now published in the form of a Brochure.
Sydney, January, 1880.
THE PASTORAL, OR THE TEACHINGS OF THE
SUCCESSORS OE St. PETER.
(To the Editor of the Herald.)
Sie, —The Pastoral of the Roman Catholic Archbishop and
Bishops in New South Wales is full of assumptions. At
present, as your space is limited, I shall dwell (and that
briefly) on one of them, viz., '*' That the education without
the teachings given by the ‘ successors of St. Peter,’ leads
to immorality, crime, &c.,” or words to that effect. Now
do the statistics of those “ highly favoured ” countries, or
“ the lands of saints ” where the chair or rather the throne
of the poor fisherman of Galilee is exalted in all its glory,
and copiafandi justify such a statement or assumption.
1, From statistics recently published in El Solfo, an
Italian journal of prominence, we learn that in 1870—that
is before Rome was the capital of the kingdom of Italy :
“ ( a .) There were in the Eternal City (for a population
of 205,000 inhabitants) 2,469 secular clergy, among cardi-
nals, bishops, prelates, and Curas; 2766 monks, and 2117
nuns ; in all, 7322 religious of both sexes. The number of
births reached in the same year to 4378, of which 1215 were
legitimate, and 3168 illegitimate; the illegitimates, there-
fore, being in the proportion of 72.25 per 100 of the total
of births. Comparing Rome with other capitals of Europe,
it results that for every 100 legitimate births, there are
illegitimate, in London, 4 ; in Paris, 48; in Brussels, 9 ; in
Rome, 143.


“ (Z>.) According to the vital statistics of Italy for 1876,
there were in that year 225,000 marriages, 1,088,000 births,
and 796,000 deaths, the population being 27,700,000 persons.
Of the marriages, the largest number compared with the
population occurred in the Southern provinces. In the
province of Eome the number was the smallest—namely,
5,59 per 1000 Education is most advanced in Piedmont
and Lombardy, were 55 per cent, and 45 per cent, respec-
tively wrote their names upon the marriage certificate. Of
cases in which neither the man nor the woman could write,
there were 80 per cent, in the Basilicate, while there were
only 18 per cent, of such cases in Piedmont, 24 per cent,
in Lombardy, and 23 percent, in Liguria. The percentage
in Home was 38. Education is, however, advancing in
Italy, for while there were only 34 per cent, who could
write their names on the marriage certificates in 1872, there
were 37 per cent, in 1876. Of the births the largest per-
centage of legitimate children occurred in Piedmont,
Liguria, and Lombardy —viz.: 95 to 97 per cent of all
children born. The illegitimate numbered only 2.17 to
3.50 per cent. In Rome, on the contrary, the percentage
of legitimate births was smallest —namely, 81 per cent.,
and of illegitimate, largest, 15 per cent.” — Times, April
16th, 1878.
“ (c.) Nor in regard to crime did the Pontifical States
occupy a favourable position before they were annexed to
Italy by King Victor Emanuel. The statistics correspond-
ing to the latest years of the Pontifical Government show
that there were committed one murder in England for
187,000 inhabitants; in Holland, one for every 168,000;
in Russia, one for every 100,000 ; in Austria, one for every
4,113; in Naples, one for every 2,750; and in the Estates
of the Pope, one for every 750 !
“2. The following are the facts given in the report of
the Chief Constable of Liverpool, Times of November 26,
1878 : — £ The number of prisoners who passed through the
gaol at Walton was 12,285, and the most appalling circum-
stances in connection with these figures is that there was
an absolute preponderance of females—a state of things
without parallel iu the rest of the world. Divided into


sexes and ages the prisoners were: —5,537 male adults, 424
male juveniles ; 6,276 female adults, and 48 female juveniles.
Both the Protestant and the Roman Catholic Chaplains
lament the prevalence of female vice and the apparent diffi-
culty of modifying it. But it is among the Roman Catho-
lics that the most extraordinary records are obtained:
an absolute majority of the prisoners, male and female,
belong to that communion. Of the 12,258 prisoners during
the year, 8453 were Roman Catholics (3882 men and 4571
women).’ Father Nugent, the Roman Catholic chaplain,
in his last report states : —‘ Drink and prostitution fill the
female side of the prison. Of the 4,571 women, 1,310 were
committed for drunken and riotous conduct, and 1,555 for
disorderly behaviour upon the streets. Not a week passes
without someone being brought to the prison whom drink
has maddened and robbed of all female decency, whose lan-
guage and actions are so horrible that they seem no longer
rational beings but fiends.’
“Now Liverpool contains a population of 443,938, of
which about 150,000 are Roman Catholics, so that whilst
the Protestant population is in the proportion of about 3
to 1, the Roman Catholic prisoners are more than double
the number of Protestants. It may be thought that these
Roman Catholics are exceptionally ignorant and degraded.
But no! The Liverpool Courier, January 4, 1876, in re-
ferring to a former report, states :— ‘ The Rev. Mr. Nugent
has been at pains to tell us that they are well-instructed in
the principles of their religion. He has spoken of the
notorious corner-men of Tithebarn-street and Scotland
Road as being well-taught members of the Romish Church-’
We may well ask what then is to be thought of the advan-
tages of Romish teaching, and of the benefits of the Con-
fessional, to which women chiefly resort ?
“ 3. Dexter A. Hawkins, A.M., an eminent lawyer of
New York, has done good service to the public by present-
ing the result of a close examination carefully made up from
the United States census of 1870, as to the comparative
value of the free, non-sectarian public school, and the
Roman Catholic parochial school system of the Union.
The Romish system produces 1,400 illiterates, 410 paupers,


and 160 criminals to 10,000 inhabitants ; while the statis-
tics of the public schools of twenty-one States give 350
illiterates, 170 paupers, and 75 criminals to 10,000 inhabit-
ants. The public school system of Massachusetts produces
72 illiterates, 49 paupers, and 11 criminals to 10,000 inhab-
itants. He then takes the State of New York, and shows
that the Homan Catholic parochial school system turns out
three and a half times as many paupers as the public school
system. The statistics for criminality present similar
results. With these facts before us, ought not our public
men to consider seriously the advisability of stamping out
the separate school system which obtains in Canada, and
substitute therefore a free non-sectarian education such as
is imparted in our public schools. If the public schools of
the United States are such * godless ’ institutions as the
Romish priesthood would have us believe, how is it that the
children educated in them turn out better than those
tutored under the very eyes of the Hierarchy ? If the
Roman Catholic parochial schools are such perfect moral
and intellectual training establishments, why do the chil-
dren educated in them turn out so badly ? The ‘ godless ’
schools certainly produce more satisfactory results than do
those controlled by the £ Church.’ ”
It is unnecessary, at present, to multiply statistics, but I
humbly submit the above, and trust that their “ lordships ”
of the pastoral might take the above facts (not opinions)
as “ stubborn things ” into their consideration. And per-
haps “ the independent-minded beau esprits of Bathurst,
who at their late meeting, in their laical zeal and mighty
professions of not being “ priest-ridden,” indulged in some-
what free lingual effusions —belauding their priests as “ the
Commissioners of or from heaven,” and stigmatising Pro-
testant ministers as t! sextons,” &c., might also inquire into
the reason, or reasons, of ££ the dead-reckoning ” given above.
BOth July, 1879. WAZIR BEG.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —-In my letter I had briefly commented on only one
assumption (out of many) made in the Pastoral by the


Roman Catholic Archbishop and Bishops in New South
Wales, viz., “That the education without the teaching
given by ‘ the successors of St. Peter,’ lead to immorality,
crime, &c.,” and had shown conclusively that the assump-
tion was in diametrical opposition to the authentic statistics
of “ the Land and the City of Saints,” viz,, Italy, (Rome
in particular) of “ the faithful ” of Liverpool and the
United States. Rev. Mr. Dillon, however, asserts that my
“ statements and inferences are not only at variance with
facts and truth, but utterly opposed to courtesy and
Christian spirit,” and then proceeds to give the cause of
the prevalence of the very great immorality in Rome, “ the
City of Saints,” by saying (in reference to the marriage
returns of Italy for 1876) that “the Civil and Ecclesiastical
authorities are at variance on the question of marriage.
Neither will acknowledge the validity of the marriages
sanctioned by the other. Consequently ‘ the official ’
returns take no notice of the purely ecclesiastical marriages,
which in many cases are three-fourths of the entire num-
ber.” Having stated the assumed cause of the very great
immorality in “ the City of Saints,” he triumphantly
ascribes the self-same cause to the very great immorality
and crime prevalent among “ the faithful ” of Liverpool
and of the United States, by saying, “ The rest of Dr. Beg’s
statements are on a par with this.” Granted, for the sake
of argument, that the variance existing between the Civil
and Ecclesiastical authorities in 1876 is the cause. But
will Mr. Dillon answer the following questions by way of
“ fair play,” of which he speaks so highly ?
1. What was the cause of the very great immorality and
crime in “the City of Saints” and Italy in 1870, i.e.,
before Rome was the capital of the kingdom of Italy ?
(Vide my letter No. 1.) (a.)
2. Is “ the variance existing between the Civil and
Ecclesiastical authorities ” in Liverpool the cause of the
very great immorality andcrime among “ the faithful ” in
Liverpool p (But, by the way, is there any variance like
that in Rome existing between the Civil and Ecclesiastical
authorities in Liverpool ?)
3. Is “the variance existing,” &c., the cause of the


Juvenile
Offenders
Payments from Treasury.
1872 1873.
1872.
1873.
Reformatories:
; 139...131 ..
£ s. d.
£ s.
d.
Protestants
. 2,1951410
... 2,1401011
Soman Catholics 910...958 ..
. 13,528 0 3
... 14,462 18
1
Industrial Schools.
Protestants
492...557 ..
. 3,23611 9
... 5,862 12
0
Roman Catholics 3215..3803 ..
. 33,077 8 3
...45,099 111
Reformatories :
,139...181 ..
Payments from Rates.
Protestants
784 16 4
... 1,085 4
8
Soman Catholics 310...958 ..
, 5,803 5 4
... 6,295 510
Industrial Schools .
ignorance, immorality, crime, &c., among “the children of the
Church” in the United States f (Vide my letter No. 3.)
4. Is “ the variance existing,” &c., the cause of the
crime, &c., in another “ highly favoured land ” —(“ the
Island of Saints,”) where “ the successors of St. Peter ”
abound? Tor further enlightenment, I give—•
“1. The following table, extracted from the 11th and
12th reports of H.M.’s inspector, which continues the
statement, as given in former years, showing the religious
profession of juvenile offenders under detention in the
Reformatory and Industrial Schools in Ireland at the close
of the year 1873, together with the amount paid for their
maintenance, as compared with the return for 1872 ;
Protestants 422...657
Roman Catholics 3215..3803
942 411 ... 1,630 17 6
4,894 8 0 ... 8,255 3 9
Total from Treasury and Rates—-Protestants, £10,719 ss.
Id. ; Romanists, £74,112 9s, 7d., about seven times the
amount paid to the Protestant institutions. These reports
also show a progressive increase of these payments in the
same proportion since 1870. The following is the amount
of increase—Protestants, £7,886 2s. 7d. ; Romanists,
£49,514 11s. 7d. These returns also show that about 90
per cent, of the juvenile offenders are Romanists, and about
10 per cent. Protestants. Whilst the proportion of
Romanists under detention is thus about nine to one of
the Protestants, the Romish population of Ireland is only
about three and a-half to one, and the expenditure for the
Romanists seven times as much. The Romish Reformatories


Protestant Epis-
copalians 3,127... 3,403... 3,499... 3,636...In. 137
Presbyterians... 765... 861... 969... 1,838... „ 869
Eoman Catholic.25,967.. .26,639...25,536... 28,221... „ 2685
Other Profes-
sions — ... 31... 24... 35... „ 11
Not ascertained 228... 195... 200.. 164...Dec. 36
and Industrial Schools are under the management of
brotherhoods and sisterhoods of various religious orders.
In reference to this report the Times , of December 29th,
1874, observes : —‘ The number of inmates in the Reforma-
tories increases every year with great regularity, but the
expenses increase in a far larger proportion, for, while the
number of inmates at the end of 1873 was about 10 per
cent, more than at the end of 1871, the cost was 38 per
cent, higher, or, excluding cost of buildings, about 25 per
cent, higher. In reference to the extraorninary develop-
ment of Industrial Schools in Ireland, as compared with
Great Britain, the Times observes — 1 The number of
children coming forward who presumably would develop
into criminals if the State did not take them under its care
is out of all proportion larger in Ireland. * * * # *
How comes it about that such a large number of children,
who have not been actually convicted of crime, are presumed
to“be so likely to fall into these courses as to require that
they shall be removed from the care of their natural pro-
tectors, and the whole cost and responsibility of rearing
them be thrown upon the public ? The question has con-
siderable importance from the pecuniary point of view, for
the cost of these institutions in 1873 was hard upon a
quarter of a million, of which the Treasury contributed
much more than half, £84,400 coming from other public
sources, so that under the name of prevention of crime an
immense system of maintaining children at the cost of the
State is being founded, and a Denominational system of
education is maintained as a rival to that provided by the law.”
“2. The following table, extracted from the 51st and
52nd reports of the Inspectors-General of Prisons, con-
tinues the statement, as given in former years, showing the
religious profession of prisoners in Ireland: —
1861. 1871. 1872. 1873. In. 1873


Romanists.,
.4,505,265..
..4,141,933..
..363,332, or
8-06 pr. ct.
Protestants.
.1,293,309..
..1,260,568..
32,741, or
2-53 „
Jews
CC f 1
393..
258..
135, or
34-35 „
“ The census returns for 1861 and 1871 give the follow-
ing results:—
Population,... 1861 1871. Decrease,
“ Rrom these returns it would appear that, notwithstand-
ing the greater proportional decrease in the Romish portion
of the population, the continuance of which is made the
ground of bitter complaints on the part of the Romish
priesthood, jet a large increase is observed in the number
of Romish criminals. These returns also show that although
the Roman Catholic population of Ireland is only about
three and a-half to one, the criminals are at the rate of
nearly six Romanists to one Protestant. The disproportion
is much greater in the case of juvenile criminals committed
to the county and borough prisons in 1873. Tne following
are the numbers given in the report9o Protestant Epis-
copalians, 29 Presbyterians, 1,25*5 Romanists, and 2 of other
religions. In all the prisons in Ireland priests have been
appointed as chaplains, yet it is evident that crime has not
decreased.
“The Parliamentary Report on Irish judicial statistics
for 1870 [No. 1034] states that the total cost of repressing
crime in Ireland for 1873 was £1,354,427, exclusive of the
cost incurred for criminal lunatics. In an equal proportion
of England and Wales the cost was only £891,023, and it
is added, £ lt appears from this that the sum expended in
repressing crime in England and Wales is proportionately
less than the corresponding expenditure in Ireland by
£463,404 in amount, or 34 per cent.’ A summary is also
given, from which it appears that the cost per head of
prisoners in gaol in Ireland is £36 75., as compared with
£35 11s. 6d., the English figure. The cost incurred for
criminal lunatics amounted to £96,721. ‘ The correspond-
ing figure, in a portion of the population of England and
Wales equal to that of Ireland, was only £8,868.’
Cost of Police Estab- 1872. 1873. Increase.
lishments £929,705 £986,487 # 56,782
* The vote taken for the year (1875) is £1,073,037.— Time5, July 16.


1 The proportion of police to the census population of Ire-
land in 1871 was 25 to every 10,000 of the people, while in
England and Wales, in 1872, it was only 12.’ In the
following (Protestant) counties the proportion of police to
the population is the smallest: —
In every Roman
10,000 Population Protestants Catholics
Londonderry... 8 ... 148,664 ... 85,127 ... 63,537
Down 9 ... 277,294 ... 189,291 ... 88,003
Armagh 9 ... 179,260 ... 94,208 ... 85,057
Tyrone 9 ... 215,766 ... 95,829 ...149,937
Antrim 10 ... 236,361 ... 180,721 ... 55,640
In the following (Roman Catholic) counties, the proportion
of police is the largest:—
Tipperary A
North Riding 43 f 216,713 ... 13,486 ...203,227
Tipperary ( ’ ’ *
South Riding 37 j
Meath 41 ... 95,558 ... 6,418 ... 89,140
Westmeath ... 37 ... 78,432 ... 6,667 ... 71,765
King’s 35 ... 75,900 ... 8,489 ... 67,411
Several tables are given in the report to show that, in the
case of the more serious crimes and offences, the number of
criminals has diminished; and comparisons are made with
England and Scotland to show that with respect to such
offences the proportion is less in Ireland; but a short
glance at the Report of Judicial Statistics in England,
1873, will show that the number of Roman Catholic
criminals in this country is out of all proportion to the
Romish portion of the population. The Times , October
27th, 1874, briefly reviews the report for England, and
states —‘ One of the most noticeable facts about our prison
population is the record of the countries which rear the
criminal stock. It is in one sense satisfactory to find that
the natives of England and Wales do not furnish criminals
in due proportion to their numbers in the population, for
whereas those who are not natives comprise only l-23rd of
our population, they furnish one-fifth of our criminals.
Scotland furnishes 2 3 per cent., but Ireland constitutes no
less than 14 2 per cent., and the Irish female constitutes


no less than one-fifth of the whole of the female prison
population of England and Wales. By the last census it
appears that out of 22,712,266 who formed the population
of England and Wales, there were 566,540 of Irish birth
and in this proportion it might be expected that this con-
tingent would furnish between 3000 and 4000 to our
prisons ; but instead of that we have 22,100 criminals of
Irish birth in our prisons last year It cannot be doubted
t iat as many ot the descendants of those criminals will
follow the same pursuits, so the proportions of many of
English-born prisoners were themselves of Irish birth, and
these facts are worthy of deep consideration from many
points of view. From whatever cause it may arise, it is
quite clear that the proportion of criminals furnished by
Ireland to the United Kingdom is excessive, for whereas
the population of England and Wales and Ireland together
is about 28,000,000, of which about 6,000,000 or 21'4 per
cent, are Irish, the offenders who pass through the prisons
m t J e f countries number about 176,000 in a year, of whom
50,000 or 28 4 per cent., are Irish, besides those who are
°f. if , extraction; and, unfortunately for the rate-payers
of England and WMes, two-fifths of these Irish criminals
have selected these countries, and not their own, for their
depredations. These facts undoubtedly furnish the true
reason for the smaller prevalence of certain crimes in
Ireland, on which so many ingenious theories have been based. ’
]Mr. Dillon will perceive that I have confined myself, at
present, to one assumption of the Pastoral on which I had
previously animadverted, but may hereafter refute the
other fallacious statements he has made, Suffice it, mean-
while, to say that though Mr. Dillon laments over the
odium theologicum of Protestants, yet he forgets that men
like Dr. Vaughan and his colleagues have inscribed in
legible characters on the chair of St. Peter, of which they
are the exclusive occupants, the motto. Nulla discordia
major quam quce a religione fit, and that for Mr. Dillon to
believe that “ Christian Spirit ” could be found in a
Protestant or Heretic, is, I humbly assert, contrary to the
teachings of “ the successor of St. Peter.”
6th August, 1879. WAZIR BEG-.


PASTORAL 111. AND AMERICAN STATISTICS.
To the Editor of the Herald.
g IB _l. D r . Vaughan, in Pastoral 111., has (as he fancies)
triumphantly cited the statistics of twelve States to show
the superiority of religious education. That religious
education, however, even according to his own statement in
the self-same Pastoral, is not Romish but Protestant, for he
says —“ The inhabitants of these States came from the same
English race, held the same Protestant religion (except the
little State of Maryland), used the same Protestant Bible,”
&c. Consequently his statistics are valueless, as they do
not apply to the Apostolic Church of the successors of St.
Peter, and fail “ to daze ” heretical eyes with “ Catholic
(Roman) light.”
2. But let me submit from America “ The Criminal and
Moral Statistics of the Romish Church.” Only a few
months ago, at the consecration of the new St. Patrick’s
Cathedral, New York City, highly laudatory speeches were
made by Romish bishops regarding the Roman Catholics
being “ the most moral and law-abiding.” In consequence
of which, says a well-known journal ( The Sentinel ), pub-
lished in Toronto, Canada, of the 10th July, 1879, the
New York Times adduced “ ugly statistics.” The Cleveland
Leader reproduced the Times' statistics, and says in refer-
ence thereto: —
“ From this we gather that the police record shows that
the average yearly arrests of foreign-born Roman Catholics
for the last seven years for various offences, was 36,648, of
which number 34,699 were Irish. The average arrests of
non-Catholics of foreign birth for the period was only
15,214. Out of every 100 arrests, 15 were foreign Roman
Catholics, and only eight foreign non-Catholics or Protes-
tants, although the numbers of foreign Catholics and non-
Catholics were nearly equal.
“Of the 22,571 foreigners ‘held’ for trial, 19,021 were
Irish Catholics. In the alms-houses the Irish Catholics
numbered during the last twenty-five years 46,239, while
the natives, two-thirds of whom were of foreign birth,
mostly Irish, numbered 13,660, the Germans 4,709, and
6,952 were other foreign born. In the Lunatic Asylum at


Bellevue, 7,880 were Eomanists, 5,596 were Protestants,
552 Hebrews, and 492 not ascertained. From this it will
be seen that the Eomish Church furnished the greatest
number of criminals and paupers, as well as the most costly-
cathedral—this too, at the expense of her poverty stricken
people.
“Of the excise tax, amounting to 271,000 dollars, all
goes to two Romish institutions, except 27,000 dollars,
which is distributed between Protestant, Hebrew, and non-
sectarian institutions. The excuse for this, we suppose, is
that nearly all the whisky saloon keepers who pay this are
Eomanists, consequently their tax money should go to their
beloved Church.
“ Of the 935,000 dollars raised for benevolent purposes
in the tax levy, 600,000 dollars, nearly two-thirds, goes to
the Eomish Church, while the remainder is grudgingly given
to Protestant and non-sectarian institutions, although the
Protestants and non-Catholics pay nineteen-twentieths of
the taxes.”
3. In connection with the above compare the American
statistics supplied by me on the 80th July last, and Dr.
Vaughan, though his deductions, as a general rule, are
illogical, ought to see that it is not a glorious thing for any
community (to use his roseate and elegant diction) to be
“ steeped in the Eau de Cologne ” of Roman Catholic
fragrance. WAZIE BEG.
sth Sept., 1879.
DE. VAUGHAN’S GOOD CITIZENSHIP AND
ROMISH EDUCATION.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir, —Though it was the Lord’s Day, yet Dr. Vaughan, last
Sabbath, in the Sacred Heart Church, set forth very
hilariously and sportively theclaims of Eomish Education
as a, or the, great factor of “ good citizenship.” As I have
already supplied you with English, Irish, and American
Statistics, allow me to send you the following, which shows
“ the good citizenship ” engendered by Eomish Education
in Scotland. The Globe, of September 17th, 1874, says :


“ Some curious facts regarding the religion of Scotch
criminals are brought out by a recent Parliamentary return.
From this it would appear that from the Ist of January
to 31st of December, 1872, out of a total of criminal
prisoners in Scotland of 84,182, 10,740, or about a third,
were Eoman Catholics. When it is considered that the
Roman Catholics of Scotland are less than one-eleventh of
the population, it will be seen at once that a dispropor-
tionately large number are criminals. If the figures
relating to the matter are put in another way, this fact
comes out in a more startling manner. While of the
Roman Catholic population one in every 27 is a criminal
prisoner, of the rest it is one in every 132. Again, if crime
among the Roman Catholics were at the same rate as
among the Protestant population their prisoners should
number only 2,920 instead of 10,740. And, finally, out of
£606,001 spent on criminals in Scotland in 1872, the
Roman Catholics of the number cost £277,629 instead of
£75,482 —their cost had the number of criminals been in
proportion to the population. Such facts as these are
worthy of public notice and investigation. 1 ’
Now, let these “ facts,” like “ Cheshire cheese,” of Dr.
Vaughan’s and of the facetious and “ indecent ” author of
Tristram Shandy, the grandson of the chaplain of the
notorious and non-Protestant Laud be “ inwardly digested,”
for the operation is calculated to produce cachinnation
accompanied with hysterical gaiele de cceur , as in the Sacred
Heart Church, within the sacred precincts of its altar.
23rd September, 1879. WAZIR BEQ-.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sin, —Mr. Gordon, in his lecture at Waverley, has made
some fallacious and problematical statements. To one of
which, I, at present, confine myself, viz.:—“ If, indeed, it
could be shown that the teaching of any denomination was
inconsistent with the good order of Society, the State could
neither support nor even tolerate such a state of things.
Thus, in some of the heated utterances which have recently
gone forth, something like this has been wildly asserted
against Roman Catholic teaching; but I suspect that not


one man in a hundred really believes anything of the bind.”
(Vide Herald , October 10th, p. 3.) Though Mr. Gordon
believes firmly in “ the Apostolic order ” (so-called) of his
Church, in opposition to the imaginary “no-order” of
“ bodies,” yet he knows that the Romanists believe and
dogmatize that theirs is not “ a body,” but a Church—the
Church, “Infallible,” “Indefectible,” &c. (Vide Dr.
Vaughan’s conferences.) He further knows, like any one
else who has been in the lata silentia of Ignatius, that
Jesuits, as teachers, whether in New South Wales or
France, are unalterably identical. Will he, therefore,
kindly listen to what M. Ferry, the Minister of Public
Instruction, says regarding the nature of Ultramontane
Education in France P The speeches of others might be
given hereafter. In the French Chamber much attention
has been directed to the discussion of the bill introduced
by M. Jules Ferry, the Minister of Public Instruction. By
the 7th article of this bill it is proposed to prohibit from
teaching members of all religious communities which have
not received the recognition of the State It is urged by
the opponents of the measure that this provision is an
attempt to restrict liberty, and that in a free Republic,
freedom of education should be granted to all; but it
should be recollected that the education understood by the
Ultramontanes is education directed exclusively by the
Romish hierarchy and priesthood, and it follows, as a
matter of course, that if the Pope, in his declaration against
Protestant schools at Rome, be accepted as the expositor
of the policy of his Church, freedom of education is about
the last thing that can possibly be permitted to exist. The
measure in the French Chamber is chiefly directed against
the Jesuits, on the ground that they are the enemies of the
State, that their teaching is in opposition to the principles
of Republican government, and would suppress all freedom
of education, and lead to the overthrow of the Republic.
On the 26th of June, 1879, M. Ferry spoke in support of
the bill. The following summary of his speech is condensed
from the Journal Officiel “ He argued that the bill was
called for by a serious social danger, and maintained that
the State was bound to transmit to posterity the dearly-


bought conquests of the past. Just as the father had no
right to confide his child to an incapable or immoral
teacher, so he had no right to educate him in principles
contrary to the tradition of the State. _ That liberty of
teaching was subordinate to public rights and public
interests, and the State could not permit the existence of
education directed to create bad citizens, and to transform
them into subjects of a foreign Power. He quoted the
decree of the Parliament of 1826, which recites ‘ That the
edicts, by which the association ot the Jesuits has been
banished and dissolved, were founded upon the recognised
incompatibility of their professed principles with the
independence of every Government. M. Ferry then
quoted the statement of the late Mgr. Darboy, Archbishop
of Paris, that the Jesuits were not subject to the jurisdic-
tion of the Diocesans, nor obedient to the laws of the State.
He read extracts from the Givita CatJiolica, the organ of
the Jesuits, showing on the authority of St. Thomas
Aquinas, that the State is in temporal matters subordinate
to the Church, and “ has only the authority which an
inferior tribunal possesses for confirming the sentence of
the superior ; that in questions of marriage, burial, institu-
tions for charitable purposes, liberty of conscience, and
questions of the moral law, the spiritual power may
intervene to correct or annul the civil laws. After
arguing that the laws against non-recognised religious
orders were not obsolete, but had been enforced as recently
as 1861 • he showed “that since that date the communities
of men had increased from 1706, with 11,877 members, to
3184, with 22,216 members, and those of women from
90,343 members to 127,744 members; 113,000 of these
belonged to authorised communities. The increase of the
Jesuits made it necessary to awaken these slumbering laws,
for while in 1845, France contained only 200, there were
1085 in 1865, and 1509 at present. In 1865 they had
fourteen secondary schools, with 5074 pupils; they had
now twenty-seven, with 9000 pupils; the other nqn-
authorised communities having also 7854 pupils. ibis
extension was at the expense, not ol the University, which
could withstand competition and had 79,000 students, but ot


private schools, under lay teachers, and of the schools
under the control of the secular clergy, which were
gradually being ousted by the schools under the Jesuits
and other unauthorised religious orders.” M. Jerry then
proceeded to prove that the Jesuits now hold the same
doctrines as they had professed during the last 300 years.
He stated that on acceding to office, he was determined on
finding out what passed behind the high walls of the Jesuit
establishment, and sent inspectors to examine them.
Among the books which served for the instruction of the
children entrusted to their charge, were the histories of
Father Gazeaux and the Abbe Courval. M. Ferry quoted
some passages from these books to show the noxious nature
of their teaching, showing “ a detestable hostility to all the
laws and institutions of modern society.” Speaking of the
Inquisition, one of these books say—“ The Court of the
Inquisition never condemned to death, but, as the Emperors
regarded heresy as a crime against society, they seized the
guilty as they went forth from the Inquisition and had
them executed.” Feudal rights are represented as just,
moderate, and easy to bear. But the State is represented
as “ having appropriated all the feudal rights, and of having
aggravated them.” As for the Revolution, the books attack
and misrepresent it at every point. The revocation of the
Edict of Nantes is held up for admiration, and Louis XIY,
extolled for having prohibited the Calvanists from the public
exercise of their religion. The work the Abbe Courval
also teaches “ the Divine right of kings, that the liberty of
the Press can never be allowed, and that it is false to
define the law as being the expression of the general will.”
In another book, by Charles Barthelemy, M. Ferry found
passages “ excusing, on the ground of policy, the crimes
committed in the outbursts of religious fanaticism, and
admitting, without expressing the slightest compunction,
that numbers of heretics and sorcerers had been burnt.”
In this work also he found descriptions of several historical
events, given in language “ that would defile the imagination
of a child, and so foul that it was impossible to read it in the
chamber.” In a chapter of this work, in which Protestant
people are dealt with, the following passage disposes of English


morality — u In London, and all over England, the holiness
of marriage is destroyed, bigamy is frequent, the wife is
not the companion, but the slave of her husband; the con-
jugal tie is dissolved, the children are poisoned or sold.
Such is the state of the family under the influence of
Anglicanism, and our neighbours are, forsooth, to be ex-
tolled for their patriarchal habits and their large families —
families of which they dispose as we have just described.”
M. Eerry then quoted passages from another book called
“ Contemporary History,” by M. Chantrel, in which every
reactionary attempt for the suppression of liberty under
Louis XVIIL, Charles X , and even down to the attempt
of the 16th May, is held up to admiration; and, in reference
to this last event, the late Ministry are condemned for not
having had recourse to force. Discussing remedies other
than those of the Bill, he admitted that objectionable text-
books could be prohibited; but “ what a derision,” he asked,
“ would it not be to suppress the books and to allow the
writers to remain as teachers, who could not be interfered
with except for immorality ? Even, too, were an offending
teacher removed, his successor would be of the same stamp,
individual measures against a religious order being quite
futile. Instead of entering on a war of detail, it was more
frank to condemn at once an organization admittedly bad.”
Now, has M. Eerry “ wildly asserted ” the above state-
ments ? And are the reverberations from the heights of
Waverley to continue re-echoing the words of Mr. Gordon
—“ I suspect that not one man in a hundred really believes
anything of the kind?” WAZIE, BEG.
Ist Oct., 1879.
To the Editor of the Herald.
"Sir, —Dr. Vaughan has quoted Professor Lombrosi’s statis-
tics from 1873 to 1875 to show the increase of crime in
Italy from 2‘82 to 2*92, and has assigned this increase to
“ secular education.” (By the way, who is Professor
Lombrosi, for his name is neither to be found in the
“ Nouvelle Biographic Generale” nor in the “ Men of the
Time?” And in what authenticated document are his
statistics visible ?) In my letter of 30th July, I furnished
on the authority of Times, April 16,1878, the vital statistics


of Italy for 1876 (which statistics are later than those of
Professor Lombrosi) and which point out the following
characteristic facts:—“Education is most advanced in
Piedmont and Lombardy, where 55 per cent, and 45 per
cent, respectively wrote their names upon the marriage
certificate. Of cases, in which neither the man nor the
woman could write, there were 80 per cent in the Basilicate,
while there were only 13 per cent, of such cases in Pied-
mont, 24 per cent, in Lombardy, and 23 per cent, in Liguria,
the percentage in Pome was 38.” Vide that letter for
other particulars descriptive of the “ Holy City ” being the
cradle of profligacy and illegitimacy, in 1876, But since
Dr. Vaughan, with his peculiar logic, will ascribe this
deplorable state of criminality in 1876 —this sudden trans-
formation or transubstantiation in six years or so from
virtue to vice, to “ secular education,” let him take into his
consideration the statistics of Italy before 1870, when it
lay “ soused ” unmolested in the bath of supernatural light,
sanctity, and innocence, and when it was not cursed with
“ secular education.”
2. Before 1870, in the schools, gymnasiums, lyceums,
and universities of Italy, there were “ regular hours of
religious ( i.e . Eomish) education,” including Mass, litanies
by the holy Yirgm (Von Raumer.) The Papal States
were saturated with Eomish religious teaching by the
schools called “ Scolapi,” conducted by religious orders;
the schools of the “Bathers of the Christian doctrine,” the
schools of “the Brothers,” &c. In them, we are told,
“ much time was given to religious (Eomish) instruction
and observances.” Though the Romish religious bath
was so brimful, and the subjects were well immersed
therein, yet the following were the dire results, as they
appeared in the London Quarterly Review for January,
1875, pp. 284, 285. Mr. Gladstone is reviewing “ The
Discourses of Pope Pius IX. in the Vatican, to the Faith-
ful of Rome, and of the World.” These discourses were
collected and published by Eev, Don Pasquali de Franciscis.
Mr. Gladstone comments on the language addressed by
Don Pasqual to the Pope, in which he is described as “ the
living Christ,” “ the voice of Grod,” and (in the face of the


Italian Government) “ he is nature that protests, he is God
that condemns.” The Pope denounces with an extra-
ordinary wealth of vituperative power. The Italian Gov-
ernment and its followers are called —“ Wolves, Philistines,
thieves, liars, hypocrites, dropsical, children of Satan, of
perdition, satellites of Satan in human flesh, monsters of
hell, stinking corpses, men issued from the pits of hell ”
(these are the conductors of the national Press). “The
unfortunate Victor Emmanuel” is also represented as
“ Holofernes, or Absalom, or Pilate, Herod, Caiaphas, or
Goliath, or Attilla.” Mr. Gladstone proceeds to examine
‘ ‘ the state of things at Rome, and to enquire what would
be the state of things which the Pope desires to have
established in their stead.” In reference to the actual
condition of Rome he observes : —“ It never had the name,
under the Popes, of a very well-ordered city. The Pontiff,
however, speaks of it as having been under his dominion,
holy, whereas now it is a sink of corruption, and devils
walk through the streets of it.” Now, except on this
authority of one who knows nothing, except at second-
hand, it seems totally impossible to discover any evidence
that Rome of 1874 is worse than Rome before the occupa-
tion. And this really is a question not of dogmatism or
of declamation, but of the testimony of facts and figures.
To this test, the condition of every city can be brought with
more or less of approach to precision. Now, these odious
charges that a peculiar immorality and utter disorder pre-
vail in Rome are launched by the Pope with such vaugueness,
that if they came from a less exalted personage, they would,
at once, be called scurrilous and scandalous, and it would
be said, here is a common railer, who having no basis of fact
for his statements, takes refuge in those cloudy generalities,
under colour of which fact and figment are indistinguish-
able from each other. After taking some pains to make
inquiry from impartial sources, we are able to state that the
police of the National Rome is superior to that of Papal
Rome, that order is well maintained, crime energetically
dealt with.’’ “ Outrages in the streets are of rare
occurrence, crime is promptly repressed
There are not half the number of priests or friars
in the streets, and mendicancy is not a tenth part of what


Highway robberies..
236 .
.. 123 .
.. 103 .
.. 85 .
.. 26
Thefts
802 .
.. 714 ,
... 785 .
.. 859 .
.. 698
Crimes of violence..
938 .
.. 886 .
... 972 .
.. 861 .
.. 603
Total
1976 .
..1723 ,
...I860 .
..1805 .
..1327
it formerly was.” “It is known that at the time of the
forcible occupation in 1870, a number of bad characters
streamed into the city ; hut by energetic action on the part
of the G-overnment, ill-supported, we fear, by the clergy,
they were by degrees got rid of, and soon ceased to form
a noticeable feature in the condition of the place.” The
Reviewer proceeds : —“ It has been our care to obtain from
Home itself some figures on which reliance may be placed
They indicate the comparative state of Roman crime in the
two last full years of the Papal rule (1868 and 1869), and
the three full years (1871, 1872, 1873) of the Italian
rule:—
1868 1869 1871 1872 1873
“ It will be observed that these figures confute the state-
ments of the Pope. The year 1873, in which alone we may
consider that the special cause of disturbance had ceased to
operate, shows a reduction of 391, or more than 22 per
cent, on the last year of the Pope. Yet, more remarkable
is the comparison if we strike out the category of thefts,
the least serious of the three in kind. We then obtain the
following figures:—For the last Papal year 1869, 1009;
for 1873, 634 ; or a diminution of nearly 40 per cent.”
3. Now contrast this change for the better from 1.869 to
1873 with “ the assumed ” change for the worse (as stated
by Dr. Yaughan) from 1873 to 1875, and one cannot help
observing, that a sudden change for the worse has taken
place in the morals of the young, and that in the short
space of two years, ascribable (according to Dr Yaughan)
to “ secular education ” —a change quite unparalleled in
the political history of any country—a change, not effected
in New South Wales by secular education even in nine
years ! Alas ! Professor Lombrosi’s statistics, till they be
seen in some authenticated document, must remain mysti-
fying, or ohscurumper obscurius. WAZIE BEG.
6th Oct., 1879.


To the Editor of the Herald .
Sir—As Dr. Vaughan, in the fifth Pastoral letter, which
has’just been published, gives “ the opinions” of two
Eoman Catholic Americans —Judge Taft and _ Muller-
condemnatory of the American school system, it is_ but fair
to hear what even some American Roman Catholics have
said in favour of the system :
1. The following remarks, published in the New York
Independent , were made by the Hon A. M. Keily, Mayor of
Richmond, Virginia:—“l assure my Protestant fellow-
citizens that in what I have to say I express the convic-
tions of hundreds of thousands of my fellow-Catholics, who
gratefully remember the Public Schools as the source of
whatever education they or their children possess, and who
know that among the most distinguished laymen, and the
most pious and learned and useful priests of the Catholic
Church in America are those whose only early secular
training was in the Public Schools. I formulate their
opinion and my own when I say that the imparting of
sound, useful, and exclusively secular knowledge, by
teachers of suitable acquirements, skill, and character,
chosen mediately by the people, and paid for out of the
public treasury, is, under the conditions prevailing in the
United States, a wise, beneficent, and just system, and
impugns no rights of conscience.” [[Missouri Report, 1873,
p. 64.] Such are “the convictions ” not of one American
Eoman Catholic, but he says of “ hundreds of thousands ”
of his co-religionists.
2, Hence Bishop Eraser found purely secular schools in
New York under the control of Romanists, for he says :
“ There appears to be no difficulty experienced in assem-
bling children of all denominations in the same schoolroom,
though here again, as before noticed in regard to social
status, a sort of attraction by affinity seems to prevail, and
you find in one school quite a cluster of Jews, another
almost possessed by Roman Catholics. This is particularly
observable in New York, where some quarters of the city
are almost exclusively occupied by an Irish population.
The effect in some schools has been rather curious. Under
the influence of Eoman Catholic Trustees there has not


been any introduction of Roman Catholic teaching, but
there has been an exclusion of the Bible.” —Fraser’s
Report, p. 165.
3. From Connecticut Report, 1869, p. 22.—“ Strong
testimony as to the good effects of free schools is given in
an interesting letter recently published from the Rev.
Sylvester Malone, a Catholic priest of Williamsburg, New
York, who visited schools in several Southern States, and
whose letter evinces fairness and culture.” Speaking o a
large free school in Charleston, which is in the hands* of
the city authorities, and supported by them, he say s—
“ There is a good staff of teachers, and, what is a very
hopeful sign, they are all from the State of South Carolina.
Over 800 children are instructed in the various branches —•
reading, writing, arithmetic, &c. The teachers assured us
they were pleased with the progress, attendance, and
obedience of the children of this school.”
4. The Secretary of the Connecticut Board says —“ The
Irish and Germans evince commendable interest in our
schools, said a parent to me. I attended Church schools,
without learning enough to tell 0 from a cart wheel. I
mean to give my children an education, for I have sadly
felt the need of it. At a late anniversary of one of the best
high Schools in Connecticut, the valedictorian was a
Catholic Irish pupil. This honour was awarded her on the
ground of scholarship, and for the last year the higher
position of assistant teacher in the same high school has
been worthily filled by her.”—“ Connecticut Report,”
1870, p. 113. And do not some of our Roman Catholic
teachers in the Public Schools of New South Wales reflect
honour on the positions they occupy?
The above statements as “ facts ” are made on authori-
ties given. Though Dr. Vaughan has the happy knack of
making statements or quoting extracts (mutilated or other-
wise) without giving “accredited records,” yet manly
candour, apart from hierarchical dignity, demands that he
should give the authenticated documents whence he makes
his citations. He has seen we have found out that his
authority, “ Professor Lombros*,” does not exist, for the
name of “ the most recent authority ” on pazzia pellagrosa.


or pellagros© insanity, is “ Lombroso,” (vide Bucknill and
Tuke, 3rd ed., pp. 366, 369) ; and that the increase of
crime founded on Lombroso’s statistics, and most unac-
countably attributed by Dr. Vaughan to “ secular educa-
tion,” is treated by Professor Lombroso, in a psychological
light. Perhaps Dr. Vaughan might bring forward, in array,
the statistics carefully collected and forcibly illustrated
under the head of “ The Psychology of Criminals ” in the
“ Journal of Mental Science,” vol. xvi., p. 326 ; but I am
afraid, like those of Lombroso, they will not aid him in his
crusade against Public Schools,
22nd October, 1879. WAZIR BEG.
ENGLISH HISTORY IN OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sie, —Dr. Vaughan has very poetically likened the teach-
ing of English History in our Public Schools (as it is pro-
posed in the bill before Parliament) to “ Scavenger’s
Daughter,” though he has, or seems to have forgotten the
truly Romish “ rack ” called “ The Duke of Exeter’s
Daughter,” introduced into England in the reign of “ the
Catholic ” King Henry VI. Without referring to the
“ Iron Gauntlets, the Little Ease, the Thumb Screws, the
Spanish Boots,” &c., invented by Romish ingenuity for the
spiritual behoof of heretics, let the following extracts from
“ Roman Catholic school-books ” suffice to show the falsifi-
cation, perversion, and travestieing of English history, and
let the Protestant public keep in mind that the misstate-
ment, distortions, evasions, false colourings, &c., found in
the Romish school-books, whether in France, England,
Ireland, or New South Wales are identical, and that they
are “as anti-Protestant as they are anti-English in their
tone.” A great deal has been said of late about “ Chris-
tian Brothers.” In their schools in Ireland 23,000 boys
are receiving instruction. From the examination of their
books we learn :
1. In the Historical Class Book: “ The usual plan of the
authors, when they approach critical questions, is to ex-
plain away what they cannot deny, to omit altogether what
they cannot explain away, and to fling the falsest accusa-


tions broadcast against all, whether Protestants or liberal
Catholics, who oppose Ultramontanism.”
2. Every credit is taken for “ the noble stand of liberty
made by Cardinal Langton, in opposition to King John; but
the Bull of Pope Innocent 111. annulling Magna Charta,
suspending the Cardinal, and cursing the Charter, is care-
fully suppressed.”
3. “ The history of the persecutions of Protestants in the
Low countries, and under Queen Mary, the massacre of St.
Bartholomew, and the cruelties of the Inquisition, are either
denied, or are glossed over and explained away as 1 severi-
ties exercised by the Civil power with which religion had
nothing to do.” Whereas the so-called “persecutions”
under Elizabeth are vehemently denounced; but the facts,
to use the words of Dr. Bollinger, “ that a succession of
Popes sanctioned the assassination of heretical sovereigns,
and that one actually instigated attempts on the life of
Queen Elizabeth,” are sedulously concealed.
4. Tbe Treatise on Modern Geography “is constructed
so as to set for the social and intellectual condition of all
countries in a way to exalt Romanism and disparage Pro-
testantism. The authors are particularly careful to repre-
sent Ireland as only prosperous before the Union, and as
decaying ever since, and extracts are given laying the blame
at the door of the British Government.”
5. In reference to the fourth class book of select reading
lessons which Master Brooke, a member of the Eoyal
Commission on Primary Education, pronounced to be “the
best preparation for Fenianism that could be imagined,”
it is said : —“ This fourth book is on the very principle of
the Nationalist newspaper, which scrapes together the abuse
of England from all the journals of every country under
the sun, with the view of feeding the anti-English resent-
ments of the Irish masses ; it is, in fact, a first-class school
manual for Fenianism, because its most pungent extracts
point to insurrection as the approved method of asserting
Irish independence.”
Other extracts might be given hereafter, Now it should
be remembered that the books of the school of the
Christian Brothers have, “ according to the evidence of


Bishop Dorian, all received Episcopal sanction that Cardinal
Cullen regarded the Historical Class Books as very good.”
Since Cardinal Cullen so regarded them, Dr. Yaughan
must necessarily follow his chief, and if such is the state of
Episcopal matters, then we Protestants are justified in
holding that “ the Roman Catholic hierarchy are even more
answerable than the contemptible Nationalist press for that
spirit of disaffection and discontent, that twice in a gener-
ation has broken out in revolt, and is still trying to keep
Ireland irreconcilable, that she may be a thorn in the side
of England.”
I humbly submit the above “ anti-Protestant and anti-
English ” falsification of history contained in the Romish
school books of these persons, who are dignified by the
affectionately fraternal cognomen of “ Christian Brothers,”
and ask Dr. Yaughan and his champions, Messrs. Dailey
and Alexander Gordon, whether such outrageous perver-
sions of English history—be they distortions, evasions,
false colourings, &c.—should not be likened to “ the Catho-
lic instrument of torture called “ The Duke of Exeter’s
Daughter,” or “ The Little Ease,” which did such wonders
for “ the successors of St. Peter ” in days of yore ?
17th Nov., 1879. WAZIR BEG.
“ GENERAL RELIGIOUS TEACHING” IN OUR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
To the Editor of the Herald,
The following was a philosophical statement made
by our able statesman the Premier, in Parliament, on Thurs-
day, 11th December:—“The system, which had afforded
facilities for the teaching of the Christian religion, had
grown up and intertwined itself with the affections of the
people, and he was not prepared to give up those facilities.”
—“There was no portion of the bill to which he attached
more importance than to this.” Now, let me solicit the
attention of Mr, Cohen and others to the following “ facts,”
which show why momentous importance is attached to
“religious” teaching by “ philosophical ” educationists.


1. Germany, under the lead of “ infidelity,” once drove
religious teaching, or “ Scripture lessons,” from its schools ;
but it has since restored religious instruction. Basedow,
Saltzmann, Campe, &c., advocated, like Mr. Cohen, the
principle of the exclusion of a “ Christian basis ” from com-
mon schools ; but Pestalozzi, who has been called “ the
school-master of the human race,” did not adopt their
“ hard secularism.” This greatest of “ educational reform-
ers ” encouraged in the most emphatic manner “youthful”
acquaintance with the Scriptures. He regarded the history
contained in the Gospels as an indispensable ingredient in
the education of every “ young mind.” “ I consider,” he
wrote, in 1820, in a report to the public, “a thorough
knowledge of the Scriptural histories, and especially of the
life, sufferings, and death of Jesus Christ, and the study of
the sublimest passages of the Bible, with a child-like, be-
lieving spirit, the beginning and essence of what is neces-
sary for religious instruction, and then, above all things, a
fatherly care to make the children feel the worth of prayer
offered in faith,” Now, such an advice from Pestalozzi is
worthy of observation, when it is kept in mind that the
theological sentiments of “ the schoolmaster of the human
race” were not what are called “orthodox.” In spite,
then, of the “speculations” of Kant, Fichte, Schelling,
Hegel, Richter, &c., the theory and practice of Germany
are in favour of a “ Christian basis ” in schools, and Ger-
many is “ the best educated country in Europe,” It ap-
pears that all the recruits in the war of 1870 could both
read and write. “ I inquired of all classes of teachers,”
says Professor Stowe, “ and men of every grade of religious
faith, instructors in common schools, high schools, and
schools of art, of professors in colleges, universities, and
professional seminaries, in cities and in the country, in
places where there was a uniformity, and in places where
there was a diversity of creeds, and I never found but one
reply, and that was, that to leave the moral faculty unin-
structed was to leave the most important part of the human
mind undeveloped, and to strip education of almost every-
thing that can make it valuable. Every teacher whom I
consulted repelled with indignation the idea that moral
instruction is not proper for schools, and spurned with con-


tempt the allegation that the Bible cannot be introduced
into common schools without encouraging a sectarian bias
in the matter of teaching.” (Eeport on Elementary In-
struction in Europe )
2. The National Assembly, at the head of the French
Eevolution, wanted to extirpate Christianity, and so
adopted a system of education in the primary schools devoid
of religious or Scriptural lessons. And it was no wonder
the land was cursed with what has been designated “ the
Eeign of Terror,” where all distinctions of right and wrong
were confounded, the grossest debaucheries triumphed,
&c. The majestic eloquence of “the able statesman,”
Edmund Burke, was stirred against this godless scheme.
“ These enthusiasts,” he wrote, “ do not scruple to own
their opinion that a State can subsist without any religion
better than with one, and that they are able to supply the
place of any good which may be in it by a project of their
own —namely, by a sort of education that they have
imagined, founded in a knowledge of the physical wants of
men progressively carried to an enlightened self-interest,
which, when well understood, they tell us, will identify
with an interest more enlarged and public. The scheme of
this education has long been known. Of late they distin-
guished it, as they have got an entire new nomenclature
of technical terms, by the name of a Civic Education,”
Alas! it is a deplorable fact stated on high authority that
when the French Eevolution was over, a committee sent to
Paris by one of the religious societies of London to ascertain
the moral condition of the people, searched four days in all
the bookstores and print-shops of the city, before they could
find a single copy of the Holy Scriptures.
3. Even in America, in the great ordinance of 1787 made
for the territories north-west of the Ohio, the preamble
declares the object of the compact to be “ the extending the
fundamental principles of civil and religious liberty,” &c.
The third article, which reappears in the constitutions of
all the States of the north-west, is in these most significant
words : —“ Eeligion, morality, and knowledge being neces-
sary to good government and the happinness of mankind,


schools and the means of education shall for ever be en-
couraged.”
4 In Holland, Prussia, Austria, aud Canada, “ the
National Education” consists of a system similar to that
of the bill before the Paliament of New South Wales.
The religious teaching is “ non-sectarian,” and does not
interfere with the tenets of any description of religionists
“ Separate ” religious instruction is imparted to children of
all Christian denominations.
The above “ facts ” afford historic and philosophic reasons
to able statesmen and educationists why the National
Education (which is a political necessity) of a country,
or this country, should be founded on “a religious”
basis, and this “ political necessity ” is the necessity of
morality to good government aud the happiness of subjects.
Ay, it is “the right of self-preservation,” consequently our
bill is founded on historic, philosophic, and safe bases,
and the exclusion of “a Christian basis from our schools
would jeopardise public morality. A Christian basis,
however, is not to be made to mean either Romishly
papistic, Anglicanishly churchianic, or Scottish ly Anti-
prelatic, for it is non-sectarian, as it consists of “ general
religious teaching.” As to the political rights of Jewish,
&c., conscience, the duty of the State to exercise religious
toleration is limited by its right of self-preservation. Be-
sides, there is a distinction between “ the legal rights ” of
conscience and “ the theoretical rights.” “ The legal
rights” only are capable of such definition as can make
them the basis of political action. There is a distinction
between “the national conscience” a >d “the individual
conscience,” and it is not for “ the individual conscience ”
to dictate to “ the national conscience.” Is “ the individual
conscience” of a very small minority of infidels, atheists,
&c., to be “ a national authority ?” Let us, therefore, rest
the education of our young on “ a religious basis,” which
is historic and philosophic, which contributes to self-
preservation, morality, order, or good government, and
which was approved of and recommended by even Pestalozzi,
“ the schoolmaster of the human race.”
Cth Jan., 1880. WAZIE BEG.




WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR
i. Reply to Archbishop Vaughan’s First Advent Conference,
or Attack on the Protestant Church. Price, is.
2. Pope as a Political Chief. Price, is.
3. Puseyism or Ritualism Anatomized. Price, is,
4. Appeal to Protestant Young Men. Price, 6d,
5. Manual of Presbyterian Principles. Paper, is. 6d.; Cloth,
Boards, 2s. 6d.
6. Light and Darkness: or Dr. Vaughan’s Ignorance of
Freemasonry Exposed. Price, is.
