

LETTERS
From A SANATORIUM


LETTERS FROM A
SANATORIUM
George Robertson & Company
PTY. LTD,,
MELBOURNE. SYDNEY, ADELAIDE AND BRISBANE.


LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM
4th OCTOBER,
1907.
Dear Violet, —
I wrote to you last time just after the Doctor had
told me that there was a small beginning of a break-
down at the apex of my right lung, and I am cer-
tain my letter was most sad and desperate, for the
news gave me a painful shock —for I loathe the
idea of disease, and I have seen so much. All my
dear ones who have gone lingered out in some way,
I thought I had passed the danger age, and I had
been using myself up always, and the strain of the
last two trying years was too much, until, lo ! the
writing appeared on the wall for me —for me. How
hard it is to realise that such a thing as consump-
tion can come to one’s self! My Doctor says that
I have a very good chance of recovery as I was
taken in hand at an early stage, and am in a posi-
tion to have the necessary treatment. He recom-
mended a Sanatorium, but I hated the idea, and was
wild to get home to the children. Dick persuaded
me when he arrived on the scene, though I think he
hated it worse than I did. No microbes were dis-
covered in the analysis they made; this comforted
me more than anything.
Dick has now returned to his muttons and I am
waiting for a vacancy in the chosen Sanatorium.


I am in a private hospital, having semi-open air
treatment. Kept in bed and not allowed to talk or
to see people—but what I lose in conversation I
gain in food—four pints of milk is merely an item
on the daily menu. I faithfully promised Dick to
eat every morsel ordered, but was routed this morn-
ing by a large piece of fat bacon. I thought of the
microbes —I thought of the “family,” but even the
dear little family could not prevail over that bacon.
I had already consumed half a pint of milk at an
early hour. Then a plate of porridge, eggs, toast
and much butter, and two cups of milk coffee. I
have always regarded porridge as an excellent food
for other people, and I bring up the family on it;
but I do not wonder if the Scotch have not a lively
sense of humour on the diet. For my own part a
cup of tea or a glass of hot lemon water has been
the extent of my breakfast for the last fifteen
months. “Suicidal mania” snorted the Doctor
when I told him. “Not at all, my dear Doctor—it
was the No-breakfast cure. I did the No-breakfast
cure and the Work cure combined.” “ Criminal
lunacy,” said the doctor, with violence. Now I
have to eat meat three times a day, and I feel like a
cannibal—but I am already improving, many hor-
rible sensations and pains are leaving me. But I sigh
for my no-breakfast faith; I have never cared for
much breakfast, and I read a book which clearly
proved that everybody systematically over-ate him-
self or herself, and that if one would only curb one’s
passion for meals and reduce them to two in twenty


four hours, doctors would become extinct and dis-
ease would vanish. The author, who calls himself
“ Gossip,” also said that one should never eat un-
less actually hungry —not if one has to wait for a
week. I had not felt fit for a long time, and we had
such dreadful worries. Indigestion had attacked
me and I hated to give in to doctors and doses. The
no-breakfast cure seemed the very thing that was
wanted, and it was quite true in parts, for after a
little I never missed breakfast, I presented my
copy of the book to dear old Wilhelm, who became
an ardent disciple of the theory. He was 86 then,
and perfectly well and up-to-date. He is now 87,
and a sadder and a wiser man, for he fell away and
became so weak and ill that just before I came
here he had quite a break-down with influenza, and
I had to convert* him back again as fast as possible
to six meals a day. He is hale and hearty again,
and curses the no-breakfast cure, chiefly o'n my
account, for we have been friends ever since I was
a baby, and that is a long time ago.
I often think of that cure now that I am always
eating, and never getting a chance to feel hungry.
A large tray is at this minute squeezing itself
through the door, followed by a nurse, so I must
stop until to-morrow. Writing tires me, and rest
is everything now—no exertion is allowed—the lung
is in splints as it were. Another meal, alas, but I
must beat the microbes and get back to the family,
dear little mites—l do love them so. (I mean the
family, not the microbes.)


OCTOBER 6th.
That last sentence is as mixed as Mrs. Eddy’s
metaphors. Have you read Mark Twain on “Health
and Science?” I have just had it, and have
laughed so much that my temperature must have
gone up shockingly. It seems to me a very
good criticism—very fair and generous to the com-
mon-sense part of mental healing. I agree with
him in thinking that four-fifths of the sick could be
very possibly cured in that way, and that if it can
cure four-fifths of the world of nerves and tempers
and imaginary ailments, Christian Science can add
greatly to the sum of human happiness. But on the
other hand, one must consider the feelings of some
of the sufferers robbed of the comfort of their imag-
inary ills. I know a nice old lady who has enjoyed
bad health all her life, and had her own way in all
vital questions simply by getting “upset.” Nothing
would have hurt her feelings more than to be told
she was strong and sound. I knew a young woman
who had turned her family grey with hypochon-
driacal tortures, but that young woman would have
cheerfully undergone the severest operation rather
than sacrifice her cherished invalidism. For my
part I am willing to hand over my claim to the
“ itises ” and the microbes joyfully, and to relapse
into a mere healthy stodgy lump for a reasonable
consideration. I have got an “itis” myself now.
“ Periostitis,” the Doctor calls it. Naturally lam
rather proud of this, and should be much incensed
if a Christian Scientist told me it was imaginary.


I wish I could keep to the point—perhaps my
brain is getting affected.
Parts of Christian Science are quite bearable. I
feel with Mr. Harrison that it would be very nice
if one could only believe in it, and up to a point I
do believe in the under-lying truth—but I will have
none of Mrs. Eddy. Her metaphors put me off. I
can’t write English myself, but then I have never
se‘t up to improve on the Lord’s Prayer. Mark
never thought to have seen that good old security
watered down.
I am excited to find that there is another no-
breakfast lady here, in this very hospital at this
very minute. She has just published her first novel
and had her first baby. The poor thing has been
doing the no-breakfast business, and the baby
weighs barely six pounds—a tiny atom it is, Nurse
says. The lady also did Sandow dumb-bell exer-
cises (so did I—whenever I felt low). Nurse is most
scornful about the effect upon the baby and mother,
who are now rapidly picking up on an increased
diet. The lady is grieved because the child is a
boy. She had hoped for a daughter, and had its
name ready—“ Hypatia Leonora.” Is it not a
fortunate escape for the daughter ? I do not think
she can be really clever ; the book must be romantic.
I do wonder what she will name the boy.
In my daily note from Dick he remarks that the
no-breakfast man should be prosecuted, but that is
the prejudiced view of a lonely husband. I still
think that the author of the two-meals-never-eat-till


you-are-hungry book is a benefactor of the human
race, but personal experience leads me to modify
the statement to half the human race. He makes
the ancient mistake of recommending a universal
panacea for all ills whatsoever. I should like to
write to him. I should say, “ Dear Mr. Gossip, —
I heartily agree with you that seven meals a day
are undesirable, also that many people would bene-
fit by a two-meal diet. I also have found it quite
true that doing without meals eventually reduces
appetite. But, I think you might improve the book
and get better results by allowing a certain number
of exceptions to the rule. In the case of —let us say,
people over eighty, people with consumptive ten-
dencies, consumptives proper, and expectant
mothers—three meals a day are, I submit, desir-
able. I find the same fault with Gossip as with
Christian Science—half a truth magnified. Gossip
is a Positivist, perhaps that explains it.
SANATORIUM,
2nd NOVEMBER.
Dear Violet, —
Thank you so much for the shirt waist you em-
broidered so charmingly. It is most fascinating.
I see that though you liked their fancy work you
were tired of the ways of American women and
their talk, talk, talk, and glad to get back to Eng-
land-very ungrateful of you; but I think I have
8
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


an idea what you mean, they do seem so super-
naturally alert and interested and intellectual, and
never tired or stupid. I only once saw an American
girl tired out to the verge of tears, and she was
quite a relief to the mind. I am now in a Sana-
torium under a new Doctor. How I wish you were
here for conversation. Think what interesting
things we should talk about —-but how you would
send my temperature up, which it is the whole aim
of this treatment to keep down.
I see you have changed your mind again. You
must have been a chameleon in a previous existence,
but I don’t mind, unless you change to me.
I am lying on a lounge under a scraggy gum-
sucker not far from the building. We haven’t got
a house, poor things. We each have a separate hut
which opens on every side, nice little chalets. I
have a green and white one luckily. One lady has
a bright yellow buff one, which would depress me
to death, but she does not seem to mind. We also
possess a verandah, where we dine and lie about
on lounges at stated times.
I am in a Reformatory, dear, hedged with hv-
laws, where the days are cut into lengths for rest
and exercise, with intervals for temperature taking
and meals. The Doctor’s word is law, and we must
conform to his rules or march out. It is very hot
to-day, and I am being slowly dried up by a hot
wind. I have laid in quite a stock of oatmeal,
powders and creams, hoping to preserve some sem-
blance of a complexion, as the scarlet and purple


skins I have encountered here quite distress my
mind. But I daresay I shall become purple gradu-
ally and cease to notice. Cold water is the rule for
baths and sponging, and when I first arrived I had
a severe struggle to obtain sufficient hot water to
bathe my stinging countenance. The Staff seemed
convinced that I was scheming to dodge cold water,
and I had to assure them that I loved cold baths,
and threaten an appeal to the Doctor before I ob-
tained my supply. The first night here really de-
pressed me too much for words. The thought of
being among twelve consumptive people, and the
dreadful coughing of a lady in the next chalet, and
the attacks of mosquitoes kept me awake all night.
A dry-hash nurse instructed me to take my tempera-
ture as soon as I awoke in the morning, and to eat
some fruit. I enquired whether there -were many
mosquitoes. “Oh yes, lots,” she replied callously.
I must say, though, that we seldom suffer from
them. This is really the simple life. No pamper-
ing, everything to harden one and make one inde-
pendent.
There is a regular rule about temperature. If
one is 98.8 early, must stop in bed; and if 100.2 at
5 p.m., must retire. The patients go up and down
like ninepins. No one is allowed any private judg-
ment. I felt fearfully restive the first day I was up,
and encountered the by-laws at every turn. Before
meals we lie on lounges silent for one hour, then
the meal is allowanced, meat usually three times a
day, and four pints of milk per diem. We have to


eat all they give us, and I suppose it is not exces-
sive, as we get nothing between meals—no after-
noon tea, no tea at all—milk, milk, milk; no stimu-
lants allowed, no corsets, no cards, no nothink. If
one happens to be sick after food, Nurse calmly
brings along another supply. After meals we lie
again on lounges, like gorged boa-constrictors, for
half an hour, and then if ordered walk out at a
snail’s pace. When I first saw the patients creep-
ing about, I pitied the poor feeble creatures, but
found that it was the regulation pace, and I was
frequently pulled up for my jaunty tread. I wanted
to stay in bed for breakfast, and couldn’t (without
a regulation temperature). I tried to go to bed at
7.30, but was hustled back to the verandah till 8.
Later I was hustled for not being in bed half an
hour before temperature taking, at 9 p.m. I remon-
strated that I couldn’t hurry—all day long I was
told I must not hurry, and I couldn’t hurry at
night, but the reply I got was that the Doctor said
he could get to bed in three minutes. Bother the
Doctor, he hasn’t got a ruined complexion to attend
to.
Four times a day we take our temperatures, and
we do the same thing every day and have no will of
our own. Heavens ! I shall be so tractable at the
end of a month that my own husband won’t know
me, I wrote at first to Dick to say that I really
couldn’t stand it for more than a fortnight, but
have made up my mind since to stick to it and
laugh at the situation, A sense of humour is the


only hope —they cure you all the time. We are
never hungry, we never have time to be hungry. I
think it is a most boring illness. I like to do such
lots of things. The Doctor thinks my case a very
favourable one, but says I must join the slow bri-
gade in future, and keep up this treatment for six
months, not necessarily here. One learns the
scheme, and then can carry it on elsewhere. He
says it is nearly always the energetic, nervous tem-
peraments who get this. Lazy people never have
the complaint. These are the crumbs of comfort
we receive. No lights allowed after 9 p.m. Nurse
carries them away as if we were children.
NOVEMBER
7th.
There are six men and six women at this Sana-
torium, and directly one leaves, his place is filled.
At each change the chalets are sprayed with for-
malin, and mattrasses thoroughly sterilized. Fur-
nishing is of the simplest, plainest description,
.dressing-chest, small press, enamel wash-stand and
ware, bed, plain wicker chair and table with glass
top, that is all. Being open on four sides and con-
stantly bathed in sun and air, the chalets are pretty
well sterilized without any formalin. A covered tin
containing a solution of lysol is always left near
patients in case of expectoration, and if necessary
they must carry a flask in the day time; my cough
is so little now that I do not need to, thank Heaven.


I cried over these things, but safety for others is in
understanding them. The Doctor says a careful
consumptive need never be a danger to anyone,
Lysol and water are used to keep the sputum from
drying, but it is burned afterwards. lam telling
you these horrible details from a stern sense of
duty. The Sanatorium is an educational centre,
and from it light is expected to shine into dark
places, every patient acting as a torch. That is the
idea, but patients must sometimes go home so
enlightened as to be perfect nuisances to their
healthy relations, while again others are blissfully
oblivious to their responsibilities. We have one
really bad case —a lady whose cough is most dis-
tressing, both day and night. Once when we were
discussing the home aspect of disinfection, she said
between pants, with rather a pitying smile, that
there was too much fuss about germs, and she never
bothered about them when she was at home.
Mr. Bunny is a patient of the opposite or nervous
type. He seems fat and robust, and lam sure that
if he ever had any lung trouble he has now recov-
ered completely, yet, he stays on and is full of con-
stant fears. He is always fussing about his pulse,
or his temperature, and seems dreadfully anxious
about every little symptom. He bombards the
Doctor with cross-examinations, and spends all his
spare time in demonstrating to us that the medical
pronouncements of one week do not tally with those
of the week before. Yet he clings like a limpet to
the inconsistent doctor nevertheless. The microbes


have got on his nerves. We should miss Mr.
Bunny. He argues, expostulates, rings bells, and
keeps things moving round him. Yesterday a new
nurse arrived—rather a vacant kind of body. Of
course Mr. Bunny proceeded to scare her, but she
replied innocently that she didn’t mind anything,
because she was used to lunatics. Mr. Bunny was
prostrated, and she stared in surprise at his hysteri-
cal spasms of mirth. In his gloomy fits, Mr.
Bunny’s mind dwells on an early grave, but there
is not much danger—hypochondriacs live a long
time. We have one throat case—a Miss King.
She is a funny, charming girl, with such pretty
brown hands and arms, very plump, and the
essence of good humour, quite a “good fellow.”
She deserves a testimonial for amusing the Sana-
torium, though as a fact silence is the order for
her. Occasionally when the world goes very wrong
she collapses into a silent heap of sorrow, but that
does not last long. I hope she will get better—l
cannot imagine her an invalid.
DECEMBER
Ist.
Violet, you pampered Epicurean, you should be
here. It is no joke to sit out, all day under a
scraggy tree in a raging hot wind, but we get rained
on in bed to make up for it sometimes. I laughed
immensely last night. The hurricane almost lifted
oUr chalets up bodily and rain came in on every
side. My pillow was wet, and spray went all over


the bed-clothes. My day garments on the chair
were saturated (as I did not know enough to cover
them with a macintosh), my press flew open and
striped cambric skirt streamed madly out of a win-
dow. I jumped out of bed to collect a few treasures
that were tearing round the apartment —the floor
was under water —my sponge and a few trifles were
recovered next day in the gully. But, bless you, we
thrive. “ Damp does not matter, damp does not
give you cold.” We walk in the rain and need not
change damp clothing unless we like. The Nord-
rach book says one can stay all day in wet clothes
and not catch cold. I am quite willing to believe
it. I always keep an open mind—but somehow old
superstitions would worry me in a case like that. I
asked Mr. Sharp if he had read this (he is a school-
master, thin, rather nice). He said, yes, it was quite
correct, but he added, with a chuckle, that so far he
had never seen anyone in the flesh do it. Among
the many odd things I have heard from the patients
is that rheumatic signs are favourable tokens of
recovery —that is, lung recovery. I don’t know
what becomes of the rheumatism.
DECEMBER
4th.
It is quite cool to-day. Miss King is up for the
first time for a week. She is still under the ban of
silence, but all depression has vanished, and her
spirits are too high to be repressed. She has sat


among us, stitching away at fancy-work and whis-
pering quaint asides behind her hand all evening.
It is almost impossible not to respond, though one
ought not to. At present she is executing a light-
ning skirt dance on the slippery floor, a picture in
a short scarlet dress and white lace petticoat frills.
“ Its the Delirium Trimmins,” she observes
gravely, and drops into a lounge just in time to
escape Matron. The stolid youth watches her
admiringly. Little Mrs. Peck, a new arrival, is
rather boring. She has come here more for preven-
tion than cure. She is nervous about herself, and
talks incessantly and exhaustively of ailments and
operations. “ Have you got a throat, Mrs. ?”
she demanded loudly to-day when we were all on
the verandah, and I was knitting a tie, quite inof-
fensively. “ Oh, yes, I have a throat,” I replied in
a sweet, innocent voice, which made Mr. Sharp
smile, but she didn’t mind. “ What I mean is this
—ls your throat affected ? You haven’t got any
cough, or any haemorrhage, or any expectoration.”
“ I have a little cough,” I said hastily, and changed
the conversation; but it was impossible to restrain
her without being snubby, and one cannot snub a
sickly person in a Sanatorium. “ You all look so
brown and healthy,” she wandered on, “ I can’t
think there can be everything wrong with you, Miss
Brown —you look so—so agricultural looking.”
Poor Miss Brown, who has a sense of humour and
a cavity in her lung, nearly did herself an injury
with suppressed laughter, at the compliment-. Miss


Brown has been here two months, and has put on
two stone.
Like Mrs. Peck, I expected to find people here
oppressed with care and anxiety, but it is a light-
hearted, happy-go-lucky atmosphere one encoun-
ters on the surface at least. The smallest jokes
amuse us, we are like school children. I think it is
because we are all in some measure in the same
business. One consumptive person among well
people would feel differently —would, perhaps, have
a sense of humiliation or depression at the differ-
ence in his lot, or of annoyance at being an object
of pity. I expressed this to Mr, Bunny, who was
worrying about his crepitations (I have no idea what
crepitations are, have you ?) He agreed heartily
with me. “ It’s this way,” he exclaimed. “We’re
all in the same boat. You think to yourself—Look
at Mrs. Muggins. Mrs. Muggins is a lot worse
than me, and then you feel more cheerful —see?”
He brandished his arms and pointed to an imagin-
ary Mrs. Muggins and then to himself impres-
sively. I said I thought it was dreadful of him to
feel happy because Mrs. Muggins was worse. “ Oh,
well, you know, you do,” he replied. “ It’s this
way ” but I departed to bed at this stage.
I am getting quite used to talk about haemorr-
hages and temps, and microbes. In the after lunch
rest to-day anti-tuberculin was the topic. Mr. Bunny
said he felt a delightful buoyancy after injections;
Mr. Sharp felt nothing. Mr. Bunny told me quite
a lot about his Opsonic Index and Phagocytes, and


virulent germs that survive through being the fit-
test, and many weird things that I have never been
acquainted with before, but somehow I don’t feel
any real interest in microbes, my only interest is in
getting away from them. I feel my ideas are all
mixed up, and between microbes and crickets and
Mr. Bunny, I feel rather jumpy. I am ordered to
walk a little now, and to-day was the only lady on
the track. We are not allowed to talk when walk-
ing, and the Doctor tells us exactly where to go.
We rest in a hammock for twenty minutes before
returning.
I am looking forward to a letter soon telling of
your arrival in England.
' ' DECEMBER
6th.
We are all dreadfully upset to-day. Miss King
has received her conge. The Doctor has asked her
to leave in a fortnight, as she declined to drink
milk ordered, and persisted in forgetting her rule
of silence. We do wish we could intercede for her,
but with her high spirit and defiance, it would be
impossible to induce any promise of reformation.
The Matron has got on her nerves. Besides, I
don’t think she could stop talking altogether, poor
dear. Of course, the doctor has right on his side.
I believe he made a wonderful cure of one man’s
throat, but for many months never allowed him to
speak—gave him a slate to write on. But a woman
is quite another matter. Imagine a slate, dear !
How inadequate !


We are having silent hour now, and I have to
lie back on my lounge, which accounts for the very
vile handwriting. Quite a sepulchral silence reigns
-—one could hear a pin drop. We are over-awed
by the fate of Miss King, not that we ever do talk
at these times, but occasionally one hears a whis-
per. No doubt this will make us more circumspect,
but lam sorry for Miss King. Miss King says she
doesn’t care—she is still breathing defiance and
grievances, though she looks pale. By next week
volumes of family dismay will pour in upon her,
and she says we shall then see her going round
haggard and worn with repentance. It is so sad—
we shall miss her terribly. Why are perfectly
sensible, immaculate people so often boring? I
don’t know, do you? Would you rather be too
insufferably sensible, or too absurdly silly ? Let me
know by return post. Adieu.
DECEMBER
Bth.
This afternoon I am scribbling out on a hill-side.
All the nice hammocks are filled, so I am lying on
the ground, gazing at a clear blue sky and feeling
very nice feelings. What a good thing it is to love
fresh air and trees and birds —that is, ‘when one
can have them. To-day there is a cool, pleasant
breeze and the gum-saplings are waving their new
light green tops and whispering continuously. The
trees are nearly all small gum-suckers, with a thick
undergrowth of scrub, and the light and shade ef


fects are very pretty. I have seen a pair of the
sweetest little blue-caps, the male bird so gay, with
a dear, domesticated-looking little wife. A ground
quail has just crept in and out of the bushes, with
two young ones, like little grey chickens. They
kept close to Mama, did not take the least notice of
me.
We have a very narrow pathway, graded gently,
the Doctor having planned it so for the prevention
of conversation. The patients come back in single
file with cushions under their arms.
5 p.m.
A little later I heard footsteps coming steadily
along the pathway, but supposing them to belong
to a belated patient, I paid no attention, until sud-
denly they ceased and the head of a brown cow was
poked under my umbrella so unexpectedly that I
sprang to my feet with a wild shriek and rushed for
shelter. When we were assembled on the verandah
I found that every soul at home and abroad had
heard my shriek and wondered at its cause, “And
yet not one brave man ran to the rescue,” I re-
proached. “ Ran,” said Mr. Sharp, “no one ever
runs here. Good gracious, did you expect that?
Why, you wouldn’t run here if a mad bull were
after you. Die, if you must, but never, never run.”
Temperature undisturbed by the cow.
In his daily sermon this morning the Doctor
remarked that the aim of the treatment was to keep
temperature down. The ideal temp, on awaking is


sub-normal or normal; after exercise at noon ggdeg.
or so, or perhaps higher; even up to loodeg. after
exercise at 5 p.m. is excusable temperature,
provided it drops to normal at night after half-
hour’s rest in bed. If thermometer is high, one
must go slow in the matter of exercise. The only
exercise allowed is slow walking, stooping or vio-
lent movements to be avoided; after an icy shower,
one must dry one’s self with stately dignity. We
are never to walk fast enough to cause the least
shortness of breath, or far enough to cause fatigue,
but to rest always when tired. We have so many
limitations to remember, and so many things to
dread that I wonder where mind influence comes
in, but it can come in I suppose in the will to per-
severe and beat the microbes. But I do not want
to be quite obsessed with any set of rules, however
worthy, so I eat meat three times a day, and read
Mrs. Earle on Vegetarianism to keep an open
mind. She says that Tuberculosis is caused by
meat-eating. I don’t in the least want to be con-
verted to her extremely uninteresting diet of tinned
milk and nuts, but she acts as a counter-irritant.
Before reading Mrs. Earle I had a distinct leaning
to vegetarianism, but she leaves one with so little
to eat. Most fruits even she avoids, and salt is for-
bidden—think of vegetables without salt! Why
are we cursed with tastes for nice things ? Tea and
coffee are most deleterious stimulants. Religion,
she says, by encouraging tea-meetings, has coun-
tenanced one of our worst vices. Here we are al


lowed to eat any ordinary food, provided we take
enough milk, butter and meat. There are no diet
fads about the meals. Fat patients are allowed
some tea.
DECEMBER
10th.
Yesterday morning Mrs. Peck had violent hys-
terics, seemed very low in her mind, and com-
plained that she was misunderstood and neglected
in an uncongenial atmosphere. She was removed
to bed, and with compunction in our hearts, we
severally stopped to condole on our return from
exercise. Mr. William (who detests her) was parti-
cularly attentive, and from fragments of their con-
versation I gathered that she was informing him
that she had a loose kidney. This morning her
examination put her in high fettle. She is consti-
tutionally delicate and full of nervous terrors, but
her chart shows that the evidences of trouble are
slight. To-day she is triumphantly reckless and
reports: —“ I said, Look here, Doctor, have I got
consumption or have I not?” The Doctor replied
that he really could not say; she had the prelimin-
aries and must build herself up, but she had nothing
very dreadful to worry about, and every chance of
getting well. She is off on a fresh tack now—crow-
ing that she has not got consumption at all. I
have just seen her leave the pathway and strike up
a sheer steep hill at a rattling pace. Mr. Bunny
contemplating the proceeding with deep disgust.


“The woman’s a fool,” he said, violently. Cer-
tainly things that amuse one in Miss King do seem
idiotic in Mrs. Peck.
Most of the patients have injections of tuberculin
once a fortnight, and then stay in bed for two days.
At intervals their blood is tested by what is called
the “Opsonic Index,” which tells whether the blood
resistance is above or below normal. It is not
claimed that tuberculin is a cure, but that it in-
creases the resisting power. Mr. Bunny explained
the whole thing to me, as I had never heard of any
of the things before. He says that some of the
white corpuscles in our blood are called Phagocytes,
and their mission in life is to eat up the microbes.
Our aim, he says, is to “ buck up ” the Phagocytes
by nourishment and tuberculin. “ Why tubercu-
lin ?” I asked, and he replied that by feeding the
Phagocytes on dead germs, we encouraged an appe-
tite for live ones. That is very definite now —no
confusion about that. I am acquiring quite a lot
of information. But it makes me rather creepy. I
wont have tuberculin as long as I go on so well
without it. Gained lbs. last week and feel so
much better.
DECEMBER
12th.
Miss King still defies the lightning. She says it
doesn’t matter, as she is leaving. We have tried
to persuade her to have it out with the Doctor, but
in vain. She is making her arrangements, and has


sent twelve telegrams and twelve letters to break the
news to her friends.
We had some fun to-day with Mr. Sharp as we
straggled in from the walk by casually observing
that we should have to shake our thermometers down
a few points. This is one of the permanent jokes
on the ladies’ side. No one does it, of course, except
occasionally Miss King, but she says even her con-
science wouldn’t allow it, if she were 100.8 deg. Mr.
Sharp’s shocked paralysis was amusing. No man
had ever dreamed of such iniquity, not even to es-
cape the two points that send one to bed. We
told dreadful stories of how we shook the thermo-
meter up when we wanted breakfast in bed, and
down when we had visitors coming in the after-
noon. Mr. Sharp became hysterical in his mirth
and had to be restrained. (By-law X. Pleasures to
be taken sadly.) More hysterics to-day from Mrs.
Peck.
DECEMBER
13th.
Poor Miss King has received several telegrams
and twelve agitated letters imploring her to make
amends and remain at the Sanatorium. She is
determined to leave, though upset about her people.
The poor dear is a wreck with emotions, and is
writing twelve more argumentative letters, to prove
to anxious friends that she is in the right. We feel
so sad, for it will be hard for her to do treatment
anywhere else, the apparatus is here. “ It’s very
24
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


well for the Doctor to preach,” she said in a crying
voice, “ but I haven’t got a wife and family.”
The Doctor, being a cured patient himself, often
reminds the discouraged how he persevered for the
sake of those depending on him.
It is hot this morning, but I am lucky in finding
a shaded hammock disengaged. The bird-notes are
charming, and magpies sing most gloriously here.
I notice them particularly very early in the morn-
ing, but they sing more or less all day. Myriads
of crickets keep up a shrill incessant roar from the
grass, I think. Where do crickets live, and when
do they go to bed ? Do you know ? Here, at night,
they are almost too noisy to be respectable crickets.
Curiously now, they have all stopped instantane-
ously, giving one a distinct sensation of relief. Our
crickets at home ring their little bells with a fainter,
sweeter shrillness. I like them. Do you remember,
Violet, how the frogs used to roar in the station
creek on summer evenings ?
The Doctor has cut my walk down because of a
slight increase of temperature, but I am doing well
and have gained i J lbs. this week, making 6 lbs. in
the last three weeks. Certainly the treatment does
wonders.
The cricket creatures have begun again, with a
deafening noise, most nerve rending. Mr. Sharpe
and the fat boy patient paused to commiserate. I
asked them about their hours. The boy says they
take shifts day and night to keep up the row. Mr.
Sharp says they are locusts, not crickets, cicada, or
musical locusts.


DECEMBER
15th.
Miss King is in bed for temperature. The Doc-
tor spent the day here, and had an interview with
her, in which she dissolved into tears, and the dif-
ferences were, after all, washed away, and most
friendly relations established. She will remain two
months longer, and be a good child. No more con-
versations. She has sent us an amusing letter of
farewell, and has despatched five more telegrams,
and is now beginning again on twelve family let-
ters —most exhausting, really.
Dick is coming to see me. He is leaving the
Drought to take care of itself, and coming down for
two days. 500 miles is a long journey, but it will
satisfy him that lam really getting better. I am
longing to see him, but I know it will unsettle me.
The two days will pass so quickly, and then I shall
be alone again. I try to be a stoic, and if troubles
make stoics, surely I should be a real red Indian.
But this illness seems the last straw. I hate it, and
having to be away from the dear little things. I
want them and I want to be petted and comforted—
in fact, lam a mere baby. I have tried to persuade
the Doctor to let me have a day in town with Dick,
but not he. He regards friends and relations as
quite as destructive as microbes. I also mentioned
with dignity that I needed to consult my dentist, a
first doubtful speck having appeared on one of my
nice front teeth. The wretch was adamant—hus-
bands and front teeth are details to him. One visi-
26
LETTERS FROM a SANATORIUM;


tor in the week is allowed, and he is not expected
to stay more than half an hour, and gets no tea
to encourage him after a train journey and a drive.
But I am to have Dick a little longer, as he comes
from such a distance, and if my tooth needs atten-
tion, a dentist can come out, or the Doctor will ex-
tract it, if I prefer that! ! Really, this Doctor
DECEMBER
16th.
Dick arrives to-morrow, and here I am in bed
for temp,, and suffering from severe dyspepsia. My
views of life, particularly Sanatorium life, are jaun-
diced, but lam not surprised. If you ate as much
as I do, and drank four pints of milk every day and
lay round on a lounge all the time, except for a
short crawl, do you suppose you would have sur-
vived for a whole month, as I have? Not you —
strong as you are. It is not any wonder that dys-
peptics are bores about their symptoms. I shall no
longer despise the poor creatures. I have a whole
medical book-full of symptoms, and tea and toast
is the only rational diet for me to-day. But I had
fruit to eat early, and a cup of hot milk arrived at 7
a.m. I did not argue with them, but I seized an
opportunity and threw it quietly out of my side
window. Presently breakfast came. Porridge,
eggs and bacon, four slices of bread and four balls
of butter, and one pint of milk, every scrap of this
I am expected to take. I told Matron forcibly that
I had a bilious attack, and indigestion. She replied
27
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


that here one eats just the same in such a case, and
that the treatment is also a cure for indigestion.
“Madam,” I said, “eggs and bacon will never
cure me.” But she was firm. However, I refused
to commit suicide by eggs and bacon, and after a
struggle, she removed them from my tortured gaze,
but she insisted upon all the rest. I ate the por-
ridge as it was difficult to pack up. The bread and
butter I wrapped up and hailed a passing patient
later to rid me of the parcel. It was Mr. Sharp, a
schoolmaster and M.A. He was horrified, but
humane. By the time he returned from his walk, I
had a large package of library books ready to be
returned, and as he stopped to say he had fed the
ants, I asked him to take my books for the post.
“Is —is it provisions ?” he enquired faintly, as he
gazed at the parcel. How delightful it is to laugh.
Thank Heavens I can laugh, otherwise I should be-
come a crank here. Conscientiousness carried to
extremes is unhealthy—too pious people die young.
I feel like Miss King, but Ido not care. One can
be too superstitious about the treatment. There is
something in Christian Science after all. Poor Mrs,
Henderson is laughing at me in the next chalet.
She has been in bed for weeks and weeks trying to
get the temp. down. One never gets up here till
temp, is down, no matter if it takes months. She
says if I had enough Christian Science I could
eat the eggs and bacon. The Doctor was inclined
to mercy when he came, because of my general
tractability.


DECEMBER
17th.
In bed for temp, to-day of all days, and Dick
coming. I had planned to have him for exercise
hours, and to take him up the track to a shady
spot, where we could have a lovely talk; instead,
here I am in a wind-swept chalet, hardly able to
open my eyes for glare and grit. This is not usually
a dusty spot. The Doctor fights dust in every way
-—he will have no flower beds because of the dig-
ging. Indeed, dust is his devil, but his devil is out
to-day. Nice Mr. Williams, passing home from
his walk, brought me a tiny sprig of sweet briar
which he discovered up the hill. It has such a sweet
smell. He also lent me a pamphlet on Foot-rot in
sheep. I gazed at him pensively over my pillows
and asked if he thought I dressed the sheep’s toes
and branded the calves when I was at home, because
I didn’t as a rule. I was too much taken up bak-
ing dampers and killing snakes, and milking cows,
and
He said he wanted me to show it to my husband,
as it would interest him. I said Dick might think
my brain was affected, if I began to talk about foot-
rot, when he had only an hour with me, and when
a howling drought was raging in the land. If he
had anything on “Fodder” for me or—-or “defi-
ciency of trucks,” or “starving stock rates,” I
might work that into the conversation. The joke
then dawned upon Mr. Williams, who shook
silently, and went away. He came back to say that


I had talked quite professionally about sheep to
him one day. I did. I endeavoured to dissuade
him from giving up law and taking to small farm-
ing with a view to making money. It seemed to me
such a gamble, and Mr. Williams has troubles
enough as it is. His wife shuts the windows and
spring-cleans very often.
DECEMBER
19th.
Dick came in a storm of wind and dust, and now
that he has gone I feel that I have hardly seen him,
and there are a thousand forgotten things to say.
I feel I cannot stay here any more, but he wishes
me so much to remain, and the nice man brought
me a beautiful ring as a reward for good behaviour.
I must stick to it, but it is maddening to be cooped
up here away from the babies and to have seen so
little of Dick. I have lost weight this week, with
upsets and excitement, and feel at present a total
wreck. Mr. Williams said if one husband could
do so much damage, what would a whole family
do ? Good-night.
S3lSClSSio3li] S
21st.
Dear Violet, —
I posted you a rambling diary of experiences
yesterday. While you are doing a perfectly inter-
esting “cours” in Paris, I am trying to make up my
30
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


mind to stay here till the middle of February. I
shall be a fossil. Thanks so much for the books
just received; I shall brush up my French to read
them. I have been up and resumed walking, but
temp, went off again a little, so I have to stay on a
lounge all day. The Doctor showed me that my
rise had kept up for some days without settling pro-
perly, which means in this trouble, rest, rest, until
it drops. Yesterday had bad rheumatism in my
back and shoulders, to-day indigestion. I said to
the Doctor that it seemed to me that exercise and
starvation were what I required. But he smiled a
slow smile and shook his head, and said, “We find
that Tubercular dyspepsia is more easily cured by
rest than exercise.” I enquired about rheumatism.
He said it was often associated with these cases,
and was rather a good sign. Apparently one should
be pleased with it. He doesn’t mind it, he cures
lungs. I said, I thought indigestion was another
little joke associated with the complaint, and he
said the treatment was a cure for indigestion even-
tually. Eventually —if one can stand it long enough
I suppose. The poor, harassed Doctor said that,
anyhow, rheumatism was better than lung trouble.
’Tis a matter of taste. I should prefer it (by itself),
because one becomes a vegetarian for rheumatism,
and I hate meat three times a day (though the quan-
tity is not large). But to have rheumatism as an
accessory to another fact, and to have to feed it up
on meat, and walk it out in the rain, and be grate-
ful for it (for rheumatic patients generally do well)


is quite another thing. As for indigestion, I am
sticking to the diet, and living in faith, and really
am improving on the whole. The Doctor is very
much against giving doses of any kind. The whole
system is to harden one, and make one independent,
able to eat and wear anything and to do for one’s
self. It is a good idea. I should hate to be a help-
less invalid, but can do with a little pampering at
times. lam looking now from my tree at our little
bare, open chalets, and the raised verandah where
we dine, and sit at night. Quite the simple life.
Miss Brown remarked once that she often felt like
crying, but there was no place to cry in. We laugh,
instead, at the smallest joke, but it is bad to laugh,
you know, shakes the lung. Isn’t that enough to
make anyone laugh, dear ?
Dear Violet, I haven’t much to write about; this
is one of my dull days, when I remember my age
and my sorrows, and my blessings are so far away
that they seem like dreams. These are the days
when I realise with melancholy what insignificant
atoms we are, merely little wounded ants, with ab-
surd discontents and ridiculous desires. This comes
of dyspepsia, home sickness and Frederic Harri-
son combined. I am reading “ Creed of a Lay-
man,” and find it most logical and most depressing.
The religion of humanity is splendidly unselfish,
and has no illusions apparent, and yet how unsatis-
fying the sum of it is. lam not noble enough for
It, or it is not noble enough for me. lam not con-
tented only to live and die for my fellow creatures.
32
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


Indeed, my fellow-creatures often get on my nerves.
I want ever so much more life than to struggle up-
hill for a few years and then cough myself into
nothingness. “ Give me your reasons, Madam,
for hoping,” says Mr. Harrison. ‘‘Thank Hea-
vens, my dear Sir, I have always been superior to
reason, like Wilkie Collins’ dear old butler.”
‘ ‘ There are some truths revealed to savages
and hidden from political economists.” I
shall be glad when I recover from this attack of
Frederic. It is so uninteresting to” feel an atom in
an organism, simply existing for the next genera-
tion, No wonder Hegel called it ‘‘the terrible disci-
pline of self-knowledge.”
It was ever so much nicer in the middle ages
with the world fixed between Heaven and Hell. Hell
was the only thing one had to worry about. How
nice and important a human was then, and every-
one likes to be important. I think the secret of
happiness must be to be perfectly healthy and to
own plenty of illusions. Perhaps in time a race
will be evolved too absolutely healthy to care what
happens next without any systems, you know.
‘‘The future men of action will have abandoned
the search for ultimates. They will seek God’s pur-
pose in the sphere of their activity, and desire no
more than the immediate conflict before them,” but
I haven’t got on as far as that yet. In the mean-
time, I worry and pray with the egotism of the
weak, unsatisfied person. In my own heathen way
I believe as firmly in the prayer habit as any nun,
33
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


but not exactly in prayers for rain. If this goes
on I must take a dose of Whitman. Robert Louis
says he’s an antidote to green sickness, but Whit-
man had his qualms, too, in “Yet, Yet, ye doubt-
ful hours,” and I wish to Heavens he had delivered
his messages in prose.
To-day in my walk I found an enormous
caterpillar fully four inches long, and so fat,
light green on the back, shading to dark-
green underneath, with hard little brown feet with
which he holds on to the bough. I got him on
a young gum bush, and have him beside me now,
crawling about in a most worried way. The men
think he is the caterpillar of the Emperor Gum
Moth, though he has two bright pink stripes down
each side of his fat green body, that are not men-
tioned in the description, and look like pink icing.
I want to keep him until to-morrow to show the
doctor. Mr. Williams is going to mind him for
me, and is kindly arranging a box for his recep-
tion, I don’t think it can be against the by-laws to
keep a caterpillar in a chalet, because I have all
sorts of daddy-long-legs on my ceiling, and I
awoke once with a spider dangling at the end of a
thread, just above my nose. To-day the young
swallows flew from the nest in the verandah, and
now the parent birds are endeavouring to get them
back into the nest for the night.
Mrs. Peck is in a feverish state in the next
lounge. She went down for a wrap during silent
hour, and a nurse met her and told her she should


be resting at that time, whereupon Mrs. Peck flew
at her violently, and came back and told us, and
said she would not be spoken to in that way, and
she would NOT put up with it, and she would let
them know that the Doctor should hear of it, etc.,
etc. Mr. Sharp put down his book and studied
her with a weary curiosity.
Then when we sat down to tea, she entered afresh
upon her grievances, and we had it all over again,
what she would not put up with. Mr. Bunny, she
said, had risen from his lounge too, and why
should she be made a butt of, pray ?
The Matron said that no one saw Mr. Bunny
or he should have been spoken to too. Then Mrs.
P. said she hadn’t her watch, and how was she
to know when time was up. (Once when bells were
instituted to notify us they were objected to, by
Mrs. Peck among others). The Matron held her
own and changed the conversation, but Mrs. P.
sat grimly breathing injury all through that meal.
Why is it that the most insignificant people make
the most fuss about their dignity? Mrs. Peck
isn’t happy unless she has a row once a week,
with the establishment. Once she complained to
the Doctor that the other patients did not fuse
with her, and that she was left out in the cold.
Since then everyone has made alarmed efforts to
be agreeable, but the poor little person is her own
enemy. She cannot “escape from her own sha-
dow.” The patients are all very pleasant among
themselves, but no Sanatorium would ever suit
35
letters Prom a sanatorium.


Mrs. Peck, She is like the Companion you tra-
velled with for three years and spoilt. You said
you used to keep on brushing your teeth and doing
your nails, while she had fits of temper and hys-
teria in your room, and then you went to breakfast
quite undisturbed. Violet, how I wish I had your
nerves of iron. People affect me horribly. Glanc-
ing back, this seems to be all about Mrs. Peck,
and the caterpillar, but that is all I have to write
about.
TUESDAY.
The Doctor has brought a very large clock and
fastened it opposite our rest lounges.
WEDNESDAY.
Clock has stopped—does not like open-air treat-
ment.
DECEMBER
22nd.
No melancholy tale to-day. lam doing so well,
and do you know I have pink cheeks and almost
a double chin. All my belts have been let out,
and I feel a glorious sensation of well-being.
Rheumatism and dyspepsia have fled for the pre-
sent, and I am sure the microbe must be having
an awful time with my phagocytes. When the
Doctor asked for symptoms to-day I mentioned
“fatty degeneracy.” “Fatty i?e-generacy you
mean,” he said with a most approving twinkle.
36
LETTERSSFROM A SANATORIUM.


lam a satisfactory Sanatorium specimen. My
increase in weight has been splendid, steady and
not abnormal. On an average I have put on two
lbs. a week, and have the glorious prospect of a
reduced diet —can even dream of an occasional cup
of tea in the future. Some patients who put on
too much weight are on a limited allowance of food,
cases being known when they are hungry for more.
Further experience has caused considerable modi-
fication of the old Nordrach system of excessive
over-feeding.
So also with tuberculin, which is given every
fortnight, and in a very much smaller pro-
portion than formerly, since the discovery of the
Opsonic Index. The blood is tested frequently
until a sufficient , resistance is established. Tuber-
culin, they say, lowers the patient for the first
two days, and then re-acts. Long ago, when poor
Tom had it, they injected every two days, and must
have kept him lowered all the time, and so has-
tened the end. Nous avons change tout cela, so
they say. Tuberculin is not claimed to be a cure,
but is said to increase the blood resistance. I
am quite accustomed to Phagocytes and Opsonic
Indexes and things like that. Miss King asked
the Doctor to-day if he believed in deep-breathing.
He said, “not for his patients; one might as well
exercise a broken leg, or tear the bandages off a
wound and expect it to heal.”
Mrs. Peck has gone, shaking the dust off
her feet, after a grand finale of complaints


and ructions. She was extraordinarily rest-
less and uneasy, hands always moving,
feet tapping, mind ever seeking grievances
and impositions. “ She had her eyes about
her, she was no fool,” she said mysteriously.
She was like a small tornado in this peaceful com-
munity. One felt one knew not what dire sus-
picions filled the poor little soul. It struck me
as pitiful. I think this treatment gave her her
best chance of recovery, but she would not submit
to restraints of any kind. She has a husband
and two small daughters, but seemed wrapped up
in herself and in operations. I wonder whether
hysteria causes operations in these cases, or opera-
tions hysteria ? I am a mass of nerves myself, so
I needn’t talk. Dick knows all the trials and gives
me heaps of sympathy, but if he could bring him-
self to a beating once a month, I feel it would do
me a lot of good, too. I recommend the cure to
Mr. Peck—poor man. Peter the Great put down
hysteria in Russia considerably. He ordered all
women showing symptoms to be well flogged.
He was drastic, was Peter. The beating cure should
be used with discrimination.
CHRISTMAS
DAY.
Dearest Violet,—
A Merrie Christmas to you. This is the queerest
Christmas on record with me. Last night the Ma-
tron brought me a letter to put under my pillow
38
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


for the morning, but I clung to her lantern and
read enough to know that Dick was trying to per-
suade me not to have the children down. He puts
it as nicely as possible, but I feel it to be too bad.
I am blooming, have gained a stone, have stuck
to my part of the bargain thoroughly, looking for-
ward to lie on a beach and watch them having a
glorious time. Tired as I was, I could not sleep
for disappointment and woe. I know the little
things were up at dawn of day, flying about with
bare feet and diving into Christmas stockings. I
feel so jealous of losing so much of their babyhood,
but I am one of thousands. The three mothers
here have the same want, and far less hope than
I have. Still that does not make my ache any
less, rather I ache for them too. I had letters
fiom Dicky and Rosemary, and bunches of stone
dead carnations, packed carefully by them both
Little daughter prints most original scrawls which
always begin the same way. “ Mother, when are
you coming home, I want you” ? Rosemary is
the sweetest mixture, so loving and a little wilful
and utterly faithful. “ Back to back, with a clay-
more in each hand,” is her attitude towards Dicky.
One has to earn her devotion though, she does
not give it for nothing.
But I must tell you about our Christmas. We
are playing ourselves, and taking unheard of liber-
ties. Before sunrise Miss King came to me attired
in a pink wrapper. I dried my tears, and we flew
up to the verandah, where we fastened a cord from
39
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


post to post and hung it with green boughs and
Christmas stockings. Then we retired, and pre-
sently heard shrieks of mirth from Eileen, the
robust housemaid. Then Mr. Weir (a fat youth
weighing 13 stone) appeared in Nurse’s costume,
cap flowing and temperature book, and went the
round of the chalets, followed by the hilarious
Eileen in explosions. He looked very funny.
Miss King and I intended to add some personal
jokes to the stockings (very little amuses us), so
after consulting I wrote for a bottle of Hair Re-
storer for Mr. Sharpe’s high forehead, Anti-fat for
Mr. Weir, and a baby’s comforter to smoothe the
nervous agitations that perpetually rend the breast
of Mr. Bunny. Unfortunately they did not ar-
rive in time.
AFTERNOON.
When we went out in the early morning the
grass was dripping with dew, yet as it advanced
the day grew insufferably hot. Everyone did his
pathetic little best to live up to the occasion, and
the Doctor was merry, and cracked Christmas
jokes, though he had the air of an anxious parent
indulging the children, but morally certain of hav-
ing them all sick after it. We had many luxuries
for dinner, also permission to eat as little as we
liked, and to have tea in the evening. “ Real black
tea,” as Rosemary would say. What more could
one desire. By 3 o’clock dinner, mirth and heat
had reduced us to silent suffering on our lounges.
40
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


By 5 p.m., some were marched to bed for tem-
perature. Miss Brown spent Christmas in bed,
having had a slight haemorrhage. We were so
sorry for her, for she is so patient, and has been
ill for a long time. Haemorrhage cases are not
necessarily worse, but the treatment is more tedious,
much more bed and very little exercise is possible.
The Doctor says a slight haemorrhage in the be-
ginning is rather a good thing, as it is often one
of the earliest signs and frightens people into hav-
ing Treatment.
This is the hottest Christmas on record —spent
in the open —appalling.
DECEMBER
26th,
We are having frightful weather, a burning
hurricane positively raging round the building.
We have been for a very short walk, and now lie
once more on lounges, panting, for silent hour,
that is, such of us as have survived. The greater
number have retired to bed protesting, with tem-
perature above the limit, 100.2. lam very proud,
my temperature is only 99.8, which is splendid on
a red hot day after exercise.
The Doctor says the temperature of a perfectly
healthy person can run up on these days. They
have proved it by putting ordinary well people
into sanatoriums and noting results. The more I
observe temperature here the less I understand it,
41
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


but I do not care personally, so long as I get my
drop at night in bed. We do not usually walk
in such weather, and it is such a bore to have to
go to bed, but that is the system, so it must be
good, you know.
Miss Brown says she has to cling to the sheet
that covers her to prevent it from blowing away.
We look so disreputable with wild strands of hair
waving in the gale and scorched faces. I found
the bottle of skin lotion (which so far has kept my
epidermis in its place) had quite dried up—effect
of open air life in a chalet. lam drying likewise.
Eileen is setting the tables under difficulties. She
laid a cloth, and hastily added forks and knives
and whatever came handiest, but before she could
proceed further, the gale caught the corners of the
table cloth, whirled them up and away went every-
thing helter skelter, crash of crockery, rattle of
steel, shrieks from Eileen who has begun again,
though it seems hopeless. Imagine how dry our
cut bread will be before we can possibly eat four
pieces. I did not gain sufficiently last week, so
am back on full diet. Alas—woe is me. I had
to stop scribbling in order to have dinner before
it was blown away. Heavens! what a meal, pre-
serve us a’. It was worse than being at *sea
with the fiddles on. How the flies managed to
keep their balance on our noses God knows, but
they did.
This is the simple life, very, very simple. I
think I have remarked this before. It is difficult
42
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


to get away from the idea. We had marrow for
dinner. It reminded me of a time when Dickie was
three, an innocent baby who never hurt a fly,
or dreamed that animals were slain for man’s table.
When he met her bird-hunting, he used to chase
the cat, saying “ Naughty pussy, why don’t you
eat chops ” ? He thought chops grew somehow.
One awful day he rushed to me, and throwing him-
self into my arms, with blazing eyes and bursting
sobs told me —he had seen Tom —bad, wicked,
cruel Tom, c-cut a p-poor chookie’s head off, and
he wanted Mother to lynch that murderous Tom,
who had laughed at his rage and killed the fowl.
I explained to the poor little angel all about chops
and steaks and chookies, and said the animals did
not mind or feel. It seemed the only solution, and
it quietened him, and for many days he studied
the subject minutely, becoming finally philosophic.
Occasionally on Sundays the station barber, a man
named McNamara, used to cut Dickie’s hair, en-
tertaining him pleasantly during the process.
Shortly after the fowl incident, marrow was served
for the first time in the nursery, “ What is this
stuff, May”? said Dickie, critically inspecting the
contents of his spoon. “ That’s marrow, Master
Dickie,” replied May. He took an interested
mouthful, and looking up enquired pensively,
“ McNamarrow, what cuts my hair”? He was
prepared for anything, dear little cannibal, after
the fowl and the chops.
Oh ! this wind is faging and howling and crack-
43
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


ing its cheeks with a vengeance, empty cane chairs
are sliding, blinds are banging. lam nervous, ut-
terly tired of clinging to my belongings and clutch-
ing at my skirts. This may be, and no doubt is,
healthful, but lam not enjoying myself. Mourn-
fully I think of the past Summers ; the cool, clean
rooms, carefully closed during the hot hours
against dust and glare. How I loathe heat, and
dust, and glare. What a fate that we must be
healed in this way. Not for us the comfort and
pampering, the friends anticipating every wish, the
flowers and dainty service, the luxury of care and
attention of almost any other dangerous illness.
And yet nearly everyone here has been brought
to this by over-exertion and over-anxiety. The
idle and lazy do not get this complaint according
to the Doctor, If you take good care of yourself
and consider yourself first, you will not as a rule
get consumption. It really doesn’t seem fair, that
even in a well earned rest cure there is no peace
for such as we are. We must keep on enduring,
must be independent, must harden ourselves to
glare in Summer, and no fires in Winter, to part-
ing with friends, kisses, babies, enjoyments, pur-
suits, excitements, waists, complexions, even
brains. (Mine is softening). Alas! we are born
to sorrow as the sparks fly upward. I did not go
out this afternoon. The doctor ordered me to drive
up the hill and walk down, and the nurse tried
to make me, but—it is a long worm that has no
turning.
44
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


NIGHT.
Big drops of rain are falling at last. It will be
a nice change to be rained on.
DECEMBER
27th.
Sheets of rain are falling, hills are shrouded in
grey. It rained all night. We have a new lady
patient, who began life here on Christmas day.
She was paralysed first by the heat and the meals,
and quite dumbfounded at sleeping in an open
chalet on a raining night. This morning she is
even more paralysed by the sight of lunatics walk-
ing in rain. We have consoled her with the usual
chestnuts that damp doesn’t give colds, and eating
cures indigestion, but she requires time and ex-
perience to convince her. Though the Doctor puts
meat before the Sanatorium babes, he does not
always insist upon their walking in actual torrents
of rain, if they are nervous, but he recommended
me to go, as it is a good day for exercise. I set
out in a waterproof and rubber shoes in a steady
rain, which never stopped once. Rivers of w T ater
ran to meet me down the hill, and soaked my feet
and ankles —but it was beautifully fresh, and I en-
joyed myself. A canvas cover gave me a slight
shelter for the rest, but I could not get into the
hammock which was strained tight and high, so
I squatted beneath, read a wet newspaper and medi-
tated.
45
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


I took back all my melancholy remarks of yes-
terday on the treatment. It is infinitely better to
be hardened to face every wind that blows, than
to be wrapped up in cotton wool and coddled in
hot rooms from draughts. I love air, but I hope
and firmly intend to keep the fireside. Why, fire-
light is one of the winter joys of life, especially
to a book lover. I shall keep my fires, even if I
have to gaze at them from the verandah. This
Spartan Doctor advocates and practises no fires in
a house, but how impossible to rob others of the
pleasure a fire can give. Imagine Dick, after a
long day’s driving in Winter, returning blue and
chilled to the soul from our bitter plains, to dine
and smoke in a fireless room. No, my dear Violet,
he shall have his fire, and I shall sit beside it
too, sometimes. I shall sleep out at night and
live out by day, but I WILL NOT spend my Win-
ter evenings on the verandah. If I get influenza
I shall stay out, but in bed. I tried to hor-
rify Dick with this fireless tragedy, but he re-
sponded cheerfully that it would mean an immense
saving in firewood. Really Dick is a person who
is capable of being thankful that he “ hasn’t a
harelip.” Of course one should never sit in a
closed up room. If one does have a fire, the win-
dows should be open to make a “nice draught,”
Draughts do not hurt the open air person. How
Aunt Jane’s hair would stand on end at that idea.
Squatting being uncomfortable I came back
early. Only three men were out. I met them on
46
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


the track. Mr. Williams had brown paper tied
with string for leggings, and looked heavenly.
We stood and laughed at each other, four people
in macintoshes, with streams pouring from um-
brellas. I am so sleepy now, and as the rain is
extraordinarily ceaseless I intend to curl up in rugs
and have a quiet afternoon. I notice that when I
am down hearted, the Doctor says that consump-
tion is one of the most curable of diseases, as nearly
every post-mortem shows that many people have
had it in some degree and recovered from it, to
die of something else. Every second person has
it in some degree.
Then, when my spirits are too irrepressible, he
observes solemnly that no matter how well one
feels, one must remember one’s limitations, and
what a very insidious disease it is; no one can say
for certain what turn it will take. He dislikes to
use the word cure for that reason, etc., etc.
NEW YEAR’S
MORNING.
It is ever so early to wish you a happy New
Year, but I have been awake since daybreak. It
is not at all like a morning in January, a heavy
cold mist has descended, shutting the hills quite
out, the foreground trees loom out of a background
of mist, and the little gum bushes in the clearing
are saturated with moisture. Birds innumerable
are melodiously exchanging New Year’s greetings.
47
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


Never was such a place for birds; it would rejoice
the heart of an ornithologist. A swallow flew into
my chalet a minute ago, perched on the bed and
then on the dressing chest, annexed a fly or two,
and sailed out. On cold mornings our bell
ropes are a resting place for half frozen flies,
and the swallows know, and come for breakfast
for themselves and the family. Rabbits too, are
very tame, and feed quietly up to our doors; one
ran through Mrs. Henderson’s chalet yesterday.
They regard us as inoffensive, gunless creatures.
Later on, the day will be hot, but it is a fresh,
beautiful morning spoiled only by pitiful humans.
Two patients are beginning a coughing duet, and
the new one is loudly proclaiming that her clothes
are all damp. Automatically, I reply, “ Damp
does not give you cold, damp does not hurt you,”
and scribble on. I wonder where you are to-day,
and if perhaps snowed up. Temperature is nor-
mal, and I feel very well, but I shall not be allowed
exercise to-day, as I ran up an extra temperature
yesterday, and had to go to bed. I walked too
far, and the By-law is, “ After an upset in tem-
perature, always rest next day.” I feel that all
this information is being thrown away upon you;
you must have simply ripping Phagocytes. Pine-
apple and milk are on the horizon, so adieu for the
present.
Oh, I had a letter from Dick yesterday, telling
me that a parcel containing Hair Dye and Anti-
fat had arrived at home for me, and that he cannot
48
A SANATORIUM.


understand it all, and he wishes to know whether
I ordered these things for myself, or for him, and
he is most exercised in mind over either idea.
Miss King and I are quite weak from laughing,
and it is very bad to laugh, you know. Franks
sent them to the entry address ! !
The Doctor said yesterday again that he re-
garded consumption as a most curable disease, as
nearly everyone had it at some time or other.
Sanatoria were not as successful as they would like,
but they got a large percentage of cures, princi-
pally early cases; but he said he believed there
was almost no stage of the disease at which it might
not be arrested, and he had seen wonderful cases
of recovery of advanced patients. But no one
could prophesy what turn a case might take. Con-
sumption, he said, is decreasing rapidly, and in
thirty years should be extinct. I had no idea of
this. I thought it was increasing.
JANUARY
3rd.
Terribly hot. Driven up on a hill—too hot for
walks; told to loaf on hot days. Sat round mourn-
fully on our cushions or lay on newspapers; many
ants, much thirst, no lemon squashes. Back at
12 temperature rest hour dinner Hot roast
beef, and many flies. I am stating a fact, not a
grievance. Flies cannot be avoided without wire
49
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


doors, and there are no doors in a Sanatorium din-
ing room. I mourn, but do not complain.
3 p.m. Driven up on a hill; more newspaper
beds, more ants, certain sameness about it.
5.30. Back again temperature 100.2 bed.
The butcher brought some ice. God bless the but-
cher. He has a way of forgetting it on red hot
days.
JANUARY
4th.
In bed for temperature. Baking.
JANUARY
sth.
Up, very hot. Hill, etc. 5.30. To bed for
temperature. Induced a fat, healthy nurse to take
her temperature; proved it to be 100.2, same as
myself. Bears out what the Doctor says about
the temperature of a well person rising on hot days,
especially after exercise. Punctuate to suit your-
self ; too hot to write grammar.
JANUARY
6th.
In bed for temperature, also I may add temper;
very nervy. Wrote Dick a horrid letter last night
and couldn’t sleep after it. Had my exam, to-day;
excellent report, sounds all but vanished —extra-
ordinary, Mrs. Henderson has gained 2J lbs.


this week and 3 lbs. last week; heat, bed, hill, not-
withstanding. Sanatorium life is very trying in
such aAvful weather, but there is nothing else for
it, and the nights are cool here. Patients do bet-
ter in Winter, though. I see a new lady being
marched to bed protesting. She says it is a shame,
when there’s nothing the matter. Has not grasped
the idea, and appears never to have seen a ther-
mometer before coming here. I feel sure, when 1
leave I shall find myself enquiring, “ What is
your temperature?” of everyone I meet.
JANUARY
7th.
Dear Violet, —
Whatever sins are on my conscience I haven’t
energy enough to reckon, but I am expiating them.
The whole week has been a record for burning heat.
I have spent part of it in bed for temp., and part
on the hill, where they drive us on awful days.
To-day I am in bed, and as the chalets are unbear-
able (with the sun blazing through, an umbrella
becomes a mere mockery) I am placed outside in
the shade. Two perspiring men lifted me out,
bed and all. I felt very sorry for them. One of
them, seeing my paper, asked how the divorce
case was gitten on, and he moralised on the
situation as he propped my bed level with bricks.
The survivors have been driven to the hill. It
is cooler there, but the ants are very active, and


one gets tired of lying on the hard ground. I
made myself a bed of gum boughs like a bushie
or a blackfellow.
By the way, consumption is very common among
the blacks now; consumption and hydatids. They
keep hordes of dogs, and sleep in wretched little
tents or huts, pasted up with newspapers. I have
often argued with them that the children should
sleep in the open. They agree with me heartily,
but there it ends. Black Annie is still at the station.
Do you remember the talking parrot you bought
from her, that never talked after leaving the camp.
Oh, Violet, I am so hot —so insufferably hot. There
is not one speck of cloud in the brazen sky. How
do missionaries keep up their zeal, and continue
to be so sure of their creeds in torrid zones. I
should be so afraid my opinions might not be the
right ones after all. I even don’t feel qualified to
preach over-eating to all and sundry, though it
has done so much for me. Yet, after only five
weeks of no-breakfasts Gossip set out to convert
the world, without any qualms whatsoever. Now
that is force of character. I have none. I shall
never convert anyone, at least not in the Summer.
I think the no-breakfast man is quite right to in-
veigh against seven meals a day, but when he
suggests that one meal is sufficient and urges
one not to eat for a week unless hungry, I don’t
think the theory will fit consumptives. Consump-
tives have to eat to make up for the waste going
on in the system, I tried it for over a year for
52
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


indigestion and anaemia, and it assisted me on to
the rocks. I have lost all anaemia now, and have
red gums and colour in my face such as I have
not had for years, and my digestion is infinitely
better. This is just my own experience, of course.
I have to go to bed for temperature pretty often
this week, but the heat is extraordinary and affects
the temperature, and I get good drops at night
which is the main thing. I have been three months
at the treatment and know it thoroughly, have
gained over one stone, and now I am aweary,
deadly weary. I intend to keep it up for fully six
months elsewhere. The Doctor says my case is
very favourable, and if all his patients behaved
as I did he would have no worries. He said I
need never be a danger to anyone, but told me not
to kiss the children. “It isn’t for all your life,”
he said afterwards. I can’t settle any longer here
and want to leave, in a very fast motor, and never
stop anywhere. Think of the dust. I am sick
of thinking of things—only a prig can keep per-
fectly healthy apparently. How one lives is more
important than how long one lives. I am tired
of battling. Goodnight,
JANUARY.
After eight appalling days, rain and comforting
greyness again this morning. I find myself still
alive, and not much the worse, but dreadfully
sleepy and tired. From this, (if you have followed


me through the Sanatorium contrarieties) you will
instantly surmise that I am obliged to get up, and
your inference will be correct. By the law of com-
pensation, if I have to go to bed in the middle of
a red hot day when I don’t want to, I am bound
to get up, having no temp., when it is an ideal
morning for curling up for a rest. So that is why
I am on the verandah suppressing yawns and
sneezes alternately, and watching the silly little
baby Bunnies skipping about in the grass, between
showers, with their little white tails cocked up at
such an angle. They evidently think it is still
early morning, and quite safe to be out round the
building. I find I have lost ij lbs. —not so bad,
for I have not eaten as much as usual. Most of
the patients have gained, but a couple have lost
weight in the heat, which has been phenomenal,
the worst on record. Some are in bed to-day, the
rest are out paddling. I am kept in by the rule
before mentioned, I am very keen to get all the
walking possible. Exercise is immensely im-
portant, and we are supposed to gradually increase
it, if well enough, even up to 8 miles in the day,
but always slowly and with proper rests between;
three-quarters of a mile twice a day is my limit
as yet.
Miss King has left us, and is greatly missed.
She is much better, and intends to continue treat-
ment. The poor new girl is coughing away in
her chalet, very homesick and miserable. Two
country doctors had declared that her lungs were


sound, but coming to town for the Exhibition, she
saw a good Doctor, who sent her here. Both lungs
and her throat are affected; the case seems obvious
enough, too. The poor thing expects to be cured
in a month at present, but she will learn here. I
think Sanatorium life fortifies one’s spirit. Con-
sumptives are usually brave, but many seem in-
capable of realizing how serious a fight it is. Two
brothers of this patient have died of phthisis. I
notice a fair amount of “ family history ” here. I
feel very sorry for the new patient, not having for-
gotten my own first night, so tired and fretted
and full of repulsion at the whole thing. As I
lay in bed, the jokes and chatter seemed inane and
tiresome, and when suddenly a lohd phonograph
brayed out, it really was the last straw. lam now
not only reconciled to the instrument, but com-
paratively attached to it. It performs every even-
ing for a quarter of an hour, and is our only re-
laxation. Phonographs and hot water tins on cold
nights are the only frivolities that are not bad for
one, as far as I can recollect. lam surprised, I
must say, at the hot water tins. We are not al-
lowed to play cards. How on earth I shall ever
do anything so exciting as move, I cannot imagine.
It is fortunate that things are now prosperous,
because this Doctor has infected me with the germ
of laziness. It seems a dream that I was ever a
woman of many parts, who rode and drove, played
and painted (walls sometimes), raised children and
chickens, cooked dinners in emergencies, toiled at
55
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


flower beds, made clothes for the three, and wres-
tled with the Australian accent. I wonder has
Dickie developed a twang. lam writing for flower
seeds for early sowing now. Do you remember
the lovely shady nooks under the willows by the
creek, where we used to read whole mornings last
Summer? We have so many big shade trees, and
I am glad they are deciduous and let the sun in
in Winter; so many people prefer evergreens for
a garden. I don’t. I love the changes. The
bare time is very short and quite compensated for
by the lovely pale green budding of Spring, and
the glorious reds and yellows of Autumn. Our
Autumn garden is beautiful, though it keeps the
gardener busy sweeping up leaves for weeks and
weeks. I daresay he longs for evergreens.
JANUARY.
I have had my walks increased in length, and
have got this morning to the fourth resting place
feeling very proud and also a little tired. It is fine
to rest in a hammock, swung by the wind, with a
strong gale bending and twisting the gum sap-
lings, and shaking rain drops down on one. It
is still very dark and stormy looking, and I am cer-
tain to be rained on presently, but I have a mac-
intosh and no hat, and feel joyfully indifferent.
The magpies are carolling with glorious ecstasy,
and everything has a clean, well-washed look, the
trees particularly bright and green against a wild,
56
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


dark, blue-grey, lowering sky. Yes, it is a very
fine treatment, take it on the whole. That is If
you love trees and skies and rain drops, and wild
breezes blowing. But if you shut your windows
and bolt your doors at night, and sit in a house
all day and keep out of draughts, the Lord help
you. Not you, you know, you were always an
open air girl. Do you remember how we climbed
Giotto’s tower together ? And how often you have
walked me into breathlessness, and how naughty
you were to do it for ‘ ‘ over exertion is worse than
bad air.” Chief San-aphorism. I dream in aphor-
isms now, and can produce a chestnut to suit any
emergency at a moment’s notice.
Rest is the key-note here, and I am sure it is
the point to emphasize. Over strain broke me
down, not want of fresh air, for I have always re-
velled in it. Exercise must be regulated by tem-
perature and condition; all movements must be
slow, one must never get any hustle on until the
cure is established, and not then either.
A Sanatorium may not cure, but it teaches the
patient how to live. Aphorism H. No one seems
exempt from the disease unless he keeps in health
and condition, old as well as young are liable to
contract it. We used to hold that it was hereditary
and not infectious; now we know it be contagious,
but not hereditary. Ignorance of the microbe
often accounted for its running in families, but
now no careful consumptive need be a danger to
anyone. But, dear me, what is the use of talking.
57
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


How many people will live as they ought? And
yet alas it is so. Priggish boring people are the
ones who are fond of living on a system. How-
ever, it is not priggish to protect people from con-
tagion ; cold baths and open windows are only
priggish, if one talks about them to a boring ex-
tent. Then no doubt as Bagshott would say, “ A
diet of pearls is extremely boring to the swine.”
I have read a good deal during my term here, to-
day took out some essays of my very dear
Matthew Arnold, to whom I shall ever be faithful.
Writing of poor Keats and Maurice de Guerin,
who both died of consumption, Matthew remarks
on the influence on them of their mysterious
malady; the temperament is devouring, he says,
and uses up vital force too hard. In 1839, Maurice
de Guerin writes in his journal, “ I pass my life
within my bed curtains and wait patiently enough,
thanks to Caro’s goodness, books and dreams for
the recovery which the sunshine is to bring with
it.” Poor fellow, he died three months later —
naturally. I have had a letter from Miss King,
saying that she has broken off her engagement.
Poor Miss King.
FEBRUARY.
I leave in two days. Now that the time ap-
proaches,! feel many nervous qualms as to what
will happen, whether I shall have sufficient strength
of will to resist the baleful influence of friends,
58
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


and the seductions of amusement and over-excite-
ment, whether I shall contract a cold or pick up a
germ. Pitfalls wait on every side in the future. I
really am wonderfully well, but symptoms of brain-
softening are developing—inability to fix my mind
on anything other than pulse, temp., meals, and
rest hours. Phagocytes, Opsonic Index, Tubercu-
lin, Blood resistance —the ideas drift in and out of
my stupid head as Mr. Bunny explains them with
untiring perseverance and little result. My world
seems bounded by the Sanatorium hills. I tremble
at the thought of going forth into the wide reckless
world without the Doctor to direct my steps from the
time I open my eyes at dawn until I shut them again
at night, to read me daily little sermons on “going
slow,” to remind me that “attention to detail is the
secret of success.” “Little Indiscretions can undo
in one day the work of months. We find, etc.” How
well I know it, dear Doctor, and what alarm now
fills my soul at the thought, Violet, of my inveterate
tendency to those same little indiscretions. Here, in
these conventual precincts I am restrained, guarded,
protected, preserved, and I feel like adding pickled,
to complete that, but honesty compels me to state
that my complexion is better than it has been for
years, thanks to myself, though, not to the Doctor.
Open air does not hurt the skin if one repairs dam-
ages with oatmeal and cream.
Still, I am not as frightened as Mr. Bunny is. He
has been here five months, and is perfectly well, but
cannot make up his mind to leave. In a Sanatorium


training nothing is kept from the patient. His con-
dition is exactly explained to him, and his limita-
tions, and he becomes accustomed to facts, and as
he improves takes on hopefulness and tranquility.
But Mr. Bunny is the exception to this rule. His
nerve is quite gone. In vain has the Doctor pointed
out how well he is, that he was never bad, that his
temperature is that of a quite healthy person, that
he should make room for a sick man, that this is now
no place for him. Mr. Bunny hugs his chains, and
refuses to be comforted. I am afraid we do tease him
a little, he is so fat and strong looking that a
microbe would have a bad time on him. A little
Christian Science would do Mr. Bunny worlds of
good.
I wrote last week to my own Doctor to remind him
that my term of imprisonment was up. He replied
that Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego couldn’t
hold a candle to me and he released me with plea-
sure, so that this is the last Sanatorium letter you
will receive. I came in a washed-out wreck, and go
out blooming, quite ten years younger to look at. I
shall always hold a brief for the .San. treatment for
benefits received. The Doctor is genuine and
straightforward, and practises what he preaches,
though somewhat obsessed by it. lam going to
continue treatment, observing rules of rest, food,
open air and exercise; I place these in the same
order of importance as he does. One has to live the
simple life, avoid crowded places, and keep up
strength and vitality by every possible means until


the microbe is beaten. Must always rest when tired,
power of resistance is low when tired. There is
plenty of self-control in the scheme, although break-
fasts are included. In our case they add to the self-
control, so Gossip should excuse them. I have had
no medicine whatever since coming here, with the
exception of one solitary pill. I hate medicine and
never want to be dosed if I can help it, and never
am by my doctors. No one with any backbone to
speak of would complain seriously of the austerities
of a Sanatorium, though of course, if not improv-
ing one might hardly feel them worth while.
I feel sorry to leave some others behind who are
not so well as I am, and I am sorry to leave the
birds, but it will be nice to stretch my own wings
just a little after this.
JANUARY,
1909.
You ask whether lam still doing treatment. No,
my six months are long past. I observe the spirit,
but not the letter now, and have kept remarkably
well for a year. I walk a good deal and ride a little,
and have kept up my full weight until lately with
three meals and plenty of milk—-and afternoon tea?
certainly. I live in faith, and do not worry or oven-
exert —at least, not often. Dickie and Rosemary
sleep out doors in all weathers, and are rosy as
apples. None of us caught colds this winter. Even
the baby boy slept out; he is a fine three-year-old,


so sturdy. Dickie is much stronger. He loves
camping out, and his views on ventilation are ahead
of Noah’s. He was immensely exercised in his little
mind when I read the description of the Ark.
“Fancy three storeys high, Mother, and only one
window, and all the animals, Mother ! But when I
got to the ten months of flood and then “And it
came to pass at the end of 40 days that Noah opened
the window in the Ark which he had made —”
“ Mother ! ! ! he had the one window shut all the
time!” he exclaimed in horror. It’s just as well
for me, that I gave them the Bible after Matthew
Arnold from the beginning or where should I be at
these times ? I want them to have the everlasting
truths on a sure foundation, not a Sunday-school
one. Dick smokes and confines himself to setting
an example. I have a secret conviction that they
learn more about Righteousness tending to life from
his silence than from my feeble attempts at teach-
ing, but it wouldn’t be reasonable to expect me to
supply both the teaching and the example, and Dick
is very reasonable.
Have you read Antonio Fogazarro’s “The
Saint”? Isn’t the Time Spirit wonderful! How
much more interesting real things are than mir-
acles ! I wish they would hasten the re-adjusting
process, and give the poor world a modern religion.
It wants it so badly for its nerves. “ Man is a reli-
gious animal.” I read some more of Gossip lately.
His religion is better than his diet. Now, he rather
favours forty-day fasts. This shows how one must
62
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


guard against systems. Two years ago he abhorred
Vegetarians —now he lunches best on nuts and oat-
meal porridge, and is trying to get down to one meal
a day. He is leaving off salt, sugar, tea, cocoa and
coffee, poor dear. He says there is only one disease,
over-eating; and one cure, fasting. I believe he is
right in many cases, but not in mine. Personally,
I am attracted to vegetarianism and fasting, but eat-
ing continues to suit me so dreadfully, and I haven’t
much rheumatism now. Lately I have been grow-
ing careless and lost a few lbs., but my doctor re-
ports that there is nothing active going on, and con-
siders me very satisfactory. Analysed, no microbes.
I have been doing a good deal lately, and it has
been hot, and I have eaten less, and have had a dull
time. Mem.: To eat more, and go for a change of
scene. I think the mind influences the health of the
body much more than diet. Mental and moral thera-
peutics are being studied now-a-days. I can follow
those ideas. I realise that bad temper is as destruc-
tive a vice as drinking, and to hate people is very
debilitating, as I have found. I can understand
mental healing through faith, but I hate to be told
that pain is non-existent, and matter is non-existent
and so on. It gives me a headache. It seems to me
that body and mind are bound up in one another,
and must each be studied in cases of real illness.
Some doctors actually suggest diseases to their
nervous patients, and how many cases are purely
mental and could be healed in the same way, who
can tell ? lam inclined to think that the mind heal-
63
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


ing quack who suggests a cure is ahead of the doc-
tor who suggests a possible disease. As for faith—
I have not a shadow of doubt faith assists the effi-
cacy of any treatment. Breakfasts eaten in faith
benefit me while they would probably kill Gossip in
his state of mind. And it is madness to think any-
thing but health; but these views do not make me
a Christian Scientist. This is why Gossip always
feels so ill after a cigar or a whisky, "His unconscious
mind expects to be so. I know vaguely that I am ar-
guing in a circle, but what other way can a woman
argue, who hasn’t had time to study Herbert Spen-
cer as Gossip so earnestly recommends her to do to
balance her mind and form her opinions. I have
never been able to do either of these things. To
dogmatise on hygiene is exceedingly rash. It must
be dreadful to have to live up to a system and to be
obliged to keep well to prove it (especially on a diet
of uncooked cereals and nuts.)* In the black and
awful days of nervous dyspepsia, what can one do
to rise above its wretched influence ? Religion seems
to be the only hope, and yet I hafe seen religion and
dyspepsia combined into an appallingly dreary reT
suit. Perhaps it was the wrong kind of religion—
not enough open air and exercise about it! I think
• NOTE.—I understand from Gossip that there are 15 organs
of the human body which are an improvement on the
anthropoid ape. If we return, as some people want us
to, to the habits of our ancestors, what a waste of good
improvements 1
64
LETTERS FROM A SANATORIUM.


it is Metchnikoff who says that all the unsatisfied
longings of man’s soul are due to the belated larger
intestine —once rid of that we can aspire to the
content of the oxen. I should love to hear Carlyle
on this !
MAY, 1909.
I am doing a few days’ rest in bed to get rid of a
cold, and have the most delightful book to tell you
of—“ Principles of Western Civilisation,” by Ben-
jamin Kidd. I should like Gossip to give it to his
readers for a change. It is full of long words, and
makes me feel, too, very like one of Maeterlinck’s
bees, but with a difference interesting and inspir
ing. He says that self-denial, the sacrifice of the
Present to the Future, is the keynote of Evolution,
as well as of Christianity. Self-control is the Pagan
ideal; in spite of its nobility, it reduces all virtue
to a ‘‘majestic egoism” an “equi-librium” of the
intellect, centred in self. The dear nice Pagans—
I love them; but the world is not going back to a
religion of self-interest, however enlightened. It
has ‘‘dreamed a higher dream,” it cannot retro-
grade, To continue Kidd. The Christian ideal
was an immense* evolutionary advance, although
* Makes us sacrifice ourselves for future people, which is all
that is wanted by Nature—most unintellectual (for us).


when it arrived at temporal power, it shut the hu-
man mind up, first in a Roman Catholic, and then
in a Puritanical tyranny. This is what happens
when religion and politics are mixed. Perfectly
well-meaning people mostly perpetrated great cruel-
ties quite conscientiously. It is a startling fact,
Kidd says, that the principles of intellectual, of
religious and of political tolerance, can only be
held in the last resort as a conviction of the religious
consciousness.
“To the emancipated intellect which has com-
pletely divested itself of the bitterness engendered
in the protracted struggle maintained against
science, through the ecclesiastical era in Western
History, no conclusion appears to be more clearly
involved in the modern evolutionary hypothesis that
that in the absence of this condition, there is not to
be discovered any cause inherent in the intellect
itself, which could prevent human activities from
being again shut up in the tyrannies of interests de-
fined within the limits of political consciousness.
“ There is not, he says, and never can be, a purely
intellectual sanction for the submission of the indi-
vidual to a world process in which he has absolutely
no interest.” We return, in short, quickly and in-
evitably under such standards to schemes like the
“scientific breeding of the human race” (advocated
by Gossip*) “the inner meaning and mark of which
* This subject Is too difficult for me,


is simply the ascendancy of the Present in the Evo-
lutionary process,” that is to say, a back number.
Gossip may be assisting a new Inquisition into the
world.
I think it is a provision of nature that the ordin-
ary person continues unintellectual. I can imagine
an intellectual tyranny worse than the Inquisition.
People scientifically born, bathed, brought up,
scientifically married when fit, and extinguished
when unfit. I can see already anchorites of the faith,
dieting on dried pease and cold water, fasting forty
days without a sup, fireless, hygienically clothed,
logical, unpoetical, masticating creatures. Dear
me, I have just discovered the Evolutionary signi-
ficance of Christian Scientists —to keep these diet-
ing, system-crazy people down. lam reconciled to
them now.
This boiling down of Kidd begins to fatigue me,
but I do want to relieve my mind, and Dick has
escaped to the back station from it. You see how
it would be if all the women took suddenly to Her-
bert Spencer, and worse still did all the men read
about their interiors and their symptoms in the Aus-
tralian Medical Book as the no-breakfast man wants
them to. Kidd regards Spencer as an intellectual
giant, who nevertheless missed the point, so occu-
pied was he with the emancipation of the Present
from the Past, to the exclusion of the greater idea
that in all development “through measureless
epochs it is the shadow of the Infinite future that
has continually rested upon the Present, growing


and deepening as the upward process has con-
tinued.”
Herbert Spencer’s explanation of the idea of sac-
rifice ‘‘that projects itself with increasing insistence
through all the creeds of humanity” as a survival
from cannibal ancestors who delighted in witnessing
tortures, Kidd regards as ‘‘extraordinarily superfi-
cial” in the light of the meaning of the evolution-
ary process.
Renan, too, he says, ‘‘had so little perception of
the meaning of the great process of life, that he had
no clearer message to deliver than that religious
beliefs are surviving phenomena, destined to die
slowly out, undermined by primary instruction.”
Never. “The hosts of the great army of progress
stand silent, scornful, before the professors who
know only the materialistic interpretation of his-
tory. It is an army that moves not, restive, sullen,
it waits for a re-statement of its faith in other
terms.” I think it is not just a craving for the im-
mortality of our egoisms. If that had to be aban-
doned, more than ever should we need a religion of
self-sacrifice. Think how the synthetic philosophy
dried Spencer up. Think of our nerves I Ido hope
that all the ladies who attack Haeckel and Spencer
will balance their minds with Kant and Kidd, and
arrive at a net result, satisfying to themselves, and
their husbands.
It is very difficult for me to express myself clearly
or to think connectedly on serious subjects. You
see, I eat so much. Ido so wish I could get along


on one meal a day, and give up eating killed ani-
mals, but twice I have tried under-eating with an
interval of ten years between the experiments, which
each resulted in a break-down. I scientifically
starved my first baby nearly to death, but the others
benefitted by his experience. (I should like to shut
Gossip up with a baby for a few weeks.) Dick says
that young lambs must have simply quantities to
eat if they are to develop well. This is his contri-
bution to the discussion. I have had only one ex-
perience of long fasting people. Our book-keeper
suddenly abandoned the table, saying that he was
better without meals, but at the end of one week he
went mad. We put him to bed and fed him, and
while Dick was away distractedly reading the medi-
cal book for madness, and I was sitting alone with
him, putting eau-de-cologne on his head and com-
forting him, he seized my wrist and hissed, “Where
do you want to go ? Heaven or Hell ? Quick.” I
temporised and escaped, but he afterwards shot him-
self, poor fellow. So now I am rather prejudiced
about long fasting, though no doubt it can be done,
and the practice would come in handy for ship-
wrecks, but the only time I was ship-wrecked we had
plenty to eat. We do own a medical book, you see,
but it is 50 years old, and doesn’t do us much harm.
When our hut cook took twelve fits on Christmas
Day, the present book-keeper rushed to me and de-
manded to hear the treatment for fits. I read the
book aloud. It recommended bleeding, and a hot
bath, but as there was nothing portable nearly large


enough to contain Delany, who is 6ft. ain., and very
fat, Mr. Roberts implored for further information,
and sneered disgustedly when I read that the next
thing to do was for all to unite in prayer. I think
it is a very nice book—-the author recommends open
air treatment for consumption, too, which is very
advanced. We get along very well here with castor
oil and whiskey and embrocation. Whiskey for the
convalescents after sprees. Open air huts are by
no means popular, men like them hermetically
sealed to sleep in, with bags stuffed into the venti-
lators and a fire on.*
I think I am most inclined to dogmatise upon the
subject of open-air sleeping. It is so exhilarating,
so gloriously refreshing to sleep under the stars,
“ the unwasted stars that pass in their old glory,”
that even Dick talks poetry about it. And to walk
among pines in a drizzling rain is another of the
nicest experiences here below (with a rain-proof coat
of course). We have the pines, but seldom the
rain.
Good-bye. Do hurry up and come out while lam
so well. One never knows what influenza waits
round the corner, but I am not going to worry.
Cowards die many times before their deaths.
* Let ns hear the conclusion of the whole matter. A person
with a delicate constitution will probably remain delicate,
chase he never so many systems —and vice-versa. Of many
systems there is no end.


ADIEU.
P.S.— July, 1910. —Still alive. Lung perfectly
clear (after influenza, and plenty of overwork, too.)
The three children are splendid. Thank Heaven
for their four healthy grand parents. Colds and
coughs are almost unknown in my house now.
