

LETTERS
EMBODYING
SUGGESTIONS
FOR A
VOLUNTEER FORCE
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES,
BY
SIR E. STRICKLAND, K.C.B.,
COMMISSARY-GENERAL, BRITISH ARMY.
SYDNEY: THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1883.
4a 144—83




LETTERS
EMBODYING
SUGGESTIONS
FOR A
VOLUNTEER FORCE
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES,
BY
SIR E. STRICKLAND, K.C.B.,
COMMISSARY-GENERAL, BRITISH ARMY.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1883.
4 a 144 —83




VOLUNTEER NAVAL ARTILLERY.
. To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir,
It was with much pleasure that I learned by your
paper of the 29th ultimo that a meeting had been held
at the Town Hall in this city for the purpose of
organizing a Volunteer Force, to he called the Volunteer
Naval Artillery of New South Wales. It were bettter,
perhaps, that, taking the Honorable Artillery Company
of London as a model, the Volunteer Force now in embryo
here had been named the “ Volunteer Artillery of
Sydney. Later on it might aspire to a Captain-General
and Colonel being appointed to command it in the person
of a member of the Eoyal Family, the Prince of Wales
holding now that rank in the Honorable Artillery Com-
pany of London.
But it is not alone in these smaller details that I
am anxious to see the Home institution copied here. I
deem it highly advisable that the system of training and
instruction in force in London should he adopted here,
as also the system of internal economy, organization,
and discipline.
When it is recollected that the Honorable Artillery
Company of London is not only the oldest Volunteer
Corps in Europe, but claims also to be the most perfect
in England, public opinion will, I trust, support me in
holding it up here for imitation. In years gone by,
when the grand Volunteer Force which now exists in
England was in its infancy, the admirable example
always shown by the Honorable Artillery Company of
London served a very good purpose.
A


For the defence of our harbour a well-trained naval
artillery corps must always he of great value. It
becomes, then, a question of national importance that
this germ of a Yolunteer institution, now nascent in our
amidst, should be encouraged and cherished and assisted
by those in place and power, and that money aid should
be liberally conceded to it for instruction purposes.
At the first creation of the Volunteer Force at Home
many years ago it was well nigh starved by the false
economy of the War Office. In this and other respects
the force had for many years a hard struggle for
existence. Fortunately, able, competent, and wealthy
men placed themselves at the head of the movement,
and nobly tiding it over all difficulties, succeeded in
landing the Volunteer Force in the high position which it
now holds. It numbers 200,000; it is composed of light
horse-mounted rifles, engineers, a large force of artillery,
and a grand army of riflemen. The once much-despised
Volunteer Force in England is now a national institution
of which the nation is proud, and it is now counted upon
as a highly valuable adjunct to the defensive force of
the country, some Volunteer Corps having tendered
their services for the Egyptian campaign.
I fail to see any reason why a similar success should
not crown similar efforts here, always provided that the
movement be supported as it deserves to be.
To the attainment of this desirable success the organ-
ization and composition of the Honorable Artillery
Company of London may be made to serve as an excel-
lent example, well worthy of imitation.
The organization is that which is in force in every
Volunteer Corps in Great Britain, and this would need
far more explanation than could be given in a brief


letter, and it can always be found in the many books
printed on the subject, but the composition may need
some explanation to the uninitiated in this Colony. I
will therefore explain that the force is composed of
artillery, light cavalry, and infantry, and is essentially
self-supporting and unpaid. Arms, accoutrements, and
equipments are found by the Government, also a neces-
sary staff of instructors in drill, gunnery, musketry, &c.
The Honorable Artillery Company of London yields
to no corps in the realm for smartness and fitness on
parade; in its gunnery and musketry it always holds a
high score, and no one ever hesitates to rely upon its
perfect efficiency if ever called upon to serve in the
field.
Such is the model which I venture to express a strong
hope may be adopted by the Volunteer Naval Artillery
of New South Wales in spirit. I have had very consi-
derable experience of Volunteers in many parts of the
world, and in active service in the field.
I therefore presume to claim some knowledge of them,
and in this spirit throw out the suggestion that the
Volunteer Corps of this Colony, now in its infancy, may
be nursed and matured with a liberal hand by the Govern-
ment, and moulded into such a shape from its initiation
that it may serve as a nucleus for other Volunteer Corps—
of artillery (mounted), infantry, and riflemen—through-
out the Colony, each to be governed and supported on
its own basis.
Such corps might easily be formed at a cost but very
trifling to the State, and it would be impossible to exag-
gerate the infinite good service which they might render
in return should it ever occur that we were forced to
defend our hearths and our homes; and allow me to


remark, par parenthese, that now-a-days this is an emer-
gency against which in all prudence we should always
he well prepared.
All the requisite raw material is available on the spot.
The Australian war-horse is the best in the world, and
the Australian youth rides him to perfection. What I
most anxiously desire to see is a judicious utilization of
these two good and sterling elements. I do earnestly
desire to see arms put into the hands of the Australian
youth, and knowledge imparted to them as to their use.
Once this knowledge is acquired, I dare assert that very
little training will make available, within the Colony, a
force of mounted infantry second to none in existence.
The early initiative difficulties for the accomplishment
of such a scheme would doubtless be considerable, but,
if combated in a proper spirit and by competent men,
all are superable, and the Volunteer Corps now being
inaugurated may be easily made to serve as a useful and
accessible nucleus or head-quarters for a Volunteer Rifle
Corps, mounted and infantry, for the Colony of New
South Wales.
E. STRICKLAND.
Sydney, December Ist, 1882.


VOLUNTEER NAVAL ARTILLERY.—II.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir,
Accept, I beg of yon, my best thanks for your
obliging insertion of my letter No. 1 in the Herald of
December 6, and of replies thereto.
The movement thus fairly launched on the troubled
sea of public opinion, mainly through your good offices,
will, I trust, hereafter prove worthy of such high aid.
Not unnaturally, Mr. W. D. C. Williams advocates
an adherence to the original idea, when the institution
of the New' South Wales Artillery Corps w r as first
mooted, i.e., that it should be a naval corps of artillery
exclusively, and modelled on the admirable Royal Naval
Volunteer Corps of England, originated, nursed, and
brought to a high state of perfection by Sir Thomas
Brassey.
This advocacy makes no material difference as to
the main objects in view by all concerned, which
essentially is, the organization of a Volunteer movement
of all arms throughout the Colony available for, and
fitted for, services of defence.
Seniority must always be conceded to the New South
Wales Naval Volunteer Artillery, because it has been
the first in the field, and the first to step boldly to the front,
and, proclaiming its intentions, solicit State aid, and court
the good opinion and encouragement of the public.
So far the public response has not been unfavourable,
and I would once more seek the good offices of your
columns clearly to explain the grounds upon which I
have so largely elasticed the original idea of a Naval
Volunteer Corps.


Peeling confident, as I do, of the vast advantages td
be derived by the State and by the individual from the
organization of two good corps—one of infantry riflemen
and the other, of mounted riflemen —it at once occurred
to me, not only that these two corps could always
with increased advantage in the field when working
harmoniously together, and well known to each other
ab initio , hut that it would he in every way expedient
that each corps should he so brought up from its infancy
as a matter of economy and efficiency; the former
because the same administrative machinery requisite for
the maintenance of one small corps could easily be made
to serve all administrative requirements of other corps
—at all events until each corps grew strong enough to
stand alone, with clear prospects of soon being able to
march along with all others imbued with a military
spirit, and possessing a military cohesion, which means
strength. Once arrived at this point, each corps,
whether of naval artillery, of mounted, or of infantry
riflemen, should then become self-supporting, adminis-
tratively and otherwise, except as regards instructors,
and the supply of arms, accoutrements, equipments, and
ammunition.
But all these latter should reach each corps from one
administrative centre, and from this recognized centre
should emanate all necessary administrative orders and
instructions; and this centre could always act usefully,
as the mouthpiece of the Volunteers of New South
Wales, before the authorities for the time being and the
public at large.
On the score of efficiency I have expanded the original
idea of our corps, not only because we have had ample
practical proof in recent warfare, how admirably naval
artillery can be made to work with mounted infantry


and riflemen, but also, because I could not be blind to,
tlie fact that if ever it became necessary to employ the
Naval Volunteer Artillery to repel an attack from an
invading force, the very same cause must make it neces-
sary to the safety of the Colony to have a land force
ready to co-operate with any sea force employed, to man
our forts and our shores with riflemen, or to mass them
together, if need be, in the interior of the country, there
to hang on the flanks of an invading army, and destroy
the bridges and the roads, and burn the whole country
around him, thus making starvation certain to any
enemy whose line of communication was threatened or
cut. In common with every fellow-colonist, I pray that
such a day may never arrive, nevertheless, I venture to
assert that it would be unwise, and in a high degree
imprudent, to remain as we are now remaining, very
much unprepared for it and without any machinery
existent by which a defensive force could be collected
together. In the name of prudence, then, Ido urge the
organization of a defensive force and the creation of the
administrative centre of which I have spoken. That
such a course recommends itself on the score of economy
and efficiency I hope I have made clear; and Ido hope
also that Mr. W. D. C. Williams and the members of
the New South Wales Naval Volunteer Artillery will
be ready to admit that the serviceableness of their corps
will be materially improved by the joint creations and
co-operative action which I have sketched out. Each
corps may continue to progress and to gain strength in
its own interests without clashing in the slightest degree
with any other corps, and the public will doubtless see
arise among them a wholesome spirit of rivalry and
emulation, and this cannot fail to work good in the cause
I have so strongly recommended, guided always by past
experiences and what I believe to be local requirements.


In a future letter, for which I shall again seek kind-
ness at your hands, I will enter upon the subjects of the
general organization of a Volunteer Corps throughout the
Colony, and of the detail of its component corps.
This is too large a subject to he entered upon in this
letter, especially as it would he discourteous of me to
close it without reference to the admirable letter of
“ Cavalry.”
Methinks some old war-horse has been aroused, and
has already heard sounded in his imagination a tocsin of
invasion, to repel which cavalry are an imperative neces-
sity. I gratefully accept “ Cavalry’s” recognition of
much that I have written, and I would beg of him again
to wake up his imagination in so far that he may realize,
or at least idealize to himself, the great change which
even a little military training assuredly will produce, not
only in the train of thought, now habitual to young
Australians, hut also in their very hearing, in their very
gait and comportment; and in their ways, manners, and
modes of amusement; the rifle will rival the stockwhip.
Such has invariably been the result of military train-
ing to the youth of every country, of every nation.
Assuredly there can occur no difficulty in grafting a
similar military spirit upon the youth of this grand
country.
I am, &c.,
EDWD. STRICKLAND.
December 13th, 1882.


ORGANIZATION OR VOLUNTEER CORPS.
III.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir
Please accept grateful thanks for having kindly
found in the columns of your paper space for my letter
No. 11. According to promise, I venture again to tres-
pass on your kindness. Absence and “ urgent private
affairs,” two well-known military terms, have made it
impossible for me at an earlier date to enter upon this
my third letter.
Its general purport shall he the organization of "V olun-
teer Corps throughout the Colony, giving some detail of
their component parts and of their cost.
I would propose to divide the Colony into military
districts, as European countries are, including Great
Britain and Ireland ; and at the head of each district I
would place a military commandant with a requisite
staff of instructors, to he calculated upon the area of his
district, the number of Volunteers enrolled, and local
circumstances. In each district there should he erected
a depot of arms in a defensible position, and within each
depht should he placed a supply of rifles and sabres and
a gymnasium; also sufficient appliances to keep all
weapons in order, as well as to learn and study up all
regarding their use, their manufacture, their preserva-
tion generally.
A vast amount of information can he gained on these
subjects, not alone from the multiplicity of printed
matter easily obtainable thereon at very moderate prices,
but also by obtaining from the records at Home copies
of all rules and regulations promulgated regarding
niusketry instruction and practice, and copies of the
statistics of rifle-shooting in the British Army, which


are published every year. These valuable statistical
tables can always be made to serve as proofs of the
excellence attainable in rifle shooting, also as examples
to be followed by Australian riflemen.
Beyond all doubt the authorities at Home would hail
with delight, the addition of a column in rifle statistics
indicative of Australia’s skill in the use of the rifle, the
very king of weapons. And dare anyone advance any
good reason why the Australians should not obtain in
due course, under the influence of proper training and
practice at their own homes, as high a standard of merit
for rifle shooting as for cricket, competing in each case
against the most skilled men of old England. As
marksmen of old, the Anglo-Saxon race won their
greatest victories. The Australians have already in
many manly sports —rowing, riding, running, cricket —
proved themselves to be worthy descendants of their
ancestors, who won the battle of Hastings by the cross-
bow. It is with pity and regret that I see so little
importance attached here to training with the rifle, the
modern improvement on the cross-bow. The rifle is
not even deemed worthy of a fitting and complete rifle
range at the very capital of the Colony, and amid all
the prosperity being showered upon us, a public boast is
made that a few paltry hundreds are devoted to prizes
at the miserable Paddington Rifle Range, whilst fully
an equal amount is wasted by defective administration.
It is not by such false economy that riflemen are to be
made anywhere, and least of all in Australia, where
time is money to every man.
Having established in each district the necessary staff
and machinery to enable the youth belonging thereto
to enter at once upon the study of the rifle and its use,
it should then be the duty of the commandant, guided


by the electoral lists, to urge, even personally if neces-
sary, the attendance of all the electors np to a certain
age at the head-quarters for instruction and practice on
a fixed number of days in each month or quarter.
The attendance should be carefully registered in each
district, and even a cursory study of these records ought
always to afford means justly to gauge the zeal and
efficiency of every commandant. It would be well, of
course, to make a beginning of such a scheme as I have
roughly sketched out in the counties bordering on the
sea. The scheme will easily take root further inland
if ever rifle shooting is destined really to become an
Australian institution, as are cricket and boating already,
or if ever a mounted rifle corps is to be formed within
this Colony.
Dividing now the counties of New South Wales
bordering on the sea into military districts, I will then
endeavour to make a fairly approximate estimate of the
annual cost (1) of the initiative outlay necessary to
establish such head-quarters; (2) of the sum required to
meet the requisite expenditure of each depot or head-
quarter, as regards personnel and material.
Ist. Divide the country from the borders of Queens-
land to Port Hunter into two military districts, having
two head-quarters, viz., (a) Port Macquarie, (&) Clarence
Diver.
2nd. Northumberland, Cumberland, and Camden
should be made to constitute one military district, with
one head-quarters, Sydney, and three sub-stations, viz.,
{a) Newcastle, {b) Hawkesbury, and (c) Wollongong.
This is the most important country to defend, and there-
fore specially provided for.
3rd. The counties of St. Vincent, Dampier, and Auck-
land might be made to form the fourth military district,


with head-quarters at Twofold Bay, and one sub-station
at Bateman’s Bay or Jervis Bay. To each of the head-
quarters I would give a staff and a plant or appliances
as follows : —Pay and allowance: One field-officer, com-
mandant, £BOO per annum; one musketry instructor,
£500; one instructor of gymnastics, £500; three clerks,
£l5O a year each, £450; three confidential men as
labourers, storekeepers, markers, &c., £IOO a year each,
£300; total expenditure for pay and allowances, £2,550.
Cost of plant: Purchase of land and erection of build-
ings (say) £10,000; hire of range and fitting up of it,
(say) for ten years, £1,000; cost of arms, accoutrements,
and equipments (say) 1,000 men at each head-quarters, at
£4 per man, £4,000; total, £15,000. Add 7 per cent,
on £15,000 to cover cost of fair wear and tear, losses and
repairs each year, £1,050; total expenditure for plant or
appliances, £16,050. Thus we arrive at a sum of £2,550
for the personnel of each head-quarters every year, and
an outlay of £16,050 for the plant or requisite material’
including cost of maintenance. Multiply this by 4,
and for the four head-quarter stations of which I have
spoken, we have as result:—Total expenditure for pay,
per annum, £10,200; total expenditure for plant, £64,200;
total for four head-quarters, £74,400 in the first year—
to be reduced to an annual expenditure of £10,200 a
year for pay and allowances, and (say) £1,050, represent-
ing the 7 per cent, above explained. Add to the above,
for four sub-stations already spoken of—three-quarters
of the total amounts set down for the four head-quarters,
and the total outlay necessary to inaugurate and place
and maintain in working order the scheme under notice
along the coast of New South Wales maybe thus summed
up:—Total expenditure requisite for four head-quarters
as explained, for first year, £74,400; add for four sub-
stations at three-quarters the aboveestimate (say) £55,800;


grand total, £130,200; and we arrive at a fairly approxi-
mate estimate of the first year of expenditure under a
system of reform which I advocate. This amount will
he diminished in the second and succeeding years by the
amount of inaugural expenses, and will he thus reduced to
a very small amount, easily to he met by improved
application of actual authorized expenditure under a
system of reform. At first sight, however, these large
figures cannot fail to he suggestive of a heavy expen-
diture in the cause of reform. But it must not he lost
sight of that the very completion of the reforms suggested
involves the accomplishment of a large economy in the
expenditure now incurred annually, I may say perpetually,
for military purposes.
This economy may, I quite believe, he brought about
with great benefit to the Colony and to the taxpayers by
a total remodelling of the whole of the colonial force of
all arms on a simple intelligible footing.
I propose that it he composed of two elements only,
viz.:—
1. A permanent force of artillery, modelled on the Royal
Artillery Force of the Mother Country. The only fault to
he found with the present artillery force of the Colony
is that it is not sufficiently numerous, and money is too
grudgingly spent upon it. This latter is easily traceable to
alack of administrative experience. No other permanent
force is necessary, beyond the staff requisite to train,
administer, instruct, and give a military consolidation to
the second element composing the military force of the
Colony, viz., the Volunteer Force. This important force
must naturally he composed of several arms, as follows:
(a) The Naval Brigade—an admirable Volunteer Corps.
It is, however, a matter of public regret that it has never
utilized the “Wolverene.”


( b ) Volunteer Naval Artillery Corps, now being in-
augurated on the model of a similar corps, which, under
high auspices, has recently been raised at Home and
brought to great perfection.
( c ) The remaining component elements of the
Australian military force might be a perfect little army
of itself, including artillery, cavalry, mounted infantry,
and infantry all well trained and skilled in the use of
the rifle.
An ample staff, requisite for the maintenance of this
force, is now receiving pay from the Colony, but this
staff requires dispersion and employment otherwise than
at present. And here we have at once the solution of the
financial difficulty which appeared so formidable as I
gradually developed the scheme of military reform which
I submit to public criticism.
With confidence I assert not only that what I have
here suggested in the way of reform and economy in
military expenditure is feasible, but also I venture to
assert that all may be easily put in practice, with infinite
advantage to the Colony generally. The head-quarters,
of which I have spoken, should be made to serve as
depots of arms, as schools of instruction, in everything
in connection with musketry and the use of the rifle on
horseback and on foot, and as points of rendezvous for
the use of the country youth wherein to develop his
muscles and his brains in times of peace, either at the
gymnasium or at the rifle range; whilst in time of war
these same depots would always serve well as rallying
points. Aided by the facilities afforded by railways, by
the bush lore and instincts of our colonists, and by many
other adventitious circumstances, there ought never to
occur any great difficulty in massing on any given point
a formidable number of highly dangerous riflemen,


mounted and on foot, ready to rival in their colonial
fastnesses, the prowess and valour of those Swiss heroes
who in the first years of this Century held at hay the
great Napoleon and his hest generals.
Prominent amongst the beaux sabreurs, the great
cavalry leaders of the day, stands a colonist —Sir Baker
Bussell. There is a grand example for Australians to
imitate, and I feel sure that there exists not an Australian
parent who will not gladly, for the sake of his son, profit
hy the useful military training placed within his reach hy
the establishment of the head-quarters or depots of which
I have spoken, and endeavour through them to teach
his children to acquire a proficiency in arms and a
military spirit, and eventually a niche in the temple of
heroes. And as regards the sons of the soil, I will
answer for them that any one of them will rejoice in
responding to the appeal of their parents to rally round
the training grounds, as recommended hy their parents,
and thus profit to the utmost of every means of acquiring
knowledge placed at their disposal. It is not against
such sons of the soil as I here picture to you that any
enemy can hope for success ou Australian soil.
EDWD. STRICKLAND.
December 31st, 1882.


VOLUNTEER, FORCE.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Sir,
Once again it is my pleasing task to tender to you
grateful thanks for the useful aid you have been good
enough to give me in your columns, and once more I
venture to trespass on your goodness by soliciting space
for this my fourth and last letter.
Before entering upon this letter I am anxious to avail
myself of the opportunity now afforded to me of thanking
those gentlemen who have taken the trouble to discuss
with me my scheme of organizing a Volunteer Force in
this Colony —a task which lam happy to say is already
approved of by many colonists.
To some I have tried to explain the perfection to
which Volunteering has been brought in America, where
I have myself seen three regiments, over 400 strong
each, leave Utica on a prolonged picnic to the Saratoga
Springs, and intended to last for at least a month.
These regiments were armed, accoutred, and equipped
almost entirely at their own expense, and at Saratoga
they encamped, and there strict military discipline was
thoroughly maintained. I have seldom seen a prettier
military sight than the marching of these troops right
through the pretty town of Utica to the railway station,
there to he entrained. The whole town and neighbourhood
turned out to witness the departure, and conspicuous
amongst the throng were the Utica beauties. Many of
the Volunteers were no strangers to real war, and they
seemed to give cohesion to the whole force.
To others I have tried to picture correctly the happy
and merry parties brought about in the Canadas and
Nova Scotia by meetings of Volunteers at appointed
places, where the keenest competition was maintained


in rifle shooting and in gymnastic exercises amongst the
assembled Volunteers. All seemed to put forward to the
utmost every skill and strength they possessed, lest they
should lose favour in the hearts of some one of the many
pretty faces present. The fair ladies always graced these
Volunteer meetings with their presence, and cheered
and encouraged the competitors hy their approving
smiles and the twinkle of their bright eyes.
And many of these ladies were no mean judges of the
competency of men in rifle shooting or in gymnastics,
and in the same way some of the brightest of the
fair sex here are now quoted as authorities upon cricket
and the statistics thereto belonging. To all I have
quoted Wimbledon, and held it up for imitation and as
an example of what may he done hy Volunteers who
enter heartily and loyally into the task they have set
themselves. The Volunteers of England, I have told
inquirers, have nobly revived all the glory of the cross-
how shooting of old, when every village green could
boast of an expert. They have kindled throughout the
length and breadth of the land a military spirit of stern
loyalty, which makes the nation confident in its own
strength, and feel independent of the protection afforded
hy the silver stream which separates it from Continental
neighbours. At this moment all England might he well
nigh stripped of trained professional soldiers, and the
people would unhesitatingly trust their lives, their
families, and their properties to the safe keeping of a
Volunteer Eorce, which can he called out any day, as it
were, at a moment’s notice. And I have also tried to
explain to inquirers the real glories of Wimbledon, every
one of which are within the reach of Australians, if
once they can he persuaded to follow a grand and highly
useful example. I have explained how all nations
B


contribute prizes to this grand national recreation ground;
how these prizes are competed for by representatives
from various colonies and climates; how rich and poor,
officer and private, trained soldier and Volunteer, all
meet on an equal footing at the ’Wimbledon rifle range
as competitors in a glorious healthy rivalry —a rivalry, I
may add, which is nourished and fed at every detached
rifle meeting throughout the land by the highest local
influences, and is sanctioned and honored by the presence
and patronage of onr gracious Queen or by one of the
Royal Family at least once in each year at Wimbledon.
Respite the dulness and faintness of my descriptions
of what is done at Home, I have rejoiced in my heart
when I have seen the Australian youth warm up to the
subject, and express a keen desire to be at once a good
rifle shot, and a good mounted rifleman ready for any
emergency.
Reverting now to the point of preparation at which I
quitted that subject in my letter, No. 111. — i.e., the for-
mation of military districts and sub-stations —I will now
briefly develop the mission, as it were, which these
districts and sub-stations are in my imagination and
aspirations intended to fulfil in the carrying out and
accomplishment of the scheme which I have advocated,
and earnestly seek to bring to perfection.
Every man enrolled in each district should be bound
to attend a prescribed number of days of drill and rifle
practice ; and within each military district there should
be a certain day appointed for competition for prizes to
be given by the Government for each district and each
sub-station. The winners each year I would form into
a team, and they should repair to Sydney, there to be
ready to meet all-comers in rifle shooting, on foot, or on


horseback, or in gymnastics. On arrival in Sydney the
blue ribbon for each of these sports should he competed
for, Coram populo , by members of the team spoken of.
To all winners good substantial prizes should he given,
thus to repay in some small degree that time which
must necessarily have been sacrificed to ensure success ;
also to encourage others to follow the good example set.
To the pleasure-loving Australian I can imagine no
more happy meeting than that which might he annually
established by the bringing to our great, and by nature
beautiful capital, the best riflemen, horsemen, and
athletes of the Colony, there to enter the lists for the
bine ribbons awaiting distribution to the victors. No-
where in the world has nature provided to a people a
situation more beautiful than can easily be selected
around Sydney for the establishment of an : Australian
Wimbledon. On a site well selected for the sports of
which I speak, under our bright sky, and under the
influence of encouragement from the equally bright eyes
of Australia’s fair daughters, a grand Wimbledon might
he inaugurated, where modern British sports and athletic
exercises might he made to rival and even excel the
grandeur and local importance of the ancient Olympian
games, which aided so materially to make the Greek so
hardy and so brave, so skilful in war, so learned and
cultivated in peace.
I have trod the spots where these great Olympian
games were celebrated, also those of Isthmia; the first
looking out towards the lonian Sea, the latter on the
Gulf of Corinth. The spots appropriated to the games
and the approaches to them were magnificently decorated
with statues in the highest art, sculptured by the most
skilful living hands, and it was the climate which chiefly
induced the Greeks to construct these grand recreation


grounds for the people in the open air. It was at these
ancient schools of recreation—so much resembling onr
modern Wimbledon meetings —that opportunities were
afforded to the sculptor and‘the artist to study the
anatomy of mankind up to that point, which enabled
Greece to improve vastly upon all she had learnt from
Egypt in the fine arts, and to produce such artists as
Phidias and Praxiteles, whose excellence has never yet
been exceeded, if even it has been reached. Here we
have the origin of Greek sculpture, so exceedingly ap-
preciated up to the present day for its undeniable
excellence and unapproachable perfection in those minute
details which give sharpness, character, and artistic
finish to Greek sculpture and architecture still extant.
But what has all this disputation upon ancient Greek
arts and Greeks to do with the organization of a Yolnnteer
Corps or Eorce in a very modern British colony ? “ Les
extremes se touehent .”
The Olympian games before Christ contrast with the
Wimbledon meeting in the 19th Century —the primitive
cross-hows with the marvellous rifle of modern days —
the pre-historic open-air schools for music, poetry, and
elocution in the olive groves of Attica, or on the Pnyx
of the Acropolis of Athens, with the modern vast music
halls and palatial colleges. Thus Ido truthfully assert
that in advocating open-air meetings of Yolnnteers, for
purposes of instruction and competition, lam originating
no new human idea, hut simply endeavouring to trans-
plant to New South Wales a plant or plants older than
Christianity itself, and which has already taken root at
Home and in our colonies, and which gloriously flourishes
in America, where it is held to he in a high degree
desirable that every youth should matriculate in military
colleges.


This is my explanation for lightly touching, not alone
upon modem institutions, hut also upon ancient and
most time-honoured systems, and practices, and customs,
all eminently suited to this climate, to our people, and
to the times in which we are living.
History is now about to repeat itself in these anti-
podean regions, and the great object and aim which
preoccupies me at present is the organization of a
Yolnnteer Force in New South Wales on somewhat the
same footing and principles as it exists at Home, in
Canada, and in other colonies, as well as in America, and
as it did exist of old amongst the ancient Greeks.
That such a force might he of incalculable utility
both by sea and land I have already, I hope, made clear.
Also, I have quoted precedents for its existence both in
ancient and modern times, and I have endeavoured to
explain to what useful purposes the Ancients applied
their Olympian games or Yolnnteer assemblies, and how
they were converted by them into schools for the study
of fine arts, and even of poetry and oratory, of music
and of elocution also. As regards then our own days,
I have set forth in some detail what enjoyable places of
happy meeting and of amusement the rendezvous of
Yolnnteer Forces is now made in old England, in many
of her colonies, and at the homes of her American
children, and how admirably these meetings are made
to serve as schools of instruction in military discipline,
as well as in all manly sports ; also, in fields of compe-
tition in the art of rifle shooting and in gymnastics.
We have no such place of rendezvous or meeting in
New South Wales. We have no Wimbledon here. We
have no ground adapted for a revival of Olympian
games under Christian conduct, but we have, for such
purposes as I am discussing, one of the most admirable


sites in creation—the National Park. It is within easy
access of Sydney, the capital of the Colony; it is acces-
sible hy sea, it commands an admirable sea view, and its
salubrity is unrivalled. Presh water is in the immediate
vicinity, and rifle ranges, even artillery ranges of indefi-
nite lengths, can he easily formed within or close to the
park. There is nothing to prevent mimic war and
athletic exercises being carried on upon the more
elevated level of this grand field, whilst below in Port
Hacking or at Botany, a sea fight might he instituted.
Both places afford admirable ground for practice for the
Naval Brigade and for the New South Wales Naval
Volunteer Artillery; or, if so it pleased those in
command, the land and sea forces might on this field he
made to act together co-operatively, thus learning and
teaching lessons of great practical advantage, and
affording to the public a sight which could not fail to
waken up in the audience enthusiastic admiration.
The National Park will soon, when reached by the
railway now being constructed to Illawarra, be brought
within a short half-hour of Sydney. If these my views,
as I have set them forth in my four letters kindly pub-
lished hy the Herald , are favourably received hy the
public, I beg with much deference to throw out the
hint that no time should be lost in erecting upon the
National Park a rifle range worthy of the purposes it is
destined to fulfil, and of the Colony to which it belongs.
A good deal else will need preparing on the park, hut it
might be so managed that all he completed simul-
taneously with the railway.
It has been so often proved of old, as well as quite
recently, that the pursuit of manly sports, and of out-
door amusements, is quite compatible with all studies,
as well as with the acquisition of knowledge even of a


high and important character, and with the expansion
and development of the brains and thews and sinews of
the rising generation, that I make no apology for
endeavouring to establish a Wimbledon in New South
Wales, where not only the Volunteer Forces, naval and
military, of the Colony can meet and contest with each
other for suitable prizes, but also as a field open to all
the youth of this Colony or of other colonies, wherein
to display their skill, or to enter the lists against the
youth of New South Wales.
I am, &c.,
%
EDWD. STRICKLAND.
Manly Beach, January 4th.
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lSS3.




