

LETTER
TO THE HON. JAMES M‘CULLOCH
THE EDUCATIONAL QUESTION,
WITH A SPECIAL VIEW TO THE SOLUTION OP
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC DIFFICULTY.
BY THE
RE Y. AND RE W ROB E R r J’ S 0 N,
WEST MELBOURNE,
♦ »
ft^elbouijne:
MASON, FIRTH & CO., PRINTERS, 51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST.




LETTER
TO THE HON. JAMES M‘CULLOCH
THE EDDCAIIONAL QUESTION,
WITH A SPECIAL VIEW TO THE SOLUTION OF
• «
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC DIFFICULTY.
BY THE
REV. ANDREW ROBERTSON,
WEST MELBOURNE
(selbouqne :
MASON, FIRTH & CO., PRINTERS, 51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCn.XVITI




LETTER TO THE HON. JAMES M'CULLOCH
THE EDUCATIONAL QUESTION.
As the Educational Question is beginning again to
be agitated in our ecclesiastical courts, and as it must
necessarily occupy more and moi’e of the public attention
until it obtains a final and permanent settlement, any attempt
made, however humble, with the view of expediting so
desirable a result, deserves at least to be commended.
The Act which is at present in force, and which is com -
monly known as the Heales Act, has never, it appears to
me, received that just appreciation to which it is entitled.
In its leading principles and objects it leaves nothing, I con-
sider, to be desired, and at the time and in the circumstances
it was enacted, it was certainly the best and most statesman-
like measure that could possibly have been devised. It
requires, however, to have its provisions enlarged and
amended, to enable the Board of Education or the Minister
of Instruction, if one should be appointed, to work out more
fully and speedily the ends which it contemplates, and to
meet more comprehensively and equitably the growing edu-
cational wants of the community.
Its design, as you are aware, is twofold—
(Ist.) To provide, so far as the State is concerned, a
good secular education for the children of the
Colony.


And (2nd.) To initiate a general system of public schools,
which would ultimately effect the merging of the
denominational into national ones.
It was never, however, as some seem to suppose, the in-
tention of Mr, Heales to exclude from the common schools of
the country the religious element, or to prepare the way for
the establishment of a purely secular system. The rights of
parents to have the opportunity afforded them of getting their
children taught in the public schools the primary truths of
morality and religion are distinctly conserved by Mr. Heales’s
admirable Act; the hours for secular education being limited
to four, for the express purpose of allowing the local com-
mittees to supplement the secular education at extra hours,
if they think fit, with whatever religious instruction the
parents of the children may be willing or desirous they should
receive.
Nor have the Board of Education in any instance ever
interfered to prevent this from being done by the local
committees; but, on the contrary, have afforded every facility
for the free working of this valuable portion of the Act.
Confining themselves to their own legitimate province, the
Board have left it to the local committees to act in this matter
as they might deem proper or expedient, the Board having
intimated that their superintendence extends solely “ to the
temporal regulation and secula r efficiency of the schools,” while
they enjoin their inspectors accordingly “ carefully to avoid all
interference or expression of opinion, either to the teachers or
local committees, respecting their arrangements, if they have
any, for imparting religious instruction.”
No procedure on the part of the Board could be more in
accordance with the design and spirit of the Act, which
leaves the local committees full power not only to say
whether or not religious instruction should be imparted, but
to determine the kind and amount of religious instruction
that should be given. The chief mistake committed by Mr.
Higinbotham, in his otherwise excellent bill, lay in his


attempting to define by legislative enactment what is at
present left to be settled by the local committees. This
mistake, however well meant, was fatal to his Bill, and
exposed it to all the animadversions which were made upon
it by Bishop Perry, and with which I most cordially concur.
Even in Scotland there is no legislative enactment authori-
tatively prescribing or defining what religious instruction
ought or ought not to be given in the public schools. In the
parish schools, which have obtained such a wide-world
notoriety, and to which Scotland owes so much of its glory,
the Bible is read, and the Shorter Catechism is taught, not
because the Heritors are bound by Act of Parliament to see
that this is done, but because the religious feelings of the
country and the well-known wishes of the parents demand
it. Nothing, therefore, I conceive, should be attempted in
the way of altering the present law, which does not
admit, I apprehend, of any improvement in this respect
being made on it. Some, indeed, of our legislators, evidently
perplexed by the controversy which Mr. Higinbotham’s Bill
provoked, appear to me to be now seeking a way of escape
from similar contentions, by advocating the exclusion of the
religious element altogether from our public schools, and the
adoption of an out-and-out purely secular system. This
would be not only to set aside one of the best provisions of
the present Act, but to create an antagonism to the progress
and success of the general scheme with which it would be
found in the long run incompetent to grapple. Whatever
defects may adhere to the denominational plan, it will never
be abandoned by the denominations to facilitate the intro-
duction of a purely secular system. Not to speak of the
Roman Catholic body, neither the Episcopalians, nor the
Presbyterians, nor the Wesleyans will lend themselves either
to the introduction or establishment of a purely secular
system ; and were the Legislature to make the experiment,
so far from settling the question on a permanent basis, it
would only raise a conflict between Secularism and Deno-


minationalism, which would do more to perpetuate Denomina-
tionalism than anything that has hitherto been done. Rather,
I would say, let things remain as they are, than provoke a
contest which would stir up such antagonistic feelings on the
part of the best friends of education, and which would pro-
bably, nay, I venture to predict, almost certainly, terminate
in driving us back again to the very denominational system
which it is the object of the secularists to abolish.
What then is to be done in order to eliminate the denomi-
national element from our public schools, and realise the
great objects for which Mr. Heales’s Act was introduced.
This is the problem which our statesmen are now called
upon to solve. It has its difficulties—all feel them, but
they are by no means, I think, insuperable.
First of all, then, I desire it to be distinctly understood
that I do not by any means share in the sweeping censures
which are cast by many on the denominational system, at
least so far as it has gone. Those who are acquainted with
the brief history of the colony, know that but for the de-
nominational educational efforts that have been put forth,
Victoria would not be, so far as education is concerned, in
the position in which it now is. To decry denominationalism
as if it had been, in the matter of education, a bane and not
a boon to the colony, is simply to ignore the entire history
of the past. It so happens, however, especially in young
advancing colonies like this, that when a certain stage in
their progress is reached, churches, so far from being helps,
become hindrances to the free and full expansion of those
educational efforts which are absolutely necessary fairly and
fully to meet the requirements of the country. Besides
having a tendency to prolong that sectarian rivalry and
jealousy which ought not to exist, denominationalism leads,
in too many places, to the needless multiplication of schools,
while it presses hard in other districts even against the
denominations themselves. The religious party which is
first in the field not unfrequently prevents those that follow


from having their proper share in the benefits of the
Education Act. A country such as this, which is just in the
course of being peopled, and whose population, drawn from
all parts of the world, is constantly changing in its relative
proportions as regards sects and creed, some districts being
in the first instance chiefly Catholic it may be, and then soon
afterwards more Protestant than Catholic, with the same
alterations perpetually occurring in the relative proportions
of all the other religious bodies amongst us—a country such
as this it is evident can never have its educational wants
effectively, or even fairly and justly met, if these educational
wants are to be supplied in accordance with denominational
demands or denominational interests, and not in accordance
with the actual requirements of the people themselves*
irrespective altogether of denominational distinctions and
connections. The colony at first had almost no choice in the
matter ; but it is now in that stage of its history when its
population are beginning to feel that they must be treated
by the State, not in the character of sectaries, but of citizens,
and that their educational wants must be provided for on
that basis alone. All the subjects of the State are entitled
to be placed on a level, and to enjoy the same advantages in
regard to education, irrespective of the religious party to
which they may belong. Nay, even supposing they do not
belong to any religious body at all, every citizen should
have equal rights and privileges, and no one should have
any rights and privileges which are not common to the
whole. Denominations, as such, properly speaking, have no
rights at all, except that of being protected in the exercise of
their worship, and it is only in the capacity of citizens or
subjects that the State should recognise them. Let this safe
and sound principle be acted on and carried out in the ques-
tion of education, and you will speedily eliminate the denomi-
national element from your public schools. Fix a date—
say three years hence —at which State aid will be withdrawn
from all schools, without exception, which have not been


absorbed into the general ones, and you will then reach the
true and solid platform on which to erect and extend your
national schools.
But what, it may be asked, is to be done in that case with
the Roman Catholics, who it is well known strenuously
object to fall in with any general system you may adopt 1
Some would say, let them in that case maintain their own
schools at their own cost, and let the State confine its
aid exclusively to those schools that have been set up in the
interests, not of any denomination, but of the country at
large. This sounds well, but it is not the view which a real
statesman will take. It is the duty of the Government, in
the interest of the State itself, to provide a good secular
education for all the children of the colony, and it is as much
in the interests of the State to see to this being done in the
case of the children of those who cannot join in the general
system as in the case of those who can. No wise far-seeing
Government will ever allow its supervision of the secular
education of any portion of the people to slip out of its
hands, and if for conscientious reasons there be, as there
undoubtedly is in this colony, a large section of the com-
munity who will not be prevailed upon—far less compelled—
to send their children to the general schools, it is the part of
the legislature to devise a remedy for the same.
The solution of the problem lies, I conceive, in the applica-
tion of the simple principle I have already laid down, namely
—that of dealing with the people, not as religionists, but
as citizens and subjects. Insert in an amended educational
measure “a conscience clause,” of which all alike, if they
choose, may avail themselves, no matter whether they be
Jews, or Roman Catholics, or Protestants —insert a conscience
clause to the effect, that in any district or place where
schools may be established, no matter by whom, or by what
class of citizens, and which are attended by children whose
parents for conscientious reasons declare that they cannot
send them to the general schools, that in that case the schools


so established shall be open to Government inspection, and
that if found that the secular branches required by the legis-
lature are taught in these schools, that they shall be aided by
the State on the principle of payment by results. Now, so far
as the State is concerned, this is all that it is called upon to
look after and secure, namely, a good secular education for
its subjects ; and if, by permitting exceptional schools of this
nature (and all general rules have exceptions), this object of
the State is gained, the State should be satisfied, especially
when the object is gained, not by sacrificing any principles,
but by respecting and accommodating itself as it ought to the
conscientious scruples of its subjects.
Besides, there are very considerable incidental advantages
to be derived from allowing of exceptional schools of the
kind I have described. The general system will work all
the better, all the more freely and smoothly, that the Com-
mittees are not hampered in their management by conflicting
parties, especially in their arrangements as to the nature and
amount of the religious instruction to be imparted in the
schools. Theoretically I would prefer to see all sections of
the community merging their peculiarities, and uniting
together in the administration of one uniform system, but
when there is no likelihood, or rather when we know that
there is no possibility of this taking place, it is surely better
for all parties, and particularly for the general system itself,
that it should be wrought by those who can agree and co-
operate together, without any risk of discord and vexatious
wrangling disputes.
But what if the Roman Catholics, it may be said, refuse
to be treated simply as citizens, and not in their denomina-
tional character ? I cannot, however, conceive of their re-
fusing to be so treated, even on their own avowed principles.
What they demand is justice; to have nothing less and
nothing more than others have, with no rights and privileges
conceded to them to which all other citizens may not lay
equal claim. Besides, I gather from their published state-


ments that they would not stand out against such a proposal
as that which I suggest. Dr. Bleasdale says that the
“ Catholics of Victoria will be content to accept of the
simplest arrangements that will secure their religious
rights,” and that they will allow of the examination of their
schools by Government Inspectors, and of payment by results
accordingly; while Mr, Duffy has stated that “ifwe do
not presume to forbid the children of Roman Catholics to be
taught the doctrines on which they rely for making them
honest men and good citizens,” that they are prepared to
allow the Government to “ take the amplest security that
the teachers shall be adequate to their task; that the system
of instruction shall in its secular branches be uniform with
that adopted in other public schools,” and that they will
submit to “ a rigid system of inspection.” With these
ample admissions coming from the Roman Catholics them-
selves, there can be no insuperable difficulty, I humbly think,
in arriving at a satisfactory and* honourable compromise.
“ Compromise,” says Macaulay, “ is the essence of statesman-
ship,” and in this instance there may be compromise, and yet
no principle violated, for which either as citizens, or even as
Protestants, we can contend. It is, if I mistake not, a prin-
ciple with all Protestants, or if not with all. at least with
those who are worthy of the name, not to over-ride the
conscientious convictions of others while insisting on their
own.
With the elimination of the denominational element thus
effected, the field would then be clear for the vigorous prose-
cution of our educational efforts throughout the length and
breadth of the colony, particularly in the rural districts and
the bush. In order to this, however, considerable modifica-
tions must be made in the proximating and restricting clauses
of the present Act, while the system of payment by results
must be accommodated so as to apply to schools which
cannot, according to the present regulations, receive the
slightest countenance or support whatever from the State.


Even in cases where two schools in the same locality, but too
far apart to be attended by the same children, might be
placed under the superintendence of the same master, no
aid, according to the opinion of the present Attorney
General, in answer to a question put to him by the Education
Board, can be given to such a combination, if attempted,
without an evasion of the present Act, unless each school has
an average attendance of 20 scholars, although these schools
may be of more real service to the State than schools of five
times the number in the city, where education can be so
easily had, and where there is. less need of State-aid than
there is in the scattered and more thinly peopled districts.
Meanwhile, I humbly conceive that the first thing to be done
is to eliminate the denominational element from our public
system of instruction, fixing the date at which all schools
continuing to receive State-aid must be merged into the
general ones, with the exceptions provided for in “ the con-
science clausethus giving time for the transitionary pro-
cess to be fully completed, as well as affording an opportunity
for maturely considering those amendments in the present
Act which are necessary to work out more efficiently the
general system itself, and which amendments can all be very
easily enacted in a future supplementary bill.
In closing this brief letter, which I address to you as a
public man on public grounds, I may be permitted to press
upon the Government, of which you are the head, the urgency
that exists for the speedy settlement of the educational
question; since the longer it is delayed the more difficult it
will become. The Roman Catholics have just now received
an accession of educational strength to which I do not object;
but with their well-known adherence to the denominational
plan, and with the apparent drifting of our senators into a
preference for a purely secular system, the Presbyterian
Church, with which I am best acquainted, and which all
along has manifested air ever-increasing inclination to merge
its denominational schools into the national ones, is now


beginning to pause, and to consider the wisdom of going any
further in this direction until it is ascertained what course
the Legislature will take. That Government which shows
itself capable of grappling with the question, and which sets
itself in earnest and without delay to free it from those
disturbing and obstructing influences that now surround it,
and which are impeding the free and fair and full develop-
ment of educational efforts in the colony, will do more to
advance the present, and, above all, the future well-being of
Victoria, than any Government can ever hope to do by all
the other legislative measures to which it may address
itself. There is no question in which the interests of the
country are more closely bound up than the question of
education, nor one that more clamorously calls for an instant
settlement at the hands of our Legislature.
I am, Sir,
Yours very truly,
ANDREW ROBERTSON.
To the Hon. James M'Cullocii.
MASON. FIRTH AND CO., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.




