



T his Volume may not be taken out of
the Library.


LETTERS
TO KING JAMES THE SIXTH
FROM THE QUEEN, PRINCE HENRY, PRINCE
CHARLES, THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH AND
HER HUSBAND FREDERICK KING OF
BOHEMIA, AND FROM THEIR SON
PRINCE FREDERICK HENRY.
FROM THE ORIGINALS IN THE LIBRARY OF
THE FACULTY OF ADVOCATES.
PRINTED AT EDINBURGH.
M.DCCC.XXXV.


PRESENTED TO
THE MAITLAND CLUB
BY SIR PATRICK WALKER
OF COATES, KNIGHT.


THE MAITLAND CLUB.
FEBRUARY, M.DCCC.XXXV.
THE EARL OF GLASGOW,
PRESIDENT.
ROBERT ADAM, ESQ.
JOHN BAIN, ESQ.
ROBERT BELL, ESQ.
SIR DAVID HUNTER BLAIR, BART.
WALTER BUCHANAN, ESQ.
THE MARQUIS OF BUTE.
ALEXANDER CAMPBELL, ESQ.
ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, ESQ.
LORD JOHN CAMPBELL.
JOHN DONALD CARRICK, ESQ.
LORD COCKBURN.
JAMES DENNISTON, ESQ.
JAMES DOBIE, ESQ.
RICHARD DUNCAN, ESQ.
WILLIAM JAMES DUNCAN, ESQ.
JAMES DUNLOP, ESQ.
JOHN DUNLOP, ESQ.
JAMES EWING, ESQ.
KIRKMAN FINLAY, ESQ.


REV. WILLIAM FLEMING, D.D.
WILLIAM MALCOLM FLEMING, ESQ.
JOHN FULLARTON, ESQ.
JOHN BLACK GRACIE, ESQ.
RIGHT HONOURABLE THOMAS GRENVILLE.
JAMES HILL, ESQ.
LAURENCE HILL, ESQ.
GEORGE HOUSTOUN, ESQ.
JOHN KERR, ESQ.
ROBERT ALEXANDER KIDSTON, ESQ.
GEORGE RITCHIE KINLOCH, ESQ.
JOHN GIBSON LOCKHART, ESQ.
ALEXANDER MACDONALD, ESQ.
WILLIAM MACDOWALL, ESQ.
THE VERY REV. PRINCIPAL MACFARLAN, D.D
ANDREW MACGEORGE, ESQ.
ALEXANDER MACGRIGOR, ESQ.
DONALD MACINTYRE, ESQ.
JOHN WHITEFOORD MACKENZIE, ESQ.
GEORGE MACINTOSH, ESQ.
ALEXANDER MACNEILL, ESQ.
JAMES MAIDMENT, ESQ.
THOMAS MAITLAND, ESQ.
WILLIAM MEIKLEHAM, ESQ.
WILLIAM HENRY MILLER, ESQ.
WILLIAM MOTHERWELL, ESQ.
WILLIAM MURE, ESQ.
ALEXANDER OSWALD, ESQ.
JOHN MACMICHAN PAGAN, ESQ. M.D.


WILLIAM PATRICK, ESQ.
EDWARD PIPER, ESQ.
ROBERT PITCAIRN, ESQ.
JAMES CORBET PORTERFIELD, ESQ.
HAMILTON PYPER, ESQ.
PHILIP ANSTRUTHER RAMSAY, ESQ.
JOHN RICHARDSON, ESQ.
WILLIAM ROBERTSON, ESQ.
ANDREW SKENE, ESQ.
JAMES SMITH, ESQ.
JOHN SMITH, ESQ.
JOHN SMITH, YGST, ESQ.
WILLIAM SMITH, ESQ.
MOSES STEVEN, ESQ.
DUNCAN STEWART, ESQ.
SIR MICHAEL SHAW STEWART, BART.
SYLVESTER DOUGLAS STIRLING, ESQ.
JOHN STRANG, ESQ.
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF SUSSEX.
THOMAS THOMSON, ESQ.
W. B. D. D. TURNBULL, ESQ.
PATRICK FRASER TYTLER, ESQ.
ADAM URQUHART, ESQ.
SIR PATRICK WALKER.
WILSON DOBIE WILSON, ESQ.


The familiar correspondence of King James the Sixth, with his Queen
and their children, originally collected by Sir James Balfour of Denmilne,
and now preserved in the Advocates’ Library, is curious and interesting,
as exhibiting in their genuine colours the character and habits of that
monarch within his own private and domestic circle, in contradistinction
to what is better known of his public and political life.
Bellenden, the translator of Boece, in his “ Epistle to the King’s Grace,”
makes not an inapt introduction to this subject. “ Erasmus Roterdamus,
in his buke namet * The Institution of Christin Kinges,’ schawes, maist
nobil prince! na thing in mair admiration than workes of kinges; quhilks
ar sa patent to the sicht of pepill, that every man lies thaim in his
mouth, to their commendation or reprief. Thus may nae thing be sa
fruteful to dant the commoun erroures of pepill as honest and virtewis
life of kingis : for the life of kingis drawis thair subdittis to imitation of
thair werkis, worthy or unworthy; and the same cumis to licht be im-
pulsion of fortoun, that nathing sufferis to be hid. Farther in every his-
tory that man redis, apperis evidently the same maneris with the pepil,
A


quhilks ar usit be the king. And sen na thing is, that the pepil followes
with mair imitation, nor kepes in mair recent memory than werkis of
nobil men, of reason thair besines suld be mair respondent to vertew than
of ony other estatis.”
James has been hardly and not very fairly dealt with by various writers,
and latterly Sir Walter Scott has contributed the aid of his able pen in
turning him into ridicule for failings that belonged to the ignorance or
superstitions of the times, and did not attach to him individually. If he
was in dread of witchcraft, how should the blame attach to him, when the
most enlightened civilians and the most learned divines of his day gave
credence to it not merely in Scotland but in Europe? If he was timorous
and feared Treason, no man had ever a better apology, and those who scoff at
him on that account ought in candour to judge him fairly not in the halcyon
days in which they themselves have lived, but as during the period in which
he lived. Looking, therefore, to the state of Scotland before his birth, at
his birth, during his reign, and as long as the murderer of his Queen
mother swayed the sceptre of England, we find more acts of treason and
rebellion attempted in Scotland than any other country has exhibited. To
recount these is not the object of this introduction, and it is enough to say,
that though he might have overcome and reduced to obedience the tur-
bulent Lords that kept up discord in the kingdom, and threatened the
overturn of his throne by calling forth the energies of the nation, had the
origin of their intrigues been confined to the bounds of Scotland, yet he
was unable to cope with them on equal terms, when it is notorious that
they were instigated by Queen Elizabeth, who had attached a large pro-
portion of the nobility of Scotland to her side, and who was most de-
sirous to get the possession of the young king, as she had already obtain-
ed that of his unfortunate mother, on a pretence of friendship and pro-
tection. The clergy were unfortunately not friendly to the king, and endea-
voured to throw discredit on all his actions, and in particular upon the ac-


count given by him of the Gowrie Conspiracy, but which is now proved be-
yond a doubt to have been in every particular correct, by the evidence ad-
duced in the Criminal Trials published by Mr. Pitcairn; and when we con-
sider that Elizabeth, having failed in her expectation of alarming the young
king to seek refuge in her kingdom from the rebellions of the nobles ex-
cited by her own devices, next attempted to get him into her clutches,
by means of a treaty, during the mother’s captivity, who can hesitate to
give credit to the supposition, that the Gowrie Conspiracy was also her
causing, even if the circumstances attending that extraordinary event had
not afforded, of themselves, strong presumptive proof that the capture of
the king was her object ?
Every apology is therefore to be admitted for the alarm which King
James may have'felt in these times, but, timorous though, it must be admit-
ted, he was, it would seem to have been only in political measures, and not
personal, for we find him occasionally displaying a coolness and intrepidity
directly at variance with that character, two of which may be shortly no-
ticed ; the one was in that same Gowrie Conspiracy, when, at the moment
of the struggle, and his life or liberty were in danger, he put his foot on
the chain of his favourite hawk, which had dropped from his arm, to pre-
vent its escape by the open window; and the other when braving the
combined efforts of the witches of Denmark and Scotland to raise storms
to prevent the arrival of the Queen, and in whose powers he fully believed,
he put to sea in a stormy autumn to bring home his Queen from Upslo.
That he was a pedant is true,'but if that pedantry, by the force of the
example of their king, produced the effect of inducing his people to direct
their attention to learning, then to him is due the merit of the high cha-
racter which Scotland has obtained amongst nations on that account.
Under George Buchanan he acquired these views. Hume remarks, “ That
James was but a middling writer, may be allowed; that he was a con-
temptible one, can by no means be admitted. Whoever will read his


‘ Basilicon Doron,’ particularly the two last books, the true law of free
monarchies, his answer to Cardinal Parron, and almost all his speeches
and messages to Parliament, will confess him to have possessed no mean
genius.”
This confessedly his best work was published at Edinburgh in 1590,
when Prince Henry had entered his sixth year. These “ His Majesty’s
instructions to his dearest son Henry the Prince” are divided into three
heads, —the first, the Prince’s duty to his God, —second, his duty when
he should become king,—and third, his duty in indifferent things, which
were neither right nor wrong in themselves, but according as they were
rightly or wrongly used, and would affect his authority and reputation
among the people. In the preface, signed James R. is the following spe-
cimen of the King’s poetic talent, which Bishop Percy highly compli-
ments.
“ God giues not Kings the stile of Gods in vain,
For on His Throne His sceptre do they sway.
And as their subjects ought them to obey;
So Kings should feare and serve their God againe.
If then ye would enjoy a happy reigne.
Observe the Statutes of our Heavenly King,
And from his law, make all your laws to spring.
Since His Lieutenant here you should remaine,
Rewarde the just, be stedfast, true, and plaine ;
Represse the proud, mainteyning ay the right.
Walk always so as ever in his sight.
Who guards the godly, plaguing the prophane,
And so shall ye in Princely virtues shine.
Resembling right your mightic King devine.”
The birth of King James is thus announced by Sir James Melville,
“ All this whyll I lay within the castell of Edenbrough, preing nycht and
day for hir Majesteis gud and happy delyuery of a faire sonne. This


prayer being granted, I was the first that was advertist he the Lady Boyn,
in her Majesteis name, to part with diligence the xix day of Junij, in the
year 1566, betwen ten and eleuen houres before nun. It strock tuelff
lioures when I tok my horse, and was at Berwik that same nycht. The
fourt day efter I was at Londoun, and met first with my brother; wha
sent and advertist the secretary Cicill that same nycht of my commying,
and of the birth of the prince, willing hym to kep it vp, vntill my being
at court, to schaw it my self vnto hir Maieste, wha was for the tym at
Grenwitch, wher hir Majeste was in gret merines and dancing efter supper;
hot sa schone as the secretary Cicill roundit the newes in hir ear of the
prince birth, all merines was layed asyd for that nycht; every ane that wer
present marueling what mycht moue sa sodane a chengement; for the
Quen sat down with hir hand vpon hir haffet, and boursting out to some of
hir ladies, how that the Quen of Scotlandis was leichter of a faire sonne,
and that sche was hot a barren stok.” At the audience next day “ I re-
quested hir Maieste to be a gossup vnto the Quen, for our commers ar
callit gossups in England; quhilk sche granted glaidly to be.”
James was thus born in captivity, and seized upon by one or other of
the parties, according as strength or stratagem devised, and, amidst the
history of these tumults, Sir James Melville thus goes on, when James
was in his eleventh year, 1577, to describe the characters of those under
whose tuition he was placed.
“ Now the youg king was brocht vp in Stirling be Allexander Askin
and my Lady Mar; and had for principall preceptouris Mester George of
Buchwennen and Mester Peter Yong, the abbotis of Cambuskynneth and
Drybrough, branches of the house of Askin, and the lard of Dromwhassell,
his Maiesties maister houshald. Allexander Askin wes a nobleman of a
trew gentill nature, weill loued and lyked of euery man for his gud qua-
lites and gret discretion, in na wayes factious nor enuyous, a louer of all
honest men, and desyred ever to haue sic as were of gud conuersation to


be about the prince, rather than his awen nere frendis, gif he thocht them
not sa meit.
“ The Lard of Drumwhassell, again, was ambitious and gredy, and had
pretest cair how till advance him self and his frendis. The twa abbotis
were wyse and modest; my Lady Mar was wyse and schairp, and held the
King in gret aw; and sa did Mester George Buchwhennen. Mester Peter
Yong was gentiller, and was laith till offend the King at any tym, and
vsed him self wairly, as a man that had mynd of his awen weill be keping
of his Maiesteis favour. Bot Mester George was a stoik philosopher, and
loked not far before the hand; a man of notable qualites for his learnyng
and knawledge in Latin poesie, mekle maid accompt of in other contrees,
plaisant in company, rehersing at all occasions moralites schort and fee-
full, wherof he had aboundance, and invented wher he wanted. He was
also of gud religion for a poet, bot be was easely abused, and sa facill that
he wes led with any company that he hanted for the tym, quhilk made
him factious in his auld dayes, for he spak and wret as they that wer
about him for the tym infourmed him. For he was become sleperie and
cairles, and folowed in many thingis the vulgair oppinion; for he was
naturally populaire and extrem vengeable against any man that had of-
fendit him, quhilk was his gretest fait. For he wret dispytfull inuectywes
against the Erie of Monteith, for some particulaires that wes bet wen
him and the lard of Buchwhennen, and bccam the Erie of Mortons gret
ennemy, for ane hackeney of his that chancit to be tane fra his seruand
during the civil 1 troubles, and w r as bocht be the Regent; wha had na will
to part with the said horse, he was sa sur of fut and sa easy, that
albiet Mester George had oft tymes requyred him again, he culd not get
him, and wher he had bene the Regentis gret frend of before, he becam
his deadly ennemy, and spak euill of him fra that tym fourth in all places
and at all occasions. Dromwhassell also, because the Regent kepit all
casualtes to him self, and wald let nathing fall till vthers that wer about,


the King becam also his ennemy, and sa did they all that wer about his
Majeste.
“ The Regent again, reuling all at his pleasour, maid na accompt of any
of them that wer about the King, vntill a discret gentilman callit Mester
Nycholl Elphinstoun aduertist him how that he was invyed of many and
hatted of euery man, specially be them that wer in Stirling with the
King; aduysing him (albeit ouer lait) to bestow part of his gold vnto sa-
many of them as he beleued wer wonnable. Wha, till ane that was in mean
rank, he gaif twenty pieces of gold at xx lb. the piece. What he gaif
till vthers I can not tell; bot sic as had spoken ill of him before durst
not alter their langage, because of the Kingis wit and gud memorie, wha
culd chek up any that he persauit had first spoken euill, and then began
to speak gud again, ds his Maieste had done till ane of the company,
alleging that he had chengit his coit, as I was informed for the tym. Sa
that the Regent was ouer lang in dealing of part of his gold to them that
wer about his Maieste; wha incressing in yeares and knawledge, sindre
gentilmen began to sut service, and wer onwaters.”
This appears a very natural and true account of the persons about the
King, though not a creditable one, and shews them to have been very
apt scholars in the system of bribery practised by Queen Elizabeth in
Scotland.
One other extract from Sir James Melville deserving of notice, is
dated in 1579, and regards the state of parties at the time, his remarks
being equally severe as true. “ During the Kingis yong yeares, the
parcialities wer sa gret, and the haill centre sa parturbit be the twa
parties, that allegit themselues to feicht and flyte and stryue for the
King and the Quen, hir Maieste being captywe in England, and the
King yet very yong, that many parsaued to be bot factious, fasschious, am-
bitious, gredy, vengeable, warldly, wretchit creatours; and baith pairties
craftyly sterit vp and halden tu be a only faction in England, wha had


that Quenis ear, intending the wrak asweill of our yong K. as of our
Quen, to set vp some of ther frendis to bruk the croun of England, quhilk
moued (dyuers ythers to cry out against the foly of our nation and the
malice of our nybours) many to cry out against our fulische contentions,
some in proise and some in meter.”
The king’s marriage in 1585 is the next occurrence in chronological
order, and is thus told in the “ Historic of King James the Sext.”
“ The King in this yeir was becum a brave prence in bodie and stature,
weill exercesit in reading, that he could perfytlie recorde of all things that
he had ather hard or red; his memorie and jugement war becum verie ryp
and fyne. Tharefore that noble King Frederic the Second King of Denmarc,
finding sik opportunitie and occasioun be the credible report of famous gen-
tilmen and marchands of Scotland to congratulat the gude estait of our King
his confederat, he essayit him twa wayis, be his renounit Ambassadors sent
in Scotland in the moneth of Julij 1585. The first way was, that he pro-
ponit be his ambassadors, that the His of Orknay and Zetland war bot
lent from the croun of Denmarc for the debt of a sowme of money awin
to the crown of Scotland ; and for the redemptioun of thayme thay had
the money present to rander to the King and his estaits for laughfull
restitutioun and repossessioun, &c. The uther w r ay was, becaus the Kings
gudlie stature and ryp yeares requyrit the societie of sum condigne Prin-
cess to be his bedfallow; and that King Frederic had then twa doghters,
and was willing (geve it sould pleas the King of Scotland) ather to geve
him his chose of thayme, or that he wald accept the ane of thayme, as it
sould pleas the father to bestow, whilk sould be the maist cumlie, and the
best for his prencelie contentment.’’ The King saw the ambassadors at
Dunfermline, but delayed the first question on account of the plague then
raging, and directed them to remove to St. Andrews. As to the other
he thanked the King, and would communicate with his Majesty upon
both by an ambassador of his own.


A curious specimen of these primitive times is here told, that would
astonish our modern diplomatists to practice. “ When they (the ambassa-
dors) wer appointed to part out of Domfermeling towardis St. Androwes,
ther to get ther dispatche, his Maieste ordonit to tell them that he suld
send them horse out of the court to ryd vpon. The day of ther parting
being com, they send away ther bagage and officers before them, and wer
buted them selues tareing lang vpon his Maiesteis horse; quhilk, because
they cam not in dew tym, they tok ther journey fordwart vpon fut. His
Maieste was very miscontent when he vnderstod how they wer handled,
and caused his horse to folow fast efter them and ouertak them.”
“ Mester Peter Young, mester almowsser, was send in Denmark to
thank that King and to se his dochters, that he mycht mak report again of
his lyking of them, with a promyse that his Maieste suld send ther or it
wer lang ane honnourable ambassade.” “ Crownell Stewart” followed,
“ and they baith returnit with sa gud and frendly answers, that ther
was litle mair mention maid of the restitution of the ylles of Orkeney.
The K. of Denmark was also put in hope be them that his Maieste
suld send the nyxt sommer ane honnofable ambassade in Denmark to
deall further in tha matters.”
Queen Elizabeth was very jealous of the proposed Danish connection,
independent of the disappointment it offered to her own views, and
she despatched Dr. Wotton as her ambassador, who, she justly calcu-
lated, would acquire influence with James in private from his witty and
facetious conversation, and who had sufficient knavery to form a secret
concert with some of the Scottish noblemen for the purpose of causing a
quarrel with the court of Denmark, in order to put a stop to the intended
marriage, altogether, or, if that could not be, to defer it for three years.
In this plot they were at first very successful, and went so far as to plan
even the capture of the King, and his delivery into the hands of Queen
Elizabeth, but the conspiracy was discovered, and Wotton fled.
R


“ When the Kingis Maieste hard that they wer about till accuse and
convict the Quen his mother,” says Sir James Melville in his Memoirs,
he remonstrated very strongly against their proceedings, by letter ad-
dressed to Queen Elizabeth, and sent off Sir William Keith, one of the
gentlemen of his bedchamber, as his special ambassador, with instructions
to use his utmost endeavours to avert the threatened danger. He soon
after sent the Master of Gray and Sir Robert Melville to support Keith,
which they had done so strenuously, and in such strong terms, as to cause
her to threaten the life of Melville, because he “ spak braue and stout
langage to the consaill of England.” There is a holograph letter of James
in the British Museum addressed “To Master Archibald Douglas,” October,
1586, urging his best endeavours in the same cause. “ Reserve up youre
self na langer in the earnist dealing for my mother, for ye have done it to
long, and thinke not that any youre travellis can do goode if hir lyfe be
taikin, for then adeu with my dealing with thaime that are the speciall
instrumentis thairof, and thairfore gif ye looke for the contineuance of
my favoure towartis you, spaire na painis nor plainnes in this cace, bot
reid my letter wrettin to Williame Keithe, and conformeyoure selfquhollie
to the contends thairof, and in this requeist lett me reape the fruittis of
youre great credit thaire ather now or neuer. Faerwell.”
With Queen Elizabeth the applications of James were of little avail,
for her emissaries had so completely torn Scotland with dissensions, that
she knew he was unable to bring forward the only argument that could
have influenced her, by marching an army into England. Her factions
in Scotland were become more numerous and more virulent, from their
being mixed up with religion and supported by the clergy. Of this no-
thing affords a stronger illustration than that the whole clergy, with the
exception of the King’s own Chaplains, and one other clergyman, refused
to offer up the humane and merely charitable prayer, “ That it might
please God to illuminate Mary with the light of his truth, and save her


from the apparent danger with which she was threatened.” The council
having obtained the sentence of death, “ they gaif the Quen warnyng a
nycht of before to prepaire hir for God. Quhilk schort warnyng sche tok
very patiently.” But here let the curtain drop upon as foul a murder
as ever disgraced the page of history, and an unmatched example of
perfidy, treachery, and dissimulation on the part of Elizabeth !
In 1588 the marriage of James with the Princess of Denmark was re-
vived and again counteracted by the plans of Elizabeth. The ambassadors
had scarcely sailed for Denmark when she started a new match for him
with the Princess of Navarre, through the medium of Monsieur Bartas, and
some delay having occurred in consequence of an error in the commission of
the ambassadors, “ the K. of Denmark thocht nathing of ther commission,
hot fecles dealing and dryuyng of tym and faire langage, without any power
to conclud.” In the meantime the eldest daughter married the Duke of
Brunswick, but matters having been explained to the satisfaction of the
king, he expressed his wish that James should marry his second daughter,
and the ambassadors returned with her picture ; and almost at the same
time the ambassadors arrived from Navarre with the picture of their Prin-
cess. During the delays caused by these interferences the King of Den-
mark died, but so intent was he upon the marriage that he left instruc-
tions with his council on the subject. James decided on marrying the
Princess Anne of Denmark, and in order to prevent all further interrup-
tions, in June 1589 sent off his ambassadors, the Earl Marshall and others,
to carry the business through; but they had a long voyage, by tempes-
tuous and contrary winds, and when they did arrive another defect was dis-
covered in their commission, which forced them to wait until one of their
number was sent back to Edinburgh to get it corrected.
The marriage was entered into by proxy in August, and the young
Queen sailed for Scotland, but encountered very severe weather, and was
driven into Norway, where she was long detained. As every storm in


these days had a cause, so it was easily accounted for by witchcraft, called
forth by “ a kuff or a blaw, quhilk the admyrall of Denmark gaue to ane of
the Bailyeis of Copenhouen, whais wyfe consulting with hir associatis in
that art, raised the said storm, to be reuengit vpon the said admyrall.”
The witches in Scotland also combined with them, and raised continued
storms, and many vessels perished in the Frith of Forth. They had nightly
meetings and plots matured at Prestonpans, and even in the kirk at
North Berwick, where the devil presided in the pulpit, and John Fean or
Cunningham, who acted as secretary, called the roll, and gave the witches
their instructions. Many a night, it appears from the Criminal Record,
they went sailing in selves upon the Frith of Forth—many a black cat,
with its claws taken off, was flung into the sea, with incantations, —and
the devil himself went rolling over the waves, in shape of a hay-rick. At
one of their meetings, held “ be nicht in the kirk of Northberwick, wher
the deuell, cled in a black goun with a blak hat vpon his head, preachit
vnto a gret nomber of them out of the pulpit, having lyk leicht candelis
rond about him,” &c.—“ Then dyvers amang them enterit in a raisonyng,
maruelling that all ther deuellerie culd do no harm to the K. as it did till
others dyuers.” The deuell answerit, “II est vn home de Dieu.” The
devil’s “ body was hard lik yrn, as they thocht that handled him : his face
was terrible, his noise lyk the bek of an egle, gret bournyng eyn; his
handis and legis wer herry, with clawes upon his handis and feit lyk
the griffon, and spak with a how voice.” Fean the secretary, and a num-
ber of the poor wretches were tried before the Court of Justiciary, and,
being convicted, were burned, or “ worried at a stake,” (strangled,) con-
form to the sentence of Court, upon the Castle-hill at Edinburgh.
The King’s patience being worn out at Craigmillar Castle, where he staid
during the expectation of the Queen’s arrival, on the 28d October 1589,
suddenly announced his determination to go in person for her, by issuing a
Proclamation and Declaration, the former stating in part the reasons of


his intention, and containing instructions and power for the conducting
the affairs of the country, in case his stay should be prolonged beyond the
twenty days he calculated upon to return to Scotland.
The Declaration is a singular document, and particularly interesting,
because it was drawn up by himself, and is in his own handwriting.
“In respect I knaw that the motioun of my voyage at this tyme wilbe
diverslie skansit upoun, the interpreting quhairof may tend alsweill to my
grite dishonnour as to the wrangous blame of Innocentis, I have thair-
upoun bene moved to sett doun this present Declaratioun with my awne
hand, heirby to resolve all gude subjectis : First of all, the causes breiflie
that move me to tak this purpois in heid, and nixt in quhat fassioun I re-
solved myselff thairof.. As to the causes, I doubt nocht it is manifestlie
knawne to all how far I wes generallie found fault with be all men for
the delaying salang of my mariage; the ressonis wer, that 1 was allane,
without fader or moder, bruthir or sister, King of this realme, and air
appeirand of England: this my naikatnes maid me to be waik and my
Inemyis stark, ane man wes as na man, and the want of hoip of successioun
bread disdayne; yea my lang delay bred in the breistis of mony a grite
jealosie of my inhabilitie, as gif I wer a barrane stok: Thir ressonis, and
innumerable otheris, hourly objected, moved me to haisten the treaty of
my mariage ; for as to my awne nature, God is my witnes, I could haue
abstenit langair nor the weill of my patrie could haue permitted—l am
knawne, God be praised, not to be very intemperatly rashe nor concety in
my wechtiest effairis, nather use I to be sa caryed away with passioun as I
refuse to heir reasoun : This treaty then being perfyted, and the Quene
my bedfallow cuming on hir jornay, how the contrarious wyndis stayed
hir, and quhair sho wes drevin, it is mair nor notorious to all men: And
that it wes necessarlie concludit be the Esteatis that it behuifit necessarlie
to be performed this yeir, I remittit to thame selffis quha concludit the
same in the spring, at the Erll Mairshallis directing; the worde then


cuming to me that sho wes stayed frome cuming thrugh be the contrarious
tempestis of windis, and that hir shippis wer not able to perfyte hir voy-
age this yeir, thruch the grite hurte thai had ressaved; remembering
myselff of hir inhabilitie on the ane part to cum, and of the foirsaid reso-
lutioun of the Esteatis on the uther, the like quhairof I had oft solemp-
nitlie avowit, I upoun the instant, yea very moment, resolvit to mak
possible on my part that quhilk wes impossible on hirs. The place that
I resolvit this in wes Craigmillair, not ane of the haill Counsall being
present ther: And as I tuke this resolutioun onlie of myselff, as lam a
trew Prince, sa advised with myselff onlie quhat way to follow forth the
same: Quhairupoun I thocht first to haue had the cullour of the Erll
Bothuillis parting, quhome first I employed to haue maid this voyage, als-
weill in respect of his office, as likeuise the rest of the Counsale being
absent all that haill day; efter I come to Edinburgh, the Chancellair
and the Justice Clerk being yit unreturned oute of Lauder, and the
haill rest of the Officiaris of Estate being all at ther awne houssis,
the Clerk of Register onlie excepted. Bot fra I saw this voyage
impossible to be perfyted be the Erll Botlmill, in respect of the coistis
he had bestowed upoun the preparatiounis of my marriage, quhair-
by he wes unable to mak it with sic expeditioun and honnour as the
estate of that affair and his persone did require, I wes then forceid to seik
sum other way, and to abyde the Counsallis assembling; quha being con-
venit, fand sic difficulties in reiking out a nowmer of shippis for hir con-
voy, for sa I gaif it oute quha suld be the personis of the Ambassade, as I
wes compelled (to mak thame the mair eirnist) to avow in grite vehe-
mencie, that giff thay could be gottin na other to gang, I suld ga myselff
allane, gif it wer bot in ane ship : Bot giff all men (said I) had bene als
weill willit as become thame, I neidit nocht be in that strait. Thir
speiches moved the Chancellair upoun three respectis to mak his offir of
going: ffirst, taking these speiches of evill will unto him, because all men


knawis how he lies bene this lang tyme sklanderit for over grite slawnes
in the mater of my manage; nixt, his zeale to my service, seing me sa
eirnist; and last, the feir he had that I suld have performed my speiches,
giff na better culd have bene. Fra the tyme of the making of this offer,
I have evir kepit my intentioun of my going als clois as possible I could
frome all men, becaus I thocht ay it was aneuch for me to putt my fute
in the schip, quhen all thinges wer redy, without speiring of furthir, as I
kepit it generallie clois fra all men : sa I say upoun my honnour, I kepit
it sa frome the Chancellair, as I was nevir wount to do ony secreitis of
my wechtyest effearis: twa ressonis moving me thairto, first, becaus I
knew that giff I had maid him on the counsaill thairof, he had bene
blameit of putting it in my heid, quhilk had not bene his dewitie, for it
becumis na subjectis to giff Princes advise in sic materis; and thair-
foir remembering quhat invyous and unjust burding he dalie beiris, for
leiding me be the nose, as it wer, to all his appetytis, as giff I wer an
unressonable creature, or a bairne that could do nathing of myselff, I
thocht pitie then, to be the occasioun of the heaping of further unjust
sklander upoun his heade. The other reasoun wes, that as I perceaved
it wes for staying of me that he maid the offer of his ganging, sa was I
assured that upoun knawledge of my ganging he wald ather alto-
gether have stayed himselff, or at leist lingered als lang as he could,
thinking it over grite a burding to him to undertak my convoy, as
I knew, upoun the rumouris of my ganging, he lies said na les to sindrie
of his freindis. This far I speik for his parte, alsweill for my awne hon-
nouris saik, that I be not unjustlie sklanderit as ane irresolute asse, quha
can do nathing of himselff: 'as also that the honnestie and innocencie of
that man be not unjustlie and untreulie reproched. And as for my pairt;
quhat moved me, ye may juge be that quhilk I have alreddy said, be-
sydis the schortenes of the way, the suretie of the passage, being dene of
all sandes, foirlandis, or siclike dangeiris, the harboreyis in these partis sa


suir, and na forreyne fleetis resorting upoun these seis. It is my pie sure
then, that na man grudge or mnrmour at thir my procedingis, hot latt
every man leave a peaceable and quiet lyffe, without offending of any: and
that all man conforme himselff to the directionis in my proclamatioun
quhill my returne, quhilk I promeis salbe, God willing, within the space
of twentie dayes, wind and wethir serving: Latt all men assuir thame-
selffis that quhasoever contravenis my directionis in my absence, I will
think it a sufficient pruiff that he beris na luif in his hairt towardis me ;
and be the contrail*, thais will I onlie have respect to at my returne, that
reverends my commandiment and will in my absence. Fairweill.”
These events are thus described by the author of “ The Life of King
James the Sext.”
“ In the moneth of August of the nixt yeir, 1589, Queyne Anne,
doghter to Frederic King of Denmarc, was mareit in Denmarc to King
James the 6. of Scotland, be his ambassador the Erie Marshall, wha was
directit thair for for that effect.
“ In the end of that yeir the tempest of storme bayth be sea and land,
was sa vehement that many ships pereishit upoun the sea, sa that the
passage for Queyne Anne was verie difficill to cuni in Scotland; and the
King abayd daylie fra the moneth of August, luiking for her arryvall, whill,
at last, upon the 22 day of October, without lang deliberatioun, he em-
barkit himself, with his Chancellor Maitland, and certayne utheris of his
officiers and courteors, at the port of Leyth, and saillit to Opslo, whare
Queyne Anne was attending upoun fayre wother, and litill luiking for
his Majesteis cuming to hir at sik a tempestuous tyme of the yeir.”
The king appears to have been very expeditious in his movements, for,
it was only upon 11th October he issued his letter, declaring his intention
to bring home the Queen in Scot’s ships, and calling upon themariners in the
Frith of Forth to repair to Leith for the purpose of manning them. The
city of Edinburgh readily contributed their aid, and entered into an en-


gagement with “ David Hutchesoun, maister and skipper of the ship called
the Ayngell of Kirkcaldy,”—“ who sail furneis his said ship with all neces-
sars requisit in sic ane voyage, and specially with the number of twenty-
foure personis, guid and habill and weill expert maryners, quhairof thair
sail be sex at the leist habill and qualifeit to be pylats upoun ony sey-coast
of this realme, and with pulder bullat and mnnitioun in sic number and
quantitie as sail effeir for the honour of this burgh.”
The following notice appears in the books of sederunt of the Lords of
Council and Session, “ The King shippit at Leith to pas to Norrovay on
Wadinsday betwix xij and ane houris efter midnight, quhilk was the
xxij day of October 1589.”
Sir James Melville, in his Memoirs, says, “ Thre vther schippis sailed
with his Maieste, wherin was the Justice Clark, Carmychell, the prouest
of Linclowden, Willyem Keith, George Hum, James Sandilandis, and his
mester almowser, with all his hynes ordinary seruandis. The wether was
rough aneugh, for it was in the beginning of wynter, bot the last day was
sa extream stormy that they wer all in gret danger. Bot his Maiestie
landit that sam nycht at in Noroway, wher the Quen was abyd-
ing the wynd.”
The MS. quoted in “ the Documents relative to the Reception at
Edinburgh of the Kings and Queens of Scotland” adds, “ Upon the 28
day of the said moneth of October the Kingis Majestie landit at Slaikray
on the coast of Norroway, quhair his Majestie remaining a great space,
went up to Upslo, quhaire the Queine his bedfallow wes for the tyme, and
come with great travell, baith upon sea and land, upon the 19 day of
November therafter. And immediatlie at his coming past in quietlie
with buites and all to hir hienes. The rest of his company went to his
awin ludging, takin aganis his coming. His Majestie myndit to giue the
Queine a kiss efter the Scotis faschioun at meiting, quhilk sho refusit, as
not being the forme of hir cuntrie. Efter a few wordis prively spokin
betuix his Majestie and hir, thair past familiaritie and kisses.
c


“ Upon the 23 day of November 1589 the King and Queine wer me-
ried in Upslo be Mr. David Lyndsay, minister at Leithe. The Bancket
wes maid efter the best forme they could for the tyme.”
The King’s intention of returning so soon to Scotland, as held out in
his Declaration, was disappointed, for he “ culd not be persuadit to re-
tourn to Scotland that winter, be raisoun of the raging sees and storme
that he had susteanit a little of before.
“ The Quen and consaill of Denmark being advertist that his Maieste
was to abyd all that winter at send and requested him to com
to Denmark. Wher he past be land with the Quen his new bryd ; and
behaued him self honorably and liberally be the way, and at the court of
Denmark sa lang as he taried ther.”
A number of other Scots appear to have found their way to Norway be-
sides those who accompanied the King, as above mentioned, and whose
conduct led to much inconvenience, as witnesseth Sir James Melville. “Bot
the company that wer with his Maiestie held him in gret fascherie, to agre
ther continuall stryf, pryd, and partialites. The Erie Marchall, be raisoun
that he was ane ancien erle, and had bene employed in that honorable com-
mission, thocht to have the first place nyxt vnto his Maieste sa lang as he
was ther. The chancelair, be raisoun of his office, wald nedis haue the pre-
eminence ; lykwayes betwen the constable of Dunde and my L. Dinguall,
for the first place; between the chancelar and the Justice Clark. Bot
George Hum schot out quyetly Willyem Keith, fra his office of master of
the garderob. At lenth the hail wair deuydit into twa factions; the
ane for the Erie Marchall and thother for the chanceler, wha was the
starker, because the King tok his part. Sa that the chancelair tryumphed,
and deuysed, being yet in Denmark, many refourmations to be maid, and
new fourmes and faflions to be set ford wart at his Majesties hamecom-
myng.”
Amidst all these tourmoils incident to royalty, however, the merry
monarch had his fun, and he writes Alexander, Lord of Spynie, addressed


“ Mr. Alexander Lyndsay, vice Clialmerlane to oure Soverane Lord,” as
follows:
“ Sandie, quliill youre goode happe furneis me sum bettir occasion to
recompence youre honest and faithfull seruice xitterid be youre diligente
and cairfull attendance upon me, speciallie at this tyme, lett this assure
in the inuiolabill worde of youre awin prince and maister, that quhen Godd
randeris me in Skotlande I sail irreuocablie and with consent of parlia-
ment erect you the temporalitie of murraye in a temporall lordshipp with
all honouris thairto apparteining and lett this seme for cure to youre pre-
sent disease, from the castell of croneburg quhaire we are drinking and
dryuing our in the aulde maner.
J. R”
When the King of Denmark visited King James in 1606, the “ drinking
and driving our” was carried on to an extent beyond all precedent. The
exercises and amusements of the Kings during the day were, says Howes,
the continuator of Stow’s Chronicle, “ eyther to hunt, hawke, play at tenis,
see wrestling, or the manly play of the English fencers, six of the best being
selected, and played three against three with foyls, at sundry weapons, ac-
cording to the manner of fight: there was also the like play betweene a
skilful Scot and a Germeane, or running at Tilt,” &c. But as to the drink-
ing part of it in the evening, the King of Denmark appears, from Sir
Edward Peyton’s account, to have been a real sandbag, and too much for
King James, “ who got so drunk with him at Theobald’s, that he was
obliged to be carried to bed.” And Sir John Harrington, in writing to
Mr. Secretary Barlow, says,, “ I came here (Theobald’s) a day or two be-
fore the Danish King came; and from the day he did come until this
time, I have been well nigh overwhelmed with carousal and sports of all
kinds. The sports began each day in such a manner and such sorte as
well nigh persuaded me of Mahomet’s Paradise. We had women, and
indeed wine too of such plenty as would have astonished each sober be-


holder. Our feasts were magnificent, and the two Royal Guests did most
lovingly entertain each other at table. I think the Dane hath strangely
wrought in our good English Nobles, for those whom I never could get to
taste good liquor now follow the fashion and wallow in brutish delights.”
Sir John makes a great deal of fun in this letter at the expense of his betters,
but of course exaggerated. • “ The Entertainment and show went forward,
and most of the Presenters w’ent backward or fell down, wine did so occupy
their upper chambers. Now did appear in rich dress Hope, Faith and
Charity; Hope did assay to speak, but wine rendered her endeavours so
feeble, that she withdrew, and hoped the King would excuse her brevity.
Faith was then all alone, for I am certain she was not joyned with Good
Works, and left the Court in a staggering condition. Charity came to
the King’s feet, and seemed to cover the multitude of sins her sisters had
committed; in some sorte she made obeysance and brought giftes, but said
she would return home again, as there was no gift which Heaven had not
already given his Majesty. She then returned to Hope and Faith, who
were both sick and spewing in the lower hall.” So much for a Danish
feast!”
In the meantime great preparations were making at Edinburgh and
Leith for receiving the King and Queen in a suitable manner, and amongst
others is the following curious specimen of the customs of these days, and
the state of his Majesty’s finances. The Lord Provost and Magistrates
and Council resolved, that “ forswamekill as it is requisite for the honour
of the toun, that sum honourabill propyne be maid and gevin to the
Queynis Grace at hir entrie, and knawand that the toun lies ane Jowell
of the Kingis Majesties quhich is an taiblett of gold in ane caise with ane
dyomond and an emmerawld, lyand in the hands of Alexander Clerk of
Balbyrnie, to the toun’s behuif, in plege of foure thowsand pund; as
alswa understands that his Majestic, for to plesure the toun, is content
that thai propyne hir Grace with the said Jowell: Thairfore thai haif
thocht expedient to reteir the said Jowell furth of the hands of the said


Alexander Clerk, and he delyverand the samin to gif ane sufficient dis-
charge thairof. And therafter to propyne the samin to his Majestic, and
to repose thameselffis upoun his Gracis guid will for the payment of the
said sowme, for the quhilk the samen is layet in plege.”
Their arrival is thus noticed by David Moysi’e in his Memoirs:—“ His
Majestic with the Quenis Grace arryvit at Leithe npone the morne at
nicht, being the first of Maij 1590, and remainit in the Kingis work*
theare, till the sext day of the samyn monethe, that the palace of Haly-
rudhous wes maid redy. They wer met command out of the boit be the
Duik of Lenox, Lord Hammiltoun, Erie Bothuell, and a great number of
the nobilitie, with sum honestf men of Edenburgh.
“ There come with the King and Quenis Majesties, the Admirall of
Denmark Calipeir, Monke theCaptoune of Elsinburgh, with sundrie utheris
noblemen of the realme, and besydis that a xxx or fourtie personis in
goldin chenyeis of guid faschioun. The number of the haill trayne wes
ij°xxiij personis, quhilkis wer all interteined be the King and noblemen
of Scotland, and bancketted daylie. They were j m and twa c merkis
everie day for ther furnischingis during the tyme of thair remaining.”
The ceremony of the royal reception was attended with all the state
and pageantry usual on such occasions, and has been particularly de-
scribed in various works at the time, both in prose and verse. This was
followed by a coronation, with much feasting, banqueting, hunting and
other amusements in different parts of the country.
The King’s amusements seem to have been chiefly directed to hunting,
riding, “ schuting at the buttis,” and “ playing at cairts.” Hunting was
his great delight, and in that the Queen occasionally partook, at least in
shooting and hawking, but the King’s passion for hunting was so strong as
* The Old Custom House in after times, situate in Berners Street,
t The term used for citizens or corporation men.


to him sometimes even to forget affairs of state for it, and his enemies
to lampoon and scoff at him; as an illustration of that, may be here no-
ticed a very good piece of wit played off against him after his progress to
London. It is told in a letter from Edmond Lascelles to the Earl of Shrews-
bury, dated November 7> 1604. “ Thear is no newes heare but a reasonable
preaty jeast is spoken that happened at Royston. Theare was one of the
King’s speciall hounds caled Jowler missing one day. The King was
much displeased that he was wanted; notwithstanding went a-hunting.
The next day, when they weare on the feild, Jowler came in amongst the
rest of the hounds; the King was told of him, and was very glad, and
loking on him, spied a paper about his neck, and in the paper was writ-
ten “ Good Mr. Jowler, we pray you speake to the King (for he hears
you every day, and so doth he not us) that it will please his Majestic to
go back to London, for els the country wilbe undoon : all our provition
is spent already, and we are not able to intertayne him longer.”
With reference to the Queen’s hunting and shooting, several of her
letters to the King speak of her deers being preserved, of wishing to see
her jerfalcons fly, &c.; and on Ist August 1613 Mr. Chamberlain writes
Sir Dudley Carleton :—“ The King is in progress, and the Queen gone, or
going after. At their last being at Theobald’s, which was about a fort-
night since, the Queen, shooting a deer, mistook her mark, and killed
Jewel, the King’s most special and favourite hound: at which he stormed
exceedingly awhile; but after he knew who did it he was soon pacified,
and with much kindness wished her not to be troubled with it, for he
should love her never the worse, and the next day sent her a diamond
worth L. 2000 as a legacy from his dead dog.”— -(Jewell.)
In the King’s progress to London he hunted at various of the seats he
visited, and used to complain when interrupted by the crowd or the per-
sons of high rank and of office who paid their respects to him, that he would
have more pleasure in hunting if they would only cease to hunt him. The


Londoners were so anxious to humour his Majesty’s love for the chase,
that Saville, in his account of the King’s progress, says, “ From Stamford
Hill to London was made a traine with a tame deare, with such twinings
and doubles that the hounds could not take it faster than his Majestic
proceeded: yet still, by the industrie of the huntsman and the subtiltie
of him that made the traine in a full-mouthed crie all the w r ay, neuer far-
ther distant than one close from the highway whereby his Highnesse rid,
and for the most part directly against his Majestie, whom, together with
the whole companie, had the lee winde from the hounds, to the end they
might the better perceue and judge of the vniformitie in the cries.”
The King was very fond of archery, in which art, and in golf, he caused
his sons the Princes to be practised as soon as they were of suitable age
for it. The cards were also much played at by the King and
which “ Sandie Maculloch” seems to- have been the favourite companion,
and many an entry appears in the treasury accounts for money lost by the
King to Sandie, when “ schuting at the buttis,” and for sums lost both
by the King and Queen to him when “ playing at the cairtis.”
One of the most whimsical amusements of the King is described by Sir
Anthony Weldon after his arrival in London :—“ After the King supped
he would come forth to see pastimes and fooleries, in which Sir Edward
Zouch, Sir George Goring, and Sir John Finit were the cheife and Mas-
ter Fools, (and surely the fooling got them more than any other’s wisdome)
sometimes presenting David Droman and Archer Armstrong the King’s
foole, on the back of other fools, to tilt one another till they fell together
by the eares; sometimes they performed antick-dances. But Sir John
Millicent, (who was never .known before) was commended for notable
fooling, and was indeed the best extempore foole of them all.”
These pastimes or fooleries were the taste of the times, and pro-
bably an introduction from France, where one of the chief amusements
at the solemnization of royal visits, or such like occasions, was a tilting


in boats, where the tilters were continually getting knocked off the high
prow into the water by the wooden spears with which they were armed.
Whether the Queen joined in seeing these sports, is not said, but she
was particularly fond of all sorts of dancing, of music, and stage repre-
sentations, and she, with the ladies of her court, and afterwards with the
addition of the Prince and Princess, often figured in masques, as they
called them, which were got up at a very considerable expense.
Upon this subject Lady Arabella Stuart, in a letter to Earl Shrews-
bury, dated from the Queen’s Court at Fulston Bth December 1603, after
noticing the arrival of a number of ambassadors, says :—“ But out of this
confusion of imbassages, will you know how we spend our time on the
Queen side ? Whilst I was at Winchester theare weare certaine child-
playes remembered by the fayre Ladies, viz. e I pray, my Lord, give me
a course in your park,’— ‘ Rise, pig, and go,’— ‘ One penny, follow me,’
&c. And when I came to Court they were as highly in request as ever
cracking of nuts was. So I was by the Mistress of the Revelles not only
compelled to play at I know not what, (for till that day 1 never heard of
a play called Fier) but even persuaded by the princely example to play
the childe againe. This exercise is mostly used from ten of the clock at
night to two or three in the morning; but that day I made one it began
at twilight and ended at supper-time. Theare was an interlude, but not
so rediculous (rediculous as it was) as my letter, which I heare conclude.”
The play upon words which the King continually practised, was also
the custom of the time, and if not introduced, was at any rate kept alive
by Ben Jonson. Even when the King grieved for the loss of his dog, as
is before mentioned, he could not forego the pun of sending the present of
a diamond as the legacy of his dead dog Jewel. At that period this acquire-
ment Avas a sure step to preferment both at the courts of Elizabeth and
of James, and my Lord Herbert, who is described as “ the very picture
and viva effigies of nobility,” is complimented because “ he leapes, he


daunces, he singes, he gives counterbusses,” &c. “ Pun and quibble were
then in high vogue, and a man was to expect no preferment in that age,
either in church or state, who was not a proficient in that kind of wit.”
Mr. Toby Mathew, dean of Christ Church, was an adept in that way. He
left Durham for a benefice of less income “ for lack of Grace? as he said,
and afterwards became Vice Chancellor of Oxford. A person who had
a case before him was very anxious to delay the court for his counsel.
“ Who is your counsel ?” says the Vice Chancellor, “ Mr. Leesteed,” an-
swers the man ; “ alas,” replied the Vice Chancellor, “ no man can stand
you in less stead .”—“ No remedy,” adds the other, “ necessity has no law?
—“ Indeed,” quoth he, “no more I think has your Chancellor.” A man
came in great haste to sign a bond very like to be forfeited, saying, “ he
would be bound if he might be taken in? —“ Yes,” says the Judge, “ I
think you will he taken in? —“ What -is your name ?”—“ Cox,” said the
party; “ Make him room there,” said the Chancellor, “ let that Cox come
in.” The private history of the court abounds with these, one of which,
in verse, is not undeserving of notice, which was given to the King when
the infant daughter of Lady Pope was presented to him at Halstead on
25th June 1618, holding in her hand, says Dr. Fuller, “this paper of
verses:—
“ OF THE LADYE POPE’S DAUGHTER, PRESENTED TO THE KING
ATT HALSTEED 251 H JUNII 1618.
“ Sir, this my litle Mistris here
Did nere ascend to Peter’s chaire.
Nor anye triple Crowne did weare.
And yett she is a Pope.
Noe benefice she ever solde
Nor pardon, nor dispenst for golde ;
She scarcely is a quarter olde,
And yett she is a Pope.
1)


Noe King her feete did ever kisse,
Nor had worse looke from her then this;
Nor doth she hope
To Saint men with a rope;
And yett she is a Pope.
A female Pope, you’ll say, a second Joane,
But sure this is Pope Innocent, or none !"
Proceeding, however, to the subject more immediately connected with
these letters, “ Quene Anne, oure noble Princes, bure her first sone in
the castell of Sterling upon Tyisday the 19th day of Februar (1594,) and
(he) was baptesit in Sterling be the naymis of Henrie Frederik, and
installit Prince of Garrick.”
“ The 15 day of August (1596) the Queyne was delyverit of a ladie in
Falkland, and baptesit be the nayme of Elizabeth.”
“ Due Charlis, the King’s sone, was borne the 20th day of November
(1600), and was baytesit the 23 of December, and installit Due of Al-
banie, Marquise of Ormont, and Erie of Rosse.”
The notice of the other children is not called for, the letters now pre-
sented being those of the above three, and chiefly during the time of their
education. /Vast ceremonies and expenses attended the occasions of births
and baptisms, of which Sir Dudley Carleton’s letter to Mr. Win wood is a
true picture, and as afterwards appears in the treasurer’s books. “ Here is
much adoe about the Queen’s lying down, and great suit made for offices,
of carrying the white staff, holding the back of the chair, door-keeping,
cradle-rocking, and such like gossip’s tricks, which you should understand
much better than I.” And Mr. Samuel Calvert writes, “ The Queen ex-
pects delivery within a month. There is great preparation of nurses, mid-
wives, rockers, and other officers, to the number of forty or more..”
The baptism of Prince Henry Frederick was solemnized with the great-
est pomp at Stirling Castle, at which ambassadors attended from almost


all the courts of Europe, the particulars of which have been given in a
publication of the time. The invitations to the nobility and gentry were
signed by the King, and the parties are respectively desired also “ to haist
in sic quick stuff as ye haif in reddines and may spair to the support of
the charges, that the venneson and wyld foull, as it may be haill callour
about the day of the solempnitie.” There are also preserved in the ac-
counts of the Lords High Treasurers of Scotland a variety of warrants
and precepts of payment for furnishings upon this as well as other occa-
sions, obligingly communicated to me by Mr. Macdonald, a member of
the Club, and which are given as an appendix to this prefatory notice.
The death of Queen Elizabeth, which took place on the 24th March
1603, led to many important changes. King James had kept up a pri-
vate correspondence with several persons at the Court of Elizabeth, and
amongst these was Lady Scroope, to whom he sent a sapphire ring by Sir
James Fullerton, which it was agreed she was to return by a special mes-
senger, as the token by which the King would know that the Queen had
certainly expired. Lady Scroope was the sister of Sir Robert Carey, who
became himself the messenger, and travelled on horseback with extraordi-
nary speed. The Queen died on Thursday morning, he reached Berwick
on Saturday, and the same evening arrived at Holyroodhouse, and thus
describes his reception■
“ The King was newly gone to bed by the time I knocked at the Gate.
I was quickly let in and carried up to the King’s Chamber. I kneeled by
him and saluted him by his title of England, Scotland, France, and Ire-
land. Hee gave mee his hand to kisse, and bade me Welcome. After he
had long discoursed of the manner of the Queen’s sicknesse and of her
death, he asked what Letters I had from the Councill ? I told him none,
and acquainted him how narrowly I escaped from them. And yet I had
brought him a blue Ring from a faire Lady that I hoped would give him
assurance of the truth that I had reported. He tooke it, and looked upon


it, and said 4 It is enough, I know by this you are a true messenger.’
The Lords of the Council sent off their despatch on 25th March intimat-
ing the Queen’s death, and requesting his Majesty’s presence in London.”
The King made great despatch in complying with this call. He was
proclaimed at Edinburgh on 31st March, and upon Sunday 3d April
went to church, and after sermon addressed the people, who were much
moved at his leaving them, and told them that though he was now con-
strained to do so, he would shortly return and do all he could to serve
them. On sth April the King left Edinburgh, which is thus noticed in
Dugdale’s Time Triumphant , “ let me tell you, by the way, the joy was
not so great in England by the English to fetch him as the sorrow was in
Scotland of the Scots to leave him, and that was more confounding to
their joyes then the rest, the parting betwixt the Queene and him in the
open streete, in the full eye of all his subjects, who spent teares in abound-
ance to behold it.”
His departure was so sudden, and his hurry so great, that he had no
opportunity of seeing his sons the Princes, and in consequence he wrote
to Prince Henry, (who was then in his tenth year) the following letter, the
original of which is preserved in the British Museum, Harl. MS. 6986.
“ My Sonne, That I see you not before my pairting impute it to this great
occasion, quhairin tyme is sa preciouse, but that shall, by Goddis grace,
be recompencid by youre cumming to me shortlie, and continuall residence
with me ever after; let not this newis make you proude or insolent,
a King’s sonne and heire was ye before, and na maire are ye yett; the
augmentation that is heirby lyke to fall unto you, is but in caires and
heavie burthens ; be thairfore merrie but not insolent; keepe a greatnes
but sine fastu; be resolute, but not willfull; keepe youre kyndnes, but
in honorable sorte ; choose nane to be your playe fellowis but thaime that
are well borne; and, above all things, give never good countenance to
any but according as ye shall be informed that they are in estimation with


me; looke upon all Englishemen that shall cum to visite you as upon
youre loving suhjectis, not with that ceremonie as towardis straingeris,
and yett with suche hartines as at this tyme they deserve : this Gentle-
man quhom this bearare accompanies is worthie and of guide ranke, and
nou my familiare servitoure ; use him thairfore in a maire hamelie louing
sorte nor otheris. I sende you herewith my booke laitlie prentid, studdie
and profite in it as ye wolde deserve my blessing, and as thaire can
na thing happen unto you quhairof ye will not finde the generall grounde
thairin, if not the uerrie particulaire pointe touched, sa mon ye leuell
euerie mannis opinions or aduyses unto you as ye finde thaime agree or
discorde with the reulis thaire sett doun, allowing and following thaire
aduyses that agrees with the same, mistrusting and frowning upon theime
that aduyses you to the contraire; be diligent and earnist in youre stud-
dies, that at your meeting with me, I maye praise you for your progresse
in learning. Be obedient to youre maister for youre awin and to
procure my thankis, for in reuerencing him ye obeye me and honoure
yourself. Fairwell. Your louing Father,
James R.
The expenses of the King’s journey to London appears, from an
authenticated document to have amounted to L.l 0,752. The expenses
of Queen Elizabeth’s funeral, were L.l 7,498.
The King had given the charge of Prince Henry to the Earl of Mar,
which was afterwards the cause of some disquietude between the King and
Queen, and incensed her greatly against the Earl. The King’s letter bears,
“ Because in the surety of my.son consisteth my surety, and I have concre-
dited to yow the charge of his keeping upon the trust I have of your honesty:
this I command you out of my own mouth, being in the company of those I
like otherwise, for any charge or necessity that can come from me, you
shall not deliver him. And in case God call me at any time, see that


neither for the Queen nor Estates their pleasure, you deliuer him till he
be eighteen, and that he command you himself. This from your assured
friend, Striveling, 24th July 1595.”
In 1603, when Lord Mar accompanied the King to London, the Prince
and Princess were placed under the care of his Countess, with similar in-
structions. The King had desired the Queen to follow him within twenty
days, and the Prince to remain in the meantime at Stirling. The Queen
accordingly went there for the Prince, but the Countess refused to deliver
him up, which so incensed and distressed the Queen, that she was seized
with a fever. The Duke of Lennox was sent from London with a warrant
to receive the Prince, and give him to the Queen; but still the Queen was
not satisfied, and wrote in very strong terms to the King of the dishonour
done to her, and insisted upon public reparation, by the punishment of the
Earl of Mar and his servants. The King, in reply, informed her by the mes-
senger “ that she would act wisely to forget the resentment she nourished
against the Earl, and thank God for the peaceable possession which they
had obtained of these kingdoms, which, next to God’s goodness, he ascribed
to the last negotiation of his Lordship in England.” The Queen, how-
ever, afforded a specimen of her temper on this occasion, and with the
utmost fury replied, “ she could rather have wished never to see England
than to be obliged for it to the Earl.”
Connected with this subject, and showing the continuation of the Queen’s
bad temper, are the two following letters, which, although printed by Lord
Hailes, seem deserving of being here added. The first is a superscribed
letter of the King’s to the Earl of Mar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland.
“ Right Trusty, and well-beloved Cousin and Counsellor, we greet
you right hartely well. Having understood as well by your awin decla-
ration made to the Counsell, which yee desyred should by them be signi-
fied unto us as by your owne letter, upon your dewty and allegeance that
some of our subjects had an intention to have taken our dearest Son the


Prince, if he had come from Sterling to the Torwood, and considering the
same to he a purpose of no little consequence, that it cannot he let pass,
hut meryting deu tryall and condigne punishment, which cannot be well
prosequited except yee come hither in personne to give us up the names
of the persons who should have been of the said consperacy, that we may
thereafter proceed in their tryall. It is therefore our will that yee faill
not all excuses sette aside to addresse yourself hither in all possible dili-
gence to the effect foresaid; for seeing yee have sette doune the accusa-
tion so clearly, wee intend to proceede with no less care in the tryall and
punishment thereof.
As for our letter sent by you to our dearest Bed-fellow, although you
have done nothing in the not dely very thereof but according to our direc-
tion ; yet, since the contents thereof are not of so great consequence as
they are particulare and not fitte to come in every man’s hands, it is our
will that, for the better satisfaction, ye delyver the same to any of the
Counsell to be given to her, and disposed upon as she pleaseth, in case
she continew in that wilfulness, as she will not heare your credite, nor
receive the same from your own handes.
In all other things concerning the transporting of our Sone, yee shall
dispose yourself (according as our Cousin the Duke of Lennox will par-
ticularly acquaint you) to that which is our leasure, and advise with him
carefully upon our honour and his surety, to whose sufficiency we com-
mitting the rest, and looking for yourself in all haste, we bid you farewell.
From our Palace at Greenwich, the 13th of May 1603.”
The following letter to the Queen is without date—it is holograph of the
King, and must be the one alluded to in the above letter to the Earlof Mar.
“ My Hairte,
“ Immediatelie before the resaite of your lettir I was purposed to have
written unto you, and that without any greate occasion except for freeing


myself at your liandis from the imputation of seveareness, but now youre
lettir has gevin more maitter to wryte, although I take small delyte to
meddle in so unpleasant a proces. I wonder that nather your long know-
ledge of my nature, nor my laite earniste purgation unto you can cure
you of that rooted erroure that any living darre speak or inform me in
any wayes to your prejudice, or yett that ye can think thaire youre un-
friendis that are true-servantis to me. I can say no more but proteste
upon the peril of my salvation and damnation, that nather the Erie of
Marr nor any flesh living ever informed me that ye was upon any Papish
or Spanish course, or that ye hadde any other thouchtes but a wrong con-
ceaved opinion that he had more interest in youre Sone, or wolde not deliver
him unto you, nather does he farther charge the Noblemen that was with
you thaire, but that he was informed that some of thaime thocht by force to
have assisted you in the taking my Sonne out of his handis; but as
for any other Papiste or forrine practise, by God he doeth not so much as
alleadge it: thairefore he says he never will presume to accuse them, since
it may happen well to importe your offence; and thairfore I say over
agane, leave these froward womanlie apprehensions, for, I thank God, I
carrie that love and respecte unto you quhich by the law of God and na-
ture I ought to do to my wyfe and mother of my children, but not for
that ye are a King’s dauchter, for quhither ye waire a King’s or a cook’s
dauchter ye must be all alike to me, being once my wyfe. For the re-
spect of your honorable birthe and decente I married you, but the love
and respecte I now beare you is because that ye are my married wyfe,
and so partaker of my honoure as of my other fortunes. I beseache you
excuse my rude plainness in this; for casting up of your birthe is a need-
less impertinent argument to me. God is my witness, I ever preferred
you to all my bairnes, much more then to any subjecte ; but if you will
ever give place to the reports of everie flattering sicophant that will per-
swade you that when I account well of an honest and wise servant for


his true faithful service to me, that it is to compare or prefere him to
you, then will nather ye or Ibe ever at reste or peace. I have, accord-
ing to my promise, coppied so much of that plotte quhairof I wrote unto
you in my last, as did concern my Sonne and you, quhich herein is in-
closed, that ye may see I wrote it not without cause, but I desyre it not
to have any Secretarys than your self. As for your dool made concerning
it, it is utterlie impertinent at this time, for sic reasons as the bearer will
show unto you, quhom I have likewise commandit to impairte dyvers
other points unto you, which, for fear of wearieing your eyes with my
rugged hande, I have herein omitted praying God, my hairte, to preserve
you and all the bairnes, and sende me a blythe meeting with you, and a
couple of thaime. Your awin James.”
The Queen almost immediately set off to London with the children,
and was afterwards reconciled to the Earl on their arrival at Windsor;
an act of Council approved of his conduct, and discharged him from his
trust, as no longer necessary, with many thanks and compliments, and
various honours were conferred upon him for his services.
Prince Charles was entrusted to the care of the Lord President Fyvie,
and was of a very weakly constitution. Sir Robert Carey says in his nar-
rative, “ When I was at Norham God put it into my mind to go to Dun-
fermling to see the King’s second son. I found him a very weak child.”
And upon 30th May 1603 Lord Fyvie writes, “ Your Sacred Majesteis
maist nobill sone, Duke Chairles continewis (praisit be God) in guid
health, guid courage, and loftie minde, althoght 3ft weake in bodie, is be-
ginnand to speik sum wordis far better as yet off his minde and tongue
nor off his bodie and feite. Bot I hope in God he sail be all weill and
Prencelie, wordie of your Majestie as his Grace is jugit be all werye like
in lineamentis to your Royall person.”
Sir Robert Carey adds the following in his memoirs—“ The Duke was
E


past four years old when he was first deliuered to my wife; he was not
able to go, nor scant stand alone, he was so weak in his joints, and espe-
cially his ankles, insomuch as many feared they were out of joint; yet God
so blessed him both with health and strength, that he proved daily stronger
and stronger. Many a battle my wife had with the King, but she still
prevailed. The King was desirous that the string under his tongue should
be cut, for he was so long beginning to speak,' as he thought he would
never have spoke. Then he would have him put in iron boots, to
strengthen his sinews and joints; but my wife protested so much against
them both, as she got the victory, and the King was fain to yield. My
wife had the charge of him from a little past four till he was almost eleven
years old, in all which time he daily grew more and more in health and
strength, both in body and mind, to the amazement of many that knew
his weakness when she first took charge of him.”
The King’s rule seems to have been to require occasional specimens of
his children’s progress in their education by letters, (especially about the
new year), written in the languages they were studying at the time ; and
accordingly most of the letters that form the bulk of the facsimiles, are
of that description. No one can look on these without satisfaction, al-
though the Prince only tells us, “ I learne to decline substantiues and
adjectiues,” and the grandson, that “ I can say Nominative hie, hmc, hoc, and
all 5 declensions, and a part of pronomen and a part of verbum. I have
two horses alive that can goe up my staires, a black horse and a Chesnut
horse.” Those of the Princess Elizabeth, afterwards Queen of Bohemia,
are not less interesting, and those of the Elector become so merely from
his having been her husband, for otherwise they are of little importance.
In her Italian letters the Princess has successfully imitated the Italian
hand, and one of them in particular is quite beautiful both for the hand
writing and the eloquence of the style and the language in which her
grateful sentiments towards her father are conveyed.


These letters were not passed over by the King as mere matter of form,
of which one very good example may be observed in regard to a letter of
Prince Henry addressed to the King on Ist January 1603-4, which is cer-
tainly a very pretty specimen of his writing, and evinces a most remark-
able progress in penmanship from his previous half printed half written
one signed Henry Stewart. It did not escape the King’s penetration, and
his letter of chastisement, which is printed in Nichols Progresses, will
better speak the King’s mind than any other words can express.
“ My Sonne, I am glad that by youre letter I may persave that ye
make some progresse in learning, althoch I suspecte ye have rather writ-
ten than dyted it, for I longe to rassaue a letter from you that maye be
quhollie yours, as well maitter as forme, as wellformid by youre minde as
drawin by youre fingers, for ye maye remember that in my Booke to
you I warne you to bewaire with that k'ynde of witte that maye flye out
at the end of youre fingers, not that I comende not a faire hande wrytting,
sed hoc facito illud non omittito, and the other is multo magis prcecipuum;
but nothing will be impossible for you if ye will onlie remember two
rewils, the one ande semper in all vertuouse actions; truste a litle more
to yoore owin strentb, and awaye with childish bashfullnes audaces fortuna
jurat timidosque repellit; the other is my old ofte-repeatid rewle unto you,
quhat ever ye are about hoc age. I am also glaide of the discouerie of
youe litle counterfitte wenche. I praye God ye maye be my aire in suche
discoueries ; ye haue ofte hearde me saye that most miracles nou-a-dayes
proues but illusions, and ye maye see by this hou waire Judgis should be
in trusting accusations without an exacte tryall, and lykewayes hou easiele
people are inducid to truste wonders; lett her be kept fast tell my com-
myng, and thus God blesse you, my Sonne.”
Henry was a Prince of the highest promise; he was the idol of the
nation, and his death was received as the announcement of a national mis-
fortune. Various authors have recorded his qualities by histories of his


life, and by lamentations upon liis death, and his letters, published and
unpublished, are so numerous as to make it endless to allude to them.
His studies were various and comprehensive, and his athletic exercises
not less so. In some of the last he indulged to excess, and of this Sir
Charles Cornwallis, in “ A Discourse of the Most Illustrious Prince Henry,
written in 1 626,” pointedly complains. “ His other exercises were dan-
cing, leaping, and, in times of yeare fit for it, learning to swimmc, at
sometimes w T alking fast and farre, to accustome and enable himselfe to
make a long march when time should require it; but most of all at Ten-
nis play, wherein, to speake the truth, which in all things I especially
affect, he neither observed moderation nor what appertained to his dignity
and person, continuing oftimes his play for the space of three or foure
houres, and the same in his shirt, rather becoming an artesan than a Prince,
who in things of that nature are onely to affect comelinesse, or rather a
kinde of carelessnesse in shew, to make their activities seeme the more
naturall, then a laborious and toiling industry.”
In Strutt’s sports the following anecdote is told of him. “ While the
Prince was playing at Goff, his Schoolmaster (whose ferula had likely
been in contact with the royal palm) stood talking with another, and
marking not his Highness, warning him to stand further off; the Prince,
thinking he had gone aside, lifted up his Goff Club to strike the Ball:
mean time one standing bye said to him, “ Beware that you hit not Mas-
ter Newton,” wherewith he, drawing back his hand, said, “ Had I done
so I had but paid my debts.”
Master Newton was very much esteemed by the Prince, as the follow-
ing letter, dated Richmond, Jan. 28, 1605-6, shows;—“ Sir, Your Ma-
jestie commanded me to wryte to you when any fitt occasion were offred,
and now hearing that upon the death of the Archbishop of Yorke there
are many sutars for preferment I have taken the boldnesse to be a suter
also for my Master. Not because I doubt that your Majestie is unmynd-


full of your promesse made at Hampton Court, that if he should stay so
long as till the Archbishop were dead, he should have the Deanry of Dur-
ham ; but to shew the desyre I have to do good to my Master, I have
learned, among other good lessons, this out of Pibrac :
Tune scaurois d’assez ample salaire
Recompenser ccluy qui t’a soigne
En ton enfance et qui t’a enseigne
A bicn parler et sur tout a bien faire.
and I know perfytely that my master’s hope these two yeeres past hath
rested altogether upon the expectation of this Deanry; and so hoping that
your Majestic will both accept of my humble sute, and excuse my bold-
nesse, I kisse your Majesties hands. Your Majestie’s most dutifull and
obedient sone, Henry.”
This application could not be resisted, and Master Newton was instal-
led Dean of Durham on 27th September 1606. Having acquired a for-
tune he afterwards resigned the Church, and was created a baronet on
2d April 1620.
Another specimen of his kind consideration and zeal for investigation
is to be found in a letter to “ his dear freind Sir John Harrington in 1 609 :
—My Good Fellow, —1 have here sent you certaine matters of anciente
sortc, which I gained by searche in a musty vellome booke in my Father’s
closet, and as it hathe great mentione of youre ancestry, I hope it will not
meet your displeasure. It gave me some paines to reade, and some to
write also, but I have a pleasure in over-reaching difficult matters. When
I see you (and let that be shortlie) you will find me your better at Tennis
and Pike. Good Fellow, I write your friend, Henry. Your Latin
Epistle I much esteem, and will at leisure give answer to.” The book here
alluded to was “ An account of the Barons of Harrington alias Havring-
ton.”


The two brothers had a strong attachment to each other, of which their
letters, published by Birch, Ellis, and others, are the best indications.
None of these are in Sir James Balfour’s collection, which is confined to
those addressed to the King. Two letters from Prince Charles to Prince
Henry may be very appropriately given here out of numbers of others
which there is pleasure to dwell oh if it was not for swelling this intro-
duction to too great an extent with articles that have been already
printed. The first of these is probably even earlier than the one of which
there is a facsimile given, beginning “ Sweet, Sweet Father.” They are
both signed York, and he was created to that title when he was only four
years old. The letter to the King above alluded to was to appearance the
first specimen of his penmanship, and cost him so much labour, that the
following letter to his brother is only signed by him:—
“ Sweet, sweet Brother, I thank you for your Letter, I will keep it bet-
ter than all my graith; and I will send my pistolles by Maister Newton.
I will give anie thing I have to yow, both horss and my bookes, and my
pieces and my cross bowes, or anie thing that you would haive. Good
Brother, loove me, and I shall ever loove and serve yow. Your looving
Brother to be commanded, York.”
The next is entirely his handwriting, and follows various letters about
his amusements, horses, dogs, hunting, &c.
“ Sir, Pleas your H. I doe keep your haires in breath, (and I have very
good sport). I doe wish the King and you might see it. So, longing to
see you, I kisse your hand, and rest yours to be commanded,
York.
“My Mayde’s service to you. To his Hienesse.”
The brothers and sister w T ere equally attached to each other, and when the
Palsgrave arrived, and the arrangements were proceeding for the marriage of
Princess Elizabeth, Prince Henry evinced the utmost kindness upon all oc-


casions, and though then in a dying state, exerted himself over much in his
attentions to one whom he wished but never lived to see married to his
sister, “ Yet was he wonderfully busie in providing and giving order for
every thing belonging to his care for his Sister’s Marriage, advancing the
same by all meanes possible, keeping also his Highnesse the Palsgrave
company as much as conveniently he could, together with Count Henrie
his Excellencie Grave Maurice his brother whom he also much honoured
and esteemed.” The Monday of the week in which he died, when inter-
mission of his pain allowed him, he “ did rise and put on his cloaths, play-
ing at cards that day and the next also with his brother the Duke of Yorke
and Count Henry.” On Thursday evening,” says Sir Charles Cormvallis,
“ appeared a fatall signe about two hours or more within the night, bearing
the colours and show of a rainbow, which hung directly crosse over Saint
James’s House. It was first perceived about seven a clocke at night,
which I myselfe did see, which divers others looking thereupon with ad-
miration, continuing untill past bed-time, being no more scene. This
night w r as unquiet, and he rested ill.”
“ To tell you that our Rising Sun is set,” writes the Earl of Dorset to
Sir Thomas Edmonds (23d November 1612) “ere scarce he had shone,
and that all our glory lies buried, you know and lament as well as we,
and more truly, or else you were not a man and sensible of this King-
dom’s loss.” He frequently called David! David! but when Sir David
Murray came he was unable to speak to him. Mr. Chamberlain writes
Sir Dudley Garleton (12th November) “The Lady Elizabeth is much af-
flicted with this loss, and not without good cause; for he did extraordi-
narily affect her, and during his sickness enquired after her, and the last
words he spake in good sense, they say, were “ TVhere is my dear sister V
She was desirous to visit him, and went once or twice in the evening
disguised for that purpose, but could not be admitted, because his dis-
ease was doubted to be contagious. Pie meant to have conducted her on


her way into Germany, to the uttermost bounds of the States dominions,
which purpose he kept very secret; and it came abroad but since his
death.”
No less than thirty-two publications came out upon the death of this
amiable and accomplished Prince, under all sorts of names, in prose and
verse, from the simple Elegy and Lamentation to the “ Lachrymai Lach-
rymarum, or the Spirit of Teares distilled for the on-tymely death of the
incomparable Prince, Panaretus.”
Prince Charles officiated as chief mourner, and the obsequies were at-
tended by “ Prince Frederick, Count Palatine of the Rhein,” (as he was
now called) “ Count Henry de Nassaw,” and all their attendants.
Time would not stop, and the Palsgrave could not tarry, therefore the
arrangements for the marriage of the Princess Elizabeth followed very
shortly. The Queen had been, at first, very averse to the match, al-
though it was fixed that the Palsgrave was soon to be made King of Bo-
hemia. Amidst the gossip of the day “an idle story asserts that she
used to call her daughter, in disdain of so inferior an alliance, “ Goody
Palsgrave.” However the Queen’s opinion underwent a great change, for,
according to a letter in Birch’s MSS. “ the Queen doth discover her lik-
ing of this match over all others ; and for the more honouring of it she
exceedeth the King in new liveries that she giveth to her servants, and
caresseth the Palsgrave whensoever he cometh to her, as if he were her
own son.” Mr. Chamberlain writes his opinion on the subject to Mrs.
Alice Carleton. “On Tuesday I took occasion to go to Court because I
had never seen the Palsgrave, nor the Lady Elizabeth near hand for a long
time. I had my full view" of them both, but will not tell you all I think,
but only this, that he ow r es his Mistress nothing if he w r ere a King’s
son, as she is a King’s Daughter. The w’orst is, methinks he is much
too young and small-timbered to undertake such a task.”
Great spectacles, fireworks, ■with numerous masks, public feasts and


rejoicings preceded and followed the solemnity of the marriage, which are
described in eleven publications of the time. The bride and bridegroom
after the ceremony proceeded to dine in state at the new banqueting
house, with the prince, the ambassadors, and all the lords and ladies; “ and
then fell to dancing, masking, and revelling, according to the custome of
such assemblies, which continued all the day, and part of the night in
great pleasure.” And it appears that “ the ringers of St. Margaret’s were
paid 2s. 6d. at the Lady Elizabeth her Grace’s marriage.” Her portion,
paid to the Palsgrave was L. 40,000, and the expense, including her transport
to Flushing was L. 53,294. Of this there was no less than L. 4800 “ paid
to the treasurer of the Navie, for the Navall fight performed on the
Thames, and L. 2880 for the fireworks on the Thames.”
Picnics have been claimed as a recent introduction, but these would
appear to have been in ordinary practice' during the reign of King James.
One of these is described in a letter by Sir Philip Man waring from New-
market to the Earl of Arundel:—“ The Prince his birth-day hathe beene
solemnized heare by those few Marquises and Lords which found them-
selves heare; and to supplie the want of the Lords, Knights and Squires
were admitted to a consultation, wherein it was resolved that such a
number should meate at Gameges, and bring every man his dish of meate.
It was left to their owne choyces what to bring; some strove to be sub-
stantial!, some curios, and some extravagant. Sir George Goring’s inven-
tion bore away the bell; and that was foure huge brawny piggs, pipeinge
hott, bitted and harnised with ropes of sarsiges, all tyed to a monstrous
bag-pudding.”
Neither the King nor the Queen appear to have been at this party,
though the humour of it accords very much with the Queen’s taste. She
used to go to see the bears and lions baited in the tower, with the Prince,
the Duke of Brunswick, and others, whether the King was present or not;
and the King, who, by the bye introduced horse-racing into England also
F


used occasionally to attend the cock-pit, for all these sort of things re-
ceived his countenance.
Amidst all her gaities the Queen never lost sight of her own interest,
and other specimens of her temper, than that she exhibited against the Earl
of Mar, occasionally occur. James was always attentive to her, and some-
times gave her pretty pointed lectures about checking her temper, and the
jealousies she was seized with against the most faithful of his servants,
in viewing any particular attention paid to them by the King as indicating
a preference to herself. James had recourse to a very effectual remedy, as
appears by the pen of Archbishop Abbot, who says, “ King James had a
fashion that he would never admit any to nearness about himself, but
such ane one as the Queen should commend unto him, and make some
suit on his behalf; that if the Queen afterwards being ill-treated,' should
complain of this dear one, he might make his answer: ‘lt is long of
yourself, for you were the party that commended him unto me.’ Our
old Master took delight in things of this nature.”
When on his progress to London from Edinburgh, he wrote the Privy
Council, 12 April, 1603 ;“Aswe do intend to bring into this Realme as
soone as possibly we can, both the Queene our Wyfe, and our two elder
Children, which be able to abyde the travaill, we must recommend to your
consideration the sending hither of such Jewells and other furnyture, which
did appertaine to the late Queene, as you shall thinke to be meet for her
estate; and also coaches, horses, litters, and whatsoever els you shall thinke
meet.” And in another letter from Topcliff, on 15 April, he says: “ Touch-
ing the Jewells to be sent for our Wyfe, our meaning is not to have any
of the principal! Jewells of State to be sent so soone nor so farre of,
but only such as by the opynion of the Ladyes attendant about the late
Queene, our Syster, you shall fynde to be meet for the ordynarie apparel-
ling and ornament of her; the rest may come after, when shee shall be
nearer hand.”


One of the Queen’s letters acknowledges the receipt of jewells before
leaving Scotland.
Immediately upon Queen Ann’s arrival at Edinburgh, “ Upone the xij
day of Maij, the Admirall, accompanied with sundrie Denssis, passed to
Falkland, Dumfermling, and Linlithgow, to tak seasing of the time lord-
schipis for the Quenis dowrie,” and no sooner did she reach London than
the subject wus also taken into consideration, for, Sir Thomas Edmonds
writes: “ The Queene’s joynture is nowe allso passing, w ch , as I understand,
amounteth in land to the vallue of L. 5000 yearelie, w rCh is sayd to be as
much, or rather more than hath been grawnted to anie former Kinges Wief,
and yett it is meant to enlarge the same pentions and other commendams.”
And Mr. Crewe writes—“ There is a joynture now agreed upon hear for
the Queene, ready for the seale, of L. 5000 land by yeare of ould rented
Crown land, chosen by her Auditor and Officers in . . . . . advan-
tageable land for her with little exception ; and a provision in the booke
inabling her to make leases for 21 yeares; and this joynture to be con-
firmed at the next Parliament.” Lodge, by way of comparison, has given
the particulars of “ The jointure of Queen Katherine, daughter of Spain,
wife to Henry the Eighth, King of England,” and the following memo-
randa from a rough copy in the hand-writing of Lord Cecil
“ The joincture between James, K. of Scotland, and Cicely, d. to Ed. IV.,
—Dutchy of Rochsey,—Erie of Carvill.—The K. gave with his daughter
20.000 marks.
“Q. Marie’s joincture with Phi. K. of Spain, was 60,000 livres of
France. (Every livre is 20 stivers, every stiver is a peny; 40 gros to the
pound.)
“ Ch. K. of Sp. Emp., and Mary, daghter to K. Henry VII. He gave
250,000.
“ Charles the VI. had a wyfe called Isabell, who had for her dower
12.000 franks.


“Catherin wyfe to H. tlie V th had but 10,000 pownds Tournois.”
The amount was considered satisfactory at the time it was granted, but
afterwards Sir Ralph Winwood, dated London, February 13, writes Mr.
Chamberlain: “ She (the Queen) hath been somewhat melancholy of late,
about her joynture that was not fully to her liking; whereupon, to give
her contentment, there is L. 300 a-year added to it out of the Customes,
with a donative of L. 20,000 to pay her debts.
Ann entered very readily into King James’ whims, and various of her
letters regard hunting. She says in one of those now given in fac-
simile : “ I am glayd of soe good appearance of my roes ofspring.” In
another: “My heart, I desyre your Ma tie to pardon that I haue not an-
swered your Ma tie sooner vpon your letters, because I would knowe the
truth of the park of Ottelands, as I vnderstand there is niere fortie grossi
beastiami of diuers kindes that deuours my deere, as I wyll tell your Ma tie
at mieting.” And in a third: “My heart, I craue pardon that I haue not
sooner answered your M. letter, you shall not feare the paine in my fingers,
you shall finde them will enough for you wdien you come home. I think
it long to see my gerfaulkon flie, which I hope to see when I shall haue
the honore to kisse your M. handes.”
Her great delight was performing in masks and balls with her family
and favourite attendants, although circumstances and dress were some-
times whispered about court to be “too much courtezan-like for a Queen.”
The following letter to the King displays a good deal of humour, and if I
am right in the parties and occurrence to which it alludes, (of which I
have not the least doubt, as I shall immediately shew,) it is evident she
enjoyed a little light talk. The letter is without date, and is one of those
of which a facsimile is given.
The Queen writes the King, “ Your Maiesteis letter was Wellcome to me.
I haue bin as glad of the faire weather as yourself, and the last parte of
your letter yow have guessed right, that I wold laugh—'Who wold not


laugh—both at the persons and the subject, but more at so well a chosen
Mercuric betweene Mars and Venus ? You knowe that women can hardly
keepe counsell. I humbly desire your M. to tell me how it is possible that
I should keepe this secret, that haue alreadie tolde it, and shall tell it to
as manie as I speake with, and if I were a poete I wold make a song of it,
and sing it to the tune of Three fooles well mett.”
This letter must have been written in September 1603, and certainly
alludes to the Earl of Nottingham, the Lord High Admiral, and the Lady
Margaret Stuart as the Mars and Venus, and the King as the Mercury,
who took a great interest in these parties. This marriage afforded a great
deal of amusement at Court, and was the theme of many of the letters
from persons about Court to their friends at a distance. Thus Lady Arabella
Stuart writes the Earl of Shrewsbury on l'6th September 1603. “My
Lo. Admirall is returned from the Prince and Princesse, and either is or
wilbe my cousin before incredulous you will beleeve such incongruities
in a Councellour as love maketh no miracles in his subjectes of what de-
gree or age whatsoever.”
, On 11th September 1603, Sir Thomas Edmonds writes the Earl of
Shrewsbury, “ Since the tyme that yo r L. left us we have whollie spent
our tyme in that exercise, (hunting is alluded to) but the Queene remayned
at Basing till the King’s coming hither, and hath as well entertayned
herself with good dansing, which hath brought forth the effectes of a mar-
riage betweene my Lord Admyrall and the Lady Margaret Stuart.”
This also gives the probable date and place of the letter to the King,
wherein she turns the tables on his Majesty—“As for the blame you charge
me with, of lasie writing, I think it rather rests on your self, because you
be as sloe in writing as my self,” and adds, “ I can write of no mirth but
of practise of tilting, of riding, of drumming, and of musike, which is
all wherewith I am not a little pleased.”
The marriage had not then been known, otherwise it would have been


too good a joke for her Majesty not to notice. Lord Cecil, however,
writes Earl Shrewsbury : “ the Earl of Nottingham hath begonn ye Union,
for he hath married the Lady Hargett Stwart and came up y e morning
after to tell y e K. he had wedded his Cosen.” And on 24th September
1603 the Earl Worcester also writes the Earl of Shrewsbury, “ And
now my good Lord, you shall not thinke butt that wee have gallants of
70 yeres that in one night cowld dance himself into a fayr Ladye’s favor,
for my Lord Admirall is marryed, and greatly bostethe of his acts the
first nyght; but the next day he was sike of the ague, but now howlds
out very well, saving that my Lady singethe the greateset part of the
nyght, whether to bring him asleepe or to keepe him awake, I leave to
your Lo. judgement, that ar cuninger then I in those matters.”
Another marriage of two favorites, that of Sir Philip Herbert with the
Lady Susan Vere, engaged the particular attention of the Court. It took
place on St. John’s day, the new year 1604-5, and the Queen’s Mask was
given on Twelfth-night, in which the Queen and her attendants performed,
and for which L. 3000 had been advanced by the Exchequer.
Although it is evident this was not the “ three fools well met,” alluded
to in the Queen’s letter, yet the account of it, and the Mask, as extracted
from a letter of Sir Dudley Carleton to Mr. Winwood, deserves to be
added. He writes in the beginning of January 1604-5, “On St. John’s
day we had the marriage of Sir Philip Herbert and the Lady Susan per-
formed at Whitehall with all the honour could be done a great favourite.
The Court was great, and for that day, put on the best bravery. The
Prince and Duke of Holst led the bride to church; the Queen followed
her from thence. The King gave her; and she, in her tresses and trin-
kets, brided and bridled it so handsomely, and indeed became herself so
well, that the King said “ if he were unmarried he would not give her,
but keep her himself.” The marriage dinner was kept in the great chamber,
where the Prince and the Duke of Holst, and the great Lords and Ladies


accompanied the bride. The ambassador of Venice was the only bidden guest
of strangers, and he had a place above the Duke of Holst, which the Duke
took not well. But after dinner he was as little pleased himself, for,
being brought into the closet to retire himself, he was then suffered to
walk out his supper unthought of. At night there was a Mask in the
hall, which, for conceit and fashion was suitable to the occasion. The
actors were the Earl of Pembroke, the Lord Willoughby, Sir Samuel
Hays, Sir Thomas Germain, Sir Robert Carey, Sir John Lee, Sir Richard
Preston, and Sir Thomas Eager. There was no small loss that night of
chaines and Jewells, and many great Ladies were made shorter by the
skirts, and were very well served that they could keep cut no better. The
presents of plate and other things given by the noblemen were valued at
L. 2500 ; but that which made it a good marriage was a gift of the King’s
of L. 500 land for the bride’s jointure. They were lodged in the Council
Chamber, where the King, in his shirt and night-gown, gave them a re-
veille matin before they were up, and spent a good time in or upon the
bed, clause which you will believe. No ceremony was omitted of bride-
cakes, points, garters, and gloves, which have been ever since the livery
of the Court; and at night there was sewing into the sheet, casting off
the bride’s left hose, with many other petty sorceries.
New-year’s day passed without any solemnity, and the exorbitant Gifts
that were wont to be used at that time are so far laid by, that the accus-
tomed present of the purse and gold was hard to be had without asking.
The next day the King plaied in the Presence ; and as good or ill luck
seldom comes alone, the Bridegroom that threw for the king had the good,
fortune to win L.IOOO, which he had for his pains; the greatest part was
lost by my lord of Cranborne.
“On Twelfth-day w T e had the Creation of Duke Charles, now Duke of
York. The interim was entertained with making Knights of the Bath
-which was three days’ work. They were Eleven in number, besides the


little Duke, all of the King’s choice. The solemnity of the Creation was
kept in the Hall, where first the Duke was brought in, accompanyed
with his Knights; then carried out againe, and brought back by Earles
in their Robes of the Garter. My Lord Admiral bare him, two others went
as Supporters, and six marched before with the ornaments. The patent
was read by my Lord Cranborne, and drawn in most eloquent law Latin
by Mr. Attorney; but so we have a Duke of York in title but not in sub-
stance.
“ There was a publick dinner in the Great chamber, where there was
one table for the Duke and his Earl’s assistants, another for his fellow
Knights of the Bath.
“ At night we had the Queen’s Maske in the Banquetting house, or ra-
ther her Pagent. There was a great engine at the lower end of the room,
which had motion, and in it were the images of sea-horses, with other
terrible fishes, which were ridden by the Moors; the indecorum was, that
there was all fish and no water.
• “ At the further end was a great shell in the form of a skallop, wherein
were four seats : on the lowest sat the Queen, with my Lady Bedford, on
the rest were placed the Ladies Suffolk, Darby, Rich, Effingham, Ann
Herbert, Susan Herbert, Elizabeth Howard, Walsingham and Bevil.
Their apparell was rich, but too light and curtezan-like for such great ones.
Instead of vizzards, their faces and arms up to their elbows were painted
black, which was disguise sufficient, for they were hard to be known : but
it became them nothing so well as their own red and white, and you can-
not imagine a more ugly sight then a troop of lean-cheeked Mows. The
Spanish and Venetian ambassadors were both present, and sate by the
King in state; at which Monsieur Beaumont quarrels so extreamly, that
he saith the whole Court is Spanish. But by his favour he should fall out
with none but himself, for they were all indifferently invited to come as
private men to a private sport; which he refusing, the Spanish ambassa-


dor willingly accepted, and being there, seeing no cause to the contrary,
he put off Don Taxis and took upon him El Senor Emhaxadour , wherein he
outstript our little Monsieur. He was privately at the first Mask, and sat
amongst his men disguised; at this he was taken out to dance, and footed
it like a lusty old gallant with his country-woman. He took out the
Queen, and forgot not to kiss her hand, though there was danger it would
have left a mark on his lips. The night’s work was concluded with a
Banquet in the Great chamber, which was so furiously assaulted, that down
went table and tresses before one bit was touched! They say the Duke of
Holst will come upon us with an after-reckoning, and that we shall see
him on Candlemas-night in a Mask, as he hath shewed himself a lusty
reveller all this Christmas.”
The King, when on a visit to Lord St. John, at Bletsoe, sth August
1608, writes the following extraordinary letter, partly in cipher, to the
newly made Lord Treasurer the Earl of Salisbury. The original is in the
British Museum, and begins in the usual familiar way in which both the
King and Queen used to address him:—“ My Littil Beagill, Ye and
youre fellowis thaire are so proude nou that ye have gottin the gyding
againe of a Feminine Courte in the olde fashon, as I know not hou to
deale uith you: ye sitte at youre ease and directis all; the newis from all
the pairtis of the uorlde comes to you in youre chamber, the King’s owin
resolutions dependis upon youre posting dispatches, and quhen ye list, ye
can (sitting on youre bedde-sydes) uith one call or quhisling in youre
fist, make him to poste nicte and daye till he come to youre presence.
Uell, I know Sicffoke is married , and hath also his handis full nou in
harbouring that great littell proude man that comes in his chaire; but
for youre pairt, maister 10. qho is wanton and uyfeles, I can not but
be ialous of youre greatnes with my uyfe; but most of all ame I suspi-
cious of 3, quho is so laitelie fallen in acquaintance uith my uyfe; for
besydes that the verrie nomber of 3 is uell liked of by ueomen, his face is
G


so amiabill as it is able to intyse, and his fortune hath ever bene to be
great with Sho-saintis; but his pairte is foule in this, that never having
taken a uyfe to himself in his youth, he cannot nou be content with his
graye haires to forbeare ane other mannis uyfe. But for expiation of
this sinne, I hoape that ye have all three with the rest of youre societie,
taken this daye ane eucharistike cuppe of thankefulnes for the occasion,
quhiche fell out at a time quhen ye durst not avou me. And heir hath
beene this daye kept the Feaste of King James’ deliverie at Saint John-
stoune in S l Jon's house. All other maitters I referre to the old knave the
bearar’s reporte. And so faire ye uell.”
Whether the King was in joke or earnest is not easy to ascertain, but
if the Laird of Dundas had an opinion to give, he probably would have
favoured the last, notwithstanding of the lady being so coy to James
at the time he past in quietlie with buites and all to her at Upslo, “ and
myndet to give the Queine a kiss, quhilk she refusit.” The causa sciential
of Dundas occurred when he was in attendance upon the King and Queen
in the Palace at Linlithgow, and really will not tell in print. Suffice it
to say, that meeting a female in a dark stair, which was the private access
to the King’s chamber, something took place that his risible qualities had
not been able to subdue by the time he entered, but that the King ob-
served it; and insisted to know the cause and partake in the joke. The
laird, thus compelled, told his story, during which both laughed immo-
derately, but at the concluding description “ Our own Ann, by the living
God,” exclaimed the King, “ Dundas, we must have no more of you by
that stair again.”
All these, however, may be mere jest, for she was at all times attentive
to James, and when he had a fall from his horse hunting, or was ill and
at a distance, various of her letters show anxiety about him, and a desire
to come to visit him. These stories, had there been real impropriety in
them, would have prevented Arthur Wilson from giving her the following


character.—“ She was in her great condition a good woman, not tempted
from that height she stood on to embroil her spirit much with things be-
low her, as some busie-bodies do: only giving herself content in her own
house, with such recreations as might not make time tedious to her. And
though great persons’ actions are often pried into, and make envy’s mark,
yet nothing could be fixed upon her that left any great impression but
that she may have engraven upon her monument a character of virtue.”
The prejudices of the English against the Scotch were very great at that
time, (as in truth they are at the present day), which gave rise to many
very gross and scurrilous publications, quite unworthy of notice; but the
following poem, published by Ritson in his North Country Chorister,
partakes so little of that character, and is withal a fair and clever pas-
quinade, as to entitle it to notice here.
“ Bonny Scot, we all witness can.
That England hath made thee a gentleman.
Thy blue bonnet, when thou came hither.
Could scarce keep out the wind and weather.
But now it is turned to a hat and feather.
Thy bonnet is blown the devil knows whither.
Thy shoes on thy feet, when thou earnest from plough,
Were made of the hide of an old Scot’s cow.
But how they are turned to a rare Spanish leather.
And decked with roses altogether.
Thy sword at thy was a great black blade.
With a great basket hilt of iron made.
But now a long rapier doth hang by his side.
And huffingly doth this bonny Scot ride.
Bonny Scot, we all witness can.
That England hath made thee a gentleman.”
The above, though sufficiently pointed, is almost a solitary exception to
the discreditable character of the other publications of the day, whose


merit were decided by their extent of grossness and of falsehood. This
conduct was not confined to the men, for it was both practised and en-
couraged by the women, and even by ladies of rank, and about Court, of
which Lady Clifford affords a specimen in her Diary 1603, “We all went
to Tibbald’s to se the King, who used my mother and my aunt very gra-
ciouslie; but we all saw a great chaunge between the fashion of the Court
as it was now and y 4 in the Queenes, for we were all louzy by sittinge in
Sir Thomas Erskine’s chamber.” Constant quarrels were the consequence,
and it was probably one of these that occurred in the Queen’s presence,
to which she alludes in one of the facsimile letters sent to the King by
Sir Roger Aston, wherein she says, “ What I haue said to S r Roger is
trew: I could not but think it strange that any about your ma tie durst
presume to bring neer where your ma tie is, on that had offered me such
a publicke scorne, for honore gois befor lyfe.” And the postscript adds,
“ I refarre the rest to S. Roger.”
There is no date, but Sir Dudley Carleton’s letter to Sir Thomas Parry,
3d July 1603, probably explains what is alluded to, “Here was some
squaring at first between our English and Scottish Lords for lodging, and
such other petty quarrels, but all is past over in peace. The Lords of
Southampton and Grey the first night the Q. came hither, renewed old
quarrels, and fell flatly out in her presence. She was in discourse with
L. Southampton touching the L. of Essex action, and wondered, as she
said, so many great men did so little for themselves; to which L d South-
ampton answered, that the Q. being made a party ag 8 * them, they were
forced, to yeald; but if that course had not been taken, there was none of
theyr private ennemys with whom only their quarrel was that durst have
opposed themselves. This being heard by the L. Grey, he would mantain
the contrary party durst have done more than they, upon which he had
the lie erebled at him. The Q. bad them remember where they were, and
soon after sent them to their lodgings, to which they were committed,


with guard upon them. They next day were brought and heard before the
Council and condemned to he sent hack to the Tower. But soon after the
King sent for them, and taking the quarrel upon him, and the wrong and
disgrace done to her Majesty, and not exchanged betwixt them, forgave
it to make them friends: which was accordingly effected, and they pre-
sently set at liberty.”
I have found it difficult to confine this introduction to shorter hounds,
owing to the vast quantity of curious matter, printed and unprinted, that
has come into my view in this investigation; and in order to set limits
to it, it becomes necessary to leave out all the correspondence of the King,
the Prince Charles, Steenie, and other curious matter connected with the
Prince’s romantic expedition to Madrid, and his intended marriage with
the Infanta, and also the letters between the King and Prince Charles
about the right to the Queen’s Jewels, &c. In short, I propose to conclude
with the King’s Progress to Scotland, where, by the introduction of Pa-
rish Schools and Parish Registers, he conferred the greatest obligation a
country ever lay under to a Sovereign. These were his individual doing,
and though they have been the theme of admiration even in the present
times, it seems never to have been known to whom the credit of them was
due ! This introduction will, therefore, close with the 1617; but whilst
speaking of the Queen, one other anecdote deserves to be mentioned in
justice to her, which occurred in 1618, although it may be considered by
the arrangement both out of place and date.
Sir Walter Raleigh presented a petition to the Queen, and it did not
pass unattended to by her. His poetical address is of some length, of
which the following may be considered sufficient extracts and a fair spe-
cimen. In the introductory part,
0 had truth power, the guiltlesse could not fall.
Malice winne glorie, or revenge triumphe,—
But truth alone can not encounter all.


Mercie is fled to God which mercie made
Companion dead. Faith turn’d to pollicye;
Friends know not those who site in Sorrow’s shade.”
He then makes the following pathetic address :
“ Cold walls, to you I speake, but you are senselesse,” &c.
“ Then unto whom shall I unfold my wrong,
Cast doune my teares, or hold up folded hands ?
To Her to whom remorse does most belong.
To Her who is the first, and maye alone
Be justly called the Empresse of the Britannes ?
Who should haue mercye if a Queen haue none ?
Save those that would haue died for your defence !
Save him whose thoughts no treason ever tainted !
The Queen interceded strenuously for mercy, as appears by the following
letter to the Marquis of Buckingham, published in Hailes Memorials of
James I. It is without date.
“ Anna R.
“ My Kind Dog, If I have any power or credit with you, I pray let me
haue a trial of it at this time, in dealing sincerely and earnestly with the
King, that Sir Walter Raleigh’s life may not be called in question. If
you do it, so that the success answer my expectation, assure yourself that
I will take it extraordinary kindly at your hands; and rest one that wish-
eth you well, and desires you to continue still, as you haue been, a true
servant to your Master.”
The Queen’s application was not successful, and Sir Walter was be-
headed on 29th October 1618, which Aubrey says “ was contrived to be
on my Lord Mayor’s day, (the day after St. Simon and St. Jude) that the
pageants and fine shows might avocate and draw away the people from
beholding the Tragedie of the gallantest Worthie that England ever bred.”


King James had been strongly impressed with the propriety and advan-
tage of an Union between Scotland and England previous to his succession
to the latter kingdom, for it was amongst the first of his thoughts after
that event. His desire was, to apply a favourite phrase of his, “ most vehe-
ment” “ to sie thame joyne and coalesce togidder in a sinceir and perfyte
vnioun, and as two twynis bred in ane hellie love ane another, as no moir twa
hot ane estate ,” as he expresses himself in the following curious letter, ad-
dressed to the Lords of the Privy Council of Scotland, never before printed.
“ Right trustie and weil-belouit cosinis and counsellouris, We grete you
hairtelie wele, whairas it hes now pleasit the gracious goodnes of our God
to settle us in peccable and full possessioun of our right to the inheritance
of this crowne, preordinat be his goode providence to fall to us in his dew T
tyme be blude and lineall discent, and that nixt to the solempnitie and
ordour of our coronatioun, it hes bene .alwayes oure intent, according to
the custome of this land, to conuocat oure three esteatis in parliament,
boith for establisheing of oure successioun to this imperiall kingdome, and
for accomplisheing of sindrie otheris wechtiest affairis necessair for our
estate, and necessair at the inauguratioun of princes heir, whilk nochttheles
be the prevailing of this infectiue plague within oure Citie of Lundoun,
and the dispersing thairof through a greate parte of this realmej we haif
bene forceit to intermitt till now that it hes pleasit God to quenche it in
his mercy, and be removing of that latt to oppin to us agane the oportu-
nitie to prosequute our first intent sasone as possibillie we can, and for that
oure equall ryght to boith the crownes mon neidis affect us with an equall
cair to boith thair weillis, and that being now joyned togidder and under
ane head, as thay haif bene of lang tyme past in ane religioun and lan-
guage, and ane commoun habitatioun in ane He disioinit fra the greate
continent of the world, Oure princelie cair mon be extendit to sie thame
joyne and coalesce togidder in a sinceir and perfyte vnioun, and as two
twynis bred in ane bellie, love ane another as no moir twa hot ane estate,


We haif to this effect affixt a parliament within this realme, to convene
ahoute the tuentie day of Marche nixt, whilk for that it sittis vsuallie a
moneth at the least, we think it meitest and will desire you most effectu-
uslie to lett preceptis he directit in our name for convening of a parlia-
ment thair about the tent day of Aprile thairefter, Quhairin it is our ex-
pres will that thair be no thing motioned nor treated saulfing the mater of
the vnioun allanarlie, quhairof the generall mon be first and
putt through, To the whilk we can not well beleve that ony estate or
subiect of that land can with reasoun refuse his ... . respecting quhat
greatnes it importis to our esteate, quhat honour and reputatioun to our
name to haif it affected in oure tyme and quhat greate benefeit and
perpetuall peace and tranquillitie it mon neidis carie with it to oure haill
kingdomes and dominionis, and nixt vnto the voting of the generall, mon
follow the chuseing of oure commissionaris for treating and capitulating
vpoun the headis of the said vnioun with pouer onlie to reporte to the nixt
parliamentis. Quhilkis Commissionaris for that thay mon be mett with
equall nomber frome this parliament quhair thay mon be first chosin be
reasoun of the prioritie of thair convening, Tharfoir sasone as thay ar no-
minat yow may expect thair names and styllis tobe send to yow befoir the
day of your convening, That yow matche thame for your parte with per-
sonis of lyke qualitie and rank, whome we desire tobe directit to come
heir to us for keiping of thair meitingis in our presence, and consulting
with our advise in suche difficulteis and doubtis as may occur during that
treaty, disposit to attend vpoun that eirand till suche headis be aggreit
vpoun be oure advise, as being putt in forme may be presentit as worthie
groundis to boith the parliamentis, and for that boith the parliamentis be-
ing affixed at ane tyme it is not possible to us to honnour thame both
with oure personall and Royall presence, and that we ar informed that
both be practise in our darrest moderis tyme of worthie memorie and be
the vse and consuetude of other Cristeane Kingdomis the princes absence


at sic tymes lies evir bene suppleit be thair commissioun to some speciall
nobleman, for representing of thair place and persone induring that so-
lempnitie, and having in our choise preferrit yow oure Chancellir to that
effect, as we haif ordanit you oure President, to represent oure chancellor
during the tyme of our said parliament, we mon desire you thairfoir tobe
cairfull to seeke oute the antient recordis of formar parliamentis, and ac-
cording to the practize you find to haif bene vsed in the lyke, forme your
commissioun with warrandis and instructionis necessair for suche ane eir-
and and send thame heir tobe exped and directit bak to you in tyme for
the authorising of quhatsomeuir salbe accordit to and voted in that parlia-
ment, be this point of the vnioun our fame and reputatioun throuch the
world, oure honnour tobe the workair of it in our tyme, and the vnspeak-
able benefeit that mon redound thairof to this haill lie, gois so deiplie
in oure consait as in the greatest subiect we can putt in our handis, and
quhairin our expectatioun is, you will extend your greatest cair to do
us most memorable and worthie seruice, Sua to your nixt occasioun We
committ you to God, frome oure Honnour of Hamptoun courte, this xij of
Januair 1604”
The King had very frequently expressed his desire to visit Scotland,
and in the course of 1616 that subject became seriously talked of; but
there was great difficulty of finding the ways and means of defraying the
expenses attendant upon so extensive a Progress, and probably the Eng-
lish jealousy did not incline to its encouragement, as may be fairly con-
cluded from the illiberal and unbecoming insinuations thrown out in the
various letters from the English Court and from the officials at the time.
Then, as now, the English had no regard for Scotland, further than as it
tended to strengthen or benefit themselves; and then , as noio , all the
money that could be drawn out of Scotland was considered a highly
proper thing, whilst every penny expended there was accounted so much
thrown away.
H


The King’s letter to the Privy Council of Scotland, in contemplation of
his intended visit, for which he has (as he descriptively enough calls it) a
“ salmonhjke instinct,” I formerly printed in the “ Documents relative to
the Reception at Edinburgh of the Kings and Queens of Scotland,” but
still, the following extract from it may be very properly introduced here,
in order to connect the arrangements for his visit. In stating his induce-
ments, he says,—“ Wee ar not aschamed to confesse that we have had
theise many yeiris a great and naturall longing to see our native soyle and
place of our birth and breeding, and this salmonlyke instinct of ours lies
restleslie, both when wee wer awake, and manie tymes in our sleip, so
stirred up our thoghtis and bended our desyris to make a Jornay thither,
that wee can never rest satisfied till it sail pleas God that wee may accom-
plish it; and this we do upoun our honour declair to be the maine and
principall motive of our intended Jorney:” and in conclusion he adds, —
“ wee pray you to rest assured that our intentioun is to behave our selfe the
tyme of our being there, as everie one sail see that our care sail not be
wanting to do as muche goode as wee can, and yet so to carie our selfe
as our actions salbe accompanied with the applause and heartie consent of
all our goode people.” This assurance he most honourably fulfilled, as all
who read Lord Dumfermline’s letter, which concludes this introduction,
must admit.
James wrote various other letters connected with this expedition highly
creditable to his feelings, and confirmatory of his regard for Scotland, and
his desire to promote a reciprocal kind feeling between the people of both
kingdoms. The general purport of these, and in particular his Directions
to the Magistrates of Edinburgh, is to recommend the goodly arrange-
ment of all things, becawse, he says, “ the strangeris and otheris that ar
to accompany his Majestic will be so much the more careful! narrowlie to
remark upoun and espy the carriage and conversation of the inhabitants
of the said Toun, forme of thair interteynment and ludgeing, and gif thair


houses be and thair bedding and naprie clene and neate, and ac-
cording as they sail find they will mak reporte outlier to the credite and
. . . . . or to the reproche and scandall of this Burgh.”
The utmost care was also taken to inculcate upon the minds of the
people a spirit of kindly feeling, and a suppression of all former animosi-
ties towards the English who might accompany the King. This wish was
rigidly and honourably fulfilled by the people of Scotland, notwithstand-
ing of the great and daily provocation received by them; for in place of
meeting with a grateful return, the English lampooned them, as inferior
people, who had not the courage nor the power to break their heads in
return for the insolencies they committed. Amongst these none made
himself more prominent than that scullion Sir Anthony Weldon, who
thought it great preferment when he rose to be Clerk of the Kitchen, and
who, when he acquired greater honours by his appointment to the Board
of Green Cloth, accompanied the King to Edinburgh, gave vent to his
early acquired language and sentiments in his vituperations against Scot-
land, which were pretended not to be intended for publication, and yet
all he wrote appeared in print, according to his account, from acci-
dental circumstances. This libel upon Scotland was found wrapt up in
a record of the Board of Green Cloth, to which he had been promoted,
and being ascertained to be his handwriting, “he was deservedly removed
from his place, as unworthy to eat his bread, whose birth-right he had
defamed.”
The King borrowed Lloo,ooo from the City of London, to pay the ex-
penses of the journey, but the whole expense of the King and his Court
during his abode in Scotland was defrayed from the Scottish Treasury,
the entire direction of which was under the charge of Sir Gideon Murray,
the Treasurer Depute,—“ where his Majesty appeared witli as much splen-
dour as in England.”
In the contemplation of this expedition, Mr. Charledon writes to Sir


Dudley Carleton, 4tli January, 1616-17- “ The Queen removed yester-
day to Whitehall from Somerset House, where she had lain this fortnight
sick of the gout or somewhat else, it being suspected she dreams and aims
at a Regency during the King’s absence in Scotland.” In this project she
was disappointed; and by a letter from the same to the same, dated Bth
March, 1616-17, we are told—“ The King’s Journey into Scotland holds on
this day se’ennight, though money comes slowly in; and much ado there
is and will be to get the Lloo,ooo in this toun. Yet there is much urg-
ing, and in the end it must be done, though men be never so much dis-
couraged.”
The King entered Scotland on the 13th May, and on the 15th arrived
at Seton, the seat of the Earl of Wigton, where he was received with
speeches, poems, &c. The King went to the church of Seaton, where a
curious sermon was preached to him from as curious a text, James I. and 6.
“ But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that wavereth is like
a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed.” The above is not re-
corded or authenticated in writing, but has been handed down as a church
tradition, through which channel I received it, and I could not withhold
so characteristic an anecdote.
Upon the 28th May Charles writes the King, in one of the letters given
in facsimile, —“ lam sorie for nothing but that I cannot be with your
Majestic at this tyme both because I would be glad to wait upon you and
also to see the Cuntrie whair I was borne and the customes of it.”
The following are the Documents alluded to at p. liii of this introduc-
tory notice. The Letters are printed from the originals, the first of which
is preserved in the General Register House, the other is taken from Sir
James Balfour’s Collection in the Advocates’ Library, and the Acts from
the Registers of the Privy Council of Scotland.


" LETTER FROM THE KING TO THE PRIVY COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND,
Nov. 2, 1616.
“ Righte trustie and riglite welbeloued cosen and counsellour And
riglite trustie and welbeloued counsellouris Wee greett yow well, Whereas
it is necessarie for the better establishing of true religion that childrein
be catechised and educated in the knowledge of the groundes thereof
frome their tender yeares. And whereas manie parentes are so negligent
and careles in that point as their childrene being eyther altogether igno-
rant or careleslie instructed are when they come to age easilie peruerted
and drawen to Poperie. It is therefor our pleasour that yee cause make and
publishe an acte commaunding all parentes to use the ordinarie meanes
of instructing their young childrene to presente thame to their ordinarie
pastour at all usual! times of catechising and examination and to bring
thame to the bishoppe of the diocese at euerie visitatioun to be tried and
confirmed by him, with certification that such parentes as shall neglecte
these meanes shall pay according to their qualitie a pecuniall summe witli-
oute anie remission, And this recommending to your speciall care, Wee bid
yow farewell. At our pallace of Whitehalle the secunde of Nouember 1616.”
“ Act of the Privy Council of Scotland appointing a Scoole to be
in euery parroche, Dec. 10, 1616.
“ Forsameikle as the Kingis Majestie haueing a speciall Care and re-
gaird that the trew religion be advanceit and established in all the places
of this kingdome, and that all his Majesties subjectis especially the youth


be exercised and trayned up in civilitie godlines knawledge and leirning
That the vulgar Inglish toung be universallie plantit and the Irische lan-
guage which is one of the cheif and principall causis of the continewance
of barbaritie and incivilitie amangis the inhabitantis of the Ilis and hey-
landis, may be abolisheit and removit And quhairas thair is no meane
more powerfull to further this his Majesteis princelie regaird and purpois
than the establishing of Scooles in the particular parocheis of this king-
dome whair the youth may be taught at the least to wreit and reid and
be catechised and instructed in the groundis of religioun. Thairfoir the
Kingis Majestic with aduise of the Lordis of his secreit Counsall hes
thocht it necessar and expedient that in euerie parroche of this kingdome
whair convenient meanes may be had for interteyning a scoole That a
scoole salbe estableishit and a fitt persone appointit to teach the same
upoun the expensis of the parrochinaris according to the quantitie and
qualitie of the parroche at the sight and be the aduise of the Bishop of
the diocie in his visitatioun Commanding heirby all the Bishoppis within
this kingdome That thay and everie ane of thame within thair severall
dioceis deale and travell with the parrochinaris of the particular parrocheis
within thair saidis dioceis to condescend and aggree upone some certane
solide and sure course how and by quhat meanes the said scoole may be
enterteyned And gif ony difficulteis arryse amongis thame concerning
this mater That the said Bishop reporte the same to the saidis Lordis to
the effect they may take suche ordour heiranent as they sail think expe-
dient And that letteris be direct to mak publicatioun heirof quhairthrow
nane pretend ignorance of the same.”
“ Ane Act of the Privy Council of Scotland anent the Catechesine
of Childrene. Dec. 10, 1616.
“ Forsameikle as the Kingis Majestie with the aduise of the Lordis of


his Secreit Counsale lies found it verie necessar and expedient for the
better establischeing of the trew religioun that childrene be catechesed
and educate in the knowledge of the groundis therof from their tender
yeiris And seeing mony parentis ar so careles and negligent in that point
as thair childrene being aither altogidder ignorant or cairleslie instructed
ar quhen thay come to aige easilie pervertit and drawne to Poperie
Thairfore his Majestie with aduise foirsaid lies commandit and ordanit
and be thir presentis straitlie commandis chairges and ordanes all and
sindrie parentes to use the ordinal* meanes of instructing thair young
childreen, to present them to thair ordinar pastour at all usuall tymes of
catechising and examinatioun and to bring thame to the Bischop of the
dyocie at eyerie visitatioun within the parroche to be tryed and confirmed
be him under the paynes particularlie underwrittin to be incurrit toties
quoties be euerie persone failzeing to present thair children to the Bishop
at his visitatioun as said is That is to say be euerie nobilman fourtie
pundis be euerie Barone fourty merkis and be euery inferiour persone
twenty merkis or lesse according to the meanes [of ilk] persone And
that letteris be direct to mak publicatioun heirof that nane pretend igno-
rance of the same.”
“ LETTER FROM ALEXANDER EARL OF DUNFERMLING, LORD HIGH CHANCEL-
LAR OF SCOTLAND, ADDRESSED ‘ TO THE KING HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.’
“This yeare (maist Sacred Soueraine) almaist now worne to end, lies bene
unto this land and kingdome a yeare of jubile and a yeare of singulair
joye this kingdome being this yeare nocht onlie illustrat as all other yeares
be your Royall and famous actiouns, bot also marvelouslie decored and
inritched be your Prencelie and glorious presence and Majestie Hes fur-
neist greate confort vigour and strenthe to this haille estaitt all members
and pairtis thairof.


“ The particuler successe of speciall actiouns I shall heir breiflie accord-
ing to my bund deutie and cuistum tuitche unto your Majestie That ye
may have a present view and jouissance of the froots of your happie and
good gouernament owir this peopill.
“ The end of the last yeare and first entrie to this your Counsall in this
Estaitt be your ordonance bestoued on the consideratioun and approba-
tioun of certane articles concludit at ane generall assemblie of the kirk
keeped at Aberdene in August before Thir speciall Articles war approwin
That thair sould be ane generall Catechis formed to be universalie teatched
to all the youthis in this Countrie That in euerie Parische thair sould be
ane Schoole and in eyerie Parische ane register of the naymes of all borne
and babtized and of all died.
“ The Marqueis of Huntlie and Erie of Erroll be your sacred Majesties
good meanes intreatie argumentis persuasiouns and mediatioun lies bene
at last reduced to conformitie in all necessair poynts and articles of relli-
gioun and fullie reconciliat withe the kirk of this kingdome Lykeas your
Sacred Majestie lies also agreed the saidis tua nobill men and thair
freindis in a particuler perrollus deadlie feade was fallin out amongs thame-
selfis and lykelie to haue maide great truble betuix thame for slauchter
and bloode betuix Laird of Gight Gordoun and ane brother of the Erie
of Errolls and some others his freindis.
“ The questioun of bloode, slauchter and all criminall or ciuill actiouns
betuix the saidis pairteis being remitted and compromitted to your maist
Royall Majesties persoun and arbitrall decreit was be your Highnes maist
circumspectlie wyslie and amicablie composed and decydit to baithe the
pairteis ease and contentment sua that thaj war baithe by your prencelie
command before your Counsall in September last broght to full reconci-
liatioun and amitie.
“ Ane other truble appeirand to haue fallin out betuix the Erie of Perthe
and Lord Lewingstoun for questiouns of mairtchis in thair wooddis forrests


and hountings be your sacred Majesties wyse commandement and direc-
tioun was submitted to freindis of thair awin and is finalie weell composed.
“ The Erie of Mar ane auld trustie and familiar serwand to your Ma-
jestic from your infancie be your prencelie ordonance installed in the full
plaice dignitie and administratioun of the office of Threasaurarie in this
kingdome with greatte applause and allowance of all.
“ In Januar It pleased your Highnes be your fauourabill letter to sig-
nifie unto your Counsaill your frill resolutioun to honour this Countrie
withe your Royall presence, In May efter declairing thairwithe the rea-
souns mowed your Sacred Majestic to this determinatioun reasouns full
of wisdome lowe and kyndnes to this your natiwe soylle, The letter was
found sua woorthie and was sua acceptabill to the haill Counsall as thai
thocht fitt copies of the same sould be dispersed to all schyres and dioceses
to make all your good subjects acquent with this your Highnes fauorabill
disseynge whilk rejoyced the hairtis of all good pepill in the land.
“ Ane Conyentioun of the Estaittis was drawin togither onder your
Highnes authoritie to mak all den preparatioun for honnourabill ressaitt
of your Royall persoun and all your nobill companie. The Estaitts maist
willinglie granted ane subsidieof Twa hundrethe thowsand pundis to supplie
the necessair chairgis of sic ane extraordinair and maist honorabill erand.
“ Directiouns war gevin for reparatioun of all hie wayes parfyting of all
your Sacred Majesties houssis Palices and Castells, innumerabill craftis-
raen of all sortis entered to all warkis, all be cair and diligence maide
readie in deu tyme abowe all exspectatioun; for the lyke was newir scene
in this land of before; greatte ordour tayne for abundance and store of all
prouisiouns and viures for horsse or men and for honest ludgeings to all your
Majesties traine and companies in euirie pairt, where yee war to resort.
“ Your Majesties Chappell in Halyroodhous builde up of new with all
ornamentis and deu furnitour micht be requyred in any Royall Chappell
and maist magnificklie dekt and sett furthe.
i


“ Furnitour of silwer wark and Plaitte Tapesserie ritche Beddis and
bedding and all sic necessaires for ane Royall house send for be your Sa-
cred Majesties awin directioun and prowydit in greatte store from all
pairtis, whilkis still remaynis in your Wairdroppes and Palices, may seme
for many aiges as the same serued your Sacred Majestie at this tyme
maist honorablie and plentifullie.
“ About the middis of Maij your Highnes entered in this kingdome,
accompanyed withe good number of your Highnes Nobilitie Prelatts Offi-
cers and Counsallours of Ingland and good number also of Nobill men
Officers and Counsallouris of this Estaite, sic as your Majestie had or-
doured and commanded to meet yow at Barwicke.
“ Your Sacred Majestie honored first My Lord Erie of Hoomes house of
Dunglas with your maist gracious presence And nixt the Erie of Vintouns
house of Setoun, was in baithe the saidis Nobill mens houssis with all your
Nobills, ressaued and intertenyed to thair powar, althoe far onder your dew,
yitt to your contentment and all your companies honorablie and magnificklie.
“ Then came your Majestie to your awin Palice of Halyeroodhouse,
making your entrie throw your good Toun of Edenburght, where ye war
maiste joyfullie ressaued, and visited that kirk, hard preatching, and was
conwoyed be the liaill toun, in honorabill equippage to your Palice.
“ Thair was your Majesties maist ordinair residence Maij Junij and Julij,
visitting alwayes be tymes, Fyffe, Angus, Perthe, Sterlingschyre, and other
pairtis aboutt baithe yourawinPalices andNobill menus houssis intheCoun-
trie, Till in August Your Highnes retired be thewast countrie from Glasgow,
Paslay, Hammiltoun, Sanquhar, Drumlaynrig, and Lyncluden toCairleill in
Tngland, and from that fordwart to your ordinair Royall saitte at Londoun.
“ It wald require a greate volume to recompt the greatte benefitts and
commodities baithe the Nationns Inglische and Scottis, lies had in this
your Majesties jornay and sejorne in Scotland; all manifesting your Ma-
jesties incomparabill wisdome in that interpryse.


“ Since your Sacred Majestie attayned to the Croun of Ingland thair
lies nothing hene done, nor meaned to, could advance and furder, a per-
fytte unioun of the twa nationns, sua far as this hes done.
“ Your Majestie had heir in your train and companie a number of Ing-
lische Prelatts, maist joyse, learned and grave, Nobills that merited justlie
the honour and title of nobilitie and wald have kyithed sua abowe others,
in any ciuill corner of the warld, courtesse, honnorabill, amiabill, tract-
abill, circumspect, euer readie to all woorthie actions, mowed be thair good
behawiour all men in Scotland, to honour, reverence, and admire baithe
thame and thair vertuis.
“ Lykeas on the other syde be your Majesties prencelie directiouns
your Counsall in Scotland ordoned all sua, as nayne of your trayne or
Court could see or fynd anye thing in this land, might gif him any dis-
taiste, or occasioun of miscontentment.
“ Plentie of all to all sorts of men, All used be all possibill ciuilitie, good
ordour and discretioun, sua that thaj granted and affermed all, thai fand,
where ewir thai war in this land, all the good treatment could be wisched
in any good Countrie, and all far from that barbaritie thai war almaist
persuadit before did regnne in thir northerne pairts. This maide a greate
unioun of the hairtis, betuix baithe Natiouns, the ane fynding all honour
and courtessie sua frilie offered to thame and the others finding all sua
weell and thankfullie accepted and sua weill thocht off and acknauledgitt.
“ In all the tyme of your Majesties remayning in this kingdome (a ma-
ter maruellous and to be admired) in sua greatte companies, and sua many
nobill men and great personages off tua Natiouns conveyned, neuir any
actioun, woord or appeirance of any discord variance or offence betuix
anye of the Natiouns withe other, for whatsumewir cause, I doubt giff
euer the lyke has bene sene, at sic occasioun off sua frequent a meiting of
men, Strayngers and onknowen to other.
“ To augment and strenthen this amitie and kyndnes your Majestie maist


wyslie and prencelie admitted sworne on your Priuey Counsall and Coun-
sall of Estaitt in Scotland good numbir of your Nobles Officears and Pre-
lattis off Ingland was heir withe yow in companie, was all maist willinglie
ressaued, maide priuey and acquent withe all our proceedings, and alwayes
honored to our powars.
“ Your Majestie had thame also all withe yow, In our Counsall house
and Sessioun or Souerane Court of Justice in this kingdome, where in
your Sacred Majesties presence was syndrie actiouns according to our or-
dinair formis baithe disputed and decydit, The ordour and fassion whereoff
thaj werie weill allowed and commendit, albeit in dyuers poyntis different
and disconforme from thairis.
“ In the tyme of your Sacred Majesteis aboade in this kingdome was
also ane Parliament haldin in the monethe of Junij, illustrat be greatter
concurse and nombir of the Nobilitie and all Estaitts, nor hes bene scene
before in our aige, ciuilie and weill ordered in all respectis daylie honored
be your Highnes Royall Presence, directed and gydit be your wisdome.
“Many notable good Actis estableist in this Parliament, for better ordour
of Parliament in all tymes to cuim; ffor restauratiounof the decayed Churche
estaitt; for mantenance of peace and justice amongs all subjectis,ffor cleiring
of rightis and tytillsand awoydingof pleas for all good ordour intheCountrie.
“ And in consideratioun the tyme was schorte nocht ansuerable to your
prencelie yealle and ernest desyre to liwe all heir at parfytte ordour; The
maist important affairis of your Estaitts baithe at hayme and withe for-
rayne Princes, drawing yow to Ingland agayne, for remeid to the greatte
inconvenient hes bene persawed and heavilie complained on, thir many
yeares, off the pouertie of the estaitt of the Ministers of the kirk, Preatcll-
eours and Teatcheouris of Goddis holie woord, and Ministers of the sacra-
mentis of our Saluatioun.
“ In your heiche judgement hes this Parliament furneist withe sufficient
commissioun the number of 33 mixt of all the Estaitts to conveyne at


certane tymes and to prowyde as maist commodiouslie may be, to ewirie
kirk sufficient stipend for ane minister, outt of the readdiest of the teynds
of the saidis kirkis; withe reasonable consideratioun of recompence to the
possessours of the teyndis; ane Commissioun the maist solemne and best
adwysed on, and whilk is hoped shall produce als greatte and goode ef-
fectis, as any hes euer bene in this land.
“ At your Majesties going furthe of this Countrie eiuen on the mairtchis
betuix Ingland and Scotland It pleased yow direct command to your
Counsall to call all the Landslords and Cheiffis of Clannis or other princi-
pal! Commanders in the Middleschyres, and make thame all renew the
generall band, baithe onder thair aithe and subscriptioun, for manteyning
of the peace, Ansuering for all thair men, tenents, serwandis and de-
pendars, and to enter ewirie ane of thame, as they sail be called in jus-
tice. This is the key of all good ordour, and obedience in theese pairtis
hes bene preceislie obserwed and put to executioun, be the Counsall in all
poyntis, conforme to your prencelie ordonance.
“ In this last Nouember onder your Highnes authoritie and withe assist-
ance of Commissioners appoynted be your sacred Majestie did conweyne in
the Cittie of St. Androis ane Generali Assemblie of the haill kirk of this
kingdome; Agreed amongs thame on syndrie poyntis and articles, import-
ing to the policie and good ordour in Godds sendee, and for uniformitie in
administratioun of the sacramentis.
“ This same monethe of Nouember war the Commissioners appoynted
be the last Parliament to attend on the plantatioun of the Kirks and
prouisiouns for Ministers stipends, conweyned werie ordourlie, and en-
tered to thair warke, proceeds werie weill and circumspectlie in the
same, and ar lyke to bring that to good perfectioun.
The haill Cuistuims of this kingdome upon syndrie good reasouns and
respectis weell weyed and considered be your Officears and Commissioners
appoynted for manageing of your rentis layed doun before your Royall Ma


jestie and be your Royall command, ar this yeare ondertayne onder your
Majesties awin nayme, to be collected on all hazards to your beliowe uti-
litie and proffeitt: And be the directioun of your Highnes Commissioners,
wha daylie bestowes sum tyme on the consideratioun of theese affairis ar
maist cairfullie attendit upon Wee hope shall turne to naa loise to your
coffers in end, will alwayes make your Officears and Counsall privey to the
haill estaitt of theese affairis.
“ This yeare lies bene unto your Sacred Majestic glorious, in sua far as it
lies furneist unto yow subject to actiouns will be of memorable honour and
admiratioun to all posteriteis; lies bene also to this kingdome, happie and
fortunat, be the fauour and schyning of your maist gracious presence upon
ws and be rair and manye good ordours in governament, Your Majestic hes
brocht in, maid ws to sie and satled amang ws, baithe in ciuill and Eccle-
siastical! estaitt.
“ I man heir make end, because my Ingyne nor penne is nocht habill
to furneische me woords I may onywyse esteeme ansuerabill, to the greatte
obligatiouns all this Countrie and Natioun hes, to the honouris fauors and
infinit good your Majestic hes done unto ws : Taking thairfore my leive,
withe the maist humbill and reuerend kisse of your Royall hand; Wisches
unto your Sacred Majestic from the greate King of all, All happiness,
grandeur, prosperitie and contentment,
3our maist sacred Majesties maist humbill affectionat and obedient
From Edinburgh 23 December Subject and Seruitour,
Dunfermline.
“ In a word,” as Weldon says in his character of King James, “ he was
(take him altogether, and not in peeces) such a king I wish this kingdome
have never any worse on the condition, not any better; for he lived in
peace, dyed in peace, and left all his kingdomes in a peaceable condition,
with his oune motto,
“BEATI PACIPICI."


APPENDIX.
EXTRACTS FROM THE ACCOUNTS OF THE LORDS HIGH TREASURERS OF
SCOTLAND, FROM THE YEAR MDXCIII, TO THE YEAR MDCIII.
Feb. 1593. Item be his Majefteis precept to certane pure ftrangeris
Yngarianis captives to the Turk ij c i.
Maii 1594. Item be his Majefteis precept to Helene Lytill his hienes
awin nureis and to Griffell and Sara Orayis hir dochteris for thair apar-
ralling agane the baptifme of his hienes darreft fone the Prince
vj c Ixvj i. xiij s. iiij d.
Jim. Item be his hienes precept to Dauid Moyfie depute to my Lord
Secretare for hying to him of claithis the tyme of the folempnitie of the
baptifme of his Majefteis darreft fone the Prince ij c }.
Item payit for fyve tymmer beddis maid for his Majefteis chalmers
in the Caftell of Striveling togidder with irne wark thairto agane the
tyme of the folemnization of the baptifme j c i.
Aug. Item delyverit be commandiment of his Majeftie and fpeciall
dire&ioun to Dame Annas Murray Countes of Mar the furneffing follow-
ing for the ufe of the Prince agane the tyme of his baptifme.
Item thrie fteikis of lane contenand in length xxiiij , elnis time quar-
teris &c. &c. ixxxxi i.
Item be his Majefteis command for tranfporting of the Lyoun fra Haly-
ruidhous to Striveling and thairfra bak agane &c. &c. ij c lvij }. xvj s.


Item payed be the Quenis Majefties miftive for the furnitour of ten
greit Deir houndis appoynted to pas in Denmark . ij c xxviij i. xv s. ij d.
Item to James Lennox meffinger accumpaneit. with time herauldis and
thair coittis difplayit and tua trumpetouris paffand to the mercat croce
of Striveling with letteris chargeing all and fundrie our foverane Lordis
leiges of quhait eftait qualitie or degrie fa ever thei be of To fet apairt
thair particular feidis quarrellis and gruges and keip gude peace during
the tyme of the baptifme as thai tender his Majefteis honour and eftima-
tioun of thair natyve cuntrie v i.
Jan. 1595. Item to Elizabeth Moncreif Lavender to the Prince his
grace for faip fciffing utheris neceflaris and wefching of his claithis fra
the moneth of Februar 1593 to the moneth of Januar 1595 &c. ij c Ixxvj i.
1596. Item be his Majefteis fpeciall direftioun to ane pure wo-
man callet Jonet Michaell being greit with barne in name of almous and
lyand at the yett of Halyrudhous v t.
Nov. Item be the Lordis of Secret Counfall and Chakkeris ordinancis
&c. agane the tyme of the baptifme of the Princes as followis
Item in the firft fourefcore tlirie elnis and ane half of reid ikarlot
Loundoun claith to be eyerie ane of the pages and Lakayis cloik coit and
breikis being xviij perfones in nomber viij c Ixxviij i.
Item to ane uther boy pafland of Edinburgh with clois letteris to the
Erie of Rothes Lordis Lindfay Gray Conftable of Dundy Lairdis of Bal-
werie Lundy Eifter and Wefter Weymis Torrie and Bonyntoun for wyld
meit and veniefoun to the baptifme of the Princes and to cum and tak part
thairof thamefelffis the xxviij of this inftant v t.
Dec . Item to the Violaris Taburrers and Suefchearis at the Princes
baptifme conforme to the Lordis of Chekkaris warrand xxx i.
Item be his Majefteis command to ane boy of the laird of Craigiehallis
that prefentit ane pacock and paa hen to Barganeis manage xx s.


Item conforme to the Lordis ordinance for fuefchearis and ane pe-
pherare that playit at Barganeis mariage x I.
Mar. Item he his Majefteis fpeciall direftioun out of his awin mouth
to four Inglis Violaris in Haliruidhous xxxij t.
Item the xxvij day being Sunday to the brode of the kirk dure of Dum-
freis iij i.
Apr. 1597- Item to James Murray wrycht conforme to his Majefteis
precept for tranfporting of xxviij deir that came fra England fra Leyth to
the park of Falkland in cairtis 1 1, xix s. viij d.
Jim. Item in drink fylver to ane man that brocht ftray berreis to
his Majeftie fra Alio way vi.
Item to ane boy pafland with clois letteris to the Proved; and Baillies
of Dundie and San&androis for reiking out twa Barkis to await upoun
the King of Denmarkis cuming - xxxiij s. iiij d.
Jul. Item to William Murray verlot for hying twa pair filk fchankis
twa beltis and twa dageris to the Prince Grace xxij t.
Jan. Item the fnrnefling following maid to his hienes darreft fone the
Prince as the particular fubfcrivit be Sir Patrick Murray of Ganes Matter
of the Prince his gardrop &c. beiris
Item v ell and ane half of blak velvet to be ane coit &c. &c. Ixxxviij I.
Sept. 1598. Item be his hienes fpeciall command to ane Inglis fportour
that come doun upoun ane tow fra the cok of the Jiepill of Edinburgh xxi.
Item to his Majefteis felf twa fyve pund peces to play at [chide the burd. x i.
Item be his Majefteis fpeciall dire&ioun to the Sweffburis of Edinburgh
that paft throw the toun for ane of his Majefteis houndis was tint vI.
Item be his hienes precept the furnitour following maid to the ufe of
his darreft bedfallow the tyme of hir birth be the direftioun of William
Schaw Matter of Wark &c.
Item for ane cradill to the bairne xvj 1.
Item for ane tymmer bed to fet the fame xviij i.
K


Item for ane chayare to the Maiftres nureis iiij t.
Item for the feat of the feit iiij i.
Item foure ftuillis to the rokkeris liij s. iiij d.
Item to the wrichtis expenfis in paffing to Dalkeith to fet up this
wark xl s.
Item to the wrichtis childer in drinkfilver xx s.
Maii. 1599. Item payit to Peter Sanderfoun tailyeour for certane fur-
nitour maid be him to thair Majefteis twa dochteris agane the tyme of the
baptifme of Ladie Margaret iiijc t.
Jun. Item he his Majefteis fpeciall diredioun the furnitour following
for the ufe of his darreft dochter Ladie Princes Elizabeth
Item fex lane mutchis contenand ane ell and thrie quarteris viij t. xv s.
Item for pearlling to put about the famin xxxiij s.
Julij. Item be command of his Majefteis preceptis the furnitour fol-
lowing for thair Majefteis audit Laqueyis and ane of the Prince his thair
darreft sone
Item xlv elnis reid fkarlet Londoun clayth to be the faidis Laquayis
cloikis cottis and hreikis iij c ll.
Mug. Item to be ane gowne to Princes Elizabeth v elne and thrie
quarteris yallow fatine xlyj i.
Sept. Item to ane boy paffand of Linlythqw to Falkland to caus Robein
the haunter meit his Majeftie in Stirling with the houndis xx s.
Oct. Item for the ufe of the Prince nyne elnis of weildaris velvet to
be him clok coit and hreikis of colour de roy j c xx t.
Item half ane unce of filver pafmentis to be his belt and loupis to his
powche and theis of the breikis liij s. iiij d.
Item delyverit to his hienes felff to be gevin to the Inglis Commedianis
xiij crownes of the fone at iij i. yj s. viij d. the pece xliij t. vj s. viij d.
Nov. Item be his hienes fpeciall diredioun for fax elnis and ane half
grene Lundoun clayth to cover the Bilyard burde Iviij t. x s.


Item be his Majefteis dire6tioun gevin to Sir George Elphingftoun to
be delyverit to the Inglis Commedianis to by tymber for the preparation!!
of ane hous to thair paftyme xl t.
Item to William Forfyth meffinger paffand to the mercate croce of
Edinburgh changing the eldaris and deaconis of the haill four feffionis of
Edinburgh to annuli thair act maid for the difcharge of certane Inglis Com-
medianis x s. viij d.
Item to the faid William paffand with utheris letteris to the laid mer-
cat croce and thairefter found of trumpet notefying his Majefteis plefure
to all his liegis that the Jaidis Commedianis mycht ufe thair playis in
Edinburgh xxj s. iiij d.
Dec. Item lykwayis delyverit be his hienes dire&ioun to Sir George
Elphingftoun of Blythifwood Knycht to be diftributit amang certane Inglis
Commedianis . iij c xxxiij I. vj s. viij d.
Item payit to Alexander Barclay ypothegar for certane oylis vntmentis
and emplafteris delyverit to Johnne Nafmyth chirurgiane for the ufe of the
Princes xxx i. viij s.
Jan. 1600. Item for the ufe of his Majefteis darreft dochter Princes
Elizabeth tlirie elnis of fyne broun fpanis freis to be hir a goune xxij t. x s.
Item fewin quarteris cramofie fatyn to lay it out upoun and to lyne
the fyd flevis thairof xv i. xv s.
Item delyverit be commandment of his hienes precept to Sir George
Home of Spot Knycht Mafter of his Majefteis gardrop the Jowellis for
his darreft bedfallowis New Yeir giftis this prefent yeir as followis To wit
Ane Jowell with ane gret Emerod fet about with dyamontis pryce thair-
of vj c crownis of the fone Ane Jowell contening tuentie nyne dyamontis
&c. &c. iiij m iij c xxxiij t. vj s. viij d.
Feb. Item delyverit be commandiment of his Majefteis precept to
Sir George Home of Spot Knycht Mafter of the gardrop twa goldin
cheinyeis and cheinyie beltis with twa pair of garneflingis bak and foir


To be delyverit as his hienes propyne to the Countes of Sutherland and
Maiftres of Forbes the day of thair manage J m iij c xxxiij 1. vj s. viij d.
Mar. Item for the pryce of tua pair of filk fchankis to his darreft
dochter Princes Elizabeth xx t.
Apr. Item the furneffing delyverit to his hienes darreft fone the Prince
ufe as foliowis
Item for twa bowis ane quaver and ane gilt key thairto x i.
Item for ane dozen of arrowis iij i.
Item ane fchuting gluif wrocht with velvet and pafmentis of gold
iij t. xs.
Item ane quarter of velvet to be tua handis to the laidis bowis and to
lyne the brais iij I. yj s. viij d.
Item for ane quarter unce of pafmentis of gold to the hand of the
bowis xxvj s. viij d.
Item gevin in drink filver of the foirfaid geir xx s.
Item to his awin purfe fix crownis hide xx I.
July. Item for the ufe of Princes Elizabeth —ane craip to hir of fyve
quarter lang &c. x s.
Item for the ufe of Ladie Margaret —fix quarteris of laine to be hir fex
mutches vij i. x s.
Item delyverit to his Majefteis felff to play at the cairtis in the moneth
of Februar 1600 the tyme his Majeftie wes in the Cunyiehous of Edin-
burgh at the manages of the Erie of Sutherland and Mailer of Forbes fex
fyve pund peces being omittit in the preceiding compt Ixxxij I.
Aug. Item the furnitour following delyuerit for the inbauming of Ladie
Margaret fecund dochter of Scotland eftir hir deceis And that be the di-
re&ioun of Mr.Martene Scheues mediciner and Johne Nafmith chirurgiane
Item ten quarteris lain at iij i. x s. the eln viij t. x s.
Item fex quarteris fmall Lining to be a fchew claith xxx s.
Item fex quarteris cramafie fpanis taffatie at viij i. ye eln Inde xij t.


Item viij ell florence ribbonis xxx s.
Item half ane vnce cramatie tilk xx s.
Item ane kill of leid xiij 1. xs.
Item for carrying the faid kill frome Edinburgh to Linlythqw xx s.
Item to Alex r . Barclay ypothecar for certane oyles vnguentis and medi-
camentis furnift be him the tyme of hir difeafe and for hir imbauming as
his particular compt prefent to fchaw beiris xij }.
Item furneift be Alexander Barclay ypothecar and fend to Mr. Martene
Scheues mediciner to his maieftie certane drogis medicamentis and uther
geir for the vfe of Lady Margaret during the tyme of hir feiknes And alfo
for fyne poulderis and vtheris necetfaris for hir inbowelling As the parti-
cular compt Snbfcriuit be the faid Do6lor Mairtene producit beris xl i. x s.
Sept. Item for the ufe of the Prince—v elnis of purpour fating to be
him dowblet and breikis of the frenche fafchioun xlij I. x s.
Item for twa golf clubbis twa ftalffis and four rakkettis iiij i.
Item ane half quarter and ane naill velvet to the handis of the rakkettis
and club fchaftis 1 s.
Item ane greit Lantroun bowet xx s.
Item ane hat of orenge colour lynit with dowbill fpanis taffatie and
tiring of gold about the lippis thairof viij I.
Item for the ufe of the Princes Elizabeth—fewin elnis figorit velvet
blak upoun reid to be hir ane goun lix t. x s.
Nov. Item to his Majetlies felff and gevin out of his awin hand to
Jonet Kinloch meidwyff of hir Majetleis latl delyverie of hir birth
xxvj t. xiij s. iiij d.
Nov. Item payit for the bedding of the perfones following the tyme of
hir Majetleis birth in Drumfermeling
Item for twa beddis to Do&our Mairtene and his man the fpace of ane
moneth price of ilk bed nichtlie ij s. vj i.
Item payit for twa beddis to Jonet Kinloch and Jerie Boweis wyffe
during the faid fpace vj i.


Item for twa beddis to the Maiftres and rokker be the fpace of fex
oulkis ix i.
Item for a bed to Elizabeth Abercrumbie be the faid fpace • iiij I.
Item for ane bed to the Dutche be the fpace of ten oulkis viij t. x s.
Item twa beddis nichtlie to the four brodinfteris that wrocht hir
Majefteis bed in Drumfermeling vij i. x s.
Item be his Majefteis fpeciall command gevin to Johnne Murray for
bringing the firft newis of hir Majefteis delyverie xvit.
Item to Abraham Abircrumbie faidler for certane extraordinar fadill
geir maid to ferve Monfieur du Ruthanis gentilmenis hacknayis that wer
borrowit to ferve thame during thair remaning in this cuntrie viij i. xviij s.
Dec. Item for boffis to beir drink to his Majeflie at his paflyme in
the feildis and ftringis thairto vj i.
Item gevin to the Herauldis to be caffin furth in figne of larges at the
baptifme of the Duik of Albanie . Ixyj t. xiij s. iiij d.
Item to Abraham Abircrumby faidler for repairing of her Majefteis
Litter geir the tyme that the Duke of Albanie wes tranfportit fra Dum-
fermling to Halierudhous xiij i. iij s. iiij d.
Item for certane fadill geir to the Prince his twa horlis furnifit be the
faid Abraham xj i. iiij s.
Jan. 1601. Item payit be commandiment of his Majefteis precept to
George Heriot goldfmyth for ane Jo well quhairwith his hienes propynit
his darreft bedfallow in ane new yeiv gift j m iij c xxxiij i.
Feb. Item be his Majefteis fpeciall command to gif in drinkfilver to
ane boy that brocht hame ane French naig to the Prince and delyverit to
Thomas Pott for that effect xxj 1. vj s. viij d.
Mar. Item payit be his Majefteis command to Williame Mayne bowar
for twa dofand of fpeiris for the ring and gluiff xxxvij i.
Item be his Majefteis precept to Helene Creichtoun Maiftres nureis to
umquhile Ladie Margaret his hienes fecund dochter of Scotland to be hir
ane abulyement as followis &c.


Mail Item to Alexander Barclay ypothegar for certane drogis me-
dicamentis and other geir furniffit for hir Majefteis ufe and liir fone
tlie Duik of Albanie As alfua for certane emplaifteris oylis and liniamentis
for his Majefteis awin perfone the tyme of the hurt of his arme j c xxij i. x s.
Junij. Item nyne elnis and ane half purpour grograne taffatie to he the
Prince ane uther ftand cloik dowblet and breikis Ixvij i. x s.
Item gevin for ane bybill doubill overgilt and for ftringis thairto xi.
Item to Patrick Creichtoun meffinger palfand of Edinburgh with letteris
to charge the baillies of Sanquhar to bring to his Majeftie the bigill and hir
quhelpis that he wrait for to thame or ellis that thai within tlirie dayis
enter thair perfonis in waird within the caftell of Edinburgh under the
pane of rebellioun yj t. xiij s. iiij d.
Item delyverit to James Murray mafter wricht in tyme of my Lord
Lowdounes ereftioun to be faittis and Ikaffellis within the palice of
Halierudhous ane hundreth daillis xxxiij i. vj s. viij d.
Aug. Item payit to Finlay Tailyeour to by fpeiris for the ryng and
glove at his Majefteis being in Perth ix t. xiij s. iiij d.
Sept. Item the furniffing following delyverit to Abraham Abercrumbie
faidler for outred of four faidillis quhairof twa of the Scottis faflioun with
reid velvet and pafmentis of gold and lilver and the uther twa of the
Frenche faflioun with marikin and blak velvet fend with the Princis four
naigis to France with Thomas Pott &c.
Item lykwayis payit be the Compter to George Heriot younger gold-
fmith for his expenfis in palling to Londoun to bring hame the copburde
that was propynit to Munfour Vaton Frenche Ambafladour as his Majefteis
warrand dire6t to that effeft to the Lordis Auditouris proportis
iij c xxxiij t. vj s. viiij d.
Item to Johne Purdie Meffinger palfand with letteris to the marcat
croce of Striviling and thair efter found of trumpet commandit that nane
fuld follow his Majeftie to the Park to the hunting bot fa mony as are
contenit in the roll under the pane of deid xxj s. iiij d.


Dec. Item the furnitour following deliverit to Alexander Wilfoun
tailyeour for the ufe of the Prince
Item threttie ellis fmall lyning to be him farkis at xxxij s. the ell
Inde xlvij i.
Item fewin ellis fmall plaiding to be wylie coittis at xx s. Inde vij i.
Item ane dozen of golf ballis xl s.
Item tua golff clobbis xv s.
Item four pellattis xx s.
Item ij dozen clekan vj s. viij d.
Item ane dozen of ftaffis xxx s.
Item tua pellok bow ftringis xxxij s.
Item tua fchammoy fkinis xxxij s.
Item iij Inglis kames xxiiij s.
Item be his hienes fpeciall command and dire&ioun the furnitour
following deliverit to Peter Sanderfoun tailzeour for the cleithing of
Princes Elizabeth as followis
Item four ellis Spanis taffatie to be hir ane goun at viij i. the ell xxxij i.
Item viij ellis plufche to lyne the famin at xij I. the ell Ixxxxvj i.
Item iij ellis and ane half purpour ferge thairto at vij i. vs. the ell
xxv i. vij s. vj d.
Item xvj unce and xv drop wecht gold and diver pafmentis to hir twa
gownis at vt. x s. the unce Inde Ixxxxiij i. iij s. ij d.
Item viij ell of ribbanis of colouris to the fleiffis of hir nicht goun
xxvj s. viij d.
Item iij quarteris and ane half flaming to be hir fchankis iij i. js. iij d.
Item fex ellis buckorie to lyne hir walkene bodeis and fleiffis iiij t.
Item iij ellis plaiding xl s.
Item for ane ell and ane quarter orange craip and ane ell and ane quar-
ter pepingo craip with tua elnis of gold and filver freinyeis thairto to he
put about hir ci'aig xj 1.


Feb. 1602. Item delyverit to Peter Sanderfoun nyne elnis figurit vel-
vote to be ane goun to his Majefteis darreft dochter the Princes j c viij t.
Item ane elne and ane half quhyte fatyne upone incarnet to be fleifis
to hir goun xiij i. x s.
Item audit elnis and ane half plaiding to lyne the vafkene and to be
ane wyliecoit for the nicht vI. ij s.
Item be fpeciall command and dire&ioun the furneffing following fend
to Dumfermling to Maiftres Jeane Drummond for the ufe of his hienes
tone Duik Charles
Item ten quarteris fwall wirfettis to be him Juppis iiij i. x s.
Item gevin for ane cradill belt xyj s.
Item ane unce and fex drop wecht quhyte filk pafmentis to the Jupis Iv s.
Item ane tymber ftule with rynand quheillis to gang in xxxvij s. iiij d.
Item ane fwafche and ane velvote belt with ane dager quhilk wes fend
to him with Johne Nafmyth iiij t. xviijs. viij d.
Item payit be command of his Majefteis precept to Mr. Mairtene
Schoner Mediciner and Johnne Nafmyth Chirurgiane In recompanfe of
thair panis and travellis for onwaitting upone the Quenis Majeltie at hir
lait berth vj c Ixvj i. xiij s. iiij d.
A.pr. Item to be ane counterclaith to the Prince and to garneis his chyre
and to be ane cufcheoun fourtene elnis grene velvote at xv i. the elne ij c x I.
Item the furnitour following maid at his hienes fpeciall command for
the ufe of his Majefteis darreft fone Duik Robert befoir his baptifme
Item fex elnis quhyte fatyne to be him ane coit and to be flevis to ane
uther coit of yallow fatyne quhilk Duik Charlis gat &c. xlviij i.
Item fex quarteris of fyne- lane to be ane aipprone ane mutche ane
ovirlayer and ane pair of handis all frettit with gold viij i. vs.
Item ten quarteris purpour velvote to be ane cod to beir Duik Robert
to the kirk to be baptifit xxxvj i. vs.
Item tua pund of hair thairto &c. xl s.
L


Item delyverit to Iffobel Colt Maiftres nureis to the faid Duik Robert
x elnis half elne fyne Touris taffatie to be hir ane gowne j c v
Item four elnis and ane half blak velvote to be hir fkirt and to lay out
the breiftis of hir gowne Ixv t. vs.
Item ane quarter blak velvote to be ane mutche for hir heid iij t. xij §. vj d.
Item delyverit to Johne Arnote mercheant burges of Edinburgh quhilk
wes fend to Dunfermeling for the ufe of his hienes darreft fone Duik Ro-
bert ane filver plait and ane lilver Ijpune xxxv i. j s. iij d.
Item for ane ftickit mat to Marioun Hepburne rokker to Duik Charlis
vj i. xiij s. iiij d.
May. Item for the price of ane pointit diamont quhilk his Majeftie
gaif to his darreft bedfallow the Quene befoir the baptifme of Duik Ro-
bert ij c lxvj i. xiij s. iiij d.
Item to his Majeftie to play at the cairtis in Falkland with George
Nicolfoun fextene fex pund peices Ixxxxvj t.
Item cafiin amangis the pepill the day of the baptifme of Duik Robert
in name of Lairges Ixvj t. xiij s. iiij d.
Item to ane honeft man in Dumfermling for reparatioun of the fkaith
quhilk he fuftenit in his comes at the rinninge of the rigne efter the bap-
tifme of his Majefteis fone Duik Robert xij i.
Item payit to Thomas Weir pewderar for ane laid kift and for his and
his fervandis expenffis in ryding to Dumfermling and for ane kift of aikin
tymber to lay Duik Robert in efter his death xvj t. xviij s.
Item iiij elnis blak velvote to be ane mort claith &c. lix i. vj S.
Jnlij. Item delyverit to Alexander Wilfoun tailyeour the furnitour
following to be ane garment of hunting claithis to the Prince his grace
Item four elnis thrie quarteris grene fatyne xxxviij t.
Item delyverit to Elizabeth Hay for the Princes ufe ane birfe to ftraik
hir hair viij s.
Item ane quarter of fatyne to be hir ane mafk xl s. viij d.


Item tua pair of doubill gluvis pafmentit and tua babeis to play hir
liij §. iiij d.
Item delyverit lykwayis be his hienes fpeciall dire&ioun to the faid
Elizabeth Hay lifter to Alefoun Hay the Princes Maiftres Nurice for
thair claithing ten elnis ferge of florence Ixxv i.
Aug. Item payit to Francis Manfioun wricht for ane pulpett of Eift-
land buird to the kirk of Falkland with the furneffing of Irne wark thairto
and for his expenfts with his fervandis in earning and ganging to fet up
the famin Ixxij I.
Item to James Warkman painter for painting of thair Majefteis armes
to be patrone to the armes of fome claithis that wes to be maid iij i. vj s.
Oct. Item the furnitour following delyverit be his hienes fpeciall com-
mand and dire£tioun to be ane goun and vafkene to his Majefteis dochter
Princes Elizabeth
Item four elnis and ane quarter broune frenche fteming xxxj i. xvij s.
Item four elnis reid cramafie taffatie to be ane Vafkene xxxiji.
Item time elnis buckrum to be ane Vardegaird and to band the goun
with xl s.
Item xiij drop weicht reid waiting pafmentis to the taill of the Vafkene
xxvj s.
Item iij quarteris reid fkarlot frenche flaming to be hir ane pair of hois
v I. xij s. vj d.
Item be his Majefteis fpeciall dire&ioun for payment of the Futc gaird
that accumpanyit his Majeftie of Edinburgh to the raid of Drumfreis de-
liverit to Capitain James Huntar j c lxxxxij I.
Item to the Herauldis and -Purfewantis for thair fervice in onwayting
the tyme of the baptifme of Duik Robert xl f.
Nov. Item the furneffing following delyverit be his hienes dire&ioun
for the cleithing of his Majefteis fone Duik Charlis
Item iij elnis and ane half reid frenche fkarlot ferge to be him ane coit
and hois &c. xxvj i. vs.


Item for certane drogis oylis unguentis medicamentis and emplaifteris
maid and furniflit be Alexander Barclay ypotliecar To tliair Majefteis and
thair bairnes ufes As tlie particular comptis fubfcryvit be Mr. Mairtene
Schoneir Mediciner John Nafmytli and Gilbert Prymrois chirurgianes
producit upon compt beires - iip xxxviij i. xy] s.
Dec. Item ane kame caife to the Prince of grene velvote with the
haill furniffing thairin iij 1. x s.
Item ane fyne brodderit belt iiij i.
Item ane hat of colour de roy vij i.
Item tua fchammeaux fldnis to weir under his fchankis xxvj s. viij d.
Item gevin for mending of his Montour xxvj s. viij d.
Item ane fpounge xxvj s. viiij d.
Item fex elnis Cambrige to be him apprones mutcheis and ovirleyeris
xxiiij i.
Jan. 1603. Item be his hienes fpeciall command delyverit to Elizabeth
Hay to the Princes ufe ane fair kaife of kames coverit with velvote vI.
Item twa elnis Cambrige to be ane kaming claith viij t.
Item twa babeis to be plaiyes xiij s. iiij d.
Item payit be his hienes fpeciall command and dire&ioun to William
Vans armorar for certain fwordis and dagaris quhilkis wer preparit for the
Ytaliane (Daniell Archdeacon) and Frances Mowbray aganis the day of
thair combat Ixyj i. xiij s. iiij d.
Item payit to Alexander Wilfoun tailyeour to the Prince to be gevin
for the fraucht and uther neceffar expends maid be him upone fum geir
that cum fra Ingland to thair Majefteis ufe viij!
Item payit for ane horfe hyre to carie certane neic yeiv giftes fra his
Mojeflie to the Prince and Princes iij t.
Item be fpeciall command and direftioun foirfaid to James Murray
maifter wricht for tymber daillis naillis and for his workmanfchip in ma-
king of the barier quhairin the faidis Italiane and Francis Mowbray fuld
have fouchin the fingill combat j c lxxixi. viij s. vjd.


Item for graving of Iris Majefteis armes in tymber for Iris liienes kirk
iij f. llerling hide xxxt.
Item for uther twa hattis to Iris liienes ufe ane tliairof broclerit with
gold and the uther with lilver with ftringis and fedderis thairto vi. Iter-
ling Summa in Scottis money 11.
Item for ane bybill to the Prince xxyj s. viij d. Itarling extending
to xiij i. yj s. viij d.
Item for baggis of fweit powder xvij i.
Item for ane pund of powder to lay amang his Majefteis claithis xi.
Item for ane bottell of fweet water v i.
Item for ane box of mufk and fevat v I.
Item for fex tyres dreflingis for hir Majefteis heid 1 f.
Feb. Item be his Majefteis fpeciall command and dire&ioun delyverit
to Mr. Cobler and uther thrie commedianis to be ilk ane of thame coit
and breikis viij elnis fkarlot claith Ixxvj I
Mar. Item payit to James Murray younger for making of dafkis and
faittis about the pulpet in the chapell of Halierudhous xxxiiij i. iiij s.
Item to Johne Fairny keeper of the Princes chalmer dure at Linlith-
gow 1 i.
Item payit for poulder to fchut the ordinance of the Caftell of Edin-
>
burgh quhen his Majeftie wes proclamet King of Ingland xxxvl. xvs.
Item to the ordinaris of the Caftell in drink ftlver yj i.
Item to Charlis Fortay Laquey to the Prince grace for his liveray
claithis xij I.
Apr. Item to the Prince grace tua pair of fyne gartanis with fair
freinyeis of gold ane pair for-to be ane hingar to his dager and the uther
for his leggis xvj I.
Item payit be command of his hienes to Robert Lyle fervitour to the
Erie of Argyle for inbringing of thrie notorius theifis of the name of the
barbarous Clangregour iijc xxxiij i. yj s. viij d.


Item payit and delyverit be his hienes fpeciall command and diredioun
to James Murray younger for certane bilyardis and bilyard bowles furnifit
be him to his hienes awne ufe Ixxx t.
Item to William Mayne bower for certane fpeiris and golf clubbis fur-
nifit be him to his Majefteis ufe j c i.
Item for certane plaiges babeis and uther fmall neceflaris for the ufe of
his hienes fone Duik Charlis yj I. xviij s.
Item payit to Richart Lawfoun buikfeller for certain buikis delyverit to
Mr. Adam Newtoun for the ufe of the Prince grace xxj I.
Item for carying of the greit balhuiff with his Majefteis filver work out
of the abbay of Halyruidhous to the Caftell of Edinburgh iij i. yj s. viij d.
Item to ane Inglis poft that brocht from Berwick ane packet that wes
diredit frome his Majeftie at Newcaftell the tent of Aprile and delyverit
heir the ellevint thairof at- nicht contening certane dirediones for the
convoy of the Quenis Majeftie yj i.
Maij. The furneffing following delyverit be the diredioun of the Lordis
of Secret Counfall for the ufe and cleithing of the Quenis Majeftie the
Prince grace and Princes thair Paigis and Laqueyis and certane utheris
quha wes appointit be diredioun foirfaid to attend upoun thair fervice at
thair removing heirfra towardis Ingland
Item nyntene elnis figurit taffetie to be hir Majeftie ane goun Ixxxxv t.
Item four elnis and ane half quhyte fatin to be bodeis and flevis thair-
to xxxviij t. v s.
Item tua elnis and ane half quhyte fatyne to help to mak up ane goun
of hir grace awin quhilk wes all oppinit up and maid of ane uther new
fafibun xxji vs.
Item payit to George Hendrie wricht in the Cannogait for tymber to
be ane cheriote and for making of the famin and to pay for fum Irne work
thairto xxxix i.


Item the furnefling following delyverit to be ane fut mantill to the
Quenis grace &c.
Item threttene elnis purpour velvote to be the bodie of the fntmantill
and half ane ell to covir the fute brod and to put upone the fute mantill
to keip it unworn foment the brode ij c xxij i. xv s.
Item for the ufe of the Princes thre elnis reid fpanis taffetie to be hir
ane wyliecoit narrefi hirjark xxiiij t.
Item thrie elnis ane quarter and ane half rounge broun fatyne to be ane
tolheidclaith and ane pook to put hir nicht geir in xxviij i. xiij s. iiij d.
Item four elnis and ane half grein claith to be ane coit to Thomas Du-
rie hir Majefleis fule xxxiij i. x§.
Item be fpeciall command and direftioun foirfaid the furniffing follow-
ing wes delyverit to the Prince his grace tua paiges of honour viz. the
young Laird of Mellerftanis and Dik Doddifwode &c. &c.
Item for the cleithing of Johne Fell and Arthour Kilbowie Laqueys to
the Prince his grace &c. &c.
Item payit for aucht flane wecht of powder quhilk wes fchot in the
Caftell of Edinburgh at hir Majefleis and the Prince his grace cuming
from Striviling to Halyruidhous Ixxxx t. xiij s. iiij d.
Item payit to Johne Norlie muficiane for his allowance of this moneth
of Maij Ixvi i. xiij s. iiij d.
Item payit for aucht llane wecht of powder to be fchot at hir Majefleis
removing heirfra toward Ingland Ixxxx i. xiij s. iiij d.
July. Item to the Herauldis upoun the day his Majeflie was crownit
King of Ingland &c. paffand to the croce of Edinburgh and thair eftir
found of trumpet and difplaying of thair coitis of armes publifchit the
treafonabill pra6tife intendit aganis his Majeflies facreit perfone And thair-
with chargeing all his hienes loving fubje&is to be cairfull to apprehend
fik as wer fugitive gif thai come in this cuntrey vj i.
Item to the trumpetouris iiij 1. xiij s. iiij d.


Dec. Item be command of the Lordis of Counfall to Margaret Ladle
Uchiltrie in rememberance of the travell and panis tane be hir in onwait-
ing on tliair Majelleis bairnis being knawin to the faid Lordis that it wes
his Majefteis will the famin fuld be gevin to her v c I.
Item to Marion Hepburne maiftres Rokkar to Duik Ghairles be com-
mand of the Counfell in conlidcratioun of hir panis and faythfull fervice
j c Ixvj I. xiij s. iiij d.
EDINBURGH : PRINTED BY T. CONSTABLE.
M.DCCC.XXXV.


Letters.
/tY'O w C/2 netsie. (A L
U jC)r-mCc
C/A?&rks SC,-
(y 2 syi est/yt'E, oA oJvc/yyt^^
T’ytd
U- Kj s<*■ ■■ 6’
•->


Cum. udAtMi
vtJl'i'vLyt/ti HiAntMwi (Putu tyx*
tuamuM iwl 2 wut caZ) CrtJu-~
Zf
'iJuriiAM Wiilml id maalvuiu (ntmtiJddii'mtuv
jv2vLjyid{i/xdtitm towsi/gz. J^cJi
ZJ. JjAia
Hdllti
iZuim
$(1: l(flt ■
I AO l Ojvtim) irdaxii
(LViiMZ^J^rrio


nrinne fmtper Jejsu re
jjlliCx wiotru u
4 'ffUTVts.'T £ dd'UtdT^HidVdl^td'dl/ TJtffli,
irwftttjnm ft c^mte,,
inmtctan-mQentLnf /t r'Mv
finym*/^'me
£ m
e-fejTrt
onikc [[ufomMiM


Oire
(j>g nej f%j eft £inejse fj/ amr fffe m<m (ffnr
%y ftfmfeue/ercjd&tj'tres/iuviffe'ct £a'/utn&f‘
« rf a Pvr
wjmtnvr etyejiiu fwi fol^urfiT^ l le^Td.ees
Um^utsjM£j(uQrJi matjurte/fff £ %f re _
tnvm Wfc maislfcM(t u'TftA
true rim / Ucnffft amfifLnmt ate ilfnfMvere
Cyf/ nT r ffj^" r r
iJttidelmJutT neMtrfmfzs c/tojedim&^
jfdcnfwrMfuU ffftmtrrin imfiuu vT
ntpiit nmlewLfUv^envoye
Hi MCfnit It&u JtJttu m cmitmue
fid cflurfeiijfit ft Mf^isfritiiri tymmjiit
yjum mn rdfii^^d^ifuJW^/emii&r
m^f w
Jmiiaf/uwujit /Sr rfm 111 exit tin u
nf/trriii
t y r r--r^-^ J /> > Jtf
qftnr nij -ul'uy ftJxutjM le^randm is _


insert mi/mu a. mm e&m)ttr tdJ/L' &/l
u.
ty mMJer-auM nmr tys
iTWMyOU2<) tfLctd
<w>£- d& mmJtjrM it atyz/t
tytytyit pwt[#p It rn Pt/^tytyf//lt>iaj/jtyj
aMIC )lm T zjiyiitim.j
u J&Zi. *
P
tJut
/ A? .
jtA'd£
Jh?/// ytZ'


S^LT
•
'fna:/ ~
L^k>^yi6cLLC(jfn , Lt- tjo me
jrLoucc frtu. ae ala-/ o/talcfcttr/
/alt
tiarte tf^a^u^/£^t/r/ ytrvp, A<y^^
n//fie /oZ/iaJr
tfic ScrsvvJ cm/ttz^p*/ttc/z/
b-njpmvfrc out-so (Wd/A a. Cues^n-
• //crcumc/^^^ 9^-^/ 17 ' 5 CL ' n /
evenU3[fop-Cryve 'tfi'Zrrfr (2000n6.n
SAI rj /rcjpo~MJ c <yM- £#
t/lc ~t/-cdL^
/ s/o-ulz/e&P e / tt> L S y SO^etrtAat:
'/auc. tal/c vt / ' cvn/J%d-
fell / to CU 7najrue_djf
Qjj il j yy&cx/a-fitsi
1 j (yi^y'a/c/ a- Se r u_a^i/(i~ y
§ a-r Let Scny to aj~
le/a mcsc a
Pi Iv — ——


3™
c [t Ca^^ D^pyaM l (jLhU ruoAdnir
Junr £u/n omuAMJ' oam. Ua mUutu Uj jv/us-i—,
ClAultif it (nviljiu Ell kl d MytL/nkllAUlicJlU t (Mr
jAq Em, Myn tmju uiCl E dEuu t EEnjEuu ziawi tkrus-
LiMAUUII HifTUi CJ'UIA/ll CTL-ttlrdl fy/l Cd-U tiuitnx ML [HUCIi
(ajLfiufa, hU am IdUilyLVi 'dtiticA<yotjunj r [e ji-urfUA au ucL~.
l % j s , w r , r >. 4 j
jl/rii/Myij CAitirum kj /Umoc. L JLt y/ t~i.(ru.4U j tu,^
cyPi. tuu Usst~e. fJVLMmz fbriLA r dM/Udulu-I'll
? // /? / , q/E ■
n d inru pi ■ LkLjb(L / in*ti*-c jju tc
yu-n La pydii/j truAdnuu
,aa
Jy m trr fiu
& tui dvxyjLtsnt kuoltzii-i
Imk
(I AFeMtiy.
/It--
An
T


(h-
-t'
Jwimo jtj' vu&m Jeemh JiMy
my uy(fHz/t ’p/lyateriJif. lemM^rmy^ymeM
7U t mjyjH jiymfM- ffc&fan 4A ' r/ kr
‘jiytment vy imt
Lmj£ (LuM mJirnMc t> ymroA. fyiiisc,
amfinuc me (fliim yem
it /m^ifyymtcyt
/umi- btiinlmdjeau. muJudH fo/tfii
//' mi /r irf/f # Jtriucj ■
euht many u’futA jofuulaayr L ft euda.ujt ? itv
u d/ihHMfyw
JH-lyz/aue/t) armnmttJizef w^>{ftt/lemr
Jjyy t> Cfi }fnM ’aJt /lm-& Jvryrurc/l
cvruUfiat (jit vwy He. am ypvrtJjy
iiit hw
Or
c) /; // ///'■■ ■
jyjeapru/i. L fUn£ ! JuwMiJyfc*
c i. im zojgvctifcr (j(L* yy/H^LUL
i. 4*


Rex Ser me: & amantissime
(um etjjufflico iJrenarum £oc anm iczrvppr cmi tt/'z/Jui rum
i’fjpriua.iun aruiitd. me a, ccmsuefu e/ine mendus neceS/ttsi-tem mt
(iferario TTLumre salzifamc/ij nu/lum occurre/mt aid amuenicn-Hiu
■irc/Tyy or 1,2272/ Jlzu/tjs meis dLCCozniruzz/ainusj dut O': £ut tLyo.
'jjuij'em ejctiimafavO) dce^/iuj^u-tururzzjjua.m. si carmine J no no
me C itcru m ircziirdtd-jjaricm, n one?tsaccum 3erern.:
iaxmert m.& ) tum-jjda.renti3 am a. n tijsi m_ i f £t? ma/v\fOi z/z t-
cojjihi iu> -tanc/Ittl^Jitslenirdmi: .t/41*uofiuernmem n^/ ?d - 7 'ezdes Suor 2/721
7igfUo,t /Z072,j-r/uTn. Cecc/7jdrt^J‘ed~ifif'C7'an 7/1 elriaTn,
&(3 cos'CpjoS TmJiutipima ttnuzeri/zn c/rzui a 0:i n itm. ra. toj o rajcfbc
nr?? dLspcrTZsiri. c>s4-tq J-uvfici foac fretus esC-iff/maui
a, . 771 2t/ssim u77l x CjO~*Putnam, m +errzs
- refer eritcyrLj hac ijuaJia JUfjus/C mCccjjrimorr/ta,
[o7?z consu /turam, e't carTninactoTL omnino fo7ia, j beTpjjnd, 1 nierprcfntic
meOiord, J-'a/ffuram-J , ■ -
Zmrt jaater-j sa.cm Ai-x 771722 e d2 >
dm?npoi:ens f £c ce/si reflor OCyrtvjDz
'Fran fe. jo/et mzcamud fa/is jjcCtFurzs .
/ 9 J
mu.rsu.vt Sc Us, ti'Lopis fz/Tarnt-rut r/e octroi.
ac C? cuy? jQadtvmfzj:
rhTcU med tenuzs^TiTnar/Tto.
otrtjuz fiesjuni/o j
2 db; jrtuftvJ-QillCl\?s
OoTxt-LnuaJe nc T'OE(J~ciA. sdc/d^j*C7]Ud72tu7\
tjTsJ! 0^‘ < ‘>/Cc^usnhJltj- z^UJ .
I~bj c r r icii7.


i
Jm£
t ~\ic a. & iu by
ajjui4 cp&riy tricar u i&nyry', maa rpyayiit
cm f jynuu-m d d et cUz cdam LL> urtrrrt
drUsiiAzAM; dddJxit A dddc'/iJTtt ii ti&tl ty Ttcinr tu,
/ . / . ■, , /
di vtdaj crtart at rttmr ft ptMcc myyai
par cutpy A ixuJd' d/p/mAmwt Ly wriad Jdl'/L-
->V / J / d ■ ■ dr /
Qc U HoftM&r ai vut cantinar trurtyift / -Jumtur cu cJ
djJdyvA 7,u
jjianrbt ddTtucp A Jhml rrvfafiudMaitMi^r
yy tl Amt bm2r
hnudmnjjur cl tmcuc
Silt
(j)f VJt yj yy yyj
fer
JSct &tjdritaaptt
% ) /' /' JfT~‘ .
'4%£ . i ItMflL
<L r -


y/K-J buT't
j nan a/dJ. -t/u±)
tnl/yviL dj-ytrur, rrt u Ma. Adalt/t
yb td drZ?i±in.uX-',r
fra / t /ante po7t d/aJjd in-C-
-'ytat/ apt/UiiAj?
ft rant/nr rts±s sr/b
/dc/uisn yatL iatr)Vnjiin
mmy / j ban numta /nn nr
prac/ttf-fr tt/ttncn
iff am/^
— 7rLus{ij/yyfiOfiu/ u a///,
/amt rut a /it/e /Aaid/ m
Sd perJdHuaL
//y -yp-tayr/t, funA
-rSZ==r/ruL r2s/~Z^^


jAofl^jjraiunesJnittayqn n.ni char
Jkjia-rmjtcms rihirne to ifie wuri
ame mee U veU byrejenfyn r
-J this yaytr the ray mjthumlik
tojoiirljwk-nes ifrnyty itycovjyt mfmlci
bwijhicel' r WK‘ s j° yj l& env y Jonryteyn.ee
■ve ikouok j Mrc not vrefums to hyw
noikmy TYoidli [oylMjy nfe Anlfoknmty
y/ill ev*r amimne
~\jow JA% nojy oke/ient
J clammier
J^liZuLetk
noeA
uceutnijHtu4ly


J y 7 -fit xljJ'/r //t /ttfsrs^
C^YCwem/rarrcff^y 77^
tury?a zZtzX
f//tr
pejyr pvs/ssms t
j>> y~rftma.f <?a ryrsJ^^^rd
ms tV r /£ ?f
f-p yptij y^a^^y^'/iX.
Y#aj zt? //Zjs/sOf jrr£icn6? ZZ
/ y /i-Z AfzuZ zZ Zp tsze y^ZZ.
s a £ Zyj/ w 7 -z* A k zZuj ztm-
y j'su 7X ryj?* rz7
fZi/l £P/?f?S7£UJ
Voters
-yyrm^


Xpc Jcraafeimc d> dmant it] rmx. pater,
yoPujuanx iam scptimum exajsi aumrnv
city af> ccfatt Ci csc. emetic. yttufiorum ciujjci
* %
uucTtrn.avtu.vi cxjkl iafirr } yutain cls^r
giCr, nttt aumtrcnL jrojkcir . .
in Crttcrrs fftfaietivti tucx maxcnre
fti-d-TTL ■f'c’ yr a’Start yvofl y.>rer captor . ,
vovnru, uerfo fro mi prat . du o/si rn
pto crccy n'ij jur tent in£ urC ybToj^liCTf
mi ante dvrra ftitdtd diicrms cm imafis . fhaani
jrecor njt (d[ai cfh tent ttulm dtut-ifstrite
rntdi firu.de mcofttmem .
fvA
Straus j%UvLs (
%dv Jcremjsimo, StQ I .
. tf
'PqXt'i stto (xon/n'dtijsixu) ,


zmpejJ&jzf*' ceo&y
idbuf cmbiusit fu i J W J4uunr mf
*S SM /$ rf,
■Murtru* jiwuce&LaeM-
sa/tofc' LddiieJ& U J4UmJozJ*£* fcrzeJ& &
d jiar&ffd&VJfd
tilCoy ViTiJu ffl*Zt^tl£f' d. /cy
cztiii&ar m&rtie /nie*t&*
vtwjvl m&re, mzjum. irfwfJ'L ne.
rigM. Jj? iurua£yu(. i&r aiu !?&*■
tyJ(.U flnswr Jvu: C^^ m&m^lm ■
/miM£jf!tL&<f CMMZZ
M7L4ij£j^cuonrdraMMVr cemjJUd
<X, iaynzttcd
£* 11/JL
jajvtc
s£&Mjb#oLU>
fjLu dLj}£,


/}{y Juu-rt ■
<j Pajn/ffn. tka.4- 'j I y
—no / pMyjJr cuts m* r<D vr ur. yK,
LX^yrj,)/(nt I'lctr//' jioi
■i -pM! Tl iU/{ r.r / yar-C-
-r/J/f y f
'~-f s mU-L L tIatTZTZjTL OV til £ TZJjMfh.
y r y / x > O-
— /W /Ll?L<y vyc C-ditu M rHL
—-'Aylvinkji ttmlf -ta SU 7riy yf
~ycy nx)/uy ,
sdjty rwju*. j y {
trhx luiur? f 7 lay >y,nuyy'L /
ia*e* Cv
-y t ~:'S v
y ■ ~ '
7t.WMi%y


,r
'ffwi (r&unyr ymrcmm
tfiii )PibJ “v r iJtpd^JawdJit
fZZMmU r dJ
{H/4t JimM urtcca (m Ja£t» (re-u%JL
IM. tv cm&Mi nit m y>mr
JLwo4' MidTWnJTJUUZ idw Ixwijl
ijiit wvrJ^Jfm djtd
jtc it, J) wtJ
fuM/s
u£ Jr
J\L c Jrma6 JmfiJH^tif-
yoiiz wccc^JyJeuicJtfJi
-tiatr jmay yuy Jw%r tfU /mapm- imw sf\
Jr 4 //J /■ /Jf y{J*/
l4l. jw/ti, yivucn it my
4tt/n s 'iff y^^(-
4L %s
C- '


'""N
A Ur.
V./ / ' r, ■ / ■) ■' // nJj / )
/jT wt ftuuuuii funw c 4 yru c/li/inli /utu( lirt thm
U J A / ; sS >' /) . /V ,
(iam.fiMial w trf 'ysur c/U hiA / CdAhiJutat/.
ruiiuuit umA otoau truuiA rtuturm h £iwiAft
trJu fru,oi LutAiuciJLuc fwu rli jLnftr'r mj
nlf Aua Acrtrcr vA/IHsimhl ha \LLiua crccnti tut
* / /" 7 * ' /° a ,/y ■
uiMt mg zrn&t dtfyrt h-AtUrw rf.yricr- M wc4
m t nLk H #ujL L^icrfLc
rnj narf/r"LLuild ojvl J> lupin h
LfcCl/
0/ /a Ja ,/
I (ru/r (s k L ’ vtccvr/iM/Cm ajul.
■ (Amh
AAmu±o i /^
At#'Am TUrdr
yA€iJMJZA


/? . /?, / /'ft,
dftdtt IM'TM' / /y? 3/3


swute
%vect( pttficr i \(Wnc to fccfw sJ>stantiucj
anl alu cuius /me me yuf [fcsSim! /
i tlmijjotijor mAf best maity
ork^
TiT mj tfiC
%-


tj/ dtp 'fytuJt/A Ju/i4 icm n.rf /uu£ ttf iaM-uej
• p/p yo'op f . « pp? ) r
iro J-et OW-fO/L . * a y ap Tiitl/ytuP tt PcPO p O-fP p a x 'd' 'A ..
O ’ / / ✓ ' O/J dt /* :/ Y/
tldrp tppitc.p tnOty yruj'W noaJu tffl-U fup wtf/t:
/O fP y '-' It O// o tf * ? ' 9- y //
7 (?Tffls'/ff''V ft///At P/It / Uiyy ft /iPt A/t/r/M // It/MaO tl) 'p UA iZUt/O
o y PIP t"P P f /■' /
tu w > / nuut Otr tit M.m fip/utt Po/m it uOt ufiu tf ttm
Y //t O ■PO P' pP* , > P dP ' f "'
Jpp/t / m/iM pypuitp AAA4A dz/tz pi to !LPa.d/t J tTcdtu
OJ o p o /P d. 1 Ppp P
it /s vriru/PoP t v OpoPp cteti/uMp mz of y/rr/rtnOttCm-
P ' (?' Pt / rr . / p-OopPP' i ,
pOuJni ppyt Ipjrp djAAtttjtvll 70 J'LpO
try (jp’twce. /OiO tr/tnjary/y )rfaut £ii f.m yru. to
/. t. ■' cfC / / <^ s ' / ’? tAA (t/~> f
fat in cj(. (ny(. ij ( -- { P trttjjt Mup Op l/PPpM/ pt/if/tp/a/rm
taPr (pi iuup y/ /(l nutJie jut OMqse/tfce w jru/p
Yt-Oi/t (PP PP 1 P Op OJp.Yp 6 P
„ niA/y' hPum Try tlt/duts IU/yttttd/A/t/ pM/rpAOi// x/i At
. X 7 . P/O f P Y2d P P- 7 / ’
pjruAtx/ fnt/T nu/P J/lttP IPs pf/tn/A nMtt/zO'
f £ cP ■ • (/ /-J OtP Cy
J /npt/upM/t/X J (All
drdPwtrtiujddOtbx
P ary a/a
pf - ’ f V yynO/d tpO-6 /ru/Jt tiymlni
mj-o my MtwrrtL^- —v' - ' / r/' ; / a ,
PO y dPpO v ~- tnd H/ OUrU t&nuuut
/ ( PpP ■ fAn /7
T C/Mm


.J /
JjLy heart /
J dcjjncy o-ta~ / inn ’ f ' 'to /
fialir not censWire/ io-tcr
rjwejia"- Tartar /leauifc
/j lie trufti cf
tic j Vfteia r/c/s j aj j Oirutac-
there u nure rrrtie,arc&t
cullers iitm/cl
ieucrurs tny /lire /<u / te/fj *(?tO
iut
_ nuriLV_j aj/o-ur ; 7/1 a
•yohle Lcutc rnc to rueicjycHc/ aJt
CWirttia/l j asm lore
foni ULConWintcnS tit n^y~~/cM-S
icute / j>>
J^eMjytrii.r <&■ Lzn/i if i'ef£
ryjcrusT , _ ,
' ]//Na ‘


/ / 'O
t (Jdh>r litufmi
M t unn~
pitiuii tiix/UA yuyiA/iij/aA'i' nil
0 /o , • .i : J' ./
dye x> HswJimt pnt tivt vuru/m ■
jj&ULL ui /niuiiJnu: uuh/iA4ii /dJrn yjwuUfi
£u>, wtysC'lMjwu iloMytn. qwmdc
& Qj / I' J
ra ■ Js oAjL -
' J j $ 'd^t/uimiu-
/■MUM jtlui/A
M(J>€.uJi /i .
as f / (MfiM,
/ s u l'£t£,m» ion Os..- ■■ -
L czz^
ilm Ojitiuu
(JdUi &mJitwtiTu). %


i 5,
Iw'-jlrio LP C numurid c/uioitmjO Jtruuru mtctma=
vnTmmino sjoatu Jt&Ttvjpo in d{tro,mdVOjuonoone
io fe [dtern,come. <ynftj)iccw(ii jlmdsddtLOTicruUri- ynu/. coiihiiPun
cfoani dcjted c convert atmaK-JfJ ll V
C/nubrsi dC^r-tn. iLmw jinc t Jdfo’ aPfuutrt \Aonnj)
eftdideno /’liftro c?t <£scruir!xsuiijiidr<w dd ditto clu
ru joLLiciiu/me a/'dftro c?t a (kferirP (PjLurdom, c(iio U deboo-,
j)CT ejder cfcconda. to Co cfi.
Slid. luLmtlimdJijiiuoL
Undtia.
J


JvU
y-mt tnriuu. (a unnmadaz'’ aiu, ,/e4t lia-T ct
r J /'O /U / ' J ' '
- pcrttu'/)■ k Hair ai tyiuAyruta jiu m. Mimmir y&ruc yrt/f Mi
ludamt pvr u Cu duduleMtt atiil mz.mt ' V--?/ dmr
y.t/n mm dmm-r via. a m iiupum- mt h Imric
OLOLHyrTL s*ytu imfiJTtm&r dadLy mntrmar al-jmzar
•0/ 4/f / f ■ . / ■ *
. a& Ll amtzauid&JTi at vlo. auiiurtLtfi jl fine u^ulcx
tfue dCC hijmCt dime airrftmueer
I ’thtnuLeam ddaa cam-mc UjUaa^widi&nr
tfriU&nawfrjfi-L 4 a-uL MCO dmaMt & uemea
id
kJ lei,
Sedde/I
d tneddca/i/d>.
ddCd J€/ULdm£e


coc 5
(He JntTLBl ttt UudijlUdri Oclj
o . r * • , > ■ * /
Uc uu uurm j ut Hi u auyun jMnLi'U iirrrfcxJ n iLrijWii it-
CiubnJr. (iUmJ( ura urJcjiwitui^
ritrit non uu (d in Cr L*ti?muti ojluiujjji
/ • c7^d //T/ //
ttifijiiLd ui InnuuiUM nntuui Jtudjf4 j dpur&rnwlm
(uc
&Lmurnui mA rid (iniit (jm^scMSS-CJU
i n •
J. . Kjfi iwi Uu&irsrcrmi cjlvl cornu
cd#L mJLL c£ J^
SMjbur Taitrdlrr^urfdirri:
d. /// j-
o i^^duitdutnMjdu
0 jdM6 -$ C I J d3I


Sa/n<h(- i^ijr'curcg-cjde &>
'c/ 1 " irS on^r Utte'iJ 6ejre>u*-e
OUrJoM W”*» t y cn
P*"
****** t3,y~~* *«g«
ie-ft tkvJ&i-uc jercAAre fr>Votvfe s /'
/ .■ ■ S Qr *** M ** e *j»"4**&& of
our . y
tyumyh. .


&/itOfi/UcumunJ'fi {Jill l J : ft V'tsi^ifu^
// , /O /> ' / ,/,0 -fa - o
vntmiL) cut fim 'jurtxyfiwiit di kJIL jc n uy ItnAl
rum/ (U zmti/rt uraxa it 9d-uu. dMcjin&m ur-
>n<J J > , /? > - f /
/u///Mfitur yrrti'c I fluent tr !u lull ecu tu ju /i a m
duai 4am ui vur/uh iiit jLifit cf/re Lc fiu
s 1 fc nirf/k' /
j7u JuuL ' uwu t/iijuiumj c -/u fuut/uy
Jjjruit lx ■ d U-di.
<?.
’ld . 1 , /
c_.' njwjMt yiu sf>-
u, u
!'A ~ /-', ...
/ //!mJ/A
ct H l4. (1/ L t-
cAn fi/sy


V
mijicucdiuL kfu <jzu?tf-a tntdildra idyliV/
/Cdiy/yjsib' dcyjucnji zdsy dirvAC
nut dint r?zu> cdrddyJzo /fu n^/tczn
Sata Si\;;uicd?'tzi di nuttid U /uiu£ud- i/aii Jz
Jditz iante d&ritc afcuo7r. J cdazL~
0 , ~d dL. ' c rf*
c#rzL initenytmd z^ywt teyio szd vzzzzl <? iridTX.dyJzzi
fa fat/m? cd fddyfruifa zd/dz sud ddnua/ds-
amzzLa t mtzi jn^zii/'d
ieramu) wiesd CdUdijirdy/u-
a d)ujzcsr Idji wsji&rida- dxld. 'JvLJdm?/uz Ivxzx t&myzo -
rale aeua
c' r -fr* t y~ yz
jJ)ud fmmiitp'^fxyi
jt&/


/^cnilwi mlt ff iL mi tcaum
mi fui/AJimctfo
mi to tmj htiM*
jjoljin
(amt
cScJrtki
cv r , <ff£^
\JdW Jrld-
- mii JutiJuit Gymlml
muf mil fiumla. ,JkiMt
™ ff cu


Jv-c '
(/'/ / 4 .<■■
</f>. 4*, A()
Jr&fi'UVii^TnJTi/'/Toi/
ju4^4e-7n^^y7?uij-c£4^^^Ani^d
'nirytt
o d
7t?wr& rr#J&7m)V£
>* * ***
.*,, 4^m4r
Jfu,^kji^ra^}o^itij7i£.


C:
sjm m enJ&*/eme^
(£ rCt). ZJ'
(jjlDTi Cm Junct vt wjj drVmTM kw sMltfWy
font wet m fwiwwu me )& ZZr^TZZfiZ^Mik
lira \jmnhO ! metre etrrtmrTi&wuf-jZ
(A IP|%
ZZZZmjM* c Z$^Z^ZZ f
cunt
s
Z /?
(^^ZtimmjrtfZ^ATitZr
<. // Ptjo'ti9 r


Q
AT / . / ,
JyJljirf' 'W~tyLt.ua fa tnivu amai, f'o vnry.ttf wn.tv
Pj ctmJcl yjrt ePu-c Imf fcuLt iLIIJ
tlL* ncafuni (ry f it ftftm a r/S P/Pck PL iPP'tu pn°^
r PP/ f JJ M P^P
Usnf Tivy LicvuirLe J C/HLict, tt-'ntv %a~a/r CL/b ayfti IjrrtL
<? n J fJcrtyP /
hid tTitcLy/ cdwturf' re <hi/r*//L
t ajJtSP^PaPdf w-dcf
'lUirtiya% &atJa/Pt fv w£tw p wo*
P 7 / s 4 r P //
Laid t'L& cjutvituj iff tt L& fVnoriJitfb ft fr^(dnxyHi/r
Mu*. P / /r " 7
U'L ftfi'auiLdU yf-bta riLjjfdU Jtttfrp touL
UL4 PLanP/t a. ndo 'inyaiu&njt
(yPd r f r
a./nJjJ
til 3-i
■ <? I fl?
id{i R^ /rLQA nuvP
doctduw-tr
Cs


J\[m mi ( Fder mntissvnt/tmjjntim^mi
fill T ' -w=
"(dwM wMtiai /nitvmJjru/iris t
etmsilii.it imam, fyjiim liitissm}^£u(tmm t l)tm
Wjire i mlamfer wjm. ~VJe. °
Hm U tu Mm marmatu =
sum
/
[ik
Ft%'il'l Oytwy


/
Obhvb /
u j XTyytLl n j/lui(_
tt s£.77truje- ’i/uLf- dJjjrudr- y^cr
\ 'xv/v£2*c — s''/'j/ > ■ /
n/s T a / ovl t/t&-
if< *y/ ' / ■ //' /
'offc.rc./L mi- suy/L cl-
_^^yct?T7U./ -ffr f/^
T 7 .
IwtJsjl reJ^lMl-P
fyycr/ ,
■fr,in^ L <§L-
} ' y
J Ttiarrc iHt- rtr& /
I £. £«fe-r, \


5/
fern fy fywfiafm fd / /f( / loc, ml/if y fw-
my ml ayarffj?mmm mlcijwtoj
JmM bvo fms alwef/uihaH yM f iff
shirrs , n mb br& , a fif'd (fd/
fbft 3Vk
y<?- ym, <
dfm^tfTyyyyd/d
Jbrdbri'cb ff^-^trjy.
fjl'tfe fffy.




