

To the Chairman and Directors of
THE VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMPANY,
31, FINSBURY CIRCUS, LONDON, E.C.
PENROSE, PENROSE JUNCTION,
AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND,
10th August, 1881.
GENTLEMEN,
With reference to Mr. William Norman’s letter of 19th August last, and
your letter of the 28th January of this year, I have proceeded to and inspected your various
properties in Tasmania, leaving this on the 2nd June, and reaching this on the 8th instant,
thus occupying altogether 68 days. In my letter to your Secretary, dated 16th June, I
expressed a hope to have been able to forward my report in about one month from that time,
but the inspection took more time than I then expected, and as the interests involved are so
large I preferred to defer forwarding it until after my return to New Zealand, so as to enable
me to weigh the impressions formed on my mind during the inspection on the' ground, and
thus with more confidence write what I now, after due consideration, believe will be of value in
putting you in full possession of the present state of your properties, and at least indicate
means of improving their producing capabilities. With this short preface, I now beg to report
as follows, viz.:-
I. Your Tramway from Emu Bay to Rouse’s Camp, 45 miles, is in fair working
repair, and has been maintained so as to carry the traffic safely—about 50 horses are employed
as motive power. I find them well, but not overfed, they are in good working condition and
up to, but not in excess of, the work to be performed. The men employed in conducting the
traffic, in the care of the horses, and in maintenance of the road, are at the lowest point
consistent with efficient and safe working. The rolling stock is in good working order, but as
regards the passenger cars they are deficient in the means of comfort and protection from the
weather which the travelling public have a right to expect for the fares charged, this defect
will pass away when the line is worked by locomotives running on iron rails, and suitable
passenger cars are substituted. The perishable nature of the wooden road is, and must be,
a continuing source of great expense, the time has come when these repairs will have to be
made on a large scale, in fact, so far as renewing the rails, this has been going on extensively
during the present year, for the life of these rails may be taken at not over three years, and
that of the sleepers about seven years; to meet these present repairs a large number of
sleepers have been prepared and laid at convenient places along the line (say over 1,000
sleepers) and are placed in position as required; and notwithstanding a continual replacing of rails
when found defective, which up to the present time amounts to a very large number, a number
of rails sufficient for about 30 miles of the road, or about two-thirds of the whole line is in
course of being cut to meet the wants of the next year; the timber now being prepared may
suffice until iron rails are laid, should you decide to convert the tramway into a railroad.


The prospects of traffic in the future depends mainly upon the permanent yield of
metallic ores in the district of Mount Bischoff, and from your own properties, but to some
extent, also, upon the development of the productive qualities of your own lands, and that
land supporting a population. Your tramway has opened up a very large area of land, and
great quantity of it is suitable for producing, if capital could be brought in to clear and
utilize it either for grazing or other purposes. As regards the permanent nature of the mineral
industries of the district about Mount Bischoff, from all the information I can obtain and the
opinion I can form from personal inspection, I can see no reason for a falling off but rather
a larger development, with an increase of population, thus affording increased work for your
tramway ; and, having this opinion, I the more confidently suggest that the sooner you can
do away with the present wooden road and convert it into a railway worked by locomotives,
the more profitable will be the undertaking, and the less will be the risk of the traffic for
Mount Bischoff district being diverted to other channels. At the present time your rates of
freight, Sox per ton for 45 miles, is a source of complaint, and Mr. Smith, acting on your
sanction, was endeavouring to come to an agreement with the Mount Bischoff Company for
the conveyance of their tin and machinery for a lengthened period at 6ox per ton, which,
I believe, is a wise arrangement to make. With a railway and proper locomotives and suitable
rolling stock, the freight might be reduced still lower, and thus do away with any fear or
desire for competition.
The extension of your tramway from Rouse’s Camp to Waratah, about 2| miles,
should be completed as speedily as possible (for it would save a great deal of misery to
the passengers who in the winter are dropped at Rouse’s Camp in mud and snow, with no
means of reaching shelter nearer than Waratah, through mud and water over ordinary boots,
and the goods at present are unloaded without proper storage at hand, and go forward at
the will or caprice of those in charge of the Mount Bischoff Company’s Tramway, who do not
lay themselves out for the speedy delivery of goods.) The bridges and earthwork formation was
about completed, but no ballast or sleepers laid at the end of June. This extension was
commenced too late in the season, and the completion was retarded by wet weather. I
urged Mr. Smith to lose no time in pushing this work to completion, and I believe he saw
the force of pushing it on as much as I did, and would, doubtless, be glad to remedy the
inconvenience and discomfort to which the passengers were subjected.
At Emu Bay, Hampshire and Waratah, there should be suitable station accommodation,
with waiting rooms and conveniences, also fires in these waiting rooms during winter for the
comfort of passengers. It is, I believe, by studying fairly the comfort and convenience of the
public that profits result.
In connection with your railway, your sawmills might provide building timber for the
wants of “Waratah,” or other villages that may spring up in the district. You have large
quantities of timber alongside the road at convenient places, and I would suggest that this
industry be pushed to a practical end. A timber yard at “Waratah” station should be
remunerative —for want of it pine is now used, having been sent from America to Melbourne,
thence shipped to Emu Bay, thence carried by your tramcars to Mount Bischoff the cost
there must be high enough to allow you to dispose of your own timber growing within five
or six miles of the township at a large profit.
2. Shipping accommodation at Emu Bay. This is a matter the Colonial
Government have already taken steps in by lengthening the old jetty by 90 feet. A further


proposal is to extend this jetty another 300 feet. If this work was carried out steamers and
other vessels would have good facility for shipping and discharging cargo with safety in all
weathers. I believe it is your interest to give every possible facility and financial assistance,
and to encourage the Colonial Government to proceed with this work. I would go so far
as to say that it would be to your interest to contribute to the extent of one-third of the
cost, the Government providing the other two-thirds. I cannot give a reliable estimate of the
cost, but should go a long way in such a structure.
The construction of these harbour works is best left in the hands of the Colonial
Government and the Harbour Board, with whom would rest the responsibility of maintenance
after construction, and other details.
A good and safe jetty at Emu Bay should render your land near the shore of value
for smelting works , instead of shipping the tin ore to Launceston. Coal could be landed at
Emu Bay as cheap, or cheaper, than at Launceston. The refined tin could be forwarded to
Melbourne for shipment to England at no greater rate of freight, thus saving freight of
steamer from Emu Bay to Launceston of the unrefined ore.
If this should come to pass, and with a good port, not only would there be a demand
for building allotments in the township, but there would also be a market for the dairy and
other produce from the adjacent lands.
There has been a proposal by the Mount Bischoff Company to erect a jetty for their own
use inside the Government Pier, and in shallower water, but I should not recommend favoring
this scheme or granting a site for the purpose. I think one good landing place better than
two indifferent ones, and I believe the Colonial Government Pier when extended will be
ample for many years to come, and, being a Government work, much more likely to be kept in
repair.
3. Your “ Emu Bay Block ” comprises 50,000 acres, more or less, in which I
include the township of “ Burnie.” The system of sale of town allotments has been to
sell alternative acre lots, but I believe it will be better in future to give your agent
authority to sell any allotments for which purchasers applied and were willing to pay the
price fixed; but I think it might facilitate building if the lots were also leased at a ground
rent calculated at say 6 % on the estimated value of the land, and with stipulations for
building within a time to be agreed upon of certain class of houses as per plans and
specifications to be approved of and attached to and form a part of the lease; there might
also be inserted in the lease a purchasing clause that would enable the lessee to secure
the freehold within a certain number of years, say 21 years, at a price to be also named.
The unsold Suburban or Forest Farms laid off around the port of Emu Bay, might be
dealt with by leases with purchasing clauses, and the option should be given to present
tenants to the same mode of acquiring freeholds, reserving as heretofore the right of Van
Dieman’s Land Company to make roads, trams and railways, minerals, &c., &c. The farms
on the sea frontage which have not already been sold, should not, I think, be disposed of
at present, but might be retained for use of the Company, and ultimately cut up for
building lots. I think a periodical letting of these suburban farms would be best effected
by “ Public Auction ” or by “ Tender,” say in October or November of each year, of which
due notice should appear in Victorian and Tasmanian newspapers. The yearly tenancy by
which some of these farms are held does not conduce to the tenants making any great
permanent improvements, and there is ample evidence to show that in many cases these


farms have been exhausted by continuous cropping without any manure, and when so
exhausted are for years of little value to any one.
Proceeding up the line of tramway, there is very valuable volcanic land on both
sides for many miles; say the suburban farms extend as far as 4 miles on the line, there
is from this 4 mile post to about the 8 mile post, a block of 4 miles by miles, say
18 square miles that capital might with advantage be expended on.
The process would be to ring the large timber, cut the scrub or undergrowth, burn
off and sow with “ cocksfoot seed ” and “ white clover ” in the proportion of 30 lbs. of the
former and 4 lbs. of the latter per acre. This could be done at from 505-. to Bo.y. per acre
if let by contract for the preparation of the land and sowing, and the seed should not cost
over 1 2s. per acre. This block should be cleared from the Emu River to the Cam in one
solid piece, leaving any poor pieces of land with the timber now on it for shelter. I
estimate there would be about 10,000 acres of good land that would, thus treated, afford
splendid pasture for fattening cattle, and eventually carry sheep, when this block of land has
been brought into grass and found financially successful, which, I behe\e, would be the case.
Further operations of a similar nature might be carried out on the next block, and so on
to the 20 mile post at the Hampshire Station. Above the Hampshire Station to Rouse’s
Camp the land is at a greater altitude, and, until experience has been gained in the lower
lying country and more favoured climate, I should think it would be better to utilise this
high but rich volcanic soil for the rearing, to some extent, and feeding of young cattle, to
be afterward finished off below.
I believe this country could only be utilised by capitalists first clearing it and putting
the land in a producing state; a small man even, if he cleared 50 or 100 acres, and
grassed it ever so well, could hardly prove successful, for the whole of his crops or grass
would be devoured by the numerous wild animals sheltered in the superabundant untilled
land about him. These remarks apply also to what is called “ Saint Mary s Plains, about
1,500 acres, now let for £2O per annum.
4. Your Hampshire Hills... ••• ••• ••• ••• 10,000 acres
Surrey Hills ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 150,000 „
Middlesex Plains ... ••• ••• ••• 10,000 „
170,000 acres is
let to Messrs. Field Brothers on a yearly tenancy of {£z°°) Three hundred pounds per
annum. It is used by them as a cattle run. It is managed by one stockman, except
during, say, 6 weeks, when the cattle are mustered once a year, and those of sufficient size
or age removed to the lower country to be fattened and sold for beef. During this
mustering time six to eight additional men with horses are employed; and this is the cost
of working—say equal to the wages of two stockmen for the year—say including the
use of horses. These properties are now grazing from s)°°° to 6,00 c head of cattle, and,
in my opinion, it would feed quite double the number if stocked and properly worked by,
say, four competent stockmen. I should estimate that these properties could turn out at
least 2,500 store cattle each year, of the value, say, of £$ per head. I do not, therefore,
consider that the present letting to Messrs. Field is making the best of it, although it might
have been the most that could be got for it when it was let, the fact being, I imagine,
well known that, if not let, it would remain unstocked and unused. In case you put your


Emu Bay Block into grass, then the store cattle you could rear and feed on this higher
country you could fatten off below, and for which there is now, and likely to be for years
to come, a good market at Mount Bischoff.
5. CIRCULAR HEAD.—
Peninsula. —3,153 acres, of this property 2,780 acres are leased at a rental of
,£1,464 SJ. per annum, it is a very rich block of land mainly under English grasses and
crops generally well farmed, but it is observable that the largest farms, those of Mr. Ford
and his son, look best and I am inclined to favor amalgamating the small farms as
opportunity occurs to avoid a very evident evil, the small farmers grow potatoes very
extensively, and year after year with little or no manure, until the land becomes thoroughly
exhausted, this process is a sure one; it both improverishes the land and the occupant, and
the land is pretty sure to come into hand to be put into condition, or let, at a low rent to
enable the tenant to do so. The other portion of the Peninsula, 373 acres, is worked on your
own account, and is now, after some years, becoming to shew its restoration from the potato
process. It is used as a depot for your cattle from Woolnorth to freshen them up before
selling them for beef.
Forest Farms. —1,276 acres are leased for ,£278 rental, 1,486 acres are
still in a state of nature. I believe the plan suggested for the Suburban Farms at Emu Bay
might with advantage be adopted here.
Duck Bay, East Inlet, &c.,— 10,962 acres. This is leased for per
annum; it is mainly sand hills and swamp; in its present state of little value. It is used
as a run for cattle during summer: there is a plentiful supply of good water, and, as water
is very scarce on the Peninsula, those who possess cattle on the Peninsula arrange with the
tenant to run their cattle during the dry season. In this way it is practically utilised as a
common. I believe some considerable portion of this property might be used as a
sheeprun if any one would expend some money to clear and sow grasses. I would suggest
that a piece be well burnt off, and that a mixture of 30 lbs. cocksfoot seed and 4 lbs.
of white clover, recommended to be used on the Emu Bay Block, be tried on a few hundred
acres of this country. I should not be very sanguine of success, but it would not be very
costly, and, if it succeeded, would render what is now nearly worthless, valuable.
Artesian Well on Circular Head Peninsula. —lt might be worth trying
to obtain water in some central spot on the Peninsula by means of an artesian well. Your
agent thinks water could be so obtained, and I would suggest that he be authorised to spend
a sum not exceeding £,300 in this direction. I think the tenants should contribute say one-half,
that is, the Company put down the same amount that the tenants are willing to contribute.
Township of Stanley. —This township is in a depressed state; the houses, built
on allotments sold years ago, are, some of them, in ruins, and others going to decay—
therefore sales of building allotments cannot be expected; should sales become feasible I
suggest the same plan as recommended for the sale of lots in Emu Bay.
Your stone-built store houses on the wharf are let for per annum, they are not
in good repair: and your stores at the same place, built of wood, are now in ruins.
I would suggest that the ruins be cleared away, and those buildings that are useful
or used should be kept in repair. This latter recommendation should also be applied to the
mansion and buildings at Highfield, which are not in a good state of repair, and at the


end of the lease may possibly lead to litigation, as the lease provides for the tenant
keeping the house and buildings in repair. Generally this applies to all the homesteads at
and about Circular Head, and gives a depressed and impoverished appearance that does not
impress a stranger favorably.
Road from Stanley along the Coast— Your agent pointed out a line
selected for a new road to approach the town of Stanley, when it is high water, and not
practicable for people to pass along the sands to the town. I see no objection to the
proposed road, it will rather improve your property, and I advised your agent to carry out
your concurrences, which he said he had received.
6. Woolnorth and Trefoil Island, 100,300 acres.—This property is worked on your
own account. It is carrying about 650 head of cattle and 5,000 sheep. The net profit for the
last seven years appears to have been about per annum, averaging the whole period.
On this property, west of the Salt Water Creek, including the Te Tree Marshes, is
some of the best of the land. A piece of maish land, about 600 acres, was drained and
put into grass many years ago, but the drainage works were allowed to choke up, and the
land was thereby much damaged. When you put this property under your agent, he expended
some money and partially re-opened the outlets for the water, but there still requires more
expenditure to make the drains effective. There are several pieces of this marsh land, estimated
at from 8,000 to 10,000 acres, that could be easily drained and laid down with grass, probably
at a cost of £\ per acre, and the produce in cattle and sheep fed upon it should well repay
interest for the outlay.
The sheep are mostly kept on the high sand-hills along the coast, and look fairly well,
but they could be more profitably worked with a considerable area of the marsh land in
English grasses on which to fatten those intended for the butcher, &c. &c.
Mount Cameron is a fairly good sheep country, and is so utilised; but the country
further down the West Coast is not good. Returning inland from Mount Cameron to the
Isorth-West is a large tract, estimated at over 60,000 acres of extremely poor country
composed of white sand, with a scanty growth of heath and very little vegetable mould on
the surface. There seems to me to be little use trying to sell or cultivate here. The only
thing I would suggest is trying a few hundred acres with some coarse, hardy plant that
would afford life to stock. If such could be got to grow, then something might be done
with it as a sheep run some years hence. Another portion of Woolnorth is the “ West
Montague,” where a few bush farms have been sold ; but I think, unless more of the district
be cleared and put in grass, it will be hard times for the present occupiers. I would suggest
adopting the plan proposed for the Emu Bay suburban farms. Leases with purchasing
clauses ; but, before you can expect much result, an expenditure must be incurred in opening
up the country by means of roads or tramways, so as to give access to these lands.
Wild Cattle.— There are several mobs of wild cattle roaming over distant parts
of Woolnorth, they are not included in the 650 head first alluded to as being kept on this
property, but are cattle said to have escaped from the Companies’ herd before the Company
gave up its operations years ago. These wild cattle are variously estimated at from 400 to
1,000 head, they are a decided nuisance, as you dare not run tame cattle where they are
or you lose them; these wild cattle should be destroyed. I believe their hides would quite
pay for their destruction, and, when cleared off, an equal number or more of remunerative
cattle could graze in their place.


This property is becoming of more value than formerly and may become of still
greater value from its position. It is in the line traversed by those driving cattle to the
new tin mines at Mount Heems Kirk, which, by report, will prove very valuable. The supply
of cattle for this mining population could be furnished from Woolnorth so far as they can
be produced by utilizing the land that is good and available by the outlay of capital; it
should become a depot station for cattle to supply a large portion of the West Coast.
7. Robin’s and Walker’s Islands, 25,000 acres.—These Islands are leased for p£6o
per annum. From the best information I could get, without personally going over them, I
gathered that their agricultural value was very little, the land being of the poorest quality.
The tenant runs a few sheep on one portion only, and is making no improvements. No doubt,
when the land of good or better quality on the mainland has been brought into a productive
state, these Islands will become of more value, and it will then be time enough to deal with
them.
8. Your Mineral Properties are practically undeveloped ; the only tangible discovery in
this direction is a “ Silver lead ” lode, at Hampshire Hills, on which you have made some
outlay. It was under offer to some Melbourne capitalists, Messrs. Lyell and Gowan, on terms
which you authorised your Agent to enter into. I discussed these terms with Mr. Smith
and with your Solicitor in Launceston (Mr. Ritchie), and, if carried out and the mine properly
worked and produces a payable mineral, I consider the terms of the lease and the royalty
of 10 % reserved a fair and reasonable arrangement for all parties. To develop generally
or extensively the mineral resources of your property, the ground must either be prospected
at your own cost, or you must offer as great or better terms to prospectors than the
Government. I think, to any man who first discovered and worked a mineral to a payable
point, that man should be given a piece of land, say 10 chains square, at a low rate of
royalty, say at one half the royalty charged to any other mine worked in the same reef or
lode in the same locality, and it may be a question whether a lease for 21 years mine
under and within the defined area of 10 chains square might not be given to the first
discoverer of any particular metal for a nominal sum, say 20s. It is pretty clear, prospectors
will not develop the mineral lodes on private property so long as there is unlimited area
of Government land to search in, unless the private owner holds out substantial advantages
for him to do so. Your agent, Mr. Norton Smith, is, I believe, largely interested as a
shareholder in most of the mines about Mount Bischoff, and must, therefore, know how
these matters can best be arranged to secure a speedy development of your mineral wealth,
should it exist.
9. Should you decide to change your policy of inaction for one of active development
of your territories, I should advise an assistant being provided for your agent in the
management; it is quite impossible for one man, however much he may desire to do so, to
manage properties of so great an area and so far distant. He should be a gentleman with
engineering knowledge sufficient to deal with railway works, and with drainage works, as well
as having a general knowledge of business. In fact, he should be a man in whom
you would have perfect confidence to manage your affairs in the Colony, in case of accident
to or change of your present representative in the Colony. I understood that, to some extent,
you had provided for this event by your Accountant, Mr. Murray; but I do not think he


would be physically capable of performing the out-door duties for any length of time, and
I believe you should have a second officer on the spot capable of carrying on the management
at any time that you might require.
10. Your official staff at Emu Bay have plenty of work, they work diligently,
and, so far as I could judge, after carefully looking through the books, they are all well
kept, and the records are in good order. I do not suggest any alteration in the official
routine or mode of keeping the records.
11. In Conclusion. There is a fair field on your various properties for the
employment of capital to develop the productive qualities of the land now in a state of
nature. Much of the land within 20 miles of the Sea Coast is rich; it should pay good
interest for any money properly expended in bringing it into cultivation, and it is, to my
mind, quite clear that, unless the resources of the soil are developed upon a large scale, you
cannot expect any appreciable return.
The earnings of your tramway will continue to pay, but you must not look to the
tramway to pay interest on the value of your landed estate. I think a great deal of the
Colonial jealousy evinced against your Company might be removed if you had a Colonial
Registry of Shares, and that Shares in your Company were held in the colony. You may
see your way to raise some capital in this way for future improvements in preference to the
issue of Debentures, and, should Colonists invest in your Shares, a Colonial Directorate would,
I believe, be of more value than at first may appear. Such a Board, of which your Manager
might be a Director, could settle local matters and have carried out such schemes as your
London Directors might indicate. You might also with advantage have a voice in the
Colonial Parliament, and thus obtain a fair share of the expenditure of public monies in
districts where your properties are situated, which have hitherto, I believe, been treated as
anything but an integral part of the colony.
I believe you could well and profitably spend capital on your several estates, to the
extefit of 20 to each year for the next five years, and I would recommend your calling
upon your resident agent, Mr, Smith, to prepare surveys and details for your approval of the
several works we have talked over and discussed, which are mainly for the utilisation of the
Emu Bay Block and Woolnorth. In carrying on any pastoral pursuits, I believe it will be best
to stock with ordinary good cattle and sheep, in preference to incurring any great expense or
attempting to breed pedigree stock, at any rate for some years, until the country has been
prepared and made suitable for them.
I think this is all I have to report, but should there be any other matters on which you
would like to obtain information, if it is in my power, I shall be most happy to afford it.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your most obedient Servant,
JAMES BAILEY.
