

■
LETTERS
: I
■
185, High Street, Uxbridge,
7
Who accompanied 500 persons to Queensland by the
Ship Winefred, December, 1874.
. - ■ ' v- 'A. • . ■ " >--V' «
QUEENSLAND PRINTING WORKS, UXBRIDGE.
f§ '
X : v ■ ■
i
* ‘ •
* ■ .. % ''■ ■■


<s>


LETTERS
FROM
QUEENSLAND
SSiiCHUkKTSi
WITH OTHER INTERESTING INFORMATION.
Reprinted from the Uxbridge Marvel and other News-
papers collected by
Pt. Jf. tat
Selecting Agent,
185, HIGH STREET, UXBRIDGE,
Who accompanied 500 persons to Queensland by the
Ship Winefred, December, 1874.
QUEENSLAND PRINTING WORKS, UXBRIDGE.


o: i
'iITLKdS /: i■! •
■
- .< ;
■


LET T E R S
FROM
YOUNG WOMEN IN QUEENSLAND
■o——!
•
,
Salt Bush Park, St. Lawrence,
Ist October, 1874.
Dear Sir, , ... ,
I now take tins opportunity of acceding to your request
that X would write and let you know how I liked the colony. lam
glad to be able to say I like it very much indeed. I have been here
eleven months, and five mentis of the time in the heart of the bush,
being about fifteen or sixteen miles from any house, and although
whoa I first came out here I was really quite useless as to anything
that is required of servants out here, I found ladies were not only
willing, but able to shew you what they wished done and how to do
it. And although you cannot get parlourmaids’, and, in fact, not many
housemaids’ situations, yet I have given a fair trial, and J think
service out here is far preferable to service at home. X am getting
.£32 a year which is exactly double what I had at home, and X never
had such good health in my life as I have had since I have been out
here. The voyage was not so bad as I expected it would be, of course
at first I was very sick, and it was not very pleasant, but after the
first month I really enjoyed it. Ido not think there are many of my
shipmates that regret coming, and I am quite sure X do not. Trusting
you are well, I remain, yours truly,
FAN AY K.IAG-.
To Mr. Hetherington.
[We are favoured hy Mrs. Squire , of 55, Montague Hoad ,
with the following letter just received, hy her parents from her sister.
Queensland, July 25th, 1874.
MY Dearest Father axd Mother,
You must be anxiously waiting to bear from me. Xu the first


place I must tell you this really is a beautiful country. We had a
very good passage out indeed. The matron was not quite strict
enough, it was her first voyage out, also the doctor’s. We fared very
well on board. The passengers’ cook used to fry us pancakes and
make us pies and bake us potatoes, and we used to club together and
the matron would have a cup with us. The girls used to be allowed
to see their friends from two till four o’clock ; directly the four bells
rung the matron used to go and fetch them up on their own deck.
When we wore in the tropics we were allowed to stay up on deck
until ten o’clock. We had five deaths on board, one poor man left a
widow and five children ; the captain’s cook was another, he died of
consumption, and there were three babies. I received your letter about
.four days after I had been at the depot and I got the order changed
all right. We had as much as we could eat on the ship and used to
have soft bread every other day. Everything is dreadfully dear out
here, cheese is Is. Bd. a lb., butter,, 2s. ; meat is very cheap ; bonnet
shapes are 2s. each. You should sese the people stare at us when we
walk out; they call us the “ new chums.” Our vessel only went as
far as Keppel Bay and then the steamer came and took us on to
Rockhampton ; we arrived there alt about 11 o’clock at night. There
were numbers of people there waiting to see us come in ; they say in
the afternoon there were thousand® waiting. There is a great demand
for servants and barmaids. The next day there was a lot of people
come for girls—one lady took quite a fancy to and pressed me so
hard to go with her, that I have giwen up all thoughts of the telegraph,
and have took a general servant’s pdace at this lady’s ; she is going to
give me 15s. a week—fancy, motheir, getting that in England. I must
tell you when you arrive here at tlhe depSt they are very particular
who you go to and what place you ttake. I must say the Queensland
.emigration people do the thing properly ; they carry out every-
thing to the letter, and if girls wvant to get on I say come out to
Queensland. When you write adidress the letter to Miss E. Smith,
Port Mackay, Queensland, Australia, to be left till called for. They
have meat and potatoes here every jmeal; this is the country to live.
Where I live is in the bush, close to a sugar plantation. When Igo to
town I have to go on a horse. I lhave had four offers of marriage
since I have been here, but ! thouglht it best to wait a little while. I
had an offer while I was on board, m good offer too, a gentlemen going
out to a farm he has there. He saied he had to come to England on
business, but as that was finished lies was going out again. He said he
should not lose sight of me. Give my love to Loo and Arthur. I
will write next mail a longer letter sas Ido not want to miss this. I
remain, dearest father and mother, your affectionate daughter,
E. SMITH.
Ipswioh, Queensland, June, 1874.
My Dear Sister,
I dare say you have received my first letter by this time;


I received yours a fortnight after I landed. I am getting on first-rate.
I stayed in Brisbane five weeks, but I like Ipswich much better. It is
a very clean, pretty little town. I have a room with Sarah , now
\f rs . 1 whom I had the pleasure of meeting out here, and go out
dressmaking from eight in the morning to six in the evening ; so I
have my Sundays and my evenings to myself, and I am out of the
bondage of service. As I look back at the past I can truly say that
the best day’s work I ever did was to come out here. I only wish you
would come, and dear father how he would enjoy the change! Every-
thing has turned out lucky for me, I have the promise of constant
work, and I hope by the time you receive this letter I shall have a
machine of my own to work at home in the evening. I hope you do
not fret about me. I speak as I find it, and I have a great deal to be
grateful for. Try and get your courage up to come. The sea is-not
so dreadful as people make out it is. There is the sea sickness, but
you get over that. Emma was quite wrong about our not wanting
our silk dresses out here. I can assure you we like to dress here as
well as at home, and it is just the same style of dress, only the
fashions do not get out hero till two months after you have them in
England. I have left Ellen in Brisbane, because her time was not up,
so when you receive this I hope to have her with mo. We shall get
on very well, I think, if, please God, we have our health. It is not
so hot as people say it is ; it is cold night and morning in this our
winter; but I am in just the same clothing as I would be at home in
the spring or autumn ; and we have such lovely sunsets, you never
see the like at home. Servants have to work very hard, but they get
very high wages. I had a pound note for my first fortnight s pay ; X
might have stayed in England for ever and a day and not got that. I
did a lot of work coming over. There was a box of work, and any
one who liked to make the things had them on landing. Ellen, too,
did some. So you see we are bound to get on. I would like to cross
and re-cross the sea once more; but that I daresay will never be, and
I can make myself very comfortable here. I carry a lighter heart
than I have for many a long day. Brisbane is a topping place. 1
must tell you more about it next time.
Your ever time and loving sister,
MARY BETTS.
[The following ia a Idler from Fanny Court, one of the young women
■who accompanied Mr. F. W. Eetherington, in his emigration party to
Queensland, by the good ship “ Winfred."
Toowomba,
July 14th, 1875.
Dear Grandfather and Grandmother,
I write you these few lines hoping to find you in good health
as this leaves me well at present. I landed safe in Brisbane. When
J first went on board I was sea sick for about a week, and then I en-


joyed myself for the remainder of the voyage. We used to have con-
certs on board all the way over, and we had a very good matron and
doctor. I did not stay at Brisbane, but went on to Toowomba.
Some of the girls got married in Brisbane, and some stayed there.
I stayed in Toowomba dep6t for one day and night, and then I en-
gaged with Mrs. McGoldrich. I had two chances of being married,
and would not accept them, from monied men. I enclose you a por-
trait that I got taken : I thought it would please you. You can get
any sort of meat for 4d. a poumd. Tell Mrs. Hancock I could not
find out her sister anywhere. So I must conclude with fond love to
you, to Mrs. Shekell and Miss Slhekell, and Mr. Rogers, and all en-
quiring friends. 8 » *
Your Iheloved grandchild,
* TAKYY COURT.


LETTERS
FKOM
YOUNG MEN IN QUEENSLAND.
Rockhampton.
June 22 1874.
Dear Mother and Father,
I write these few lines to you hoping to find you quite well,
as it leaves me at present. lam now taking the pleasure ox sending
you £5 which I promised you. I should have sent it before but did
not know how far I should have to travel JSo doubt you thought I
had quite forgot you, but I kept my word as I sain I n ould. 1 lease
pay the little I owe. They don : t think no more of a pound out
here than you do of five shillings at home. Dear Mother, I have
had this letter registered right from here to England, it will not
be paid to any one but you. All you have to do is to take it to the
post office and get the money. Tell father that I cannot send nim any
tobacco home, it is rather too far off; but be sure and get him some
out of the money. If I had him over here with me 1 would soon
put some money in his pocket far easier than knocking them boai ds
about for 15s. a-week. I have now plenty of clothes to my back
and more pounds in my pocket than I should have had pence if 1
had stopped in England. If you are in any trouble or want, please
write to me at once, say how much you want, and I shall be pleased
to send it at once. If any ask you about the country, tell them,
from me, that if they are already comfortable to stop where they
are, hut if they want money to come out here. I never regret the
day when I left old England. If I have luck I shall have a run
home iu a few years time, but I do not say that I shall stop. _ Give
my love to Mrs. Hawthorne, George Oripps, and all enquiring faenda.
I remain your affectionate son,
GEOEGE TAPLIN.
To Mrs. Taplin, Harlington, near Uxbridge.


Queensland, Sept. 5.
Sir,
I -write to tell yon tthat we arrived out here quite safe on
the 4th of August, and we had! a good voyage out here. We had bo
sickness out, and I like the coiuntry very much. I got into work as
soon as we landed at Brisbame in the depfit. You can do as yon
like with this letter, sir. I onUy wish that I had come out here be-
fore, as I am getting my 7s. per day for eight hours. I only wish
my brother would come out Ihere, and all my friends, for this is the
country to live in. Beef for breakfast, dinner, and supper, and I
know they cannot live on beorf all day in England. Everything is
cheap out here; you can buyy horses for 10s. each. You can get a
house and eight acres of land ftor £7 a year; and you cannot rent a
house in England for that momey. I should like for any working-
man to come out here—not to> work for 15s. a-week when they can
get it in two days out here. Who would not come to Queensland,
sir? I am eighteen miles noirth of Brisbane, what they call Pine
River. Tell them all to come (out here to do well and to save a for-
tune, and not starve in Englantd as they do.
Frrom yours obediently,
ANDREW GTJRDLETI,
To Mr. F. W. Hetherington Formerly of Uxbridge
■ o
March 9 th, 1874.
My Dear Mother,
I sit down to write tlhese few lines to you hoping they will
find you happy and well as, tbamk God, it leaves me at present. We
got to London quite safe, andl afterwards embarked on the ship
and towed away by the John Bull” steam ship out of
the East India Docks as fair as Greenhithe, we laid at anchor
there for the night, and them we steamed away for Gravesend,
and there laid at anchor ttill Saturday morning- when we
took a farewell look at England! Our ship was piloted by the steam-
ship all round the coast by thee Isle of Wight and Dover and Calais.
We had such a lovely view of ithe once dear old England, where we
had spent so many happy homrs. When we got to the mouth of the
Channel the steam pilot left, amd we gave three hearty cheers, and
parted for the new land, or whait we may call the “ new home.” W©
sailed round the Bay of Biscaiy, where we had some rough weather,
but we kept up our spirits by slinging and playing at cards. I very
much enjoyed the sailing of the; ship : the sailors called me “ happy
go-lucky.” lam always busy om deck, and when the meals are ready
they call me. Dear mother, I have fallen in with two cronies, and
we are jolly enough together, smioking, singing, and dancing. I will tell
you their names, Mr. Blake amd family and Thomas Marks, and now
we are fairly out on the highi seas. We have passed many islands
and are now passing the coastt of Spain, whose peak stands twelve
thousand onaGiundred and ninety-two feet in height. The Islands


here are all inhabited. We have Divine Service on Sunday morning
aniT afternoon, and we have a. concert twice a week-v^alandxn
andTay at anchor till the 4th of June ; the water was so low that we
l to be landed in small boats ; then we went into the depot to get
pw mas ters who were there very soon and engaged such as th y
wanted. After i week’s spree we started on 3 ou ™ e /
blacks’run wild, but they
hannv we arel the bush about a mile and a half from the masters
housJ’ We are engaged at 35/. a year with rations which are four-
teen oounds of beef with tea and sugar for a week, and is brought to
us We have plenty of sport, shooting the wild pigs and kangeroos.
Of which there are plenty When we want a horse we go and cateh
Give my love to my sister and that “torment” tell her to be
■i good girl for she has only her poor dear grandmother to lc >ok up to.
'l'fll her that if she is a good girl her uncle will
takes some money. Give my kindest love to Mr. and Mrs. Mauwen.
So now I conclude with love to all, from your ever truly and obe-
dient son, ALBERT EDWARD TEAGUE.
(Formerly of Uxbridge.)
Too-woomba, Queensland,
January 10th, 1875.
[After requesting that we will communicate with his vrife’s father
and mother and family, and obtain free passages for: them to Too
woomba to join him, the writer goes on to say,]—Dear Sir,—ims is ?,
small letter that you’can put in print from me. I am very glad that
I came out here, for this is a fine country for any young man to come
to : there is plenty of beef to be got, that is what there is not in Eng-
land; and if you know any body that is any way m coming
out, you can tell them from me that it would be the best toy s work
they ever did is to come out here, for the wages are Rouble they are
at home, and I should like to see some one come fromWoolwich. lucre
is no one coming from that quarter, and I think if there was anyone to
go to that place, there is any amount that would come from there. Jf ttua
should meet the eye of any of my old mates m Woolwich, I take tho
liberty to advise them to leave a place of starvation and como to a
country where there is plenty, for I am very glad that I left England
and come out to Queensland—for if I worked at home aU my Ufa


time, I should not get anymore than 18s. per -week, but out here you
can get from 365. to 50s. per week, and any one that is steady can put
by a little for their old age, but in England I am sure they cannot
live on their wages, so it either comes to begging or the union in the
latter end. I should advise any one to come out here, and if there
is anyone coining, and they will enquire for me, I will give them all the
information I can, for Queensland is the place to emigrate to. This is
from an old resident of Woolwich.
GEORGE TINKER,
ILately employed in the Royal Dockyard
To Mr. F. W. Hethcringtion.
October 4th, 1874,
Buhdalbsrg.
Sir,—Having experienced two months’ in the colony, I now take
the pleasure of writing those few lines to you. I was an emigrant by
the ship St. James , which lelft Gravesend in April, 1874, bound for
Maryborough; she was a splemdid ship, and made an excellent passage.
We had a splendid time of it coming out, with concerts several times
a week, which usually lasted ttwo or three hours ; and plenty of pro-
visions there is no mistake abiont it. This is a splendid country, plenty
of everything that anybody (could wish for; there is no stint of any
thing. There is a great demamd for labour here and wages are very
high and getting higher eveiry month ; the wages here for farm
labourers is forty-five poundls a-year, and all found, and it was only
this week that I was offered liifty, which I should have took had I not
been under an engagement. E send this letter hoping you will publish
it in your abstracts as you asikcd me to do at Gravesend, hoping it
will meet the eyes of the existing poor wretches of farm labourers
who now, at the present time;, arc striving with a wife and family on
eighteen shillings per week iin the old country. Had I have thought
that this country was half so-flourishing as it is, I would have been,
out here years ago. I do not write this to entice my fellow countrymen
out hare to a country sixteen. Thousand miles from home. This I hope'
will bring hundreds of poor (creatures to a country flowing with milk
and honey; it is now summer time coming and it is pretty warm. I
would advise anyone coining (out here not .to bring any more clothing
than is absolutely necessary fair the voyage, because it is putting them
to a lot of expense at home wlhcre they might have that much iu their
pocket, and not only that, for - while they have the home style on them
they have the pleasure of seeiing a hew chum while they wear them,
I’leaso to put this in print as lit is not only for the good of farmers


men, but for the use of my fellow class.. "Work is more bn the locomo-
tives than anything. I will now make a finish with the honor of re-
maining, Sir, your obedient servant,
THOMAS JAMES.
Maryborough, Queensland,
Friday, July 25th, 1874.
My dear Mother and Father,
I now write to tell you that I lost a 51. note that I was going to send
you, but never mind, dear mother, I have the strength to earn another,
I will send you some the next cheque I take. I offered 10s. reward
two days ago but I shall never get it. I told Sam about it. He will
send some money but it may be two or three months from this date.
I must have pulled it out with my other notes, for I had it with them.
I never missed it till the next day. I received your letter two days
ago. I have got the newspapers you sent me. It was’over six mouths
before I received the last two letters from you, and I thought you
was all dead or coming ont by the ‘‘ Saint James.” I saw young Jim
Pellin from Uxbridge and his wife and family yesterday ; they arrived
here quite safe on Thursday, July 24th. Dear mother, I must now
draw to a close with my kind love to you all. I read the two letters
to my dear brother and he said he would leave it all to me; and so I
think if you come out here you will do all right. There are men out
here older than my dear father and get a good living, besides I should
see that yon never wanted, and Sam saj r s the same. We wish for yon
both to come, and Johnny too. You need not fret about a house, you
can rent one fro n 4s. to ss. a week. You shall never want for a
pound or or two when you come here. Dear father, let your trade
and come over to us. We shall never think of coming home again.
If you come to Queensland yon must write and let ns know when you
are coming. You will not have to work so hard here as you do at
home. We must now draw to a close with our kind loves, from your
loving sons.
JOHN & SAMUEL FULLER.
To John Fuller, Pipe Maker, Uxbridge.
Walton-on-Thames,
May 13th, 1874.
Sir, —You were instrumental in sending James Heather to Queens-
land, and his mother is anxious you should have a letter she has just
received from her son, which gives a very satisfactory and encourag-
ing account of his voyage and prospects. If you think the contents
likely to promote the business of your office, you may think it desir-
able to enclose to her a little information for the guidance of intend
ing emigrants. She has already done some service by publishing the


matter among her acquaintances. While hoping that a sufficient
number of good labourers may be retained at home, I am pleased to
observe so many efforts to provide for the remunerative employment
of surplus labour in our colonies.—l am, Sir, yours respectfully
m , r „ , J. BLAKE.
To Mr. Hethenngton.
Clifton Station, Darling Downs,
February 4th, 1874.
My dear Father and Mother and Brother,—l now take take the
carlist opportunity of writing to let you know that I have landed safe
and in good health. I had no delay in getting a situation. lam em-
ployed by an English gentleman for six months, at the rate of 32/. a
year, and I feel highly pleased with my place. The work lam at is
only trifling ; I have to milk a few cows daily, the remainder is riding
about and attending about the house. In regard to Queensland, lam
highly delighted with the country ; none of your cold nights or frosty
mornings here, its all sunshine. I shall be impatiently waiting a
letter from you. Its very likely that when my time is up hero I shall
start for the Gold Fields, as everyone is starting for them ; men work-
ing at the Gold Fields, are at present getting 30s. a day and rations.
1 now wish to inform you about the passage out; as a matter of course
we had a little difficulty to contend with, but we did not feel it. We
had a few storms, but they did not do any damage. Since the day I
left London, I have not had one hour’s bad health, and. never got sea
sick. We left London on the 30th of September, and landed on the
14th of January, in Morston Bay, making a run of 109 days ; all in
good health ; with the exception of three deaths—all infants. I wish
you to let all my old acquaintances know that I am in good health,
and like the country well. Please give them my best respects, and I
hope they are all well. You will tell William Line that I am very
sorry he was so foolish as not to come out. It is sufficient for any
of my friends that would like to come out here, that I tell them it is
the only country that a man can do well in. I now conclude for the
present. Accept Dear Father, Mother and Brother, the confidence of
my love, —I remain, your Affectionate Son,
JAMES HEATHER
To Mr. Heather, 14, Manor-place, Walton-on-Thamos.
Railway Hotel,
Ipswich, Queensland,
May 12th, 1875.
Dear Mr. Hetherington,—l was very much delighted to see your
son, Mr. Frederick. I was then in the height of my glory, having


won the Governor of Queensland’s prize fcor the finest Bull, named
Butterfly. The bull is the property of Mir. Bishop, residing at Bose-
wood Scrub. He was awarded a silver crap, and I obtained seven
pounds from the Governor for training andl getting it up for the show.
You can see by this that I have not done s<o badly since I left Ux-
bridge. I have often from my heart, thanlked your son for being the
means of getting me out here, and persuadiing me to come. You will
remember, perhaps, that in Uxbridge I mever had good health, in
fact, six months out of twelve I was in tlhe Infirmary. I am very
much oWhged to Dr. Eayner for passing nae. He said to come out
here would make a man of me, and so it hais. I have enjoyed nothing
but the very best of health since my arrival. I consider that him
signing my medical certificate, was the best dose of medicine he ever
gave me. I wrote to Messrs. Hall and Beach, of Uxbridge, but do not
know whether they ever received my letter. I should like to hear
very much from my Uxbridge friends. Your son told me at the show
that if I wrote to you, giving you an account of how I am getting on
in Queensland, you would be sure to write me back an answer. He was
very much pleased at my appearance, and was sometime before he
could believe that I was that half starved chap he had sent away from
Uxbridge only a few months before. lam quite colonal looking now,
and have plenty of hair about my face, strong, Ihealthy, and have good
clothing. No wonder Mr. Hetherington did not recognize me at first.
I don’t really think my own mother would know me. lam so much
altered and improved. When I first landed I did not like the place.
I remained at the depot a -week. I did not take a situation, as I con-
sidered the wages offered very low. This I soon found out to be a
mistake, and should recommend any new chums not to consider too
much about wages for the first situation you take ; take anything you
are offered for the first six months, and then you will know something
about the colony, and soon get higher wages. I t think nothing of
spending a sovereing now, not so much as I did a shilling at home.
In fact, at home I never had one to spend. It does not do to drink
here. I am not a teetotaler, but am pretty careful. I take my money,
place most of it in the bank, and have a week’s holiday when I think
I will. Living up in the Bush costs nothing—when I am hungry, I
kill up in the Bush, Kangoroos, Opposum, Wallaby, Parrot, or Wild
Turkeys. We have our horse and dog with ns in the Bush, which is
far the best place for single men. Queensland, I assure you, is a splen-
did country for any one who is willing to work. They can do just as
they like here—go on any ground, and shoot whatever turns up first,
fcut if any of the loafers want to come who hang about Uxbridge
Market House, supporting the pillars, tell them this is not the country
for them—no idle people are wanted here. If a man can work his
eight hours a day, he is respected by one and all. I would not return
to such a poverty-struck place as Uxbridge again to stop, but I may
come home in a few months time, but not till I can enter the town as
a gentleman. I think of going to the gold diggings, up in Palmer


River, to try my luck. A young man who I knew at home, went up
there a few months ago, and returned a few weeks after with 3000(1.
Tell Mr. Dealy I am much better off now, than when I sold oranges
for him, at three a penny. Tell John Beach there is never a day
passes but what I put my 21b. of beef across my chest. It would
astonish the people out here to see his steam horses. He would do a
rare trade here at 6d. a ride. There is not such a machine in the
colony. Will you inform the Rev. Thomas, of Hillingdon, that lam
doing well, and that lam much obliged to him for his present. I
never done a better day’s work in my life than when I applied to you
for a passage to Queensland. It was indeed a great pleasure to meet
your son out here. I shall never forget his kindness to me before
starting for this distant land. I sincerely hope he will have a pros-
perous future, and that he may have a safe and speedy passage home,
is the wish of your obedieut servant,
ALFRED WRIGHT.
To Mr. Hetherington.
White Robinson’s Helensvale, near Comera,
Brisbane, February, Bth, 1875
Sir, —K-o doubt you have been expecting a letter from me for some
time past, or perhaps you think I have forgotten you altogether, but
it is not the case, as I think about you every week ; we had a lovely
voyage out, we had about a mouth of rough weather, we experienced
the first near Dover. We only went 2) miles during the night of Sun-
day, the 28th of January, 1874. We drifted towards the coast of
France. On Monday the weather cleared up, and we sailed past Ply-
mouth. By Tuesday at 11 o’clock we had passed the north side of
the Bay ef Biscay, and into the broad Atlantic. In rounding the
Cape of Good Hope, the sea was very smooth at the time, not even
a ripple to to be seen, all sunshine. In sailing up the Pacific, we had
a rough sea, running mountains high, we read in the Bible where
the Red Sea stood up in heaps—the water was in many heaps.
There were plenty of whales passing our ship, the Mowhawk oird, the
albatross, very large, (measuring about 14 feet from tip of one wing
to the tip of the other). The Cape pigeon is about the size of the
house pigeon at home, dark in colour with white spots, and a great
number of other sorts of birds. We came into Moreton Bay the
2nd of May, 1874, and we were in Brisbane on the Monday. The
Royal Dane is a beautiful ship; she is just the ship to carry invalids,
to take them out airing, she goes so easy. We had as good a captain and
mates and crew any ship oould have. In the depdt we were treated
very well, most of the emigrants were picked away the day after we
landed. I got a place on Thursday. Mr. Robinson was up at Brisbane,
and I soon got acquainted with some of the principal merchant* of


the town, and one of them introduced me to Mr. Robinson. I left
Brisbane on the Friday for which is 48 miles, and I led
down an entire horse that came in thato morning from Sydney by the
steamer. I missed my way on the Suncday evening, but I soon found
lodgings in the bush for the night. I got home safe on Monday
morning. lamon a sugar plantation ; we began cutting sugar cane
the first week in June, that is in the wiinter ; the crops average from
two to three tons per acre. I have ploughed and helped to plant
100 acres since I arrived in the Colony. I like the country very much.
I have been nine months now, for siix months I had 17 1. 10s., and
rations, now I have got 40k per year. I should advise every young
man who comes out to go to service for some time, and then
you get acquainted to the country. We employ forty blacks and six
white men. It is a healthy country. Mr. Robinson has 141 acres of
sugar cane growing, looking well, it will be fit to cut in June next if
all is well. I hope Mr. Hetherington, sen., and yourself and family
are all very well as it leaves me. Can you recommend any nice
young woman that might be coming out as I might be able to make
a home for her, age about 26 years. Please sir, will you answer this
by return of post, and tell me all the news that is travelling in old
England. I remain, your obedient servant,
° W. DARK.
Mr. F. W. Hetherington.


LETTERS
FROM
MARRIED PEOPLE.
AN IVER MAN IN QUEENSLAND.
t>„„_ T Toowombax, Queensland, May 4th 1 874
m DlJam es,—l send you these few limes to let you know that we
, We f ’ to fiad you enjoying tthe same health. We had a
pleasant passage and like the country verjy much; it is much better
hexe than at homo I hope you will lett my brother William know
that I am well and the family. I wass very sorry that I did noT
let you know that I was coming out; I haad such a short notice This
L\To Ch bu b6tt ; r tban at home, forr we have no rent to pay or
coals to buy, for there is plenty of timberr. I suppose you would tke
to know the wages of this country: Laboourers get a poimd a week
and rations. Housemaids from 10s. to lios. a week and their rations
acre d and y h?vp h t eaP ° Ut h f' 9 ’ yo " Can get ' 64o aores of la nd for 10s. an
a ®f ’ ar ! d " av ® ten y ears to pay it in. I aam living in a healthy place
as heaithy a place as there is in Queensland. We can grow everything
nfhp, +v d name ‘ J° n can bu y g° od bee£ ffor 3d. and Id. a pound aU
ai ’° S l6 samo as at llome 5 butt we miss poor little Henry
he dmd two months after we landed, he wras in a decline. lam wj
glad I started away from this country. I am in a -meat deal
tat “a S h "t, h6 £ A « 6r a fei "' years 1 will bra a ble de t a <!
service f u' ,T h ® th n e eldest of children are out at
service. I hope that I will see some of yom soon. Tell Margaret that
WeTe™ Tf ° f hCT T ° ut here ' « has, -nd mcMslrtw
nlentv to e r & I to for our P ass;a g e or shipping. We had
t es/nll V d T rmk- } bave eat more ,beef sinoe I came out than
before T “A 11116 I l was at h ° me ; 1 ° an a S° od hot breakfast
** 1 S °a° m? rk ' ■ You can bave two cro P s in the year off the
nd ' Jhere is a great rush out here- now—a new gold field
has been opened. You don’t want so muoih clothing out hfre as at


home, There is no work out hero in the fields for women, for they are
all ladies. Out here they are always riding on horses, girls and hoys.
Give my love to T. Silver, and my old friend John Warner; tell
them this is just my motto. School out here is all free. Give love
to all. lam very comfortable out here. Good bye,
THOMAS WAREIBLB.
To Mr. J. Warfield, 8, Thorney Cottages, Iver, Uxbridge.
October Sik
Mr. Hetberington, Dear Sir,—l have received a letter from my
daughter overland, and now according to promise send a copy of it t*
vou. “Dear mother and father, sister and brother, I now with
pleasure write to you, hoping tlhe receipt of it will find yoa aH
enjoying good health, as I am hapipy to inform you that Charles and
me are quite well, thank God. Wie arrived at Port Mackay o. tk.
Saturday, as I wrote your letter on. the Thursday, and on the Monday
» centloman from Ashford Downs came for me and Charley to go and
wol-k for him and his lady to clean the house, and Charley a employed
to carry bark for the men that is building houses for the gentleman
We got a sitting room and bedroom to ourselves, and plenty ef goon
food, pots of jam and eggs, and plenty of bread and a bag of nia*
mutton every day we cannot make use of it a* all. Jn s wish dear
father and mother you were here to help to eat it. This is a bean-
tiful place, and we have agreed for three months at sixty pound* a
year and board and lodgings, and when the time is up we are to go back
and Charley is to work on the railway ; he is to have eight shillings a
day. The roads has not begun yet, they will begin m about two month*,
and then we will not forgot you. I will send you as much money as
I can. I wish my brother Henry would come out here, there is plenty
of work for bootmakers, and they want men. The gentry are so kind
out here they think the servants as good as them, and treats them
as much ; there is no dirty gutters here. X will not coma to greedy
England again. I wish you were all out here. One gentle nan same
into our depot and gave every man two shillings ; I bought Charley a
pair of boots with his. Dear mother, I thought I should have boa*
able to send you some money before this, but we paid the four pounds
to the gentleman, and I had two more, but Charley and me wanted
some things fit for service, and I was obliged to get them. 1 will nave
nine pounds to come, and then wo will not forget you Remember us
kindly to my landlady, as also the neighbours, and to Mr. and Mrs.
Johnson, and all enquiring friends ; tell them we are very happy. And
now dear mother with kindest love to you and father, brother and
sisters, we remain your ever GOLDING.
To Eliza West, 21, Gladstone-steeet, Hto-tew, Landport, PortswidWth.


~ - ~ ~ _ . Rockhampton, January, 1874.
My Dear Mother —I received your letter, and was glad to hear that
you and my brother and sisters are quite well. We had a pleasant
passage ; Ted got employment three days after we landed ; we were
provided with a home until ho got work. Ted has 10s. per day •we
are very comfortable. Julia got a situation before she left ’ the
Lanashorovgh. A gentleman paid the 21. she owed for the Emigra-
tion. She has 10s per week. Mother, this is a fine place : I wish
you were here with us. I could go out to work if I had someone to
mind Cecil. Tell Jesse I was dreadfully cut up as she did not come
My dear mother,—l am sending you 31. for Ted’s watch, send it out
byjiost. I had 71., but Cecil has been very ill, and I was obliged to
pay the doctor 10s. per visit; but I will soon send you more money.
This is the place to come to ; beef 2d. per lb., mutton 3d., bread 7d.,
butter Is., plenty or work and well paid. May 10th, 1874—Mv dear
mother,—-I received your kind and welcome letter. We are glad to
hear that you and Jessie arc better. We are quite well thanks be to
Cod Dear motner, we have got a few pounds and will pay it to the
agent for you and Jessies passage; it is not any cheape/by paying
m hero. We would have sent it home to you, but perhaps you wou d
not come. I will tell the agent to send it to the Slade School, so you
may be ou the look out for it when you get this letter. It will come
from the agent in London, you most then settle with him about the
boys to come m the same ship. Dear mother, I hope you have re-
ceived the money I sent you mmy last letter for three pounds Cecil
is getting a great girl, and when I asked her where is grandmother she
says you are m the box—your likeness she means. Don'; v u -mt the
snips bit; you have plenty of small mattresses if they get new
covers ; they will ao best. Now I must tell you about this. Its
winter now, and very warm in the day time, but cold at night. You
will get here m the summer; they keep the ships in quarantine.
Answer tins letter by return of post, and when you get your passage
papers, write and send the name of the ship so that I may meet you.
y °T v myCe , ci1 ’ Ellza ’ aud Ted *** their love.
Deal bister,—l am happy to bear that you and mother are better I
you some money and Ted has paid yours and mothers pas-
sage. You must ma.ee Jonn look sharp and not be. left behind aoain •
he would do well out here ; a great strong man like him that cantura
his hand to anything Te l him to look out for a gentleman on the
ship whose name lS Mr. Allen ; he will see him, for he likes to look
out for a gentleman with a gold band round his hat; he can make
him cols iable of the ship ; and as for you, the best thing you can do is
to see the doctor, he will be glad to get you if you show him your tes-
timonials , as they are almost sure to want a midwife on the voyage, or
lot him apply to the institution. Dear Jessie, you would earn a°loo/.
a-year here, and as for Julia she is doing well, she still keeps her
place ; she is very happy; she has bought a new hat aud dress for two
pounds. Its a happy day for us to leave Woolwich, where Let was


not sure of work from one day to another. Show Mr. Brodio my let-
ters. so that himself and family may see hcow well we arc doing ; also
to the Rev. J. Mallish, and tell mothar tthe best thing she can do is
to get some letters of recommendation frorm her school, and the gentry
who belong to the church. I must tell yom that we were well-treated
on board the Landshorouyh, and had an excellent voyage. Poor little
Cecil was sea sioki I had good health, amd Julia was never better ;
and kindly treated by the matron ; in faiot everything was nice and
comfortable. As Ted has paid your passtago, John and the boys will
come free. Dear Jessie, if mother was herre I could be out at work
every day • I can earn six shillings per day, washing and ironing. Do
not forget’to bring the several sets of gofffering irons, and a pipe for
Ted. Do not forget to bring plenty of flower and garden seeds of all
sorts as they are very dear here now. My • dear sister, I think I have
told you all. I will, if possible, send a feew pounds to help you and
mother, to get a few things.—May 10th, 11874. Sly dear mother, —I
now take up my pen to write these few lincss, hoping they will find you
all in good health, as thanks be to God, aas this leaves ms at present.
I am still in my place, and am very comffortable ; the lady promises
to give me .fifteen shillings a week my nejxt quarter. We only want
you and my’ sisters and brothers out here. If you come bring plenty
of under clothes with you for the voyage.. Remember mo kindly to
all the school girls, and also to the Rev. Me. Allister. I hope
you will make haste ani sell your house and give up the school. I
should think yon might have a school on the ship, that is if it is to
be had. Maria has got another dear little girl, called after Lizzie.
Ted is doing well, so the sooner you are aUout here the better for u s
all. Now dear mother I have told you all, so now I conclude with my
kind love to yourself, and all my brothers and sisters, not forgetting
George and Lizzie, from your affectionate Daughter till death,
JULIA CHAMBERS.
January 23rd.
My dear Father and Mother, I now take the pleasure of writing
these few lines to you, hoping that when this reaches you, you will be
all well, as thank God its leaves us both quite well at present. We
have got a very good place indeed, we have 601 a year and all our food
and everything found, and they are such nice people; they have only
been married about three months. Wo have plenty of new milk and
butter, and plenty of beef, for they kill all the bullocks were wo are,
and send them to town to the butchers. They have to kill every day
or else the meat won’t keep ; we have beef steak every morning for
breakfast, and fresh joints every day for dinner ; I often throw away
to the dogs what you would be glad of ; I often say what a shame it


ic The meat is 3d. a pound hero ; boor is Gd. a glass—like we got a
home for a Id—everything is 6d. a glass. We have got a little black
boy where we we—their are plenty of them about here, some of them
don’t wear any clothe* at all, only just round them. It is very hot
here now at this time, this is the hottest time now. There are plenty
ef snakes, frogs, cockroaches and ants, they are all over everything—
all in the sugar. You are obliged to keep everything in water or else
▼on cannot eat it. We have tea three times a day. Clothing is very
dear hero to what it is at home. This is the place for servants, they
get ten, twelve, and fifteen shillings a week.; but there is a lot of cook-
ing to do and washing, as they wear all white clothes out here ; this
is the place to make the clothes a good colour ; you can wash, dry,
and iron all in one day. It is a wild country because there is not
many people in it, but it is a beautiful country. People are very
obliging here—not like they are at home ; if you call at their place they
will give yon plenty to oat before you start away. We were very sea-
sick, Sam was worse than me a great deal. We did not have any rough
weather at all. There were two little babies born on the ship, You
can tell Mrs. Clark that when the ship used to roll, it used to roll the
tin plates and pots all over the place, and used to rattle well. We
nsed to get plenty of pea soup and preserved meat, and preserved
potatoes. There are plenty of ways of saving money if you like here,
as you can’t spend it very well. Tell my friends this is a fine country,
and we are getting on fine, but I miss my beer. We used to lay in a
bed on the ship till dinner sometimes, for it was so very cold. There
was a sailor on the ship that I knew. So I have no more to tell you
this time, with my kindest love to Father and Mother, and all Brothers
nd Sisters. 1 remain your affectionate Daughter and Son,
MAEY ANN and SAMUEL BUNTIN.
August 16,1874.
My dear Mother,—l received the letter and watch all right. I
hope this will find you all in good health, as thanks be to God this
leaves us at present. I enclosed the nomination certificate, yon will
have to fill it up and send it to Mr. Hetherington. I thought they
bad sent it home months ago, but I had it sent him to forward it.
■dgar has commenced work for himself ;he is painting a house. He
Was sent from Rockhampton to point the Dawson Bridge—ha has
finished that now to the satisfaction of his employers—so with the
kelp of God he is sure to got on. Griffin will get eight shillings, and
■hilling* a day. There is plenty of overtime, so that any
■■an qt woman who is not lazy can soon have a comfortable home.
Wo have bought a house so that you have a home to come to j you
wfH tarns a cow nd a fine tat of fowls, so that you will have plenty of


dence here. I am quite out off money at present and I must sand
thi« by the out-going mail. Ble sure and send me the name of the
ghip and the time of starting frrom the docks. Be sure you thank Mr.
Hetherington for being the means of sending us to such comfort
Klentf of blessings on his head for the happy homes out here. So
now P I conclude withkive to all, and remain, dear g^ 113
Bon and daughter till death, MARIA and E. CHAMBERS.
Dawson Bridge, Rookhamptom.
Ipswich, June 14,1874.
Dear Sir —As I promised I write to toll you a little about the
colony It is a vorv good placte for anyone willing to work. There
are a great many employed on a new raiiwuy liiie
from here to Brisbane. Their wages are a shilling an hour. When
new comers get settled down thejy are as happy as their masters are m
England, and as for Domestic Servants there are any wage* given for
them, i hope the Storm King iis bringing out a respectable lot of
people as it did when wo came. I have not seen more than a dozen of
L old friends from about Uxbmdge as yet ; they must have g° n ® “P
ii/the bush or stopped in Brisbamc. lam still with the same master
and don’t care about leaving hum as it is a very good 1
almost as I like from one end of ltho week to the other. Bridget who
came out with us is married but Kate is not yet, they are staying wi
me and we are very happy. We received tne Marvel paper, and had
a very pleasant hour over the reading. I hope you will let me know
if my^ brothers are in West Drayton, I have not had but the one letter
from them sines I came here, and that had been opened. Please re-
member me to all enquiring friends at West Drayton, and beheveme,
dear sir, your sincere friend, _ JAMES OARMCDi.
To Mr. F. W. Hetherington, Uxbridge.
AT TEE IMMIGRATION DEPOT.
Dear Parents,—We got to Queensland on the Ist of June, but the
rm.il was gone, so I could not send before. We are in a place caUea
Port Dennison, Queensland ; it is a very nice place, it is by thessa-mae;
me and Charley and some mere people go down on the pier nshing,
and we get plenty of fish and bring it home and cook it for our teas. We
are in the Depot and it is a very nice place—there is one part tor
single men, and another for single women, and another tor married
people. There are three nice cooking houses for ns, and nice large cop-
pers to wash with, and plenty of wood, and nice water. Me ana,
Charlie have a pound of meat and fresh potatoes, salt, pepper, bread,
soap, tea and sugar. The meat is very nice, it is killed every uight for
us in the morning. I can eat it with good relish, and thank Hod a
am so well. I have never had the headache since I have been here
and yon know, dear mother, bow I used to suffer with it. Charley
had a little cold, but the doctor was kind enough to give mm Bom«


pills, and his cold is much better. There are no wild dos?a here •
are plenty of cows horses, sheep and goats, and
here 'for" there T d th % briug us wood - 14 is w>t P so Sot
ff™’, , r thcr ® 18 a mco breeze from the sea. They are very kind
people here when we go to buy anything they give it to us that is
more than they would do in England. Dear mother, do not answer
th f * e44 ® r > 88 ' we have to go by the steamer on Thursday to a place
called iEva, to work. We went to Port Dennison to leave the fa™
W f. are S 01 ?S to Miva. I think wo shall hke the place
,s d !T Ptlon W 0 bav ®, had of it- 1 hope that all of you will b£
With us m a few years. I will send you what I promised you all as
me and' OhTl f P- t 0 T V \ There has been three ladies aft”
me and Charley to work in the house—food for us both and 55/ a
theue^ W6 -u ill - g0t ° Wivafor we will get 60/. there and
the next year they will give us 76/. Meat is 4d. per lb. here The
young woman and her husband that came in the same ship has got ns a
and a tbov a re SOO u a 5 WC th ° H ° m ° ’ th ®y areb °th together
aad , ®y BXBBO happy. Charley and I go to see them very often f
u 1 mme a l d Charley’s love, praying that God bless
yon all and keep you from harm. ELIZA & 0. GOLDING.
.A T , Rx yf™ jE *j™ t J' eturne df r om Queensland and was present at the
Z,' l f the , X Glamorganshire ”on which was a large number of
sz7A a .pa<:7i‘Z’Sr , “ d ° / -*>»*
I have just now returned from Maryboro” in Queensland where the
emigrant ship Glamorganshire had arrived from London’ with 350
emigrants of which 75 were single men, of from 16 to 29 years of ago
a few ty ° f th + em farm labourers - some of then/bricklayers'
and a few carpenters; 35 were single female (domestic servants)
menwfti^iwi 7 3 ° y !/“? of . , age ’ and tile remainders were married
men with their wives and families, belonging to all trades from the
farm labourer to the skilled mechamc. ’
I went to the Government depot ” to see how they would be re-
ceived and taken care of. They were comfortably h.-rasod and fed.
I returned next day to find the large public room full of strangers'
engaging the emigrants. I went every day for a week to see thed-
different agreements, of which the following is a fair average : Do-
but^lotW^ 8 .te 6neral X 3(W t . O 451 P er annum; everything g providcd
8^ mon^s not , x . c ® required on either side. Cooks, 35/
to 50/, under the same conditions. Ploughmen, 26/ to 40/vearlv •
everything found. There was only one engaged at 26/; he wai a boy
16 years old. Carpenters, 9s. to 12s. per day. Bricklayers, Bs. to lIZ
?^ U lf dry n^ c h amc s, smiths, turners, boilermakers, &0., Is, to
rifin taa fourth da y- counting from the arrival of the
ship, all the single women were engaged, and away to their situations;


on the sixth day, all the single men had obtained good appointments ;
and on the tenth day, when I lief Maryborough, there were only three
families disengaged and they were expecting to leave every hour.
They had already received sonue offers, but were waiting for something
better. On the arrival of an exmigrant ship, all the emigrants are taken
to the'“ Government dep6t ” amd kept there comfortably lodgd and
fed until they are engaged, amd if they do not like their first ng age-
ment they are at liberty to retiurn to the “ depfit ” and remain till
they get another situation.
A word on the climate of Queensland. It is exceedingly dry, and
not too warm, unless you go ttoo far North. The country is so vast
you can get a considerable chamge of climate in it, and taking it alto-
gether it is not unlike the cliimate of Madeira. Consumption, and
other diseases of the lung are very rare. In fact this is the case ail
through Australia, owing, I thiink, to the dryness of the atmosphere.
In conclusion I may say, from psersonal experience that I earnestly ad-
vise all those of the classes I hiave named (especially mechanics, car-
penters, and bricklayers) who have not got good situations at home
immediately apply to the Queensland Government, and endeavour to
obtain a passage to the colony.. I feel certain that those who follow
my advice will have every reason to congratulate themselves before
they are six months in the colony.
Arrival of Mr. Hetheringlon’s Emigration Party-
in Queensland.
The following it an extract from the “ Toowoomba Chronicle a Queen-
sland Newspaper, of August, 7.
On Saturday night last thirty single women, thirty-one single men
and one married couple arrived at the Toowoomba depflt, many of
them having been engaged at Brisbane depfit for this district. On
Monday last we had an opportunity of seeing some of the new ar-
rivals, who appear to be of a class most suitable to the colony. Of the
single girls we cannot speak too highly, evidently they are superior to
the immigrants usually sent to us. The Winefred has actually intro-
duced a first-rate lot of domestic servants (nearly 200) who have been
carefully selected by one of Mr. Daintree’s most energetic agents, a
Mr. P. W. Hetherington who we understand, has already succeeded
in forwarding to the Australian colonies no less than 3000 persons.
Mr. Hetherington personally conducts the young women having un-
dertaken to procure employment for every one who would accompany
him to Queensland, a promise which he will have no difficulty in ful-
filling, as nearly all of his party have effected engagements at a fair
rate of wages Mr. Hetherington intends to remain in the colony for
a few weeks in order, before leaving for England, to obtain a thorough
knowledge, from personal observation of the southern labour market,


so that he may be able to point out from hie own observation, me
freat material advantages offered by Queensland to all kinds of labour,
nt especially to domestic servants in which class he more particularly
interests himself.
The Winefred has had a somewhat lengthy voyage the passenger*
having been on board no less than 128 days. To relieve the
of the voyage a ship paper entitled the Winefred Marvel was prints®
and published nearly every week on board by Mr. Hetherington,
sold to the passengers at one penny per copy. It is printed on a
quarto and contains the usual ship news, report* of entertain nents,
poetry, &c. The circulation of this marvellous newspaper exceeded,
we are informed 300 per week, and must have served to create much
amusement oh board. We shall probably make some extracts from
on a future occasion.
On arrival of the Winefred at Moreton Bay, Mr. Hetherington was
called unexpectedly to the Poop-square, where all the young women
had assembled, when one of their number read aloud the following
very pleasing address.
“ Ship Winefred, April 9th, 1875.
From the Single Women’s compartment.
To Mr. F. W. Hetherington.
Dear Mr. Hetherington, at the close of our voyage from London to
Brisbane, wo feel that we cannot part from you without endeavouring,
however inadequately, to express our since gratitude for your uniform
kindness, and untiring atteniton to us during the voyage. We thorough ■
ly appreciate the many acts of kindness you have shown us, and are
exceedingly grateful for the efforts you have made to relieve the
monotony of the voyage, by the concerts and other entertainments
you were the means of promoting. We now reluctantly bid yon fare-
well, wishing you a pleasant sojourn in Queensland, a rapid and safa
passage back to England, and a future career of happiness and
prosperity.” [ Here follows 170 signatures.]
o-
Mr. Hetherington expressed his thanks, and made an appropriate
reply to this public mark of respect in which he stated that he should
ever remember the happy hours he had spent whilst on the Winefred,
and the pleasant faces that then surrounded him. He assured them
that when the time of parting came they would carry with them his
warmest wishes for their future welfare. He remided them that it
was his intention to remain in the colony for a short time and during
his stay should they need a friend to help them in any difficulty, to
rely upon him.
[The number of emigrants remaining in the depot, and engaged at 9
pjn., last evening were— Single women, 4 ; single men, 14. Total, 18,]


NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
/ ■


