





LETTERS
PROM
GALLIPOLI
19 15
PUBLISHED IN THE PRINCIPAL AUSTRALIAN NEWSPAPERS
IN 1915 BEFORE MILITARY CENSORSHIP STOPPED
FURTHER PUBLICATIONS.
THE COLLECTION WAS MADE FOR PUBLICATION IN
BOOK FORM AND THE PORTIONS CROSSED OUT WERE
TO BE EXCLUDED, BUT THE BOOK WAS NOT PUBLISHED.




M ’!*'■
»<•*?




letters from the front.
GOING RIGHT THROUGH.
Lance-Corporal L. N. Wallis, writing from
Malta to his mother, Mrs. Wallis, 171 Com-
nonwealth-street, Sydney, states:—
“I have a bit of a wound in my hip, but it ;
is getting all right now, and I hope to be back (
again inside a month. All of my mates were
killed. I managed to get out of it till the
morning.
“I captured a big German with a machine
gun. The people here are good to us all;
they can’t do enough for us, but I am anxious
to get back again to the firing lino. lam
confident of going right through to Constauti-
SOLDIERS WANT NEWSPAPERS
The following extracts are from a letter
from Private Sydney John Holland, 13th Bat-
talion, dated May 18, 1915. to hla parents, 51
Collins-street, Surry Hills:—
“I am in the best of health, hut have had
many narrow escapes. I think we will come
efi best, as we are getting plenty of reinforce-
ments, which will give us great help. The
fiist few days it was terrible, shells breaking
all over us, and advancing under heavy fire
from their artillery- As lam writing this
letter the shells are bursting all round us.
Well, mum, the only thing I want you to do is
not to worry over us. Write as often as you
can, and send plenty of newspapers. Jack
often says to me he would like to be in
the Googee basin for a swim, as it is very
hard to get a wash here.”
“HELL ON EARTH.”
:r from Luna Park Hospital, Helio-
lis aunt and uncle, Mr. and Mrs.
Gosford, and dated May 5. Private
s an account of how he went into
action at Gallipoli. He wrotes: —
“I sras awakened early on Sunday morning
by the sound of heavy gun firing close at hand,
the first time in my life that 1 had heard a
shot fired in earnest. We had breakfast at
daybreak. The Navy was bombarding the
shore, covering the advance of the 3rd Brigade,
which had landed before daylight. We could
see the shells bursting in the distance,
“We went ashore on a destroyer, and landed
about 9 o’clock. They were shelling us as we
landed. One shot nearly hit our troop ship.
However, we got ashore without losing any-
body. If you had been with us you would have
wondered however they managed to land. The
country is like the hills around Ourimbah
very steep and scrubby, but no boulders.
“The Turks don’t care much about the ba-
yonet, I believe that when the 3rd Brigade
landed and showed them the bayonet they
scooted. The 3rd were a origade of heroes.
They were the first to land, and deserve all the
credit that is due to them. We had ad-
vance up steep gullies before we could deploy,
and the snipers were busy all the time. me
first man to get shot in our com P " as a
young fellow named Hoyston. Wh ® a
reached the plateau the shrapnel was beßin
ning to burst. A shell exploded on th g
quite close to me. I was hit in the v
a piece of earth. Then the shells hu st >
out ceasing all day. ..
“The Turks were difficult to see, as it a
Private Fred Gale, of the 4th Battalion,
writes to his father, Mr. Geo. H. G-ale, of 113
Clarendon-road, Stanmore, as follows:
“We are all entrenched here now an# the
Turks won’t face the bayonet. They make
an attack on our trenches sometimes and as
soon as our chaps charge them they turn and
go back to their trenches as quickly as they
can. The seaplane flies over us every day.
We are not so much afraid of rifle fire as we
arc of shrapnel. I have seen some sad sights
of wounded here. A big shell hurst in front
of me while I was writing this letter. You
would think it was an earthquake or some-
thng else had happened if you were not used
to it. It is beautiful weather here, just like
a summer day in Australia. We have a good
supply of spring water and no trouble getting
food. We get bacon every day and. tea, jam,
and stew, so we are not bad for food.
“This is our third week under fire. We will
all be glad when the war is over. Some of
the Turks are getting very good shots now. i
If «ou just put your head above the trench
for half a minute tlhey will get you. One
cause as soon as they eight the head of a
pick and put dt above the trench and he got
three holes in it, so you can see they are not
bad shots. Our boys are just as good be-
cause as soon as they sight the head of a
Turk over the trench about a dozen shots go
at it at once. The Turks crawl along the
ground some nights and try to sneak around
our trenches and our boys wait till they get
about two yards from us and then they fire
a volley into them and you see tfhem roll
over. If anything should happen to me it
will be all for the best."
StTiS?’ t£"y WOUNDED SOLDIER'S REGRET.
hundred yards ahead, and were using .
iinareu vai uo * —-
bullets. Major Swannell •was killed
■e I was. He was kneeling, trying to
near where I was. He was Icnecung, ryms w
get a shot at some of the snipers. The bullet
caught him in the head.
“They found one /of our sergeant with his
face battered in and horribly mutilated. The
and the wounded lay about where
fell, with nobody to attend to them. it
earth. I saw one fellow near
ariii. x ~ _ r.
an explosive bullet, and it blew his
was on the way to the beach the
■e constantly sniping, but I escaped,
walked down without taking coyer.
>u the truth, I did not care whether
N


V* /V” illATnil lAM nni nimo’ I We sald good-bye. to Egypt a few weeks ago,
[<?. // I. HIS llf HI IHEI hi I lill-lfh ! arid went to Lemnos, where the Dardanelles Ej- ,
L , / nUU I IIHLIHII UULUILIiU | -peditionary Force concentrated. We were In a
£t/lsl i ■ bfeautiful, land-locked harbor, green hills all
I rTTfOO around us, dotted with tiny villages. We used
* f'( ll* I I pl l I to get ashore occasionally for exercise.
LL I I Lilli* The fleet was a x'mique. sight; hundreds of
„ . . boats of all descriptions—transports crammed
, with fierce warriors (imagine yours truly as a
: F.W.) —then warships of every shape and site,
Rf rj rp T rn Dill I CT6 from the Queen Elizabeth (she is familiarly
KILILLUI Lll DULL!. IQt I known us ‘’Lizzie”) down to the tiniest torpedo
1 boats,, submarines, trawlers, and repair ships. (
** * • Just outside the bay is another inlet, where*
our French friends assembled. We passed a
SAVED BY iCIGAntI I t I >IN. quiet fortnight there, but during that time I
sustained a slight casualty. My remaining front
tooth had been giving mo some bad twinges;
you know the “cream puffs” that we “tourists”
INCIDENTS OF LANDING. | live on play old Harry with the teeth, so I de-
| cided to get it out. We had an alleged dent-
! ist in the ranks of our company,, and he carried
» his instruments of torture with him just to
lieutenant W. G. Maddern, formerly an of- i keep pig h aiic i in. He got to work, and the
;r in the Victorian Treasury, writing to ! tooth broke off up in the gum, and, although
mds in Melbourne, gives the following des- %TTiVIX
ption of incidents of landing:— | ence suggested that he should blast for it.
Ve were roused out for breakfast at half- However. It gives me no trouble now; but I
;t 2 next morning. The ship was station- was unfortunate enough to lose my plate later
r and we could just make out the hills loom- on, so lam now rather at a disadvantage when
’an in the darkness. We were about a mile the bully beef and “cream puffs” arc given
Lieutenant W. G. Maddern, formerly an of- J
fleer in the Victorian Treasury, writing to !
friends in Melbourne, gives the following des-
cription of incidents of landing;— i
We were roused out for breakfast at half-
ary, and we could just make out the hills loom-
ing up in the darkness. We were about a mile
from the shore. The Third Brigade was the
first to disembark. We could not see any-
thing; but from the rifle fir© we could tell they
were having a pretty lively time. Our brigada
was next, and our platoon was the first. We <
started off in two boats; 1 had the tiller in the
leading one. It was just breaking daylight,
and we were about half a mile from the shore -
when they started to give us a touch of shrap-
nel fire; but, although some shells hurst un-
comfortably close to us, we were untouched.
When about 400 yards from the shore rifle fire
was opened on us, and they very soon had our j
range. My arm was knocked away from the
tiller; but it was only a slight flesh wound.;.
Then one of our rowers dropped with a bullet ,
through his stomach.
Joe Pearce, the old Melbourne half-back, Mho
was sitting next to me, was shot dead, and by
the time wo reached the beach six others had
been killed, and nearly everyone hit. The mi-
nute our boat beached I jumped overboard up
to my waist, and all that could followed suit.
One poor fellow was poised on the side of the
boat when he was shot. I towed him high
and dry, a glance sufficing to show me that he
was cone*
This kept mo a little behind the oth ® r ®*
and, together with another chap, who ha-a
stumbled and fallen, I made a bolt for cover,
about 40 yards distant. We were bo*h
within five yards of it when we were bowled
over. He was hit in the ankle and lin the
knee, but we quickly crawled to safety. Out j
of our boatload of 30, only 11 managed to
reach that cover, and several of them were
wounded. The other boat, which landed
about one hundred yards lower down than
us, fared even worse, as they landed in the
teeth of a machine gun, and only half a
dozen are alive. I managed to get about
five shots off, and then an order came to ad-
vance, apd as I could not walk, I had to
remain and make myself comfortable, to-
gether with three others who had been ren-
dered hors de combat. I then “ran the
rule” over myself, and found that I had been
hit in the clothing and equipment about half
a dozen times.
A cigarette tin in my pocket saved me
from at least a nasty wound In the stomach.
It deflected the bullet right away. My am-
munition pouches were hit, and two cart- :
ridges, smashed into small pieces of brass, 1
burled in loose cordite. I also recovered a
FOUR LEFT OUT OF FORTY.
Writing from Malta to his parents. Private
P. A. Parker assures them that his wound
(caused by a bullet through the muscles of his
left arm) is not a bad one.
“I will never forget the Sunday we landed,”
he states. “We pushed on after the 3rd Bri-
gade, who were having a hot time. The Turks
simply poured shot and shells at us. A bul-
let went through one of my putties, and hit the
next chap on the knee. A third man stooped
down to pick up the wounded man, and his
head was nearly shot off. .1 was one of four
left out of a company of forty men. One of the
Bth Battalion’s officers was shot through an
arm and the body. The last words the poor
fellow said were, ‘Retire on to that small
ridge, and hold it at ail cost.’ ... We even-
tually retired to the trenches dug by the sup-
ports. That night, within 70 yards of our
trench, came the Turks, shouting ‘Allah! Al-
lah!’ But they would come no nearer. A bul-
let struck my bayonet, and I thought I was
gone. My knees played ‘Home, Sweet Home.’
We fired all night, and next morning the place
to which the Turks came in the night was
strewn with their dead. ... A German dressed
as one of our officers was found in our lines.
He was giving orders, and wrong messages.
But wo got him. It’s all in the game,” Private
Parker adds significantly.
-GOD SAVE AUSTRALIA!”
The dauntless spirit of Private Edward J.
Bell, a member of the Australian Expedition-
ary Force, who was killed in action at the
Dardanelles, is shown by Private H. Sweeney,
of Bendigo, Victoria, in a letter to a twin
brother of the deceased soldier.
Private Sweeney wrote; —“It is very sad
about poor old Ted. You know we each pro-
mfsed that whoever fell first the other should
write to his people. This war is awful. Ted and
I stuck together till the end. We had been
fighting all night, and next morning we were
in the same trench together. At about 10
o’clock, Ted said to me: ‘They have got me,
Harry. My God!’ I turned round, and poor old
Duneu iu luuse uuiuuu. x Harry. any U-oui i luiixeu iuuuu, auu
couple of bullets from my pack. These i Te<j sajdr—’Good-bye, Harry. God save the
escapes seem miraculous, but I find they are »„»♦,.««« t* r field him un 1
the rule, not the exception. We were picked King, and God save Austra a -held Wmj
-P by the held ambulance about 10. bandaged “f to the Mlblrtns
up, and taken down to the beach for despatch
to the ship.
We spent the next night on board, and
next day watched the warships shelling the
country with shrapnel and lyddite. It is a
great sight to see a lyddite shell send half a
hill up in the air. All of us were piously
hoping that 100 Turks were in each lot.
There was a village some miles over on our
left, and we noticed the aeroplane hovering
over it. Presently there was a most ter-
rific explosion from our rear, and something
went up from that village. I think it is
still going. It appears that the aeroplane
had discovered a battery and ammunition
column, and one of Lizzie’s 15-inchers settled
the lot with one shell.
We went away to Alexandria next* day—a
couple of days’ trip. They took about 300
of the more serious cases ashore. There
were 700 on board altogether, and. as it ap-
pears that the present hospital accommoda-
on is taxed to the limit, they are sending and have
on to Malta. I can get about all right get ver -y
>w, as long as 1 don’t bend my leg. The plenty o
illet has just gone through the flesh of the very cob
ice-cap, grazing the bone en route; so I reading
pect to be right in a fortnight at the out- sat , up a
and one
he died a very brave man. On the following
Friday, I was hit in the leg. It Is very sore,
but I hope to be about again in a few days.”
The late Private Bell was 28 years old, and
was born in Cardiff. Wales. He enlisted in
West Australia, his father being the licensee
of the King’s Head Hotel, York. The brother
to whom this pathetic letter was sent is a son-
in-law of Mr. C. Hyden, of Skene-street, Ben-
POPPED TWO TURKS
Private A. Kirkwood, a Lithgow volunteer,
in a letter to his mother, says:
At last we have our hearts’ desire—we are
in the trenches. I am writing this under
rifle and shell Are. We have been in the
firing line twice—the first period for four
da vs and nights—after which we were re-
lieved for three days. We then went back,
and have been here for three days now. We
g-et ver-y little sleep in the trenches, but


STRALIAN SOLDIERS.
LETTERS FROM THE FRONT.
STORY OF RED CROSS' MAN.
ASSISTING THE WOUNDED.
“A great flash, which we took to be
lightning, illuminated the sky, but then there
came a deep, terriffic ‘boom,’ and we knew
that the Allied warships had commenced to
bombard the peaceful-looking valleys oppo-
site.”
Such was the baptism of fire of private Eric
Roper, of Vvarrnambool, Victoria, who is at-
tacned to t-te Army Me-leal Corps. In a
letter to his mother he gives an interesting
account of the do.ngs of Red Gross men at
■Uaba Tone. *
After having spent neany ihree weeks at
Lemnos (he writes), we v.eighed anchor, and
passed down along t-*e line of troopships and
battleships to an anchorage nearer the en-
rance to tne harbor. On the Saturday morn-
ing we cleared the lighthouse at 7 o’clock.
Even then no one knew anything about our
destination except that it would be some-
where in the Quif o' Saros, but so long as e
. ore going to meet the enemy, everyone was
quite satisfied. Instead of turning straight
across to the Dardanelles (as you will see by
the map is the shortest route), we headed
in the opposi e direction, and sailed close
to the oliTs of the island, and by noon had
rrived in arother small bay, exactly at the
hack of the island; here we anchored.
STRETCHER BE ARE IS READY.
During the afternoon we received informa-
tion as to ■ h t was being done.” We were
t -Id that v ould arrive off. the Turkish
oa t at day k next m main $, and tonne*-
a ely our s.retcher-heai ers (1.8 in number)
o Li be transferred to destroyers that would
be awaJtino- us, and all the rest of the fleet,
and then, un'er the protection of the war-
ips, i hoy wou’d oiect a landing on the
b a h. Our men were given to understand
• at it would be a risky task, but little they
ought it would be as difficult as It turned
o t to be.
Reveille sounded at 3 o'clock next morn-
lo", and, although I know 1 was not to go
s ore, I war up, and on deck as soon as the
others. it was a beau if I’y ca’tp morning,
t a very roll wind blowing set our teeth
t'erirg. There was not a light on deck;
eryihing Jn darkness. Across the water
could barely d ! *c?rn the out.J’ne of one of
0 other troopships creeping along like our-
■ o res. with not a light to be seen. It was
'o about 5 o’ lock, and we could distinguish
1 ■ land ahead, which was our boys’ destina-
tion.
NO BLANKETS.
By this time the engineers and our stretcher-
oarorf were all formed in line on deck, ready
for the .shore Our boys had full marching
order dregs—caps, tunics, trousers, putties,
■ oots, and overcoats rol’ed across their shoul-
( ers; mess tins, belt, and pouch—the latter
containing first field dressings and extra ban-
etc.; haversacks, con'aining rations for
i hours, consisting rf tinned meat and hard
biscuits; and each man carried his waterproof
„ R f t ‘ no blanket*. r n addition to this
-ns thG man in char se of each stretcher
Carr * e< * a haversack wilh every appll-
.ace for treatment of the wounded. Break-
was thp n served, and whilst they were
f * ITI an<3 ari other (who was also a
’ t division man) went up the bows of the
!aee t 0 and 866 sometllin S 01 the landing
' e had barely reached the place before a
rca. cash, which we at first Role to be light-
nc, illumlnaled the sky; but before we could
r mark on the matter there came a terrific
°m, and we at once realised that the war-
:ps had commem ed to bombard the adjacent
arts hidden in the mountains. Before the
ound of ihe first died away there came ano-
ther flash, another boom, another, then other
ships further along commenced, and all con-
centrated their shells on one spot. By this
time It was clear daylight, and we could see
everything that was going on around üb.
“LIZZIE” APPEARS.
Warships could be seen In all directions
fight along from the point of land close to
our landing . pot, along the coast in the direc-
tion of the ihu candies as far as the eye could 1
see. By th.; t ne (be noise was terrific. You
can’t Imagine what it is like to be within a
mile of these big warships when they are
cruisers to
British and
Suddenly a cloud of black smoke along the
coast drew our attenti n to another w j hip
coining along at great speed. She passed
within a stone’s throw of us, and we broke
forth with a tremendous cheer, for It was the
largest, most modern* battleship afloat —the
Queen Elizabeth —come to help. But the noise
was terrifying. Crash! Crash! Boom! . Loom!
thud, thud, thud, as all the warships poured
forth their huge shells, and all of these shells
wore exploding In what would appear to the
eye, to a peaceful little valley within two
r'lles of the beach.
Up to this tlm.-, not a sound was heard from
shore, it might Just as well, apparently, have
been an uninhabited island, it all looked peace-
ful and harmless, although we well knew that
concealed in that scrub were thousands of
Turks and Germans awaiting the first boat load
of our troope, to say nothing o{ the deadly
batteries everywhere.
WATCHING THE BATTLE.
Well, we watched the destroyers from our
own ship and the other troopships tearing
j across to the sandy beach in the distance, all
, packed with troops of every description, but
mainly infantry. Then the roar of cannon
I commenced, this time from the shore batteries
of the enemy, and then to our horror shrapnel
began to burst right at the landing stage as
soon as the first boat-loads neared the spot.
Shell after shell, shell after shell began to
burst, and although we couldn’t see our troops
on the beach, we knew that they must have
been getting th e full force of it. But still
they landed—boat after boat load swept by on
their way ashore until by 10 o’clock almost j
every ship had been emptied of her troops; j
still the warships bombarded. The same little j
valley was attracting most of their attention, :
but other points, where we afterwards learned
that the Turkish trenches were, came in for
deadly shelling.
You will be thinking it was all right for us
on board to be watching all this, but I assure
you there was nobody more disappointed than
myself at not being among the first ashore,
."but you se e it was impossible for us to erect
hospital tents anywhere on shore as yet, so
we were compelled to wait behind. lam one
of the 30 in the hospital tents to attend to
cases as they arrive. The stretcher-bearers
bring the wounded from the trenches to us,
and we treat them, and our doctors operate
when necessary. From our hospital tents
they ar e forwarded to the hospital ships, and
conveyed to th p base h^s^itals.
A.M.C, PRIVATE FINDS IT ‘ A
Private A. M. M‘Leod, one of the New Zea-
land Medical Corps, writing on May 10, to
a friend at Balmain, says:—“Talk about having
Turkey for dinner. There are enough bits of
Turks about here to keep us going for months,
and after being exposed to the sun for the last
week or so they are getting very high—quite
tender, in fact.”
After describing the landing, Private M'Leod
says:—“ln the banks and around the place
there were snipers hidden, and they settled
many of our boys before we found them, and
gave them some of our celebrated lead pills.
Sunday night, about 12 o’clock, we—half a
dozen or so of us—had to go right up to the
front, and to bring down the wounded Austra-
lians. and it took us from 12 o’clock until 5 in
the morning to carry them back, and as my
tea consisted of bully beef and a biscuit, I was
absolutely done by the time we arived back, :
likewise the other boys. It Is not too nice to 1
hear the bullets- ‘buzz, buzz’ around us, and !
very often land at your feet. These four or ’
five days we have bad a bit of a spell, but the ;
bullets never cease dropping around us. It is
rather funny at times, though. We live in
holes dug out of the ground, and when the
shrapnel begins to fall wo duck in and out of
our dug-outs like rabbits. Oh, it is a great
life this—©porting life.”
REDFERN CONSTABLE’S HOT
TIMS.
A letter from Constable G. G. Boyd, of the
Redfern Police Station, who was wounded dur-
ing the fighting on the Gallipoli Peninsula,
has been received by Constable Clarence Gil-
bert from San Stefano Military Hospital. After
stating that he was wounded In both hands,
Boyd writes: “I had hoped to be out and in
action again some time ago, but my hands have
; taken longer to heal than was expected. 1
have been in the hospital just over a month
now, and although my hands do not seem to
be improving much, still the doctor considers
fair progress has been made. We had a very
hot time under shot and shell, and I consider
I was very lucky to escape with only wounded
hands. I have met Bill Kahoe and Downey
over here, and anpther man from No. 3 Station.
I expect they are busy at the front at present.
They arrived a short


•ill II Is If !■ I I kWi* jSDL. I “ Nbw> this 18 whtit beats me. 7n the first
A/' llirflil E LLLOUi* LOlilla L i place - no ma ° had any earthly right to come
./Y ( fc-WWffll h| out of that inferno alive. In the second place
{p ■l/ ’ i ) 1 achieved a miracle by standing up and walk-
. / \ ing back unhurt, and now that I am here the
>7 7 BULLETS FLYING ALL AROUND. I
U / 11 killed me twice. Anyway. I got over the hill
♦ • ♦> safely, and lay down in a captured trench, and
PHI mnvo rx/nrnirimr ... wanted to go to Sleep, but someone camealon*
SOLDIER S EXPERIENCE IN and bandaged my wound, set me on my feet.
and started me off for the beach 2% miles off,
TURKEY. along with a string of others. After many
spells I got there. The snipers continued t*
Private Goughian, in a letter to a friend
om Mena Hospital, writes as follows:—“Af-
>r fourteen days at Lemnos, we were told
that on the morrow we would be hard at it;
that we were to commence disembarkation at
4 a.m., the 3rd Brigade leading, and the 6th
being in reserve, and to land at 6.30; that we
were all to do our work with the bayonet,
and carry everything we needed for three
days; that we were taking on something that
had never been attempted since the time of
William the Conqueror; that there was to be
no retirement; that our losses would be heavy;
and that, owing to the enemy’s custom of
mutilating prisoners, there was to be no sur-
render. You will thus see we were playing
for keeps. We were told to go to bed early,
and try to get some sleep. I tried to sleep;
but gave it up. Many of the boys were too
excited to sleep, and kept moving about. I
got up, and washed myself; so that I could
get ashore clean.
“We had a hot breakfast at 3 a.m., and then
the ball opened. We were about a mile off
shore, and could not see. Upon anchoring we
got into the ships’ boats, and -were towed
ashore, and as soon as we grounded we sprang
out and waded ashore. We did not lose a
man from our boat, as wa were only under
shell fire, and they were bursting high. The
third had driven the enemy off the cliff with
one magnificent bayonet charge in 20 minutes,
although allowed until 9 o’clock to complete
the job. On landing wo formed up, slung off
our packs, and started off for the firing line.
On the way we came across a Turk sniper, who
hit one of our boys on the knee, and then sur-
rendered. A little further on one of the lads
happened on another. He made one holy drive
at the Turk with his bayonet, but the cow
dodged it, and it went into the ground up to the
hilt. The Turk should have had him then,
but he was too rattled, and the lad snapped
it off in the ground, and swung him one with
the barrel on the Jaw The Turks fell, and
then the boy put in the Australian leather.
Someone saw him an-hour after still kicking
the pieces. We reached the right flank, and
■were ordered to reinforce the left. It was
hilly country, and my mate and I got on ahead i
of the others.
“On the top of a hill we found some men I
from every battalion, who said there were more
ahead, so we set off. We only got about 30
yards when down we went flat, for such an in-
ferno greeted us as would be difficult to ima-
gine.
“Wc continued to crawl forward for the ma-
chine guns were firing over the tops of the
bushes. We progressed in this manner for
a while, and the firing redoubled in intensity,
and shrapnel exploded closer. At this point
I funked it, and calling out to my mate, found
that he was of the same mind, namely, that
It was an absolute cert that If we moved an
inch from oar bush we would be cut to mince
meat We both agreed that we were well gone
in any case, but if we stayed where we were
we might do some good, and might have a
million to one chance of hanging out till it
got dark. Do you think it was cowardly? Our
firing line was supposed to be ahead of us (I
now have my doubts), though we were well
ahead of our platoon. If there were men
ahead of us it was our place to go on. On
the other hand, I really believe that it was
absolutely certain death to go from our hush,
for wc would have been riddled in a second,
and bo no more good, but a soldier should never
think of himself-
“ Sometimes I think I did right, and at other
times lam worried. We had been there about
five minutes when my mate gave a yell,
and cried out that he was kit. Keeping
flat 1 swung round and found he had
been shot through the leg with shrapnel. I
ripped open his field dressing and applied it,
but I seemed to be all thumbs, and it was
all soaked before I got it half on. I then
wound his puttee round it, but the blood still
.poured through. AH the time he kept calling
to me to never mind him, but to look after
myself.
“I swung back to my bush and picked up my
trenching tool to dig in when a bullet struck
it in front of my head. Almost immediately
another grazed the place where one is popular-
ly supposed to get it when running away. A
second or two after I got it bang. I roared
louder than a bull. My poor wounded mate
worked his way over to me, got my equipment
off and ripped open tunic and shirt By this
time I had recovered somewhat, and finding
I was not blown up, started to drag myself to
the rear. I remember going about 60 yards,
and sitting up behind another bush, feeling
much stronger, but thinking that nothing mat-
tered mneh. Then I got on my feet and wad-
pick us off, and many a man got his quietus on
• his way to the beach.
“We were taken off in punts, which wer«
under shrapnel fire all the time. While rest-
ing on the way I could see the engineers mak-
ing a road up the cliff, so that we could bring
|up the artillery. They had also erected a
i wireless station. I must mention the Indians.
! When we were going into action I noticed In-
j dian officers standing on the cliff exposed
1 merely as spectators, in order to gain in- s
I formation. On my return they were leading
i a mountain battery. I saw them get shrap-
nel wounds, get them bound up, and then re-
turn to their work. It made me feel petty
and mean. We had the Indian Red Cross look-
ing after us, too, and they were wonderfully
kind and gentle.
“We hear many tales of Turkish atrocities.
A German officer sneaked on one of our sig-
nallers, and covered him with a revolver, tell-
ing him to walk straight ahead. He did so;
but soon saw he was walking straight into
some concealed Turks. His mates, seeing him
walking so fearlessly, were following him.
Without a second’s hesitation, he wheeled
round, and shouted, “Go back!” He was rid-
dled in a second. One of our buglers had his
longue cut out, and was horribly mutilated.
The Turks sent him hack. He reached our
lines, and wrote, “Bayonet every one of the
and fell dead. Then there is my own
case, where I doubted if there were any more
of our boys ahead of us. The more I think
of it the more I think there were not. If
that machine gun had not been turned on us
we might have crawled right into the Turks,
which is 1000 times worse than being shot.”
• COMB. 0. MY BROTHERS 1”
Lance-Corporal W. (Patscy) Uibley, a well-
known Leichhardt athlete, who was wounded
at the Dardanelles, and is now in hospital in
Egypt, writes to his club mates of the Leich-
hardt League of Swimmers; —
“The Turks have put a bullet through my
left leg just beneath the kneecap. O. bro-
thers, my language was terrible to hear.
This kid, and many other warriors; landed
amid a terrible hail of shot' and shell. With
loud cries we rushed our enemies’ positions,
driving them before us as our forefathers did
in the good old days. Alas, many of our
bravest warriors fell, but that; only helped
us to drive still further. We rushed head-
long into it. For 40 hours I fought with
hardly a rest, and not a wink of sleep; one
lime advancing and another time retreating;
with ‘Lizzie’s’ deep contralto heard above
bursting shrapnel, and rifle and machine gun
fire. How I escaped being hit Is beyond
me. Thrice my officer warned me to keep
down. My blood was up, and I only wanted
to kill, and gloried in doin? it, too. Just i
after dawn I caught sight of a sniper about
150 yards behind us-—a little to the right.
I now hare a button he used to wear as a
memento. A little later on 1 got another .
hutljon. Don’t think I killed two Turks
only. Far from it. I was the 12th best
shot in the brigade, and I fired just under
200 rounds, and never without a target. How
they do yell ‘Allah! Allah!’ I would not miss
the glories of battle for all the good times
we have had together. Once we were driven
'back by a terrific hail of shrapnel from their
Krupp guns, and had to seek shelter behind a
friendly hill, but only for a little while. We
were ordered to fix bayonets and charge over
the hill, because the Turks were advanci
under cover of their guns. ’Twas then
found I knew so many words that you fail
see in the dictionaries. As we advanced, o
line became very broken by their fire, a
we had to straighten a bit. I called c
‘Down,’ and then made some of our la
straighten the line a bit. I had just sto
up and called on the lads, when crack! I w
wild. I tried to catch up, but had to do
Turkey trot out of the firing line to look 1
the medicine man of our tribe. Come, O, i
brothers! You are wanted over here. J
who can, let them come, and avenge o
fallen f-nrnra rl


SOLDIERS' LITTERS.
"DO OR DIE."
AUSTRALIANS’ MOTTO.
DEEDS OF HEROISM.
larrikins,' hare'
d, and I have witnessed many ins
sacrifice. These men will go any
anything.
“Another fine spirit of Australian manhood
is to suffer pain. I have seen men being car-
ried down with arms and legs shattered coolly
Smoking cigarettes—no moaning. The doctors
say they are marvels. Australians have proved
their worth to the civilised world. The price
and no one here begrudges it.
you should not at home.”
TWO FOR THE “BOSS.”
' ffJj 'j' *
Sergeant-Major J. Sloan, who is serving with
the Australians at the Dardanelles, an in- j
teresting letter, dated from the firing line, Private Edward Marchant, writing from Cot-
May 5, to his mother, Mrs. J. Sloan, who re- j, tonera Hospital, Malta, to a Fairfield mate,
sides at Centennial Avenue, Randwick, says: says; —
“I assisted to sort the mail, and it « x am wellj with the exception of a couple cf
nainfill to DlclCG 3.51d6 thOSO dddrGSSGQ to HIGH! . ' _
hers who are taking their long sleep in the sea P woun#, -and a soreness in my left eye
V.III socket. miniTß' IYW PVO whlnh TX/o-c cVirvf mif **
Aiers who aic c .
unmarked graves on the hillside. socket, minus'my eye, which was shot out.”
“We arrived near the shore where we were Speaking cf the famous landing of the Aus-
to land on the morning of April 25, and three tralians, he says: “It was very interesting
hours earlier the Third Brigade landed, and while it lasted. Our fellows did hot know the
charged the heights. It was a feat of arms meaning of danger until they got right Into
that ranks alongside anything done in British if, and then they enjoyed it to such an extent
history. All hats are off to the Third Bri- that they cannet he drawn out. We keep get-
gade. The Turks posted on the hills waited ting a littl) closer to the Turkish trenches, and
till our boats touched the shore, and poured are holding cur own. To look hack at our
on them a withering fire. Our boys fixed dead and wounded is the worst part of all.
bayonets and charged and never stopped till Here you ece one poor fellow with bis head
they reached the top, and entrenched. The half off through shell fire, another is dead, in
position is like Chowder Bay to George’s a fierce death grapple with a Turk, and so on.
Heights, only higher and steeper. The hill- 1 jot a few Turks before they got me. and
side is covered with dense scrub. Our bri- when my boss got hit I got more, bo I got
gade landed about 8 a.m. I was with the own back and two for the ‘boss.’ ”
brigade and regiment headquarters, and as
we rowed along in boats the forts, which the A BOY HERO,
navy could not silence, opened fire with shrap-
nel. One shell landed ten yards away from
our boat, but did not burst. If it had it Private Charlie Smith. 15, the youngest Aue-
would have cleared us all. Wo moved up a tralian at the fiont, whose photograph appsar-
gully, and watched the remainder land. e< ? the Evening News” recently, writes to
“A number of men were killed, end soon the b * s mother at Pine-street, Fairfield, as fol-
beach was an inferno. Eight guns inland open- .
ed fire, and swept the beach all day. Their
gunnery is great, but our men stood the test
splendidly. We were kept in reserve, while
the remainder reinforced the 3rd Brigade.
Soon the horrors of war came upon us, as
hundreds of wounded men were being taken
down the gully to . the beach. The landing
was carried out by the navy, and was done
magnificently. Jack Tars playing with death
as coolly as walking down George-street. In
the afternoon the 4th Brigade was ordered to
reinforce the right of the line. We .had to
cross a shrapnel-swept gully, and it was
there we received our baptism of fire. Our
men faced the music grandly, and Australia
should be proud of its manhood. We reached
the heights, and entrenched for the night.
“The following afternoon, the 26th, a gen-
eral advance of the whole line was ordered.
Everyone moved forward, and soon we were
met with a withering fire of machine guns,
shrapnel, and rifle fire. It was terrific. I
was lying with my signalling officer, Lieuten-
ant Smith, and a machine gun played all over
us. He was wounded in the knee. When
there was a lull < got him back to cover. We
advanced with the colonel, and everyone f.as
ordered into the firing line. I collected a
Platoon of stragglers, and moved through the !
hail of lead. I felt no fear, and was only
anxious to get forward. Soon the order to
retire was given, and I was one who got back
* r ® nch without a scratch- Our colonel I
was killed retiring, and the second in com-1
badJ y wounded. My officer bound
P his knee, collected a few men, and charg- I
ed forward t 0 hi s death. He was brave to a
* 'L e lost the pick of our non-com-
missioned officers. Naughten’s brother was J
leading a charge. Our men behaved
ma^ifi° e ntly. Australia has made good.
We are now entrenched on the heights and
are building roads to bring up artillery. The
German guns are deadly, but wo don’t care for
the rifle fire of the Turks. They have a few
Suod snipers who have got a lot of our officers.
>Jar brigadier and brigade staff have been
' vip ® ou _t, also a number of the senior officers j
in the brigade. Last night an officer was shot. {
® pai( * tbe penalty for disobeying a sentry’s
rder. [This statement is not officially con-
fined.-—-Ed., E.N.] It was very sad, as he
.ad made good. He led his battalion in the
%reat advance on the 26th, and his men wor-.
shipped him. He never looked for cover, but
“Perhaps by now you have heard of my being
wounded. I was hit in the face —quite a nasty
knock, and as my face is all bandaged up 1
am getting the Church of England chaplain to
write for me. I know how sorry you will be
to hear that my right eye had to go. The .doc-
tor said it was quite necessary-’
SAW THE TRIUMPH SINK.
Pte. C. Brian, of Strathfleld, in a letter from
Gallipoli, states; —
Our battalion made a landing about 6.30 a.m.
amidst a perfect hail of shrapnel and rifle fire.
We have now entrenched in a good position,
and are keeping the enemy pretty busy await-
ing the arrival of the British and French forces
who are pushing forward towards us from the
southern end of the peninsula. When they
arrive, we will have about a quarter of a mil-
lion men and a good long fighting line; then
I believe we push forward. When we get go-
ing there will be something doing for the poor
Turks. About a week ago the enemy were
driven out of their trenches by German offi-
cers and a charge was made at our trenches,
which are between 75yd and 150 yd from theirs.
They were shot down like sheep. It seemed
like murder to shoot them. We killed about
3000 and wounded about 7000, and only wish
they would make a charge about every second
night; then the existence of the Turk would
be wiped out for ever.
It Is amusing to see some brave Turk sneak-
ing up to our trenches in the dark to drop a
bomb among us. All of a sudden about 50
rifles will let go at him, and he drops like a
stone never to move again. The Turks do
some daring things.
The conditions under which we live are very
good. Of course, we get very tired at times,
but never too tired to face a charge from the
enemy. We have a three mile walk to the
beach to have a wash. It is funny to see the
lads swimming on the beach. On a hot day
it reminds one of Manly. We have good tucker;
fresh meat now and again, a good supply of
bacon, jam, and plenty of biscuits, with tea to
drink and an occasional tot of rum. I forgot
to mention that they have Issued us
plenty of new clothes, so we are really having
the best time we have had since enlisting last
August. The worst we had to put up with is
the stench from the enemy’s dead, and now
that has been done away with, ,as the Turks
asked for an armistice to bury their dead, and
the day granted was last Monday, Empire
Day.
A German submarine got amongst us on
Tuesday, and played a good part for the
enemy. Her periscope showed up just as we
were having dinner, about 12.30 p.m., and she
let go a torpedo, which struck H.M.S. Triumph
amidships, causing her to sink in less than
half an hour. About eight minutes after she
was hit, she turned turtle, and you could see
the bottom of her for about 20 minutes, when
she disappeared altogether. It was a most
cruel sight to see such a massive piece of work
—which probably cost about a milion pounds
minutes. P
he men who
go do
body


FRONT.
- ■ ♦*■»
DVANGE ALL ALONG THE LINE
THE COST OF SUCCESS.
A medical officer writes:
nO rDQM TO j- COLD STREAMS IN THE TRENCHES.
Ilw I lIVIIII I Ilia The following is taken from the letter of an
officer of the Coldstream Guards;
I to get a letter off yesterday; the
medical officer took it down for me. We have
hvl three or four men hit by stray bullets since
we came in on Tuesday night—there have been
a great many of them about, also shells and
trench mortars. I have been looking after
myself very carefully, and my back aches from
walking about with my back bent; but I man-
aged to get a lie down last night for a few
hours, and have had plenty of food, so am all
right. Eggs and bacon, bread and jam, and
lovely hot, muddy cocoa for breakfast, mutton
chops, potatoes, sauce, rice pudding, bread, jam,
cheese, whisky, and water for lunch, cake and
a meaicai omcer writes: tea, and then a cold meal at night. Some parts
We, are- frightfully busy, so don’t worry if 0 f our parapet were blown in by trench mor-
you only get a postcar d occasionally. The tars this afternoon, and it is not pleasant hav-
papers astound me! A small notice of “The i n S them so near. No one was hit, lam glad
British Capture a "Village! i his, in reality, ra j n(?( j again last night, just when I was
has been a terrible battle. The cases are & n watch from 12.30 to 4.30; but I put a
pouring in day and night. We have had 200 ground sheet over my shoulders, so kept dry
. , , . , except mv boots. I rested from 4.30 to 5.30
officers at least through our hands in less than tMg P morning) then had to go down to an-
-48 hours —every hospital full of men, and the other part of our company to stand to arms,
fighting still raging all along the front. I which we do for an hour at daybreak every
have been hard at it till midnight last night, morning. It has not rained all day, and there
and to-day from 1.30 a.m. till now—ll p.m.— if no wind, so it has been a comfortable day,
and more officers now just arriving. lam except for the. mud, which is awful. We will
very fit and well, however. The strikes at be relieved at 7 o’clock, and it is now 5, and
home make me despair of England's ever wak- must be oft to try and get some tea. One
ing up, and realising what is doing. The no- ot ’ our corporals, such a nice fellow, died in
tinAo an> annparin? jallv in the naners askinx about 10 minutes after being hit by a stiay
tices are appearing d aily in the papers asking
for more and more doctors, so I canot decide
otherwise than to go on. We have taken
large numbers of prisoners, and are advancing
all along the line. • The news is very good, but
the price is, terrible. We have scores of mor-
tally wounded cases in.
A BILLET IN A SHELLED TOWN.
j 4 private in the Royal Fusiliers writes:
| We are right in it now; billeted in a town
on the firing line, five men in a house, and all
quite comfortable. The place, of course, has
been bombarded; nearly all the inhabitants
have left, and what remain live in their cel-
lars. The house we are at had a shell through!
the back, so you can imagine the state it was
In when we took it over. The stove and oven
were blown out into the back yard, and the
windows were out. The owners had evidently
left in a great hurry, as the furniture, beds,
meals on the table, etc., were all in order.
They had, I should imagine, just taken a few
clothes, and run for it. It is heartbreaking
to see all these things. The little kiddies
photos, on the mantelpiece and baby’s clothes
all strewn about! 1 understood that Uhlans
have been billeted here. We managed to get
the fireplace back again, but rigged it up m
the best room, where we d o all our cooking
and sleep, beds, which are all in order,
are too wet to sleep in.
The remaining inhabitants of the town gave
us a fine reception when we came in. We had
just finished a very hard march of about 30
miles over awful roads, which are badly made
lof cobbles. Saw Sir John French and- the
Prince of Wales. Spent last night up in the
; trenches, which are only about a mile outside
the town. Set off at 10 p.m., loading sand-
bag'; on a railway truck, and bullets whizzing
past vour head. It being very foggy, we couldn’t
possibly see anybody or anything. Then the
heavy guns from behind would “let go.” The
roar of the shells after the firing is most weird,.
They seem to screech as they fly over your bead,
it’s funny to see men quite naturally bobbing
down, and ducking as a bullet screams past. Of
course, it’s all “pot luck” if you are hit. You
j may as well stay where you are—if your num-
ber’s up—it's up.
We reached home again about 3 o clock this
morning, dog tired. As I write I can distinctly
hear the continual firing of rifles, machine guns,
and artillery, and occasionally a whistle sounds
—cue long blast—which means that all men
must be kept indoors, stand ready, as aircraft
has been seen overhead. We are at a place
where, if you remember reading the papers
about it, our troops left the trenches on Christ-
mas Day, and exchanged cigarettes, etc., with
the Germans. I understand that we are ap-
posed to the Saxons, who I believe are quite
decent individuals, inasmuch as they do not
fight in the dirty manner of the Prussians—
not so keen on killing wounded or night attacks,
etc. I have seen that church, if you remem-
ber reading of same, where a German was fouud
concealed in the steeple, where he was discov-
ered signalling the range to his gunners. Well,
I suppose we shall have had a fair share of
It by the next time I write. We do two days
in the trenches and four off, so I shall have a
few hours at times. Hope you are all well.
am at present in the “pink.”
bullet at the entrance to our company support j
trench this morning. These things must hap- j
pen in a war like this. lam looking forward
to being in billets again to-night to have the j
peace and comfort of four safe walls and a
meal at a table, and a wash and a shave, and
especially to get my clothes and boots off.
FIGHTING THE TURKS.
A seaman of the Royal Navy writes from
Irmailia;
Of course you have not known our where-
abouts for some time, at least not definitely;
tut probably you guessed that we convoyed
all the Indian troops across the Indian Ocean.
Only once did we veer from that monotonous
job, and that was to go south to the Laccadive
Islands in search for the Emden, but we soon
returned to Bombay for a further batch of
troops. We did not have much excitement
during that time, but bad to keep our weather
eye lifted, as the enemy’s- ships were still at
large. We had heaps of work to do, getting
the ship re-ady for battle. After convoying,
we came to Port Said, just before Christmas,
where we remained until January 26, having
had a fairly good time at Christmas, and re-
ceiving the King’s Christmas card. There is
one thing which will always stand out in my
memory—that is a Christmas card with six
buttons and cotton attached which the Chris-
tian Endeavor sent to each man. Each card
had with it a letter from one of the C.E’s.
The one I had came from Hull. So you see
we have received a simple recognition from
good people, the majority of whom. I suppose,
are among the middle and poorer classes. «
We left Port Said on January 26 for Kartara
where some of the enemy were gathered. Our
soliders were retiring, the Turks advancing.
■We got in position in the Canal, and let drive,
starting with our small guns, and soon ranging
our heavies. You should have hear d us cheer
when we fired our first angry shell, but I don’t
think the Turks liked it very much, for they
retired behind the sand dunes, leaving about
300 dead, which our shrapnel and lyddite
caught. The same night a party got right
down to the Canal bank with guncotton, but
we spotted them, and they dropped cotton and
nipped. The next day—my birthday nothing
much took place, but on the 28th we got a call
to Ismailia, a few miles up the Canal, which
the Turks were trying to bombard, but their
shell fell short into Lake Timoah. We put a
few of our pills into them and they retired.
Then we went up further to Toussoum, where
the enemy had reached the banks and launched
pontoons to get across. This was a real go,
there were snipers all along the bank, but we
carefully kept under cover, except one man,
who, unfortunately, got hit, and soon died.
It* is, of coarse, the first time I have been
under fire; it was funny and exciting. Fancy
a battleship being fired on by rifles; it almost
seems absurd, although, if they ha£ known
where to aim, many of us wouttl have been put
out. I had my eye along my gun all the time,
'saw a few Turks behind an upturned boat, and
I I put a common shell into them; they did not
! snipe any more. After plenty of firing the
Turks drew off, and we had one man killed. Since
we returned to Ismailia to await a fresh
! attack, but instead our airmen tell us that the
enemy is in full retreat. None of the enemy
is within 20 miles of the Canal. Several Turks
surrendered, and we sent a party out into the
desert, and brought back many wounded Turks.
Now we a re looking forward to go to the Dar-
danelles. and bombard the forts there. Mean-
while we remain here, and keep a good look-out
for the return of tin? enemy.


ii'K
the left side of the head, and it was eight days
before they got the bullet out. I nearly went i
mad< for want of sleep; but am feeling grand 1
IT&OtS


Y.
LETTERS FROM THE FRONT.
NOT CHOCOLATE SOLDIERS.
“WHEN OUR FELLOWS WADE
IN.”
Private John Bryden Walker, son of Inspector
Walker, chief of Sydney’s detectives, wrote an
interesting letter a few days before he was and they even sent their own bread and cig-
....M i arettes ashore that we might not go shor**
Kiiu.Q in action. With shrapnel, machine guns, aeroplanes, and
"We are lying in a snug little harbor anxi- j submarines, one does not find this game mono-
ously waiting for the word to sail to fight the [.tosoufii W& feS*® aoi jliKi JkCk JohfiSOtt at Ok
Turks," he wrote. "We are keen to show the for a few days _the warships must have destroy-
world that we are not chocolate soldiers and ed it> We al j S i ncere i y hope so, anyway. I
are ail in great spirits. There will be some- don >t think this battle will last much longer,
thing doing when our fellows commence to Often during the day we hear the British and
wade in. There are 70 ships here crowded to French bombarding the Turks. lam getting
the scuppers with troops, while every kind of a u tbe papers all right. Thank for the
war machine is represented from the gigantic stack of papers he has sent me. They all come
Dreadnought to the wily, scarcely-visible, yet , j n handy and there are always dozens of !el-
wonderfully deadly submarine,. The scene is lows waiting for a loan of them,
an enthralling one, and probably unique in his-
tory. I’ve been intensely interested in that —,. .
marvellous naval creation, the Queen E ' iz .®-i BAGGED TEN SNIPERS,
beth, the boat which, of all others in the Brit- ?
ish Navy, will make history. Her big 15in i j ....
guns are both the wonder and admiration of all Lance . Corporal P . H . clapin, son of Mr. \
of us. The Lizzie Is just a love ana is W. E. Clapin, of Parliament House, Sydney, j
pride of the navy. .... who was wounded at the Dardanelles, writing j
"The tars have given us some . tnruuug f rom victoria Hospital, Alexandria, says;—
stories of the engagements they have been in j my best and have a credit balance. I
and particularly of the, bombardment of the j j C { t ten o{ them stiff before I left the field my-
Dardanelles, which must have been terrific, j Be jf alive, but badly wounded in the left arm.
«ome of the forts, which were supposed to be j jr was a terrible three days—they outnumbered
were simply blown out of exis- j U s, but we got them. For my pals I can say
e The shooting in many instances was j nothing. I never saw any of them, and can t
SSSnee of 10 to 12 miles. Some ; say where they are. Since being in hospital
done fro ® a . f l acc uracy of the modern 1 have had some excellent English surgeons’
idea of the \ onde J^. a^ aC t y he fact that the treatment. They have cut off two fingers and
big gun may be gamed from opened up the forearm, where it was shot right
gunners never saw the °W * .. billet> through. Also my wrist is broken, and I have
ling at, yet almost every a wound and a bullet in the upper part—will
I’ve met a lot of fellows who keep bullet as a souvenir. Did you get a
vice in the North Sea and have been tn g cable ‘Wounded, well?’ Our priest sent that
naval engagements in the Dardanelles. ® f or me . j haven’t got a penny. Good of him if
of them were on the Hawke and others on a*, bp d J d Expect they will send me home as
Irresistible -when those warAips met them goon as tbey can> but there is some talk of
doom. One of my uncles was serving on the England, but would rather come straigth home
Irresistible. l'v<} been trying to locate him, now j had three days under fire. The first
but it is like looking for a needle in a hay- Sunday we landed under fire. I had charge of
t twelve men, and we sheltered until the rest
tell vou of an exciting incident that arrived. Our company and part of B went
occu“e?on o!ir way here. Aftef we left Alex- with Colonel Braund to hold a position on the
andria an enemy submarine appeared, ileft flank. I was beside the Colonel all that
one cf our troopships, and ordered hovs C ay, and shot two snipers to his great delight,
get off or go under. About 100 of the boys w > were here tin Tues day, and I S»t thr .e
jumped from the big liner and I believe 60 of oto my credit , then A Company got the ■
them were drowned. The submarine fired thr*e ordej . tQ re mforce the firing line I soon gerta ,
torpedoes at the transport from a distance of i good pos ition, and got five more to m. ’ j
about 100 yards, but missed striking the ves- and tben they go t me. ’
sel. In the meantime the wireless operator
was frantically signalling for help. Just when MUSIC AT MEALS.
it looked as if the transport was at the mercy
of the enemy a grey hull was seen in the dis- —————
tance and a destroyer came tearing through the Sergeact L . Collins, of the machine gnu sea-
water at a terrific rate, the spray almost hid- ti(m of the 3rd Battalion, wounded at the mr
ing her from view. In fact, she was really dane]]es> writes to his mother, CoUw.
out of sight at times as she fairly buried her- g? Liverpoo i-road, Ashfleld, as fo * ' ’
self in the water. She was travelling at the motber; w « are having a really good time, also
rate of 40 miles an hour. When the submar- a hot onc . The enemy are always throwing
ine saw the destroyer coming she cleared away, sbrapne i shells at us, and no doubt about u ,
but the destroyer fairly flew at her and ran tbey are very hind. They always play mu .. ,
her ashore. with the shells when we are having our mea *.
"We’ve been busy signalling during the past but uttle we care about them 11 “ “
XS. "Tad STJS ZZ 2? «
t x trsrus z s ?
r t,rsr™ jzzssss-jz &
SR ■ a£££*££ SSSZZE&*
it 415,“ nt from the leach. The country Is »-»«•?« •“
old telegraph, with which we sat Sown and rip- mountains, so that we cannot use t e h
ped messages off in no time. From the emln-
ence on which we work the harbor presents a MORE DOCTORS NEEDED.
magnificent spectacle and at night the sight *
Sill STshipl ; CapUin cork, council Clerk at Casino is in
are it up and the silence of the night is broken receipt 0 f a letter from his nephew. Lieutenant
occasionally bv the sounding of a bugle or the Rupert cork, who at the time of writing was m
strains of the ’famous song -Tipperary,* sung as i command of a troop at Cairo. He visitedl a
onlv our lusty-lunged Australians can sing H. i arge number of wounded in Heliopolis Hoi-
Thl Greeks living here treat us splendidly. pita l, which he describes as a magnificent build*
There are thousands of French troops with us. ing 0 f 1800 rooms, and capable of accommodat-
H.idTuS e ofcX w wLc°; strr am
.wmwHi: More .Iter .eve did J -t -
wLrSi'd? .1“ keep J premiee. ! woupde “!
the men had a bayonet wound, which shows that
x it ei i ftl.tcm
POTTING NIGHT AND DAY.
Private T. J. Hyland, of Darlington, 4th Bat-
talion, writes as follows to a friend; —"Just
another note to say that I am still on top and
doing well. Things are just the same. We
are potting at one another night and day. 1
only wish they would attack again like last
week. They seem to be shy of coining too near
now. We still have the shrapnel bursting over
our heads at different times of the day. So
far I have bad a bit of wood knocked oft my
rifle and holes through my socks, waterproof
sheet, and overcoat. 01 course, I had none of
them on; they were outside my dug-out for an
airing. I had a good view of the going
down the other day. I was on the beach at
the time. All the boys were sorry as the
Jack Tars are the finest fellows in the world,
and they even sent their own bread and cig-
! arettes ashore that we might not go short*
; With shrapnel, machine guns, aeroplanes, and
j submarines, one does not find this game mono-
I toaous* We have not had Jack Johnson at a*
.for a few days—the warships must have destroy-
ed it. We all sincerely hope so, anyway. i
don’t think this battle will last much longer.
Often during the day we hear the British and
French bombarding the Turks. lam getting
all the papers all right. Thank for the
stack of papers he has sent me. They all co ne
in handy and there are always dozens of bel-
lows waiting for a loan of them. ,
Lance-Corporal P. H. Clapin, son of Mr. (
W. E. Clapin, of Parliament House, Sydney, j
who was wounded at the Dardanelles, writing j
from Victoria Hospital, Alexandria, says;—
‘T did my best and have a credit balance. I
left ten of them stiff before I left the field my-
self alive, but badly wounded in the left arm.
Iz was a terrible three days—they outnumbered
us, but we got them. For my pals I can say
nothing. I never saw any of them, and can't
say where they are. Since being in hospital
1 have had some excellent English surgeons’
treatment. They have cut off two fingers and
opened up the forearm, where it was shot right
through. Also my wrist is broken, and I have
a wound and a bullet in the upper part—will
keep bullet as a souvenir. Did you get a
cable ‘Wounded, well?’ Our priest sent that
for me. I haven’t got a penny. Good of him if
he did. Expect they will send me home as
soon as they can, but there is some talk of
England, but would rather come straigth home
now. I had three days under fire. The first
Sunday we landed under fire. I had charge of
twelve men, and we sheltered until the rest
arrived. Our company and part of B went
with Colonel Braund to hold a position on the
left flank. I was beside the Colonel all that; j
day, and shot two snipers to his great delight
We were here till Tuesday, and I got three
more to my credit, then A Company got the |
order to reinforce the firing line. I soon got a j
good position, and got five more to my credit, i
and then they got me.”
MUSIC AT MEALS.
tut/ UitU ’
the Turk does not appreciate fighting at close
quarters. They told him nearly all their wo’k
was with the bayonet, and almost every Turk
killed was bayoneted in the back. The doctors
and nurses "were doing great work, but there
ed for far i


TING IN TURKEY. HOW
ERS FROM AUSTRALIAN
I trenches to Mr. Cotterill, late headmaster
W »
w v • ill) lu-UD JivAUiUilObCVl Ui j
the Paddington Superior Public School, stated:— !
“Long before this reaches you you will, no ;
doubt, have received the sad news of your sop’s
death, and it is with the hope that it may bring
some little consolation to you in your great
bereavement that I send you this, telling how
a gallant soldier met his death. Our trenches
are within a few hundred yards of those of the
enemy, and it was necessary to get some es- j
timate of the force opposing us—a very danger- 1
ous mission. Volunteers were called for, and i
Sergeant Cotterill, with five companions, of-
fered to try to obtain the required information. |
It was no rash impulse that prompted him, for '
he and those with him knew well how danger-
ous was the task they had set out to do. Ever 1
thoughtful of others, he sent hack the youngest
of the party, as he thought he was too young
to take up such a risky job.
“The party left our trenches, and managed
to get along unobserved for some distance. Ser-
geant Cotterill then raised his head to ascer-
tain if he was moving in the right direction,
and almost immediately was struck by the bul-
let which killed him. Tt was a man’s death,’
met doing a man’s work, and Australia must
needs he proud of such as he. He was among
the best of our very fine N.C.O.’s, and his loss
is a great one to his regiment, where he held a
SOLDIERS.
WOUNDED ASK FOR TOBACCO.
Writing at sea, Corporal Frank Saunders, o,
Singleton, who is attached to the Army Service
Corps says:—“Here lam on my way back
fiom the Dardanelles, after seeing it all, tak-
ing the horses back, partly for exercise, and
partly because they were eating their heads
oft* on the troopship. It also appeared as U
jr would be some time before we could effect
a landing; firstly, on account of the ruggedness
of that part of Gallipoli we are operating, ana
partly on account of the fighting being practi-
cally confined to the near coast and shrapnel
and' shells falling from the enemy’s guns all
along the beach, and in the harbor of Gaha
Tepe. During one day about 20 big shells foil
in the harbor right in amongst our troopships,
and the explosion was deafening. The water
was thrown up hundreds of feet into the air,
but the most wonderful thing is that up to
now only one ship has been hit.
“Snipers are doing a lot of damage amongst
OllliJCliy 0,1 X.. ~ ~ w O* ***« * nuexe UU Jiflti rt
our mules and men. They start from one end high place for his soldierly ability, as well as
of the beach and work all along, and down , hi s manliness and gentlemanly ways. He was
gees anything in the road. We were living in • mo st gallantly brought back to the trenches
•dug-outs’ in the side of the hill, aud had or- by private Harold George, one of the scout-
ders to get under cover as soon as the shells j ng party, between wTiom and your son existed
began to fall. The beach could be thick with a very strong friendship, which, I understand,
men —unpacking barges, disembarking troops, dated pack to their old school days. You will
packing mules, etc.—and whiz! Bang bhrap- regret to hear that he was SO riously hurt be-
nel! Not a soul would be seen m less th fore roftcb | ng our trenches. 1 trust that when
two minutes. Laughing and jo,u g, ..y . time has softened the severity of your great
run for all the world like rabbits 11 utt their bereavement the knowledge of how Eric died
them bJ ' It e Wr Ul o d rde°“-and t Common° sensed W>h, to which may be added in the case® 1 of
Buck, you’re spotted,’ is a favorite phrase. It young soldiers of the King,
you don’t duck you find yourself on the way lias ™ cause for tear,’
over to the hospital ship. j . lt . wl fi l1 1 b « a great blessing when this unholy
“A rather painful incident happened on " al finished, and the Morlfi sees peace once
Monday. One of the chaplains was holding a more.
- . . . .... • ...i ~ « i ■ —■
burial service over three men, when a shell
about 9in dropped right in the grave. The
mourners, a fair number of beach and depot
men, soon”made for their uefets, fully expecting
the inevitable hail of shells. The chaplain
never flinched, but finished the service, and
then made no mistake about a nest for him-
If. Fortunately, the shell never burst.
NOT MEANT TO DROWN.
Private Sid Williams, writing to his parents
at Houston-road, Soulh Kensington, from Plix-
ton, England states: —“I am wounded; hut not
Voruunaieiy, me tueu uevci uum. _ . , T ... ~ , , •
i may not believe it. but it is a fact, seriously I was hit on the head with shrap-
iming down on stretchers, with, peVhaps, uel, but I am walking about, and enjoying my-
a shot away, or one who lias been lying self. 1 vas among the first lot to land at the
ivs wounded in some secluded spot, will Dardanelles, and was in the trenches nine days
ibly ask: ‘Got a fag (cigarette), cobber, before being put out ol action. We have lost
t a pipeful,’ and they smoke and joke all a lot of our fellows; but they made a name
ty down the mountain side, saying, ‘Not tor themselves. I, have seen some of the gas
rday afternoon soldier now. eh?’ or ‘Off cases from France, and also some awful sights—
few days’ light duty,’ and always ‘Good- sights too horrible to think of. I don’t think
obber, better luck than I had.’ my life is going to end by drowning. We
! funniest thing of the whole show, nearly had a shipwreck leaving Australia, and
i, is the troopship sailors. Somehow or the boat I came from the Dardanelles in came
they have sneaked ashore in dozens, into collision with an Italian steamer, and sank
dly put together a bit of some kind, and jt near Gibraltar. We had a very narrow
in the trendies enjoying the ghave, and if we had gone down about 600 ol
- our boys would have been drowned, as we coulc
not have got off.’’
WOUNDED IN BAYONET )
CHARGE. \
:e-Corporal ,1. B. Steuning, writing from
to his sister-in-ldtf, Mrs. South,
>seve!t. Hotel, corner Campbell and Eliza- j .
’’■inn ''. 'l..f’if??.’.. TfT’,7.l. _ Lieutenant D. E. Wilson, of the 4th Infantry
Dnrdanoncs with oSJ that are no, Bj-lgade, writes as follows to Mr. W. R. Harris,
aired. The majority of our men are there j Clarence-street,
1. The country is very mountainous and | The fighting has been very heavy, and yours
cult for horses, so in all probability we truly was unlucky enough to get a,bullet in him
i return very shortly with mules until we on Saturday, May 29, during a very heavy en-
into more level country when wo will use gagement. lam not seriously hurt, although
horses again. It is impossible to conceive it has tamed me down for a few weeks hence,
it war is like until one is amongst it. ; I must admit lam proud to say it was during
| re - is only one description for it, and that a bayonet charge by our boys I met with the
“Hell let loose.” Our company was split misfortune. One doesn't feel quite so bad off
among several troopships to be landed at when he gets hurt in a thing of this kind,
erent points. We had, I believe, the most Qur boys are simply marvellous. The spirit
cult landing. A small sandy beach, and they keep in it may be hard for you to believe,
Q Was like climbing North Head, only but nevertheless It is true our chaps were ac-
.n higher. The boys made a mighty good tually singing during the charge. I have taken
cf it, however, and carried all before part in three of these bloodthirsty actions since
®. ,ii the news that we get is what is landing, but the third, lam sorry to say, was
sed along the lino from one to the. other. too muc ii f or you will all be pleased to
OVTinnt fI, A ifAinr pN/il'i 1 Xf T , _
, w . , , . , . , , IUI -LUS. iUU Win Ctil UC W
xpeet to be returning very shortly to i earn that I have received my commission—am
•key, and the sooner the better. After hav- now lieutenant,
a taste of it one wants to get it over as "
as possible. There aro men here, scores
iem, with wives and five or six children
enlisted for no other reason but that they
dered it their duty. I am as fond of
as anyone, but there is unpleasant work
it is up to those who are able to


EDS OF THE DAR- ,
DANELLEB.
AUSTRALIAN SOLDI!-IS’
LETTERS.
WHAT OUR BOYS DID.
AMONG THE SHELLS.
ON THE FIRE CONTROL
STATION.
Shells were flying round Pte. Peter O’Rielly,
of Drummoyne, as he sat in a dug-out writing
tc his mother. His letter is as follows:
Our battery Is well dug in, and we give Mr.
Turk a good shaking up whenever he moves.
However, he is no mean foe, and fights very
bravely. At present lam with the O.C. at j
the observing station (a dug-out from which
all fire is controlled), and it is very interest-
ing. They shell us all day and night, but we
take no risks . The dash represents where ;
I just ducked my head under a parapet, as
our friends are busy again. They have three , j
kinds of shells, which they send over to us, ; j
and we have named them “Annie from Asia” (
(very big), and "Willie” (medium); also "Wil- J
lie’s little brother,” who annoys us consider-I
ably. ■ ■ t ' t -*■ 1
FIVE BULLETS THROUGH HIS
CLOTHES.
Mrs. Malone, of Orange, received a letter from
her son, Sergeant John Malone, of the A.M.C.,
iu which ho says:—
We have been fighting now continuously for
37 days, and have a prospect of going on for
another 137 days. Some of the bullets come
pretty close, but we don’t take any notice of
them now. Magazines are the most welcome
things you can send me; the last two ran the
gamut of the section. Reading matter is aw-
fully scarce, and we have arrived at the con-
clusion that advertisements form splendid
reading. Envelopes are in negligible quantities,
I paid 2s 6d for three yesterday. The climate
here is lovely—the most beautiful sunsets ima-
ginable; wild flowers in profusion, of most beau- j
tiful hues everywhere. All my little lot of
A.M.C. boys have so far escaped uninjured;
but our doctor was shot first morning. I’ve
had three bullets through my cap, one through
my pants, another through my puttees, and the
top of my boots. Don’t worry, as I want to see
, you as well as possible when Johnny comes
marching home.
“YOU CAN’T DO TOO MUCH FOR
THE WOUNDED.”
Captain E. Milne, Western Superintendent of
Railway Lines, Orange, has received a letter
from his son. Captain E. O. Milne, at the front,
which throws a vivid light on the urgency and
importance of the work in hand by our Austra-
lia Day workers. He says:—
"Tell all enquirers that not one ounce too
much can be done to ease the sufferings of our
lads who come hack from the front. Despite
the fact that our troops came away better pro-
vided, medically, perhaps, than any other army
ever created, we needed it all and more when
the pinch came. Stocks of materials were
cleared out at one stroke. A.M.C. men of all
grades and stages of experience performed won-
ders. The motor ambulances are a wonderful
aid, and our fleet here is not one car too big.
Those who cannot come are as surely firing a
shot at the Turk and the Hun by putting up
their money, no matter bow small, as those
who go into the trenches.”
INDIANS AND AUSTRALIAN;
Sergeant Marcus G. Faunce, who Is at the
front on the Headquarters Staff of the 6th Light
Horse, and is a son of the late Canon Faunce,
;St. Clement’s Church, Yass, writes as follows
to a Yass friend;—
“We have been in some very hot fighting, with
a few narrow escapes, but have pulled through
safe so far. We managed to get a swim in the
sea to-day, but it is dangerous, as the Turks
shell the beach if they see a lot in the water at
the same time. One of our boys got hit with
a shell, and it blew his head clean off. I was
sorry to leave my horse at Ma’adi. We have
none here, as they would ouly be in the way,
but]we hope to get them back again as we ad-
vance inland. Bert Wardrop, who was captain
of our football team in Sydney, was killed, poor
chap. Nearly all the team (Newtown) are
here with different lots. We are getting good
rough food, and are given three packets of cig-
arettes a week, so the Government are doing
their share in kepmg up smokes. Water and
food have to be carried up by men, and it is a
very steep climb. As well as being a fighter
a man has to be a pack mule, a navvy, and
various other things.
“We have no worry about the clothes we will
wear each day, as we have only the clothes we
Stand up in, and you can guess they are fairly
holey. Some of the costumes are very funny.
At the front all men are on the same level. The
society man, the lawyer, and the drover are all
mates, and everybody is “Jack” or “Tom,”
i whatever his first name may be. The officers
J have to rough it, too. They wear the some
clothes, or nearly so, and have the same rough
food. The Indians do the transport work with
mules. They evidence great liking for the
Australians, and call us ‘White Ghurkas,’ saying
!we are the same as them, only black. Different
i in color, but equal as fighters.”
A BROTHER’S SORROW.
Private Sydney John Holland writes as fol-
lows from the trenches at Gallipolli, to hia
mother and father, 51 Collins-street, Surry
Hills;—
We have just come out of one of the toughest
engagements since we landed here. Dear
mother and father, I hardly know how to break
the news to you of Archie’s death. I hardly
like touching the subject. I was in the rear
trenches called the supports, and we were
working hourly shifts. Archie and McKenna
v/ere on watch at the time and were about to
be relieved by Harris and myself, when a ter-
rible explosion occurred, followed immediately
by a number of bombs, and after that we were
fighting for hours and I had to retire as I
could hardly move a .limb in my body. Just
as I sat down I hoard someone say “A. Hol-
land,” I turned round and saw Archie on the
stretcher being carried out.
Well, dear mother and father, don’t break
down; the Major came to me and told me my
brother “died a brave soldier.” That put fresh
life into me and I feel quite myself again. By
permission I obtained his watch and Bible,
which was presented by the British and
Forbign Bible Society.
I am pleased to say we drove the enemy back,
and inflicted terrible losses, and also took
many prisoners. I receive your letters every
mail.
I saw poor Archie buried and it nearly broke
my heart to bo alone after being with him
all the time. I know how you will miss him
too, but bear up and pray and hope for the
best. I wrote and Uncle Jack. I have
received one letter from him and a photo of
Cousin Arthur in uniform.' I should think
there will be plenty enlist after hearing of
,us in action, and the sinking of the Lusitania,
which was cold blooded murder; the Austra-
lians here are going mad over it, giving tha
enemy no chance whenever they get a go at
them. We suffer more from shrapnel than any-
thing else.
BEFORE HE DIED. K
>• vj
SOLDIER’S LAST LETTER. \
Writing in "good spirits and perfect health”
three days before he was killed in action, Pri-
vate Archie Holland says:—
Both Sid and myself are right up to the mark
just now, and the only thing that is troubling
us, as well as everyone else, is that we don't
know where our next piece of paper and en-
velope is coming from.
Now that there is no danger in the Pacific I
think it only right that the troops should be
given a great send-off before leaving their
native land. The climate here is beautiful
and the weather good and that possibly ac-
counts for the fact that I am putting oa
weight.


other ships, convoyed by the cruisers Dart-'
mouth and Amethyst, and two destroyers /
;, of Bombala, now on a trans- f ■ UP i the Turkish coast as
rdanelles, writes under date to" dnw' th ’ making- dummy landings—just
to draw the enemy from one place to an-
seding to an anchorage prior troops would be towed
we were passing a warship * aad ’ an(i then brought on board
mouth and Amethvst, an
A'lni
ilst proceeding to an anchorage prior
landing we were passing a warship
• i » *****.'■• mi un uoarc
affa iu’ only to P rocee< t to some other spot tc
go through the same manoeuvres again
• “ You Ti c ° ul tf see the town of Maidos burn-
ing. It had been set on Are by the sheik
Sh l ps /, The Q ueen Elizabeth
Ja-nded three shells on a spot on the top oi
fv*}! 11 ,; , Th t ! Se sh , ells - 1 heard afterwards
shifted a battery of six guns into the middle
of next week.
“Every day we received shells from the
Goeben from across the Narrows, and she
was answered by the Queen Elizabeth or
body P ’ Wkh n ° to any-
“ The reports from the rifles and the ma-
chine guns put me in mind of an ironworks
—like so many men hitting iron with ham-
mers, and the machine guns sounded iust
like an automatic riveter.”
vhen she yelled out, ‘Get to hell out of that.’
md almost at the same time she fired two
2-inch guns right in front of us. I was
itanding looking over the rail right near her,
md I got a big shock. She had sighted a
lattery on shore, and these were about the
irst shells fired on our side.”
HOW TEE TROOPS ARE FED
The letter of Lance-Corporal Theo. Atkin-
ion, of the First Field Co., New Zealand En-
gineers, to his mother, Mrs. Atkinson, of Coo-
ree Bay, will be interesting to mothers, be-
;ause it gives details of the food which the
roops are receiving:
‘‘l have been under fire now continually for
7 days, and so far have escaped with nothi-
ng worse than a bullet graze across the
■hiimh
WOUNDED MAN’S APPEAL
•Corporal H. J. Bowers, Private S W
fSrSuSf Private N - H - Bowers, of the
irfth Battalion, were wounded at the Dar-
danolles, but have recovered and returned to
the firing line. Corporal Bowers, writing to
his father, Mr. Alfred Bowers, from the Alex-
andria Hospital, states:—“Look here, dad if
.there were only enough of us Australians’we
coula beat these Turks in a few months but
more - Wh y don’t thev come’ and
help? We will be well again in a few weeks.
Then we shall go back and hope to be iii
the march for Constantinople.”
good; that is, of course,
got up to us. For the
landing we lived on bis-
d water, but now com-
re all right. It is as follows:
Two biscuits, bacon, %-pint
: Cheese, 3oz. jam, 2 biscuits,
Potatoes, beef or stew, biscuits
you see there is nothing much
t as far as food goes.
ie old British section arc killed
Our landing was a thrilling
'he Australians were great,
valley now on every ridge but
this the Turks lie and snipe
ey. They get the range of a
t, and anyone who goes past it
LIVING UNDERGROUND
seven
Corporal Cecil Grice to his parents in Syd-
ney:—
“I have been underground, living like a
rabbit in a burrow for three weeks and
thankful to God that I am alive—not a wash
a shave, or my boots off! The fire of the
enemy was so heavy that we or they are
unable to bury the dead. The stench is
awful at times. Whilst I am writing this
the shrapnel is bursting overhead. We are
all wondering when it will cease to enable
the troops to look over the parapets of the
trenches. A small instrument called the
periscope is used. I was looking through
this last week, and had the misfortune to
receive a bullet wound on the finger. I am
all right, and was not put out of action.
Life in the trenches is very monotonous.”
imes, each time luckily, and the eighth time
nother man followed me. Halfway along
took it into my head to duck, and only just
i time. A bullet shrieked over my head
nd went right into the middle of the other
hap’s stomach. Bad luck, of course.
“The hottest corner I’ve been in was last
unday week, -when we had to accompany
ie infantry in an attack on a ridge. The
urks were in greater force than was thought
ad poured in a very hot rifle fire. Still, we
ad ot go on, and eventually got into the fir-
ig line. We were under a cross fire, so no
>ver was obtainable. I sat down to have a
°k round, and three bullets struck the bank
ae at the side of each ear, and one just over
y head. Just after this my senior corporal
as shot talking to me, the bullet passing
rer my neck into his, and 13 opt of 20 were
ut out of action in five minutes.”
TRENCHES 30 YARDS APART
Staff-sergeant Stan Stephenson, of ?nd
Company, Army Service Corps, at the Dar-
danelles, to his brother. Sergeant Joe Ste-
phenson, of Dulwich Hill, dated May 23-
“We are at last given a respite, after 29
days hard fighting. The Turks have been
for four days endeavoring to get an armis-
tice to bury their dead, of which there
are tens of thousands between our
trenches, which in places are only 30 yards
apart. In some cases they are using bodies
as a barricada The stench is terrible. They
endeavored tw-ice during the last week to
storm our position at night time, and we
mowed them down. On one night their
casualties were 7000. I will, if luckv, know
how to appreciate a holiday after this. We
arc enjoying an armistice of nine hours,
from 7 o’clock this morning till 4 o’clock
this afternoon—which is heaven.
“General Bird wood has been wounded
in the head. Our supply officer, Major '
Young, was wounded, and also Captain i
Tommy MiHner.”
Private H. C. Brennan, who was in
landing with the Third Brigade, writing
Sydney friend, says:—
“The Turks are brave men, and ker
going very hard for the first four or
days, but they haven’t got a chance
our boys. We dug them out of the hills
hollows like periwinkles out of their s'
“We are well catered for here, and tl
are going our way. The lads are more
tented than they would be if they were
in their little back rooms.”
ups were
agains
all thi
• ear.


LETTERS FROM SOLDIE
Ifftfo
I
GOOD WORK BY MACHINE GUNS
D.O.M. FOR POLICEMAN
e writes. —
petitionary Force, N.E. France, Private Harrie Sykes, who is a member of
I have rejoined at a time when a machine-gun section attached to the 4th
teen hummin- Nisrht and day battalion, Ist Infantry Brigade, has written,
3ten humming. .\igtn anuua, under date May 23, from the Dardanelles to
lias been almost incessant, a rom j his father, Superintendent Sykes, head of the
eft, April 29, till this morning Eastern Police Division. He says:—
id my boots off. But work, ray “It is now four weeks since we landed. We
re is no rest at all, and the> are working* hard improving our positions and
blazes. The smell bombs are ;| making our dug-outs as comfortable as pos-
gasp like a chicken with the ; sible. We are becoming quite used to trench
from the fumes of the shells. life. There is a plentiful supply of hard
v a new use for cholera belts, , biscuits, tinned beef, cheese, and Jam. We
dh wads’ to breathe through, | also have boiled potatoes and bully-beef stew.
!i We are living pretty well
We are in a battalion in the ; “Most of the fighting during the last few
in, but ray company is in re- j days has been between the artillery on both
it shelled from three sides very X av P raged rather _fiercely.
Thing and any sized machines. , hij . f to have developed a bad
ing Sin. guns on us this morning bab * ° r T f shells at ’f durm & meal
success. [am perfectly filthy, ‘ “mnr consequently become quite a
n lack of sleep, but very fit. of dfrt wA ? t Ur n° R P° iled u< by
a.—The battle which is raging z|n°- nf thp ?hpii'o often hear the whiz-
bluntly, hell’s delight. I have t mS® a % th ® y , pas f ° ° Ur heads
ir imagined anything quite like their wav to whpr/n 3 m the Narrows on
lent we are subjected to. This tioned tua n • ar . h a ttleships are sta-
iches were blown a wav and tloned : The navy is doing great work. The
icnts y> ere mown awaj, a a warships have been firing shells across the
an awful mess. I am a terrible ° »ueiis across me
>n and lon- for a wash let pemnsula to the Turkish forts facing the
Things seem to be going all IStlrraws ’ The Turks hav e so far not done
imn„s set m to oe going an any damage to our ships or transnorts
of the pressure, and a message .. w ° h i„ V i
the Commander-in-Chief this apna-el is not smi-pp looked after. Wearing
iy the success of the army j eyerv chance von o-ot S w d a ang newspapers
ue to the gallantry of the ! w ha Tthe ivdnev nfnlv. ® aU Want *° read
ing the German attacks, which ,w e were inftlff fX® S£ Z' nS ab ° Ut US ’
By George! this is a hot cor- i had publisher? J terday that the Turks
naa Pnoiished a report that we had been
i swept into the sea.
1 . Our fnachine-gun section is doing famous-
THAT SHOT HIM | snatch^ 6 ?nX e A be .- n ™ entioned twice in de-
and Acting-Sergeant George Brain
i a policeman) has been recommended
+ . „ .n . ' x evuiimienueu
who was m , the Distinguished Conduct Medal. The
poll is now R” ade matters rather sultry with us a
Alexandria, struck The SOm % 4 ’ 7 shells ’ ° ne
o the firing I oA i X x ° v ® rhead cover of our gun, but
0 the firing failed to explode. It then struck the side of
writes to X® Plt -. and after golngr through Gribble’s
“l oahl a ! ’-o Pi^ Ced ? n 18 ' inch wall and fel l into
'ori s didn't 5 ?, k nson s dug-out, striking Laurie
show 'their £® H and br ® his arm. At the time there
they threw S m Were f ° Ur ° fficers and the same number
ut and I i shAi? v, m .° Ur P !t ’ 80 11 was fo rtunate the
at’s an 1 I J”? not explode ’ Another shell lodged in
onus snent 1 ~ l b ° UrS later, but it also failed to
v hostfital Th ® Turks sent us four shelis
L h « P » %u le we were having breakfast this morning.
1 anatomy! |SS flvtfabSuf ° Ur ' ren ° heS and sent tha
f j puiSdX TmIViV
r the finng was in a position to see a good deal more
chdn t even than most of our chaps. After the blttlTthl
to a single ground round our trenches was littered with
opportunity dead Turks. The ‘bang-oh’ lasted from Tust
;o have an after midnight till 7 o’clock ” 3
that shot
near rela- " “
HIS WEEKLY WASH
i ing after the fight you could see dead Turks
I iT *l g i m f T ront of our trenches every way you
i looked. I fired 200 rounds in half an ho™
that night. It was dark. All you could see
was. smoke and flames from the rifles and
machine-guns. The Australians have got a
f°° d pos , iUo , n h cr°. an d it will take more
than 1 urks to shift us out of it- I have had
! , VerJ l narrow escapes. I had an 8-inch 1
| shell burst about 10 yards in front of me It
| sen t earth all over me without hurting‘me
Another day a shell hit about one yard from
| feet, and blew the dirt on me. I have
| had three of my mates shot beside me in one
morning E. Pearson, from Newtown,! has
had a lot of War Crys sent to him. He is
| gaj , n s f° lend them, to mo.
| ‘‘ We haVe & ot things going very good here
We are pretty comfortable living in our
r trenches and dug-outs. We are being issued
senp new clothing and boots, so we will
feel a little cleaner- I had my weekly wash
this morning. I have a wash once a week
here. I have not had a shave for a month
now, so you would not know me if you saw
me.
“I saw our seaplanes chase three of the
German ’planes the other day. They flew
right over our heads.”






STACKS OF DEAD
SOLDIERS’ LETTERS 1
Captain O'Gorman, , veterinary officer, 1st
|
Field Artillery, writes to his wife at Manly
from Gahiroii under date May 21:—
“THE EXTREME OF MIRTH” i
“At first we had a very bad time' of it. but
now our troops have made their positions
more secure. The other night they sent us
a note giving us till midnight to get off or
COVERING UP TRAGEDY
thcv would drive us into the sea, and they
—
evidently thought they could do it. They
brought un strong reinforcements, and made
Major H. V. Vernon, of the 1st Ligh
a very determined attack at night, which
j Florse, writes under date May 24, and heads
i utterly failed—Our chaps cut them to pieces.
his letter, “We MUST have more and more
| There were stacks of dead all over the place.
of the Sock Brigade from Sydney”:—
j “To-day I am sitting in our very comfort-
They made another attempt the following
: afternoon, which again failed, and again they
lost heavily. The Australians and N'ew Zea-
! able dug-out, with the rain dropping dowr
land boys have fought splendidly, anti quite
! various parts of the neck—as the dug-out is
upheld all the traditions of the British army,
and the navy have a great admiration for
j in a watercourse, witfc the higher side some
them, which is considered a very high com-
12ft. above me, it is oeing -watched pretty
pliment. General Girdwood says he cannot
| closely for a rush of water.
tpeak too highly of the splendid courage and
“To-day, 24th, is a holiday. After many
I endurance shown under the very trying cir-
days’ parleying the Turks have been grantee
in all his oast experiences, which include
nimj hours’ armistice in which to bury their
the hard struggles of the Russo-Japanese
campaign, he has never seen more devoted
dead, of which there are many hundreds (our
official rag totals 2000) piled up within easy
gallantry displayed than that which has
characterised their efforts during the past
few days. . . .
“We are all living in holes dug in the side
of the hills like rabbits, and whenever the
smell distance of our trenches. Precautions
are being taken to find out or be prepared
for their real reason for an armistice. This
week we are recruiting our health in the
leaden air of the valley. Almost sheer above
us rise the various hill forts that we hold,
dominated in one place by' the enemy, who
pour down it all day and night a shower of
shells get close we rush into our burrows,
just like they do when they hear a gun go
! off.”
bullets on, our roads and bivouacs. My dress
is nail-studded boots, puttees, knickerbockers
EIGHT HUNDRED PRISONERS
or shorts, belt, shirt, and cap. Even in this !
light rig-out the sweat pours off us in climb- !
ing up the declivities, or swarming doubled i
The following are extracts from a letter
written by Arthur Branighan, who is a mem-
ber of the Red Cross on board a steamer at
Lemnos Island: —
“We Red Cross fellows had a hard time. {
The Turks as soon as they see one they
would shoot at him; it was nothing to see
up through traversed or winding trenches,
narrow enough to just get through with the
loss of elbow or coat material
j
“Most of our men at present in this rest-
cure are digging-in parties—four hours on
and eight off filling sandbags, carrying
stores and ammunition from the beach, and
digging holes for those That get blown out
Red Cross men dead and wounded. For in-
stance, we had a dressing station on the
beach, with wounded men outside and Red
Cross men attending them. The Turks let
go at us with shrapnel, bombs, and bullets.
The boat I am on was full with wounded in
We had none hit yesterday—a record, thank
goodness—owing to a little more care being
taken the sniping not quite so accurate.
Yesterday I handed over the regiment for
a time to Major Reid, and went with Cap-
tain Lawry and Clark down to the beach for
a swim. Met several friends in several
garbs on the way down. The beach is now
wonderful—although every day thev are
shelled and men get killed, the place is alive
with men carrying stores, sorting out equin-
ment and arms gathered in the hills and
gullies from the dead, sailors off the ships
Indians With mules going to and fro, Turk-
ish prisoners allowed to bathe as a necessity
just Manly', with the exception of the
;rr t Sidf : Tbere is only a narrow/ strip
some 40ft. wide cf stones, and then the hills
We had a splendid swim—no fear of
sharks, sandy bottom, and felt much cleaner
As we are short of water here we are not
two hours, so you can imagine what the fire
was like. The wounds on some of these poor
fellows were terrible; it would make you cry
On board we had close on 10C0 wounded, and
if you heard the cry of them from pain vou
would pity them, bearing it all'for their King
and country. We got orders to sail to Alex-
andria, and on arrival there we put 260 of
them off, and all the others had to go to
Malta on account of there being no more
room at Alexandria, Malta is a fine place-
we there two days, and then pro-
ceeded to Lemnos Island to get orders We
are still in the bay. We have 800 prisoners
(lurks) doing work, making roads, &c.”
RECKLESS GALLANTRY
Lieutenant norace P . Brown, attached to
. 2nd Battalion, writing from the
atItaimor? to his moths.
vela'll mi fl i’ hting of our men came as a re-
cavh mr, 1 1 ex P e oted much, but they
at the Tnri Th ® y f airly, hurled themselves
3fflce h rs lr w?re U toerGerman
man led about to‘%mV lnd brave - One Ger-
eft flank; TT™ & on our
Water Police) wafted Jfl M L cock (Newcastle
/ards from the j 11 he was about 20
lowled hta over "S* , ?A st - a "“ ‘Ion
returned. The 2nd tLVS• entei 'Pri.sing
S.ZZ %
nfUle repeated attemptV°to break
#
allowed to wash, but have sufficient for
I
i
,t
i
r
a^- and . teeth - There should be more
wmwu’ Th , e valley is not echoing
to day with the crack and rattle of rifle fire
stiflnes^ bS rt’ and W r are ffoing deaf with th e
a' nph nti ‘ S / S ° flmny ’ and we still shout
the Sr™e ot-mw" " P the tra * edles
“dark looks after me well. Yesterday he
some potatoes, and when asked how he
was cooking them said, ’Frying and boiling
appeared 1 to time.' On inspection thif
appeared to be happening, and they were
'IrHved°°hnf Ii^ e . we11 - Fresh beef has
armed, but firewood is non est—only broken
b “Mv a i nd gF * en twifirs from the scrub.
of abou 6to 1 '\v°r- at - a11 Sore ’ but an ar ®a
frnm tSo t by 51n - 18 Purple and green
from the blow—on the calf. Most of us are
of U a e vnnn/ e e C r mended the extreme bmvery
of a young fellow called Crisp, who at ev'
treme peril volunteered to save a wounded
man Bing almost vertical on a hill across i
a Turkis?Trem4i an if°ter V a?i ho
"not at^
Gnrl cm Lv r. , * v U P> -*■ F1S6 at o.oO a. Ill
loin/ When SLS'k at 4 ', 3 » if
low., all dafaM rtnht andfoU I™ 8 Up an ’ 1
m the flat whenever I could m2 mmutes
1U M d i ed ‘%r° f lucky escapes” ° ar °
Major Vernon concludes his letter:- i
come S b .r’,UUnc A .ro‘^
njn


-QJapjJ
•/jj' 6 '




■ ft' ?
■ this, but the trouble
vho drive them to at-
-3 get within three or
start to retreat the
leir machine-guns on
What bothers
Knowing the country
3 find. They are us-
pers, My wound is


Os \ .




E TURK.
at 4 o’e:
morning we
■2s hiC unHllUinu MIL iuhh.
ing party in a crowd of boats, and essayed a
landing after our ships had dropped a few shell
in various directions. We found no opposition,,
so returned to our ships in time for breakfast.
While hanging round, the commander of one of
the torpedo boat destroyers (T.8.D.), told us
the New Zeuianders had got their howitzers
ashore at Gaba Tepe, and were in action. We
are about to scamper back there now, I ex-
pect.
The fight went on right through Sunday and
Sunday night, and Monday without a break. It
ieaeed off at times during Monday night, but was
more vigorous from an artillery point of view on
Tuesday morning. Our guns, as I said, were
getting very busy indeed when we left yester-
day. Our ships, too, were firing more and hea-
vier shells than previously, but this merely
went to counteract the artillery that the Turks
h it d brought up overnight. fheir resistance
is likely to grow. We are enjoying the dress
circle view from the bay, but we are chafing to
get ashore to do our '‘whack.” There should
be ample chances for our artillery and other
mounted troops.
There have been a lot of thrilling moments
/ 2
SHINE GUNS BUSY.
STRALIAN OFFICER'S
EXPERIENCE.
mant Oswald B. J. Steel, in a letter
wife, describes the scene off the coast
:poli, when the Australians landed, ana
ie was waiting to land with his field
and excited, because we are
ly here at it, on the west side of the
)11 Peninsula. No doubt, you will know
about the result of to-day’s fight (which
beginning of a big one) than we do, for
iws will be sent on. But we have had
tty hot, indeed. Our infantry landed a
ng force before daylight, and things very
r o t busy? They had a difficult, steep,
i hill to get up; but succeeded in get-
ae enemy out of the way in a magnificent
a. The din of machine guns is almost
ant, and apparently every Inch of the
iis hotly contested. But our boys have
good already, and the first boatload of
half a dozen wounded came past us be-
reakfast, all waving, and looking cheer-
i spite of wounds, mostly in the arm,
er, and hand. We heard that the infantry
ed three Knapp guns before breakfast,
ring increased rapidly after that until
during the past few days, but one of the moat
thrilling was the shelling of what appeared to
us from the ship like a mud hut at the foot of
a little sand hill. The warships let drive
at it, and soon our Red Cross workers were
gent along to collect what was left. They were
promptly set on by a machine gun in the fort
(for that is what it was), and just as promptly
was the place opened on again, and smashed to
bits. This lime the A.M.C. was not fired on,
and they collected the bits of seventeen wound-
ed Turks, besides their killed. The Turkish
casualties are apparently very heavy indeed,
although we can get no definite news Machine
guns are very busy indeed on both sides —sur-
prisingly busy for such fighting.
We made another feint, which cainc off in the
afternoon without drawing fire at all, but this
afternoon we went back to the noted Bulair
lines, and on taking a few boatloads ashore we
were promptly opened on by guns in or near
old Port Napoleon. Needless to say, we found
what we wished to know, and have pushed off
again very quickly indeed to rejoin our ships
no casualties at all. The Turks used two
guns with black powder, and put their position
away, but they appeared only field guns. At
any rate, we hope the ‘‘Cook’s Tour” of the
Gulf is not repeated again, for we know the geo-
graphy of the place pretty well by this time.
We got news this afternoon again that our
men were still progressing well, so we may
get ashore very soon now. If they have gone
as far as we have heard, there should be plenty
of room for our guns on the hill now, and if
so we will be able to repay their presents
with pretty high rate of interest thrown in
very voluntarily.
Things are busy again to-night with a ven-
geance.- It has been a quieter day, but the
pyrotechnics commenced .again this evening,
and our warships were busier than ever. The
higher parts of the crest from the left flank
of our trenches to the summit of the now
famous Hill 971 has been a veritable hell for
over two hours as a result of our warships
fire. It looks as though our men'were going
to assemble right away, as the gun fire has
suddenly ceased.
afternoon.
enemy’s artillery paid our boats very
come attention this evening, and the
with one of our brigade’s bat-
on board, was presented with a shell
ander the bows. Then we came in for
persistent attention, and a beautiful group
•ee just landed in front of us. Tne bat-
•esponsible for the bouquets' then switch-
ver, and the , which carried a
our ‘‘brass hats” and ‘‘gorget patches,”
i couple passed to her. Two or three
came between her and us, and the skipper
;d to go out a bit, and spoil their shoot-
He was not the only one vno decided
it way. My feelings were probably those
my others, and I must admit I did not
omfortable; but still I was strangely in-
ed in the fall of the big slut, and the
-aterspouts they sent up. It was quite
mining to hoar our officers’ remarks, and
tforts made to cover their feelings. Se-
actually thought it ‘‘great fun’‘(so they
and we had no means of proving that
riifl not 1
a continuation of the ‘‘Cook’s
The wild-cat stories I may have pitched In
this letter are due to hearsay, because we
cannot get authentic news very often. Lorct
Kitchener, however, has sent an extremely fine
message, admiring our men and deploring our
heavy casualties. Sir lan Hamilton is “wildly
delighted” at the wonderful dash our 4 ust;ra '
lians have displayed. Their spirit is heroic.
One batch of 90 men were lost officially for
hours. Eventually the whole "90 marched
(or limped, etc.) to the dressing station on the
beach in fours, all cheering and smiling, and
all wounded. That is a small instance of
the dash, spirit, and endurance shown by our
Australians. I could quote scores of similar
cades- A lad was carrying ammunition for
our guns on the hill. He was one of many
who were doing likewise, and they had to pass
, through a leaden-hail-swept zone. He went
on till all at once he uttered a yell, and jumped,
and expressed his opinion in a forcible man-
ner, that the “blighters” had “got him.” His
bcot was cut, so he limped down to have the
foot attended to. On taking off his boot and
seek he noticed that a toe was hit, and re-
marked that that corn would ndyer worry him
again, at any rate. •
i Walking along past the wounded one hears
I no grumbling except at the hard luck which
has taken them out of the firing line tempor-
arily even. They joke at one another, with
“Hullo, Whiskers! So they got you, too!”
One poor fellow, whose hand was badly smash-
ed by an explosive bullet, was sitting up after
having it amputated, and saw a gun being
hauled ashore, and said to the officer in charge,
“For God’s sake, sir, get it up there quick;
we want it there . . • bad.” These are
very few of innumerable instances of the kind.
Our casualties to date are 5000, including
several very prominent officers kilted (mostly
infantry). The majority are only slightly
wounded, and will be busy again very soon-
Artillery casualties are very slight so far, tno
Indian mountain battery coming off worst. _




tm-
trench, and then opened a rapid fire at fivi
yards and skittled them. What was ’eft o
them threw their gears away and ran fo
their lives, but very few got back. It is i
great thing to be in a bayonet charge, espe
cially when the enemy run from you. Ou
chaps are wonderfully brave, and some hav
been mentioned for orders.”
n inch of skin off my chest,
t me, only frightened me
is a lovely sensation when
st. You ought to come,
through all right. After
am not to be shot. You
at it is like until you see
“OH, THE LANGUAGE ”
■Lieutenant ft H. M. Gumming, D Com-
pany, 16th Battalion, writes:
‘The Indians here have an intense admir-
ation for Australians. One, explaining ti
me the difference between the English anc
Australians, said; ‘Shrapnel come along
Englishmen duck, get in dugout. Austra-
lian turn round, and say, “Who the hel
threw That thing!” '
“An English officer was heard to remark
‘Finest soldiers in the world, but oh! tin
language.’ ”
NO TIME FOR EATING
Private Pl, Williams, writing to a Temon
friend - —
“I was in the trenches 126 hours betore :
was relieved. For the first two days all !
had was half a bottle of water, and somi
ha'f-dozen biscuits, but we never though
of eating. We had no time for it. My ey<
went crook on me after the third afternoon
I lost the sight of it so much that I nearly
shot two of my mates. One unfortunat
fellow made a rush to get into the trend
alongside of me, but he was shot in tin
stomach. You could put your two fists inti
the hole it made.”
FIGHTING POLICEMEN
Constable Dudley, who, before leaving for
the front, was connected with the clerical
if the Coast Hospi branch at Police Headquarters, under Super-
ved word from her intendent Tait, the head of the metropolitan
inman of the Ist 'Police, has written to Constable Mackay, also
ationed at the San of Police Headquarters. The letter is dated
ndria. The letter June 12, and was forwarded from the General
Hospital, Alexandria,
een pretty heavy, “Well, Mac, I am still above ground. The
men than we. Our lads acquitted themselves splendidly in their
s. I saw a fort- initiation into the great struggle. They
lospital ship, after covered themselves with glory in the first
he wounded we had great plunge, with everything against them,
We have Austra- viz., conditions, weight of numbers, &c., &c.
Iritishers, Indians. I must say lam pretty proud I happened to
•ounded. They all be one of them. We have felt the strain of
it the Indians are hard times on more than one occasion, and
They are wonder•• have put up with a lot. Never mind, we
as patients. This are fighting for the good old flag, and if we
h 1100 beds, but at get through we’ll be glad to return to God’s
,h wounded Austra- own country—Australia.
“Many of the boys went under, and ‘yours
ives of India- Bri- truly’ nearly happened to be one of them. I
a Egypt are assist- was shot through the leg anid the side of
e wounded at our the right arm during the bayonet charge on
similar institutions, the first day. but I did not trouble about
The wounded speak the wounds, as I thought they were only
raise regarding the slight. After a couple of days spell I was
to work under fire. in the thick of it again. All went well with
badly wounded.” m e until another charge on the night of
—■ May SO, when we put up a bold and success-
._ _ n/i-rocsT-Mri ful felcl for another important position. In
AKXi IViiooliN u the struggle I got in the way of one of the
enemy’s machine-guns, and fell, badly
knocked. I got a bullet through the chest
, of the Fourth just below the collar-bone, but what put the
s front as a private, Jack Johnson knock on me was a bullet I re-
rom the firing line, ceived in the forehead, above the nose. I can
assure you it was a dandy punch. As luck
and have not had a would have it, I had my head bent forward
iugh the last couple while making the charge. If not, I think the
easier. For nearly bullet would have entered my brain and I
at all, but had to would have been no more. As it hapipened,
y to repel attacks, the lead went downwards, at the back of
urselves in for pro- my eyes, and stayed there. I have been un-
i fire. The second der the X-rays, and the bullet was located
i a great charge in in the centre of my head in a line with my
Police
ie heat here is frightful, but the ho
are comfortable, and the people
indria ate very kind to us. Every d£
bring us fruit, cakes, and sweets,
will be many weeks before I get ba<
e firing line again, and by that time


ajf'H


2.7// 6:
neen. it 10 adtiuict'-iui j *** *, T
eneral has realised the difficulty troops were being landed Just as that mes-
and expressed his boundless ap- sage was finished, a warship lifted that, house
some 30 feet in the air, the remains catching ;
ly I have been hit four times, fire. During our stay at Gabatepe it was :
had countless narrow escapes. one continual rain of shells and bombs, night
ng I had just dressed a man’s attacks, counter-attacks and bayonet charges.
and was lifting him on to a Night and day our ships trembled from the
vhen a sniper’s bullet whizzed discharge of heavy guns. Cape Helles was 1
~m, drew blood on three knuckles, a repetition of Gabatepe. The authorities
I the patient’s neck, fortunately would not let us land a, horse. They are
him. I was also hit in the ribs using all mules there. During the sth, 6th,
mage, whilst shrapnel failed to and 7th we remained off the cape. Battle-
ay haversack and mess tin. I ships on both sides of the cape kept up an
m and confident that everything ! intermittent fire day and night. The British
ut well. You needn’t worry a got two 60-pounders mounted on the point,
: and got at it- At 11 a,m., on the Bth, a great
lalns are fine workers in all di- artillery duel took place for two hours. Our
Te are splendidly fed, each day, troops made an advance toward a large vil-
l with biscuits, jam, beef, bacon, lage called Krithia. It was a great sight, but
ar, and occasionally tinned soup, nothing to what followed. The battle raged
p-top. The commissariat does all day, the incessant roar of guns and rifles
; War Office.” and machine guns was deafening. At 4 p.m.
our troops retired, followed by thousands of
nt? T-m? WOTTNTWra Turks, who occupied the vilalge in great num-
UH IJtliii WUUJNJJUjjJ bers, and then, at 4.30 p.m.. it happened. Well,
lt baffles description. It started shortly after
three of our seaplanes went up. The Eliza-
S. Yule, of the First Brigade, to beth fired a ranger, which landed squarely in
t Carlton:— the village. Instantly our ship began to
weeks I happened to stop ‘one.’ tremble with the vibration. Seven battle-
of fact, I did not stop it, it went ships fired broadsides, batteries on shore
st Saturday morning, about 2.30, which had till then been silent opened up—it
•e sent out to smash a machine- was a sight which I shaJl never forget. The
s enfilading some trenches which village seemed to rise in the air and disappear
*alanders had just captured. It in a cloud of smoke and flame. Bursting
snch about 80 yards in front of
We were out of our french and
fore they knew it, and had the
r with several Turks, who were
i they replied. In the scuffle I
igh some overhead cover into the
aoh. I must have frightened
aad time to scramble out again
i I went hi.
tting up J felt a needle in my
came to retire. We made a run
and I am bio wed if they
shells, flying shrapnel, and debris of all kinds
hid the view for a width of two miles. The
12-inch and 15-inch shells seemed to lift acres
of ground 100 feet in the air, taking whole
houses up with it. We left on the 12th for
Alexandria, arrived on the 14th. disembarked
. horses, and are now at No. 3 Rest Camp.”
SHOT THROUGH WATER BOTTLE
From Corporal W. B. Browne, at the Cita-
del Convalescent Hospital, Egypt, to his
brother, Mr. 11. Browne, at Haberfield:—




The Turkish ‘ cut them to bits. Everyone who tell!
ir addresses to visit them his story says it was a massacre. ThU
chaps had to hito their j has made Australia for always, and I
it" them saying they , have been out out of It. for anything. Ant
ore the war finished. They
ously, end then we proceeded
each other. We have been
o-morrow, constantly under
wed halt a bottle of water a
re pint. It is hot In the
he day, and we are often
i our bodies, much less our
he question. Now and then
of water and wash my face
■ mefes tin. That means a
a drink of water.
the Australian can do anything when he wants
to Our fallows aren’t BRAVE —they don’t
Everyone wfiwtells his story says it was a mas*
sacre. This has made Australia for always,
and I wouldn’t have been out of it for anything.
And the Australian can do anything when he
wants to. Our fellows aren’t brave —they don’t
even know what fear is—and they.don’t take
nearly enough care of themselves. They are
like a lot of kids —but they’ll do anything and
work like horses. In camp in Egypt they
were always growling about something, but
in and . now every man is doing his Utmost, and the;
it for men w r ho in peace time
form and gain social and other
then let the other fellow do
Surely men like‘myself have
ran single men would have to.
i are grumblers out here,
cheerier, jollier set of men.We
; of fun in the trenches when
ng out the goods’ or receiving
we. do want more Australian
r and help us finish this job.”
LUST OF KILLING.
-ge H. Dorman, of the 4th Bat-
to his mother from Victoria Red
il, Stretford, Manchester, fie-
lding at Gallipoli, where he was
irm. He concludes: —”1 wish I
a more graphic account, but for
' knew what was going on. All
I wanted to kill, kill, and keep
ever stop. But the pain in my
e to my senses, t made my
beach and was taken to Alex-
our days in hospital, we were
and. I didn’t see much of the
ight months’ training for two
It hardly seems fair, but I
ne more yet.”
ONG HEIGHTS.
are happy. All the outward discipline there
ever was Is gone. Everyone works with every-
one else, but the only discipline there Is Is
that the men will do anything they are told if
its in the work or fighting line. Our wounded
are grand, and 1 have never heard a moan, and
some of the wounds are awful. They were even
happy the last two days, and they loved to tell
us when they were brought down that ‘w'e were
giving them—what for.’ ”
A MEDICAL MAN’S EXPERIENCES.
Dr. A. Hamilton Tebbutt, Chief Resident Patho-
logist at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, who
is with the Army Medical Corps, connected with
the 4th Battalion of Infantry at Gallipoli, says,
in the course of a letter to Sir Thomas Ander-
son Stuart:—
“Since those first two days (April 25 and 26)
we have had many ups and downs, we have
learnt more about cover and trench making, and
of the ways of shells and wo try and keep down
our dally casualty list as low as possible.
Our heavy losses were due to the natural im-
petuosity of our men. Like football forwards,
they dashed ahead with the ball without a
thought for their halves or three-quarter line
behind. We have given the Turks more than
their own back on several occasions since, when
they have tackled us. Our men are well fed
and well clothed, and are getting .a few letters
from home, and so they are mostly cheerful
and are all keen fighters. The officers have
—— i every reason to be proud of their men, and
: there is a feeling of mutual confidence, which
mother at ’Penrith, Driver Leo ' the best assurance of good discipline and conr
i the landing-place of the Aus- ! tinued success. Personally, I find the actual
ne Idea of the task,” he
heights above Richmond
ice), thickly entrenched
armed to the teeth, and
hind nearly every rock,
inhered by two to one,
r amongst them as fast
u would have an inkling
our boys’ lot to carry
say it was impossible,
n Infantry has done it.”
F WAITING.
ill, writes from Gallipoli,
to his brother, Mr. Bag-
-I’t the actual fighting which
be waiting Is the trying
in the trenches. My rifle
i’t hold It without burning
1 a fairly trying time, and
it the end of nine days, as ;
eep. We are now In dug-
1, and the chief danger is 1
mel. Were It not for the i
e could almost see humor !
ike rabbits in burrows, and
sport of the enemies’ gUns
r.”
j experience of modern war a horrid business
; really, there is so little one can do to amelio-
. 1 rate a man’s condition when he ia properly
“ j hit by a shell or a Mauser bullet. Though I
. have as yet soe.n nothing myself or obtained any
reliable evidence to make me believe that the
” j Turks have mutiliated our fellows, yet the hor-
rors of wa,r are bad enough when both sides
s play the game. Many a time 1 have felt sick
> both at stomach and at heart w'heu I have been
’’ brought up against a grim picture from Bel-
* \ ona s gallery. I find my only consolation In the
knowledge of the good cause we are fighting
for, and In the free use of language.”
"It was a terrific battle that I was in/' ,
writes Privacy J. Tyrrell to his wife, at yyi // ■ „
SeotcTiroer-street, North Fitzroy. "The ( }
Turks must have suffered enormous losses. n //
We landed in Turkey on Sunday, 25th / // J
Apr 3, under a heavy shrapnel fire, and / /
from then until the following Wednesday, '
when I was hit, fighting hardly ceased for a
minute. We had no sleep and very little
food, as we could not leave our trench to
get it. When the battleships covering our
landing fired a broadside, heaven and earth
seemed to tremble. . . . The Turks got
right into our trench once, and we had
to bayonet them out. They would creep
up to about 30 yards from the trench and
be stiff, and when they continued their
crawl we would leave the trench and
chase them, with fixed bayonets. When
they 'spotted’ us they would go for their
lives. We could not get them to face the
cold steel at all. The Turkish snipers did
most of the damage; one of them got me,
and I thought a ton of bricks had fallen-;
on me. Our men caught several snipers, f
One had two weeks’ supply of food and j
4000 rounds- of ammunition, upon him." ]


Jhp
fW' 1 '


Inkster, M.A.,
ift Sydney about
in the thick 01 1
with the Gordon !


/ij/i


J.'fx.p-
JfaLrjjii '


I ... j;


/ i'!/


_• , , fmm Ifcnd «t the time of writing was still in his
Sergeant Enc Evans (wounded), writing from ifcody> “After a few minutes’ rest,” he writes,
l© hospital at Alexandria to his father, Mr. advanced into the firing-line, and lay
B. Evans, captain of the Associated Wars- inhere for a Jong time. It was an awful
iousemen’3 Rifle Club, says;— •rdeal- Men were being killed and wounded
Turks nicked me off, and so ,»ear mo by the score, and I never imagined
Well,- the Turks picked me on ‘(anything could be so cruel. . . My mate
iere am I with a bullet wound in S• j s^ together; we lay there waiting
ever. (Jtn . turn come, and you can imagine
ately mhat our feelings were. Mine came, and
nful, an awful shock it gave me. A shrapnel
[am hurst just over my head, and I got two
T - : bullets out of it. I thought I was done,
a and the pain was so terrible that I could
1 ttie scarcely bear It. Although, of course, I
long did not give way. I hied a lot, and felt
foot, very weak. The next thing was to get to
0 f i the beach. First I rolled along the ground,
I hut my shoulder was too sore, so I got up
nany |and ran a little way. Then I lay down for
my-la rest, ran a few more yards, and was just
guns going to rest again when another bullet
Ylien caught me In the back, and dropped me
was jfiuioker than I expected. After the shock
passed, I made another attempt to get out
out ’ of. the line of fire, and eventually met a doc-
iway, tor, and had my wounds dressed, after
and which I was helped down to the beach. Al-
ive a together 1200 of us were taken aboard a
I troopship and sailed for Alexandria, but as
scrub tb ere was n 0 accommodation for us at the
head, hospital we were brought to Malta. It
It. I Is a grand place, and the English-speaking
found people here cannot do too much for us.”
A USEFUL PRESENT.
uni- t —’ 1
ack. - Private T. H. Coombs (C Company,
who was a member of the first con-
3ned 1 tingent, found good use for a walking-stick.
It He writes to a friend at Galston under date
and May 10 as follows: —“I am the soldier who
k® a has had the privilege of using that stick, and
igh- j can assure you it came in very handy. I
ites, Tfas shot through the leg, but with the aid of
and the stick I have managed pretty well. There
ain- ere a lot of other chaps not so fortunate, and
ging, you would laugh to see them hopping round
If—like playing hopscotch. I’m going to put
i on that stick safely in my black kit- bag when
and I go back to the front. Perhaps it may come
foot la handy again. Don’t forget to follow up our
the; movements as well as possible, and then yon
TV U UUU CLXXU. t/Ul, c*. rr a.j
knee wound. I rested, and then plunged into will he able to realise to some extent what our
the gully head first, brushing aside the difficulties are. Wo aPP recia t® to the fullest
■brambles as I went. I never thought I’d get the good wishes of those who are physically
Ithere, but after about two miles —it seemed unfit enl st ‘ ° hospital, have many
ito me two miles —I came across the 3rd Field English ladles to see us They Ibring usi nice
Ambulance. There they dressed the wound things to eat and books, so under the cram-
VrwT iota mo in th. dhailp Wounded nmn stances we do fairly well. Thank you for
and laid me in the shade. w oundea m.n gtJck frQm the unknown ft. lend .»
.were coming down like flies, and piesently [ln February last the boys of the Public
the Turks began sweeping our gußy vith gc^oQl> Galston> sent to the Red Cross Society.
shrapnel. They burst all around us, but ,or- collection of walking-sticks.]
tunately none was hit. It was getting too * J
The -wounds are not very serious, however.
Unluckily, septic poisoning set in, and lately
has made one of the wounds very painful,
but that is being got under way, and I ami
having every attention in the hospital. I do
not expect to be able to put my foot on the
ground for a month, and it may be a long
time before I gain the full use of my foot.
We entered the firing line under a hail of j
«hrapnel and machine gun bullets, and many j
,«f our fellows were shot down. I threw my- I
i«elf flat into a dug-out, and the machine guns
■were hitting up the dust all around me. When j
,J received my first hit In the leg It was >
jlike a big electric shock, and I cried out,
T’m hit-’ The pain suddenly went away,
and I thought it had been just a graze, and
eo I looked round for some Turks to have a
‘whang’ at. I couldn’t see anything but scrub
dintil I noticed something moving just ahead.
!l let drive, hut I didn’t know the result. I
happened to glance,down at my leg, and found
jthe ground covered in blood. Of course I
ithought I was seriously hurt, and so I got
!off my equipment and piled up my ammuni-
tion on the ground and made to crawl back.
• Hast as 1 left my dug-out the machine gun |
■which had our whole line enfiladed opened
[again, and I received the second shot. It
i caught me in the muscle of the foot, and
tny leg drew up under me and quivered like a
leaf. The pain was like a prolonged high-
voltage shock. I lay for about 10 minutes,
■with the blood pouring out of my boot, and
then'essayed a move again. I crawled pain-
fully, elbowing my way forward, and dragging
■my legs like two wet socks after me. 11
must have lost my direction, for I landed on
the edge of a gully. There I stopped, and
applied my first field dressing to the foot
[wound and cut away the clothes from the
r arm, so the doctor sent all who could walk t-vt mi mi DTTCCTTTQ
n. A stretcher-bearer offered to carry me; UN Ixlll, LMJLrUUIo.
s no stretchers were available. For two
liles he carried me down the bed of a muddy Captain Dudley A. Smith, Ist L.H., writing
reek, falling heavily with me twice, and I ]y[ r . d. k. inglis, of Macleay-street, says:—
ras glad when, on reaching the more open “When we were attacked on May 19 and 20
arts, to meet a stretcher party. From everyone was ready. It appears from infor-
ere I went to a rest hut, and there saw mation from prisoners and other hands that
ome of our unlucky fellows. That night I our whole line was attacked by 32,000 infantry, j
ms conveyed to the troopship, and the fol- of which 9000 were the 11th Division of the i
owing morning we left for Alexandria.” Turkish Army, supposed to be the best they!
have. The attack was repulsed all along
■PTTT PTVa A rOMR ADF the line with heavy loss, and, judging by the
A UUIVUIAUD. number of dead and wounded they left In
front of our trenches, their losses must have
IJ.M.S. Donald (wounded), in a letter to his been very heavy, as the main attack was not
ather, Mr. W. Donald, of Goulbnrn, writes:— made in front of us. I believe where the
T was carrying one of my comrades back main attack was, they came in close forma- i
rhen a shell burst and sent the two of us -1 tion, and our machine-guns mowed them down
Oft below on to a ledge of rock. After ii n hundreds. Our losses were very light, as
oming to my sensed it made me feel like all our men kept to their trenches, although
etting even with. them, so I joined in with. we had a hard job to keep them there, as
New Zealand regiment and made another they wanted to get out and charge,
dvance. Machine guns were peppering us “We all have to live in dug-outs, Mine is
holesale. Now and then a German officer about 6ft long, 3ft deep, and 3ft wide, but
ould call out, ‘Come on Australians,’ cr they are not bad to live in. We run for them
lease fire; Indians on the left.’ We could If they start shelling us, which they do
isily distinguish them, being dressed in grev. \ pretty often, but without much damage to us.
accounted for one of two during the day. 1 ! think they must be getting very short of
lost count of the Turks. The German officers shells, as each day they fire fewer and fewer.
appear to have to force the Turks on when
they want to make an advance. In a bay-
onet charge the Turks were headed by a Ger-
man officer, about 16 paces In front. We
soon accounted fpr him, and as soon as the
Turks noticed this they went back for all
they were worth. I received a piece of shrap-
nel down the nose, and a piece knocked off
«ne of my fingers, which is all right now.
The work gets very fascinating. After a few
fcoors' good going we are broken into it.
Pottr out of six officers in my company were
grot out of action, so you see how well the
taen used their own Initiative to carry on.”




I i%. .ft .
Y 4) Y :




9)&






Fhe .twigs of the sc;
Y of that, leaden stor
still came back to us i
es that had been cut
ight their way out. \\
here came a youthfu
aose face the din of b:
I the debonair appea
... lying about ten yar
ed him, and hailed hi
e and walked across
ir V He said it wj
soon
us. As
Thev
■


'Jjl,
' j '
/ 1
* -* -it
•• X*. 4
* Jk ’




hfi. fejcs :
/ *> >


r
£ V
• 1
i




hi.
tt
j:
Adi
wei
a c
us.


/X. &&&


fK. tty? /^i,,yj/i ;
<54




2 J.


(EVER EN.
R


* -fej&l/f.
ze-


u-lti


\SL b/1 i
brave
r, so w
sene tin
r e had
around us; but
a grand but sad
the Triumiph. S
fighting, for she
rather
)t a ee
have been am
orparal Alfred Sear, y
be British forces on
gainst the Germane,
rany gained by our gai
Corporal Sear is a ibr
ear, 20 William-street,
lise what our i
ig?” writes cnm
Heliopolis He
casualty lists
brave :
killed,
hat the


V a.


3(?
ty/i-
I have
from eerie
enemy’s gun
from the oth
■<>
our gunners los




iJs M


i <y/l»
rery bad lam
w, and tbc life is
4URRAH ’’ FOR
t
I
be proud
iois say ,
ribiy bra






hi'.


—*l"




Division which was operating seven mile* The sea was calm and quite favourable for *
south of us, which read: —“ls that you such operations. W© then steamed off
Australia?” Th e reply, “Yes” was sent, with all lights out" towards Cape Ibrizi
and back came a message, “Hang on, we ■ in the Gulf of Saros, where another de-
will join you as quickly as possible.” They monstration and sham landing took place
too have evidently a hard-nut to crack, i at daylight. The destroyers shelled th e
for that was five days ago, and they are coast but got no reply, and without land
not here yet, but their message gave great j iing, the boats (about twenty-four) re’
encouragement to our boys at the time. All ; turned to their respective transports We
day long our engineers worked in their | we re just hauling the boats up when we
smglete making a zig-zag road up the cliffs, j received a wireless from the Queen Eli™.
and were under shell and rifle fire the beth—
whole time. This road was being pre- , • . v
pared for our guns to reach the summit of e m ottr Vicinity.”
Hill 400. The engineers also did plucky j lifeboats and belts were made ready, and
work in constructing barbed wire every man ordered on deck with rifle and
.entanglements in front of our trenches. bandoliesr and to keep a sharp look-out.
This of course was done at night, but from Two IS-poundens of the sth Battery were
Sunday morning till Tuesday morning they hoisted on deck from the hold, and when
rs to work ana insisted beautiful to watch. There was general re-
ns up into their positions, [ lifif fftlt whell th relurned) and reSrtod
t fifty men on Hie drag, what the floating obstacle really wfs and
gun. When the first ! much flm {
went on its errand there We sailed awa towards E where
ng m the trenches. Its „ fih er feint t
was great rejoicing in the trenches. It’s other feint attack and mock landing was
wondei-fu! the respect that the average made afc 4 p . m , No firin „ was done g her e.
infantryman, has lately cultivated for the We just hung around until our destroyers
frunnex KV 7 ©clock at. a rantre of on v n._ , , J
patrolled the sea-shore, and when a squad
and strong wind made itself felt at dusk,
our boats returned again as before. Again,
with all lights out and steaming towards
“home,” the place we first left and where
there was so much fighting <that’s not why 1
called it “home”), fresh instructions came
to the transport to anchor on the lee side
of Imbro Island and to wait for further
orders. Soon after this the transport on




''r > .i.i 'i














V
/
I


* si?’-' ■


* si?’-' ■










jwf*


fr
fk ' so\ *




If*/ >»
*
t < >i i^ 1 * i j s_Hi Y '
(■-4
$
■ m ■ '•
I?'*.


ttb '


V W''
















“Unprecedented
Adventure.”
ATTACK ON GALLIPOLI.
1
Sir Ian Hamilton’s Message.
We are indebted to Mrs. Craig, wife of
Lieutenant Craig, who is with the
Queenslanders fighting in Gallipolli, and
to Dr. J. Buchanan, 1 Second Light llm-.se
for a copy of a sp'ecial order issued’ bv
Sit Ian Hamilton, to each member 0 f
the allied forces on the night before the
memorable assault on the Turkish strong-
hold. It reads :—
General Headquarters,
„ 31st April, 1915.
Soldiers of France and of the King
Before us lies an adventure unprece-
dented in modern war. Together with
our comrades of the fleet, we are about to
force a landing upon an open beach in
tace of positions which have been vaunted
by our enemies as impregnable. The land-
ing will be made good, by the heln of
God and the navy, the position will be
stormed, and the war brought one step
nearer to a glorious close. “ Remember,”
said Lord Kitchener, when bidding adieu
to your commander, “ Remember, once
you set foot upon the Gallipoli Penin-
sula, you must fight the thing through
to a finish.” The whole world will be
watching our progress. Let us prove
ourselves worthy of the great feat ol
arms intrusted to us.
(Signed) IAN HAMILTON,
General.
'








. T


■


'/fry * ■>--






S'*


■*
■-
a
3 Of
, y,
•, r. ■ i
V ‘-v ■ •
. r v .. . ■
t.J'
ill <
-■ ' " '■ ?
*
.■






~*T V


1.1 f
f


.jjj ;.






¥S
■


1 £






—Shot While Rowing to Shore.—
Lieut. A. R. Ikeighway, a young officer <
not vet 21 vears of age, who was wounded
in the fighting at Gallipoli, has written to
his father in Melbourne: —“During this per-
formance we were rowing towards the
shore. Everything was going on nicely.
I might sav I did not feel the least bit ner-
vous, but -when we got within 50 yards of Q
the shore the Turks opened fire on us. „
Then things were not too pleasant, be-
cause we could not reply. Well, the bullets L
started to zip all round us. Nobody was si
hit 'until we got within 20 yards of the B
shore, and they turned a machine on q
to ue. One of my men was hit first aj
through the neck, then I was the next to
get it through the chest. It nearly «
knocked me out of the boat. I quivered ti
up like a rabbit, but pulled myself together hi
at once. I was steering the boat at the g]
time, so I had to let go with my hands QI
and use the tiller with my foot. I managed
to keep the boat nosed for the snore, ine
poor chaps that were rowing stuck bravely «
to it, and so did the others. _ You could tl
see a lock of revenge on all their faces. As m
soon as we bumped the shore they . T ,
scrambled out except myself, tnree killed
and seven wounded. I tried hard to get |
out, but I got as far as amidships and j fi
there I had to stay m the bottom of the &]
boat. I believe a lot of ray men were
killed when they were stepping on to the j e
shore. The Turks kept up a continuous
fire on the boats, although they knew they ,
were full of dead and wounded. W bile , hi
I was lying there one just took, the skin w
off my shoulder, and another ripped my
haversack. Dozens of them went within
an imh of me. When the bullets cn *
through the sides of the boat you could
smell the burning paint. A me 1 me th
Bcreaming towards us once. It touched th
«ide of the boat and wem nuo the th
water without exploding, but sent up a a .
huge spray that nearly drowned us. About j
tS hours afterwards the Red Cross came
to our assistance, and our wounds were
doctored. I was for seven hours in «
cramped position in that boat before I
got on to the hospital ship It was a great
relief to get between sheets. One of mj
men died on the way to Alexandria.
Lance-Corporal’s Ordeal.
_____„ O i ■]
The experiences of Lce.-Cpl. L. D. Co.e-
ehin, of 6th Infantry Battalion (\ic.l, who
was wounded on four occasions during tne
initial engagement in Gallipoli#™')■
reading. He says: — At tips ,
stage we were within 30 yards of th~ ,
but there was thick scrub, sometimes waist .
high, intervening. I claim to have got a
Turk through the head here, and when ve
advanced 1 took a cartridge from him as ,
a keepsake. We successfully drove the i
Turks off the third lull and reached the ,
top, where we gpt it hotter than ever from i
their main position on the fourth niU. - i
machine gun soon fixed me up, a bullet ]
piercing my right thigh bone. Jt, o
course, broke my leg. I also got a scratch ,
on the left elbow. The nearest shave 1
had was when lying disabled on the gro. n . j
A bullet landed about three inches in front ■
of my head, sending dirt down my back. ,
I coiild not move, so had to lie still ana
pray. Later I called out and said 1 could 3
not move, and my skipper (Capt. Hook),
who was near and an ambulance man ran j
out and carried me hack over the lull.
Our chape were dropping wholesale, ana
they were on the point of falling hack,
when supports arrived and saved the situa-
tion.
■—Thirty Hours’ Crawl with Broken Leg.
“At this time t*he enemy were shelling
the rear of our line, to (prevent supports
coming up, so, rather than fall into the
hands of the Turkp, I began to drag myself
down the hill, «nd with tne help- of a
couple of chaps 1 got about 20 yards. 1
lay there from 8.30 p.m. till about .4 p.m.,
getting three more wounds—one m each
foot and another in the right arm. They
were all caused by shrapnel. It tooic me
over 30 hours to crawl 200 yards. It rained
all Sunday night. I was miserable, and
ail by myself except when a few wounded
staggered past. The firing line waa held
all night, and reinforced successfully in
the morning bv machine guns, whien gave
them pepper. On Monday afternoon 'vas
picked up at the bottom of the tnhu hi .
and taken away on a stretcher. -Lao ot
the bearers of my stretcher were wounded,
and (he doctor also got one in the thumb,
but i, Icing Hat out, was not nit. Bnk
lets continued to fly around until we. got
on board.” Lce.-Cpl. Colechm .says the
Turks use explosive bullets, causing shock-
ing wounds to some of the troops. _an
support, of this statement he mentions mat
a patient in an adjoining bed had had the
iront naif of a thigh and aiso a kneecap
blown off. '.o' 1
“A Blooming Kangaroo.”
LONOON. Jung-«L
A stirring tale is told that an Australian
officer, Second-Lieut. E. S. Sutton, of B
Squadron, 1st Regiment (N.S.W.), 1st
Light Horse, volunteered to go out with a
small party to blow up a Turkish trench.
Before it was possible to carry out the
object of the raid the Turks suddenly
attacked, and forced the party to hastily
retreat. Lieut. Sutton took refuge in a
trench held by the Ghurkas, and amused
himself in returning to the Turks hand-
grenades thrown from their trenches, until
one explbded and blew off his right hand.
The young officer received a field dress-
ing and was sitting in the trench nursing
the stump of his arm, when the Turks
made a rush. He suddenly found a huge
I Turk towering above him with a bayonet.
S Quick as thought Sutton, snatched e kukri
i from the hand of a dead Ghurka and
j slashed the Turk’s neck. The hog fellow
fell upon him. Sutton grappled with his
left arm, and duning the wrestle embedded
his teeth in the Turk’s ear. Thus he held
| him for 10 minutes until assistance arrived,
j when the Turk was lifeless.
Another Australian, one of whose feet
was riddled with shrapnel, wag being assis-
ted down the gully jto Oaba Tepe village. On
■the way he met Gen. Godley (commanding
the New Zealanders), who enquired about
the man. The Australian soldier replied,
as he limped on one leg, “I am a bloom-
ing kangaroo now, ain’t I, general?”
The story of Private Croft’s narrow escape
is- boat told in his own words in a letter to
Mr. P. Catt, of Bulli. “Towards 12 noon
on the day of the landing at the Dardanelles,”
he writes, “the Turks were knocking us over
pi city often, and I stopped a bullet in my poc-
ketrbook after it had been through my left
fore-arm. It was a good thing for me that
it turned against the bone, causing it to come
out broadside on (as the doctor says), in which
fashion it entered my pocket-book, going al-
most entirely ihyough itV Had it done so there
would have been no more Turks for me. I
thought I was finished as it was, because the
blow over the he*.rt knocked me out. I will
send you the pocket-book to keep for me as
soon as I get to Cairo. It is no use to me
now, but as it saved my life I would like to
keep it as a curio.”
Mr. H. F. Cotterell, of Bulli, in forwarding
(be pocket-book for reproduction, on behalf of
Mr. Gafrt, says thatHhe doctor at the base hos-
pital at Mona stated that but for the bone of
the arm deflecting the bullet nothing could have
saved young Groft.
The book is about half an inch thick, with
Morocco cover. The bullet completely em-
bedded Itself,, hut in tly» q,pQvc piature-46-ghowa
pgjtiivHy. f.ximgniL „ ■ ■ —d ~—-


WOUNDED SOLDIER’S DESCRIPTION
Lance-Corporal Val Marshall, of the 4th Bat-
talion, who was employed in the Artists’ De-
partment of the “Evening News,” was among
the wounded at the Dardanelles. / In a -letter
OP. WHAT REALLY HAPPENED.
Dawn Monday morning brought the rain of
shrapnel (“Turkish delight” we now call It)
again, and the attack of the enemy. It was
frustrated, and about dusk we attacked with
“cold steel.” The Turks can’t stand the look
of the bayonet, let alone the feel, and scooted.
It was a great charge. They simply peppered
us with machine guns and shrapnel. Our col-
onel (Onslow Thompson), senior-major (Mac- ;
naughton), and signalling officer (Lieutenant
Smith) were killed right alongside ig.e. It’s
a queer feeling you have—a mad desire to
kill. You see your comrades going dotvn, and
there is a lumpy feeling in the throat and dry-
ness round the lips; a shell bursts near you,
and one of your cobbers has his Jaw or leg
blown off—then you wake up and can’t get at
the beggars quick enough. The enemy are
using “dumdums,” explosives, and soft-nosed
bullets; they strip our dead and kill our
wounded —some of th© wounds are awful.


?
(






1
WRITTEN IN A DUG-OUT
Private R. J. Kenny, of the 4th Battalion
of First Brigade, writes a breezy letter
DolL Svdney chum from a dugout in Galli-
"rihat belated quid of yours landed here in
a storm of shot and shell, and we gnashed
our teeth at the thought of the high jinks
we would have had if the infernal thing
had only reported in a smart and soldierlike
manner in Cairo. I knew a charming joint
there, where red hot whiskv was only a
uesarto a time (2Vsi).
U e lads have done, and are doing, splen-
did work —reckleSs gallantry is the dominant
feature. Our whr-cry is ‘Yellah—Harrishee
Lacashecsh,” or any hands' Arab word which
we happen to know. The first two mea,..
Get to hell out of it.’ Everyone knows the
third, and we use it to intimate that we will
attend to them presently free of charge.
Mat is O.K. Looks like a descendant of
the prophet with ins whiskers. He is on the
Head-quarters’ Signallers’ Staff now', and
guides generals around the various trenches
in a browsy, dreamy sort of manner. He
is in great demand. I am tiptop, dodging
bullets with the help of St. Patrick like a
two-vear-old. Must have committed a sin
or two some time ago, as my bayonet was
shot away a couple of Inches from my rifle
w'hile both sides were at it hammer and
tongs. It was very brisk on the day after
the charge, and in the evening the Turks,
after singing out for Allah in a most un-
musical fashion, tried to rush the trenches.
We held fire till they were very close, and
then flattened them out. They tried about
a dozen times to rush us, but drew blank
every time. They must be W'ondering what
sort of a strange animal this Australian is.
They lie in hundreds in part of pur trenches,
and smell terrible. The navy simply can’t
rrajse us enough, and go so far as to say
that Imperial troops wmuld never have ;
tackled the job we did. Really Herb, when I
look around. I have to wonder how the devil
we ever got a footing here. It is even worse i
than the country round the Hawkesbury, i
only that stunted shrub substitutes big tim-
, her. Couldn’t imagine better country for j
masking guns or concealing riflemen. We
; are all gay and determined as ever, eagerly
waiting the order to advance, when we wiil
give the swines what ho I can’t tell you of
the military operations, but we are as safe
here as in Pfahlcrt’s pub.
one .envelope, so vou will please take the ac-
companvingnote _jjQ--Mi'i!i. M. fit addi'ess on
back (5Whll£ MaD-ie- ap-The same-deg-oiat
as I. ancT-wf an—-vc ry coinFoiluhtfj
CAN WE HEEP GOING?
LETTER FROM COL. HO^SE,
Following is an extract from a J letter re-
ceived at Orange fyom Colonel-Surs eon N. R.
Howse, V.C., G.B.y Director of M dlcal Ser-
vices .for the Australian Army, oj eratlng In
the Dardanelles. /lie says: —
“Australia has /now a day (Apr! 25, 1915),
which she can Boast as much abc ut as she
likes. It was a/wonderful bit of wi rk to land
on unknown country, with the de ences un-
known. The World will greet the Australians
as heroes, and,/for my part, I am i roud to be
one of them, f
“The work o' my men and the stre cher-bear-
ers of regime its was absolutely heroic. Pic-
ture bringing wounded men, such efa had com-
pound fractur 3 of the thigh, over the worst
side of the Eanoblas. I can assure you it
was no exaggeration to say th/t you could
only slide th< m down, falling owr, and occa-
sionally they would roll out of jftie stretchers;
but the wounded never murmu/od—they were
splendid. /
“We are do ng well here, and will have this t
over, i hope./in time to get to France.
“All the generals have perso tally expressed
their satisfaction with the m sdical part of
this show, and I believe our : icn have done
extremely Well. I am pleasec at the work
of the A.A.M.C. At times it las been bril- ’
llant, and y hope many men of >ur corps will
be mentioned ip dispathes. I im doing my .1
best for them, because I am absolutely cer- J
tain they /deserve it.
. “ I^Nk| did g00d work °n SKin lay morning,
but wdSNjmundod in the knee, a* d 1 sent him 1
k K? , a iS*. 011 Sunda y night. \He should 1
,< bgaio couple of we skN, - i
* I A S w> Jane wa when I heard from him a
on but havtvNmt hearq sinceN-... We
have Orange bVwlti us. None ,
of the /others\have left (May 5), but
expectfthey wi\soon ail be here* P
“I ain sitting crouched up in/a little gully t:
trymgl to keep out of the way/of the shells, ‘J
whiejy are very frequent this morning. Yes- hi
teiday I was up In the trerpmes when the
Turks tried to rush us. We- lost a big lot
of men killed, but drove them back with
great loss.
IN THE TRENCHES.
on Lance-Corporal W. A. Tebbutt (Roseville
:er i writes from the trenches at the Dardanelles
U- i “One feels-very like a hermit crab. Each hai
! constructed his own semi-shrapnel-proof duj
in j out, which fits something like tights. This ii
ed the retreat. A great deal of sniping goei
ks , on, and one can get good shooting in th<
tig | early morning at 600 to 800 yards. It ver;
ke } much resembles wallaby shooting, with thi'
nt difference that this wallaby can shoot back
a j No humane feeling is felt, and If any sue!
[ feeling came along it would hq greatly in
n- fluenced by the toll the enemy’s snipers take
nt I lost two more mates in the last two days-
eu f two men who were in my tent at Kensingtoi
ch ! when father visited there. The artillery fir
.... { is occasionally very heavy, making the eartl
he tremble. It is remarkable how one become
ill j accustomed to dirt. I have not had a batl
, or a change of clothing for three weeks, an 1
of ; it’s about a week since my last wash,
be ■ have drunk water which was yellow frot
id ' mud, and have scraped out the dirt from ;
es tin of bully beef —dirt knocked up by ai
le | enemy’s shell. Our trenches are fairly goo
ig ! now. They had to be dug under shrapne
a and machine-gun fire —i.e., dug lying flat.”
In '*
le THE A.A.M.C.
id •—-
2r Colonel Howse, V.C., C.B., Director of Aus
s > trallan Medical Services, in a letter home
x ~ tersely puts his appreciation of his commam
s - and the services of the Australians. He says
1(1 “Australia has now a day, April 25, 1915
which she about as much as she likes
k It was a wonderful bit of work to land in ai
unknown country, with the defences unknown
s - The world will greet the Australian heroes
f’ and, for my part, I am proud to be one o
1 them. The work of my men and thi
stretcher-bearers of regiments was absolutely
heroic. Picture bringing wounded men, sucl
as bad compound fractures of the thigh, ovei
“ the very worst side of the Canobolas. I cai
Ie assure you it was no exaggeration to say thai
*» you could only slide them down, and occa-
I sionally they would fall out of the stretchers
' r I But no complaint was ever made. We ar«
e j doing well here, and will have this over, ;
think, in time to go to France. All the
" Generals have personally expressed then
satisfaction with the medical part of the show
e and I believe our men have done extremely
e well, but, perhaps, it is not for me to say so
I often go Into the trenches with the men
It is warmer and a nice change from the office
t work. We are fed very well, and enjoy oui
food. I am sitting crouched up in a little
gully, trying to keep out of the way of the
shells, which are very frequent this morning
Yesterday I was up in the trenches when the
Turks tried to rush us. We lost a lot of met
killed, but wo drove them back with greal
losses.”
PM¥-ATE StMMS.
— 4> —
WOUNDED WHILE SAVING A
COMRADE.
Private Simms, of Manly, who was reported
among the wounded in our first casualty list,
describes quite in a matter-of-fact way how
he was hit. No doubt many fine things have
been done in the Dardanelles which will never
be reported. Writing to his father Private!
Simms says;—"Here is a card bought at Lem- i
nos Island previous to our going to the Dar- i
dandles. 1 got concussion of the foot caused
by a shrapnel shell, and was sent back to
Alexandria. My leg is still painful, and my
nerves are rather shaken. One of our men
had his arm shattered, and I was taking him
back on my shoulder, and when I got about
70 yards away his brains were blown out by a
dum-dum, killing him instantly. It was then
I got hit.”
i as not in ietterA there is
- a whimsical mixture mk the tragic \nd the
, humorous that excites einptlons.
-i S,1( ' h missives, in any caspVre always\iil of
, j interest. Vbe subjoined ale attracts from the
I letter of aVneniber of the Australian Right
j IIorse Hri saA in Egypt to a reflation, in iVd-
• jney, w ritten o\ May 7, just prior ik departV*!
■ from Ma’adi fo\ !he Dardanelles
“I really must tell you this story; it hap-
pens to be true. A wounded soldier at the
hospital here got a lady I know to write home
for him. He had his jaw badly wounded, and
a bullet through his neck. He started his let-(
ter: ‘Dear father and mother, —I hope this!
letter will find you as well as it leaves me at I
present.’ Another chap sent a letter from!
the Dardanelles. It was not censored. It ran:
‘Dear aunt, —This war is a fair cow. Your
Nephew.’ That was all. ,








writer, now with the i
sends the following pi<
of scenes on the arrival of the wounded at
the base hospital, Heliopolis:—
On my first day here I walked admir-
ingly through the pretty, almost deserted
streets, and, noting an unusual passage of
motor-ambulances from out the gates of
the hospital-cum-Palace Hotel, I continued
on to the farthest bound of its grounds, and
turned down to where the railway passed
through on its way into the desert again.
Here there were seven or eight cars backed
up against the small gravel embankment
that formed the platform, and others were
arriving every minute and adding to the
line of red and white vehicles that showed
so brightly in the evening sunlight tha,t
flooded the station place.
THE RED CRESCENT TRAIN.
At last, after some waiting, and just as
the sun was setting, the heavy panting of
an engine sounded faintly in the distance,
gradually becoming louder, until a long
white train, with an engine at either end,
came in sight. The little crowd of on-
lookers, now including a few fashionably
dressed French and English ladies and
gentlemen, watched it with silent, undemon-
strative interest as it loomed larger and
nearer. And presently the line of loffg
white cars, with a few grey-clad nurses,
and big Indian A.M.C. attendants in khaki
and turbans, standing on the end platforms,
panted smoothly on to the scene, and at
last came to a stop before them. At every
car-window a reclining head, looking side-
ways out, or a glimpse of w r hite bandaging,
indicated the nature of the freight she car-
ried. And at every window an Australian
soldier or two, whose duty it was alleged
took him on to the platform, was soon sym-
pathetically and curiously questioning his
wounded brother within. Meanwhile, at
the rear end of the train, others had stood
to their stretchers, and squads were busy
beginning their work of transferring the
helpless men from the railway carriages to
the smooth-running ambulance cars; and,
while this was going on, I took the oppor-
tunity of walking along the platform, and
enjoying a few snatches of conversation
with those within.
“Well, matey, and how did you get on.
I asked of a slightly haggard young soldier
of not more than 19 years, whose diead lay
on a level with the upper half of the
window opening. “I had a bit of
turkey, anyway,” he smiled, wearily;
“they got me on the left side. ' But
you’re not feeling too bad now, I hope.
“Oh, we’re not so bad at all; many of us
can walk a bit, with assistance. All the
more serious cases went into hospital at
Alexandria.”
A BONZER GO.
I turned to a florid-faced, sandy-haired
chap who was smiling cheerfully at me
from the bunk below. “How did you find
it?” I asked. “Gripes, it wuz ’ell while it
lasted,” he grinned, “but it wuz a bonzer
go. Our crowd landed in a bit uv a creek,
an’ they wuz lettin’ our three boats ’ave it
whilei we wuz still in the water. A lot uv us
men Were ’it, an’ 1 remember a few poor
blokes gurgling an’ flopping in the water.
We ’ad loaded rifles before leavm the
ship, an’ there wuz only one order given
then, ‘Fix bayonets ’ an’ up th slope we
went like loonutics till we found cm. .1 her
we rooted ’em outer three rows uy trenches.
Th’ boys after them, an’ yeilin Tmshce!
Yalla*, you black s!’ jus’ the same as
we uster hunt ’em off th’ lines at Mena
Camp. Gripes, when I come t’ think uv
it, it muster looked funny!” he re-
flected. , ~
I admitted there was a touch of the
ludicrous about it; then asked him what
he thought of the Turk as a fighter. Well,
they could fire fast enough,” he said, 'al-
most like blanky machine-guns; but they
ain’t no shots. In lact, it seemed t me
sometimes as if they didn’t wanter hit us.
An’ they were good enough on sniping un-
seen, but as soon as it became an open ‘go
they’ were quick on droppin’ their ,rifles
an’ chuckin’ up their ’ands; but we'd ’ad
enough of their sniping—five of our officers
’ad already been ‘dropped’—and, besides, fl;
wuz rumoured round that it would go pretty
’ard with us if we ’ad t’ share our scarce
rations with prisoners. Besides, it wuz
an all-in, ding-dong rush, an —well, we
o r\xr nri«nnprs >y
chan t gel any prisoners.
“But hundreds were taken in some
places; other chaps have told me,” I men-
tinned. “Yes. but they landed after us.
blokes. They were always in the lead,
some’ow, and poor ol’ , our adjutant,
i wuz th’ first I seen go over with something
in ’is neck. I believe ’e only lasted a half-
minute after. After that, 1 saw j three
lieutenants go over; long ; an’ little
SENSATION OF BEING SHOT.
Having a half-hour to spare before going
on duty, I walkecl along, yarning with dif-
ferent men awaiting their turn, and occa-
sionally lending a hand where required. But
I must say that I found the Australian
warrior in no way resembling the popu-
lar ideal of the profanely cheerful British
Tommy in time of w r ar. With the excep-
tion of my talkative, red-headed friend
whom I had just left, I found every man
weirdly cool and unimpressed by his recent
experience. None of them seemed to
think that what they had witnessed was
jn any way particularly terrible or tragic
or exciting. Several rather horrible in-
cidents were related me by different lads
in a casual, lazily friendly tone, and, with
the exception of a little paleness and weari-
ness, I might have been yarning again with
the same men back in those twilignt nights
below the Pyramids. They had little to
say about their company comrades, mainly,
1 suppose, because after being left wounded
they knew little of what had become of
the others. 1 asked my friend inside how
he was wounded. “Well, I was gettin’
along with me head down, an’ I suddenly
felt something like the stroke of a whip
across me back. I didn’t seem to realise
that it was something serious until later on,
when something seemed to be hanging
heavy in the front of me shirt, and I found
a whoppin’ big clot of blood had gathered
there. It had been trickling down under
'me arms for some time, 1 s’pose.”
Further on, 1 found a man of the th
Field Ambulance, lying silent and thought-
ful, with his right shoulder bandaged up,
and another bandage shpwing under his
split sleeve. “Well, how did the boys carry
themselves?” I asked. “They went mad,”
he answered with A quiet smile. “I hey
couldn’t be held back, and if it weren t
for the heavy pack they carried they’d be
chasing Turks yet.”
STRUCK IT HOT.
“Your crowd seemed to have struck it
hot,” I ventured. “We did,” he added
wearily. “I hope you’ll have better luck.’
“Thanks all the same,” I smiled, “but mosl
of our boys have a fear that we will bt
garrisoned here for ever.” “Don’t worry
about that,” he answered. “There’s no end
of work for us ahead. The Australians a.nd
New Zealanders bit savagely at something
miles bigger than they Could chew. It was
a credit to them, but the losses were te‘r-
rible.” “Anyway, you’ll find things quiet
enough where you’re going now for a
while,” I concluded, “That’s good—-it s a
change, anyhow,” he smiled. “Good-bye.
Good luck!”
The next man I encountered was a pay,
unshaven, but hardy-looking individual,
lying on his side, and gazing leisurely out
of tne Avindow on the scene without. 1
asked him where trouble struck him. He
told me the same place as the —th, though
they attacked before dawn, and his lot
landed about 6 a.m. “But we got a fair
share of it,” he went on. “It was a
bonzer sunny Sunday morning.' The sand
sloped up from the beach into short scrub
and undergrowth on the hills; the sky was
clear and the water was blue, but the
bullets was spittin’ round like rain, an’ the
shells screamed through the air like ships
sirens in pain; an’ the big battle-ship about
the bay was also gettiM busy with some
noise. The water about the beach was
full of barbed-wire, too, an’ men were drop-
pin’ an’ stumblin’ about, an’ things were
gettiq* a bit mixed: but in the end most or
us got through a bit uv a gully, and tormed
up wet and muddy for business. ihere
i wasn’t much waitin’ though. v\ e were
soon tearin’ up that slope with fixed
bayonet, and very little Turk in sight. But
they sent something now and then, t let
us know thev were somewhere on top.
They was pretty fair snipers; hid ’emselves
in holes in the sand an’ covered over with
scrub an’ bracken, so’d you’d never see
’em there. In fact, when we captured an
got over the top. a few uv them were be-
hind us, or amongst us. It was then that
I saw a head bob up a moment—a spit—an_
Colonel went over on his face, an’
hardly moved again. Next minit we were
over that ground, an’ a long, dusky-faced
beggar in a dirty brown-grey, half-uniform
was”standin’ amongst us, with his hands in
the air an’ Ins rifle at his feet. A few men
[went towards him, their rifles pointed
1 against his chest, an’ then three shots—an
' down ’e went. But none uv ’em waited
for th’ bayonet if they could help it. Back






Pte. A. J. Davis, a Hamilton boy, in a letter
to his parents.
“All went well,” he writes, “till we were
•within a few yards of the shore. Then a
terrific fire cut up the water round the
boats like a hailstorm. It was murderous.
It was just breaking dawn, and we were
making an excellent target.
“All hands immediately hopped over the
sides Into the water, burdened as they were
with heavy packs, rifles, and ammunition.
witn neavy pacas, hubs, tuiu ajumumuu...
I was carrying a full pack of all my clothes,
200 rounds of ammunition, heavy equipment,
rifle, and in addition all the signalling gear
necessary for the company, heliograph,
' flags, telescope, and stand, and a despatch
i bag full of message forms.
“Once oi ‘he beach we fixed bayonets,
i loaded ou 'agazines, and charged the
heights, Going up that hill was just awful.
• I dumped my heavy pack and just charged
with the rest. I was alongside Major S. B.
■ Robertson, and never left him. In less than
5 half an hour we had the Turks on the run,
1 and our chaps captured, a machine gun and
1 thousands of rounds of ammunition. We
> pushed them further back, but the men in
i the boats and on the beach were being hit.
; “We came across some dying Turks,
i Amongst them was one wounded, but he
i managed to shoot one of our chaps from be-
> hind. He got short shrift. He was
s bayoneted n about half-a-dozen places in
f about as many seconds.
“Just after this Lieutenant Jones, one of
my best friends, and as game a little chap as
j you could meet, was frit a second time, but
I he still plugged on. Our chaps were by this
! time nearly a mile inlaind, and captured three
guns. Not bad going j
i “The Turks came bapk with reinforcements
and a howitzer battery, and they pelted us
with shrapnel. All this time the transports
were arriving by the dozen and simply pour-
ing in {boatloads of men. There was a fort
over to our left, and all day long the big
naval guns were smacking away at it. What
was left at the end of the day was a mass
“Abc|ut 4 o’clock Major Robertson got one
through the lungs of me, and died
almost at once. I went from officer to offi-
cer, but they were nearly all hit. The Turks
made great havoc amongst not only our of-
ficers, but the officers of all the brigades.
“New Zealanders were on their wat to-
wards us when I got one in the right thigh.
I didn’t know what had struck me, but
strange to bay I was moving about for a long
time befori it became very painful. At last
I could stand it no longer, and got back from
the firing line. I was half way back when
I had one of my flags blown clean out of my
hand. I expect to be alright in a few
weeks.
“There 2OOO or 3000 casualties on the
first day, but when I leaf our chaps were
■ j more than holding their own.”
INJURED MEN CHEERFUL
“AllfT I HAD LUCK?”
th l^ i M t r- nan . t ‘ Colonel Barrett * writing from
the Heliopolis Palace Hotel, the base hospi-
tal at Egypt:—
..I 1 ’ 6 st part of th e night was spent in
getting these men out of the train into bed.
The demeanor of the patients interested me
bevond measure. It was impossible o'cca-
lu p re , v l nt a jo’t- hut during the ;
whole of that night I think I heard only two
suppressed groans. They took it like stoics,
although many of them knew that recovery
was practically hopeless. Some of them
nave shown an admirable sense of humor
under such dreadful conditions. One pa-
tient of mine was shot by a bullet, which
entered mst Pelow the eye and emerged in
the. lower part of the back of his neck. It
leR a hole into which a fair-sized wineglass
could have been placed. Ho is propped up
m bed with pillows, because of the weakness
of the muscles of his neck. We took the
Commander-in-chief to see him, and the
cheerful comment of the patient was, “Ain’t
I had luck?” meaning that it might have
been worse. There is no doubt of that—his
head might have been blown off!”
!TSON DIED JOKING
OFFICERS mm-Q
NEWCASTLE, Saturday. PADDY
fidual heroism are told hy
a Hamilton boy, in a letter
A PROUD COLONEL
Private M. J. MTnerney, of the 10th Bat-
1 v " ’' ~ —LViWJttHy talion:— |
“The 3rd Brigade was the first to land, and I * ■
after we had held our positions under heavv ll
PADDY SMITH’S RESOURCE flre the brigade colonel, McLagan, gave us a
message which will stand for all time. It is— ■
\ ‘Send it along the line! I am proud of the II
Corn. Austin Sraunseldojr to his former era- they”ought\osay.’ » ealamk ‘ rs and the l
ployer, Dr. Victor E. Ludlow, from the Vic- "
toria College Hospital, Alexandria:— wrTxn-KT mnn
“The wounded are stil| coming in by the WHEN THE ADMIRAL WANTS
hundreds. Some are dreadful cases. They ’ MEN
without being touched, and you would know, T . . , . . A
, with this hot climate, what the result would j Australia'— 10 au to hiS parents m South
I be. In {act, the smell here at times is 1 “The sailors cheered us as we were being
dreadful. Lears and arms are chopped o-tf taken aboard the hospital ships, and one of
Iby the dozen. The doctors here are work- fr why * e t3 , replied -
You will find out if ever you reach England
! in g day and night. In fact, one here now T h e Admiral says that if ever he wants a
has been in the ward 40 hours of -the last 43. force of men he will go to Australia to get
There are two doctors here to 91 patients. them. ’ '
They have another in occasionally to
MACHINE-GUN EIRE AT 50 YARDS ' HAY-toSSING AGAIN
„ J J„ i « J 1 A
1,1 When dawn had broken 4;00 of us h|ad land- . .
Th *' wa3 c f ered m sm « ke ' and th f some of the cabled accounts from Londc
no.se almost bad enough to wake the dead. the Queenslanaers . landing .
mo m»Tn nS T “ T ! Gallipoli stated that the Turks were hoist.
r,r n ;„rv P “,b y tW ° , T“h °t the trenches on the points of bayonet
to the top, where there were trenches and . , , ,
, . This storv is confirmed by Private C, J
machine-guns in charge of German officers. , T „
They opened fire at SO yards, with the result j M Dousall. of the 2n ...
that a great many were killed. The officers '<“■ fnora the Hebopolu Hospital-
. . . ~ . . , , . “The Queenslanders, as soon as the
to fare the worst. A colonel, two | reache( j wa ter waist deep, jumped out of ti
majors, and two paptains in the first boat boats, but ran into barbed wire entaglemeni
were killed. We lost so many officers that under the water. They soon got througl
we had to act ourselves. however. On reaching the shore they four
the Turks in trenches, but they simpl
CORPORAL LEFT IN CHARGE hoisted them out on the ends of their bayc
“at,, , , nets, as they were told to reserve their fin
ani then I had clarsfot”« men. We took 1 brnke^Va'vU' stetp’ ht
POSIU„ r r ,, We o ?hnigM S w h ?r we°L°“, r .T’" ™charedcllm b s%«S tb
Kt r™info, -f ,1 ",T m . h, ,f°lnfe Turks out everywhere. One man. fightifi
to say, the Turks must have befen left-handed I- al o n = side Ma J° r > hi ® bayont
and kept bearing a way to the battalion's left 1 and rifle up to 016 raagazine in a Turk, an
front. Meanwnilt we 'had" to I «ien put him over his head as easily as to*
make our position secure We kept picking ‘ mg hay ’ and ruslied on up 1116 hllL TD
them off all the time as they £nS to- I Turks would not stand They fought «w
wards us. but their object seemed as if they low bushes and rocks all day, while remforc<
wanted to get around Hear the beach to get ments poured off the boats. The Turks fire
In behind our lines. They did not succeed I shells at the Red Cross waggons and teni
howevei. At aboit 4 a.m. things began to I as soon as the latter had oeen erectei
get merry for us. Seeing that they could Several German officers were bayonetedW
not flank us they brought up heavy rein- | fore the Y full Y realised that the Australian
forcements and attacked us at all quarters j had landed. Three men were shot down on
But although we were catching hell we held ’ after another tryipg to get a machine gv
on. ; off a boat into position, but the fourth mai
— T - , ! was successful, and got it away and set u|
. EYV ZEALAND REINFORCEMENTS | men, cheering and yelling, with th
“The New Zealbnders were pushed up | thousands of rifles and the machine guns
as reinforcement's. They, too, wort | cannon roaring, and the big shells from th!
mowed down likd sheep, but they never 1 warships flying overhead, screeching in tliet
murmured. The boys joked as if they were flight, made the excitement terrific. But th'
only out for a shabi-flght. Our ammunition Australians never stopped a minute. All th<
by this time was getting low, so I called for wounded here are very anxious to be '
volunteers to go back to the beach for more.' again to the front They say it is grei
Three men, one old soldier namdd Paddy One Turkish prisoner said the Turks wc
Smith, went, and were back in half an hour. told by their officers and the German of
This was quick gqmg. cers not to be afraid of the Australians,
“ ‘Where did you get it so quickly?’ I asked. they could not use the bayonet and were
“ T gathered it off the bodies of the dead much at shooting. But they have sin
and wounded,’ Paddy replied. changed their time.”
“Smith has since been made a King’s cor-
poral. |
“While they were away we had almost run i~:
out of ammunition, so I decided to fix bayo- ; LIFE PRESERVED TIV MEAT,
nets. This had the desired effect. The Turks I
ran like rabbits. They are. not afraid of |
bullets, but the cold steel frightens the liver j Writing to his father under date April ! a
out of them. ! I Private Thomas William Lewis, who is rP 'fc ifi
ar THITID TTTmnr i P orted to bave been wounded, recounts his V
SLELP HUDDLED TOGETHER j nor escape from serious injury, if not death®
“At night we tried to get some sleep. Our * haversack,” says Lewis, “I had J ,hj
packs were on ti e beach, and we had no ! t?t) s of preserved meat, m l one each of tea ■ jl v
, Qf T cro r ShronnAl J nt LID K /
overcoats. To make matters worse it started sygar. Shrapnel bulleta flattened five ot M I
to rain. But fortunately some of the New j 1X tj ns, and one bullet glanced off and en | th
Zealanders Tiad their packs, and after fos- i P mi" n iptQ J” 1
sicking around wekot a few coats, and hud- 1 Vrimnw Wlku;tTan--oW Ginr j u i th.
«**'** •» «" d *»ur. slop! [ “ * g,
About 4.30 a.m., bn putting my feet up out i H 1
al'uui a.m., »n putting my teei up out ~ •
of the trench, I haw the bad luck to get hit j
iuci\y.
put up a good show,
“The New Zeala;
and now all ill-l
and now all ill-feelii g between the Nc
Zealanders and the Australians should
over. These fellows sroulci not do too mui
for us.”
with a stray bulljat. Thinking the bullet
may have passed Between my toes, 1 hung
on for a while, but! \the pain got too much,
and I had to take \my boot off. Then I
found out I was a lopeless case, and with
assistance I got baclAto the beach. It was
bad luck for me to gVt stopped, as I had a
great chance of mak :ng good, but by all
accounts all my com Dany has been wific'*' 1 ,
out, so perhaps I waa| lucky.


HIT BY SHR,
WOUNDED AID ONE ANO
Corporal T. W. Bliss is not downhearted,
although he well might be. Writing to a
friend he states:
“I got a crack on the scalp with a shrapnel
bullet, and went to sleep for half an hour.
When 1 got going again, dash me if I could
duck quick enough to stop a bullet getting
me in the shoulder. It went in at the top
and down along the shoulder blade, taking a
piece of bone with it, and stopping just under
the flesh at the bottom of. the blade. Well,
before I had time to wonder whether my
shoulder was still there or not, bang! went
a blessed shrapnel shell about six yards
above me, killing the three boys on my left
and blowing off half the face of another lad
on my right. A piece of the shell caught me
in the same shoulder, and ripped up the flesh
for about 12 inches. That finished me. I
started to run, crawl, slide, and roll back to-
wards the beach under a hail of bullets and
shells. On the way I met a cobber of the
same company going silly because the top
of his head wasn’t there, and the poor
fellow was in agony. I tied him up as well
as I could with one hand, and he tied me up
a bit on the head, but he could npt get at
my shoulder. It took us three hours to go
the four miles to the beach. I fainted five
times and my mate was In the same fix.”
Bliss concluded his letter with the words,
“Are we downhearted?” He then adds a
large and heavily underlined “No.”
chap laid there for about two hours, with
bull* i and shrapnel screaming over
but J. think we possessed charmed lives. l
There were several ‘snipers’ having a go
' at us, so we were obliged to crawl under
cover.
( “it was while we were doing this that
we came across a big Turk, who had been
shot through the left band, and we both
tackled him. I managed to get his rifle,
ftnd rny chum had his entrenching tool
handle, and between the two of us he was
soon an angel. I have still got his rifle as
a relic, and it is the centre of attraction at
the hospital here.”
“I am living in great hopes of being back
in the firing line as soon as I am fit again.
We hear here that the whole world is sink-
ing our praises. We are besieged by visi-
tors, and they make a terrible fuss of as, but
[are very kind. They bring us all sorts of
i luxuries, and we are living on the very best.
(We are getting very little news to let us
[know how our boys are getting on; but I
have no fear that they’ll just about wipe
[Turkey off the face of the planet.
/ “It would have opened your eyes to see
the way our chaps went. They fairly went
mad, and when they got near the Turks
they gave them *What-ho!’ And now they’ve
got them on the go, It’ll not be long before
they are in Constantinople.”
InVa letter dated April 6he states:—“l am
pleaded to see Harry his joined tke Expedi-
tionary Fences. Eyeirk abre-bddied fellow
that >-;an be spared shoiwd volunteer, for it
will numbers, and numbers only,\hat will
finish It quickly and decisively. Somte of the
atrocities that are /being \committed 'by the
Gertnan4are awful. I havevheard some\ people
say that\such reports canno\ be reliedl upon
Such nonsense was shown ln\its propefi light
by the auHientic account of A Belgian doctor
wno had bken detailed to report on the knat-
ter. In qfte case a girl was Stripped before
her handa
SHELL W'
Captain Elder, of Nownt Park, has received
the following letter from his son, Lauce-Cor- pniA/Drt RfIARI’O CVDrml’Kinr
poral M. B. Elder, written in Malta on May 5: — UUVVnM IVIMN o tAr tnl IIVUt,
We left Egypt a month ago. I was promot- J■ —
ed to lance-corporal before we left. We TURKS SHOfiT "RF.D (TRORiR TvrPWr
stopped three weeks at Lemnos Island. Then ” ICJhD UKObB MEN.
on April 25 we commenced operations. The I- , !
3rd Brigade landed first, and, in spite of a The foI1(Wlng Jt t<P has come t 0 hand {
heavy fire, cleared the Turks out of the first r, * T - I , „ ~
trenches, and cleared the first hill in twenty ' * ' epnedy, son of Mr. and Mra.
minutes. 'Then the !Apd and Ist Brigades P- Kennedy, of tie Royal Hotel, Cfiwra, who
landed. My launch landed about* 8 o’clock — is with A Company, Ist Battalion,, af Gallipoli,
under fire from field guns, of course, but back- irivato Kennedy was employed as a, clefk in
ed up by the naval guns. t l l ° Chief Secre ary s Department,) Sydney,
We marched up to the top of the second ® nllsted: ~
ridge, and only one of our men was hit on the T _ oit tinge, Malta, 4/5/To. Dear toother,—
way by a sniper. We lay on top of the ridge am hospital here for a few days to get
under a fairly heavy but badly aimed rifle fire ° ver , the ejects lof our recent engigement.
for an hour or more, and a number of us went e a ° ec a * Peninsula on Sunday,
to sleep; then we advanced to reinforce the 1111 w t wh le land-
firing lino on the next ridge, going across a V 5 ®' ~ e 8 , tbo off first, and
deep gully which the enemy were endeavoring ™ ve u V° ur^s c * c about tbree mile ,>• .Many
to fill up with shrapnel. There were little , “A h ,f lanolns ’ as Turks
narrow tracks through the dense wild holly -' V „ n a' f ° r ° TS . ins oal s s . tru . *
scrub, the sides of which were mined. We Sffj A v P ’ ‘ A J I
cut a Turkish telephone line cn route, and to » Putting their >tg guns
bagged two snipers and a German officer. Then ° rr ? ( , v ' .
we got near the crown of their ridge, after n J h * wu A,'!? ll If y w ,tU
having dropped our packs along the way, and , ’ ~ t e ram a . ( e U ""
saw the A.M.C. rather busy. Then we bolted ,£ * f 6 " ' "f ■ ° U f r ‘"f’
across the crown of the ridge, and flopped on j * f( Th ie f 1 .*. . at ® ln
to our stomachs in the firing line. For quite , i, . , ~ , s , >s , a . , CCI a *
~ ~ . 3 , ;• , , , j tae nrst novVitzei gallopfMi up toe bdach •with
a time we could see nothing to shoot at and t£m borscs in ha , „' At t P his t , P me j wound .
the Turks were dropping shrapnel all along the ed wbjle going tMk tQ th(J s]) . p> efore W 0
ila f/ , . ! left there we we :o pleased to hear bur artU-
Their machine guns were going pop-pop-pop lery banglng aw , , y . The country where we
In front of us, a belt being J un through at a i anc ioa was very i igged, but we drove the Turks
time However, nearly all their bullets wen. ever the flrBt fo ir rldge6> though/they were
too high, and their rifle fire was rotten if you W , u entrenched , had bi , g guns> w ' re U 1
kept low you were quite safe Then we lo- German offic£ - 3 . Tlltj y were /up to all
cated a machine gun on our eft a uit that had j sorts f tricks> aying lni „es. el lJ lc wlres ,
us really enfiladed —two of them. A lew of us . , ! ’
ran across to a place where we could shoot at a . n(l 50 ior 11 A great imptflii nt w. e
the gunners. I went with them and flopped tl e supers, who I opopd our men off it was
down! and had a spoil, then crawled a bit for- almost , to see them, they were
ward. Then a shell burst overhead, and I covered witn pcrul . Some had bushes
got one bullet, in the left thigh and one in the around them*; it was something new to
head which laid me out. I woke up, perhaps, see bushes walk. / They acted cowardly, shoot-
an hour or more after and found I was almost n 8 many Red C ross men while attending the
fainting from loss of blood, also my pipe which wounded. Anotlter case was that of two
I had in my mouth was smashed under my stretcher bearers who were carrying a chap
nose. I found that the same shell had got along, and were fcut down. Whenever our chaps
seven of us. I think the man next me got it found one they /promptly hayoneftted him. The
in the jugular vein, but am not sure. 1 was first party whqf landed, the 3rfi Brigade, dc-
told to get back to the rear, which I did, but sorve great priise. They jumped Irom the
was sniped at all the way. I tried to locate fc<nt into the /water with fixed bayonets, and
the sniper but could not see him. I brought chased the TiVrks over the Hill. Wo got a
my rifle and equipment out, but don’t know groat reception at Malta. We ire at Maletta,
where ray bayonet went. I saw a clip of and the people age treating us I finely. lam
Turkish cartridges, all dum-dum. On Sunday doing O.K. I got hit on the shoulder, but hop*
night some of our fellows got cut off trying to to be back in? the Peninsula in/a few days.”
got a machine gun, and, in spite of our fellows’ Since this letter was written, Private Ken-
covering fire, some of them saw the wounded nedy has beep again in action, and has been
bayoneted. Rights that at ordinary times wounded a sdbond time, but list seriously,
would make you sick or at all events sympa- ■ -
thetlc don’t seem to worry you in the slightest - .
when yen get into action. The thing that I LIFTED 90 VARTiR T?v RCTCTT
am sorriest ror is that they did not give me . IJjU IS i SsMJSijli.
half an hour longer. I think I could have
silenced the three men working the machine p riV ate F r mm™ mu
in th-it timp T could see one of them private * . c. Howgate, of Clifton Hill,
running out for ammunition every now and ™ S ‘l^vSfg^an'ilS
thcn ' 1 to he able to say so. Since joining the am."
I have felt bloodthirsty, and was delightr !
THE AUSTRALIAN FLAGSHIP.
shores of the peninsula on a beautiful morn -
w. a «*•„ T Aov+n,, nP covered by the heavy fire from our war
stroef Cohort
street, Coburg, Victoria, have received a batch the sbore- were received by a storm o
of letters from their son Oriel who is a mem- bllllets> but when they gaw cold steel tb , t
ber of the crew of H.M.A.S. Australia. in i was enough. They left everything and flew,
written off the coast of Valparaiso, South but we were unable to catch them. We estab-
■ e nca, ne said: iished ourselves well Inland by noon, and held
I can boast of having travelled around th* our position until I was put out by a shell,
globe. We have been told that we have con- which lifted me and put me about twenty yards
Btituted a record for miles travelled, never further back. The sensation was simply aw-
equalled in the history of the world. In six ful; I got ripped in the back, and it was like
months we covered 40,000 miles, and there is running a razor down one’s -spine. Now, I
another 7500 to do before we rcafh our desti- l am glad to say, I hope to be about soap, and
nation. On a rough calculation, I estimate have another go at them, as I must get a bit
that I have travelled 70.00& miles—rather a °. f m y own back. The most wonderful of all
j unique record, considering lam not 21 yet.” sights is ‘Our Lizzie.’ She looks only a hand-
Later he writes:—“ln your last letter, mother, f ul > but she puts a ‘broad’ on to a hill
you said the German cruisers were proving sls s fiaP e I s entirely altered for about 100 ft.
too cunning. At that time (November 1) they. 0n Monda y 1 saw a shell of Hers get fairly on
had But, like the old adage, ‘Everything lo a bis sun, -which was lifted to the height
comes to those who wait,’ no doubt you have of abcrut 20ft.” ,
since read how we drove them, after a long
chase, across the Pacific right into the guns
of the British fleet.**
Private G. R. Dixon tells of the curious c
fects of a shell:
“I got hit in the foot, and also sustain*
an injured leg through being blown up by
shrapnel shell. Another chap was blov
up, and never got a scratch, but he w;
rendered deaf and dumb. We captur*
some of the enemy’s machine guns with tl
bayonet, but when we came out of actii
we had hardly any clothes on. I had oi
boot partly blown off, and my gear had bu
lets all through it. But I was one of ti




ITOR


ite Bert. Doohan, eldest sou of Mr.
at the
and one of them c
troopships. Vhen
ter, and this time
about three
not troubled again. It was lively While it
lasted. The battleships never shifted the
whole time, and were blazing away at the
guns, but could only fire at the flashes, as
the Turks had their guns dug in right on
the crest of the hills.
“We left there on Tuesday night for Alex- i
andria with about 450 wounded on board. !
Five other ships and a hospital ship had I
gone on ahead of us, each full up. Thirteen j
died before we left and 10 since. Poor chaps, !
nearly all young / fellows, some of them !
wounded in the ctjomach and some shot in j
heai *
“On Tuesday morning the Queen Elizabeth [
came along to whete we were and started j
banging at the forts in the Narrows with
her 15-inch .guns. She was only using two
of them and firing, every two minutes, but
they were like flashes of lightning.
"One of the transports on the way to
Lemnos Island wsis attacked by an enemy
torpedo boat. Three torpedoes were fired
at her, the first twp missed, the third hit her,
but failed to explode. In the excitement a
lot of the troops jumped overboard, and j
about 60 were drowned.
“No doubt there will be a bit of a stir in
Australia and New Zealand when these casu- !
alty lists get intjo the paper. The Turks
are bayoneting j the wounded. We have
one here who wajs. bayoneted while lying on
the ground. He died yesterday morning.
Since we left 24 ! have died, but they were
badly wounded. Many of them are only
wounded in the arms and legs, and will be
right again in two or three weeks. They are
all desirous of getting into it again.
“We have two Turks on board, one of
whom has been bayoneted through the stom-
ach, and the other shot in both legs. I don t
think the one with the bayonet wound will
list much longbr. The steel went right
through him.” J . I
[The authorities have no confirmation of
the statement that the troops on the trans-
port attacked by an enemy torpedo boat were
Australians. The name of the transport was
officially * announced us the Manipon.—Ed.J
there just as they were landing. Shells were
bursting on the shore| from the man-of-war,
sending up clouds of smoke like 'volcanoes.
The Turks must have been going sky high.
Our lot, the Australians and New Zealanders,
went about three miles further along the
coast, on the European side, and the troops
were landed there. Just where they landed
the hills rise up almost straight, only about
200 yards from the beach, and that is all
1 v THE FIRST ASHORE
“COME ON YOU KANGAEOOS”
In a letter from Private T. J. Roe, 9th Bat-
talion. a member of the First Queensland
Expeditionary Force, who on May 4
was in hospital ship hound for Eng-
land, the writer gives some details of the
landing of the Australians. “I was in the
first dozen ashore,” he writes, “One of our
chans, an old soldier, as soon as w.
ed. yelled. ‘Come on lads, fix your
and charge them.’ A 8 in reply s
called out. ‘Come on, you
and T can tell you we came —with
and T can tell you we came —with tne
they went. The Queenslanders
have the credit of taking the first trenches.
We chased the Turks down the other side
the hill. Talk about a 440 yards handicap.
The scratch man (our side) scored the
points A halt at the next ridge, 500
awav. and then, as the hymn-book says. On
Christian Soldiers.' By * "
had them three miles back. We
three days to get the first big ndge, 500 y .
from the starting point, but we had it £
about four hours. The Indian mountain
teries did good work on T uesday. but
Sunday and Monday we got hell itseii
the shape of shrapnel.”
Th make a
you can hear'
before they
arrive. One of the mine-sweepers was struck
on t«e stein and sank after about an hour.
The nearest one to us was about 100 yards
off and that was tvhen they first started,
stopped two of them. The shells were drop-
ping into the water and sending up spray 20
or 30 feet into the air, so' we had to clear


? Vo
STIRRING TALES FROM THE I
FRONT.
It was absolutely true-, Vuivntn WnrL'rm
said* that Turks had been bayoneted in the
trenches and flung over the shoulders of
troops. This, according to statements
by wounded comrades, had been done in
many cases. There were wagers among the
heavy-weights, before the landing, as to
who should lead the tally in this vigorous
method of warfare. One New South Welsh-
man—who went by the name of the giant
even amongst the heavy-weights—was seen
thus to dig five Turks from a trench, before,
he fell with seven bullet wounds through
his body. According to a comrade, his last
words were:—“At any rate, I won the
wager.” The “wager” was a new hat.
The landing operations were quite as
perilous as early descriptions have depicted
them. In one case, 13 men out of 15 sank,
either wounded or lifeless, to the bottom
of one of the boats. The remaining two
sprang overboard, and clambered over
barbed wire entanglements to the beach.
In their excitement, they had left their
rifles behind, but seized a couple that had
fallen from hands of two other troops, who
had been killed, and rushed for the
trenches.
There was no withstanding the fury of
the onset. The training on the Egyptian
the onset. J ne training on me mgypuan
sands had been hard—almost exactingly
hard—but, as the outcome of it the men
were like quivering balls muscle —tense,
vigorous—and, as 1-i‘ivato Hoduwn puts-rl,
“keen as mustard.” The list of, casualties
was heavy, but the men who engaged in the
battle are proud of the work they did, and
their pride is augmented by the generous
measure of recognition it has won in Aus-
tralia. ,
Terrible destruction was Wrought by the
machine-guns that lay in concealed posi-
• tions, and were manned by Turks, whose
hands and faces were stained green to har-
monise with the foliage; but effective as
manner of the Australian advance. It had
been expected that those of the troops who
succeeded in landing safely, despite the hail
of shrapnel, and the assiduity of the deadly
sharp-shooter, would form up and deliver
an orthodox “charge.” Such dash and grit,
such determination and bravery, in the face j
of positively unknown odds—and this is
generally regarded as one of the most amaz-
ing factors of the feat of arms—had never
even entered into the enemy calculation.
And so by threes and fours, and then by
little clusters, and again with larger num-
bers, that gained with the success of the
brave pioneers, the position was won. The
men, save- 'Private Hodsnn. did more than
was expected of them.' In many eases their
officers had been shot to a man. They pene-
trated into the country for miles, and it
was a case of “mob rule.” But it was this
reckless impetuosity, it is believed, that
really conserved the Australian position.
It prevented the terrified Turks from re
iorming at a too-close proximity; but,
the other hand, there is a story that they
thus came within the section that was
covered by the Queen Elizabeth’s guns, and
that at least one non-com. was struck by a
portion of a shell that was intended for the
enemy.
Private Hodson speaks highly of the ef-
fectiveness of the training in Egypt, and
expresses the opinion that there is scarcely
a man in the first contingent who is not
capable of taking non-commissioned rank.
So thorough was the work done, he says,
that a sprinkling of the older hands among
men with but a few week's’ training would
turn them into effective fighting men. For,
he observes, the “pass-it-on” method of im-
parting wrinkles in the manner of fighting
upon which the troops are ungaged has
marvellously effective results. After a time
the esprit de corps that is established among
the men simply will not allow them to do a!
thing the wrong way. He is also eulogistic 1
of the beneficent work of the Y.M.C.A., 1
and, “though he has no time for the parson
as a rule,” can find no words to express
his admiration for the chaplains at the
front, of whom it seems that the Dean ot
Sydney is prime favourite.
BACK TO THE BATTLE LINE.
WOUND] iD MEN’S EAGERNESS,
Under c ite Heliopolis € imp, Cairo,
* Egypt, Maj 2, Sergeant Non tan Worrall,
of A troop, C squadron, Bth Imperial Light
Horse Briga ie, writes an inte -esting letter
to his fathe *, the Rev. Henrj Worrall, ot
Mount Erica Methodist Church, Windsor, in
which he sais: —“As I predicted in my first
letter from ligypt, our men were going to
successfully execute a forlor a hope, and
they have done so wit i the ut-
most valo ir and brilliarce. They
landed wii h the New Va alanders at
the most difficult point of the
Dardanelles coast. The British and Frencn
landed man • miles away, and could afford
them no asi istance. The hardest position
was allottee to the Australia! troops, and,
considering !t was their baptism of fire, and
that they ware attacking a foice four times
as great e’g themselves, with he disadvan-
tage of hating to cross over two miles ot
water in v haleboats, the res lit is one of
the most biilliant achievement s of the war.
A. Colin Cameron’s cousin is here with a
wound in the head; a. bullet entered
the rim oi his cap and gra; cd his head.
He is a sA gcant in the Sever th Battalion,
Second Brigade, and supported the Third.
They had 'to jump into the) water up to
their neckij as the boat neaped the shore,
and scramble over the loose (boulders with
their heavy packs'. They ran up and
along the base of a cliff', took off their
packs, fixe! bayonets, and charged. The
first line ol trenches w<\a 50 Wards from the
shore, and they took them under a terrific
fire, drivin; the enemy back! at the point]
of the baj onet, and so on tail day Jong I
till sunset! when they had covered five 1
miles of co in try. The units Idid splendid I
work, especially the Army Midical Corps,]
which, exp >sed to a fierce fira themselves, ■
tended the wounded with the \greatest de-
spatch an 1 efficiency. Many of the
wounded n icn ha,ve broken hospital and
returned t( the front, and oikr men are
dying to joii them. In conversation with
military m m of world-wide repute, they
have told me that the landing of our troops
at the Dardanelles was one of the finest
achievements in the history of warfare.”
BIBLE STOPS BULLET.
< ». a_
ESCAPE FROM DEATH.
Captain A. E. Greig writes from the (
Deaconesses’ Hospital, Alexandria, to Mr.
ilosenhain: —“Ere this reaches you, you will
have seen my name in the first list of
wounded, knocked out first day—a bit of
hard luck; still, it could have been worse.
I stopped one fair on the elbow and down-
wards; it came side on, and made a nice
large hole. This is now a fortnight ago to-
morrow (Sunday); however, it is healing up
nicely, and I expect to be at the front again
in a week, and expect to stop some more.
Well, we were given a very tough job, such
as Ido not wish to see again. It was a real
Gibraltar to tackle, and if positions were
reversed—well, all the armies in the world
would not have shifted us. We were fired
at from the time we left the ships until we
got back again. Some never reached the
shore. Our tow was lucky, and we got
ashore without a man being hit, and then
we started to climb primth-aiiy a mountain.
And the shrapnel—well, it came like hail,
and the machine-guns ripped it in. and, what
with snipers, it was a perfect hell. Good-
ness only knows how we came out of it
alive.
TURKS WEAR BUSHES.
“The men were very steady, and pushed,
on, although they were dropping all over
the place. It was thick, scrubby country,
and you could not see anything. The Turks
had bushes tied round them; also wore our
uniform —some German officers were killed
wearing it. I had a narrow sqrfeak of it;
was hit in right-hand top pocket, but ray!
cheque-book, photos, and letters turned the!
bullet off; and in my loft-Jimd pocket, right
over the heart, a testament my mother gave
me got a bullet right through it, but it
turned it off also, otherwise 1 was a dead
’un, sure.
“I was leading my men when 1 got bowled
over. and. after getting tied up, I tried to I
. go on, but kept falling over, and my wound
broke out afresh; so I handed over and
turned back. I had to go nearly two miles.
I and was under fire the whole time. I did
| not expec t ever to get back, and while on
j the beach waiting for boats we were
j under shell fire the whole time. After
j vve pushed off we got a dose, but it never
hit the boat. > We did not get here till Fri-
j day night. There were 840 wounded on our
boat, and only two doctors. They lay all
oyer the place—no beds, just anywhere.
This is a German hospital, belonging to some
religious order; all German sisters, and -
they are good; they look after us well. Dr.
Morrison, a Scotchman, has taken over the
pface, which is the best in Egypt; he is
very clever. We are in private wards, mag-
nificent premises and appointments. I am
lucky to be here; only Australian officers
here —English and French soldiers, but none
of our men. The society women of Alex- ,
andria help here; we get free shaves, hair
cuts, and cigarettes. Splendid climate, like
spring weather, cool, and nice sea-breeze. 1
My nerves are not right yet, and 1 cannot
do much writing or reading on account of
it. They have sent officers who were likely
to be ill for six weeks home to England;
that was if they could walk. I did not get
a chance at all.”








ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH YEAR OF PUBLICATION 16 PAGES


\'6fi t Cili4 /<4


01582142
1508


