



1508
00026441


LETTERS
HIGHLAND EMIGRANTS
AUSTRALIA,
DATED BETWEEN SEPTEMBER AND DECEMBER,
1852.
SOLD FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.
Price One Shilling.


FEINTED BY HARRISON AND SONS,
LONDON GAZETTE OFFICE, ST, MARTIN’S LANK
ORCHARD STREET, WESTMINSTER.


PREFACE.
These characteristic letters will be read with interest and
satisfaction; but in order to understand their peculiarities,
it must he borne in mind that the writers think and ordinarily
speak in Gaelic, and that the letters are therefore virtually
translations of Gaelic modes of speech and habits of thought.
This family emigration from the pastoral districts of Scotland
to Australia has, on every main point, fully answered the
expectations which were formed of it. The change from
starvation and idleness in Skye to abundance and industry in
Australia, might be considered, if it were not well authen-
ticated, to belong rather to romance than to the transactions
of real life. The emigrants are highly satisfied with their
condition and prospects ; and they have, with rare exceptions,
according to the anticipation so well expressed by Colonel
Phipps, in the letter written by him, by Prince Albert’s direction,
to the Chairman of the Society, resisted the attractions of the
Diggings, apd settled on the Sheep Parms. But, perhaps, the
most interesting feature of these letters is the strong family
and social affection they display. This virtue of the Celtic
character has shone forth in the recent famine in Ireland and
the north of Scotland, and in the great migration to America
and Australia consequent upon it, and it establishes a strong
claim upon the sympathy of those who regard the charities of
domestic and social life as deserving to be cherished beyond
all human treasures.




From John Mackinnon,
To Donald Mackinnon, Benefeler, near Portree.
Bush Station, Geelong, September the 29th.
Dear Brother,
1 take the opportunity of writing you these few lines, to let
you know that I am in health at present ; but I cannot pass the sore
news I have to tell you in the beginning, that my little boy, Charles,
died on the passage, after eight weeks’ sailing 1000 miles west Cape
of Good Hope ; and it was very sore news to me indeed ; but his
mother was worse ; but we must obey the Lord our God in every
thing he will lay on us. The measles was in the ship, and he got it,
and died after being ten days sick. And little Ann took it, but she
came safe from it. But I ought to bless God that I have the rest
safe, for there was plenty along with me that lost all their children.
Some lost three, for death was working busy all the time it con-
tinued. But likely it would not be so many, but for the measles
happening to be in the ship. All that came with me from Rasay
lost their youngest child ; and Donald Gillies lost his two daughters
on the passage; and Kenneth Mackenzie and Donald Lament lost
their youngest too. We were thirteen weeks and two days between
the two lands, and we got a fine passage, for John Macqueen’s ship
would do as he was saying.
When I landed here, I hired myself for six months with a shep-
herd on a station, and got myself and my wife £3O, and our meat,
during that time; and my wife hath nothing to do, but my meat
and washing ; and I am very pleased with the place, for all the
acquaintance I have got of it. I am five miles from the town, and
I never got a rest to my body till now. And I think, if myself and
all I have of the family be spared, that I will be a fortuned man yet,
for this is the place for plenty gold and silver. But I will not advise
any man with weak children to come here, more than two under six
years of age, for the passage is dangerous for children, and they will
get no food but for them that can work. They must keep the rest up
themselves. There were not many deaths among big people, only
one man and four women, and the man and two of the women were
sick before they came, and another one died in the family way, and
another went overboard on a washing-day. She was putting up
clothes, and she fell over. Any strong one need not be afraid of the
passage, whether he is young or old. Me nor my children, nor my
wife, did not feel sea-sickness at all.
I am a stranger in this place yet, but they tell me about it that it
is a good country ; and I may say it myself, when those that came
here last year empty, are speaking now of buying land. Any good
working man here will get from Bs. to 10s. per day ; but that is
nothing besides the gold. The gold-digging is sixty miles from here,
and there is a great expense to take a family to it; but any single


man, or man and his wife, who would travel themselves, would not
be at much expense. You would think lOs. a-day great wages. Not
many here stop at it. But I will not force any one to come here till
I see myself, but leave them to their own will. But one man I
advise, Duncan Campbell Rasay, the wright, and John Bethune, if
his wife was in health for the passage, for they would soon make
their fortune here. They would get £1 per day, and their wives
would make very good also. And any strong family, if they are wise,
will do good here. But if John and Donald, Charles’ sons, did not
come as yet, I know you and your sister's would do well; for if they
were along with me they were sure of £l4O the whole family in the
year, and their meat. But every thing is nothing beside the gold ;
but it leaves things dear. Here a pair of shoes is £1 10s. ; women’s
shoes, £1 ; flour, £5 per bag, that is, 6d. per lb. ; but beef is cheap ;
tobacco, Bs. per lb. The making of moleskin trousei’s is 10s. ; cloth
trousers, 13s. ; but, after all, tailors and shoemakers will go to the
gold, and that leaves every thing dear. But what signifies that,
when there is plenty to give for it?
Now, Donald, I tell you the truth, and no more, according to all I
see and hear. Now, this country is a pretty country, not very cold
or hot as I see yet. You would wear any kind of clothes. Now,
dear brother, although you had come along me there was no chance
of our keeping together the fii'st year, for all the people that came
with me from Rasay and Skye scattered through the country, here
and there, none of them nearer me than 20 miles, and every one a
shepherd ; but me and them expect to meet yet, I got the station
where Archibald Macintosh was, and he and his brother went to the
gold ; and his wife and sister stopped in the town.
Now I tell you any one will make a shepherd here. Big Rory in
Fearn’s Rasay would make a good shepherd here, and now any one
would do. I have 2000 sheep to herd; but I do not get out any day
till after breakfast, and I may come home to dinner. I bought a dog
from Mclntosh, and I paid 11. for it. My master is a Free Church
man, and he sent a Free Church minister to my house; and after
speaking of spixdtual things we spoke a good deal about the world,
and he told me the more people that will come to this country the
better. Now I cannot name all my friends here, but they may take
it all as truth. This will not hold all my news, but I am going to
send another letter to Angus, my brother-in-law, and he may be
looking for it a month after this one, and I will tell more in his.
Now, Donald Maclean, you would get 601. a-year here for shepherd-
ing, and your meat, but I am afraid your children are very weak for
the passage—for 82 children died in our ship; but other ships come
very safe from death. Your father’s family would do well here.
Any one who will come here let him take with him a bottle of castor
oil and some baking soda for the passage. Now I conclude with my
kind blessing to you and to all friends and acquaintances. I do not
bid you to wi'ite me because it is a chance of me getting it, for I am
hired for six months; but if you will come yourself, you will write
me by chance to the care of my master, he will know where 1 will
be. Catherine sends her blessing to all friends, but her mother and
Christy above all. Address Bush Station, Geelong, Port Phillip,
care of John Armstrong.
I am your dutiful brother till death,
(Signed) John MacKinnon.


From Donald Mackenzie ,
To Roderick Mackenzie , of Heatherjield, Benefeler , by Portree.
Killembet, by Port Phillip, Nov. 6, 1852.
My dear Father and Mother,
I am to inform you these words to let you know of the colony
so far as I can relate concerning it. lam engaged with a man of the
name of Mr. John Thomson, and he is from Edinburgh. Myself
and Archibald Mackinnon, from Cairnescross Sleat, is hired for shep-
herding, and we are hired for 12 months, and my wages is 75/. with
rations and dwelling. Besides I got a good wages. The one that is
with me he have two sons and himself to be working, and they only
get 120/. the three Ido not know nothing about none that left
home with me, but Sandy Mclnnes, who left Waternish ; his father
is in Gedintaler; he is 28 miles from me, and all the family is at
the one man, and he is a good master. His wages is coming to 160/.
a-year.
We was complaining for being so long on the passage. We were
16 weeks at sea, only having favourable weather during the time,
but three weeks of high wind, and it was blowing norwest, and that
was the fair wind with us. There was a great number of children
died on this ship, but we did not lose one, and they stood well to the
sea. All tire children that was on both sides of us was taken away,
and our two was left, and another child that was aside us. There
was ten families on both sides of us, and there was not a child left
in the ten families but four. The measles was aboard the ship, and
the doctor was wishing to attend them carefully, but they were com-
plaining of him, though he was doing his best towards them. The pro-
vision was sufficient; they were getting in the morning porridge for the
children, and biscuits and tea to themselves, and their rice and pork,
on supper, as in the morning, and beef every Saturday. We was
allowed more than we could eat. They were saying before we left
home that all what we would have would be searched and examined
before the Commissioners. You need not be afraid of anything of
that kind ; you might have anything you would like, unknown to
them, and let you bring all the necessary things you have, that will
not be too bulky for the rules of the ship. The ship was to be
cleaned three times a day, and there would be a watch on in the
night-time ; there would be three shifts* on through the night; if
I would refuse anything of the doctor’s order I would be confined ;
I would be put to prison, or a week sweeping the ship. Labourers
in this country would get from Bs. to 10s. a day, but they would
not save much money by the day’s wages, for the provision is so
dear, and when house and water and fire would be taken off it, 10s.
a day would be very little for a man bringing up a family. I took
one sum for a year, and lam content for it. I have of meat for the
family per week, 28lbs. beef or mutton, and 20lbs. Hour, 4lbs,
sugar, and £lb tea; and we did not feel any hunger since we left
home, and we have flesh three times a day. My master is killing a
bullock every fortnight, and sending the rations home to them every
fortnight. A doctor is to come to the station every month, and the
master pays him so much a year for it.
* Three changes of the watch.


I cannot give you any illustration on the country, only of sheep
and cattle, and great tacks of land, as I am too far out in the country.
A person that will come here need not think of anything better than
being in service for the first time, though a person Would think, if
he had 60/., that he would do better than being under a master’s
command ; but it is nothing, and 100/. would be nothing for any
body. You would not get a small piece of land in this place as we
would get at home. This place is very dry, but there is no scarcity
of water for drink, or cooking, and washing too. There is lakes ot
salt water in this country, and in the summer time they will dry up
as salt-rock, and the tenants is taking it home with their carts, and
it is as tasty as any salt you would get at home. This is a very good
place, but the grass is not growing so good as it is in our place, it
is so scarce in the ground. So we are content in it at this time
whatever; and it was the leading of the Almighty that encouraged
me to come to this place, besides being at home starving and in
slavery, as many one behind me is ; and I would advise many to
come if they choose to come. If the way w'ould be to them as it
was to us, as long as we will have perfect health, and I would
advise John, my brother, to come to this place. Murdoch and
Kenneth would do very good with the sawying in this colony.
As for John and Sandy, I would be afraid for giving them any
consent to come, in fear that they would lose the children, as they
are all too weak for the sea, as it is a great hardship for weak
children ; but if you would risk the chance as I did, in order that
God would be so merciful to you as he is to me in all matters,
and if you would arrive safe in this colony you would be better off
than the gentlemen that you would leave at home, for they would be
thinking to live on their money. All what they have of money in
our place is nothing besides the money and gold in this colony. You
would be better off than . I would advise Donald Mackenzie
in Lethalt to come. Though he would have two full shares of the
town, he would be much better in this place. If any one intend to
come, let him bring as much as he can of clothes and shoes, for they
are very dear in this place. Suppose a man would have 20/., here is
as you would have 205. at home.
I am, &c.,
Donald Mackenzie,
Care of Mr. John Thomson, Killinebit, by Port Philip.
I am 40 miles from Port Philip, but it is in the county of Port
Philip I am. Tell John to come though he would not bring none but
himself; and if the whole family would come, my father would get
60/. a-year for herding sheep, if he could move his foot out of the
house. Whatever is my wages I will have food and house along with
it. I would wish that all my friends would come for it would be to
their profit, and it would soon bring them to a better way than
another man’s service. If you will believe that, let you do what
you like.


From John Mackinnon, formerly Labourer and Cartwright at Roag,
Dunvegan , Isle of Skye,
To Alex. Mackinnon, Sheriff’s Officer , Roag.
Melbourne, Port Philip, Victoria,
Dear Sir, Nov. Bth, 1852.
According to promise I took the pen in my hand to state you
the ways of Victoria Colony ; but at first about our passage, which
was the quickest ever was known. We had a splendid start from
Liverpool, reaching the Madeiras Island in 8 days, where we meet
the hot climates, and were two days laying in a calm, the only calm
we had since starting till we arrived in Melbourne ; hut we had 10
days of wind a-head at the line, but constant gale during all that
time. He steered his course to South America ; and we came within
80 miles of South America, where we meet the trade winds, and then
the trade wind took us in to Melbourne. Strong gale aft for a month,
and we made passage in 68 days. Ann was sea-sick the first 12 days.
As for myself 1 did not feel as much as a sore head since I left home;
and she was in good health ever since. But, oh, Sandy! throwing
out my two boys into the deep sea; it will never go out of my
heart. The youngest died with the measles at crossing the line ; and
the other 6 days after with a bowel complaint, a disease raged
greatly in our ship among children ; 63 children died, and 2 women
in childbed, and one sailor. We had too many on board, although
had plenty of room, and had in the ship as I had in John McLeod’s
little barn, and the whole of them the same. Now I have to tell you
that I was working a fortnight in Melbourne before the smiths from
Herebost landed here. I meet them, and took them to my master,
and he engaged Thomas as a smith, and Rory and Donald Mac Donald
as hammermen at 105. per day; but Thomas and I have one pound
sterling per day. I saw John Mafie and Donald Cameron; but I
was in Melbourne before them all. I and Thomas Me Pherson, and
Donald MacDonald, his mother and sisters, and Angus MacKinnon,
smiths from Portree, are in the same house, but separate apartments.
I am working at my old trade, cartwright, one mile out of Mel-
bourne, at a place called Lower Collinwood, on the banks of the river
Yarra-Yarra. We are not scarce of water. lam paying 10$. a week
for my room and fire wood; there is no peats here.
Now, Sandy, it is no profit to me to tell you lies. That I will
not. I heard at home good accounts of Australia; but I never
believed it till I saw it with my own eyes, and I think more of it
than I ever heard at home, partly green and partly thickly wooded.
Now I think this is the richest town of its size in all the world ; all
the go is gold ! gold! gold! They do not care about a sovereign
here more than you of a penny at home; and I will tell you lam
only six weeks and two days at work, and I have in my possession
this night, after clearing all my expenses, twenty pounds sterling,
and that may tell you what kind of place this is. How long I
would be in Skye before 1 would gather as much ; but here they are
no more in a person’s eye than 20 farthings. But, oh, Donald
Campbell, what are you doing in Roag with your strong family ;
but I would not advise a man with a weak family to come—but it is
all for the fear of the passage. But I will tell you another good
sign of this country, there is not a beggar to be seen here. If they


come here they must work, for every person will get work to suit
him. If there is a lazy man, lie can get herding; there he can sit
and roll himself all day. There is very little cultivation in this
colony, and if a man will work hard for money, he can make money;
but all works are as easy to do here as at home. Herds gets from
£SO to £7O a year ; labourers from 10s. to 15s per day ; and trades-
men from 18s. to 275. per day. John, your son, would get 355. for a
pair of blucher boots. I would fully advise you to send your sons
here, where they can do something for themselves. See myself, I
came here without any person to direct me, or tell me what to do.
When I came ashore I had only 10s. I will tell you now about the
provisions. First, flour Gd. per lb.; meal Gd. per lb. ; beef and
mutton from 3d. to Gd. per lb. ; potatoes s d. ; eggs 6s. per dozen;
tea Is. Gd. to 2s. per lb.; sugar from 3d. to sd. per lb. ; tobacco
ss. per lb. ; and many other things according to that, but although
we think nothing of it, as the money is so plentiful. I saw
the other day Peter Mac Donald, the major’s son, and Donald
Monkstadt’s son and his brother,* and their house are beside ours;
the men are away at the diggings. Little Angus Me Pherson is in a
hotel, £1 a week board and lodging. His mother, Donald, Margaret,
and Fimily in the same house, about a mile from us. Now I have to
tell you that I live with as little fear as I would in Roag. They will
be speaking at home that a person would be in danger of his life day
and night ; but it is not true. I saw some of the natives going bare
naked, but they will hurt no person ; and the people here are as kind
and free as ever I saw.
(Signed) John McKinnon.
From Donald MacCaskill
To his Sister.
Devil’s River, November 17, 1852.
My dear Sister,
I have to inform you, with the greatest pleasure, that we are
all in a good state of health, since we departed from you. We have
reason to be thankful to the Almighty for all the kindness he gives
us, besides others. We had the voyage 15 weeks and 4 days, from
anchor to anchor, from Liverpool to Geelong, Port Philip. We had
the most of the time very coarse weather on the voyage. There
were two different kinds of disease on board, —the bowel complaint
and the measles, —but we were clear of it, except little Donald., he
took the measles, but it was for no trouble to him. He was only
two days in bed, and that was all. All the rest took it before. We
lost 27 children, and two of the sailors ; 8 born. There were families
that lost 4, some 5, and some 2 and 3, but I, Donald Campbell,
* The Peter Macdonald mentioned and Donald Monkstadt’s son were
two gentlemen who emigrated last year; the former is the son of Major
Macdonald, of Watemish; the other, of Mr. Macdonald, of Monkstadt.
It is remarkable that it is only the upper class of Highlanders who have
gone to the diggings; the two now mentioned, with Mrs. Mac Pherson’s
sons, and son-in-law, who are comparatively independent, are the only
instances, so far as intelligence has been received in this country, in which
the diggings have been preferred to settled employment.


Malcolm Macleod, and Donald Macdonald, took all our families all
alive to this colony, in a good state of health. When we came to
anchor the Commissioner and Doctor came on board to examine the
ship and the passengers, and they got all things right, and after-
wards the Masters came on board to engage the people ; they were
very brisk among them ; but for my part I gave my advice to the
ship’s Doctor, about what was going, and he would not allow me to
take it, till he could see what would be going at last. Now, on the
3d day, Mr. Frederick came on board, and when the Doctor saw this
gentleman coming, he just directed me to him, immediately, with all
my family. Our wages are 200/. a-year, plenty to eat and drink;
besides it, our following rations, 80 lbs. beef or mutton, 60 lbs. flour,
12 lbs. sugar, lb. tea.
Our master has two stations, his home station is 18 miles from
Geelong, and the other station 150 miles up the country; there is
the place where we are received, the name of it is Devil’s River.
Meron and I, and the young ones of the children, are in one
place, Duncan and Kenneth in another place; John and Peter are
in the manager’s house. We are all shepherds, except John, he is
about the house after the cattle, milking them, because Mrs. Digin s,
the Manager’s wife, has no servant but him. She is a Highland
woman herself. My dear Sister, it is very difficult news to believe
at home that I have 60/. a year, and my rations; Duncan 40/.,
Kenneth, 40/.; John, 40/,; Peter, 20/. Dear Sister, you can easily
understand by this account that I left the starvation behind. I can
give as much to my dogs now, as I was getting to my family at
home, to keep them alive with. Every thing is comfortable here,
plenty silver, and gold, but the most of every thing is dear accord-
ingly. This is a very wholesome country. It is not too warm, nor
too cold either. We have the summer here now, and lam using
the Highland cloth I took from home. Now, my dear Effy, I hope
you will keep up your mind for my delay in writing you. I could
have written to you before this, but I was waiting to come up to my
station before writing you. lam shepherding 1900 wedders; some
of them are very good, but I did not see any in this country as large
as the Houstle wedders. We were four weeks coming up the country,
and a week in the station. Now give my news, with my best respects,
to all my friends and acquaintances, and it is my advice to them to
come to this country, for as far as I know there is no other place
under the stars like this place, for poor people to live in ; certainly
there are many difficulties to meet with a man before he will arrive,
but he will soon forget them. Now 1 must conclude with my best
respects to you, and all my inquiring friends. Mern is sending
her kind love to you, and the rest of her friends. All the children
send the same to you. Dear Sister, your dutiful and affectionate
brother, ~ _
Donald MacCaskill.
“ Tha mi beo, slan, lan toli elite, ann an fasach Australia.”
Translation. —“I am alive, well, quite happy, in the wilderness
of Australia.”


From Donald MacDonald, formerly shepherd at Borline,
To his Brother Duncan MacDonald.
Dear Brother, Geelong, 22nd November, 1852.
I now do myself the pleasure of intimating to you, that we
all arrived here safe, after a passage of 91 days. Thanks be to God
for his wonderful mercies. I am sorry to tell you, that my wife,
Isabella, was indisposed during all the voyage. She was delivered
here about a fortnight ago, of a female child, who only survived nine
days. She is now considerably better, and do hope, in a very short
time, will be able to help me, and her young family. lam glad to
tell you, that we were well-used, and treated most kindly, by the
captain, officers, and crew of the ship* ; indeed, in one word, we were
dealt with far beyond our expectations. We have had one death,
and one birth, so I think we were the only exception that arrived
with so few deaths, in this colony, for a series of years. But a most
unfortunate affair happened before we came ashore. The sailors con-
spired to take a French leave, i.e., without the Captain’s permission.
It was on a Sunday when the crew prepared to leave the ship, and,
awful to relate, the captain shot the cook through the head. I hope
I shall never witness such a scene during the rest of my sojourn in
this vain and transitory world. For my part I have not travelled
much of the country as yet, being in the Emigration Depot for the
last six weeks ; but one thing I am safe in saying, that this is the
country for the poor working man. But picture to yourself a man
coming here with 4 or 5 young children, that is not able to work.
That man cannot expect to get the wages that young men without
any encumbrances will get. But you and your brother, John, are
well adapted for this colony. It would not be a rare thing, if John,
my bi-other, and his family, would get close upon £3OO per annum.
And Ido ask you to come, and that as soon as possible. Do not think
that I deceive you, for I write here the pure sentiments of my heart
to my dear brothers. To give you one instance of the wages. Donald
MacAskill and his family were promised £220 per annum, and many
more I could enumerate, but my space will not admit of it. My
dear brother, I charge you strongly, to take with you our sister,
Anne, who will find plenty of employment here, and will not be a
burden to you or me, for she will be able to support herself. Car-
penter’s wages is from £1 to 30s. per day ; labourer’s from 10s. to 15s.
per day ; but I must say that all kinds of provisions are high, but
every one has plenty ; and those that hired to go to the country,
have more meat than they are able to consume. Write me to the
care of Mr. Mills, Emigration Depot, Geelong. I wrote to M. Angus
MacMillan to Gipp’s Land, but did not hear from him as yet. I
hope I will hear from him soon. I expect to leave here to-day, and
is going 100 miles to the interior as a general servant, at the rate of
£7O per year ; only the wife and Mary is to help about the station in
cooking, &c. Give our kindest love to all enquiring friends, espe-
cially to Mr. MacAskill and his amiable lady ; and we are very
grateful, and do rejoice that we have been sent here. Remember me
to Mr, Weir and his family. I still hope that I will see him here,
and his family, for they are sure to do well; indeed, any one that is
* The ship was the “ Georglana.”


steady will soon accumulate a little money. The diggings just now
is not so brisk ; some are getting gold, but the most are not. I advise
you once more to follow me here.
My dear brother, yours, very affectionately,
Donald Macdonald,
P.S.—Advise John or Alex. Cameron to come ; prevail upon
them to come, and the whole of my friends.
Margaret Macleod, from Dunvegan, Isle of Skye.
[Her mother, Mrs. MacPherson, had a legacy of 300/.; she, with
a large family of married sons and daughters, sailed in the ‘ Warrata,’
and paid their own expenses.]
My dear Brother and Sister, Melbourn, December, 1852.
It is with the greatest pleasure that I write you these few
lines to let you know that this leaves us in good health, hoping and
wishing that this may find you all in the same. My dear Brother;
I am sure you would be longing to hear from us, how we are coming
on since we came to this colony. In the first place I have to tell you
that Archy, James, and Sandy MacPherson went to the gold diggings
about two months ago. That was what was keeping us so long
without writing you, till we would hear from them. We had a letter
from them last Saturday, and they were mentioning in it that they
did very little since they went there, but there is no saying but what
they may get a little yet. But the gold diggings are not at all so
well as the reports in our country are about them, and, in general,
they are not so well this year as what they were last year.
Roderiche is working in a smithy in town, and is getting 3/. a-week,
and Donald is in a lemonade shop, and is getting 3/. a-week, and
Angus is waiting in a publick house, and is getting 11. 6s. a-week,
along with rations. There is plenty of work here for every person
that will work, and good wages for tradesmen and labourers.
Tradesmen gets from 61. to 6/. a-week, and labourers from 81. to 4/.
a-week. I wish that you and Margeret would take the courage to
come out here, for you would both do very well. Margeret would
do very well in washing. She would get Bs. on every dozen of linens
she would wash and dress. Emily and I are getting a good deal of
washing to do ; we got 'll. 10s. from one gentleman last week for
washing, and it is very useful to us, as the men are not successful at
the diggings. Mother, Emily, and I are all living together yet.
Roderick and Donald are along with us. We have got two rooms,
and are paying 21. a week for them. Rents are very high here—every
thing is dear in this place—loaf bread, 2s. the quarter ; butter, 3s. pei
pound; cheese, 2s. per pound ; eggs, ss. the dozen; and every other
thing according to that. I would not get a pair of shoes to myself
under a pound. If the Macßays would come they would make their
fortune in no time. The Free Church is as near as twenty yards to
our house, and there’s service in it twice day on Sabbath; but they
are not like the ministers comparing to those we have left behind us;
but, who came here about a fortnight ago, but the Reverend Norman
Macleod, from America; he is very old now, he is just like old
Norman Macleod in your own place. He seems to be a very good


man. There is Galick sermon preached every Sabbath once a-day
here, so that the place is not so bad off as what we heard of before we
left home, for the want of the means of grace, if a person wisshes to
attend them; but this is a very wicked place, and people given greatly
to drink here, especially women. I never saw a town yet where
there is more women given to drink than this town is. Dear
brother I am sure will be happy to hear that your mother is enjoying
good health since she came to this colony, and says that her mind is
far easier than what she was at Herebost, and the colony is agreeing
with her very well. This is a beautiful country, and always fine
weather, but it is very hot sometimes, but I supose it is never very
cold. When Archy will come home, he will write you all the par-
ticulars about the colony, for he will know better about them, and
also will write to all those whom he promised to write to, for letters
are so uncertain to be sent from the place they are at, for there is no
post office where they are. You can tell John MacPherson that he
was very foolish he did not come out here with his family ; he could
get a situation for every one of them, and drivers get the highest
wao-es that goes in the colony. Give them all our kind love. I
hope you would have got the letter Thomas wrote you out of the
harbour, where he mentioned you all the particulars about our
voyage; we had a very long passage but very favorable. I dare say he
mentions about the death of our dear little boy, who suffered a
great deal before he died. Poor John MacKinnon, that left Roag,
lost all his family; the only one that was living after coming on
shore, died last week ; but they are both quite well themselves.
John MacKinnon* and Thomas are in the same shop working. They
have 51. a week. Thomas's wife was delivered last week of a son, and
are both doing well. Donald and his mother-in-law are living along
with him. Donald is working along with him in the smithy. My
dear brother, I wish you and Margaret would take the courage of
coming out here, for I know it would be better for you or your
family than staying there, for every person here has plenty to eat and
drink, and could save a little money in a short time also, if they will
be industrious. Hector Thorburnis along with James at the diggings
and is quite well, but we have not seen him yet. Alex. Macleod
from Tylone, he was down at Melbourn since we came—it was along
with that our men went to the digings, and I supose that he has done
middling well at the digings—and who is coming to visit us very
often here but William Tolmie—he has got a situation in the town.
I think they are from all quarters of the world here. My dear
brother, give our kind love to all who enquiers for us, especially Mrs.
Mac Coll and all aquaintaices. Mother sends her love to Mrs. Cameron
and family, and all friends. My dear, I hope you will write when-
ever you receive this. Let us know all the news of the place for
we are as anxious to hear about you, as what you are to hear from
us. My dear, I add no more but our dear love to you and Margaret,
and the children and all friends,
Your ever affectionate sister,
Margaret Macleod.
Dear brother, remember us kindly to Miss Mac Nell, and Mr
Wilson, and Mrs. Macdonald.
* The writer of the first letter.


From Alex. Cameron, formerly Shepherd at Talisker,
To John Cameron, Esq., Tacksman of Talisker, Macleod County.
Wardy Yalleck.
My dear Sir,
I take the opportunity of these few lines to you to let you
know that I am well, hoping and wishing this will find you in the
same, and also your father. Surely you would like to hear how I
got through all since I left you. I may say that we got a passage as
good as any that ever come over ; we left Greenock on Tuesday, and
13 weeks from that day we anker at Port Phillip, after a save
passage ; none died but one child, belongs to Ewen Robertson, from
Strathaird, near Doctor Macalster house. We had the best doctor
that ever I saw; every desease or sickness that would appear among
them as soon as he would give medicen they would soon be better,
and so that he was luckey, and by that, under God’s mercy, we had
reason of. being thanful. The most of my countrymen at home are
thinking that it is calm weather that leaves the voage so long, but
that is not true, it is the great length of the ocean that do it; we got a
contrary wind on the west side of Irland that keep us 12 days, then
we got a good fair breeze till we reach near the line, there we meet
with contrary wind for 2 weeks and after that a good smart fair wind
till we arived in Port Phillip. I don’t see but 3 days of calm
weather all the voage, many a day and night our ship would be
running from 11 to 12 miles in an hour, many a gale, and a
high sea I saw her smacking through many a sail and stidinsail-
boom the smash coming, many a ship that meet us, but none would
keep convoy to us, but one we saw and she leave us, I am sure it was
one of the packets. It was the Island of Madera the first land we
saw since we left Irland, and we saw 3 islands that belong to Affrika;
I don’t mind there names; I saw plenty that I cannot hold; heare I
saw plenty of the flying fish and of dolphins and shirks. I cannot
hold the half of what I wish, but we got save hear, and was received
by them that is taking charge of the emigrants, after being near a
week in the ship, in which we was well used since we left Greenock;
we don’t call at the Cape at all, for we had provision on board and
water for 24 week, as I say we was received by the Commissioners
on shore to the barracks as they call them, the tepoe :* we was there
the half of what was in the ship, for the houses would not hold them
all, and I was on the first and also my family, and John Mathison
and family, and Murdoch Mathison, and many other beside us
to-morrow. There was plenty wanting servant of every kind, so
that I take my chance of being a sheephard ; I was hired at one
John Gordon McMillan, Wardy Yallock, 50 miles from Geelong, for
that is the name of the town where we landed, and it is a by town.
John, my son, was hired in the town, he got horse and card, his
wages £67 besid his board and lodging; Ann, my daughter, is at a
ladie that hath a large shop with her brother, her wages is £25
beside board and lodging, and she is very near John. There was a
great demand on servants, and there wages no less than £2O with
board and lodging; my master hired me, and John Mathison, and
Lochlin Cameron, and D. McKinnon, Elgoll, and Martin Robertson,
* Dep6t.


near Broadford; he bring this 5 families out hear with all our logage
in one card, but they call them trays, and with 8 oxens, as they call
them bullocks. Myself and Ewen hath a flock, and Mary hath
wages for being the hudd-keeper, as they call the Ijddle house we
got, but my hud is big enough for the family, myself, Ewn, Keneth,
and Santy, and Mary Cathrine is in the master’s house employed; to
tell you my wage—l have £4O, my ration, 141 b. mutton, 101 b. flour,
21b, sugar, £lb. tea; Mary, £2O wages, 141 b. mutton, 21b. sugar, Jib.
tea, and Ewen the same ration, but his wage £ls, so that our wage
will come to £76, our ration to 421 b. mutton, 30lb. flour, 61b. sugar,
fib. tea per week ; although Kenneth and Santy have no ration we
have plenty to eat and drink ; I never see such mutton so fat.
Although the strangers would come now and then we would have
plenty; but for tea and sugar we cannot mannage it; many time I mind
Kirsty McCaskill if she would be near her sister that she would well
of it; Murduch is not above 5 miles from me, sheepharding ; my
neighbour, John Mathison, is besid me, sheepharding ; he was with
me last night, and Ann will be very often. John Mathison and Ann
hath the same as me and Mary; John hath £4O, and Ann £2O, for
keeping the house, the same as Mary, my daughter, and that is a good
wages with their father, keeping the house. Margret and Cathrine
Mathison is at service near Geelong, where the most of the
single girles and boys that came out with us got employment,
not one less than £2O, with board and lodging. You may tell
the girles about you that they are mad for not coming hear ;
I kept Mary, and John Mathison, Ann, for being our house-
keepers, and there wages is as good as the rest ; a good many
of the single lads is hired at the sheep shearing for 3 months it will
last them that length; there wages 21. per week, with there board
and lodgins; in some place 255. per 100 sheep. Every thing is very
dear hear with the gold digging, but them that good wages
with board and lodging may keep money. The gold digging is not
above 12 miles from hear. They always advising us to be looking
sharp, for it is on the this farm as sure as any other place. I am
writing this letter on my knees. I have to rise now and then to
follow the sheep through the wood for it is very pletiful about me.
I have 3000 in my flock ; Ewen about 2000. Our master hath 18,000
on this farm, and not paying but £lO of rent for that; they told me
that he is one of the richest in this colony, but he hath a estate
about the town of Geelong. The first night we left the town, it is in
one of his tennants house we stop, and he is paying 500/. of rent for
what he have, and that is not but very liddle of what McMillan
hath there. He is a magistrate in the town of Geelong; he hath a
grant house there, and a grant house hear. My station is only
two miles from his house hear. He will not be hear but all the
time of sheep-shearing; he is a native of Argyleshire, he is n °t
mailed. His mother and sister is in Geelong, I saw them ; they are
very kind especial to the Camerons. I wish you was mailed to his
sister, she is both rich and very bonney. I forget to tell you that
Donald Mathison is working on the sheep-shearing at my master s,
and two others—Charleas McKinnon and Alex. Cameron, both from
Elgoll for £2 each per week and board and lodging. All things is
dear hear. When I was in Geelon the quarten loaf was 35.; a pair of
shoes £2; the pag of flour £6, and all accordingly, but the lowest
wages for day work 10s. to 12s. per day. I cannot give you any


description!! about the place, it is the best place ever I have seen—
there is no poor man to be seen, but I think that £5 would go so far
in Scotland as £IOO hear for to began to spend money, but a person
would make £IOOO hear before he would save £2O there. lam sorry
that I canot hold hear all what I wish. I must tell you that all our
sailors flee away from the ship first Sunday after we come—when we
was at our dinner ; we ran up when we hard the noise ; they went
down to the quarter-deck and began to loose one of boats, the captain
asked what they mean, they told him that they was going to the
digging, and if he would not behave, that he would be on the worth
of the play ;• he run down to the cabin an out a pistle that would
shot 6 shots at once ; he keep that to the ear of there own coock and
he fall down dead, then he shot 3 shots as quick as possible, he
wounded another too, but none dead but the one ; the sailmaker, a
strong, able man, jump to him and give him a plow that nock him
down as fast as the man that he killed, and they tye him on his back
till they got away; he was flate on the deck, and the sailmaker
waiting, before any of his mates would loose him, he was able to put
them all out on the sea if he would begin. I cannot follow this, you
will see it in the newespapers, for I saw it the first day I come
a shore, and there was not 6 words of it, but the captain put every
word in his own way; but the captain had no reason to kill
any of them ; he should tell them that he would do it if they
would leave the boat. Every ship that came lost there crew. I
don’t think that they will ever get home. Mind, now, and write
as soon as you will receive this, and let me know all particulars, and
if old Donald Cameron is alive, for he was very sick when I went
away ; tell me if John Roy came this way, and how is your father
and Mr. Smith .doing. Mary, my daughter, joins with .me, and also
Ann Mathison and her father, to yourself and father, and tell him
that they are minding him very often, and to all who wish us joy
and happiness we are all pleaced here. You will adress Alexr.
Cameron, care of John Gordon McMill, Wardy Yallock, by Geelong,
Port Phillip, Australia.
I remain, your well-wisher till death,
Alex. Cameron.
P.S.—I will send another letter to Mrs, McAskill along with yours,
and another to my brother at Soa, I am, yours,
Alex. Cameron.
VIII.
From the same Alex. Cameron,
To Mrs. MacAskill.
Wardy Yallock.
My dear Mrs. Mac Askill,
As I am sure that you must be anxious to hear how I am,
this will inform you, if it comes to your hand, as wish it would. I
have to inform you that we got a save passage; we came in 13 weeks
from Greenock to Port Philip. None died but one child belonging to
Ewen Robertson, from Strathaim, near Dr. Mac Allister’s hous. We
left Greenock on the 13th July, we meet with a contrary wind on
the west side of Ireland that kept us 9or 10 days. Then we got
* That he would have the worst of the game.


fair wind till we reach near the line, we meet with contrary wind
for 2 weeks. Then we got fair wind till we reach Port Phillip.
I should mention you that Dr. Macleod, from Glasgow, came
to the ship before we left Greenock, to encourage the emigrants.
He 'gave us plenty of bibles and psalm books and tracts of
many kinds. He was saying that he use always to be in emi-
grant ships, encouraging the passengers, and that he never stand
in a vessel as well prepared as ‘Georgiana’ was. I got a fiddle in
Greenock, that keep me very busy playing every night that we
could stand on deck dancing. The Dr. and the Capt. would force
them to dance every night, and they was very few the nights they
would not try it. I was in oppinion before I left home that the
passengers would not be allowed to be on deck always, but that
was not true, for all the passengers was ordered by the Capt. and
the Dr. to be playing themselves on deck all the day, to keep them
in active. The Capt. would go down under deck now and then,
slashing them up, and he would be laming them many kind of
playing that I never saw. If I was near you I would tell you many
thing I have seen comming, but it was the flying fish the greatest won-
der that I saw; they was so numerous about the ship for 4 orfive weeks;
they would jump up about the ship, they would fly 200 or 300 yards
before they would hold ; they are about the size of a big herring, the
smallest of them : 3 or 4 of them jump on board, although the ship
was very high. I saw shirks near the Cape; but we don’t call at the
Cape, we keep 6 or 700 miles from it ; we had allowance for 24
weeks, of water and provision on board. I wrote a letter when we
was near the line to send to you, as the Capt. told us that we would
have a chance to meet with ships coming home, that would bring
our letters, but we never got the opportunity to send them. We
meet with many ships coming the same as we was, but none would
keep convoy to our ship; she would run from 11 to 12 miles in
the hour with a good breeze. 7 days before we reach we came up
to the ship William Tolmie was in, and she left Greenock three
weeks before us. We saw her at 9 of clock, a great distant before us ;
at sunset we pass her, then we come first Tuesday to anker. Thurs-
day she came in and anker beside us. Our Capt. went over, and
bring 4 of our lads along with him—John, my son, was one of them ;
who meet him but William. All the time our Capt. stayed John
or William was together : he show him his place and bed that
cost him 2 51. John told him that our place was more comfortable.
“Well, John,” says Wiliam, “I would rather be with you there
than here.” Next morning we went to Geelong, and there ship to
Melbourn. I don’t hear about William Tolmie since then, but I
saw a lad that was acquainted with Donald Tolmie at the gold
diggings, and he told me that he was a fine smart lad, and doing
well. It is time now to tell you my situation. lam a sheepheard
here, at a man, John Gordon Mac Millan, a native of Argyllshire ;
he hired me, and John Matheson, Lachlan Cameron, and Donald
Mackinnon, both from Elgoll, and Martin Robertson, at near
Broadford. I have 8000 sheeps before me. Ewen, my son, is with
me, and Mary, Kenneth, and Sandy. Myself, Ewen, and Mary
hath 7 51. of wage, with our rations ; 1 have 40/., Ewen, 15/., he hath
about 2000 sheeps before him; Mary hath 20/. for keeping the
house and preparing our meat ; our wages come to 7 51., our allowance
come to 421 b. of mutton, 301 b, of flour, 61b of sugar, fib. of tea ; so


t h ? re [ 9^ nty t [ ler , e per week for ourselves and the two liddle bovs
John Ma heson hath 40*, Ann, 20/., that come to 00/. between them
?r n A lr°?i r fami . lies 18 at employment. I keep Mary for mvself
and John Matheson keeps Ann ; and they have got
with their father s. John Matheson’s son, and Charles
Alex. Cameron, from Elgoll, is hired at our master for shearing the’
sheeps, at 21. a-week for each of them, and there lodging
Ihere is a great wages going hear, but every thing is dear accord-
mgly but them that have there rations and lodging from there Mr
may keep money if they will be wise. John, my son, is in the town
of Geelong working with hors and cart, and another lad that went
from near Portree. They have 67/. of wages, beside their iLmW
tWWR f 1 ™, y dau £ h ter, is in the town of Geelong at a lady
a^ e Sl ° P ther6 T ith her brother > 25/. of wages. Rer-
self and John is very near each other. Ann was the Dr’s assistant
commmg in the ship She was to get 31. for that, and I was to get
'i ° w mus ! c to them. The policeman on board was to get
each ; but we don t get it yet. All the accounts went to Melbourn'
We was to get .t from Melboorn. I don’t heat- a word from Ann
John since 1 come out here. I am 60 miles from Geelong at Mac-
Mi lan’s He hath 18,000 of sheeps here. He is one of tL m”“-
tata of&ihng. I heard that he is one of the richest in this colony
he hath a large estate above Geelong; although he hath that
don’t think so much of himself as —. does nor Lv niLiS’n- 6
kmd in Sky. The first night we left Geelong, it one of his
tenants we were, that is, paying 500/. of rent. 1 cannot hold here the
half of what I wish to tell. lam weel in health since you saw me
very bussy with my flook. I must rise as soon as theCn and go
home at sunset. I have nothing but following them ; and when thfv
reach the bountarys, they will turn there—they will not leave the
station to any place John Matheson is near me the same We
wI e Q not ++- lt Sl f all houses > but we have plenty to eat and drink
We are getting the best mutton that ever I saw; very seldom I saw
m Sky so good as the worst we get here. I don’/see any of the
natives since I came ; but Mary and Ann Matheson is afrafd Keni!
Ann \\ ill be coming to see Mary, and Mary to see Ann. I think
this the best place in the world—so bonny ; there is plenty of wood
on our station I never saw any of the kind. «
SfTb sff d dl £f ngS - T are Sayin & that there is of it in
all thw fann. They are desiring us to looking sharp for it. My
master hath a good house about 2 miles from me ; and Cathrine my
daughter, and another woman is his servants there. Cirsty Matheson
is not hired yet ; she followed the rest out here, but she will have a
good chance of being along with my daughter; but Merim Matheson
ms the muster s cows. The Mr. hath a grant house in Geelong • he
, n ® fc be b ® re but all the time of the sheep shearing. I mite a
Dr ;, Tahsher ’ that 1 me ntion the riots that we had the day
“ sailors went away; you will see it in the newspapers. 1
down bU he -n W f not 5 WOrds of true J th « Captf put it
tbiT J hIS u Wn j WlI uV 1 ™ u T st include in wishing you could get
ton VT ha nd, although I cannot the half of what I wish tell
you. Mind and write as soon as you get this. Excuse hurry-tho
fineeps is away. J
I remain your’s till death,
Alexr. Cameron.


Give ray compts. to all who wish me joy and happiness.
PS Address Alexr. Cameron, care of John Gordon Macmillan,
Esq.,’ at Wardy Yallock, by Geelong, and give me all particulars.
Many a night I will be minding old lang sighn, play the fiddle in
such a private place, none to hear me but the fowls of the wood, i
shall conclude with my best respects to you and all your family,
servants and all.
I remain yours truly till death,
Alex. Cameron, your old Fiddler.
From Angus Mackenzie
To Norman Ferguson.
Bush Station, Geelong, sth Dec. 1852.
My dear Friend, .. ,
I feel duly bound to let you know that we are all alive, and
enjoying good health, and not even us, but all that was in the same
ship with us, as I have seen a good many of our ship-mates last week,
which had informed of those that I did not personally; all engaged,
male and female, young and old, that can do a turn. Common servant
girls from 30/. to 18/., and 12/. for twelve-year-old girls. Your little
Flora would fetch 12/., and two or three dresses of the finest. I have
every reason to be thankful, I have not had one day or night’s sick-
ness’ or an hour’s sickness since I left Skye. Christy is engaged at a
gentleman, 20/. a-year ; Flora the same. Ann, 12/.; Angus 12/. in
a shop; all with Scotch Free Church people, but Ann, English
Church, very kind man, a clerk in custom-house. My dear Norman,
I feel oblidge to every one that ever advised me to come to this
colony, where there is such abundance of every thing needful and
esteemable for the body. I am engaged to an elder of the Free
Church myself; my terms is 90/. a-year, and engaged six months.
His name is John Armstrong, a Scotch rich man, 13 year in the
colony ; began as a sheepherd, as empty as I, he says himself. Now
60,000 sheep in six stations, two cattle stations, 800 horses and
bullocks, I can’t tell how many he sends off; 12 or 14 drays, Bor
10 in each. Bullock-drivers, three pounds and rations a-week. I
refused 285. a-day in town, and preferred coming to the bush for a
season, having nothing in the pocket, excepting what I earned as
carpenter’s mate, working all the voyage, I only got 4/., which was
not a little help. We have got a cow from the master. Nothing
but to go and milk her every day; they gather them here on a
horse’s back, with a long whip ; they’ll drive them as fast as horses.
Dear Norman, I have uneasiness when I think of how I came
away, so unsettled in every respect, without settleing my debt; but
praises to my Guide, that I am brought where I may return every
one his own in a very short time, just of my first wages, and still
live quite comfortable, and lay by likewise. I am still of the same
mind as when I and you and Neil Maclean were talking in Niel’s,
to come for a certain time, say for fortune, and return again,
unless you’ll all come. The Minister is very kind to me, and
wanted me to call upon him always, which I do. His name is Mr.
Tait—no Gaelic. We are expecting two Ministers daily, Mr. Maclntyre


and Mr. Bain, so that the means of grace, I hope, will grow more
plentiful ; and if you would be in Geelong on a Sabbath-day, you
would hardly hear a word with bell-tolling of all sort of professions ;
but the contrite heart and the bruised spirit is rare to see. I would
feel satisfied to hear how is things doing, and the state of the parish,
or how is the Lord’s cause coming on ; if the friends are all alive, or
if there is any talking of coming here, or how soon. Dear Norman,
if you would come here, you might walk about with your cane.
Margaret would make hers and your fortune quickly, as dressmaker.
I feel for poor Norman, Mary’s brother, that would do so well with
his family ; himself and wife’s wages would be £7O, shepherd and
hut-keeper ; the 2 girls would be £5O. Mary is vexed when she is
seeing their good chance, and them suffering. When I see us throw-
ing out the mutton that we can’t use, as the quantity you’ll get do
with it as you like ; tea three times a day, milk or butter in abund-
ance ; nothing worse than loaf bread. W e got a new house built for
us, very snugg. My dear Norman, I would be sorry to state you an
uncertain news, upon any account. I tell you the truth in every
word. Hugh Maclean and his sons would get £2OO and rations ;
Malcolm Macleod £7O, him and Mrs. ; little Sandy £l2, and all
rations; Malcolm Morrison and Mrs. £6O, because the family weaker.
Sandy Mackinnon could make riches at shoe making ; not a pair
strong shoes for less than 305. Angus Macleod or Malcolm, or any
one that could work in a boat, £l6 a month, or a pound a day, in
small boats rowing, as there is no land conveyance without a great
sum of money, and even with that same as the lochs are so far in the
country. All the sailors are leaving the ships, and off to the diggings.
There is 600 ships in Melbourne without crew, and ten or twelve in
Geelong ; for £7OO down from the diggins here is nothing. Sandy
Mac Pherson, and James, and Archie, went up 3 days after I landed
to the diggins. I heard nothing since, only some going and some
coming every day. I saw nothing surprising since I landed; the
people as kind and civil as ever I saw. You’ll find an Englishman
here as near in kindness as a Skye man ; every one almost new come
to the land; and every one so liberal; no want with any one—not
one to my knowledge.
I did not see a worse one than a man that came two weeks before
us. He came into depot the same night as we came, call out his wife,
our time of worshipping; he struck her across the cheek. 1 thought
shame, being from Skye.
Dear Norman, Mary wishes you to read the letter to her father
and mother, and tell them we are quite well, and doing well, few
miles out of town. Do not forget to write me immediately to the
Post-office, to be left till called for, and I’ll put the post-master on
guard myself. Sandy McAskill is witlfcmy master, and John Mac
Pherson, the weaver, from Heat, that lived in the cave—a dear
brother, and other three families from Duirinish. W. Grant, Angus
Macdonald, Malcolm Macleod, they are all well.
Dear Norman, rest asure in me, and give my love to the brothers,
Malcolm, H. and Alex. Macdonald, John MacDermid, Malcolm
Morison, Niel Gillies and Murdoch, John Macdonald, and all that
attends to the means of grace with sincerity. The children wishes
their love to their friends and old neighbours, J. M. and Kenneth
MacSween. Little Ann says, if she lives, she’ll send her granny
something soon. t _
Dear Norman, I remain your affectionate friend till death,
Angus Mackenzie.


, wish, if you’ll see Wm. Campbell, Harlosh, to tell him
that 1 am quite well, after all the journey, sea and land. The
moment I came ashore, I was asked for sawing. I could make 2/
a-day, each of us, if he was with me. I wish they would all come
I was ashore at Greenock, but could not see any of my brother’s
children. I wish they would all come, William and them, and every
one tha-t I wish well. I must tell the masons that they have 21. a-
day building with bricks, and freestone in front; any of them that
can work the same will make from 10/. to 12/. a-week; and that
trade is getting better every day, because the houses are so scarce-
and some pulling down the wood and building with stone when they
ment 6nty ° f m ° ney ’ and 80 will be in the g reat day of judg-
Norman, my dear, I hope you will all be mindfull of us in your
prayers to the Lord, private and public. My heart and mind will
ever be with you for all the luxuries and gold in Australia.
Your well-wisher,
Angus Mackenzie.












