

] ; bn H r » rr 3
rt -;i - u ' I Zb\
LETTERS ON TRANSPORTATION,. :
AS THE ONLY MEANS OF EFFECTUAL
CONVICT REFORM:
ALSO
LETTERS ON THE REVOLTING CRUELTIES PRACTISED
UNDER THE GAME LAWS,
SHOWING THESE LAWS TO BE ONE OF THE MOST PROLIFIC
SOURCES OF
J
CON VTCTISM.
■
BY WILLIAM HOWITT,
AUTHOR OF “COLONIZATION AND CHRISTIANITY,” &C. &C.
K| "* ■ '
LOXDO.^:
A. W. BENNETT, 5, BISHOPSGATE STREET WITHOUT.
-
IBG3.
Price One Shilling.




LETTERS ON TRANSPORTATION,
AS THE ONLY MEANS OF EFFECTUAL
CONVICT REFORM:
TARTLY REPRINTED FROM THE “TIMES,” THE “MORNING
ADVERTISER,” AND “ MORNING STAR.”
ALSO
LETTERS ON THE REVOLTING CRUELTIES PRACTISED
UNDER THE GAME LAWS,
SHOWING THESE LAWS TO BE ONE OF THE MOST PROLIFIC
SOURCES OF
CONVICTISM.
WILLIAM HOWITT,
AUTHOR OF “COLONIZATION AND CHRISTIANITY,” &C. &C.
“ This attempt demands time and expense, such as a potent nation may well
bestow upon a certainty of being re-imbursed a hundred-fold. It is not the work
of one year, nor of one man’s life, but powerful nations should calculate by cen-
turies, not by days. They should consider themselves as individuals subsisting for
ever, and lay plans only for eternity ."—Callander’s Terra Australis CognUa, 1766.
LONDON:
A. W. BENNETT, 5, BISHOPSGATE STREET WITHOUT.
1863.


WATTS, CROWN COURT, TEMPLE BAR.


OPINIONS OF PRACTICAL MEN.
In a country like this, -where every man is so prompt to put forward
his opinion, it is most essential to a sound conclusion to select only the
judgments of those who have practical knowledge on the question under
consideration. Such are the following:—
“ The ticket-of-leave system is a decided failure.”— Rev. John Davis ,
Ordinary of Newgate, Report 1856.
“ The conduct of many of these men is not had in prison. . . . They
leave gaol with a good ‘ proven character,’ but they have not reformed,
and do not mean to mend their ways. . . . They gain in prison
information from other thieves, and are told where to go and how to
introduce themselves. . . . They become a much worse class of
offenders, and almost all the garotte robberies, and crimes with violence,
proceed from them, or from those under their instruction.”— Rev. John
Davis, Ordinary of Newgate, Report 1862.
“ Without cheap labour, so freely and lavishly furnished, Yan Diemen’s
Land would now have been in a state of poverty, approximating to
Western Australia.” — Despatch of Sir William Denison, late Governor of
Van Diemen’s Land and Sydney, now of Madras. Dated November 1848.
“Between 6000 and 7000 convicts from England have been sent there,
and yet the per-centage of crime is as low as in any portion of Her
Majesty’s dominions.”— Governor Kennedy, of Western Australia, No-
vember 11, 1862.
“After a fruitless struggle for twenty-one years, in 1850, it (Western
Australia) was on the verge of ruin. The introduction of convict labour
alone saved it. Its prosperity has never received a check since. On the
convicts themselves the effects have been extremely beneficial.”—Arch-
deacon Brown, of Western Australia,
“ Let Government have in hand an infant colony, containing within its
limits the elements of future greatness. . . . Such labour being
afforded to a young colony, its prosperity and progress will be essentially
promoted by it. . . . Convicts will be more valuable in a colony
where there exists an adequate demand for labour, than an equal number
of assignments taken indiscriminately.”— Sir Joshua Jebb, in a Report
on Prison Discipline, 1850.
“ I am entirely favourable to a well developed system of deportation
which can be carried on satisfactorily to the colonists.”— Sir Walter
Crofton, “ Times," December 13, 1862.


’ - ■


LETTERS ON TRANSPORTATION.
LETTER I.
TO THE PUBLIC AT LARGE*
Most deeply-interested Public,—
In my visits to the Convict Colonies of Australia in the year 1854,
my astonishment -was great to discover the vast and beneficial results of
the transportation system. I was well aware that that system had been
most recklessly administered; that its almost measureless abuses had led
to many enormities, and to consequent outcries against it. Time, and
various circumstances, had modified the abuses, and had left behind only
permanent and most admirable effects. What those are, the following
letters will demonstrate. I will only say, that whilst the mother country
at home was suffering fearful throes from the pent-up excess of her
criminal population, here were great nations created out of the labours of
such a population—nations, orderly, industrious, and enjoying a far
higher social security than England itself, I saw a vast irruption of
convicts into Victoria during my sojourn there, at first creating a dire
alarm, but, under the influence of a vigorous display of judicial energy,
and of abundant means of life, soon subsiding into a condition of normal
quiet much superior to that at home.
To these extraordinary facts I not only bore bold testimony, on my
return home, in my work, “ Land, Labour, and Gold; or, Two Years in
Victoria,” in 1855, but at various times, as repeated outbursts of conviction
took place, I endeavoured zealously, through the public journals, to turn
the attention of the nation to them. The earliest of these letters, from
the Times and Morning Advertiser, are of the years 1856 and 1857. The
immediate effect was little perceptible. A deep conviction had seized
the public mind that transportation was what it seemed through the fog
of its abuses. Yet, during all this time, there was a cry from Western
Australia for such transportation, and the most satisfactory evidences,


from gentlemen most qualified to judge, of its salutary nature under
proper management.
The Venerable Archdeacon Brown, of Western Australia, at that pe-
riod, in a letter to the Times , gave the following as the result of his expe-
rience as chaplain to the convict establishment there from 1833 t 01855 :
“ The temporal interests of Western Australia have been greatly pro-
moted by the introduction of convicts. Many disasters attended the
first settlement of the colony, and were perpetuated by the unsound prin-
ciples upon which it was founded. After a fruitless struggle for twenty -
one year Si in 1830 it was on the verge of ruin. The introduction of con-
victs alone saved it; and its prosperity, though limited by a scanty
population, and by the absence of large capital, has never experienced a
check since. A census taken in 1859, as compared with the preceding
census of 1834, shows an increase in population during the intervening
period of 26 per cent. ; the colonial revenue rose from 34,000 Z. to
48,000£., leaving in 1859 a balance of 3000 Z. over the colonial expendi-
ture ; the Imperial expenditure decreased from 132,000 Z. to 92,0001.;
the imports fell 128,0001. to 125,0001.; the exports rose from
36,0001. to 93,6001.; the acres under crop increased from 11,000 to
25,000; the horses numbered, in 1854, 4000, in 1859, 8000; the in-
crease in cattle was from 20,000 to 30,000, in sheep from 173,000 to
234,000 ; while eight copper mines and four lead mines, most of them
opened since 1854, were working at the close of 1859. The progress of
the colony since the last census was taken has been more rapid, it may
safely be stated, than at any former period of its history.
“ What the moral results of this criminal influx may prove is a much
more anxious consideration. The leaven has not had time to show its
power, which will be rightly ascertained by those only who shall live to
see the children of the colonists come to man’s estate. Yet, from reason
and experience, we may infer that criminals placed amid scenes entirely
new, presenting few incentives to crime, and affording, as regards some
crimes, scarcely any opportunity for their commission, are not only likely
to be themselves the better for the change, but will do less evil to society
than where they return, amid a dense population, to old haunts, old
companions, and all their former evil associations. It may be truly said,
that up to this time the free inhabitants of this colony present as indus-
trious, moral, and upright a population as would be ordinarily found,
class for class, in the mother country. In anxiety to procure education


for their children, in their attendance upon public worship, and in their
exertions in building churches, &c., their spirit is greatly to be com-
mended.
“ Upon the convicts themselves the effects of transportation, under the
system pursued here, have been extremely beneficial. Foremost among
the influences to operate for the exile’s good is the conviction soon
forced upon his mind of the futility of all attempts at escape. This
acting upon him conjointly with other circumstances of his condition,
tames and quiets him in a remarkable manner. No longer restless,
scheming, and seditious, he is disposed to avail himself of lawful open-
ings for attaining independence and liberty. Escape, so far as experience
can guide us, is little short of an absolute impossibility. The land
boundaries are utterly impassable, unless it may be to well-equipped
expeditions. The tract between Adelaide and the extreme southern
boundary of this colony was once crossed at great risk and loss by Mr.
Eyre, now the Governor of one of Her Majesty’s West-Indian posses-
sions, but under circumstances that would be unattainable by runaway
convicts. The sea boundary presents but few ports, entered by com-
paratively little shipping, and watched by a vigilant police. Before the
recent House of Commons’ Committee on Transportation, a gentleman
is reported to have stated that a large body of convicts had at one time
effected their escape to Melbourne. I have no doubt this gentleman
stated what he believed to be the truth, yet (if correctly reported) he
had been greatly misinformed. I have never heard of a single instance
in which escape out of the colony had been effected. Many convicts have
escaped from prisons, from depots, and from road parties : a few years
back such occurrences were not unusual. With some exceptions these
fugitives were, generally within a few days, recaptured. The exceptions
were the cases of men who gave themselves up; who, after privations and
fatigue, were satisfied not only that escape out of the colony was impos-
sible, but that it was impossible for them to subsist in the open bush
within the limits of the colony. It may be readily conceived that it is
no slight advantage to a penal settlement to be able so thoroughly to
dispossess the convict of his restlessness and impatience.”
After speaking of “ the marked success of the experiment so far,” the
Archdeacon concludes—
“If measures are adopted restricting, as far as may be compatible


•with the liberty of the subject, the at present almost unlimited sale of
ardent spirits; if steps are speedily taken by the Imperial Government
to equalize the sexes; and if a sound scriptural education be dealt out by
the Colonial Government with no sparing hand to the young, through
the medium of trained English masters, men of picked character, the
colony may, under God’s blessing and help, escape all the dreaded &i!s,
and long continue to offer to England a riddance of a large part of her
criminals, while to them she affords chances —certainties if they please—
of independence and reformation such as they could never find at home.”
Captain Henderson, Controller-General of Convicts, West Australia,
entirely confirmed the statements of the Archdeacon. After showing
that the expenses attending transportation to the colonies, as compared
with those of maintaining the convicts at home, had been greatly ex-
aggerated, he says:—
“ For all practical purposes connected with a system of transportation,
Western Australia offers a field which may be sought elsewhere in vain.
There is plenty of agricultural land and an excellent climate; all kinds
of corn grow lu:mriantly; all sorts of vegetables flourish in the much
abused sand. The vine and the olive grow there exuberantly; its
timber, of which there is a vast supply, is of the most valuable descrip-
tion, as it is never attacked either by the teredo navalis or the white ant;
and there is every prospect that the mineral resources of the colony may
he developed to a considerable extent.
“ Western Australia is separated from the other Australian colonies
by an impassable desert, and the communication by sea is far more
unfrequent and more expensive than from England either to Melbourne
or Sydney; for, from its geographical position, the trade of Western
Australia will be always, as it hitherto has been, more with India,
Singapore, China, and England, than with the other Australian colonies.
“A considerable number of convicts has already been sent to Western
Australia, and as a rule they have done remarkably well. The colonists
have always been and are still anxious to co-operate with the Home
Government in any well-regulated system of transportation; and,
judging from past success in that colony under many unfavourable
circumstances, there appears every reason to hope that transportation
may be carried on to Western Australia for many years, with benefit to
the colony, to the mother country, and to the convicts.”


The Times, commenting on similar communications on the 19th of
June 1857, turned its attention to the northern coast of Australia, as
capable, as well as the western coast, of advantageous colonization: —
“ There certainly can be no doubt that this fine indented northern
coast must one day become studded with settlements, if even the country
inland be not colonized. Situated as it is in the track between the
present colonies and India, to say nothing of the mother country, it
seems pretty certain that the race which has founded Singapore,
Hongkong, and Aden, will not be debarred by a tropical climate from
establishing trading places in the most suitable spots. Why, then,
should not Government take the first step, and make the way easier for
those who are to come afterwards? One or more penal colonies on the
north coast would certainly do the rough work for the first generation of
settlers. As to the heat of the climate, we think that, provided the
convicts are not put to too hard and too continuous labour, there
is nothing to be feared. Certainly it would seem, that where men will go
for gain they may be sent for punishment. The inducements to occupy
this rich territory are indeed considerable. It is our only tropical land
which is even moderately healthy. Western Africa, from, the thickness
of its vegetation, running down to the sea, and stagnating in lagoons all
along the coast, is notorious for its deadliness. The American mainland
is not our own ; and there is no part of the earth where we could try the
experiment of free labour in a hot climate except this northern coast of
Australia. We think that a trial at least might be made, particularly
as the French have just taken possession of New Caledonia, in nearly the
same latitude, and are about to establish something like our own system
of transportation.”
And whilst these satisfactory proofs of the benefits of transportation
were being made public, up to the year 1860, the increase of crime
and outrage at home was shown to be every day more tremendous. The
ticket-of-leave system, which had been adopted as if to push the horrors
of felonry to their acme, was declared by the Rev. John Davis, the
Ordinary of Newgate, in his report on the condition of the prison to the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, for the year 1856, to be already a complete
failure: —
“ In the present year many ticket-of-leave men have appeared among
us. Those proved in open court to have been at liberty on tickets-of-leave


from their exemplary conduct in prison, have had their names trans-
mitted to Government. The calculations made public are based on these
returns, and it is attempted to be shown by such means what the
proportion is between the liberated convicts who reform and those who
fall again into crime. I greatly doubt the accuracy of such returns as
underrating what the facts of the case are. On one occasion during the
past year, when we had forty-eight men in Newgate under sentence of
transportation or penal servitude, the governor took the trouble to
inquire, from rumours among the police, from conversations among the
prisoners themselves, from the officers who were constantly with them,
and various other sources of information, how many out of the forty-
eight might be ticket-of-leave men, and he had reasonable proof that
somewhere about twenty were so. Not more than one-third of that
number could be reported to the Government under the present regula-
tions. . . . As a general rule, the ticket-of-leave system fails with
men of habitual crime, and should never be applied to them, except in
rare instances of exemplary demeanour. There is nothing so much
dreaded by habitual thieves as perpetual imprisonment, and to lessen
such a sentence tlrere is nothing they would not have recourse to.”
The Ordinary pointed out as probable the origin of garotting:
“ I have thought, and still think, that the origin of garotte robberies
took place from the exhibition of the way the Thugs in India strangle
and plunder passengers, as exhibited in the British Museum. However
valuable as illustrations of Indian manners such representations may be,
I could heartily wish that these models were placed in some more obscure
position, and cease to be that which I fear they have been, the means of
giving to men addicted to crime and violence an idea how their evil
purposes may be accomplished.”
In a report of Sir Joshua Jebb’s in 1850, he strongly recommended
transportation. He fully recognised the difficulty of the released convicts
getting work in this country, and declared new colonies the most favour-
able for their reclamation. He spoke of the difficulties of getting the
first rough work of a colony done by free labour, and said, “ If, in anti-
cipation of this, arrangements were made for extending the remoter
limits of existing settlements, or giving the aid of convict labour in the
formation of new colonies, advantages might be secured which could
scarcely be obtained by other means. Experience of these difficulties has


doubtless led to a remark which is often heard, that convicts should be
the pioneers of civilization.”
Sir Joshua recommended “Government to have in hand an infant
colony, containing within its limits the elements of future greatness.
Within a few years, he said, the colony would be in a condition to insure
a demand for cheap labour, and he contemplated that such location in a
new colony would have so favourable an effect on the character of a large
proportion, that, taken as a body, the convicts would be more valuable m
a colony where there exists an adequate demand for labour, than an
equal number of emigrants taken indiscriminately from the large towns
and country districts. “As a body,” he continued, “I do not believe
convicts to be morally worse than an equal number taken from the
unceasing stream of criminals who pass through the streets of London,
or any of our large towns. There are very few convicts who are irre-
claimable.”
He anticipates the contingency of the arrival of a period when a colony
may object to further importation of convicts, but sees no argument in that
for objection to transportation, but only one for making timely provision
for such contingency, by selection of another field for their labour. In a
word, Sir Joshua Jebb considers “ That such labour being afforded to a
young colony, its prosperity and progress will be essentially promoted
by it.”
In reading these opinions, who could believe that they proceeded from
the man who has since for twelve years continued so pertinaciously
cooping up men in prisons and so-called Reformatories, driving them
mad? It would seem that the most desperate advocates of this home
warehousing system of criminals, the same who have produced such long
rows of figures, and long columns of newspaper articles to prove its
excellence, have all the while been quite satisfied in their own minds that
transportation was, in reality, the only effectual scheme of convict
riddance and convict reform!
Still, the well-proved advantages of transportation were ignored, the
system of alternate coopings up in hulks and prisons, and of tickets-of-
leave to plunder and garotte, was persisted in. From time to time came
darkest rumours of the revolting state of crime in the convict depots of
Chatham, Portsmouth, Portland, and Dartmoor. From time to time the
public was horrified by news of attempts to rise and murder the keepers.
Mr. Thwaites, an ex-schoolmaster of one of these legalized infernos,


published a narrative of what he had witnessed in it, calculated to make
every nerve in the human body thrill; and Charles Dickens added his
vivid portraiture of these scaring truths to those of humbler scribes, but
actual eye-witnesses. At length these neglected combustibles in the
heart of society have burst forth in unprecedented fury; this hell of
vainly compressed demonry has rushed into open day. The men who, in
prison, assumed a sanctimonious air, who made the warmest responses
at divine service, as the readiest means to obtain the ticket-of-leave,
these men the most ferocious of all those caged savages—have suc-
ceeded, and flown at the throats of men, women, and children, in legions.
The women who did not succeed in these hypocritical arts have set fire
to their prison, and vow to do it again. Death has stalked through
our most public streets, armed, not with a scythe, but with so-called
life-preservers and knuckle-dusters; and penal colonies, calm, orderly,
and socially secure, have looked in wonder from afar at this latest proof
of our Christian civilization.
Whilst the public journals commented in eloquent indignation on this
condition of things, yet hesitated to name the real and only remedy, 1
once more ventured to propound it in the pages of the Morning Star. This
time, I am happy to say, there has been a warm and decided response.
Before my letters were concluded, judges, both domestic and colonial,
pronounced for transportation ; the Times and other journals threw in
their verdict on that side. For myself I claim nothing more in this crisis
than to have faithfully proclaimed, and without waiting for a single co-
operating voice, what I saw in the penal colonies themselves, and, from
time to time since, what the flagrant failure of every other reformatory
scheme has made only more palpable.
It is only just to say, that, as far as report goes, Sir Walter Crofton’s
discipline of convicts in Ireland approaches nearest to the colonial one:
yet it has one great and fatal want—it wants the amplitude of field and
the other advantages of a colony to expand itself in. In this crowded
and wealthy country, where the once branded felon is as inexorably shut
out from employment as a wolf is from a sheepfold, though he should
come in softest sheep s-clothing itself; in this country, where so many
criminals turned out of Reformatories as Black-a-moors scoured white,
have instantly shown themselves worse devils than before, the bar to
reclamation must remain for ever an utterly impassable bar.
Years ago, George Barrington, the celebrated Irish pickpocket, when


on trial for repeated offences, made a most eloquent address to the court,
declaring that in this country the return to honesty was impossible. No
one gave him credit for the wish. He had long and earnestly, he said,
resolved to commence a new career: he felt that he had powers and aspi-
rations for better things; that were the way opened, he knew that he
could worthily serve his country, but no one extended a confiding hand.
He accompanied this electrifying address by hot and agonized tears. The
whole was treated as a fine piece of acting, but the judge, this time, gave
him a chance—he transported him to Sydney for life.
And what took place ? The accomplished criminal showed that he was
in earnest. On the voyage the rest of the convicts rose to seize the ship
and murder the captain. Barrington, snatching from one of them a
handspike, threw himself in the way, and bravely defended the cabin-door
till the officers and crew came to the rescue. The captain at once gave
credit to .Barrington’s sincerity; he treated him with the utmost kind-
ness during the voyage, and, on arriving at the Cape, not only allowed
him to go on shore as often as he pleased, but gave him an order on a
merchant there for a hundred hrowns. On reaching Sydney, he made a
just report of Barrington’s services, and he was at once put into a small
post ol trust. The opportunity he had professed to desire he had now
obtained, and he rapidly rose into the position of one of the ablest and
best magistrates that the colony ever had, and wrote an excellent account
of the settlement. This man, who, like tens of thousands of others,
would have perished overwhelmed with guilt and infamy, in combating with
an irreconcileable condition of society, when placed on the only auspicious
soil for such fallen men—that of a new colony—redeemed his word, justi-
fied his scalding tears, and returned to the rank of man, no longer deso-
lating, but protecting society.
To Reformatories on a colonial scale we must come, or prepare for a
new chapter of intenser horrors and scandals. But on the colonial scale
itself we shall err greatly if we do not mark well the following teachings
of the past. There must be no sending out of a single convict to any
colony that protests against him. There must be no carting out of our
rubbish to excess. There must be no relaxation of the proper and pro-
gressive sifting and classification of the convict prisoners. There must
be no setting at large, under any circumstances whatever, of villains of a
stereotyped grade ot crime. There must be, as far as possible, an equali-
zation of the sexes. There must be no persistence in convict trans-


portation to any colony which once feels and says that it has had enough
of them. That day may, however, be far off, if we use our opportunities
discreetly: hut it ought never to be forgotten for a moment, that con-
victism, like poison or firearms, is a dangerous and critical agent, which,
to be used beneficially, requires skilful handling. It is a rude material,
which we should regard more especially as fitted to do the first rude work
of colonies, rather than for the composition of colonies themselves. Yet
all colonial history shows how wonderfully this crude material may be
converted into the very bone and sinews of new and healthy states. Nay,
Archdeacon Brown avows candidly, that to the importation of convicts,
Western Australia owes it rescue from otherwise inevitable ruin!
The worst feature, however, of the present discussion is to see magis-
trates and members of Parliament recommending flogging. It is me-
lancholy to perceive how little such men have yet learned of the true
principles of criminal reform, when they would seek it by still further
brutalizing men already too much brutalized. Such gentlemen are born
too late; they belong to the reign of George 111. We have the testimo-
nies of all the distinguished prison disciplinarians and governors of
colonies for the power of reforming criminals by the united use of mild
treatment, active labour, and hope. All such as cannot be reformed by
such a process and such a hope, should never again be let loose on
society, still less with the mark of the scourge on their backs, and the
sting of it in their hearts, prompting to a savage revenge. The general
enlightenment of the public is our best guarantee against so barbarous a
retrogression.
December 18, 1862.
LETTER lI.—DECEMBER, 1856.
CONVICTS AND COLONIES.
To the Editor of the “ Times.”
Sir,— Will you allow me to say a few words on the question which is so
urgently pressing itself upon the public attention at this moment ?—What
are we to do with our convicts ?


In the first place, I would beg to point out the dangerous fallacy
which our best-iutentioned philanthropists are propagating, on the im-
posing basis of statistics, as to the result of the home ticket-of-leave
system. They tell us, at the very moment that we are trembling in our
beds in the expectation that the villains who have ransacked the houses
of scores of our neighbours, and knocked out the brains of some poor old
shopkeeper and his wife over their counter, will be visiting us, that only
five per cent, of the criminals convicted are ticket-of-leave men. But,
Sir, that is not the question. The question is, what is the amount of
crime and robbery in the country ? That is the real test of the working
of the system. To convict your criminals you must catch them, and the
notorious fact is, that you do not catch one in ten. You catch the novices
—the Johnny Raws—but not the expert and experienced ticket-of-leave
men. You retain all the clever rogues at home, and turn them out
upon us with licences to rob ; and they do it so artistically that our police
are no match whatever for them. Have you got the Broadstone mur-
derer, or the murderer of Mrs. Kelly in Ireland, or of poor Mr. and Mrs.
White, of Bolton-on-Dearne, or the murderers and garotters near Mas-
borough, or of London ? By turning over your file, you might give us a
column of cases where the perpetrators of burglaries and murders remain
undetected. To me it is clear that not one-tenth of the real amount of
crime is brought before the public eye even. We don’t know it on evi-
dence ; we only feel it in the alarm everywhere created. Take this
neighbourhood, for instance. I am posted betwixt Highgate and Kentish-
town. Since the dark nights set in there have been round here at least
two dozen burglaries and robberies, not one of which I have seen men-
tioned in the newspapers, and not one of the perpetrators of which has
been detected. One man only, so far as I have heard, has been taken
up on suspicion. On the contrary, such is the impunity with which the
thieves proceed, that they have three times, in about as many weeks,
thoroughly ransacked a large ladies’ school, not 400 yards from this
spot. They were so well instructed, that, on one of the occasions, the
young ladies were going to have a little fete , and the thieves walked in in
the night previous and carried off all their dresses.
This vicinity, I take it, is no exception to the rest of the outskirts of
London and other populous towns. What, then, is the use of talking of
convictions and percentages of ticket-of-leave villany ?
Sir, believe me that the only sound, rational, and philanthropical mode


of dealing with your convictism is to found penal colonies. People say
felony is a bad foundation of a colony. Very true ; felony is a bad ele-
ment anywhere, but it cannot be worse anywhere than in this wealthy
country. You want it put where it can be converted into healthy hu-
manity. You want to do two things—relieve your dense and affluent
society of those felons, and convert your felons into honest men. You
confess that you cannot do either of these things at home: in penal
colonies you can do both. They are the only places where you can do it.
What is the history of our penal colonies? Have they been a failure?
Certainly not; but, on the contrary, their success is one of the most
striking and magnificent facts in the history of the world. What are
those great United States of America ? They constitute a federal nation
of some 30,000,000 of people, already become so powerful that they
dictate to us on that side of the Atlantic; witness the Central-America
question. What were they originally ? Our penal colonies. To Maryland,
Virginia, and the Jerseys we shipped our felons freely till the Revolution.
What next? We wanted fresh penal colonies, and we founded them in
Australia. Wiyit has been the consequence ? In sixty-eight years we
have created an empire containing at least 2,000,000 of people, and with
an import trade of more than 20,000,000?. sterling, and an export trade
of at least half that amount. Should we have had that if we had not
founded our penal colonies there? Should we now have had colonies
there at all ? Should we not have left that remote continent to some
sharper-sighted nation ?—to the Dutch, or the French already at New
Caledonia, or to the Russians ? These are questions which may well be
asked. The notorious fact is, that we only did colonize that splendid
Australian continent because we wanted a penal settlement. In 1788,
having lost our American penal colonies, we sent out and established one
at Sydney. It was established expressly for a penal colony, and for
nothing else. It succeeded so well, that in 1804 Captain Collins sailed
from Sydney and founded another penal colony—Van Diemen's Land.
These colonies, till about 1850, remained penal colonies. Under this
system what befel them? What do we find them now? Wretched,
disorderly, miserable colonies, bearing all the aspect and evidence of
slave lands ? Let those speak who have seen them. Every one on landing
in those colonies finds splendid towns, abounding in wealth, and far more
quiet and safe than England is at any time. General Mundy, in his
Travels in Australia , tells us, that on landing at Sydney he imagined


that he must carefully arm himself before turning out, and not turn out
at all at night. He was therefore no little amazed to find all quiet, safe,
and orderly as at home. I myself have visited both Sydney and Yan
Diemen’s Land ; and in the latter beautiful island, a solitary horseman,
I traversed forests and mountains to the very coasts. Towards nightfall
I made for the first hut or house I could see. If a hut, I was pretty
sure that the inhabitants were convicts. I flung my bridle to the first
man I saw, and made myself at home, neither being afraid of having my
throat cut nor my horse ridden off. When I came to a gentleman’s
house, often every servant in the house and about it was a convict; yet
such was the state of society that I never found one place where they
locked the door at night.
Why then, you will say, all the outcry made by the colonists against
further transportation to them ? That is the question, and a very im-
portant question, and Government should carefully mark the answer. In
all penal colonies there are two stages—the stage, or epoch, when convict
labour is wanted, and a second when it is not wanted. If you will found
a penal colony as such a colony should be founded, not in a little island,
not making sentimental experiments in another Norfolk Island, but
where there is ample space, where there is a good country, a good
climate, and good harbourage—in fact, where there are the elements of a
future nation—you will find, that as soon as convict labour has made that
colony comfortable and habitable—as soon as it has made the roads, built
the bridges, and opened the lands —a free emigration will set in; that
emigration will go on quietly and prosperously, making no complaints,
till there is such an abundant population that convict labour is super-
fluous. Then there will be a cry of “ Hold your hand!” and Government
must attend to that cry. It is the warning voice, the certain announce-
ment that the second epoch of such a colony has arrived. It will be
then no use saying to the free emigrants, “ You are the intruders ; you
are occupying a convict colony.” That cry will make itself heard, and it
will be the imperative duty of Government to adopt the celebrated line of
Milton —
“ To-morrow to fresh woods and pastures new.”
It must move off to another quarter, and found another penal colony.
And surely there can be no want of room for the next century or two.
Look at the map of Australia. See what a mere fillet of southern coast


we have yet populated See all those vast regions of the north, north-
west, and north-east, —splendid regions, under a fine climate, where yet
not a white man breathes. Are you afraid that your convicts may escape
thence to the southern gold colonies ? While Leichhardt, with all the
supplies and appliances necessary, could not get across that great con-
tinent, and through its wild tribes, our convicts are not likely to do it.
There you may found new colonies, and grow sugar, coffee, cotton, and
render yourselves independent of Jonathan, as you ought to do, for he is
growing very saucy, as he feels his power.
You want to reform your convicts. You confess you cannot do it here.
You tell us that the Rev. Whitworth Russell, who has been sixteen years
chaplain to the Milbank Penitentiary, where there are constantly 7000
malefactors, thinks he has in that time converted two!
Well, what do you see in our colonies founded as penal ones, and so con-
tinued till some five years ago? You see tens of thousands who were a
convict population, as their fathers and mothers were. And who now
are what ? As orderly, moral, respectable, and prosperous people as you
shall meet with. anywhere. In these colonies you see splendid towns,
populous villages, in which a large amount of the inhabitants are of this
class. In Sydney you see many of the finest houses, the noblest shops
and warehouses, the most valuable merchant vessels, the most superb
equipages belonging to the same class. What are these wealthy, edu-
cated, and prosperous people ? Why, they are your reformed convicts.
They are the class who would be robbing your houses at midnight, or
garotting you in the street, if they had been left penned up at home be-
twixt enormous wealth and refusal of employment. They are the living
proofs that you have succeeded by your penal colonies in reforming, not
two, nor two thousand, but tens of thousands, and converted them into
respectable, worthy, and happy people. Now, can you possibly desire
any thing more? Are not these your testimonies of success—your proofs
and results of the system you are in quest of —one that will relieve you of
your convict, and restore him to society a sound and honest man ? Show
me one such here, and I will show you 10,000 there.
And one more word as to the outcry from the colonies against con-
victs. That outcry arose from Government totally disregarding what I
have pointed out—the two stages of all penal colonies. It arose, not
from a proper supply, but from a surplusage of convictism. Government
might very justly have asked the remonstrants, however, why they ob-


jected to convicts, for it was not the convicts who went to the free colo-
nists, but the free colonists to the convicts. Why did they go there ?
Simply because they knew that it was good for them. You will never
find the fact of a colony being expressly a convict colony deter free settlers
from going there. No ; they go there, in the first place, because it is a
penal colony—because the convicts have done all that hard, dirty work,
and endured those sufferings and inconveniences attending the foundation
of a new colony, which free men had rather let alone. They have made
the roads, the bridges, the fences, the drains, cultivated the fields, felled
the trees, built beautiful houses, dug fine harbours, and prepared plea-
sant estates. That done, the free cuckoos of immigration squat down in
the convicts’ nest, oust out the convicts, and cry, “ No more of them.”
Very well, we must not complain of that; it is the natural course of
good old self-seeking human nature. So long as there is fresh land to
send our immoral scum to, we must submit. The colonies have cried out
when they had enough of convictage. Government has turned the valve,
and thrown back the whole stream of convictage upon us at home. Now
it is our turn to cry; and for that we have more right than the colonists,
because they invaded the homes of our convicts —the very lands set apart
for the purpose of their abode. Government must now listen to our cry>
and send our felons, not to the colonies which don’t want them, but to
new lands, where the convict may have hope, the parent of reform, and
where we or our children may in a while see fresh tens of thousand of free
men, who have been made so by being separated from temptation and
evil companions, separated to solitary labour and judicious surveillance
in the healthy regions of refreshing and renewing nature.
Yours truly.
Dec. 19, 1856. WILLIAM HOWITT.
LETTER lII.—JANUARY, 1857.
CONVICTS AND COLONIES.
To the Editor of the “Morning Advertiser.
Sir, —The time is fast approaching when Parliament must take up the
serious consideration of the very important subject which has for some
mouths been anxiously occupying the attention of the public—What


shall we do with our convicts ? And the more thoroughly society at
large has made up its mind on this question, the better it will be able to
appreciate the course to which Government may incline. Every one who
can contribute an atom of knowledge on the topic should be ready to do
so, and I therefore make no apology for communicating to you a few
facts within the reach of my experience.
Since my letter to the Times of December 20, there has been much
discussion on the abstract question, whether it is better to employ our
convicts at home, or to found a new and expressly penal colony. The
result of the whole, so far as I can judge, is, that there is ample scope for
amendment in the management of our criminals, whether at home or
abroad. That they may be both more profitably and more economically
employed, I think has been decidedly shown. Much has been said of the
cost of dealing with our convicts, which appears enormous, whether kept
at home or sent abroad.
Mr. Pearson contends that this cost may be greatly reduced by a
system of good management in our prisons, and 1 contend that the same
may be done in a penal colony. That is a point which, whatever we
do, must be rigorously kept in view. But, Sir, keeping all this in view,
it appears to me that there is a consideration far beyond the question of
cost in the treatment of our convicts, and that is, the grand result of our
operations. Costly, lam afraid, we shall always find the convictage of a
great and wealthy country like this, however we deal with it; but the
wisest, the best, and eventually the cheapest, will be that system which
reforms the greatest number of fallen human creatures, and returns to
the nation the greatest amount of wealth and prosperity as the very
product of this reform.
It is, after all, a poor and pettifogging mode of judging of the value of
any outlay by an isolated item of cost. The true way in every thing is to
look at the result, at what the value of the thing will be in the end.
What should we think of a man’s reasoning, who, seeing a house in progress,
should exclaim, “ What a waste of money ; there is a house now which
cost 1000 Z., and it has neither roof nor floor, neither door nor window.
It could neither find you a bed nor cook you a steak!” When, at the
same time, you know that, in a few months more, the same house will be
a place of luxury, of every comfort, and worth far more than the original
cost ? Whatever it may be as to any system of home employment of
convicts, I am convinced that that is just the worth of the argument of


cost as applied to a judiciously-founded penal colony. All the state-
ments of the cost of individuals in our penal colonies are exaggerated and
false from this cause, that they do not give you the credit side of the
account, as well as the debit one—they do not include the real value of the
convict’s labour. What is the value of labour in Van Diemen’s Land,
where we have yet 5000 convicts? Agricultural labourers are worth
from 30Z. to 40?. per annum; female servants from 18Z. to 30Z., according
to qualifications ; and skilled workmen obtain from 10s. to 18s. per day.
Why is Western Australia represented to be so eager for convicts ? Pre-
cisely because they are worth vastly more than their keep.
But, Sir, high as is the value of labour in our yet remaining penal
colonies, I contend that is not the real question ; but that question is,
What will be the value of a good penal colony hereafter in extending and
strengthening our empire, and in opening up fresh and affiuent markets
for our foreign commerce ?
Here again, then, I point to the penal colonies that we have esta-
blished ; and on this head we may challenge any man, whatever be his
theory or his practical experience, to show us any result of any system
of reform which can bear for a moment to be compared to the grand
result of that experiment. We may challenge him to show any thing
which, in all that is essential to the real objects of convict discipline, in
the reformation of human beings, in the happiness and virtue extorted
from the depths of mortal wretchedness and the vileness of mortal crime,
and which at the same time, in the creation of national wealth, power,
prestige, and permanent advantage, can bear a moment’s juxta-positiou
with that. There, Sir, stand the results of such colonization in the
mighty and affluent States of North America ; stand in a bold equality
with the greatest nations of the world, and progressing at a rate which
has no parallel in the history of the earth. There stand those great
States absorbing now our streaming myriads of emigrants, and spreading
them through their boundless forests and prairies, as though they were
nothing. There are 30,000,000 of people who emulate us in our greatness
and our wealth, and who appear destined to grow into hundreds of mil-
lions, making their empire of that Western world apparently a mere
question of time.
There again stands Australia, with her five flourishing colonies, which,
in little more that half a century, have grown into nearly two millions of


people, and have conferred on the mother country a trade of twenty
millions a year. There are those once despised penal colonies, which,
through all their wrongs and neglect, through all the abuses of the con-
vict system—and they have been gigantic and awful—have grown into
what they are, and will yet grow into something at this moment not
easily conceivable. There is our great Austral-England, planted in the
centre of a new and wondrous circle of British empire ; planted so as to
hold a proud and invaluable intercourse with our dominions in India,
South Africa, and New Zealand, and destined to pour into our lap the
teeming affluence of centuries. Affluence! Why, in five years she has
sent us more than 500 tons of gold alone! The amount for 1855, accord-
ing to the Melbourne return, was 123 tons 10 cwt., and the product of
1856, according to the monthly returns, will prove to have been larger.
The annual value of gold alone from Victoria, according to Mr. Khull’s
statement is 12,000,000/!.
Now I do not mean to say that the United States, or that Australia
have been made entirely or nearly what they are by our convictage ; all
the world knows to the contrary. But Ido mean to say that their pre-
sent status is thf direct result of our originally planting them as we did.
It was by that penal plantation that their grand resources became deve-
loped. It was owing to their thus becoming known to thousands as
countries of illimitable capabilities that the tide of free emigration set in
thitherwards, and never again could be stemmed. It was through Aus-
tralia succeeding as a penal colony that not only fresh tides of free emi-
grants flowed thither, but fresh free colonies were planted. It was by
those events, linked in a chain of positive sequence, that, however inci-
dental it may seem, the gold was discovered; and it is not the least of
these facts that they were the convicts who originally and unquestionably
discovered the gold. It was while, in the ordinary exercise of convict
labour, they were cutting the great road through the Blue Mountains,
soon after the discovery of the route, in 1813, that the convicts picked up
gold, and were forbidden, under menace of the most cruel flogging, to
whisper a word of it, lest it should disorganize the colony.
Now I ask you, Sir, as I have already asked the Times, stripping
away all mention of the gold, where is the fact, or the grand aggregate of
facts, which any one can set in rivalry with the result of our past penal
settlements? Search your prisons and reformatories; collect your dig-


missed and evangelized ticket-of-leave men from the streets ; gather your
chain-gangs from Portland or Dartmoor; bring them out; let us see
them; and when you have selected the sum total of your reformed and
healthy proselytes, we will point to our Australian colonies, those which
have been, or are penal, and for every man that you have saved by all
other machinery, we will show you tens of thousands. We will show you
flourishing towns, populous villages, cultivated lands, where the popu-
lation, moral, peaceful, industrious, and happy, is largely composed of
reformed convicts and their children. There, then, you have the result of
our past penal colonization, in the reform of tens of thousands of guilty
men and women, in the actual creation of nations, and in a trade
from Australia alone, raised within half a century, of twenty millions
sterling per annum.
But, we are asked, can we do again what we did before? There are
those who shake their heads and talk of Utopia. Why, Sir, if they will
turn to the journals of the date of the founding of Virginia, “ the Old
Dominion,” or of Sydney, they will find that their fathers were shaking
their heads precisely in the same manner, and talking of U topia. But
the Utopia of their day is the great fact of ours. Can we establish
new penal colonies advantageously still? Undoubtedly we can. Do
we ask such a question while we have thousands of leagues of wild
coast in South Africa and in North Australia, to say nothing of islands
which might answer for a while, but are limited, and therefore less
desirable ?
For my part, Sir, after all that I have heard and read on the ques-
tion recently brought forward, I turn again to the map of Australia, and
behold, from the northern extremity of Western Australia to the most
northern settlement of New South Wales, a stretch of at least 3000
miles of coast, with a vast, almost boundless, interior, which remains
to be settled? Leichardt, in his journey to Port Essington, found it to
be a good country, capable of abundant pasturage, of growing corn,
watered with a number of rivers, and even abounding with a species of
wild buffalo. He found, to his surprise, the heat little more than that
of the south. What, then, in the same country, and under a fine climate,
prevents our colonizing to our heart’s content? When Mr, Monckton
Milnes and Mr. Davenport Hill lament over the loss of the old regions,
of “ the old squatting grounds,” as they call them, of our convicts, what
matters it, I ask, that the old grounds in Sydney and Van Diemen’s


Land are lost, while we have unlimited new grounds of precisely the same
kind, and in the same regions ?
If Government, when the old settlements refused any more convicts,
had sent some there, we should never have had any resistance, never
have heard any outcry, for the simple reason that there would have been
nobody to resist, or to cry out. That cry, as I propose to show you in
another letter, has been the result, not so much of any thing in convict
transportation itself, as of sheer abuse. But there are many reasons,
besides our convict self-created difficulty, why we should plant North
Australia. We shall, ere long no doubt, hear that the exploring expe-
dition which is gone up the Victoria river has opened up some great
tract of fine country. It will be desirable to settle it, and convicts would
be your men to do the immense amount of heavy work which such a
scheme implies.
“ How blind and somniferous,” writes a gentleman to me, well
acquainted with Australia, “ does it make our grand old statesmen seem,
not to have had their eyes on Port Essington as a convict settlement,
which might begone at once. . And how important to England a fine,
flourishing, tropical colony, there, in the not very distant neighbourhood
of our Indian empire ! What a sugar-growing, cotton and coffee-producing
region all Northern Australia might be I”
Another gentleman, Mr. James Furneaux, also well acquainted with
Australia, asks very properly, why a settlement has not long been planted
at Cape York, at the entrance of Torres Straits ? Captain Flinders, one
of the first Australian discoverers, and who was employed to lay down
this very coast, long ago pointed out its dangers ; and Mr. Furneaux, in
a letter to me, says:—“ In this passage shipwrecks are of weekly occur-
rence. In the year 1855, no fewer than sixty took place there. In
every instance, I believe, where the crews were saved by taking to the
boats, they had to run to Coupang, or some such place, 1500 miles dis-
tant, the prevailing winds and currents effectually preventing their pas-
sage to Moreton Bay, the nearest civilized place. A settlement at Cape
York would probably be the means of annually succouring from 500 to
1000 shipwrecked mariners.”
But, Sir, while pointing out the capabilities of North Australia, escape
from which to the gold colonies convicts would find utterly hopeless, I
care not where these criminals are sent, so that they are sent out of
England, where, from any system of prisons and penal servitude, they


will be continually returning into opr streets and our dwellings. What-
ever we do, let us be rid of them. Let them break into the primeval
forests as much as they please, but not into our houses at midnight.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
WILLIAM HOWITT.
Jan. 22,1857.
LETTER IV.—JANUARY, 1857.
CONVICTS AND COLONIES.—THE CARTING-OUT SYSTEM.
Second Letter to the Editor of the “ Morning Advertiser"
Sir, —In recommending a return to the use of penal colonies, there is
nothing so necessary as to clear away a gross delusion which stands most
imposingly in the path. It is a received idea here at home that the cry
against the importation of convicts in our colonies is a universal and
unmixed cry—that the people have risen as it were en masse , and rejected
them. That might be the case at the Cape, where they had never had
them, did not want them, and therefore would not have them; but it
was, and is, far from the case in the old penal colonies of Australia.
How, then, has this great cry arisen, and shown itself so determinedly, in
those colonies ? That is an important question, and the answer is, that
it is the direct result of Governmental mismanagement, and is a fact
which cannot be too well understood here.
There is a history of crimes and horrors connected with our penal
colonies which ought to be generally known. So far from a desire to hide
it, in the prospect of a fresh experiment, we ought to bring it before the
public gaze, in order to prevent a repetition of it. These things are to be
found in a huge pile of Blue Books, and in the Histories of New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land. We can there turn to the dark romance
of Michael Howe and his fellow bandits; to Mosquito and his infuriated
natives. But all these terrors, and more of the same kind, we confidently
assert need never have been; they were the plain and inevitable result
of our Governmental conduct.
Governments, and especially great and Imperial Governments, with a
thousand pressing charges on their hands, while many of them, so far


from being under their eye, are at the farthest ends of the earth, have a
sublime and generalizing way with them. Imitating the Divinity, but
without Divine powers, they say, “ Let there be light!” and there follows
darkness. “Let there bo a colony!” and there is confusion. This was
precisely the case in the settlement and management of our penal
colonies. Those who doubt it, let them read West’s History of Tasmania
and Lang’s History of New South Wales. Government having dis-
covered a convenient piece of waste land, called Australia, to which to
cart out the refuse of civilization, forthwith carted it and shot it up.
Little or no care was taken to dispose of the rubbish, and it became a
nuisance. They went on carting out, simply because it was very easy and
convenient to do so, paying little attention to remonstrances on the neglect
of its proper disposal, and none to the excess of it. The upshot was certain.
Rubbish, though a nuisance in one place, is a blessing in another.
Ten thousand houses in London and other cities stand on carted-out
rubbish, and stand well too. The refuse of farmyards is the stuff which
fertilizes all England. Any one who “takes his walks abroad,” into the
outskirts of London and other cities, where building is going on, will see
boards put up announcing, in one place, that rubbish must not be shot
under high pains and penalties; in another place, however, you are
kindly invited, by a huge emblazonry, to shoot your rubbish there.
Now, suppose the rubbish carters, instead of taking their loads, not to
where it is wanted, and even pressingly solicited, persist in carrying it
and shooting it up where the ground is energetically tabooed, of course
there will be a fracas and a shindy. But if the wrong-headed carters
resolve to cart out and shoot their rubbish on our neighbours’ lawns, on
the nicely-kept spots where the wealthy “in trim gardens take their
pleasure,” of course the outcry will be frightful. That has been the exact
proceeding of our Imperial rubbish-carters.
When Sydney and Van Diemen’s Land found the rubbish not only
carelessly shot and left in festering heaps, but poured on without stop or
stay, or regard to any rule of proportion, they grew restive, outrageous,
and unmanageable. Thereupon the Imperial rubbish-carters, instead
of rationally betaking themselves to the ample and most convenient waste
ground of North Australia, insisted on shooting their rubbish on the
lawns of Cape Town, under the very nose of affluent and resolute Anglo-
Dutch merchants. In the words of Miss Hamilton’s now forgotten
Hindu Rajah, “What can I say more?”


But, after all, one is astonished on landing in New South Wales or
Van Diemen’s Land, to find that the vehement cry that reached us at a
distance is any thing but a unanimous cry. We discover that the cry
was the cry of a party, as the cry against “ deterrent punishments ” is
that of a morbidly humanitarian party here. Step on shore in Van
Diemen’s Land, where we have yet 5000 convicts, and one of the first
things which you learn is, that there is a numerous class of superior and
intelligent people, who regret the loss of further convict labour.
Having been accustomed to hear Sir William Denison, the Governor
of Tasmania, but now Governor of New South Wales, constantly abused
in the Melbourne papers as a monster, and plentifully loaded with the
epithets of gaoler, turnkey, and slave-driver, my notice was immediately
arrested, on landing at Launceston, by the gangs of convicts at work in
bright yellow suits, with black letters, a foot long, on their backs. I did
not neglect to make inquiries on the convict question when introduced to
his Excellency on reaching Hobart Town.
The monster and slave-driver I found to be one of the ablest, and
frankest, and most gentlemanly men I encountered in the colonies. I
was greatly struck with the interest with which he conversed on all mat-
ters affecting his plans and labours for the welfare of the island. His
language and spirit were in perfect accord with those evidences of good
government, the tranquillity and prosperity diffused over the whole island.
“ Well,” asked Sir William, “howdo you find this little rabbit-warren?”
I expressed my agreeable impressions of it. “ Where did you land ? ”
“At Launceston.” “Well, you found a good town there; well paved,
well lighted, with good public buildings, quays, warehouses, court-house,
theatre, barracks, and the like. That is the work of convict labour.
When you wished to come hither, you found a good long coach, as well
horsed and appointed as ever issued from the Bull-and-Mouth or the
White Horse Cellar in London. It bowled you away over as finely
macadamized a road at ten miles the hour, as over any road in England.
You passed over substantial bridges, you saw, right and left, cultivated
estates and fine country mansions. There, again, you have the product
of convict labour. Here you are in a beautiful town, with good lighting,
good paving, with all sorts of excellent buildings, Government offices,
high school, splendid custom-house and docks, barracks for soldiers and
barracks for convicts, an excellent market-house with its noble fountain—
all that is the effect of convict labour. Look there, just below these


windows, there is not a great fleet certainly, but a goodly little wood of
masts. If you had been here a few years ago, you would not have seen
those vessels of 1200 tons lying close under the town, but the grooms
and carters there washing their horses’ legs, for the estuary at that part
was only some two or three feet deep. Now they have a commodious
port. That port I dug, and built those solid piers, with convict labour;
and had the opposition party allowed me to receive fresh convicts, before
I left I would have made them another port as capacious and good.
When you land in Melbourne, though Victoria has been a colony these
seventeen years, they tell me that you find no dock, no quays or ware-
houses at the port —not a road or a bridge in the country, except the
bridge over the Yarra; that the moment you step from the boat you
sink to the hips in mud, and go struggling and wriggling up the country
through quagmire and gully, as far as you please to go. Had I been
there with a supply of convicts, there should have been a good mac-
adamized road from Melbourne to the Murray. And yet over there
they wonder what I want with convict labour.”
But Sir Wfyiam was well known to be the stanch advocate of convict
labour : I did not, therefore, content myself with his evidence, though he
had plenty of preponderating facts to show for his side of the argument.
I conversed with members of the Council, with gentlemen of both town
and country, men living in their ample houses in the midst of their beau-
tiful and quiet estates. What was the prevailing sentiment ? It was
almost everywhere the same. I found a large, an enlightened, an in-
fluential public, in the very island which had rejected the further impor-
tation of convicts—who valued their labour and regretted their exclusion.
Some of these gentlemen unequivocally declared that the convicts, as a
body, were much superior to the free emigrants which the Government
Commissioners were sending them over; and, what is still more deserv-
ing of a marked notice, that they were the only class of the working popu-
lation who were really anxious for the education of their children.
Sir, those are facts, which throw a new light on the nature and extent
of the cry against convicts in the colonies. They are facts known to
thousands as well as to myself, and they indicate with sufficient clearness
what we have to avoid in any new experiment. There must be no more
Norfolk Islands; a grand mistake, being an attempt to reform that portion
of convictism which is brutalized beyond the power of reform. For that
class, the dregs remaining after the clarification of the muddy wine of


crime, your only maxim is, “ Hold them fast and work them hard." No
yet discovered art of man can restore that thoroughly fallen section; but
you can keep them safe, and make them useful. If we are to have a
successful penal colony, we must have no more sublime Government fiats
of “ Let there be a colony!” or, “ Let the rubbish be carted out!” unsup-
ported by the necessary labour of thought and action; the necessary
previous inquiry into the fitness of the place to be selected, and the
necessary elaboration of a system of efficient penal economy and labour
in it. There are plenty of able and experienced men, both now at home
and in the old penal colonies, capable of planning and carrying out such a
colony for Government. What we want is, a plain, practical plan, laying
down all that relates to planting, establishing, and maintaining such a
colony. Supplies for the North of Australia could be had in any
quantity from the old colonies in the South, without waiting, as was the
case originally with Sydney, the arrivals from an eight months' voyage.
Above all, we want, as governor, a man of a large but firm humauity,
not likely to degenerate into a maudlin sentimentality, with a necessary
severity as incapable of deepening into cruelty.
The convictage of a great country like this cannot be dealt with, either
at home or abroad, without much wisdom and much exertion. If we are
willing to bestow these on a judicious colonization, we may raise up new
states just as well as our fathers did those which are now repaying to us
the magnificent fruits of all their cares and sacrifices.
Yours, &c..
January 26, 1857. WILLIAM HOWITT.
LETTER V.—NOVEMBER 1862.
THE TREATMENT OF CRIMINALS.
To the Editor of the “ Star."
Sir, —Your leader of to-day on penal sentences hits the right nail on
the head. You never can reform criminals —which should be the grand
object—by shutting them up with nothing to do, and with the prospect
of soon coming out of prison, with their chums waiting for them at the
prison doors, to reintroduce them into the practice of garotting and
burglary.


Sir Joshua Jebb’s plans have reformed nobody, but have driven the
convicts to desperation, as we have seen once or twice, and made London
a hell upon earth.
I like your compelling the criminals to work out compensation to the
injured and the public. It is the good old Mosaic law, and common
sense to boot. But why do you not recommend the sending of a good
quota of our condemned criminals to Western Australia? They are
continually crying out for them there, and can’t get them. The colonists
have, time after time, appealed to the Colonial Office, and to the public
through the Times. Is it because some of the Australian colonies have
protested against having convicts ? That can be no reason why those
who want them should not have them. Is it because it is supposed that
they do more harm there than good? What says the late Governor
Kennedy of Western Australia? That the amount of crime in that
colony is much below what it is in England in the ratio of population.
Both he and other colonists of that colony have declared that whilst they
got a sufficient supply of convicts the colony went forward; when they
cannot, it goes rather backward than forward. Now, having travelled in
various Australan colonies, and looked into this question there, I am
prepared at any moment to prove that the employment of convicts in our
young colonies has reformed a thousand, nay, ten thousandfold more con-
victs than any system of penal discipline ever adopted since the foundation
of the world.
What are nine-tenths of the present population of New South Wales
and Tasmania? Convicts—or the children of convicts. And where will
you find a more orderly, moral, or respectable population ? The spectacle
afforded by the creation of great and flourishing communities out of the
moral—or rather immoral—sewage of this country is the most extra-
ordinary one in the world. There are whole States created out of reformed
criminals. Such was the case, too, formerly with Maryland and the
Jersejs. And what is the difference? That whilst no decent man or
woman dare venture into London streets at night I have travelled alone
night and day amid a convict population and slept in their huts; and at
gentlemen’s houses I found no single servant who was not a convict, yet
the door of the house was never locked at night.
Whence arises this ? Simply from taking men away from temptation,
and giving them constant labour, communication with free nature, instead
of a branded existence in corrupt towns, and above all—hope.


• Of course, where colonies protest against convicts there is nothing to be
said; but where they are wanted there is certainly no mode of reforming
them and clearing our crowded towns of them better than that suggested
by, yours faithfully,
WILLIAM HOWITT.
West-hill Lodge, Highgate, Nov. 25.
LETTER YL—NOVEMBER, 1862.
OUB CONVICT SYSTEM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
To the Editor of the “ Star.”
Sib,— ln my hasty note to you a day or two ago on this subject I
touched on the most prominent features of the transportation system and
the cooping-up system. Let us now look a little at the results of each.
The highest, the divinest wisdom which has ever appeared on earth has
taught us that all systems and all men are to be tested, not by the plausi-
bility of theories or pretensions, but by their results. “By their fruits
shall ye know them.” Now, what are the fruits of transportation ? The
creation of new and populous States. What are the fruits of the cooping-up
and home ticket-of-leave system ? They are all about us in murders,
burglaries, garottings, and universal terror —in a condition of society
which makes this great London of ours, this great centre of Christianity
and civilization, a name of horror amongst the nations. In those few
words the two systems receive their respective judgments.
What we are now suffering from is the sudden tying up of a great
national artery; it is the inevitable convulsion in our social constitution
from this violence. Transportation of felons has been the regular habit
of this colonizing country for nearly two centuries and a half. It was
inaugurated by the 39th of Elizabeth, cap. 4, for the banishment of
dangerous rogues and vagabonds, and was progressively organized into
a system by various Acts of the Stuart and Hanoverian kings down to
the Acts of the 2nd and 3rd William IV, We transported our convicts to
th American Plantations, as they were called, of Virginia, Maryland,


Delaware, New Jersey, New York, North and South Carolina, and
Pennsylvania, in great numbers during the reigns of the Stuarts, of
King William, and several of the Georges. We transported others in the
earlier reigns to the West-India Plantations, to Barbadoes, Jamaica,
Bermuda, &c. Quakers were transported to several of these colonies for
daring to have an independent conscience. The readers of Macaulay will
not have forgotten, on the other hand, that he endeavoured to brand
William Penn with the stigma of having procured for the maids of honour
to the Queen of James 11. the privilege of selling the prisoners of Mon-
mouth’s army, condemned by wholesale, by the infamous Jeffreys, to the
transportation traders. At that time convicts were in such request by
the settlers in those colonies, that they were become a valuable mercantile
commodity instead of a drug, and a very deleterious drug, as they now
are. Ten pounds apiece were readily obtained for them by the Govern-
ment and people about the Court. By the labour of these convicts and
of negroes the foundations of those colonies were laid. People flocked over
eagerly to countries where land and labour might be had for next to
nothing. By the hands of those convicts was done that heavy and often
dirty drudgery which free settlers are loth to do themselves. The convicts
were, in fact, the foundation-stones and piles plunged into the earth and
the mud on which those now mighty States were raised.
When the American War of Independence cut off these great outlets to
our convictism, our gaols became glutted with prisoners to such a degree
that the Government was compelled to look out for some new scene to
which to convey them. Far off, obscure, and but partly known, lay at the
Antipodes a great Austral continent, from whose coasts we had chased the
Dutch, who had named it New Holland. Much even of its southern
coast was yet untraced on any chart, and the island of Van Diemen still
figured as a promontory of this Terra Australis. On the south-eastern
shore of this barbarous region the then British Government determined
to found a new penal settlement. It was expressly and exclusively as a
penal settlement that’they designed it; they had none of those magnificent
ideas of creating new and mighty nations which the wonderful growth of
the Australian colonies might now lead us to suppose. In May 1787
the first cargo of English convicts landed, after a frightful voyage of eight
months, on the sandy beach of Botany Bay. It was not till some time
after, that a sailor, named Jackson, caught sight of the opening leading
into the noble port, now named after him, and the convict settlement was


founded at Sydney. For many years there were no alluring circumstances
to draw free emigrants thither. The place was a place of reproach, and
surrounded by all the repulsive prestige of the home of felony. Southey
wrote dismal “ Botany Bay Eclogues ” about it; Campbell, in sonorous
sentiment, talked of the captives—
“ Doomed the long isles of Sydney Cove to see
where, in fact, there were no long isles, but plenty of promontories.
Yet, amid all this cloud of antipodean gloom and infamy, the colony
rapidly grew; free settlers flowed in as they had done to the American
plantations. Convicts built their docks, their houses, made their roads,
cultivated their fields, and shepherded their flocks. The population soon
overflowed its bounds, and burst away through the inclosing Blue Moun-
tains to a vast world of woods and high pastoral plains. Flocks and herds
spread over them, and New South Wales in seventy-five years is what
every one knows—a country of immense wealth, with a capital whose
principal street rivals Regent Street, with affluent landowners and
merchants whose fathers were convicts, and an export and import trade
greater than that of most of the European countries.
But as the free population of the colony became great, and the torrent
of convictism poured in by the Home Government inconvenient, the
Governor of New South Wales sought out a new locale for the foundation
of a penal colony, and Yan Diemen’s Land was fixed on. In 1804,
Colonel Collins planted the first convict settlement there. The result was
precisely the same as in New South Wales. Though Port Macquarrie
and Hobart Town were founded expressly for penal settlements, this did
not prevent free emigrants flocking after, availing themselves of convict
labour, and growing rich upon it. What Tasmania now is every one
knows—a beautiful, beautifully cultivated, and populous island, ten
times more orderly and peaceful than the mother country at this
moment.
I have been particular in tracing this history of our convict settle-
ments, because in a Parliamentary Report a few years ago it was given
as a reason against penal settlements that free emigrants refused to go
to them. Where is any such colony? It remains yet to be discovered.
On the contrary, the uniform story of all such colonies is that free
emigrants have rushed after the convict to build their fortunes on his
labours. True, there has come a period in every such colony when an


outcry has been raised against the further importation of convicts ; and
that cry, too, has been a just and a natural cry, and the causes of it
demand a full inquiry. This inquiry I propose to institute in another
letter. Here only I will repeat the fact that the result of transportation
is such as no other system of penal discipline can pretend to show —the
creation of new and mighty countries; the creation with them of an
enormous commerce, and the creation of hundreds of thousands of new
men and women, honourable, hopeful, Christian men and women, walking
in the light of knowledge, and the new-born dignity of truth and virtue—
the marvellous transformation of the dregs of the earth. —Yours,
WILLIAM IIOWITT.
P.S.—A “New Yorker,” in the Star, called in question the fact of the
transportation of felons to New Jersey and New York, as well as the
other “ American plantations.” For full proofs of these facts, from
American authorities, the reader may consult the succeeding numbers of
the Star, as furnished by myself.
LETTER VII.—DECEMBER 1862.
OUR CONVICT SYSTEM.
To the Editor of the “ Star.”
g IR? That, notwithstanding the altogether unparalleled success of the
system of transportation, there has at a certain period arisen in every
penal colony an outcry more or less intense against further importation
of convicts, is notorious, and the causes of this outcry are not far to seek.
In the first place, when colonies have outgrown their first rude and
arduous condition; when a free and abluent population has sprung up;
when the ponderous and depressing labours of a new settlement are
over, the people wish to be rid of the stigma of a penal depot. But a
judicious management of the convict element might have neutralized this
feeling by its benefits. The great cause of discontent against the convict
system in the colonies has been its gross and intolerable mismanagement.
We all know that every thing depends on things being wisely distri-


buted and put in their right place. And here I will repeat some
illustrations of this fact which I used in my letter on this subject of
January 26, 1857. They cannot be too deeply impressed on the public
mind. Every good chemist asserts that our sewage is of incalculable
value for fertilizing our lands—that the sewage of London alone is worth
several millions annually. But sewage poured out in our streets would
be intolerable. We have gone on pouring it into the Thames till it has
threatened us with a pestilence, and are now compelled to divert it into
another channel. That which might have been returned to us in the
abundant luxuries of life has been our monster nuisance. Put the
Australian colonies for the Thames, and the cases are parallel. The
Governments of the time, instead of reflecting that convictism was a
serious element to deal with under all circumstances, and that to work
well, even in the wild wildernesses of Australia, it must be proportioned to
the acknowledged want, and directed exactly where the want existed,
poured it out on particular points in unlimited torrents, and converted
that which might have been a blessing into a fearful curse.
We see in the various outskirts of London boards placarded “Eubbish
may be shot here,” and other places placarded with the menace of a
penalty for shooting rubbish. Now, imagine a number of pig-headed
carters persisting in shooting down rubbish where it was protested
against. Would there not soon be a terrible outcry?
But that is precisely what the Government of the day did. Having
found a couple of places for shooting their social rubbish—namely. New
South Wales and Yan Diemen’s Land—they went on carting it out and
shooting it down there in spite of all reason, and in defiance of all
protests. Ihe outcry from Sydney and Hobart Town was the certain
result. To add to the evil, the mismanagement of the convict population,
when there, was astounding. There was little or no selection of the
convicts according to their capacities and degrees of criminality. They
were assigned recklessly to such as sought after them. They were
corrupted by the treating with ardent spirits. When they obtained their
orders for their allotments of land, for such they had after certain
servitude, these were purchased of them for ardent spirits. The whole
colony of New South Wales was a regular hell from the lavish
distribution of spirits. The officers of the army had the monopoly
of the importation and sale of spirits. Their soldiers sold them at the
gates of the barracks. Large estates were made by the purchase of


convicts’ allotments for spirits. In a word, they who would know what was
the infernal condition of New South Wales from this traffic in spirits,
and from the abominable abuses of the convict system, have only to
consult Dr. Lang’s “ History of Transportation.”
This was surely enough to raise a fierce clamour against such a con-
vict system; and yet we find, by a report of the Legislative Council of
New South Wales in 1846, that a large section of the population—in
fact, nearly all the rural population —was still in favour of the conti-
nuance of convict importation. Scandalous as had been its abuse, the
squatters and farmers found great need of it, and demanded its resump-
tion, for it had been ended, as regarded that colony, by the home Go-
vernment in 1840. The home Government, won over by the pseudo-
philanthropists of the Bentham school, who have conducted us to the
present frightful pass, wavered and gave way. Had they boldly re-
solved to supply the squatters and farmers of New South Wales still with
convicts; had they founded, as they talked of doing, a new colony in
North Australia, and in both places constituted a wise administration of
that convict system, we should now undoubtedly have a powerful
northern colon} trading largely with this country, and should never have
heard of London garottings.
The system of Captain Crofton, as now in practice in Ireland, his
selections of convicts, his several probationary stages from the prison of
Mountjoy, through Spike Island, to Philipstown, or to the open farm of
Lusk, where convicts work in as much freedom as any other labourers,
show that, judiciously managed, convicts need be no eyesore, much less
cause of complaint, on moral grounds, in such favourable situations as
the wide wilds of new lands. Government, however, had not then the
wisdom or the energy for such a system. They transferred the whole of
the convict transportation to the little island of Van Diemen s Land.
Over that small island they poured out their social sewage : they carted
out their rubbish to such an extent, that they raised another wild cry of
indignation. In 1843, when the whole population of Van Diemen’s
Land amounted only to 57,420, the number of convict prisoners was
20,332, and of the other 37,088: the great bulk were convicts on assign-
ment or ticket of leave, and emancipists—that is, those convicts who had
acquired their freedom. The little knot of free settlers was overwhelmed
by one frightful mass of convictism ! There were at that time 10,000
convicts for whom no employment whatever could be found.


Such, Sir, were the most sufficient causes of the loud outcry from the
Astralian colonies against the transportation system. No colony joined
more loudly in this cry than Victoria, which never had any convicts.
The sewage which had been thus recklessly poured out on Sydney and
Van Diemen’s Land had overflowed upon it. On the gold discovery in
1852 the deluges of convictism poured over from both sides, and, for a
time, Victoria presented very much the same aspect as London does now.
There were plenty of robberies and murders, and, moreover, the pseudo-
sentimentalism of criminal legislation was there, at that moment, in full
bloom. The sentences for crime and outrage were so short, so trivial,
so easily evaded, that the convict population laughed at them : and this
population, I am bound to say, consisted nearly as much of the thieves
of London, who had rushed over to the harvest of gold, as of those who
had been sent over by the law. Some of the most thorough devils that I
came across were of this very class of London scoundrels who are now
daily grabbing at our throats. The Victoria Government was compelled,
after the shooting down of the gold escort by these gentry, to summon up
vigour, and hang a few of them, and wonderful was the quietus. For
twelve months that I continued my travels in that colony I heard little
more of robberies, and saw no more of robbers. The villains had other
means of life there, and they resorted to them rather than swing.
And after all this I visited Van Diemen’s Land. As I have said, I
never travelled in a more orderly and secure place. I slept in solitary
huts in the mountains, where I knew the people were convicts, and might
ride away with my horse, and cut my throat as I slept. I had no fear,
for I knew that they were better employed, and had a hope of advance
before them more attractive than crime. When I saw the Governor, Sir
William Denison, now Governor of Madras, and expressed my surprise
at the quietness, order, and kind spirit of the population, he said, “As
you came along you found good roads, good bridges, prosperous villages,
finely cultivated fields. You see here a handsome town, substantial
public buildings, and busy quays. They are all the wqrk of convicts.”
He took me to the window, and, just below the Government house,
showed me a fine port, in which lay vessels of 1200 tons, and said, “ Had
you come here a few years ago you would have seen men washing their
horses’ legs there, it was so shallow. That is the work of convicts.”
In a word, convict labour is capable, in a young colony, of being made,
under wise and able direction, as great a blessing as, under the most


orrupt and miserable management, it has been made a curse. If Cap-
tain Crofton, in Ireland, can make it so, how much more so may it be
done amid the wide facilities of a vast and new country ? That this is a
simple and patent fact we have the testimony of Governor Kennedy, of
Western Australia. The people of that colony have long made earnest
appeals for a sufficient supply of convicts. Governor Kennedy has
himself repeatedly seconded this appeal, and pronounced the proper
amount of convicts in such a colony by no means injurious. These are
his words at the opening meeting of the Geographical Society, as re-
ported in th q Times of the 11th of the present month:—“Governor
Kennedy, of Western Australia, in reference to that colony, remarked,
that it had fulfilled the difficult but useful task of converting thieves into
honest men. Between 6000 and 7000 convicts from England had been
sent there, and yet the per centage of crime was as low as in any portion
of Her Majesty’s dominions, and the reason was, that men were there
compelled to work, and there was plenty of work for them to do. As
long as a due proportion of untainted immigrants were introduced with
the convicts would not object to receive the latter.”
In that sentence, 1 am confident,, lies the whole philosophy of the
convict question: that with our vast unoccupied territories in different
parts of the world, an energetic Government would find nothing easier
than at once to clear our streets of the burglar and garotter, and convert
them into the foundation-stones of new States, which should, ere long,
return to us in commerce, and in the satisfaction of having rendered
society secure by the moral reformation of not irreclaimable men, an
ample reward. As there are, however, one or two points connected with
this question that I am anxious to submit to the public, I will crave the
space of one more letter.
Yours,
WILLIAM HOWITT.


LETTER VIII.—DECEMBER 2, 1862.
ODR CONVICT SYSTEM, AND THE REMEDY.
To the Editor of the “ Star .”
Sir, —I think what I have already advanced has fully proved these
facts :—That the transportation system is the only system which has at
once cleared our streets and highways of robbers, and, in the words of Go-
vernor Kennedy, converted those robbers into honest men ; that the results
in colonial growth and prosperity have been beyond all example splendid;
that these results have been obtained, not through a wise administration of
the transportation system, but in the face of the very grossest and most
wholesale abuse of it. That, on the other hand, the adoption of every
other system whatever has failed to prevent the growth of crime at home,
or its culmination at the present moment in the most frightful condition
of public insecurity and personal outrage that ever disgraced a civilized
country.
There can be no doubt that this state of things has been in a great
measure produced by sentimental Benthamism. Jeremy Bentham,
blinded by his pet theories, and in face of the most brilliant historic facts,
argued that transportation as a system had failed, and that convictism is
a bad foundation for colonies. Both of these positions have been ably
refuted, by simply pointing to the result, and observing that “the proof
of the pudding is in the eating”—that as the result of this system there
now exist vast and populous countries, and hundreds of thousands of
most valuable people, the children of convicts. But Benthamism has
done still more mischief. It has inaugurated a spurious spirit and tone
in criminal legislation. From the atrocious rigour of the criminal laws
of George 111. it has led us to a sickly sentimental lenity, neither healthy
justice nor healthy mercy—to a use of sentences which are “ a mockery,
a delusion, and a snare ” —to a cat-with-a-monse jurisprudence equally
mischievous to the public and cruel to the criminal. For the question is
not one merely of peace and protection to the public, but of human
reformation ; and we have no right to catch and let loose criminals, at
each step of the process more hardened by it, and at every step cut off


from every chance of return to honesty till they are driven into actual
devilism.
It is time that we acknowledged the staring fact, and impressed it on our
Legislature, that to every one of our reformatory systems, whether for
men, women, or children, attaches the fatality that they provide no ulti-
mate and permanent escape from the necessity of crime. In all of these
schemes and institutions the last and all-important link is wanting, the
link which unites them to a prospect of achieving an honest maintenance.
All these institutions are bridges wanting the arch which should land
men on the opposite shore; that of a fair dependence on their own ener-
gies. These institutions are all, more or less, plausible abortions. Ihey
accustom their subjects to a life of comfort, only to render their subse-
sequent abandonment to the world the more exquisitely torturing. Ihey
cultivate the moral qualities only to expose them to a more terrible
destruction. In all such schemes it should be the fixed object to land
their patients in a permanent hold on a better life. But I contend that
years now of strenuous effort in a variety of ways have forced on us the
melancholy conviction that this is utterly impracticable in this country.
We find it amid our dense and luxurious society impossible to realize the
restoration of the fallen man and woman to the grade of man and woman
such as God intended, and as every Christian soul must, desire for them.
As the door of the prison or the reformatory closes and shuts them out,
as the probationary workshop or farm fades behind them, they again find
themselves in the streets and highways of a hostile country. They are
environed by heaps of wealth which vehemently solicit, and are enfolded
by a destitution that maddens; the virtuous repel them, the criminal
invite them. They are driven to bay, with every man’s hand against
them, and they have no alternative but to say—“ Evil, be thou my
good,” and raise the murderous hand against every man.
As for that ticket-of-leave system, it is the poor branded culprit’s most
inevitable pitfall. It was a system invented for the wilderness of new
lands, and there, when well administered, worked well. Here, it is out
of all nature, a monstrous prostitution of the original idea; a trap and a
snare to all parties; the climax of perdition to the convict, and of outrage
to the public.
In a word, all these facts and experiences point to new countries and
the prospect of new careers, as the only solution of the difficulty of con-
vict reform. It is only in the wild, solitary fields and forests of new lands*


where tempters and temptations are withdrawn, where the brand does
not exclude the convict from the sympathy of his employer, and where
the future of a quiet home and family ties beam cheeringly in the dis-
tance, that the real restoration of the convict can be found, as it has been
found so wonderfully and so thousandfold before.
Of all the plans of convict discipline, Captain Crofton’s in Ireland
seems to approach nearest to the colonial one. It comprises a careful
selection of criminals; and in such selection my opinion is, that there
will always be found a certain portion so thoroughly demoralized that no
human means can reform them. These atrocious criminals should never
be allowed to go out of safekeeping, any more than a tiger or hyena. As
for the rest. Captain Crofton has shown that they may be disciplined to
work at full freedom in the open country, without attempt to escape or
to commit any injury to any one. But the fatal question still recurs—
What hope for these men when again turned into a world which suspects
and repels them ?
Now if, as asserted, Captain Crofton's convict farm is self-supporting,
why should it not be extended ? We have three or four millions of acres of
waste lands in Ireland, a large proportion of which is capable of being culti-
vated to advantage : why, then, should not these lands be reclaimed by the
hands of well-organized bands of convicts, and then sold? And again,
with all our thousands of leagues of unoccupied colonial country, capable of
producing under culture or mere occupation abundant flocks, herds, and
harvests, why should we not do as our wise ancestors did—employ them
in laying the foundations of new colonies there ? Our rulers have got
the habit of saying with great self-complacency, “ Transportation is
quite out of the question.” But if there be any truth in the contents of
these letters —if transportation has been the only, and not only so, the
magnificently successful scheme—if the home systems have been pro-
ductive only of augmented crime, of private peril, and public scandal, then
the thinking community will force on our Legislature the conviction
that, instead of being out of the question, transportation is the only
question.
There is also another truth which must be brought to the consciousness
of the aristocracy and legislators of this country—namely, that not only
must there be opened up a sure avenue to convict reform, but the sources of
crime must be cut off. Now, one of the most prolific of these sources origi-
nates with these very legislators themselves, in the game laws. Since I


addressed some remarks to the Star on the cruelties practised under these
laws I have received a pamphlet, published by Hamilton and Adams, en-
titled, “ This is not the First Link in the Chain.” The grave, mild, and
logical style of it indicates its author to be one of the Friends. It ex-
poses the evils of the game laws, and deserves to be widely read; but
it is to the facts collected in its Appendix that I now call attention.
Sir Harry Verney, at the Buckinghamshire Midsummer Sessions, read
a report of the new Gaol Committee, and at the same time said that they
were actually building a new wing to the gaol entirely for poachers; that
of 539 prisoners, 169 were committed for infraction of the game laws.
That thus one-third of their criminals maintained, and whose prosecutions
were carried on at the cost ot the country, were p.oachers ; that this ought
not to be, for gentlemen had no right to saddle the country with such cost
for their mere amusement. He traced the growth of crime mainly to this
source; for these mep, being marked men in the country, retreated into
towns, and thence, step by step, were hunted into the metropolis. By
extracts from tire Herts County Press it was shown that in Hertfordshire
nearly three-fourths, or 143 out of 201 committals, were for offences
against the game laws, and that they had also been compelled, on this
account, greatly to enlarge their prisons; whilst, in Bedfordshire, the
county has been put to the cost of 15,000 Z. for the same cause!
Sir, having now traced, on the basis of historic fact and personal ex-
perience, the causes of our present deplorable social condition, I lay down
my pen with the consolatory assurance that this vital question will, in
the approaching Session of Parliament, receive a searching examination,
and, it is to be hoped, a sound solution.—Yours,
WILLIAM HOWITT.
P.S. —The sentimental Benthamism mentioned in this letter applies
more to the followers of Bentham than to himself. Though time has dis-
proved his opinion of convict transportation, we do not forget his great
services as the father of legal reform. t


LETTER IX.—DECEMBER 4, 1862.
OUE CONVICT SYSTEM.—DAY BREAKS.
To the Editor of the “ Star."
Sxk, —I heartily congratulate you on the impression which you have
already made on the general mind—on the victory which you have
achieved over the long impenetrable prejudices of the public, or rather of
public men. Already piles of letters pour in, most cordially approving
the facts and arguments of the Star in favour of the resumption of trans-
portation. Already two judges have taken an affirmative position on
the question ; already the leading journal has made its decision. Only a
day or two ago the Times, confessing all the gravity of the subject, yet
declared that “ transportation was not to be thought of.” Yesterday it
broke from its cloud of perplexity, and declared that “it was quite right,
we must return to transportation! ” Still more, it did the Star the ho-
nour to import its arguments into its leader. The simile of the sewage was
triumphantly used; Governor Kennedy did his assigned duty, and people
in high places were warned, almost in the exact starry language, that
they must no longer talk of the transportation system as objectionable.
It said, with you, that these living men and women must no longer be
cooped up, with all their fiery passions and energies, within brick walls,
till they rise in madness on their keepers, but must be suffered to roam
the Australian wildernesses, and, in the honest ardour of hopeful labour,
commence new and beneficial careers.
Sir, the die is cast; the fatal spell of imbecile lackadaisicalism in
jurisprudence is broken. The voice of the long-imprisoned national
sentiment is heard through you. Ministers and Members of Parliament
will bo compelled to confess it, and to rid the kingdom of its foul incubus
of crime, forced back on itself till “it is tenfold more the child of hell
than before.”
And now I would earnestly call on Ministers to grasp the mane of the
crisis ; to adopt a measure worthy of them and the nation ; to send out
a vessel with able and practical men to select the site of a new colony in
the north-west of Australia. lam rejoiced to hear that the Governor of
Sydney is about to send a ship to examine Cape York for a new colonial


seat. It is a true and statesmanlike resolve. But the north-west,
abounding with the fine lands which Leichhardt and Gregory have made
known to us, waits in the patience of nature, and the impatience of
human needs, for a similar foundation. Nature there points, on the one
hand, to her noble forests and fertile savannolas, the destined home of
flocks and herds, and enlightened men; and, on the other, to that mag-
nificent chain of islands starring the summer seas all the way to India
and China. She says, as plainly as the mighty voice of Nature can say
it, “ There is the radiant highway of coming commerce. It is along
those straits, and amid those spicy islands, that the mercantile argosies
of nascent peoples are to exchange with Africa, India, China, and
a thousand isles, the wealth and wisdom of a mighty Anglo-Austral
world.”
Can there be a Ministry so narrow-visioned, so ignobly unambitious,
that it does not desire to stamp its name amid the fast-approaching
wonders of this future—that can content itself with spending its reign of
power in the vain, the Sysiphean labour of stifling in hulks and prisons
the criminal stalwart strength which contains within itself the yet
deathless germs of virtue and of peoples ? Can our present rulers cast
a glance on the States which their great and far-seeing predecessors have
founded with the very potsherds of society, and fertilized with its slime,
and suffer themselves to pass away and leave no trace amongst them ?
Can they be content that no new communities of Englishmen shall
honour their memories as their fathers, and, under God, as their
creators ?
No ! Let them speed away their ship and their well-chosen men, who,
with the eyes of statesmen and the experience of engineers, shall select a
site, fitted by its healthy character and its command of maritime advan-
tages to grow into the capital of a noble State. Let them employ all
such convicts which Western Australia may not need, in there building
docks and harbours, in opening up the wilderness for flocks and herds, and
laying down roads there; in building houses and public offices; in felling
timber, and splitting it, and fencing fields for home pasturage and tillage;
and depend upon it that for the next hundred years there will no more be
heard of garotting. And if transportation does not justify itself, it will
be because Government will not have sent out men, who, like Sir Walter
Crofton, in Ireland, are capable of producing order and blessing out of
the chaos of crime and ignorance. And finally, and above all things, let


not Government suppose that the executive of transportation and the
planting of new colonies are things that can be accomplished by packing
off to the determined scene a promiscuous herd of such persons as will of
course rush in to offer themselves as the managers and officials of such a
colony. The neglect of a judicious selection of officers, the neglect of a
constant watchfulness over the conduct of the affairs of the incipient
State, will be certain “ death in the pot,” and entail on us all the evils
and outcries of the past, without a certainty of the past success. A new
and great era of criminal reform is before us, if our Ministers are only
true to themselves and to the nation.
WILLIAM HOWITT.
p.S.—There are two other considerations which show the importance
of early colonization of the northern coasts of Australia. Who shall say
how soon some other European power may present itself vis-a-vis to us
on the opposite shores of New Guinea? France has already taken pos-
session of New Caledonia, not far to the east of Australia. It is well to
be on the watch against even friendly neighbours. Emigration, since
the late transit of the Australian colony, is fast advancing from the
South. Let it be met from the North, and the remaining incognita of
that country will soon disappear, bearing both knowledge and augmented
thought to that magnificent possession.
Postscript. Dec. 25—Among the many suggestions now thrown out
in the newspapers regarding new penal colonies, one is from “An Aus-
tralian,” intimating the repugnance of the Southern Australian colonies
to penal settlements anywhere on that continent, and menacing seces-
sion if attempted. How very reasonable! With him, all that has been
shown by Governor Kennedy, Archdeacon Brown, and Captain Hen-
derson, that in Western Australia convict importation produces nothing
but good to both colony and convict, goes for nothing. A convict is not
to be allowed on Britain’s own territory, 2000 miles off, by Southern
Australians! It is just as reasonable to demand that England shall not
employ convicts on her territory of Carpentaria, as it would be for John
O’Groat to demand that none should be employed at Portland or Dart-
moor, nay, at Gibraltar.
Another suggestion is, that convicts should be sent only to some dis-


mal climate like Hudson’s Bay or the Falkland Islands, and Siberia is
instanced as an attractive example. Beware of this suggestion! Any
colony to which free emigrants would not follow the convict, may suit
Russia, but is utterly opposed to the spirit and genius of England. In
using convict labour in new colonies, we have hitherto imitated Nature,
not Russia, and with the most splendid success. Nature’s atmosphere
absorbs all noxious gases, and restores them to purity; Nature’s ocean
receives the turbid washings of all streams, and returns only pure rain ;
but Nature does this by amalgamating a lesser in a greater element.
The convict, under the change to a new, open land, and to hope in the
future, will still want around him the higher example, the purer pre-
sence of a free population. Without this, we shall create, not a new,
great nation, but a blot on the face of the earth ; instead of a healthy
atmosphere, a cooped-up den of fire-damp; instead of a purifying ocean,
a putrid cesspool. From such an experiment may God and good sense
defend us !


( « )
LETTERS ON THE GAME LAWS.
LETTER I.
REVOLTING CRUELTIES PRACTISED UNDER THE GAME LAWS.
To the Editor of the “ Star."
Sir, — I am about through you to lay before the public a discovery which
1 am sure will produce as vivid a sensation of horror and indignation as
it did in me on first making it. In the course of last summer I engaged
lodgings in a farm-house in North Wales, whose seclusion promised the
quiet necessary for the literary work on which I was engaged. lor two
months nothing could more completely realize my expectations. Before
me I had the sea, behind me the mountains, around woods and fields, full
of beauty and peace. But suddenly the tranquillity of this seeming
paradise was to me destroyed by a cause most unlooked-for, and converted
into a hell. The farm-house was on the property of a gentleman of great
wealth, living at a little distance, who, though an active promote! ot
agricultural improvement, is at the same time a zealous sportsman and
game-preserver. As my object is in no degree personal, but directed
against a system, which subsequent inquiries have led me to believe of
almost universal practice amongst the game-preserving gentlemen of
England, I shall not mention any names, but leave those familiar with
that part of the country to apply their own knowledge.
Suddenly, as the shooting season approached, I found the whole neigh-
bourhood of this house sown, as it were, with steel-traps. They were
strong-toothed vermin traps, capable of holding a large dog or dog-fox
inextricably fast, at the same time that they inflicted exquisite torture.
I observed no less than six of these traps set in a paddock close behind
the farm-house, of only two acres and a half in extent, and one of them
within eighty paces of the back door.
To an unpractised eye these traps are not observable, because they are


always set in a small hollow, and covered with earth. A practised eye notices
them at once. I watched for the under-keeper, and when he came
represented to him the danger to the shepherd dogs of the house —for it
was a great sheep farm—and to the lambs, which were occasionally
pastured there. He bluntly replied that they would not hurt them. I
then added, that the ladies of my family almost daily walked in this
paddock, and sat there to read and sketch, and that the traps were
quite strong enough to injure a lady’s foot, if set unknowingly in one.
The man, who appeared perfectly callous to any such reasons, and to
have the consciousness that he acted under an authority perfectly
despotic there, laughed at all such notions, though he did not appear
willing to accept my proposal to take off his thick clouted shoe, and try
the effect of the trap on his own foot. To my observation that I had a
small favourite dog that I did not wish to have lamed, he rudely replied,
“ That that was my look-outand shouldering his spud, marched off to
his other traps.
The very next night, betwixt twelve and one o’clock, we were all
awoke by a borftble cry of agony from a dog, attended by a tremen-
dous barking of other dogs. My wife started up in terror; my
daughters rushed from their rooms in their night-dresses in equal
terror. The cause, however, was obvious enough—one of the farm dogs
was caught in a steel trap. I endeavoured to arouse the farmer and his
son ; but farmers sleep soundly. The howling and barking continued;
and slipping on my trousers and waistcoat, 1 rushed out to release the
tortured animal. I found, as I expected, one of the shepherd dogs caught
by a fore foot, and whirling round and round the trap, held by its iron
chain and a strong iron pin driven into the earth; whilst the other dogs
were barking furiously in concert. To release a dog in such a situation
is very hazardous. The poor brute in its anguish is certain to snap at
you if it can. With all my caution in endeavouring to keep at the
opposite side of the trap till 1 could get my foot on the spring, the poor
agonized brute seized me by the arm. Unfortunately I had no coat on,
and the bite was the more severe. However, I set the dog free.
Extending my attention to the other traps in the paddock, I found in
each a rabbit struggling in the same torture, and as the only service I
could render them in their lamed condition, I despatched them. The
next day I again waited for the keeper, and told him what had taken
place. He treated it as a matter of utter indifference, and said the farm


dogs had no business to be out. “ What!” I said, “do you expect the
farmer at night, when his dogs should protect his premises, to shut them
all up?” “Just so,” said the man, shouldering his mangled load of
rabbits, and marched away ; adding, “ all that he had to concern himself
about was to set his traps as ordered.”
As it was impossible to remain in a spot, however agreeable in all other
respects, whilst these tortures were going on every night and every day
all round it, and equally impossible to allow them to go on without an
attempt to put an end to them, 1 the next day wrote to the proprietor
of the estate, who was then attending his Parliamentary duties, and,
curiously enough, at that very crisis giving his votes for importing fresh
severities into the game laws. In this note I expressed my surprise at
finding so barbarous and unnecessary a mode of rabbit-catching still in
use—the net and ferret, as employed on warrens kept exclusively for
trade, being so much more economical as well as humane. I added, also,
my wonder that ladies living on country estates in all the comforts and
luxuries of England, and enjoying all the humanizing literature of the
time, could sleep in their beds with hundreds of these poor unhappy little
wretches in agonies of torture all round, day after day, and night after
night, often, as I found, and was prepared to prove, for six-and-thirty
hours together! This gave me the idea of an Inferno rather than of that
humane and beautiful life which we imagine English rural life to be.
That having written much on country life, and seen much of it, I could
not conceive English gentlemen approving of a mode of taking rabbits, or
even vermin, so dreadful, and so utterly unnecessary. I gave the proprietor
the credit of believing that these cruelties went on without his knowledge,
and would, being now made known to him, be promptly prohibited.
The return of a post or two brought me a very polite note from this
gentleman, in which he expressed his great regret that I had been bitten
by the dog caught in the trap, and saying, that I was probably not aware
that dogs will invariably, as human beings will occasionally, turn against
those who are endeavouring to extricate them from any trap into which
they may have fallen. As it happened, I was not only aware of this
long before, but after the accident I was assured that one of the farm
men had been severely torn by a dog in endeavouring, as I had done, to
release it. The proprietor promised to inquire into the circumstances of
this rabbit-trapping, but added a few remarks which did not inspire me
with very sanguine hopes of his abolishing the system of torture. He


expressed a sense of difficulty in drawing a line betwixt the use of such
steel traps for vermin and for rabbits, saying, that he feared that the use
of ferrets would be as cruel to rabbits as steel traps ; that if rabbits were
not to be caught in traps on the ground of humanity, rats and weazels
might become jealous of their exclusion from the same protection; and
added, that the deep-sea line fishing for cod must in justice be stopped.
As these are precisely the arguments that gentlemen attached to old-
fashioned though cruel sporting customs were likely to advance, I was at
considerable pains in my reply to show this gentleman that these pre-
sumed answers are mere sophisms, and that such tortures to either rabbits
or vermin are, in nine cases out of ten, absolutely unnecessary, the pro-
gressive knowledge of the age having introduced into this branch of rural
economy much more humane and much more profitable practices.
As my letter is, however, sufficiently long, I shall reserve these state-
ments for a second communication ; only observing here that subsequent
discoveries and information from different quarters have shown that this
system of rabbit-trapping by toothed steel-traps is attended with horrors
wholly by the public —that the system extends, more or
less, all over the country, on the estates of gentlemen—that while we
have attached an idea to English field sports of a spirit of humanity, if,
at least, we except hunting, it is a remarkable fact, that the warreners
who breed rabbits as a business, and therefore conduct their concerns on
business principles, and the poachers, whom we are taught to believe a most
ferocious race, are the only classes of rabbit-catchers who do not perpe-
trate unnecessary cruelties, which may without any exaggeration be
stamped as a disgrace to the nation.
I shall fully prove this in my subsequent letters ; and I particularly call
the attention of the “ Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals ” to the facts which I have to produce.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
WILLIAM HOWITT.


LETTER lI.—NOVEMBER 27.
REVOLTING CRUELTIES PRACTISED UNDER THE GAME LAWS.
To the Editor of the “ Star."
Sir, —The setting of the rabbit-traps so near the farm-house had at
least one advantage. It enabled me to visit them several times a-day,
and make accurate notes of what I saw there; of the tortures which the
wretched animals endured, of the total want of feeling in the men to whom
this atrocious business was entrusted, and of their gross neglect in visiting
the traps to take their victims out. It was not long, however, before I
found it necessary to quit my otherwise pleasant quarters, to the great
regret of the worthy farmer and his family, with whom it was my inten-
tion to have stayed some mouths longer. I found that I had stepped back
into the feudal ages, and could not remain there except at the cost of
personal annoyance and of danger to my dog. I suppose my remonstrance
against their cruelties had been carried to the head keeper, who was
commonly reported to have a valuable perquisite in the rabbits bred here,
and two of the under keepers, with solemn faces, waited on me, and
informed me that they must request me to keep my dog constantly tied
up. I assured them that he knew no more about game than they seemed
to know of mercy, and only accompanied me in my walks along the road.
They said it was not that he was likely to kill the rabbits, but that he
frightened them by running off the road. It was clear that they had
instructions to annoy me, and as it is not worth while to enter into con-
flict with vulgar ignorance, I at once removed beyond the boundary of the
game-preserving estate, to a neighbourhood where dog or man could range
the hills without fear of steel-traps and of leather-legginged keepers.
At the same time I addressed a second letter to the proprietor, in which
I noticed this fact, and also answered his remarks on the difficulty of
gentlemen giving up their instruments of torture. As this letter includes
some shameful facts which came to my knowledge, and answers that
gentleman’s imagined difficulties in giving up his traps, I shall transcribe
the substance of it here.
“ I Ain glad,” I observed, “ that you say you will inquire into this case,
but I beg to assure you that it is not a case, but a system, against which
I earnestly protest in the name of common Immunity, and a system


which, from what I hear and what I observe in the rabbit market, is of
wide extension. I protest, in the first place, against this trapping of
rabbits at all, as utterly unnecessary, unscientific, and cruel, but still
more against the brutal neglect of your under-keepers, who sometimes
leave the tortured animals for the greater part of two days and two nights
in the iron fangs of their traps. I speak from my own observation and
notes made on the spot.
“You find a difficulty in drawing a line as to the infliction of pain on
animals in destroying them for food, or for protection to game. For my
part I see none, and I believe I shall be supported in my view by every
humane person everywhere. There wants no line of demarcation on this
subject; there is a clear and simple principle of action, based on natural
humanity and enjoined by Christianity. That a certain degree of suffer-
ing is inseparable from destroying animals for food is too true, but we are
bound by all laws, human and divine, to make this suffering as small as
possible. To add to it unnecessarily by brutality or indifference is the
act of a savage, and not of a civilized being, much less of a Christian.
St. Paul expresses the sentiment of our faith when he says, ‘ The whole
creation groanetyi and travaileth together for the manifestations of the
sons of God.’ That is, all suffering creatures groan under man’s cruelties,
and for the realization of that mercy which is the certain result of genuine
Christianity. Coleridge expressed it when he wrote:—
“ ‘ He prayeth best who loveth best
All things, both great and small,
For the great God who loveth us,
He made and loveth all.’
“ It is the growth of this divine sentiment in the English mind that has
done so much to abate cruelties in dog-fighting, bull and bear-baiting,
cock-fighting, in the slaughterhouses and the markets, and towards
horses, and in other cases, under the indefatigable exertions of the ‘Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.’ We may still go farther and
higher, and trace its operation in the great triumph over slavery and the
slave-trade. This is one of the noblest features of England above all other
countries on earth. A little while ago Sir Edmund Buxton and other
gentlemen waited on the Emperor of the French to induce him to prohibit
the vivisection of horses in the French veterinary colleges, and he at once


promised to do so. Shall we now have a deputation of Frenchmen to call
on us to put an end to the horrors of rabbit-trapping ? Those horrors are
as real as those of equine vivisection, and totally without excuse. That
was for the purposes of science and the relief of other horses ; this is in
defiance of science and of the principles of rural economy, now so well
understood.
“ You refer to deep-sea fishing as a vindication of rabbit-trapping. I
am happy to say that there is no vindication whatever in it. Having
circumnavigated the globe, I have seen something of deep-sea fishing.
In deep-sea fishing the fishermen put out their lines with a long series of
hooks and baits, it is true; but if any mode were discovered of rendering hooks
unnecessary, they would no longer be justified in using them. The simple
principle of avoiding all unnecessary infliction applies everywhere and in
every thing. Because pain is unavoidable in one case, that it shall be un-
necessarily given in others is neither logic nor benevolence. And what com-
parison is there between the deep-sea fishermen and your keepers, who set
villainous toothed traps one morning and don’t visit them till the evening of
the following day ? The fishermen cannot leave their craft; both interest and
necessity compel them to remove the fish from the lines as quickly as pos-
sible. What comparison either is there of suffering between the prick of
the gristly mouth of a codfish, and the laceration of the far more sensitive
organization of a rabbit, which I have lately seen with the flesh entirely
stripped from the shoulder to the claw by struggling in the trap, and left
in that condition for thirty-four hours!
“You think that‘if rabbits are spared these agonies, vermin might
complain of unfair treatment.’ I quite agree with the vermin. We have
no more right to inflict a moment’s unnecessary torture on vermin than
on any thing else. They are all God’s creatures ; and in pursuing game
are only indulging the same instinct of chase implanted by the same
Creator in their natures as in yours. When they interfere with your
venue, you have a right to destroy but not to torture them; and every
one familiar with the country knows that they may be destroyed with
little cruelty, and in nine cases out of ten without the employment of any
trap whatever. I spent my boyhood and early youth amongst sportsmen
and game preserves, and know what lam saying. A ferret and a terrier
are capable of rapidly extirpating the vermin from your preserves; and if
a keeper finds it necessary to set steel-traps, he should put them down
before sunset, visit them before bed-time, and, if possible, in the night.


They must come out to feed, and if the trap is set at the mouth of their
burrow, they must be caught before morning.
“I cannot avoid the conviction that the practice of your keepers setting
their traps in numbers close up to the backs of the farm-houses is not
simply to catch the rabbits, which are more abundant farther off, but
purposely to catch the cats and dogs of the farm. I have visited other
farms on the estate, and found the traps there, too, close on the houses—
in the paddocks.
“In almost every direction fine sheep-dogs are seen with a fore leg
ruined for ever, by being caught in traps. And the farmers everywhere
say they cannot keep a good cat: it is sure to be caught in a trap, killed
and skinned by the keepers, or if it chance to escape with the loss or the
ruin of a foot, it is never of further use. It always dreads the trap, and
will not hunt for rats. In consequence, the keepers substitute an enemy
to game ten times more destructive to rabbits, —the rat, —for it pursues
them into their runs, and devours the young by wholesale. I never saw
any place so infested by rats, in consequence, as this.
“You imagine that the emplbyment of ferrets would be quite as cruel
as steel-traps, because you have an idea that they would fasten on the
rabbits. This is simply a mistake, which surprises me in so old a sports-
man. In such practice the ferret is muzzled; the sight of it in the run
drives out the rabbits into the net at its mouth, where those fit for market
are selected, and the rest are turned up; but there can be no turning up
where the steel-trap is used. They are crippled for life, and thus not
only very young and useless ones are destroyed, but pregnant does, and
does with young broods, which in that case perish. All these are, of
course, unfit for human food, yet to my knowledge they are all sent to
Liverpool market. The warrener cannot afford to be thus cruel and
destructive. He uses the ferret and net, and takes only what is proper
for market.
“ Let me, before concluding my letter, draw your serious attention to
the following facts. Whilst watching the conduct of your keepers, I
ascertained by the clearest proofs—the rabbits in particular traps being
marked purposely by me—that they never visited the traps'oftener than
once in the twenty-four hours—frequently, only once in thirty-four hours.
The poor rabbits during all this time would have been in mortal agonies
had I not destroyed them; but hundreds of others in the neighbouring
woods and fields, where I did not know of them, were so.


“ Pray give particular attention, also, to this well-attested fact.
Heenan, the celebrated boxer, had a circus at Bangor on the Ist of
July, 1862. A party of people proceeding thither that evening, at six
o’clock, observed a house-cat writhing and howling in a steel-trap in a
plantation close to the road on your estate, not far from that town.
With that apathy which the habitual living amongst such brutalities pro-
duces, or the fear of meddling with the proceedings of keepers and game-
preservers, equally strong in such game-preserving neighbourhoods, not
one of them took the trouble to set the poor wretch at liberty. At half-
past eleven o’clock at night, as they returned the same way, there was
the poor cat howling in the steel-trap still, and as they did not cross the
fence and liberate it, it would certainly so remain till next morning, and
quite as probably till noon, or till dead, judging from the lazy and unfeel-
ing habits of the keepers.
“At a moment when landowners are seeking in Parliament to intro-
duce new severities into the game code, it is the more requisite to de-
prive this lower department of the preserving system of its unnecessary
horrors, which are a disgrace to the estates where they are perpetrated,
both as regards humanity and enlightened progress. Let me say that
the people about that neighbourhood give you the credit of being unin-
formed of these atrocities perpetrated by your keepers; from this mo-
ment, however, you will no longer be so.”
I am sorry to say, that nearly two months later I paid a visit to the
scene of these barbarities, and found them proceeding exactly as when I
first pointed them out to the proprietor. A friend, who on this occasion
accompanied me, was so indignant at what he saw, that he was only re-
strained from pulling up all the traps that he could find, and hurling them
into the river, by my representation that this would certainly bring the
farmer into trouble. More in my next.
Yours,
WILLIAM HOWITT.


LETTER lII.—DECEMBER 8.
REVOLTING CRUELTIES PRACTISED UNDER THE GAME LAWS.
To the Editor of the “ Star.”
Sir, —Since my discoveries of rabbit-torture in Wales I have made in-
quiries in different counties in England, and am very sorry to say that I
find the same system widely, perhaps generally, prevailing on game-
preserving estates. I have made inquiries north and south of gentlemen
well acquainted with such matters, and everywhere the report is the
same. The warreners, who breed rabbits exclusively for the market, and
not for sport, use the ferret and net, or the trap-door, so that they can
take any number of rabbits at any time without torture, and select only
such as are in condition for market. These trap-doors are placed over
little chambers excavated in the earth, a small wattle fence being placed
round the incloeure, in the centre of which the trap-door is, with an
opening on one inde of the fence for the entrance of the rabbits, and a
heap of turnips, or other bait, laid on the other side of the trap-door,
so that the rabbits must tread on the door in endeavouring to reach
the bait, fall in, and in the morning are selected according to fitness. .
I have said that the poacher, also, is more humane than the game-
preserving gentleman. This is, however, from no principle of humanity in
the poacher, but of necessity. He cannot afford a few scores of steel-
traps, sure to be picked up by keepers ; he must take his game in all haste,-
and thus he plants his net, his gin of wire, or shoots his prey. They
are the gentlemen all over the country who are the great perpetrators of
these barbarities. The business of rabbit-destroying is delegated by
them to a head-keeper, the head-keeper delegates it to other men, igno-
rant, and, if not brutal by nature, brutalized by habit. I have shown
what they are in Wales ; we have no reason to suppose them better in
England. At all events, these old barbarous steel-traps are still in use
all over the country on gentlemen’s estates; and what a frightful perpe-
tration of cruelties does the fact open up to us ! Around the majority of
the “ stately homes of England,” “ the happy homes of England,” where
“ the gentlemen of England live at home at ease,” where the fairest and
most highly cultivated, the most humane and tender women in the world,


live amid every luxury and every amenity of existence—around these homes
of intelligence and refined mind, day and night innocent creatures are
writhing in the fangs of iron-toothed traps, left to the tender mercies of
men devoid of feeling as the clods they tread, and hard as the nether
millstone. And all this is perpetrated in utter neglect of the various
means which modern art has introduced for the taking of such unfortu-
nate animals without any torture whatever.
Let us hope that, on the part of the gentlemen, this revolting state of
things results from actual ignorance of its existence; if so, this expo-
sure of it will make an end of it. Yet, in the case already brought
under your notice, there does not appear to have been any such humane
action on the part of the land proprietor. Let us hope that the ladies of
country families will lose no time in ascertaining whether this fright-
ful system is going on around them, and where it is that they will exert
their influence to put an end to it, and for the introduction of those hu-
mane and more effectual means of capture which science has introduced
into this department of rural economy, as into all other departments of
life.
Since this subject first seized my attention I have become painfully
aware of its barbarous effects everywhere. In the poulterers’ shops, in
rabbits carried along the streets, I see broken legs, and legs stripped of
their flesh by the steel-trap. When families wonder at such a broken
leg, or at a leg which is black from congealed blood, as a rabbit lies
cooked on the table, let them be sure that that creature has suffered
inconceivable pangs, probably of twenty or thirty hours’ duration, in the
fangs of the iron-trap. I know of no sight more sorrowful than that of
these unoffending animals as they are seen in the torture-grip of these
traps. They sit drawn up into a little heap, as if collecting all their
force of endurance to support the agony; some sit in a half-torpid
condition, induced by intense suffering. Most young ones are found dead
after some hours of it, but others, as you approach, start up, struggle
violently to escape, and shriek pitiably, from terror and the pangs occa-
sioned by their struggles.
A gentleman in the midland counties, to whom I wrote, was at the
trouble of calling on different keepers of the neighbouring estates, to
ascertain whether the iron-trap was used by them. He found it so
everywhere. In a note just received from him he says:—“Since you
drew my attention to it, I find the iron-trap for rabbits meeting me on


all sides. I have seen them advertized twice amongst the articles for
sale of country effects by auction. It surprises me that gentlemen can
suffer these harmless creatures of our woods and fields to be thus tor-
tured. Where is the man who was not once a boy ? And where is, or
ever was, the boy who was not fond of rabbits ?”
What the “ Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ” has
done, and does in towns, in the cases of horses, cattle, and other animals, is
well and nobly done; but when we consider that this system of cruelty is a
system probably co-extensive with the kingdom, and is going on day and
night for at least six months every year, it assumes features so infinitely
more atrocious and gigantic, that all else sinks into comparative insignifi-
cance before it. What a sensation of generous indignation is excited when
some wretch is discovered skinning a cat alive! It is well and worthy of
Englishmen: hut let not such nobly sensitive natures forget the cat
howling and writhing for so many hours in the wood near Bangor. Let
them not forget that scores, and, probably, thousands of steel-traps are
set on the skirts of farm-houses to effect such inflictions. Let them not
forget, that in such farm-houses it is rare to see a cat without a foot
ruined or lost, and that the like ruin of the beautiful colly, whose fleet-
ness on the hills is so requisite for the collecting of the flocks, is no un-
common thing, from the same cause.
Nay, the generous nature of Englishmen will resent unnecessary
cruelties perpetrated even on the vermin and the birds of prey, which,
following their God-inspired instincts, follow game. Let them be de-
stroyed, but let it be with despatch and mastership, not by clumsy, cruel,
and lazy methods. The skilful keeper can deal promptly yet humanely
even with these. Yet, four years ago, when in the same part of Wales,
I saw on the same estate steel-traps hoisted on poles and baited with
young rabbits, for hawks. I saw hawks caught by the legs, and remain
for whole days, fluttering, flapping, and twisting in these traps, held by
their legs, till their legs were broken and nearly twisted off. Though
these exhibitions of cruelty were as plainly visible from the keeper’s
house as from my lodgings, he suffered these birds to remain in their
tortures for at least twelve hours at a time ! A skilful and humane
keeper would have planted his bait, concealed himself, and shot these
hawks at once. I remonstrated against his atrocities, and hoped that he
bad abandoned them ; but last summer, four years later, I found these
traps still hoisted on poles on the hills for the same purpose.


Learning that in Auglesea, on the estate of a well-known sporting
haronet, who has an extensive warren for the supply of rabbits to the
Liverpool market, the net and ferret were used, I made a journey thither,
and, from inquiries on the spot, learned that this was the case, but, I am
sorry to say, still, to a certain extent, mingled with the use of the detestable
iron-trap. I was told, that the general mode of taking the rabbit was
by the ferret and net, by wire gins, and during the winter months, when
the rabbits were considered to be all pretty well grown, and all fit for
market, the iron-trap was also added. My informants here assured me
that the rabbit-catchers regularly visited these traps before going to bed,
and also daring the night. Let us hope that they do; but I must con-
fess that I have small faith in men quitting their warm beds on cold
winter nights, on a coast so bleak and exposed as that in question, to
release their victims by a merciful death. And where is the use of iron-
traps at all, when a proper number of well-trained ferrets and well-
disposed gins can procure any number of rabbits at any time; especially
so when, as in this case, the gentlemen of the family make frequent
battues ?
I have yet something to say on the effects of this and the game system
in general on the interests and spirit of the rural population itself.
Tours,
WILLIAM HOWITT.
LETTER IV.—DECEMBER 9.
REVOLTING CRUELTIES PRACTISED UNDER THE GAME LAWS.
To the Editor of the “ Star."
Sir, — We have seen the sufferings of animals from the game preservers:
now let us look a little at the effect of these game laws on the people
who live under them. No person who has not resided some time on a
game-preserving estate can conceive in any degree how completely the
feudal ages yet exist there. Scarcely a creature, though wearing the
human form, dare say that his soul is his own. Here lies one of the
secrets of game-preserving gentlemen having such an aversion to grant


leases of their farms. It is necessary that the farmers, and those
employed by them, should be afraid of making any resistance to the
impositions 'which they are expected to endure; nay, should be afraid of
even whispering any expression of their wrongs. In my inquiries into
the facts connected with the subject of these letters, I found the mouths
of the farmers hermetically sealed; and I saw in the circumstances
around them sufficient causes for this reticence, and therefore sought my
information from my own researches, or from persons less likely to be
suspected. I saw swarms of game, hares, rabbits—of late years
advanced to this dignity—partridges, and pheasants, devouring their
grass and waiting for their corn crops, and wondered at their patience.
IN ear the woods especially rabbits in thousands kept down the grass
as close as that of a common, and pheasants led their broods directly into
the green corn, where they were all accurately known and protected by
the keepers, and ready to fatten on the grain as fast as it grew ripe.
To a certain distance from the woods the green young corn was cropped
down by shoals of rabbits, as if cut by a scythe. Extensive pasture
fields bordering on the woods being half grown over by bushes and
briars, I asked the farmers why they did not stub them up. They
answered by a shake of the head. These bushes were cover for game;
and I learned from others that they were not allowed to stub them. In
fact, there were instances where the farmers paid rent for considerable
stretches of land and received no benefit from it; it was wholly cropped
by rabbits or occupied by bushes. I saw a field literally sown with
rabbit-traps, which the farmer evidently did not turn cattle into,
because he did not venture to interrupt the trapping by the keepers, or
was afraid of injury to his stock. I learned from good authority that
one farmer had, at one time or another, had a foal and several lambs
caught in these traps, and their legs broken, so that they were obliged
to he killed. Whilst I was in that neighbourhood a farmer had a horse
in a field on the edge of a steep descent, which, walking on this edge, sank
with one leg into a rabbit hole, was toppled down the hill, and killed.
On these estates you meet the lounging, capped, jacketted, and
leather-legginged keepers, with gun on arm everywhere. They break
down fences at pleasure in their prowling rounds; they wade through
growing grass and standing corn at their will to look after their game;
and I was assured by some of the farm servants, though timidly, that
they often treated them with insolence. In fact, they may be


regarded as a sort of spies for their employers of all that goes on all over
the estates. Everybody is, therefore, more or less in fear of them, for
they can, if offended, carry a malicious report to head-quarters, which
may have ruinous consequences. Numberless petty annoyances beset
the inhabitants of all kinds living on strictly preserved estates. They
are warned away from the banks of fishing rivers; from short cuts
through woods, for there are pheasants there; their dogs, as we have
seen, may be lamed, and if they offend these “ leather-stockings” their
dogs may be shot or poisoned, as I have no doubt mine would have been
had I remained and refused to keep him tied up. None but those who
have lived long on such property, and whose souls have been disciplined
to patient submission to the snubs, checks, and fears that surround
them, could possibly endure existence there. For all other considerations
give way before considerations of game. Game, next to the landlord,
reigns paramount, and no sacrifices are deemed too heavy from the
tenants, great and small, for the flourishing of game.
A great game preserver, or more properly game fanatic, I was told,
had, in North Wales, some time ago bought the life-interest of a
nobleman on the hills where grouse was found. The people, far from
access to coal, had always cut the turf and heather for their fuel. This
gentleman immediately prohibited the cutting of any more, because it
diminished the cover and food of grouse. The poor people were in despair
for their winter stock of fuel, and became so resistant on the subject, that
the landlord was obliged, in some degree, to give way, and allow them to
cut half their usual quantity, but forbade them to cut any whatever
after that time.
The fate of two brothers, farmers, in this part of the country, as re-
lated to me by good authority, may serve as an example of the consequence
of showing any spirit of independence on such estates. They had a fine
and favourite sheep-dog, which they greatly valued. One of the keepers
set his iron-traps near the farm-house, caught the dog, and ruined one
of his legs for life. The brothers, incensed beyond the bounds of prudence,
summoned the keeper before the magistrates. But the magistrates were
all game fanatics, and their own landlord was one of them. The result
might have been certainly foreseen by any but excited sufferers. The
complaint was dismissed, but the keeper and his “leather-stocking”
comrades swore that the dog was not a full-bred sheep-dog, and the
brothers were fined for keeping a dog not exempt from the tax.


Exasperated at this gross injustice, they determined to take justice into
their own hands. They knew the public-house which the* keeper fre-
quented. They went there, had high words with him, but pretended to
make up the quarrel, shook hands, treated the keeper, made him tipsy,
and then gave him a terrible cudgelling. What then ? They received
instant notice to quit their farms, and were hurried off at spring
without being allowed for their crops. They were ruined, but being
young, and one a joiner by original trade, they went to a neighbouring
town, and have found a subsistence in business.
In relating these facts illustrative of life in those places where the
feudal ages yet linger around the sacred heads of game, I do not forget
that there are gentlemen and noblemen so thoroughly sensible of the
incurable mischiefs and injustices of the game system that they refuse
to preserve, and allow their farmers to shoot over their own lands.
Others retain the feathered game, and surrender the rest to the farmer,
who maintains it. Nor am I ignorant that liberal landlords, in some
cases, compensate their tenants for the damage incurred by game; but
in no case is it, in. ray opinion, possible to compensate the country for the
obstacles placed in the way of agriculture by the game laws, or for the
spirit of ferocity and bloodshed which is perpetuated by them. My main
object has been to lay bare the shocking and un-English barbarities
perpetrated on a species of game which, but till the other day, was
excluded from that category—the rabbit. It was impossible, however,
to trace the concomitants of this theme without adverting to the spirit
created by the system in which they are inextricably involved.
The game laws engender a spirit in both landlords and tenants, great
and small, totally at variance with the national character. The land-
lords, in their game-protecting domains, assume insensibly the character
of feudal despots, the people of feudal serfs. The one becomes intensely,
quiveringly jealous of privileges tacitly protested against by humbler men;
the others, farmers, villagers, and labourers, become slavish and timid.
They gradually lose all that noble spirit of independence which is the
proud boast of Englishmen, and submit in silence to injuries and
assumptions which astonish men who live under happier auspices. The
evils of the game laws, however, have been too often depicted to require
any reproduction of them here. I return anxiously to the real object of
these letters —the daily and widely-extended infliction of horrible and
needless cruelties on many kinds of wild animals in this England


of famous humanity; and I trust that every noble-natured man of
landed property, and every woman who enjoys the unparalleled blessings
of English life and liberty of thought, will unite to wipe away from our
common country this blot on its benevolence.
Yours,
WILLIAM HOWITT.
CONCLUDING LETTER.
LETTER Y.
Having in the preceding letter referred to landlords who make compen-
sation for game-ravages, I have been reminded of the following example
of such compensation in the pamphlet already mentioned, entitled, “ This
is not the First Link in the Chainand sold by Hamilton, Adams,
and Co., Paternoster Row.
“ Compensation for Damage by Game.—A Warning to Farmers. —The
following occurrence, which took place on the estate of the Earl of
Malmesbury, at Fordingbridge, in Hampshire, will at once show the
extent of the damage done by game, and operate as a warning to farmers
against trusting their capital upon the estate of a game-preserver on any
terms. Before a new tenant enters upon a farm on this estate he is told
that he must not kill even a rabbit; that the game is the first, the
primary object of its lordly owner, which he reserves exclusively to
hims#lf; but that he will pay the tenant for all damage done by the
game. This looks fair, and not a few good farmers —men who really
understand the injuries inflicted by game—have been deluded by the
specious bait.
“ Every year, for years past, ravages were committed by game—which
has been appropriately called the English locust—and a certain allow-
ance made to the tenants as the amount of damage they had sustained.
Of course they were dissatisfied, for no allowance we ever heard of as
made by a landlord can compensate the tenant for the loss occasioned by
game. However, one of the tenants on the Fordingbridge estate deter-
mined to bring the matter to the test of actual experiment: and so, hav-


ing a field of wheat of forty acres in the part of his farm most afflicted
by the incursions of the game, he fenced off by means of close hurdles
about a quarter of an acre in the middle of the field, so that neither hare
nor rabbit could touch a blade of the corn within the enclosure. At
harvest the difference between the 4 protected ’ and unprotected corn was
obvious and surprising, and afforded a ready means of ascertaining the
exact amount of the damage done by the game. The corn grown on this
quarter of an acre of land, which had been protected from the game, was
thrashed and measured, and, compared with the produce of the same
quantity of land to which the game had access, the difference upon the
whole field amounted to a sum nearly equal to the rent of the farm; the
noble landowner, true to the letter of his agreement, paid the full amount
of the now proved damage, but the tenant immediately received a
NOTICE TO QUIT THE FARM ! ! !”
Let us add a few more particulars from the Appendix to this excellent
pamphlet;—
[ 4t From Correspondent of the 44 Times ” newspaper. ]
44 Here is the mode in which game interferes with husbandry:— 4 A
tenant farmer, hiring his occupation, signs his agreement, containing
the usual clause of reserving the game and right of sporting to the land-
lord ; and if he asks questions as to the extent to which the game will be
preserved, is either unanswered, or deemed impertinent—the character
of the landlord being deemed a guarantee against extremes. The tenant
expends a large capital on the faith of his agreement, expecting to be
reimbursed before the expiration of his terra. From death or purchase
he finds himself under another landlord—either a game-mad or ajenu-
rious man; the game swarm like locusts about his corn-fields, devas-
tating the fresh-sown, the growing, and the ripening crops. The tenant
gives way, unable to stand against the spoliation the game makes; the
farm (a large one) is relet to another tenant for 20 Of. per year less, as
the landlord is still determined on having an excessive quantity of game.
The assessment of the farm is, of course, reduced in proportion to the
rental, and other property in the parish proportionately over-taxed, or
rather over-burdened. The game is killed, is sold to the highest and best
bidder, and the landlord pockets the proceeds, which are amenable for
neither parochial nor county purposes.’
44 This is a precise way of showing how much destruction is caused by


game. The writer gives a case in point:— ‘ I know a parish near by, the
entire property of one individual, where the farms are conjointly let for
above 700 Z. a-year. The owner goes abroad, and the lessee, a pounds-
shillings-and-pence man, hires the sporting for 1000 Z. per annum. He
makes a considerable profit by his speculation, which is neither taxable
nor assessable. It is laid down as a truism that five hares eat and destroy
as much as would keep a sheep ; my own observations lead me to consider
that three hares to one sheep is nearer the mark, bearing in mind their
unlimited range and humorous appetites. Our laws designate game
ferae natures, but modern civilization has made them as tame as barn-
door fowls; they are familiarized to the approach of man by his constant
surveillance, and as easily kept in a covert as hens and chickens are in a
farm-yard.’
“ I know of whole districts where the farm-tenants are forbidden to
either mow wheat or drill turnips. The first system costs less by 3s. an
acre to harvest, and further secures to the tenant an extra quantity of
straw for the use of his stock, and for making manure, but it destroys
the laying, or jungle, for partridges in September. The latter system
produces a much greater weight of root per acre, at a much smaller
expense, but it encourages the birds to run, and thus spoils the nose of the
best pointer, and the sport of the shooter.
“ Destructiveness of Game.— Our statement last week, as to the extent
of the injury sustained by the tenant-farmers, has since been confirmed
by several communications on the subject from practical men, who have
been sufferers, and who expect to be so again, unless some radical change
is speedily effected. A calm investigation into the operation and results
of the system of strictly preserving game has disclosed facts which are
startling enough, and the only feeling excited is that of surprise that any
body of men possessing a particle of influence or independence, could so
long submit to the infliction of burdens so unjust and grievous, productive,
too, of nothing but incalculable injuries to the tenant-farmers, and ten-
fold miseries to their poor labourers. We courted inquiry into the accu-
racy of our statement, solely for the purpose of sifting its merits, and we
now find that our estimate of the damage sustained was far below the
mark. Not only is an occupier of 500 acres injured to the extent of
10s. per acre, but he is pillaged in balf-a-dozen other ways. What is
his real position ? The produce of his crops is diminished by his farm
being stocked with hares for the profit (not for sport) of his landlord;


whereby his means of paying for the employment of the labouring popu-
lation are necessarily contracted, to the extent of 2501. per annum—the
consumption of five hares being equal to that of one sheep. Besides, the
damage done by the paths and play-grounds of the hares is immense.
These are cut to the distance of several yards square, at the most critical
season of the year, when the corn is in ear, the ears being lopped off, and
left to waste, to a surprising extent. The damage hereby done it is
impossible to estimate. He has to pay towards a heavy county rate for
maintaining prisoners in the House of Correction, three-fourths of whom
in Bedfordshire (according to an official return for the year 1843, now
before us) were convicted under the game laws, and committed to prison
for upwards of seven weeks, at an average cost of 21. Bs. each. The total
number of persons summarily convicted in the year 1843, were 201; of
whom, 143 were committed for poaching, and only 58 for trivial offences,
such as “ for stealing underwood,” “ damaging a table,” “ breaking
glass,” “ fishing in private water,” &c. He is the largest contributor to
the poor-rates, which are multiplied by these convicted poachers, inasmuch
as the majority of them have wives and families, who are consequently
thrown upon their parishes, and maintained during their husband’s
imprisonment, at a cost, upon an average, of not less than 20 s. per week
for each family. He has to pay towards an expensive police force, and it
is but fair to assume that if three-fourths of the prisoners in the House
of Correction are committed for poaching, a large portion of the time of
police-officers must necessarily be employed in preventing, detecting, and
apprehending poachers. Lastly, by way of a finishing stroke, the farmer
is to be called on to contribute towards a rate for enlarging the prisons to
contain the said poachers, the old ones not being spacious enough. The
total cost of the alterations to be made in Bedfordshire is estimated at
15,0001.” —Herts County Press.
“ Now, we say without hesitation, and we defy contradiction, that a
yearly tenant, on whose farm the game is kept in the landlord’s hands,
does not, be his situation what it may, make his land produce more than
one-half of what it is capable of producing, and which it would profitably
produce, if the tenant had a lease, and the absolute control of the game.
Neither does a yearly and game-ridden tenant employ as much labour,
by one-third, as a farmer who has the real and complete possession of
his farm. The truth is, that game-preserving is altogether unsuited to
the state of society and the condition of husbandry in this country; and


the sooner the practice is totally abandoned the better for all connected
with or employed upon land. And the effect of distress amongst the
agricultural labourers in increasing the game-law-made crime is strongly
illustrated by the tables of criminal statistics in the year 18-13, prepared
under the authority of the Home-Office. Everybody knows that, in
1842-43, the price of wheat was reduced by a moderately good harvest at
home, about 10s. a quarter below the Act-of-Parliament price, on which
farmers have been taught to calculate, and, of course, they were in dis-
tress. Consequently, labourers were discharged in great numbers. And
what has been the effect as regards the game laws ? Why, the Home-
Office people tell us, that ‘ in other offences of the miscellaneous class the
commitments (for the preceding year) have been nearly stationary,
excepting the offences against the game-laws, the commitments under
which had increased from 101 in the year 1842, to 236 in the past year,
or 44.6 per cent, on an average of the three preceding years! ! ! And
the increase in the commitments for shooting, stabbing, and wounding,
in the first class, may be traced to their connection with these offences.’
We believe that poaching is invariably the first step to crime in the rural
districts ; and if there were no game and game-laws, crime of all kinds
would be lessened three-fourths in all the agricultural counties. It is
worthy of remark that Suffolk, a great game preserving county, where
Lord Stradbroke, the mover of the new forest law, resides and preserves
game, is now the scene of that fearful crime, incendiarism, to a greater
extent than any county in England.”
Extracts from a correspondent of the Hertfordshire and Bedfordhire
County Press.
“ Speaking of the destructiveness of game, it is stated, that in districts
where it is preserved— ‘ A tenant occupying 500 acres has to keep no less
than 1000 hares, the average being ascertained to be two hares to an
acre; in many parts of Bedfordshire the average is far higher. No
stipulation for these is made on his entering the farm; in course of time
his landlord (perhaps a new one) finds that hares are a useful market-
able commodity at Is. 6d. each, and he has them strictly preserved, at his
tenant’s expense; not, mind, for the sake of showing sport to his friends
and neighbours, but for slaughter by his keepers, who, be it observed, are •
paid by the proceeds of the sales effected at Leadeuhall! This, we are


Loss to tenants, by the consumption of 1000 hares, on a farm
of 300 acres, per annum, as estimated by an old observer
and sufferer, is equal to 200 sheep, at 17s. 6<7. each, i. e,
one sheep to five hares, at 3«. fief. ..... 173 0 0
assured, is the true state of the case; and we mention it for the purpose
of inviting discussion and inquiry on a subject of so much importance-
We subjoin a statement of the profit and loss to landlord and tenant in
the instance above referred to, and we court investigation as to its accu-
racy, and any authentic information from our numerous readers in
Bedfordshire, which can be of service:—
JE s. d.
Waste caused by hares in feeding, equal to one-fourth . . 43 13 0
218 13 0
Gain to landlord by sale of 1000 hares at Leadenhall Market,
Is. 6d. each . - . - . • • • . 73 0 0
N.B.—Every iJjtre on a farm costs, or wastes, annually to the value of
4s. 6 d. at least. Rabbits, 2s. each.’
“ From the Parliamentary Return on the subject of the game laws, it
appears that, in the year 1843, there were, in England and Wales, no
less than 4500 convictions under this head. Of this number, more than
4000 were summary convictions of the magistrates at petty sessions, and
the punishments were fines seldom exceeding 51., or imprisonment with
hard labour, for periods varying from a fortnight to eighteen mouths.
But, in addition to these cases, we have the more serious ones tried at
assizes and at quarter sessions. During the last year thirty persons
have been sentenced to transportation, for periods of seven or ten years,
for infractions of the game laws, and, since the year 1833, about thirty
gamekeepers have been murdered.” —Extract from the Aylesbury News.
“‘An Old Vicar’thus writes to the Church-and-State Gazette: —
‘ Upwards of forty years’ experience has proved the impossibility of con-
vincing my poor parishioners, in four distantly-placed parishes, of the
sin of poaching, or making them feel that they had broken a command
» of God when they killed hares which were destroying their garden's pro-
duce. I believe that all my rural brethren will agree with me, and also


in the lamentable conclusion, that a labourer who has once been in gaol
for such an offence is by that ruined , hardened, degraded, and yet thinks
himself a martyr; that he thence imbibes a rooted hatred of lords of
manors, and turns radical. From this I would appeal to the game pre-
servers, and ask them, as Christians, ‘ who are not to seek their own,
but rather another’s good,’ whether they can justify conduct which lays a
snare for the conscience of a weak brother ?”
No one can compare the contents of the preceding letters, both on con-
victism and on the cruelties practised under the game laws, with these
facts, without seeing at a glance how entirely the game laws and the
overpowering felonry of this country are connected and work into each
other. The keepers and the peasantry are brutalized by these laws: the
keepers by the practice of cruelties on inferior animals, and by warfare
on their fellow-men; the peasantry, on the other hand, are brutalized by
a sense of injury from the keepers, and of undue severity from the land-
lords. Crime is generated thus through hamlet and field at a fearful
rate. The game-preserving gentlemen and noblemen grow insensibly
rigid and despotic towards the poorer rural population. They sow temp-
tations thickly around the villages in the shape of game, and then send
out keepers and watchers, armed with guns and flails, against poachers.
The other day, in the fatal rencontre at Eoydon Hall, the head keeper
who was killed was armed with a flail, and many readers imagined that
he suddenly snatched up this weapon from a barn, having no gun at
hand; but these flails were never meant to thresh corn, but to crack the
skulls of poachers. They were introduced more than twenty years ago
by game-preservers as an admirable invention for knocking down poach-
ers when they can he brought to close quarters, or when nights are too
dark to get a shot at them. I knew, long ago, in Nottinghamshire, a
great sporting squire who armed regularly all his keepers and watchers
with them. He argued, that by shooting at poachers you might kill
them and get into trouble about them; by knocking them on the head
with flails you had a better chance of capturing them.
Such are the arts by which low and brutal men are excited to deadly
enmity towards each other in Christian England in the nineteenth cen-
tury. It would be well for our gentry to reflect that the game laws
were one of the chief causes of the Revolution in France; and the mis-


chief lies not so much in the moderate existence of game, as in the excess
and the ever growing excess of its maintenance. Formerly, sportsmen
were content to traverse stubble, copse, and pasture, and return home
well tired with a couple of hares, a brace or two of pheasants, and three
or four brace of partridges. Now, the love of sport and of healthy exer-
cise are exchanged for the mere love of slaughter. A number of noble-
men and gentlemen take the field, swarming with game fed at the
expense of the farmer, followed by a troop of attendants who hand them
ready-charged guns as fast as they can discharge them, and the gory
passion of our legislators and appointed teachers of Christianity is to slay
their hundreds of victims. It is butchery which has usurped the place
of sport, and the fields are but another name for slaughter-houses and
shambles. The thing would wear an air of insanity if the profits of the
market were not visible in the rear.
This degrading idea of converting our noblemen and gentlemen into
butchers on their own account seems to have been learned on the Conti-
nent, in those beast carnages called battues, which are exceeded by no-
thing but the pig-killing trade of Cincinnatti, where they profess to dis-
patch a pig a imnute. Some years ago, when at A ienna, I was pro-
mised, as an especial favour, to be present at one of the emperor s wild-
boar hunts. Imagination at once presented to me all the ancient poetry
of such a scene—the mounted huntsman, the clamouring dogs, the horn
winding amid the echoes of the native forest, the rush of the huge grim
boar, the eager dash of magnificent hounds, the daring knights and
barons confronting the grisly monster with their spears. But, unfor-
tunately for the poetry, fortunately for me, I happened to visit the scene
a few days before. It was in the extensive wild-boar park at Hiittles-
dorff, near Schonbrunn. But oh! what a falling off was there! Oh!
Edmund Burke, what a burking of another age of chivalry was there!
A small enclosed paddock adjoining the park was shown me, into which
the wild swine were to be driven over night. Adjoining this was a
passage of some twenty or thirty yards wide, fenced off on each side with
wooden walls. On one side was raised a long platform ; through this
passage, which led again to the park, the wild swine were to be driven,
and the imperial, royal, princely, noble, and ignoble pork-butchers,
standing safe on the platform, and with a crowd of servants behind them
handing ready-loaded rifles, were to knock down the swine as they


passed. Having no penchant for pork-butchery, even by imperial hands,
I went another way.
But on sundry occasions I have attended ordinary battues. Word has
been sent some days beforehand by the proprietor of the chasse, and all
the sportsman of the neighbourhood have assembled. The keepers
have hired, at a few sous or kreutzers each, a mob of men and boys,
armed with cudgels. The day of all others has been Sunday, for on
that day more peasantry are to be had. Forming a wide, but ever
narrowing circle, the peasants have beaten up the woods and the vine-
yards, and a motley herd of roebucks, foxes, wild-cats, and hares have
come flying towards you helter-skelter, and helter-skelter have been fired
on and knocked over. Occasionally a man or lad has been shot, too, by
some excited sportman, who, seeing a rustling in the bushes, has imagined
it a roebuck, without waiting to make sure. And, last of all, the naked
prose of the scene, the carts loaded with the hares and roes have been
seen slowly moving off to market. We have in this country already
adopted most of the attributes of this scene. We have only to add yet
the shooting of foxes, and the selection of Sunday .for the sport. But we
are such apt imitators of our French and German neighbours, that these
may not be far off.
In one thing we have out-gone the Continent. In France and Ger-
many, to a great extent, the game belongs to the peasantry, and they
let out the right to kill it, annually, to the highest bidder. But here the
dishonesty of the thing is monstrous. The rich man bargains to let the
poor man the entire use of his land for a fair and agreed sum, and then
he turns in his own cattle in the shape of hares, rabbits, pheasants, and
partridges, besides often having a fox-cover near to keep a steady drain
on the farmer’s poultry-yard. He sends all his cattle, or game as he
calls it, fattened at the farmer’s cost, to market, and receives that which
the farmer should have received for hie cattle. To hide, if possible, the
atrocious nature of the transaction, the landlord pretends it is all sport!
Yes ; the old sport of the boys and frogs—sport to the one party, death
to the other! Nothing but long feudal usage could render the fraud
passable for a moment. To put the matter into the true light, let us
suppose a person letting a shop in a valuable situation for a rental
calculated on this very value of situation, and then saying, “ The shop-
keeper gets still too muchand so going ever and anon and taking his
friends with him to pick off a diamond, or a gold watch, from the trades-


man’s counter, or a satin or lace dress from his shelves for his wife, and
calling it sport! Would a shopkeeper endure it for a moment? Would
any man but a farmer ? And even he begins hazily to ponder on the
wrong.
“Sport!” says John Ploughshare, “what is sport to thee
Is neither sport nor livelihood to me.
I pay thee lawful rent for lawful land;
Why thou should’st graze it, I don’t understand.
I plough my leas, and sow them with my grain ;
Why thou should’st eat it, bothers sore my brain.
I look for harvest; but, amazed, I stop;
For why ? My crop is in thy pheasant’s crop.
1 drive my sheep and kine to pasture grounds,
For which I pay thee acre-wise two pounds—
Two pounds a-year; andlo! I stand and groan;
Thy hares have picked it to the very bone.
I pay for mending fences many a crown,
Thy leather -legginged rascals crash them down.
They trashel through my precious corn and tares;
I wince: one grins; another grins and swears.
They trap my cats and dogs; they breed the fox,
To nab my geese, and to garotte my cocks.
Can this be right ? says I, and rub my brow.
Rent I this land of thee ? or is it thou
Who pay’st me for it P For I find thy herds
It chiefly grazes, and maintains thy birds.
I’m all unlarned; but still, somehow, I feel
That what a man doth sell, he should not steal!
As for sport —genuine old English sport has ceased. The Act for
legalizing the sale of game destroyed it. Breeding and killing of game
has since then become a trade, and a dishonest one. Game is as regularly
bred for market as fowls, ducks, geese, or sheep, but under the dishonest
pretence of sport, and at the expense of the farmer. Merchants and
manufac'urers, who are fast buying up the great estates, find themselves
at home in this so-called sport. It is still trade and manufacture. By
the agency of nature, instead of spinning-jennies, they manufacture
game ad libitum for town consumption. They are now engaged with the


old landed proprietors in what in the meat trade is called the wholesale
carcase line. They condescend to be butchers to the salesman and the
public. They have accounts as regularly opened with the town game-
dealers as any other tradesmen.
Sport! It is gone. The age of that chivalry, too, is past. It is a trade as
sordidly carried on and carefully calculated for profit as any other. In its
pursuit it is a bloody havock spurned at by humanity when named as sport.
Many gentlemen make by rabbits only from 500 Z. to 1000 Z. a-year. By game,
fed at the cost of the farmer, they make an income equal to the rental of half
a dozen farms. Now, the gain would be legitimate enough, and no landowner
need blush to carry it on, if conducted on just principles, and stripped of
the poor disguise of sport. But it should be carried on in proper places,
and under proper restrictions. Game should not be protected in devouring
swarms all round villages, all over the poor man’s garden and the farm-
ers’ farms. As it is, the farmers are put regularly under their own
harrows; they are pressed down, with one huge harrow-tooth boring into
their brains, called “Want of Lease,” and another huge tooth boring
into their stomachs, called “ Destruction of crops by legalized vermin.”
A very distinguished physiologist lately made a visit amongst Norfolk
farmers- On their great and expensive corn-farms he found them em-
ploying capital to a large amount, and employing a great amount of labour;
but, like farmers of Wales, though little kings in extent of transactions,
they dared not call their souls their own. He says he remarked with
astonishment that they actually went about with bowed heads, from
habitual stooping and submission of mind. To that only could he, a man
accustomed to study the human frame, attribute it.
And all the while these swarming legions of game are the temptation
to the six or ten shillin j|-a-week peasant; and gentlemen wonder at the
wickedness of poachers ! If these gentlemen sowed the fields round vil-
lages with sovereigns, do they suppose that any laws, or any number of
laws, or any severity of laws, would deter poor and ignorant men from
gathering them ? But they do sow these fields with sovereigns in the
shape of hares, rabbits, partridges, and pheasants. Fresh laws are ever
and anon passed to crush, if possible, the pursuit of their paraded temp-
tations. It is now gravely proposed to make game property. Whose
property ? The hare that bolts through a hedge, or the bird which flies
over it—whose property ? So long as the world stands the astutest
legislators will never convince the understanding of the people that that


which on one side of a hedge is one man's, on the other side is another
man’s, and on a highway is nobody’s—is property.
Bat if property —whose property? Game has been, as a matter of
course, treated as the property of the landowners. But is there not
another side to this question ? What says a Nottinghamshire gentleman
in the Star of December 20th ? After describing one of the continually-
occurring tragedies in the pursuit and defence of game, he asks, Where
lies the right to this game P
“ Take the case of the fight at Inkersol, on Sherwood Forest, a few
years ago.
“ A girl, a niece of one of the tenters at Rufford, told me, that on the
morning, after dawn, she went to the scene of action, and that to see the
broken weapons, the blood spilt all about, the huge boulders lying close
to the pools of blood, the deep indentations of heels and toes in the
ground, where men had struggled hand to hand, was shocking. One of
the gamekeepers or watchers was shot, and died then, or soon after ;
another went on crutches for years, and had a pension from Lord Scar-
borough. One of the poachers had an arm broken, and many of them
were fearfully injured.
‘ Enough, my lord, do pheasants cost.’— Ceaisbe,
Now, as to the right and wrong of poaching. So long as poor men pay
for the protection of game, they have incontestably a right to some of it.
Here is a fact to the purpose. You have before you a glimpse of our
county game convictions. All this cannot be going on without entailing
on us a serious sum in county rates. We, in this small parish, pay an-
nually about 30 1, or 40 1, to these rates; in as much to county
rates as to the poor. Now, our law defines dwindling the obtaining
money under false pretences. It is a well-known fact that our county
rates are collected as poor-rates, and amongst those who pay these rates
are the poorest of the poor—men who have not sufficient to eat, men
who toil for large families, and endure the greatest privations, that their
families may not want. Here is one instance. A labourer whom I
know gets his breakfast, taking with him a piece of dry bread for his
dinner to the barn, where he threshes from dark to dark, threshing
always by the quarter, not being able, with his large family, to exist on
mere day wages. He works like a horse, living on prison fare—bread


and water-giving to his family slices of his constitution. Now this
man, doing often the work of two men, has every now and then to have
parish pay, and to have the breaches he makes in his constitution patched
up by parish doctors. This man, coming in from his hard labour and
hard fare, is sure to be found at home by the poor-rate collector, for he is
often too stiff with toil to get out of his chair for hours after he seats
himself in it. He pays the often-called-for 9d. — \\d. of which goes to
the county rate. This fact ought to flavour the amber steam arising
from the rich man’s roasted partridge or pheasant.
“ If ever there was a curse on a highly-civilized country, that deadly-
demoralizing curse is the game incubus.
“ Yours, &c.,
“ Edingley , Dec. 11.” “R- H.
In the mean time the crisis draws on. The game-fanatic may not see
it; the imbruted keeper and the hunted poacher cannot see it; but po-
pulation increases; the spirit of property grows more tenacious; bloody
hands are raised against marauding hands; our fields and woods are
continually the scenes of murders, in offence or defence of game, and the
spirit of the public is scandalized. Merchants and manufacturers pur-
chase the estates of effete families, and enter into zealous rivalry with
the old hereditary proprietors, for the breeding and defending of game.
They set up their preserves, their leather-legginged loungers, and their
hordes of night watchers. Reflective men begin to look over the heads
of these artificial men, and artificial laws, to the higher laws of nature
and human association, and ponder on a necessity more impressive than
the necessity for so much game, accompanied by so many crimes. There
is already somewhere in the air a whispered “ Beware! ” One cannot
tell exactly where it is—whence it comes —but it is there, and is heard
again and again!
Meantime the crime generated in our game preserves all over the land
stalks up into our towns, from our towns to our cities, from our cities to
the metropolis. It is traced hither from our fields through the unmis-
takeable tracks of our prisons, growing ever larger to receive poachers,
and through prosecuting courts. Men like Sir Harry Verney see it, and
point warningly to it; the newspapers see it, and record the startling
fact. The crisis draws on. The shoals of men once lurking in woods
and spinnies—hardened and demonized men—now lurk in our city alleys.


not for hares, but for men and affrighted women. It is time to attack
the evil at both ends. Whilst we seek relief from overgrown crime in dis-
tant yet unsettled lands, we must seek relief also from its generation
under the hands of game-growing gentlemen and their gun and flail
myrmidons. The condition of society thus created is intolerable in a
Christian country. Has it ever occurred to those gentlemen, who so long
have been piling laws on laws to diminish poaching, that the mqst cer-
tain mode of doing this is to diminish game. Let them reduce their
game to such a sprinkling that it shall not be worth the attention of the
poacher, and there is an end of the matter. When it shall no longer pay
the peasant better to snickle hares than to perform ordinary field labour,
he will then cease to poach, and not till then. Yet, with such a mo-
derate amount of game the landed man would find more healthy exercise,
and more genuine sport. The game will be more valued when found,
more enjoyed on the table, and he will have raised himself again from
the rank of a butcher to his true place of gentleman.
Let us all reflect long and deeply on this alternative. It points to a
far more genial and English solution of the difficulty than that mys-
teriously whispered “Beware!” that seems nowhere, and yet is every-
where ; so silent, yet every day growing more distinct, more ominous and
emphatic!
FINAL POSTSCRIPT.
“ Allsop, the brewer, I am told, calls himself a squire and a gentleman,
as certainly he may with quite as much right as many a lord
calls himself a nobleman and gentleman; for surely it is not a
fraction more trumpery to make and sell ale than to fatten and
sell game.”—Sorrow's Wild Wales, vol. ii. p. 311.
Not a day now passes but throws new light on the iniquitous operation
of the Game Laws. The following observations are by the same Not-
tinghamshire gentleman as the letter at page 70 :
“ Perhaps you are not aware that there is a general parochial rating
ordered by a recent Act of Parliament, the basis of this rating being—
not as it ought to be—the real value of the land, but the rent at which
it is let, thus laying a double burden on the great mass of small owners,


and the still poorer class of small occupiers, to the still greater advantage
of the opulent old hereditary classes, both landowners and their large and
more lightly-rented farmers. Why more lightly rented will soon ap-
pear. This inequality is causing great excitement in the rural districts,
more especially where there is 1 1, per acre rent, and four times that
sum paid for the same quality of land by the tenantry. At a country
Poor-Law Board lately, the chairman was extremely zealous to have this
unjust rating rigorously carried out. A member of the Board observed
that such a law was a disgrace to a Christian Government, and that he
would publicly protest against it.
“As an instance of the unjust inequality of the operation of the Act,
an intelligent young farmer said, ‘ Our parish rental is 31. 3s. ; for the
next parish, for land of just the same quality, the rent is 11. 10 s. ; thus
our parish will pay 2s. 6 d. per acre to a poor-rate, and the next will only
have to pay Is. 3d.' And here came out the real object of this new
rating Act, and its real working. The chairman said it would be mani-
festly unjust to rate the low-rented lands like the higher-rented, be-
cause the lower-rented were so rented in consequence of their being very
much infested with game. Thus, the landowners being compelled to
lower their rents on farms where they eat up the crops with swarms of
game, or have their farms thrown on their hands, have devised this new
rating on rentals to save themselves a rating on the real value of the
land. A member of the Board in question said, indignantly, ‘ Then let
the landlords make up the deficiency—the game ought to be assessed to
the poor.’ This opinion was echoed by other members of the Board.
“ What is the consequence of this condition of things P There is a
low rental, equivalent to a return for ravages committed by game. It
follows that there is a low corresponding rating to the poor; a much
smaller proportion furnished by such a parish to the common fund of the
union—that which is needed for the maintenance of the irremoveable
poor—a less proportion also paid towards the county rate. By this you
see at a glance what a gross imposition on the rural community game
is, especially on that portion of it the least able to bear it, the high-
rented poorer class.
“ The crowning oppression of this impudent system is, that so large an
amount of the county rates is furnished by the class which is considered
to have no right to game; expended, too, in punishment of those who
pay it!


“ Were land assessed at its intrinsic value, on that basis the game
would be made to contribute its just proportion to the public burthens,
to the county rates, and to the income-tax. Then, indeed, the land-
owners might honestly ‘ do as they liked with their own’—raise cereals,
game, or other animal food, in what ratio they pleased. It would then
be no fraudful public evasion, whilst the present game institution is a
robbery of the poor, a robbery of the county rate, and, as Falstaff has
it also, ‘ robs the exchequer, and does it with unwashed hands, too !*"
Thus the landowners propagate crime amongst the poor, then spend the
county rates in punishing it, and at the same time, as just observed, rob
the exchequer too. They rob both that and the poor-rate. Having
reduced the rent of their lauds by devouring them by game, they then
pass an Act of Parliament to levy the rates and taxes on the reduced
rental, not on the real value of the land. By this transaction they at
once throw an additional burthen on highly-rented land where game is
not preserved, and on small proprietors ; and they take their quota of
their income, which should be in the shape of rent, but is in the shape
of game, and for this quota they pay neither county-rate, poor-rate, nor
income-tax. So flagrant a condition of things will not be long tolerated
in a landowning body of legislators, or, if tolerated, will only be so at the
cost of an irrepressible increase of crime, and of a thorough destruction
of all ideas of justice. The butcher feature which the Game Laws have
assumed is also every day becoming more revolting. These are such
statements as every day present themselves in the country news-
papers :
“Game Butchery Extraordinary. The Hon. G. Heathcote,
M.P., the Hon. Lieutenant Denison, Marquis Bowmont, Captain Eger-
ton, and Major Bannister shot over Lord Londesborough’s estates, near
Scarborough, on Tuesday, and three following days, and made the follow-
ing surprising bags:—Tuesday, 63 pheasants, 2 partridges, 17 wood-
cocks, 194 hares, 123 rabbits, and 2 various; Wednesday, 110 phea-
sants, 18 partridges, 2 woodcocks, 220 hares, 115 rabbits, 3 various;
Thursday (wet), 2 pheasants, 14 partridges, 78 hares, 122 rabbits; and
on Friday, 246 pheasants, 4 partridges, 4 woodcocks, 3 snipes, 200
hares, 400 rabbits, and 6 various: total, in the four days, upwards of
1900 head of game.”
“ Bilstiiorpe. —Busing the last week Henry Saville, Esq., of Buf-


ford Abbey, and a party of four gentlemen, have had four days' famous
sport, having one day no less than twenty beaters besides the keepers. They
killed 700 pheasants, 500 hares, upwards of 200 partridges, and a great
number of, rabbits, woodcocks, snipes, wild ducks, and some beautiful
deer.”
Now, if these murderous exhibitions are the marks of gentlemanly
sportsmanship, then the Cincinnatti pig-killers and the slaughterers at
wholesale abbattoirs are gentlemen of the first stamp.
What, then, are the characteristics, as we have now seen them, of the
Game Laws ? That they are carried on by keepers and rabbit-catchers
with an atrocious cruelty not exceeded by that of any savage country; by
noblemen and gentlemen with a bloody riotousness, that must produce
a passion for blood-shedding. That must, therefore, demoralize and
dehumanize our gentry, acting antagonistically to all the finer and
nobler influences of civilization and Christian culture. That they are
now connected with a trade, and a very dishonest trade. That while
robbing the farmer and the country by checking agriculture, they at
the same time call on the country to protect this dishonesty, and that
the country is now actually pacing very largely for the punishment of
poachers, whom these very laws have tempted into poaching. That it is
notorious that these laws are amongst the most prolific sources of crime,
and that we are every day enlarging our county gaols for the reception
of poachers, or are building new ones for them. That the poorest man is
called on to pay for the protection of game in the county rates, and then
is declared to have no right in game. Operating thus in a many-sided
and multiplying power in the production of a brutalized public
of political and social dishonesty, of general crime, and general and
unjust expenditure, and, therefore, of popular resentment and popular
feeling of insulted justice and right, we hear once more the mysterious
whisper, “ Beware! the crisis draws on !” and every tightening of the
cord of feudal legislation brings it a step nearer. And mark! at this
very moment, when we are at our wits’-end what to do with our crimi-
nals, we are compelled to point to these laws as one of the greatest
manufactories of these criminals. To decrease the necessity for transpor-
tation, we must put an end to the present feudalism of the Game Laws.




ill 111 11 Hill I ill '
3 1508 01227455 6


