

Hobart,
February 23, 1889,
Rev. Andrew Hardie, Richmond,
Victoria, now on a Mission visit
to Tasmania.
Rev. Sir,
According to a printed address signed James Scott and circulated through l
the city, you have been invited by the Minister and Elders of St. Andrew’s
Church, Hobart, to conduct a series of religious services called a “ Mission
Week.”
You may be a stranger to facts and circumstances surrounding the
Presbyterian cause in Hobart, and therefore may come here with the full
expectation of advancing Christ’s cause, and not knowing that Ahab has not
repented, nor Zaccheus offered restitution. If in the Mission about to be
conducted you are able to say to David/ 4 Thou art the man,” and David says,
44 1 have sinned,” and shows 44 fruit meet for repentance,” then a great work
will be accomplished, otherwise it will be an abortion.
Ere you start in this work you might ask the Rev. James Scott what
need for this Mission ? And what have been the fruits of his labours as a
Minister of the Gospel for over 14 years ? The pious sentiments couched in
his address to the community, none can take exception to, but ask him when
he received a call to the pastoral charge of St. Andrew’s, and when he was
inducted? Ask him why he does not claim the interest on willed for
the support of the Minister of St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart, and which has
been available for the last 10 years ? Ask him why he does not claim the
right to distribute the interest of left f° r tbe benefit of the poor of St.
Andrew’s parish, and which lies in my hands, and the late Minister’s, since
the year 1879? The terms of the trust being, 44 That the Minister for the
time being, and two Elders, shall hold and administer this trust.”
James Scott, in his invitation says 44 1 hasten to assure ” Members of
other Congregations, 44 that neither this invitation, nor the Mission to which
it relates, is an attempt to withdraw them from their Church. The Mission
has a nobler end than that.” What need for this_assurance j and who in the
community would entertain the thought that the rev. gentleman would
trench upon another pastorate ?
No doubt you will be ably assisted by a choir of trained voices ; this
fact, however, must not be forgotten, that it is a paid one, costing ovei
a year.
If the state of Presbyterianism here has not been made known to you
before this pious manifesto was issued, then I deem it right that you shall
not come and go without the knowledge thatinthecamp are hidden 4 a Wedge of
Gold and a Babylonish Garmentand if the wrath of the Almighty, and
the injury to His cause is to be removed, let repentance, at least, begin at the
House of God.
Faithfully yours,
JOHN GELLIE,
Elder of St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart.


“ r
E •
E
v . .
.) ■ ■ . . ■
.
- •
I . ' »
r. .. .. . .i ,2'i . ; .
"
i.' : . ,7 j
.
; ; -1
...
:
.
t . .
' ■ ■ •
.
