

LETTERS OF DR. JOHN DUNMORE LANG
IN
"THE BRITISH BANNER."
Thes were copied from an old hook of
Caroline Chisholm’s press cuttings which was lent
to me by the late E. Dwyer - Gray, Treasurer of
Tasmania . I returned the hook, to his executors
after his death in 1945.
Margaret Kiddle,
October, 1953.


LETTERS OF JOHN DUNMORE LANG IN "THE BRITISH
BANNER. "
12th July, 1848. COLONIZATION IN AUSTRALIA.
To the Editor of the British Banner,
Sir,— In continuation of my series of replies to the interrogator-
ies of numerous correspondents from all parts of the country, I
beg to state, that I have been asked repeatedly when I intend
returning to the colony myself, and in what part of it I propose >:
to take up my future permanent abode, I have to state, in reply i
to these questions, that my leave of absence from my congrcgationj
in Sydney expired on the first of this month; but, as the state I
of things in this, country during the whole of the past year \
precluded the possibility of my accomplishing the objects of my \
voyage home during that period, I shall be under the necessity of \
of remaining in England for at least the greater part of another
year. As soon as the Company is organized, and its field of
operation properly defined, which will now bo very shortly, I
propose, if possible, to form various Societies or Associations
in furtherance of its general objects in different parts of the
United Kingdom, to embody in a pamphlet for extensive circulation
the information I have been endeavouring to diffuse through your
columns and otherwise, and to do whatever else may be requisite
to direct a large and continuous stream of thoroughly Protestant
emigration to Australia. As soon as these objects ere accomplished
I shall most willingly embark once more for my adopted country;
but it would bo ruinous to the interests with which I am identified,
to do so at present. The last accounts from the colony inform us,
that two of the Anglican Catholic, (l will not insult him by
calling him Protestant), bishop's clergy have just gone over to
Rome, The rest of them, with one or two executions only, are
more than half-way there already; and the only hope, therefore,
for our colony qnd hemisphere, depends on our getting out to it
a numerous body of Christian people of those communions in this
country, that have a real attachment to the Protestantism of the
Bible, and a, rooted antipathy to the pride and superciliousness
of an Anglican bishop. 17c require no such pactions with Govern-
ment as have been suggested in certain quarters in connexion
with this subject; wo require no stipulations beforehand a.bout
freedom of worship, &c.; only give us a numerous body of thorough-
ly Protestant emigrants for Australia,, and we shall bo perfectly
able to manage all the rest ourselves.
In regard to my own future position in the event of my
safe return to the colony; my present locality is Sydney, the
capital of Now South Wales, which is about half-way from the
northern extremity of the colony, or Cooksland, and its southern
extremity of Port Phillip, But if the stream of thoroughly
Protestant emigration, which is now beginning to flow, sets in
in right earnest for Australia generally, it will be necessary
that some minister of the requisite experience in the country
should bo disengaged, for a time at least, from special clerical
duty, to assist in promoting the settlement of ministers and
schoolmasters, and in forming Associations: for their maintenance
and support all over the territory; and I believe this duty would
necessarily devolve upon myself. It will be a matter of perfect
indifference to mo in what part of that vast territory -
extending upwards of a thousand miles in direct distance - I
shall be permanently located myself.
I have been asked, why the preliminary ship is to sail
before the organization of the Company. The fact is, it was not
practicable to form a Company at all until very recently, and
there were reasons for delay, of a different kind, which it is
not necessary to enumerate particularly. It is extremely
desirable, however, that an actual commencement of the enterprise


should be made immediately, both from the moral effect which it
will have in stimulating emigration in this country, and from
certain objects of primary importance in the undertaking which
are to bo accomplished in the colony, for instance, a surveyor
must go out by the first ship to ascertain the general capabilities
of the country, and to select the fittest tracts for settlement on
their arrival. The expected arrival of the Company’s first or
preliminary ship will be notified beforehand to the inhabitants of
the district, by a vessel with Government emigrants - farm
labourers and shepherds - to sail direct to Moreton-bay, on the
24th inst, and gentlemen on the spot, who, I am quite sure, will
take the deepest interest in the expedition will be ready, on the
arrival of the first ship, to point out to the surveyor a,nd
emigrants the most eligible locality to occupy in the first.instance,
But the principal reason for the sailing of this vessel before
the Company comes into full operation, - for it will in all
probability be in formal existence beforehand, although a considei
able time yet will necessarily elapse before the charter can be
procured, is the necessity for immediate operations on the future
model-farm in the colony, in order to have the capabilities of
the country for the production of cotton of superior quality for
the British market fully ascertained and exhibited practically
during the coming year. Any further delay would preclude the
possibility of making so important v an experiment for another
twelvemonth; but the vessel to sa.il next month will be quite in
time. The emigrants by that vessel will certainly have the best
chance in rega.rd to the selection of their future place of settle-
ment. The land will be a.ll before them,
I have also been requested to state whether any facilities
would be afforded by the Company to mechanics and other persons not
intending to pursue agriculture or to settle upon land. To such
persons I would suggest that town allotments will bo very valuable
to them, and the Company will have such allotments to dispose of
to intending emigrants desiring to purchase them, at a certain
fixed price; as suitable localities for villages and towns will be
selected and narked off progressively within the tract of country
of which the Company v/ill obtain possession, Bow, whatever amounts
mechanics or other persons not intending to hold land as
agriculturists nay have to pay to secure their passage out, will
be credited to then by the Company for the purchase of such
allotments. Carpenters and joiners, stone-masons and bricklayers,
wheelwrights, blacksmiths, saddlers, &c, &c,, will all find it
their interest to obtain possession of building allotments of this
kind, to establish themselves in business in central and suitable
localities. The scale of allowance for passa.ge proposed for the
Company is the one fixed by the Government Commissioners of
Emigration, viz., that a person purchasing land to the extent of
£lOO shall be entitled to a. free passa.ge for five adults. Any
mechanic, therefore, who should advance the amount of his passa.ge
money for the future purchase of town allotments would bo entitled
to a passa.ge out, and it is probable that when the Company cones
into operation, it will allow suitable persons of this class
generally to obtain a passage out by their vessels on paying a.
certain proportion of the passage money; for although there are
very many reputa.blc families in this country at the present
moment who would gladly emigrate, but are utterly destitute of the
means of doing so at their own charges, it holds as a general rule
tha.t the person who is able and willing to pay a proportion, if
not the whole, of the cost of his emigration, is a more desirable
person for the colony than the one who can.pay nothing. The
demand for mechanical labour of all kinds will bo very groat for
a long time to come both in Cooksland and Port Phillip, and such
arrangements as would enable respectable families of this class
to got out comfortably for a comparatively small sum, would be a
groat boon to them, and a. groat benefit both to the mother country
and to the Colony,
With reference to another series of interrogatories, I bog
to add tha.t it was originally proposed that there should bo a


separate and distinct Company formed for the promotion of
emigration to Port Phillip, in addition to the Company organizing
for Oooksland. It has been found, however, that a separate
machinery would he both expensive and unnecessary, and the probabil-
ity is that the Company will be formed on such a basis, and with
such a designation, as to include both of these localities. It
would thus be in the power of the Company to give intending
emigrants their choice of going either to Cooksland or to Port
Phillip ; the advantages as to land and passage out being the same
in both cases.
The following is the dietary scale of the Government
Emigration ships, which will be followed throughout in the vessel
to sail next month.
Por 'each adult, male or female, 2/3 lb. bread (biscuit),
and lb. flour daily; 3- lb. meat daily (on Sunday and Thursday,
preserved meat; on Tuesday and Saturday, beef; and on the other
three days pork, both of the best quality). On four days of the
week 2 oz. of raisins and 1-g- oz. of suet, and on each of the other
three (pork) days, 1/3 lb. peas. Also -g- lb. rice and ■§• lb, preserv-
ed potatoes, 2 oz. of tea, oz. ooffee, -J lb. sugar, and 6 oz,
butter, weekly. The allowance of water is 3 quarts per day, and
of vinegar pint,, of mustard £ oz. and of salt, 2 oz. weekly.
Children, whether male or female, under fourteen years of
ago, receive one half of this allowance, and no ration is issued
for infants under one year.
The surgeon superintendent is at liberty to issue three times
a week, to children under seven, four ounces rice or three ounces
sago, in lieu of salt meat.
In regard to the medical comforts, the following is the
scale on which they are supplied, to be used at the discretion of
the surgeon ;
"A. supply of medical comforts is to be put on board in the
following proportion to 100 statute adults ;-
1 cwt. of oatmeal
28 lbs. of West India arrowroot
56 lbs. of Scotch Baxley
150 lbs, of sago
30 lbs, of preserved boiled beef, tn 1 lb, tins
20 lbs, of preserved boiled mutton, in lib. tins
400 pints of lemon juice, in wickered stone bottles of five
gallons
300 lbs. of sugar
12 bottles of port wine
12 bottles of sherry wine
100 gallons of approved stout, including at least six dozen
of bottled stout
10 gallons of brandy
10 gallons of rum
10 gallons of vinegar
6 dozen pints of preserved milk
1 cwt. of chloride of lime
1 cwt, of marine soap
The emigrants have no right to the medical comforts as to
the articles of dietary, but they are to bo issued exclusively at
the discretion of the surgeon, whether for the sick, or to preserve
health."


Any family of intending emigrants can easily calculate
from this scale what amount of any article of domestic consump-
tion - choose, ham, preserved moat, jellies, &c.- they would
require for their general comfort on the voyage, A few sperm
candles would be very desirable for a family.
Although a steerage passage cannot, in ordinary
circumstances, be so comfortable as a cabin passage, everything
that is practicable will bo done to render the situation of the
emigrants by the first ship as comfortable as the case will admit
of, I have ascertained for example, that it will be quite
practicable to have separate apartments for the larger families;
and other smaller families, that are mutually connected, will bo
placed together in similar apartments. The allotment of the
available space will be made by Lieutenant Loan, R.N,; and as
there is generally much fine weather on the voyage to Australia,
there is in reality, very little in the shape of hardship or
privation of any kind to be undergone, oven by a steerage
passenger, by the way. Besides, the period is short; and if a
little privation during that brief period will prove materially
conductive to the subsequent comfortable settlement of a family
for life, it ought surely to be cheerfully undergone.
The fifth article of the proposed Constitution for the
Company is, "That the purchaser of an eighty-acre farm, who shall
have paid £lOO into the Company's funds in this country, and
emigrated to the colony within twelve months, &c,, shall bo
considered a Shareholder, &c," Now the obvious meaning of this
article is, that those only who should pay up the full amount of
the purchase-money of such a farm should have a right to nominate
five persons for a passage out. But it appears to have boon
misunderstood in certain quarters, persons conceiving themselves
entitled to nominate for a passage out, without having fulfilled
this indispensable condition.
As it is not desirable either that the Company should sell
Land on credit, or that those who are destitute of the necessary
funds should attempt to settle upon land at all until they obtain
the means of doing so, persons in this condition - who are able,
notwithstanding, to meet the cost of their passage out at the
rate of £2O for each adult - will receive land orders to that
amount in value, which will be taken as money by the Company
whenever they come to bo purchasers of land in such quantities
as the Company will sell.
Humane persons of both sexes who occasionally address to me
notes of interrogation requiring answers that consume a good deal
of time, would find most of their questions answered, by anticipa-
tion, by reading two volumes I have published on Australia, since
my return to this country, for the express purpose of diffusing
the very information they solicit. These two volumes are entitled:
"Phillipsland; or the country hitherto designated Port Phillip :
its present Condition and Prospects as a. Field for Emigration;"
and "Cooksland, in North-Eastern Australia, the future Cotton—Field
of Groat Britain : its Characteristics and Capabilities for
extensive European Colonization." Those volumes are published,
separately by Messrs. Longman, of Paternoster-row, London, and are
sold at 7s, 6d, each. They are to be found in some circulating
libraries both in town and country : if they wore found in ’
others, it would save me a groat deal of valuable time,
I an, Sir., your most obedient servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.


No. 35.
"The British Banner." "AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION. 11
Sir,- If your Correspondent, Mr. Edward Bell, (who presuaes in a
letter published in your last number, to sit in Judgment upon ae
and ny writings and proceedings-, in reference to the colonization
of Cooksland, in Australia,) had only read ray letters on tho subject
in the Banner, which he has evidently not done, ho would have seen
that his objections to that undertaking arc as irrelevant as his
strictures are uncalled for.
I have never represented Cooksland as a new colony, as Mr,
Bell gratuitously suppose it to he, - that is a portion of the
continent of Australia never visited or occupied Before; I have
doscribod it siraply as a recently opened and highly promising
district of an old colony; - the colony of New South Wales, a
district - which is evidently destined, like Port Phillip, to bo a
separate and independent colony very shortly, I have shown, ,
moreover, that it has an tactual population of about 5,000 souls;
that this population is chiefly pastoral, possessing flocks and
herds (the principal element of colonization in Australia) almost
innumerable; that the chief town, Brisbane, which is situated on a
navigable river of the same name,has a rapidly increasing population
of upwards of 1,000 souls, and is already a place of great trade
considering its size, as it exports upwards of £150,000 in value
annually, maintaining a regular storm communication with Sydney, the
capital of the colony, and having a weekly newspaper of its own.
I have shown, moreover, that its soil and climate arc admirably
adapted for tho growth of cotton and other tropical produce, and
that it presents an extent of na.viga.ble water available for steam
navigation unequalled in any of our other colonies.
Now, in advocating the ccloniza.tion of a country so peculiarly
favourable for immediate and extensive settlement as Cooksland, I
never either uttered or wrote a syllable in depreciation either of
South Australia, or of Now Zealand, or of any other pet and puffed
Colony in the ’whole batch. It is no doctrine of mine, although it
may be of your correspondent I s, that it is necessary to depreciate
any one Colony in order to elevate another. My idea is, that there
is room enough for them all in this wide world, and people enough
in this populous isle to settle them all, and to make them all pro-
sper together.
Mr. Edward Bell is in some way connected, it seems with
South Australia, and fancies that Cooksland and my efforts for its
colonization are somehow very much in his way. Depreciating
Cooksland, therefore, and all connected with, it with all his might,
he points triumphantly to South Australia as the model Colony of
Great Britain, the glory of all lands, the
"First flower of tho earth, and first gim of the sayJ"
This reminds mo of tho cries of Constantinople, "In the
name of the prophet - figs." For what are the real facts of the
case in the history of this model Colony ? Why, about twenty years
ago a number of foolish peoplo who knew absolutely nothing about
colonization, - a.s little at all events as Mr. Edward Bell - went
out, at tho bidding of Mr. Edward Gibbon Wakefield, to plant a -
Colony in Australia. So they built a city and called it Adelaide -
they built a city, forsooth! before they had any agriculture,, any
trade, anything to live on, anything to cat! And if flocks of sheep
and herds of cattle - an element of colonization they had never
thought of in England - had not been driven over to thorn overland
from New South Males, I suppose they would have had to eat one
another. In this colonizing process most of the deluded people
lost all they had and were ruined, and the speedy result of their
expedition was that thore was a whole city to let in South Australia!
Tho very Government caught tho infection of the pla.ee, and became
bankrupt, too, from city-building; insomuch, that, if the
5


British Parliament had not corns forward, at tho instance Of Lord
Stanley, with an advance of from £150,000 to £200,000, tho whole
concern - the nodel Colony forsooth - .would have been sold off by
thc sheriffs to tho highest bidder, or. behalf of the creditors in
London. In this conjuncture, when tho fortunes of South Australia
appeared to he desperate, a copper nine was discovered, which.: has
since proved a source of prosperity and wealth to the Colony, It
is evident, however, that the Colonists of South Australia have
Just as little reason to take credit for that discovery, as a
beggar has for finding a five pound note on the highway. It was
a more accident altogether, as far as,they were concerned. And
this is the model Colony, forsooth, to which we are ever and anon
referred hy ignorant people, who know no better, like Mr, Edward 8011,
and others, for the only successful example of British colonization
in modern times,
A wealthy, hut exceedingly penurious proprietor in the north
of Scotland, was one day walking down from his house along the
noble avenue that led up to it from the highway, when, observing a
farthing on tho road at his feet, he stooped down and picked it up,
A beggar, on his way to the mansion for charity, happened to bo
passing at the very moment, and, observing the laird pick up the
coin, he modestly requested him to give it to him. To this, however,
the laird could not assent. So putting the farthing deliberately
into his own pocket, he said, " s in' a farcin for yours el*, puir
body, ,r Bow as far as I have been able to sec this is precisely the
South Australian specific for successful colonization. The
gentlemen of that prosperous, but somewhat puffed colony, say to the
intending emigrant. "Only discover a copper mine, as we have done
and there will be no fear of you" But, how to get on where there
may be no copper mine to discover, these Solomons tellus not.
I dare say the public will care very little what may be the
private opinion of Mr. Edward Bell as to the practicability of grow-
ing cotton of superior quality in Gooksland. The President of the
Chamber of Commerce at Manchester and gentlemen of the highest
standing in the cotton trade in the City of Glasgow have not only
given it as their opinion, that tho thing is quite practicable, but
have _actually tested a specimen of the Australian cotton, .and borne
testimony to its remarkably superior quality; but Mr. Edward Bell
is of a different opinion. "We will note that objection," therefore,
as the Judges say at a trial, and pass on to inquire what could
have induced this officious scribe to embody tho outpourings of his
own feeble intellect and pitiful malignity in & gratuitous attack
upon myself and the colonizing enterprize with which I am at
present identified; thereby doing his best to unhinge the minds of
reputable families and individuals who had placed confidence in me
in regard to the colonization of Gooksland,
*
How I have discovered, accidently (just-as the South
Australians did their copper mines,) through an advertisement
in your last number, that Mr, Edward Bell is "a commission merchant",
who is ready to render every assistance to persons desirous of
emigrating to Australia and Mow Zealand in procuring their passages
in tho first-class vessels pit tho lowest possible rates; for there
is a species of horseleech, in all the seaport towns of this country,
that fixes itself upon unfortunate people from the country who come
to town with the intention of emigrating to Australia or elsewhere,
and. Mr. Edward Bell being one of this class and finding that,
through the arrangements I have succeeded in making, there Is noth-
ing to be done in his line in the direction of Gooksland, has done
me the honour of a special notice in your columns. Sir, there
is no class of persons so likely to fall amongst thieves as persons
of the humbler classes on the eve of emigrating to the colonies
and such persons have reason to beware of tho proffered assistance
of commission merchants, who for the most pext are either the paid
agents of particular shipping houses, or men upon the town living
upon their wits and fleecing all who come near them. No man of
common sense requires to employ a commission merchant to assist
him in discovering where the cheapest and best suga,r or tea is to
be procured; he goes himself to the shop where the article is sold


Now any person can ascertain, from the numerous advertisements in
the daily papers as well as in your own, of the sailing of vessels
for Australia or elsewhere, where and on what terms passages are
to ho procured; and if he has a grain of common sense remaining he
will go to these shops himself, and then to the Docks, to judge
for himself, "before he engages his passage. He requires no
commission on merchant for any such purpose. So much for Mr, Edward
Bell.
I am, Sir, your most obedient servant.,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
London, August 26, 1848.


No, 36.
November 15th, 1848,
Ip the Editor of The British Banner,
CHRISTIAN COLONIZATION IN AUSTRALIA
Sir, - In a paragraph quoted from a Plymouth journal, in your last
Number, it is stated that 164 young woaen, principally, if not
exclusively, orphans, froa the Union Workhouses in the south of
Ireland, had just arrived in Plymouth Sound, hy a Dublin steam-boat,
to be embarked on board a Government emigrant ship, then in the
Sound, bound for Sydney, New South Wales, And as it was added that
those young women (whose emigration, I presume, is paid for entirely
from the funds of the colony) were to be under the special care of
the Local Government on their arrival, the superficial reader would
doubtless sec nothing more in the whole matter than a mere benevolent
arrangement, and would accordingly give due credit to all concerned.
Sir, be assured there is much more in this affair than mere
benevolence. The lady at whose artless and disinterested suggestion,
forsooth, this peculiar species of emigration has been sanctioned
and carried into effect by the Colonial department, is a Renan
Catholic, A Roman Catholic of the highest caste, a perfect devotee
of the Papacy; and I an as confident as I am of ny own existence
that these young women, who are almost exclusively Roman Catholics,
from the most thoroughly Romish and bigotted parts of Ireland, have
been selected as free emigrants for Australia., expressly with the
view to their becoming the wives of the English and Scotch Protestant
shepherds and stockmen of New South Wales, and thereby silently
subverting the Protestantism and extending the Romanism of the
colony through the vile, Jcsuitica.l, diabolical, system of “mixed
marriages." It was this system of nixed marriages, - a system which
the Romish priesthood systematically employ as; an instrument for
the advancement of the Papacy in all countries,- that ruined the
antediluvian church, and induced that universe,! corruption which
called down tho vengeance of Heaven on an ungodly world in the
waters of the deluge. "The sons of God," - that is, the professed
worshippers of God of tho family of Seth, - "saw the daughters of
men," - that is, of the family of Cain, - "that they were fair;
and they took them wives of all which they chose," Tho Spirit
of evil, which thon reigned in these children of disobedience, is
still pursuing the same course, and endeavouring, ?/horever Protestan-
tism and Popery come in content with each other, to ruin the cause
of God in the world by means of mixed marriages, I speak in this
natter, not from theory, but from experience and observation.
Now, I. wish it to bo distinctly understood, that, I do not
by any moans wish to throw blame on the authorities for granting
this measure of relief to Ireland. I have not the slightest
objection to Irolandfe receiving her duo proportion of these
"daily ministrations" of Downing-street from our colonial funds.
But I would ask, why is this great national boon of a froo passage
to Australia for so many hundred young women, (for the recent cargo
from Dublin ,is merely a specimen of what is going on), to bo
monopolized by Ireland and Popery ? Is it because there are no
virtuous British Protestant females in great distress a.lso, and
willing to emigrate to that land of promise ? Is it because
thore are no "distressed needlewomen" in London, or in fifty other
cities and towns•of England and Scotland, to whom a free passage
to Australia would be an object in these tines of universal pressure?
Why, I would ask, should a paternal Government (to use an Irish
phrase) be after saying to these distressed British Protestant fem-
ales, "Stand bank; for those Irish Papists are bettor and holier
than you,"
8


It was the prospect of these Romanist doings and the
reasonable fear that they would obtain too much countenance in
certain quarters, that induced ne, at great personal inconvenience
and expense, to leave ny adopted country for a season, in the
hope of directing a copious strean of thoroughly Protestant
emigration to Australia, and thereby rescuing the principal
source and centre of moral influence for the southern hemisphere,
for all tine coning, from the grasp of the Papacy; and if the
genuine Protestants of this country, both ninisters and people,
would only open their eyes to the transcendant inportantcoof this
movement, and extend that measure of countenance and support to
the Port Phillij} and Cooksland Colonization Companies, which I an
sure they merit on the one hand, and would amply repay on the
other, we should be able, with the utmost facility, and without
costing the British public one solitary farthing eventually, to
establish a great moral and religious cordon sanitaire of thorough-
ly Portestant settlements along fifteen hundred miles of the coast
line of Australia. Besides, as the Australian Colonies axe now
promised the management of their own affairs, to an extent which
they have never experienced hitherto the existence of such a lino
of Protestant settlements as our two Companies could easily form,
would, in combination with the friends of civil and religious
liberty already resident in Australia,, create a public opinion in
the Colonics which would forthwith annihilate the present monstrous
system of a universal Church Establishment,- the main-stay of
Popery and Puseyisn and every other corrupt and apostate form of
Christianity,- and thereby enable pure and undofilod religion to
have its "free course and bo glorified,"
I was at no pains to conceal the object of ny mission to
Europe, before leaving the Colony, and as the benevolent lady,
to whom I have already alluded, happened to sail for England a few
weeks before me, a leading article, contrasting that lady and
myself, and the objects we had respectively in view, was published
on the occasion in a Roman Catholic Colonial Journal, under the
management of the priests. In that article, Mrs. Chisholm, the
lady I refer to, was extolled to the skies as an assemblage of all
the virtues personified a perfect angel of light; while I,
unfortunately, was characterised as the worst possible character —
a very friend of darkness! In particular, as I had thrown up
my Government salary, and renounced all further connexion with the
state Churches of rhe Colony, I was compared to those detestable
German heretics, Kongo Czerski, who had dared to question the
proceedings of that holy man, the Bishop of Treves, and to testify
against the worship of the Holy Coat which he had so happily sot
up in Germany; and I was told, in the vulgarcst style of Irish
vituperation, to go herd with these contemptible heretics, and
trouble the Colony with my hatred presence no more.
I deemed it expedient and necessary to notice this conmunica'
tion, and I accordingly addressed a letter on the subject to the
principal Journal of the Colony, in which I pointed out to the
Colonists, very calmly, and without the slightest approach to
vituperative language, the reasons why the Romish priesthood
preferred Mrs Chisholm, and her contemplated efforts in favour
of emigration, to me and mine, I showed, that Mrs. Chisholm was
a Renan Catholic of the very highest caste-a-fact which, till then,
was almost unknown in the Colony, although Mrs. Chisholm had been
prominently engaged in it, in connexion with works of benevolence,
of all kinds, for five or six years before - for concealment, and
the affectation of extraordinary liberality, is the uniform policy
of the Romanists in such cases - and that the Romish priests had
therefore perfect confidence in that lady, and could rest
p.ssured that, as far as she should be concerned in promoting
emigration from the mother country, the interests of Colonial
Popery would be perfectly safe. On the contrary, as they had the
best reasons for doubting whether these interests would be at all
safe in my hands, if I should have anything to do in the way
of promoting emigration, the malevolent and vulgar abuse with
9


which they had condescended to honour me, was easily accounted for,
and was quite a natter of course. At the sane tine, I hogged to
thank then for identifying no with Ronge and Caerski Schismatics
and heretics though they were; and as they evidently fraternised in
that natter with the Bishop of Treves, and approved of the new
species of idolatry which he had heen the means of introducing in
Germany in the worship of the Holy Goat, I recommended to then, as
a specific against all. the evil I was likely to do then in England,
the following Litany
LITANY OP DR. LANG AND THE HOLY COAT."
To Tbe said or sung in the Roman Catholic Church of St. Joseph, in
Sydney, after Mass, every Friday.
Dr. Dang is going to England]
Holy Coat] pray for us
He's worse.than Kongo and Caerski
Holy Coat] pray for us
Those heretical Silesian priests,
Holy Coat] pray for us
V/ho, nadly daring to think, for themselves,
Holy Goat] pray for us
And to examine the word of God
Holy Coatl pray for us
Have renounced the Pope and all his. works,
Holy Coat] pray for us
Including thee, most Holy Coat]
Holy Coat] pray for us
He will defeat our grand conspiracy,
Holy Coat] pray for us
In which Bishop Polling and Bishop Murphy,
Holy Coat] pray for us
With all the French priests in Tahiti,
Holy Goat] pray for us
Are engaged with night and main,
Holy Coat] pray for us
To Romanize the Southern Hemisphere
Holy Coat] pray for us.
This letter, and especially the 3eud*esprit, produced a
wonderful sensation in the Colony. It unmasked Mrs. Chisholm and
her Romanist designs in connexion with emigrant, which, till then,
had heen unknown and unsuspected in the Colony. It completely
silenced the Romish priests and their organ for the tine, and
exposed then to such universal ridicule throughout the Colony
that at a Romish procession in Sydney, on the following St, Patricks
day, the very boys in the streets wore running after the priests
calling out "Holy coat] pray for us]"
But Puseyism (with which, I think, our Australian Colonies
will be absolutely overrun at no distant period, unless a strong-
body of thoroughly Portestant Ministers and people "cone over and
help us," by 2fLanting themselves permanently in our ample territory)
is, in my opinion, every whit as bad as Popery, and perhaps the
worst of the two.
The circumstance of my being in the Legislative Council -
to protest, on every fit and proper occasion, against every
legislative enactment designed to promote the objects of either of
these two apostacies, and in particular to denounce the anti-
Scriptural, latitudinarian, and infidel church establishment system
of the Colony - was necessarily a great eye-sore to both Papists
§nd Pusoyites, as well as to their friends and advocates both
in the Council and out of it. It was the first case of the kind
that had occurred in the history of British colonization, although
the celebrated Dr. Witherspoon and Dr. Timothy Dwight had both
previously been members of legislatures in the United States of
America,- which served as a precedent for my friends and supporters.


But although, indistinct murmurs were occasionally heard on
the subject from the Puseyite party, not a word was said about
disqualifying me in future during the whole four sessions of '
Council that had bean held before I left the Colony. No sooner,
however, was I fairly out of sight on my way to England, than a
Bill was brought into the Council to disqualify all ministers of
religion in future from being members of the Colonial legislature;
And this Bill, which was expodally and notoriously designed for
me, was accordingly passed, for my own part, I felt so indifferent
on_ the subject, that if the Bill had heon brought forward manfully
While I was present in the Council I should have votod for it
myself, and the tidings of its having, passed consequently gave me
no uneasiness when I first heard of the circumstance about siac
or eight months sinco. But (singular enough) Her Majesty has
actually disallowed this Bill, and has, thereby, loft the door
of admission into the Council open for mo yet. Whether Her Majesty
thought that honest men were scarce in the Colonies, and especially
in Colonial Parliaments, and that she could not spare me in that
capacity in her Provincial Parliament of New South Wales, I shall
not pretend to conjecture; but the fact is certain, that she has
interposed her Royal veto to prevent my exclusion, and it is not
improbable, that, in the event of my being spared to return to the
Colony, the moan and unworthy attempt to exclude me in future
may lead to my being roturned again. I confess that in such
circumstances I should not be disposed to refuse; for in addition
to the great questions of education and the separation of all
Colonial Churches from the State, (in both of which there is much
to be achieved for the cause of civil and religious liberty by men
of nerve and principle in our Colonial Legislatures) there is a
question of the deepest interest to the emigrants whom I have been
the means of sending or may yet bo instrumental in sending out to
Cooksland; which ought very soon to he brought before the Colonial
Legislature, although I am quite aware that it will he exceedingly
unpalatable,- I mean the entire separation of that province from
Now South Wales, and its erection into a separate and independent
Colony. And as I was the means of obtaining the concession of this
groat boon for the province of Port Phillip, notwithstanding the
opposition of a large majority of the Colonial Legislature, I
confess I should bo ambitious enough to desire to render the same
service to my fellow-colonists in Cooksland,
I am trespassing, however, too much on your forbearance, and
perhaps diverging from my text. I trust, then, that in the specimens
of Romanist effort and Romanist intolerance which I have laid before
your intelligent readers in connexion with emigration to Australia,
they will recognise the urgent necessity of combined, vigorous and
oncrgtic action, on the part of Protestant Christians generally on
behalf of our common Pcrtostantism in the Groat South Land.- I am,
Sir, your most obedient servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG,
46, Moor-gate Street, London, Nov. 11, 1848.
x, ' ‘
A few years ago the Bishop of Treves, in Germany when over-
hauling the "old clothes* department of his cathedral, found or
pretended to find a coat, which he impudently and shamelessly
affirmed to be the identical coat, without seam, which the
Redeemer wore when on earth; and for months together, he and his
priests, like a band of jugglers at a fair, exhibited the precious
relic to the gaze of millions of German, Swiss, and Flemish
Catholics, who flocked to see it for hundreds of miles around,
and nay of whom were actually besotted enough to kneel down and
worship the coat, saying, "Holy coatj pray for us *" It was this
monstrous proceeding that led to secession of Rongo and Czerski,
and their followers from the Romish Church.


x,x, Two Colonial Romish Bishops, who had then just left the
Colony for Europe, Dr, Folding Is an Archbishop.
x There Is a great display of fraternisation, between the
} Romish priesthood in Few South Wales, and the French bishops and
x priests, who, I am sorry to say, are now pretty numerous In the
South Sea Islands,


No• 38 .
May 30th, 1849.
To the Editor of The British Banner.
AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION.
WHAT HAVE THE ARISTOCRACY DONE FOR IT?
Sir, - The three great aristocratic and conservedrums of this
Metropolis - I mean the Times, the Chronicle, & the Herald, have for
eighteen months past been, every other morning, beating what the
French call the rappel, on the subject of emigration - at one time
advocating its urgent necessity, and at another calling loudly on the
higher and influential classes to take up the matter in real earnest.
But to what purpose it may be asked? And how have the upper classes,
or aristocracy of the country, been responding to this call? About
eighteen months since, the Hon. Frances Scott, M.P., Parliamentary
Agent for New South Wales, was Instrumental In forming a Society,
under the designation of the Colonisation Society, for the promotion
of emigration to the British Colonies generally, but especially to
Australia.
I was present (like the Privy Council on certain other
interesting occasions of the kind) at the birth of this high-bom
and hopeful child, and you cannot imagine how many Honourables and
Right Honourables were assisting on the occasion; there was the
Earl of H. and my Lord A. Sir Timothy C. and the Honourable Mr, 8.,
with Members of Parliament like the leaves in Vallombrosa. The
three drums of course, took up the subject immediately, and beat a
perfect generals of congratulation about it, Mr. Scott even made a
tour of the provinces, accompanied by various noblemen and gentlemen
of the highest standing In metropolitan Society, to proclaim the fact
wherever the Chartists would allow them a hearing; and if I am not
greatly mistaken, the Infant Society was actually confirmed by a
Bishop. in short on perceiving as I did, that there was no
particular necessity or desire for my plebeian services In such
distinguished company, I edged out as quietly as possible, after
wishing health and happiness to the child,
I was inquisitive enough, however, a few weeks ago (to
continue the metaphor) to inquire for the nurse's report; and on
receiving and examining a copy of It duly attested, I was more than
astonished to find that the very item of Information of which I was
In quest. Viz,, the amount of the Society's revenue was nowhere to
be found In that document I This reminds me of an anecdote which,
I well recollect was told me when a little boy at school learning
the humble art of spelling, by my deceased mother. She had been
at school herself, when a child in a country village in the west of
Scotland, and as the schoolmaster was by no means an advanced scholar
himself, whenever any of the children came to a hard word in one or
other of the historical books of the Old Testament (which was the
regular school-book), and began to spell it out, the worthy pedagogue
would Interrupt him by saying, with an air of gravity and authority,
"Oh, that is the name of a great city; we will pass it over."
Whether the Committee of the Colonization Society has considered the
item of revenue as the name of a great city, I do not know; but
certain it is, they had passed It over in their Report, I
ascertained, incidentally, however, that It was somewhere about
£l,OOO.
And this, is, then, all that the aristocracy of this country,
with the three great literary drums of the metropolis to proclaim to
the wondering world, and to magnify a thousand fold whatever they do
in any way; this, I say, is all that the aristocracy or influential
classes of this country can do for the promotion of emigration to
Australia I At the usual cost of emigration, a thousand a-year will
enable them to send out not more than from fifty to seventy adults I


Now, plebeian as I am, and without the assistance of the metropolitan
brass band at all, I sent out, myself, during the past year, to a
single locality In Australia, and entirely on ray own risk and
responsibility, a much larger number of persons than this altogether.
In short, the efforts of the aristocracy or influential classes} of
this country, - including the aristocracy of rank, the aristocracy of
wealth, the aristocracy of religion, - for the promotion of emigration
to Australia, are beneath contempt; and It may well be added, in
reference to this particular question of national, of transcendent
importance, that no man careth for his brother.
When the Colonization Society found that it could not effect
so exceedingly little In the way of direct emigration, it made a
merit of originating and promoting what Is called assisted emigration;
the nature and rationale of which are as follows When a
capitalist purchases, say 5,000 or 10,000 acres of land In Australia,
(which at a minimum price will cost him so many pounds sterling,) he
will not only receive the land in fee simple, but he will also be
allowed to nominate for a free passage out, one person of the class
of farm servants or mechanics, for every £2O he pays for the land.
He will, thus, it may be, be able to send out a large number of his
redundant tenantry passage free. But if a farm-servant or mechanic
who has saved perhaps from twenty to fifty pounds, by sheer Industry
and frugality, desires to emigrate with his family, he must pay the
whole cost of that money to the Emigration Commissioners, towards
defraying the cost of his passage out, without receiving any
equivalent in land; and this, ls what is called
assisted' emigration] In short. It Is svifflclently obvious, that in
this matter'at least, there is one law for the rich and another for
the poor. How, I maintain that, so long as waste land Is sold at a
minimum price of a pound an acre, every person of the middle and
humbler classes of society in this country, who can either pay for
his own passage out, or have It paid for him in any way, is entitled
to a remission of the purchase-money of as much of that land as will
be equivalent to the cost of his passage, calculated at the average
steerage rate. This is in perfect accordance with the universal
opinion and desire of the Colonists of Australia. This is what I
have been aiming at, myself, all along, and so far as I have gone,
with a fair measure of success, notwithstanding the contemptible
hostility of interested. Ignorant, and evil-disposed persons in this
country; and all I have experienced as yet only Induces and encourages
me to persevere.
It was my intention to have developed at length the particular
course which, under existing circumstances, it will be expedient and
necessary to pursue in future for the accomplishment of the great
object of my present mission to Europe. There will be a slight
deviation from the plan originally proposed, and a slight change in
the contemplated machinery; but the general object, as well as the
course of procedure necessary for securing its attainment, will
remain precisely the same, I must defer that part of my
communication, however, for a future letter.
I am. Sir, your most obedient Servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
46, Moorgate-Street, London.
May 21, 1849.


IT o *4O«
To the Editor of The British Banner.
THE VOYAGE OP THE FORTITUDE.
Dear Sir,- I read with pleasure the Letter of Mr. Roper, in the
Banner of the 25th. As a supplement to that I send a part of a
letter I have received this week from my son, who went out in the
fortitude with Mr. Roper*
Bourn. July 27th, 1849.
" My Dear Father, - I write i,o you from Sydney, this 2oth of
March, 1849. I am here to make a few purchases, and to make
arrangements for myself and wife to he supplied with what we want
in our separate businesses. But I will give you a brief account
of our voyage, landing, and prospects. After our parting at
Gravesend we were soon out at sea, and during the first week or
ten days, our feelings were by no means of the most enviable^,.kind.
Sea sickness was all but universal among the passengers, and many,
for the first time, began to think seriously of emigration. / The
novelty and romance gave place to stem reality, and many wh-b had
left their homes with too sanguine expectations, soon became
disgusted, and, like the emigrants of old, sighed for what t&ey
had left behind in Egypt. Nor did Moses in the present day'
escape his share of opprobrium, any more than his worthy
predecessor in the days of yore. The heart of man is still the 1 ' . ■
same now as then, ever impatient under trials* and disposed to .
blame the Instrument, however pure his motives may be, or great:\
the advantages ultimately to be derived. But to proceed. The
principal feature of our voyage throughout was its exceeding
monotony. We appeared to be always in the centre of a circle,
without an object on which to look, saving the waters beneath and
the sky above us. Sometimes it is true,-this mphotohy was
relieved for a moment by a sail- in the distance, in appearance
Jike a speck on the horizon, or by a magnificent sunset, or a few
birds skimming the surface of the water. With trivial exceptions
like these, we had nothing new in the world without to awaken our
Interest, or to create in our minds any'new emotions. Yet I do
not wish you to suppose that melancholy throws her sombre garb over
every heart, and shuts out every source of cheerfulness from the
'.society of man, when he leaves his native element to cross that
trackless deep. By no means. If a person is unhappy whilst on
a voyage like that we have recently terminated, the blame is In
almost every case to be attributed to himself. For my part I was
generally happy, and should feel it but a little matter were I
■under the necessity of undergoing the whole over again. Yet,
I must acknowledge that the latter part of the voyage was rather
trying, and that I, in common with many others, felt something of
that depression which is the result of disappointed expectation.
From the time we arrived off the Australian coast, we were subject
to variable and contrary winds; and, when our spirits were revived
for a short time by a fair breeze, it seemed only to Increase
disappointment, by raising expectations which were as suddenly
destroyed by the wind veering round into the opposite direction,
and blowing, to use a sea phrase, right in our teeth. When in the
middle of Bass*s Straits, the wind became foul and we were detained
six days unable to gain a mile, and, after we had passed Sydney, we
met with a similar detention, besides other disappointments of a
more trivial kind, so that some who had been the most sanguine lost
almost all hope of getting there at all. As a body we suffered
severely from sickness, and especially from fever, though, with
the exception of a fortnight r s illness of my dear wife, from
another cause, I am thankful to say that we were mercifully
preserved from it all. We had several deaths, some of which
were peculiarly affecting. I refer to Mrs. Slaughters. Her
husband, a very worthy man, a young family, and her aged mother.


are left to mourn her loss; and th© deaths of Mr and Mrs Scraw,
with the two children, were very affecting. Their eldest living
child is an interesting little creature, and we think of adopting
the dear little orphan as our own. The young men suffered very
severely, the most robust being the most liable to be attacked.
But although many suffered much, and were very dangerously 111,
all were mercifully restored,, Th© cause of our having so much
sickness and fever on our voyage, was, in my opinion, the
following:- First, we had fever on board before we left
Gravesend. A young girl either came on board with fever upon her,
or was attacked whilst we lay there. I procured camphor and
chloride of lime to use on board prior to selling, seeing the for©
part of the ship was not properly ventilated; thirdly, th© forepart
of the vessel was too crowded. In one berth or cabin, about 18 feet
square, there were not less than 18 persons; it is true some of
them were small, but there was eighteen. In this berth originated
two of the worst cases of typhus, and who can wonder at it. Then
the next berth to this was poor Scraws ; the wife died from
confinement, and the father from fever of a most malignant nature.
Then the forepart of the ship was not kept sufficiently clean.
I am sorry to say but few attended to this matter so strictly as
they should have done. I hope others may take warning from us.
Should you know any coming out as emigrants, tell them to do these
two things: first to keep his person, his berth, and the space in
front, as clean as washing, scrubbing, and brushing can make them;
and secondly, to live on simple food. Those who eat the most
■unsparingly, and partook of the greatest quantities of salt meat,
were with but one or two exceptions, the persons who suffered most
from fever. But I must proceed to our voyage. After many delays
we at length anchored in Morton-Bay, and fondly thought our trials
were now past; judge then, of our disappointment when after
waiting on board in silence from Sunday, until the following
Thursday, we were ordered to perform quarantine on Moreton Island,
This was owing to the death of a fine young girl shortly before we
entered the bay; when, receiving this order, we were of course
obliged to weigh anchor and proceed thither. A few tents had been
provided, but not more than sufficient for a quarter of our number;
consequently those who landed first took possession of them, and the
others were left to shift for themselves. I fancy I see you reading
this, and you say to my dear cousin, "I wonder how my dear son and
daughter went on." Well I will tell you. When we arrived, all
the tents were occupied, so I took my spade, hatchet, and saw, then
I cut down from fifteen to twenty young trees averaging from three
to four inches in diameter; these I placed together as a
frame-work of my hut, and with leafy boughs and fern, I finished it,
I do not say I made my wigwam waterproof. But I did my best, and
felt a little self complacency when I found that I had put up a
better place than most of my neighbours. Dont think, my dear
father, we were unhappy or dissatisfied; far from it, we were as
happy as it was possible to be; we cooked at a bush fire, had a
box for a table, and another for a seat, and thus wo passed our
time of quarantine. Mary did feel cast down; but my dear Louisa
set too, and washed all up we had used on board. The wise man says
a good wife is from the Lord. I feel certain the Lord has given me
mine, and thankful I am for so good a gift. But I must proceed.
We were conveyed up the river from the vessel by a schooner, at
three times, we went with the second party, and were much pleased
with the river scenery. Some spots resemble the plantations near
gentlemen’s residences, so that we could scarcely realise the idea
that they were native wilds. Thus, on February 12, we completed
our long voyage, not without feelings of sincere gratitude to our
heavenly Father for his protecting care. Here we raise our
Ebenezer. Hitherto hath the Lord helped us. upon reaching
Brisbane we found a large stony building formerly used as barracks
was appropriated to our use. But we soon got other lodging at a
moderate rent. Here rent is dear. But guess of our surprise and
pleasure when I tell you we met with two persons who had lived at


" Bourn. My heart rejoiced to meet them there. We found upon
landing that servants and shepherds were in the greatest demand.
Myself and wife were offered £4O with ration for us both, per
annum. But we declined, and after serious deliberation and :
prayer for Divine guidance, as I could not obtain employment as
a journeyman at my own trade, the only master-man in the place
was a man of Intemperate habits, and of course has not much
business. I have been advised by some respectable people to
begin for myself, I may just say there were no documents to
put us In possession of the land on our arrival. In consequence,
many of the emigrants are put about. We have memorialised Sir
George Pltzroy, the Governor, and are waiting the result. The
climate suits me admirably well; my health is good; I never
felt better in my life than now, "Bless the Lord, 0 my soul,"
I have nearly made arrangements at Sydney. I shall return
quickly, Now my dear father I must commend you to God; may He
be your support in your declining years. But I am not without
hope of seeing you in Australia; the Lord has led us in the
right path. "He has done great things for us. Bless His
Holy name!" Remember us to all friends. I hope they remember
us at the throne of grace. The Lord be with you through life,
and be your portion for ever, is the prayer of your
affectionate son,"
"W.T. Deacon."


N 0.41.
September 12th, 1849.
To the Editor of the British Banner.
THE BRITISH COLONIES.
AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION
What remains to be done for It, both at home and abroad.
Sir,- Although I cannot say that I have accomplished all I either
wished or expected, In reference to the object of my voyage to
England, when I landed In this country, from Australia, In the month
of December, 1846, I have no reason to say. In reviewing my own
humble efforts during the period that has since elapsed, that I have
laboured in vain, or spent my strength for naught. On the contrary,
I am satisfied that a foundation broad and deep, has now been laid.
In the Intelligence and Christianity of England, on which a goodly
superstructure of Christian society will yet be reared In Australia,
when I am dead and gone; for I have reason to believe that many
thousand families and individuals of Christian principles and
industrious habits, who would never otherwise have thought of seeking
a home and a country beyond seas, will, ere long pitch their tent in
that far land, and thereby bring to pass that which is written,
that ln^ the place where it hath been said. Ye are not my people.
It shall be said, Ye are the sons of the living God. No higher
destiny can be assigned to any people than that which, In the record
of ancient prophecy, was assigned of old to the dispersed of Israel,
The remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a dew
from the Lord, and as showers upon the grass, that is, exerting a
fertilizing and fructifying influence upon society wherever they
should go. And such a destiny is pre-eminently that of communities
of Christian people going forth from this country to Australia.
Ye are the salt of the earth, said the Redeemer to his disciples;
and why should this salt be kept up in such vast accumulations In
this country? Why should it not, like the disciples, be spread
abroad over the face of the earth, to work out the object of its
very existence?
It was thought by many of my fellow-Colonlsts In Australia,
as well as by myself on my return to England, that a Company might
be formed in this country for the promotion of emigration to
Australia, and that English capital might be embarked in the object
on the security of our waste lands. But the prevalence of
Hudsonlsm in the great Railway world had unfortunately completely
destroyed, for the time at least, all public confidence in such
speculations both at home and abroad, and the Interests of
Australian Colonization had, consequently, had to suffer, like many
others of perhaps greater importance, from the malversations and
delinquencies of the Swindler-General of England,
Apropos - I thought, from the very first time I heard of it,
on my arrival in England, that the pecuniary testimonial (to the
extent, I believe, of about £18,000) which was offered a few years
ago by the Railway idolaters of this country to their worthless god
Dagon, was one of the basest and most degrading instances of
Mammon-worship I had ever heard of either in ancient or modern
times. I only hope the worshippers In the case I allude to, will,
like their prototypes, the ancient priests of Dagon, reverence the
threshold of the temple on which their idol has so ignominiously
fallen (I Samuel v,2-5). By the way, the stonemasons of Ashdod
must have had a hard job of it to join the pieces of their broken
god and set him up again upon his pedestal. But their task was
child's play to that which has devolved upon the modem idolaters,
Let them join the pieces of their broken idol and set it upon its


pedestal again *- If they can. The stump of the modem Dagon is
In the House of Commons - a very 'fitly place, doubtless, for the
representative of so numerous a denomination as the
Mammon-worshippers of England, - but where is the head that
devised the mischief, and the hands that pocketed the money?
They are on the threshold - low enough, in all reason.
But even If It had been practicable to have formed a Company
for Australian Colonization in this country at the period I have
referred to, I question whether it would have been advisable.
When there was at one time a tolerably fair prospect of effecting
the object, I found, to my surprise and disappointment, that the
managing body of any such Company, if established at all in this
country, must be in London, and that no self-acting and
self-determining power would be conceded to the Colonists, The
decrees of the London Board, however unsuitable to the state of
things in the Colony, however absurd, must, in such a case, must
have gone forth, like the laws of the Medes and Persians, and have
been unalterable by any Colonial authority. Now, this is a state
of things to which, on behalf of my fellow-Colonists, for whom I was
acting in the matter, I could never have submitted. For
Independently of its Injustice to the Colonists, it has been a
fruitful source of disappointment, disaster, and ruin, in every
instance in which it has been tried. In short, it is merely the
old Downing Street Government policy for the Colonies carried out
in the operations of the city - having everything done for us
unfortunate Colonists by a Board or Bureau in London, that treat us
as mere children in a nursery, who are altogether Incapable of
either thinking or acting for themselves.
The results of the policy in question are most instructive.
In the year 1825, for example, the Australian Agricultural Company
was established In London by Act of Parliament, with a capital of a
million sterling. This monster Company received a million acres of
the best land it could select in our territory as a free grant from
the Crown; and, when it was ascertained by Sir Edward Parry that a
portion of the original selection had not been made very judiciously,
it was allowed to exchange 600,000 acres for an equal extent in
another locality. It had a monopoly for thirty years of the coal j
mines of the Colony, and it obtained hundreds of convict labourers :
of all descriptions for their mere food and clothing. The success;
of such a company must, of course, have been remarkable, and so it
has been in reality; for, after twenty-four years, and an
expenditure of nearly half a million, there are no dividends for
the unfortunate shareholders, the management, or rather
mismanagement, absorbing the whole proceeds! Now if this Company
had all along had a hoard of intelligent and experienced Colonists
to manage its affairs on the spot, instead of an Australian bureau
in King’s Arms-yard, London, the result would have been very
different.
The Van Diemen's Land Agricultural Company has had a
similarly "sad and eventful history"; and the course of the
New Zealand Company, has been disastrous in the extreme to many of
the colonists, whatever it may have been to the shareholders. , In
short, the only safe course fbr any Association of the kind, is, to
have men who have an interest in its proper management on the spot,
I have already had occasion to observe, in a former Letter,
that the puritans of the seventeenth century, who colonized New
England with such remarkable success, were precisely of my opinion
in this matter. The place of meeting of their Board of Management
had not been fixed in the Royal Charter they had obtained from the
King, defining their powers; and certain of their number, who
contemplated emigrating themselves, managed, notwithstanding
considerable opposition, to carry a resolution they had proposed at
the Board, that Its future meetings should be held in Boston,


In America. And the aelf-determining and self-acting power which
this arrangement gave them, was one of the principal elements of
their subsequent success,
Now, the arrangement I have succeeded in making, in
accordance with the practice of the ancient Puritanism Is, that a
Company, or probably two Companies, for the promotion of Australian
colonization, shall he organized In Australia, and incorporated by
an Act of the Colonial Legislature, and that agencies shall be
established in London and Glasgow respectively, under the
superintendence and control of the directors in the Colony.
The business of these agencies will be of the simplest character,
consisting merely in the collection of certain funds, and the
selection of suitable emigrants; and auditors, of the highest
standing in their respective spheres, will examine and audit the
accounts periodically. It is in the Colony, however, where the
transactions must necessarily be of a much more complicated
character, that the risk of management lies, and it is there,
therefore, that the check should be provided. That check will be
provided accordingly in the Board of Management, and as the
shareholders, of whom a large proportion will be the emigrants
themselves, will be on the spot, it will be their own fault, if
they allow of mismanagement or malversation. There will, In all
likelihood, be a separate and distinct Company for Port Phillip,
and another for Cooksland or the Clarence River and Moreton Bay
District of New South Wales. But the same agencies at home will
serve equally for both, especially In the first Instance.
your readers are aware, that I have been endeavouring, during
my stay in this country, to get the money paid by each emigrant for
his passage out recognised by Government as a payment for land In
Australia. It Is the Interest and desire of the Colonists,
universally, that such an arrangement should be made, and Select
Committees of the Legislative Council of New South Wales, of which
I was myself a member at the time, have strongly recommended It to
the Imperial Government. it is true, I have succeeded In effecting
the object In a considerable number of individual instances; but
Increased obstacles have of late been thrown in the way, and the
Downing-street bureau plead as their excuse an Act of Parliament,
which, however, admits, undoubtedly, of a much more liberal
construction than they have been accustomed to give it. But I have
recently received an intimation, from a quarter upon which I can rely,
that this Act is to be modified considerably during the next session
of Parliament, sc far as to render the arrangement referred to of
general application. This will he a great boon and encouragement
to Australian emigration, and will greatly facilitate the working of
Land and Emigration Companies for the colonization of Australia.
At the same time it is undeniable that for these three years
British colonists, from all parts of our Colonial empire, have been
looking anxiously for fruit, for the healing of the Colonies, from
this barren Whig-tree ; but, unfortunately, they have hitherto
found none, Shall we give it another year’s trial - yes or no?
For my own part, it is perfectly amazing to me, that the
authorities of this country should he so utterly blind as they are
to their true position, under the present system of colonial misrule.
If they wish the Australian Colonies to be bound to the mother
country by the tie of a common Interest and mutual affection, why
are w© not allowed to offer an opinion as to what constitutes our
real Interest? If, cn the contrary, they wish them to he bound to
the mother country by the tie of force, like Poland to Russia, and
Hungary to Austria, and Rome to the Pope, I would beg to remind them
that, in the single colony of New South Wales, there is land, and
sheep, and cattle enough to enable any bold enterprising individual
who, in these revolutionary times, might be tempted to seize the


reins of government and raise the standard of freedom and
independence, - to buy off 20,000 of Her Majesty's best troops In
a few weeks, giving each soldier 100 acres of land and twenty
head of cattle, or 100 sheep, merely to throw away hia musket and
learn the art of war no morej And, with such a temptation
before them, will British colonists allow themselves, in matters
in which their own best Interests are deeply involved, to be
treated as children much longer? The three years of bitter
disappointment with which the Whig Government have treated the
Colonies have, in my humble opinion, done much to accelerate a
consummation which is only retarded by the forbearance of the
colonists. Sooner or latei, some such personage as the
President of the united States of Australia will start into
sudden existence and surprise the world with his goodly port and
demeanour. He will, require no soldiers to enable him to keep
his seat, like Louis Napoleon; he will have no foul blot of
slavery on his national escutcheon, like Zacary Taylor.
I am. Sir, your most obedient servant,
JOHN DONMORE LANG.
Moorgate Street;
London,
September loth, 1849.
P.S. As it Is my Intention to proceed to Port Phillip and
New South Wales, per the ship Clifton, which will sail about the
middle of October next, I should be happy to get a few additional
young men, of the requisite character, standing, and general
attainments, to accompany me out, as candidates for the ministry
in Australia. They could form a class on board ship, and I
should be happy to give them all the assistance I could In their
studies on the way. Surely there are many evangelical ministers
throughout the country who have such young men in their respective
congregations, and surely there are Christian people who would
assist these young men in meeting the comparatively small expense
of their passage out. I should willingly undertake all the
remaining responsibility. lam the more anxious on the subject,
in^ consequence of the very superior accommodations of the ship
Clifton, and the facilities she would offer for anything of the
kind. She is, Indeed, a noble vessel. Who, then, will go up
with us to Ramoth-Gilead to battle? J.D.L.


Sir, - I am happy to Inform your numerous readers, both In town
and country, that I am likely, as the result of the Invitation to
young men, contained in my recent letters in the Banner, to carry
out with me, per the ship Clifton, to Australia, as candidates for
the Christian ministry in that country, "a band of men whose hearts
the Lord hath touched." I should like to have not fewer than
twenty such candidates in all, but I should be happy to take as
many as thirty if they could be got; for the machinery we shall
require to set up in Australia for preparing these candidates for
their future work will be equally available*for a larger number as
for a smaller, while the moral impression that would be produced
upon the colony by a larger Importation would be correspondingly
greater. I trust, therefore, that ministers throughout the
country who have had young men under their training or Inspection
in their respective congregations, whom they could conscientiously
recommend for such an enterprise, and for whom, with a little
exertion (if they were not possessed of the requisite means
themselves), they could raise the comparatively small amount that
would be necessary to meet the cost of their passage, - viz, £2O
each. - will not hesitate to do so, as, in so doing, they will be
rendering an important service to the cause of God in Australia.
There are many promising young men in this country, struggling with
hopeless poverty, and looking in vain for admission into the
academies and colleges of their native land, in order to receive
such training as would fit them for the proper exercise of the
Christian ministry, who might thus be enabled, at a mere trifle of
expense, to acquire the requisite Intellectual and literary
qualifications for that Important office beyond seas, and to go
forth thereafter with the everlasting Gospel in their hands, over
the length and breadth of Australia. The cost of the passage out
of an ordained Minister and his family is a serious matter, upon
whomsoever the burden may fall; but a number of young men, going
out in a more economical way, and occupying what would be
equivalent to the midshipman’s berth on board a ship of war, might
be sent forth into the Christian field at one sixth part of
that expense.
In order to clear up this matter to all concerned, and
especially to show that there is no intention, on my part, to thrust
into the Christian ministry raw uneducated lads from the shop or
warehouse, I shall devote the sequel of this letter to a few
remarks on the following points, on which I have been given to
understand there is a desire in certain quarters for additional
Information, viz., - first, the requisites for the voyage;
second, studies on board; third, support during the period of
study in Australia; fourth, educational establishment there;
fifth, future field- of labour for the candidates; and sixth, the
nature of the churches they would be expected for form,
I. In regard, therefore, to the requisites for the voyage, every
candidate will require to provide his own bedding, knife and fork,
cup and saucer, plate, wash-hand basin and towels. What is
commonly called outfit merely signifies as much clothing of all
kinds, including what one already has, as would serve for a
twelvemonth. it should Include, however, some light clothing for
the warmer latitudes, and a larger supply of linen than is
requisite on shore, as washing can very seldom be had, for young
men especially, on board ship; check shirts are frequently used
on ship-board by those ";ho never use them on shore . Each candidate
THE BRITISH COLONIES.
CHRISTIAN COLONIZATION.


should also be provided with a Latin Grammar and Dictionary, with
Beza's Latin Testament, also a Greek Grammar and Dictionary, and a
Greek Testament, "Home's Introduction to the yew Testament",
would be a valuable work for those who could procure It; and if
each candidate were to bring with him such theological works he has
or might be enabled to procure on the recommendation of his pastor,
there would be a considerable variety In the whole number, which
would be advantageous to all,
11. In regard to studies on board ship - as there will, in all
likelihood, be several young men on board. Including one of my own
sons, who have gone through an academical course at one or other of
the Scotch Universities, classes for Latin and Greek will be formed,
with thdlr assistance, as soon as the party shall have recovered
sufficiently from the usual attack of sea-sickness (which very
seldom lasts more than a few days), to set to work in real earnest.
There is no employment on ship-board so appropriate, or so
absorbing, as that of learning a foreign language. It effectually
takes off the attention from the otherwise tiring monotony of the
blue sea and the blue sky, I should expect a young man of
moderate abilities and ordinary diligence, to be able, under such
tuition, to read the four Gospels in Latin and Greek, at the close
of a voyage to Australia, and this would be a very important item
in the necessary preparation for the Christian ministry in that
country. On my first voyage to Australia, I found several English
families on board ship, who had resided for many years previous In
Germany, and who, consequently spoke German as fluently as English.
At that time German was little studied in Scotland, and I was
quite unacquainted with it till then. But this circumstance
Induced me to study It, and I accordingly learned to read Luther's
Bible, which I have since found a valuable acquisition, with great
ease before crossing the line. And on my last voyage home but
one (in 1839), I read through the whole Hew Testament In the
original Greek, as well as in the Latin, French, German, and
English versions during the passage; comparing these versions
with the original and also with each other. In short, a sea
voyage affords an excellent opportunity for the acquisition of
languages, and I shall be greatly mistaken If young men of piety
and zeal, who can recognize the Importance of such acquirements to
their future usefulness in the Church of Christ, will not pick up
quite as much in the course of a passage to Australia, as they
would have been likely to do in double the time at an academy or
college at home, I propose to deliver a series of exegetlcal
lectures myself during the voyage, to be accompanied with
examinations and exercises in composition, on the Gospel according
to Itotthew, on the typical persons of the Old Testament, on the
unfulfilled prophecies of the Scriptures, and on certain of
the Psalms.
111. In regard to the means of support during the period of
preparation in Australia, the Christian public there will most
willingly provide all that will be necessary for that purpose, and
I shall be personally responsible for them in the meantime. In the
year 1841, when there seemed to be a fair prospect of training up
a native ministry In that country, I succeeded In raising £4OO
a-year for professors' salaries for four years, in the course of a
six weeks' tour in Port Phillip and Van Diemen's Land, and I have
every reason to believe that I shall be equally successful In making
a similar appeal again. To such young men as would object to
receive such support from the Christian public as a gift or
contribution, it will be advanced as a loan, either with or
without Interest, on the principle of the education societies
in America.
IV. In regard to the nature and character of the Education
Establishment, available in Australia for the training up of
candidates for the ministry, I am happy to state that we have already
the nucleus of an Academical Institution in Sydney, in connexion with


the church of which I am the pastor, with buildings sufficient for
the accommodation of a considerable number of candidates for the
ministry, and a commodious hall or lecture-room. There are no
such appliances as yet at Port Phillip* and it would also be less
easy at present to secure the services of suitable men in that
district. The institution I refer to is the Australian College,
of which i was chosen Principal on its first establishment, in
the year 1831. Like many other colonial Institutions of a
similar kind, that Institution has been rather unfortunate In its
past history, and has been entirely in abeyance for the last seven
years, in consequence of a most Iniquitous proceeding, in the shape
of a chancery suit, which was instituted against it, or rather
against myself Individually, by the Local Government, in
retaliation, I believe, for the liberties J had taken with the
Colonial Executive in my writings, in defence of the cause of public
morals, in the Local Press, This vexatious suit lasted upwards of
four years, and subjected me, for I had to bear the whole burden
singlehanded - to very serious expense 35 ; but I am happy to add,
I succeeded, at last in foiling the Colonial Government In their
own Court; and one of my objects. In coming to England on my
present voyage, was to insure the revival of an Institution In which
I had sunk a Colonial fortune of my own, and which unrighteous and
ungodly men had thus been labouring, but had proved unable, to crush.
In short, under the wretched system of government to which Great
Britain has hitherto subjected her noblest Colonies - thereby
alienating the affections of their people, and transforming every
honest man among them into a thorough-paced republican, - I have
been made to feel, in right earnest, that those Heads of Departments,
Spiballet the Horonlte, Tobiah the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian,
who are always, of course.' rabid Churchmen, are still, as of old.
grieved exceedingly when there comes a man to seek the welfare of
the children of Israeli Ihe wall has still to be built in
troublous times; and each builder, as he repairs the breaches
over against his own house, has to hold his trowel in the one hand
and his spear in the other.
Our Collegiate Establishment, will, in all likelihood, be
as follows
AUSTRALIAN COLLEGE, SYENEY.
Principal, and Professor of Exegetical Theology and
Church History, Rev. J.D, Lang, D.D.
Professor of Didactic and Pastoral Theology,
Rev. Barzillai Quaife.
Professor of Ancient Languages, Metaphysics, and
Moral Philosophy, Rev. T.E, Richardson, A.B.
Mr, Quaife, who now officiates for me in Sydney, (along with
another minister, the Rev. W, Ritchie) was educated at one of the
Independent Colleges of this metropolis. He is an able and
effective writer, (having published several minor pieces,) and a
sound and practical divine.
Mr. Richardson is a superior scholar, and would be a valuable
acquisition to our Institution in the capacity proposed; but, as he
is at present settled as a minister of the Gospel, in the town of
Portland, an important locality, in the south-western extremity of
the province of Port Phillip, about 800 miles from Sydney, it is
questionable whether his brethren may deem it expedient that he
should remove to that city to be employed in training up a
Colonial ministry. If this removal should be deemed Inexpedient,
one or two promising young men, who have completed an academical
course at one of the Scotch Universities will be engaged as tutors
for those branches which he could otherwise have taught.


It will thus be evident to your Intelligent readers, that we
shall have no contemptible machinery for the training up of a
Colonial ministry in Australia. I expect, indeed, that as soon as
that machinery is in full operation, we shall have a constant
accession of students from all parts of the Colony, In such
circumstances, an infusion of British blood from the Churches of
the mother country would be desirable in many respects for the
Colonial youth, who may give themselves to the work of the
ministry in their native land.
V. in regard to the field of future labour, and the prospect
of support for the Christian ministry in Australia, that field is
unquestionably ample, - far beyond our utmost ability to occupy, -
and it is also. In my humble opinion, peculiarly promising.
Mr. Richardson, whom I have Just mentioned. Is settled at the
south-western extremity of that field, and the Rev. Charles Stewart,
who accompanied the emigrants per ship Fortitude, is now settled In
the town of Brisbane, towards Its north-eastern extremity; the
distance between the two localities being not less than eleven
degrees of latitude, and as many of longitude, and the coast-line
between them, along which steam-boats are now plying regularly the
whole distance, being not less than 1,300 miles. Within a
semicircle of 100 miles around Sydney, there are numerous towns
and villages rising up In all directions, in which the candidates
will exercise their gifts occasionally In the progress of their
studies, till they are deemed qualified to he sent forth as
ordained ministers, to be settled wherever Divine Providence may
open the way for them. And as the Colonists generally are both
able and willing to support the ordinances of religion, and
exceedingly anxious, in many Instances, for the settlement of
evangelical ministers in their respective localities, I would say,
without hesitation, to such ministers, that their bread will be
given them in Australia, and their water be sure. And if any,
who would otherwise be willing, should still hesitate, in the fear
of not obtaining adequate subsistence, I would add, in the words of
the Divine Redeemer, "Ob, thou of little faith, wherefore dost
thou doubt? 1 '
VI. In regard to the nature of the churches which the
candidates, who would go forth to Australia, per the ship Clifton,
would he expected to form, on their entrance into the Christian
ministry in that country, I would only say, by way of Illustration,
that while Mr. Richardson and myself are Presbyterians, my friend
and brother, Mr. Qualfe, of Sydney, is a Congregationalist, and
Mr. Stewart, of Brisbane, a Baptist. But we find no difficulty
in making common cause, notwithstanding, against a common enemy.
The slightest concession on the part of each, - a concession
Implying no compromise of Christian principle, - Is sufficient to
insure so desirable a result. Knowing that the non-Episcopallan
portion of the Inhabitants of the town of Brisbane and its
vicinity were almost exclusively Presbyterians, I earnestly
recommended Mr. Stewart to them, and they have received him
cordially as their minister, as I expected they would; for, in one
of the latest papers from Sydney, it is stated, "that the
Presbyterians of Moreton Bay are preparing to erect a place of
worship for their minister, the Rev. Mr, Stewart. n I have never
been under any temptation myself to take the water, like Mr. Noel,
who has thereby, I conceive, virtually annihilated himself, as well
as all the moral effect of his recent movement; but I confess I have
long considered the doctrine of Infant baptism the weakest part of
the system of Presbyterians and Independents, and the most difficult
to defend as a reasonable service. When then should there not be
mutual forbearance on auch a point? Had such forbearance been
shown to the famous Roger Williams, by the Congretatlonalists of
Massachusetts Bay, two centuries ago, the Baptist Colony of Rhode
Island, in America, would never have been formed, and the heresy,
if it is one, would in all likelihood have died out long ago.
It is stickling on these minor points that gives them unmerited


Importance. It Is when the Jewish factions are at daggers'
drawing within the walls of Jerusalem, that the Romans take the
city by storm.
Again, as to Presbyterians and Independents, I am strongly of
opinion that a little more of the popular element would be a decided
Improvement of the former of these systems, while the energy, the
spirit of combination and the united action of a well-compacted body,
would equally improve the latter. In the State of Connecticut, In
America, there has been such a compromise, or, rather, blending
together, of Presbyterianism and Independency In actual operation,
with the happiest results, for two hundred and thirty years past.
Now, if the candidates who may go forth to Australia, per the ship
Clifton, would endeavour to form Christian Churches on this broad
basis, on their entering the Christian ministry In that country,
it would, I think, be very desirable. But the truth is, they
will be left in this matter very much to the freedom of their own
will. Those of them who acquire the requisite amount of needful
qualifications the soonest, will, of course, be first In the field;
but the period of the preparation will not require to be very
protracted for any.
To conclude this long epistle, it is surely not too late yet
to appeal once more to those young men throughout the country who
have hitherto, perhaps, been halting between two opinions, as to
whether they should go with us or stay at home. As the Clifton
has been getting newly coppered, and receiving some other repairs
that have occupied considerably more time than was anticipated,
I do not think she will be ready for sea before the 2oth of
October. But there Is surely plenty of time in the Interval that
will elapse till then for any young man of the right spirit to make
the needful preparations for the voyage. During the late Canadian
rebellion, a Colonel In the army was asked at the Horse Guards,
"How long he would take to prepare to go to Canada?" "Twenty
minutes," was the gallant officer’s reply. And why should the
good soldier of Jesus Christ be less ready to march, on the call f
of his great Commander, than the mere hireling of an earthly Queen?
Joseph and Mary had scarcely longer time to prepare for their
flight Into Egypt than the gallant Colonel deemed sufficient for
his voyage to Canada. In short, prompt decision and energetic
action are the uniform characteristics of superior minds. Who,
then, I ask again, will go up with us to Ramoth-Gllead to baTiTe?
I am. Sir, your most obedient servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
Moorgate Street, London.
September 24th, 1849.
x As I was coming home at any rate, I sold 2,000 volumes of my
noble library, along with some other chattel property, to assist
In paying the law expenses. The books alone brought me £300;
but I have a pretty good library yet. My God, think Thou upon
Tobiah and Sanballet, according to these their works, and on -
the prophets that would have put me" In fear. Nehem. vi.'l4.‘


To the Editor of The British Banner,
Sir, - I hog to make a fow observations, in addition to
what has already appeared in your columns, in regard to the
results of the expedition of the ship Fortitude to Cookstown or
Moreton Bay.
With respect, therefore, to the subject of land, a certain
extent of which was guaranteed to the emigrants in proportion
to their respective payments for passage, some difficulty has
unexpectedly been thrown in’the way by the Local Government,
although I was expressly informed by Mr. Hawes, the Under-Secretary
of State for the Colonies, months before the Fortitude, that there
would be no difficulty at all in the matter, as the Local Govern-
ment had it entirely in their own hands, and would certainly carry
out the arrangement I had submitted for his consideration and
approval.
Had this arrangement been carried out, there would have
been a sufficient extent of land available on account of the
emigration per the ship Fortitude for the whole of the emigrants
who wore entitled to land in virtue of their agreement with myself,
both by the Fortitude and the Chaseley, It seems, however, that
some difficulty has arisen in the natter, and the question was
under the consideration of the Local Government at the date of the
last accounts. This disappointment, however, will only be tempor-
ary, for whatever may have been the decision of the Local Govern-
ment in the matter, the emigrants will receive the full extent of
land guaranteed them on my return to the Colony, if not before.
The arrangement I made was the only one practicable at the time in
originating a great undertaking which is likely to load to magnifi-
cant results, and any disappointments that may be experienced in
a few individual instances at the outset will only bo of a very
trivial character compared with what the first emigrants have
almost uniformly experienced in almost every other instance in the
history of colonization. There can be no want, in any instance,
of the necessaries of life, and the climate is one of the finest
under the sun in which the facilities for the co ns on of
temporary dwellings are everywhere available at the lowest cost.
Besides, the expedition did not experience that co—operation
and assistance in a particular quarter on which I was led to depend
with some degree of confidence, Tho services I had solicited
were such as required no outlay, and involved no risk whateverj
but there was some uncertainty on this point when the Fortitude
was ordered, as it proved, without necessity, into
and, in such circumstances, men of weak minds and little hearts
are apt to shrink back from the very shadow of responsibility.
But, although there was necessarily some temporary inconvenience
from this cause, it invloved nothing serious in any way.
The real fact is, that tho immediate possession of land was
of no consequence whatever to the great majority of tho emigrants
per tho Fortitude, thoro being only a very limited number who
could possibly be affected by that circumstance in any way. It
THE BRITISH COLONIES.
AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION


is absurd to talk of going upon land when people have no
means of bringing tliat land into cultivation; and this was
certainly the case with most of tho emigrants per the
Fortitude, Tnere was about £l,lOO of tho whole amount of
passage money left unpaid when tho ship soiled, which remained
a burden upon ny shoulders exclusively. The emigrants of
this class got employment variously, and at good wages, on
their arrival, and could, therefore, have nothing to complain
of; and I have yet to learn whether their not obtaining
immediate possession of tho land guaranteed then was a serious
evil in any one instance whatever. For even when inigrants
are in possession of the means of entering upon the cultivation
of land on their arrival in.a new country, it is not always
expedient for them to do so* They must lay their account
with serving an apprenticeship, so to speak, for a limited
time, till they acquire that invaluable pre-requisite,. Colonial
experience; and when such experience can be acquired in the
employment and at the expense of others, it is certainly
much bettor to acquire it in that way than in any other. In
short, although certain evil-disposed persons, both in the
Colony and at home, have been endeavouring to magnify the
difficulties and inconveniences that presented themselves to
the emigrants per the Fortitude on their arrival at their
destination, these inconveniences and difficulties have been
of a very slight description after all, and not to bo mentioned
in the same day with those that have been experienced by
emigrants at the outset of a settlement almost anywhere else.
I have heard of several young non who went out as
adventurers per the Fortitude, who obtained eligible
employment immediately on their arrival, and who have written
hone to their friends in England in tho highest terns respecting
their situation end prospects. I cannot yet know how it has
fared with most of the other individuals and families who
constituted the corps of emigrants by that vessel; but three
cases, of which I have heard particulars, may serve as a
speciment of what may bo done in tho country by men of general
intelligence, activity and perseverance*
Mr. Alfred Slaughter, a draper in the neighbourhood of
Covent-garden, London, emigrated with his large family of nine
or ten children per the ship Fortitude. His wife died on the
passage out, after tho birth of a still born child; but
Mr. Slaughter had taken out his aged mother, on whom would
devolve the care of tho young children. He had consulted mo,
before leaving this country, as to the disposal of his stock
in trade, which he was dosirous of getting rid of entirely,
I recommended him by no means to sell it at an under value, but
rather to take out with him such part of it as would not bring
a reasonable price hero. He did so accordingly, and found on
his arrival at Brisbane that he had brought his goods to an
excellent market. The only place he could obtain for a storo
or warehouse in Brisbane was a loft, to which the only access
was by a ladder, and in this situation Mr, Slaughter sold off
his stock at a good profit I believe, in eight or nine days
after his arrival. The ladder was no objection to intending
customers, and there was no shop front wanted. On disposing
of his stock, Mr. Slaughter formed one of a deputation to spy
out the land, with which ho has expressed himself highly
delighted. On ascertaining that there would bo about 50,000
hea,d of sheep and cattle boiled clown for their tallow a,lone
in the district during the currant year, and finding that there
was no person to look after tho hides, Mr, Slaughter commenced
a small business in the way of follmongering and tanning, and
wroto homo for his brother, who it seems is a proficient in
thcs.e branches, to make the best of his way out to him with all
convenient speed, and a party of ten or twelve persons,
including the personal friends of Mr, Slaughter's brother have


accordingly been endeavouring to arrange for their passage
out to Sydney by the ship Clifton. Mr, Slaughter had in
the meantime gone to Sydney, where, through letters he had
carried out with hin, he had been able to eatablish a credit
with the colonial banks for his own business at Brisbane, and
he obtained an agency at the sane tine for the disposal of
flour in the district for a nill at Sydney, and for a factory
at Parramatta, Ho was therefore, on the highway to independence,
A Mr. Taylor, who had also been in business in London, and
who emigrated per the Fortitude, has also written hone to his
friends that he has established in business in the Colony with
the best prospects. His wife had been the forewoman in a,
factory for the manufacture of a patent article of general use
in London and an .agency has boon established in favour of
Mr. Taylor for the disposal of that article, which it seems is
in demand in the Colony,
Mr. Beacon, another emigrant per the Fortitude,, has given
an account of his own situation and prospects at Brisbane in a
letter recently published in the Banner, having established
himself in business there as a sad'dler, while his wife carries
on a business also in millinery and dressmaking, Mr. Beacon was
about to enter a Baptist College at Bristol as a candidate for
the ministry in this country; but his health failed-., hin, and the
nodical non told hin that if he remained another winter in this
country, he would in likelihood die. He is now in vigorous
health in the genial climate of Moreton Bay, Let these instances
suffice for the present for the family Croakers, The undertaking
of which the expedition of the Fortitude was the commencement,
has not proved a failure by any moans - I am, Sir, your most
obediont servant.
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
Glasgow, Oct. Bth., 1849


No >44.
list October 1849.
To tile Editor , of The British Banner.
Sir, - Our good ship, the Clifton, having Boon unexpectedly
detained till new, I an happy to inform those of your readers
who feel interested in the progress and results of emigration,
tha„t intelligence ha,s Been received of the safe arrival of
the ship larpent at Geelong, Port Phillip, on the 29th of Juno
last, I have as yet hoard no further particulars.
I have also received the following letter from Mr. Hoßßs,
the surgeon of the ship Cha.soley which it appears, arrived at
Morcton Bay on the 28th of April last,
"To the Rev, Dr. Lang.
"On Board the Chaseley in Moreton Bay,
"April 30th,, 1849.
"Dear Sir, - I take this the earliest opportunity of informing
you of our safe arrival in Moreton Baym after a very
favourable passage of 120 days from the Downs.
"I shall not now Be able to give you a detailed account
of our voyage, Being much engaged in preparing a Bill of health
for the Government Inspector, who is now on Board. I have to
record three deaths since the last I approsed you of, when I
wrote from the line, and of seven Births, all alive and doing
well.
"I will on the other side furnish you with a list of the
Births and deaths for the satisfaction of those parties who may
make inquiries of you
BIRTHS.
1849
March Bth, Mrs, Brothcrton, of a son.
13th, Mrs, Wright of a daughter
lßth, Mrs, Caldwell, of a daughter,
26th, firs, Taylor of a son
April 2nd. Mrs, Towoll of a son
3rd. Mrs. Yfelker, of a daughter /
29th, Mrs. Weir, of a daughter
DEATHS.
1848. ~
Dec, 31st. Emily Izard Markwoll, daughter of John
Markwcll, aged 11 months: infantile convulsions.
1849. !
Mar. 2Bth. Benjamin Bale, aged 1 year 10 months.
mescntric disease,
April 12th, Annie Maria Grimes, aged 4 years, consumption,
Pcß. 4tk. Edwin Field, the Gmi ; rants 1 cook, threw himself
overboard, while in a. state of intoxication,
"Wc rep.ched our first anchorage in the Bay on Friday the
27fh, on Saturday (28th) afternoon, anchored opposite the Pilot
sta-tion, and on Sunday (29th) remained there all day, the crew
taking in fresh water. Towards evening, the Custom-house offi-
cer, and Dr. Ballow came to us. This morning, Mbnday, April
29th, the Government Authorities came on Board, and wo are now
under weigh for cur final anchorage, which we shall rea,ch in a
30
THE BRITISH POLONIES »
AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION.


few hours, I have to report the general good conduct of the
passengers.
"I hope you will excuse this hurried letter. Hoping
you are well, believe me to remain, faithfully yours,
"WILLIAM HOBBS."
It has been repeatedly observed, in your columns, that
difficulties had unexpectedly been thrown in the way by the
Local Government, in regard to carrying out the arrangements
made in reference to land Mr, Hawes had given ns distinctly
to understand, before a si glc passenger was engaged for the
Fortitude, that if I should succeed in sending out a body of
emigrants to Moreton Bay, like those per the Fortitude and
Ohaseley, the Local Government having the natter of immigration
as a charge upon the land revenue, in their own hands, there
would be no difficulty in getting the amount of emigration paid
for in land. But difficulties have since arisen -- not, however,
on the part of the Local Government, but on that of the
Authorities at Downing-street, who have beon-making certain
ill-natured suggestions to the Local Government, which have
prevented the arrangements made on this understanding and
condition from being duly carried out. There are only a very
few, however, who have been affected by this temporary difficulty
and I am hastening back to the colony to got that difficulty
removed, and to have all past engagements with the emigrants
who wont out on the condition of obtaining land, fulfilled to
the letter.
As soon as it was known that obstacle had been thrown
in the way of fulfilment of the arrangement in regard to
Land, all engagements of that kind wore discontinued till the
matter should be placed on a proper basis in the colony, which
I expect will be done immediately on my return. For the
colonists are too deeply interested in keeping up the flow of
salutary immigration, to allow any obstacles to stand in the way.
Very few r indeed, of the emigrants, either by the Fortitude or
the Ohaseley, were in a condition to take up their land at
once. The delay on obtaining it will therefore be rather an
imaginary than a real evil. Those of then who paid their passage
had full value in that passage for all they paid; the land
was entirely in addition. But the public will understand that
a very considerable number of the whole body of emigrants by
these vessels had not paid anything like the full amount of
their passage. On the contrary, when the Fortitude sailed I
was left with an amount of obligation on her account, independ-
ently of all my own labour and services to the extent of nearly
£1,1:00, And what, I ask, could people in such circumstances
have done with land, even although they had got it immediately.
In short, the cases, in which any inconvenience has arisen
from this cause, must bo very few indeed.
The sending of convicts to Moreton Bay, which has been
recently announced, contrary to the express pledge previously
given to the colonists of Australia, is a real grievance, and
I intend to make it the subject of extensive agitation immediat-
ely on my return to that country. We are powerless here, and
I have done with petitioning the Secretary of State for the
Colonies for anything. We must turn a, new leaf, and harp upon
another chord altogether, letting the Downing-street people
know, that, as the Scotch Barons told one of their Kings,
that "wo are not bairns, but bearded men;" that we are not to
be treated as children in a nursery, or as beggars in a barn,
any longer,
I am, Sir, your most obedient servant.
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.


P.S.- Tho following’ is the conclusion of a letter I have just
received from the brother of one of the emigrant farmers per
the Fortitude:- "I have to inform you, that we yesterday, for
the first tine, received letters from, our friends at Brisbane,
and, speaking without prejudice, I believe it is the best news
that ever cane to Clithoroe, either by newspaper or any other
way.” - J.D.L,
Published in "The British Banner" 21st November, 1849.
BRITISH COLONIST.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE EARL GREY, HER MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL
SECRETARY OP STATE FOR THE COLONIES.
My Lord,- It is now nearly throe years since I arrived in this
country as a representative of the people of Now South Wales,
for the furtherance of certain objects of vast Importance to
ny adopted country; and, as I an now on the eve of ny return
to Australia, with but little prospect of ever setting foot
again on English ground I trust your Lordship will excuse mo
for troubling you, previous to my departure, with the result
of my experience and observation of the first throe years of
your Lordship's administration as Autocrat of "all the Russias"
of our Colonial Empire.
I bog, therefore, to assure your lordship, that I arrived
in this country entertaining the highest hope, as a British
Colonist, from your Lordship's accession to office, - an event
which I was simple enough to regard as one of tho highest omen
for the colonies. I an now returning to Australia with the
bitterest disappointment, and the deepest disgust - cherishing
precisely the sane feeling as the celebrated Dr, Benjamin
Franklin did, when ho loft England as a British subject, for
the last tine.
My principal object in coming to England, towards tho
closo of the year 1846, was, to give such an impulse to
emigration to Australia, as would direct to that country many
families and individuals of virtuous character and industrious
habits, who would only contribute materially to develop its vast
roscureos, but who would transmit tho precious inheritance of
our civil and religious liberties unimpaired to posterity. In
this object, I am happy to say I have succeeded far beyond ny i
ovm highest expectations; although I have experienced nothing '
from your Lordships office, but incivility and obstruction, i
I had also in view to procure and send forth to Australia
a number of ministers of religion to maintain and to extend our 1
common Pertestart ism in tho Southern Hemisphere, In this object
I have also succeeded to a considerable extent, having already !
sent out, in a great measure at my own risk and charges, from j
twolvo to eighteen Evangelical ministers, while I am carrying 1
out y/ith mo in this vessel not fewer than twenty young non,as
candidates for the ministry,- all of tho highest character and
the fairest promise. It occurred to me, in making the necessary
arrangements, for such an enterprise, that, as your Lordship’s
subordinates of the emigration department wore sending out
Episcopalian ministors and Romish priests at the public expense,
the same indulgence might be extended to such ministers as I
have referred to. But I regret to state that my application
to this effect was most ungraciously refused by your Lordship(s
department.


My third, object was to direct a stream of British
emigration of ■ superior character to the Moreton Bay district
of Few South Wales, with a view to the cultivation of cotton
and other tropical produce by means of European free labour;
and as Moreton Bay is situated in latitude 27South, a much
lower latitude than any to which, British emigration had
previously boon directed; and as ny avowed object in originat-
ing that emigration was one of transcendent importance, not
only to the British Empire, but to the interests of humanity,
I appeal to your Lordship, whether it was net reasonable in
such an undertaking to have anticipated the countenance .and
assistance of your Lordship's department. I regret, however,
to bo obliged to acknowledge, that I have not received the
slightest assistance from the Colonial Office. On the contrary
when I had succeeded, notwithstanding every petty annoyance
that incapacity in office could suggest, in sending out the
first ship load consisting of about 250 emigrants of the charac-
ter and description I have mentioned above to that remote
locality, instructions were actually for awarded to Australia,
from the Colonial Office to present the Local Government from
affording to these emigrants any such assistance as was indis-
pensably necessary for the carrying-out of the great undertaking
in which they were engaged I mean the attempt to cultivate,
by means of British free labour in Australia, the peculiar
productions of the West Indies and the Slave States of North
America* My Lord, I will not trust myself to characteristics .
such a proceeding and will leave it for your Lordship to do so.
Notwithstanding these obstructions and discouragements,
however, I have succeeded in despatching not fewer than three
ships, containing nearly six hundred emigrants to Moreton Bay;
and in proof of the correctness of my anticipation, in regard
to the practicability of cultivating tropical productions by
moans of British free labour in that locality, I beg to refer
to the following extract of a letter which has just been
received from one of these emigrants - a practical farmer
from Clitheroe, Lancashire - and t«? add, that a Compa,ny for the
cultivation of the sugar-cane and the manufacture of sugar is
now in process of formation at Moreton Bay, under the
superintendance of an experienced planter from Jamaica, whom
I wont out for this express purpose by the second of the
throe vessels ;-
"Eagle Barm, Brisbane, Moreton Bay,
April 9th 1849,
"All that Dr, Lang has said about the geniality of,the
climate "and the fertility of the soil is perfectly true*
There is no doubt "but the cotton plant will grow amazingly*
There are not two opinions "dressing it, there is no doubt
that it will be entered into with spirit,
(Signed) "WILLIAM BULCOCK."
In reviewing the intercourse I have thus had with
your Lordship's department for the last three years, I cannot
but exoress the extreme regret, not unmingled with indignation,
which I cannot but feel as a British colonist when 1 reflect
that I have myself experienced much more courtesy and
attention, merely as a British traveller, from the President
of the United States of America, in his marble palace at
Washington, than I have done as a representative of the people
of New South Wales from the paltriest underlings of your
Lordship's department. Like the mutes in the Sultan’s Palace
a.t Constantinople, these familiars of your Lordship regularly
strangle every honest man and every honest measure connected
with the colonies, in the dark recesses of their political
Inquisitions; and the people of England never hear of the natter
any more than the Turks used to do of those hapless victims,


whose bodies were thrown at midnight into the waters of the
Bosphorus*.
In singular contrast to the heavy blow and great
discouragement which emigration of a superior character to
Moreton Bay has thus experienced from, your Lordship's
Department, is the officious encouragement and assistance
afforded by that Department, from Colonial funds, for Irish
female emigration. In the Report of the Commissioners for
administering the laws for the relief of the poor in Ireland,
addressed to His Excellency the Earl of Clarendon, of date
July 14th, 1849, I find the following announcement; -
"We have to report, with satisfaction, the steady progress
of "the emigration of orphan girls from the Irish work-houses
to the "Australian colonies, which we undertook, in pursuance
of your Excellency's command, and 'which we first comae need in
the spring of 1848. "Since that time, the number of those
emigrants shipped from Plymouth for Sydney and Adelaide, has
been 2,219, at a cost to the unions of about £5 per head for
outfit and conveyance to Plymouth, the remaining cost being
defrayed from the colonial funds."
Now, ny Lord, from the origin and character of the
influence which was notoriously brought to hoar upon your
Lordship and His Excellency the Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland,
in furtherance of this measure of Irish female emigration, no
intelligent person, at all acquainted either with the parties
who originated that measure, or with the Australian colonics,
can doubt for a moment that the real object of the parties
a.t whose instance your Lordship was induced to sanction the
measure in question, was simply to supply Roman Catholic wives
for the English and Scotch Protestants of the humbler classes
in Australia, and thereby to Romanize the Australia.n colonies
through the artful and thoroughly Jesuitical device of mixed
marriages,
Your Lordship has thus been transforming your department,
as far as Irish female emigration is concerned, into a more
Romish propaganda. And what right, I ask, ray Lord, had your
Lordship to appropriate the funds of the Australian colonies,—
funds derived almost exclusively from the capital and enterprise
of English and Scotch Protesteuits,- for any such purposes, or
in any such way. Was it because there wore no "distressed
needlewomen" in England, to whom a free passage to Australia
would have proved p.n invaluable boon ? Was it because there
wore no virtuous unmarried females, struggling with proverty
in Scotland, that the funds contributed in such large measure
by English and Scotch Protestants, should he appropriated in
inundating their adopted country with Irish Romanism ? I admit
that neither your Lordship now His Excellency the Lord-Lieuten-
ant of Ireland, could possibly ha.ve had any design to un-
protostanize the Australian Colonies; I am well aware, that,
in the whole natter, your Lordship and the Lord-Lieutenant of
Ireland wore merely the dupes of an artful female Jesuit, the
able but concealed agent of the Romish priesthood in Australia,
who had thus adroitly managed to attach both your Lordships -
two Ministers of State to her apron string. The cruel
injustice, the enormous wrong, which your Lordship has thus
been inflicting upon the Protestant Colonies of Australia.,
is. the more inexcusable for the following reasons:— The late
Legislative Council of Now South Wales, at the instance of a
Select Committee of that body, of which I had the honour to be
a member, had actaully recommended to your Lordship, that, in
any future emigration into that Colony at the public expense,
there should, as nearly a.s possible he an equal number of
emigrants from each of the three Kingdoms; and the sane recom-
mendation a.nd request was also pressed upon your lordship in


in a series of Petitions which I had the honour to submit
to your Lordship on my arrival in this, country, from various
important districts of New South Y/ales, But in that spirit
of haughty contemptuous disregard both of the feelings and
wishes of British Colonists and Colonial Legislatures, which
seems to form a leading principle of your lordship's
administration, these recommendations and requests have been
left unheeded, and a course diametrically opposed to the
wishes and interests of the best portion of the Colonists has
boon pursued. Your Lordship's procedure in the matt ex- of the
resumption of Transportation to Now South Wales, has been pre-
cisely similar in its character. Your Lordship's predecessor,
the Right Hon.W.E,Gladstone, had projected, and partly formed,
a new Penal Colony on the East Coast of Australia, immediately
to the northward of New South Wales, in which it was proposed
to carry out an improved system of convict discipline. Had
this judicious measure, which your Lordship unceremoniously*,
and without examination, set aside, on your accession to office,
been pursued, your Lordship would have been spared all the
humiliation and annoyance which your Lordship's Department
has recently experienced from New Zealand, from the Cape of
Good Hope, and Nov/ South ’Wales* But your Lordship appears to
be quire above both advice and warning in this matter; for t
your Lordship has not only determined to transform the peculiarly
interestingly and promising settlement of Moreton Bay into
a Penal Settlement once more, but has actually ordered more
convicts to be sent to Sydney, in the face of the reprated
remonstrances amd protests of the colonies! My Lord! there are .
certain injuries and insults - especially those offered to
communities - which, for the good of society, ought neither
to be tolerated not to be forgiven, and this, I conceive is an
injury and insult of that particular kind. If your Lordship,
therefore, should persevere in carrying out this measuEe, in
direct opposition to the publicly expressed opinion of large
bodies of the Colonists of New South Wales, in all parts of the
territory, the people of that Colony will in my humble opinion
be justified in resorting to measures for self-preservation
which your Lordship will scarcely anticipate, but which will
effectually insure the redress of all such grievances for the
future.
That measures of the kind I refer to, havo already
suggested themselves, as a matter of absolute necessity in the
last resource, to men of the highest standing and influence in
the Australian Colonies, I beg to offer your Lordship the
following proof; In the yoar 1844, when tho late Governor of
New South Wales attempted, under tho notorious pretext of being
the Queen's bailiff, and of having in that capacity, the exclus-
ive administration of the waste lands of the Colony, to revive
the policy of Charles the First, by imposing vexatious taeces
up on a large portion of the colonists, without the consent
of their representatives, certain of the principal squatters
gave out, in my own hearing that they would, at .all events,
stand to their rights and that, even if Her Majesty should
send out ten thousand of her best troops to put them down they
had sheep and cattle enough in tho Colony to buy them all off
in a few weeks. For the colonists have not failed to discover,
from the numerous desertions that are taking place even at
present that the temptation of a comfortable settlement in the
genial climate of New South Wales, as compared with the
possible results of a campaign in India, the usual destination
of British troops in Australia, would be greatly too strong for
tho virtue of tho soldier. Now, my lord, the sheep and cattle
of tho Colony, in which its wealth mainly consists, have more
than doubled their numbers since 1844, and your Lordship is
aware, that the wa.ste lands, of which the value is in calculable
will alwasy be at the disposal of any Government de facto.


whatever may he the oarigiti that Govermientj and whatever
form it nay assume. And does your Lordship suppose that men
of British spirit with such means of redress in their hands,
will suffer themselves to he treated any longer like mere children
in a nursery hy any Peer in Her Majesty's realm ? Does your
Lordship suppose there are not men of higher mark in Australia
than the Irish incapahles of Dublin and Ballingerry.
Por three years past your lordship has been promising
a Constitution for the Australian Colonies, But if that
Constitution should not bo something very different from the
miserable abortion which your Lordship's subaltern, Mr. Hawes
presented to the House of Commons during the last session of
Parliament, and subsequently withdrew, I will venture to
predict, that the colonists will endorse and return it, with
the well known Post-office nark, "Too late," and "More to pay."
Very moderate concessions would have satisfied the colonists
three years ago, but such concessions will not satisfy them now.
To use a vulgar but expressive phrase, which your Lordship will,
I trust excuse, they will now "go for the whole hog or for
nothing at all."
Por the three years of gross misgovernment which your
Lordship has permitted to subsist throughout the colon!es,-
misgovernnent which was fully in your Lordship's power, and which
was your Lordship's first duty, in accordance with you previous
professions, to have rectified-your Lordship, in my humble
opinion, deserves both dismissal and impeachment; and, if the
Government of this Groat Nation were only in such able and
vigorous hands as the extreme urgency of the times demands, both
of these measures of justice would be dealt out to your Lordship,
without fail, and without hesitation.
As far as regards the Australian Coloniesyour Lordship
has, for throe years past, been knocking at the gate of futurity
for the President of the United States of Australia. Bo assured,
ny Lord, he is getting ready, and will shortly be out; and will
astonish the world with the manliness of his port, and the dignity
of his demeanour. As in duty hound, he will make a profound
obeisance to your Lordship in the first instance, in greatful
acknowledgment of the concern which your lordship has haul in his
paternity. He will then take his place in the great family of
nations, with a proud consciousness of the brilliant career upon
which his country has entered; when delivered at length from the
baleful domination of Downing-streot. He will require no
soldiers, like Louis Napoleon, to enable him to keep his seat,
nor will the foul blot of slavery defile his national escutcheon,
like that of Zachary Taylor,- I have the honour to bGj ny Lord,
your Lordship's very humble and most obedient Servant,
(Signed) JOHN LUNMORE LANG, D.D.
On Board the ship Clifton, off Gravesend,
Nov # 1849.


AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION
To the Editor of the British Banner,
Sir,- I did not expect to require to write you again Before
our good ship had finally set sail; hut, as there has Been
an unexpected detention from circumstances for which I was
By no means personally accountable, we are all here yet,
although expecting to sail tomorrow.
By the Passengers' Act, vessels are not allowed to carry
more than a certain number of passengers proportioned to the
superficial extent of the ship's deck. The Government
Commissioners always put on Board the vessels they charter
for the conveyance of emigrants the full number allowed By that
Act; hut, in vessels fitted up for a class of passengers somewhat
superior to the class of Government emigrants, that number
cannot Be taken, I had accordingly notified to the agent more '
than a week Before the ship left the docks, that she could not
accommodate more than the number then engaged; But, as that
number was greatly Below the number allowed By the Act, the
agent, inadvertantly and without my previous knowledge, engaged
several more. Three or four of these had, accordingly, to Be
landed, to proceed By another vessel, and additional accommoda-
tion had to Be provided for the remainder, and in making those
arrangements, a delay of several days tookplacc, for it is not
always practicable to get the Government officer to inspect the
vessel when those on hoard are quite ready to receive him.
The number of passengers allowed to he taken By the
Clifton, under the Passengers 1 Act, is 270 adults; and on a
former voyage, when carrying out emigrants for Government, she
had actually that number on Board, But the number now on Board
is under 210 that is at least sixty fewer than the numb.or allow-
ed.
But although any detention in such circumstances is
sufficiently annoying, we have, in reality, experienced no
loss from it; for we have unfortunately had a foul wind for a
fortnight past; with which we could have made no progress down
channel, I have myself, on a former voyage, Been detained two
months in the channel with the wind from the same quarter; and
there are at present about a hundred vessels lying "wind Bound
in the Downs,
3 In my former letters I have very seldom made any allusion
to my own personal affairs; But I shall do so on the present
occasion, if not for the satisfaction of these Busy-Bodies, who
concern themselves a groat deal too much with other people's
affairs, at least for that of those whom it does concern,
I have despatched three vessels, with nearly 600 emigrants,
to Moreton Bay, (in Australia) with a view to the cultivation
of cotton, sugar, and coffee, By moans of European free labour.
In this object,- one of national importance - I have Been
completely sue cess fill, although it implied a very great sacrifice
on my part, under existing circumstances; the first of the three
ships, the fortitude, which sailed in September, 1848, having
left me with a debt of nearly £1,300, I stated that debt at
£l,lOO on a former occasion; But I was very considerably under
the truth at the time, without knowing it, Now the whole of
this debt has Been paid off, with the exception of £lB4, for
which I have given a draft payable in the Colony,
The ship Chaselcy, the second of the three, which sailed
on the 28th of December last, has all Been paid for long ago;
and the final payment of £350, for the Lima, the third- of the
three, which sailed in Juno last, was made about a month since.


There have also been three vessels, including the
Clifton, carrying upwards of 600 persons, dispatched for
Port Phillip; the other two being the Larpent and the Travancore*
To take the last of these 3 vessels first, the Clifton was
chartered for £2,100 of which £1,600 was to be paid before
she sailed, and the rest on her arrival in the Colony, The
£1,600 has boon paid accordingly, and the captain holds available
security for the payment of tho greater part of the remainder.
The stores for the Olifton, including frosh provisions here,
cost about £1,600, the whole of which has also been paid, and
the other accounts of the vessel,- for the fittings up, the
surgeon's salary, etc,,- have likewise boon paid; so that there
has not 'been ono hour’s detention of the ship from any fault
of mine in the non-payment of accounts*
It would be strange, indeed, if any person who has
occupied so prominent a place in Colonial society as I have done
those many years, as the opponent of Popery and Puseyism, as
well as of civil and ecclesiastical tyranny, and corruption in
every form, should not have many and malignant enemies. When I
was iGcaving the Colony a Roman Catholic in Sydney told one of
the sailors of our ship that ha would go down upon his knees
and pray that our ship might founder at sea I And as we had a
tremendous passage,- having been obliged to lie to, which is
only done in extremity, twenty-four times during our voyage, and
having been struck with a tremendous sea off Cape Horn, which
nearly wrecked our vessel, I really thought, with the sailors,
that I was "the Jonah on board," and that "the Prince of the
power of the air," as in the case of Job, had got a coromission,
at the instance of those people, against our vessel, on my
account. But what if our good ship had foundered at sea, and
we had all gone downl- both my father and my grandfather
perished at sea, and the road to the kingdom of Heaven is surely
as short and direct by water as it is by land.
There certainly are other sums for which I have given
drafts on the colony; but as I have expended much more than the
amount in giving free passages out to ministers, schoolmasters,
&c,, which I boliove the colonists will repay me, I have no fear
of being able to moot thorn on their becoming due.
I have thus succeeded in sending out, to the two extremit-
ies of our groat colony - in many instances, especially by tho
earlier vessels, for tho merest trifle, and in others free of
cost - upwards of 1,200 persons, besides from twelve to eighteen
ministers of religion, and a goodly numbor of schoolmasters and
candidates for tho ministry. What manner of persons they arc
chiefly of you are well aware, I had declared publicly in tho
colony, before I loft it for England, in the year 1846, that if
I did not succood in the avowed object of ny voyage home, viz.,
to provide a sufficient chock and antidote to the rampant Popery
and Puseyism of tho country, I should never return* I have
succeeded, I think, to a reasonable extent, and I can now,
therefore, return with perfect confidence* Whether some such
effort was not needed, lot tho reader judge, when I inform him,
under tho pernicious system of government with which our noble
Colonies are oppressed, through the Dcwning-street incapables,
not fewer than 2,219 Irish females had been sent out to Australia
at the expense of the Colon!os, previous to tho month of July
last, to Romanize us and our posterity piecemeal by means of tho
Josuitical and Satanic expedient of nixed marriagesi Among
other matters which I have had to attend to those few days past,
I have had to prepare a blistering-plaster for Earl Grey, I
could not have shown my face to the Protestants of the Colony,
on my return to Australia, unless I had thus protested in the
most energetic and public manner, before leaving England,
against this monstrous injustice, this enormous wrong!


It Is evident, from tills instance, that the Government
had been pre-engaged otherwise, and could have nothing to spare
for ne in the promotion of my object. As to the amount of
pecuniary assistance I have received from the colony, in the
prosecuting of this undertaking, independently of ay own
private resources, it has not exceeded £100; the whole ofwhich
I had to pay away to one of my printers in Scotland, without
ever changing the draft, Public meetings have, indeed, been
held both at Sydney and Melbourne to strengthen ny hands, and
to raise funds to assist me; but as an idea prevailed in the
colony some tine since that I was then on ny way out, these
funds wore not sent hone, and I had to do without then. The
fact is, that I cane hone not as anybody’s delegate, hut of ray
own choice, and at my own charges, although with the best wishes
and concurrence of many. My passage home cost me £2lO. I had a
small property-of ny own in the west of Scotland, which I have
sold since my return to England for £7OO. I have fallen heir,
in the mean time, to anot er property of considerably greater
value in Stirlingshire, which I should probably have sold also,
ere this time, if I could have done so; my deceased relative,
probably anticipating such a result, and not wishing his fine
farm, which had been long in his family, to be alienated quite
so soon, bequeathed it to ny oldest son, and left ne only the
life-ront. And yet lamto bo put upon ny defence, forsooth,
in pecuniary natters, by creatures, both clerical and Laie, with
hearts like flint themselves, and hands that seen to bo made for
nothing but grasping and holding like a blacksmith's vice.
As to the amount of the pecuniary assistance I have
received, in the progress of ray undertaking from those
"Gentlemen of England
Y/ho live at home at ease",
it has been literally and absolutely nothing, I looked for
assistance to the cotton sponners of Manchester and Glasgow, when
rendering thoir craft the greatest service that has ever been
rendered it by any British subject; by demonstrating the
practicability of growing cotton to any extent by means of
British free labour in Australia; but I looked in vaini I
looked, also, to the Quakers and Abolitionists, whon doing,
perhaps, more for the extinction of slavery than the whole of
thorn together - but still, I looked in vaini I looked, moreover,
to the Evangelicals on both sides of the T?/eed, and pointed to
the open valley beyond seas full of bones - very many and very
dry - but the Priest and Levite., like the Quaker a nd the cotton
spinner, passed by on the other side; and, like Jacob, I was
loft with the Divino blessing a,s my only support and encourage-
ment, to win my portion form the Amerite with my sword and with
my how,
I beg to repeat, in conclusion, that Mr. W, T, Arnold,
of 46, Moorgate street, will continue to engage intending
emigrants for vessels to follow those that I have myself been
instrumental in sending out, hitherto with his assistance; and
an agency will immediately be established in Glasgowm in
connexion with the Port Phillip and Clarence River Colonization
Company, which I expect to got established and incorporated, for
the promotion of enigration of a superior character to Australia,
by an Act of our Colonial Legislature on my return to that
country, The Agent in Glasgow will be Mir. R. W. Smiles, 78,
George-street, I have the highest hopes in regard to the future
results of my voyage, through tho establishment of that Company,
and my success hitherto will greatly facilitate the accomplish-
ment of this important object.
I am, Sir, your most obedient Servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG,
On board the Clifton, off Gravesend,
Nov. 13, 1849.


N 0,51. November 25th. 184
LLOYD'S WEEKLY NEWSPAPER.
Fourth Edition
Published on Sunday Morning
Containing the
Latest Intelligence of the Week
THE COLONIES AND THEIR TREATMENT
Another session of Parliament must not he permitted to
pass over without those members of the House of Commons who
take an interest in colonial affairs bringing under fuller
consideration than they have hitherto done, the conduct of
the department of the Government charged with the management
of those affairs. The incompetency and maladministration of
the Colonial-office is a complaint almost as old as the office
itself, and whatever expectations were formed upon the accession
of Earl Grey,.as colonial minister, have all been disappointed.
What was said by the post of another place, may in truth be said
of the Colonial-office,— "In the lowest deep a lower still is
found." All the measures of administrative wisdom which were
anticipated by the colonists from the minister, who, previous
to his taking office, evinced so much enlightened zeal in
their behalf, and who, on several occasions, animadverted with
so much justice upon colonial incompetency and mismanagement,
and displayed so accurate a knowledge of the wants as well as
thc_rights of the colonies, still remain to be projected. In
their stead, the colonists have had a repetition of all the
blundering, and vacillation, and potty tyranny, and obstinacy
in wrong-doing, which characterised, for the most part, the
administration of Earl Grey's predecessors in office. Scarcely
a post arrives in London without bringing fresh proofs of his
melancholy fact, and fresh signs of colonial discontent and
disaffection, as its natural consequence. The other day we found
the Canadian House of Assembly assailed and destroyed, and the
governor mobbed, and obliged to change the scat of government
for fear of facing Montreal again. Since then, a numerously
and respectably signed declaration, from "all parties, origins
and creeds," in favour of annexation to the United States,
has been put forth, as a sign of "an unalloyed spirit of
rebellion," Jamaica, the governor acting under the restraint
of the Colonial-office, <and endeavouring to resist the
constitutional power of the House of Assembly, has been induced
to put an end to the session, and is left without any customsi
At the Cape of Good Hope, all things are at "sixes and sevens",
in consequence of the Colonial-office having come to the
resolve of making it a Penal Settlement, Upon the arrival of a
ship of convicts from Bemuda, the inhabitants of Cape Town rose
as a man, to oppose their landing. ' The gong of the Town Hall
was sounded, the bells in all the churches were tolled, the
excitement amongst the population was indescrible, the shops
and mercantile establishments were, closed, and business generally
suspended, and a letter was sent to the Governor, stating in
plain terms, that as "the people have determined that the
convicts must not, cannot, and shall not be landed, or kept in
any of the ports of this Colony, they trust that His Excellency,
in accordance with his often-expressed desire to promote the
well-being of the colonists, will order the Neptune, after
victualling, to leave the shores of the colony, they holding
his responsible for any consequences that may ensue from his
refusal to accede to their demand." His Excellency "regretted
the tone of the letter, which the prevailing excitement might


oxcuse, "but could not justify," and promised to keep the
ship riding in Simon's Bay until he could obtain.fresh
instructions from the Colonial-office in England* Then,
turning to Australia, the political horizon seems, if
possible, to be still darker and moro threatening than even
in Canada, the West Indies, or the Cape, Dr, Lang, who has
been here for the last three years, as representative of the
people of Nov/ South Wales, for the furtherance of certain
objects of vast importance to his adopted country, has left
for the Colony, and ho has left behind him a legacy for Earl
Grey, which cannot fail to excite in his Lordship's mind some
painful reminiscences and anticipations since he cannot but
know that Dr. Lang will have the full sanction of the vast
majority of the colonists for the bill of impeachment which he
has hurled at the colonial minister and his department. The
charges which Dr. Lang brings against the Colonial-office are
both general and specific. "Like the mutes in the sultan's
palace at Constantinople," says he, "the familiars of your
Lordship regularly strangle honest men, and every honest measure
connected with the colonies, in the dark recesses of their
political inquisition* and the people of England never hear
of the matter, any more than the Turks used to do of the
hapless victims whose bodies were thrown at midnight into the
waters of the Bosphorus," Those whose duties have brought them
into communication or contact with this department of the
Executive will be well able to appreciate the truthfulness of
the comparison. But the specific facts stated by Dr, Lang,
touching the treatment of the colonies, and of himself as
their representative, are almost incredible. It is difficult
to believe it possible that national interests and personal
courtesies should bo so outrageously set at nought as they
habitually are in Downing-street. And now, just look at the
probable consequence of all this - for it may be certain that
Dr. Lang did not sit down as the representative of important,
intelligent, and powerful colonies, to pen his letter to
Earl Grey without first assuring himself that the tone and
manner of his writing would be agreeable to his constituents:.
Thus, then, he addresses his Lordship "My Lord, there are
certain injuries and insults - especially those offered to
communities, - which for the good of society, ought neither
to be tolerated nor forgiven; and this, I conceive, is an
injury and insult of that particular kind. If your Lordship,
therefore, should persevere in carrying out this measure (of
sending convicts to Moreton Bay) in opposition to the publicly
expressed opinion of large bodies of the colonists of New South
Wales, in all parts of the territory, the people of that colony
will, in my humble opinion, be justified in resorting to
measures of self-preservation, which your lordship will,
scarcely anticipate, but which will efectually ensure the
redress of all such grievances for the future," And he closes
his letter with this very significant and menacing monition
"As far as regards the Australian colonies, your Lordship, has
for three years past been knocking at the gates of futurity
for the President of the United States of Australia. Be
assured my Lord, he is getting ready, and will shortly be out;
and he will astonish the world with the manliness of his port
and the dignity .of his demeanour. As in duty bound, he will
make a profound obeisance to your Lordship, in the first instance
in grateful acknowledgment of the concern which your Lordship
has had in his paternity; he will then take his place in the
great family of nations with a proud consciousness of the
brilliant career upon which his country has entered, when
delivered at length from the hateful domination of Downing -
street. He will require no soldiers to enable him to keep his
seat, like Louis Napoleon: he will have no foul blot of slavery
to defile his national escutcheon, like Zachary Taylor," The
people of England and the members of the House of Commons can
no longer plead ignorance either of the treatment of the colonies


"by the department over which Lord Grey is presumed to preside,
or of the probable consequences of that treatment in the fate
of the colonies. It remains to bo seen whether they will
look; on quietly, while the process for converting some of our
best dependencies Into independent republics is being thus
actively carried out by those whose duty it is to strengthen
the ties already existing between mother and children, and to
render such tics still closer, by strengthening and identifying
the interests of both.
