

'J7VF
t . I L±<S
■ .
With the Compliments of
MR. NEVILLE DOWLING.
LETTERS
Cas* ~Rsv)
Sir James Dowling, icnt..
(Chief Justice of N.S.W., 1837-1844),
TO Hito SON
James,
(afterwards)
His Honor Judge Dowling.
Dto-l
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
> (




WHEN LEAVING SYDNEY FOR NORFOLK ISLAND.
Sydney , 3rd September, 1833.
My Dear James,
During my absence from home, I trust you will so
conduct yourself, that on my return I shall find the good
opinion I have hitherto had of you, fully justified.
Recollect that in the sight of God and man, there is
nothing so agreeable as a modest, amiable, and ingenuous
youth.
I am ambitious that you should attain and preserve this
character; which can only be accomplished by carefully
attending to the advice and admonitions of those, who by
nature, and inclination are your only true and disinterested
friends, namely, your father and mother.
It would cover more paper and occupy more time than I
car now afford, to give you full instructions how to acquire
the character lam ambitious you should attain. In few
words, however, I can give you sufficient hints, upon which
you may, and I am sure will, meditate, young as you are in
years, and green in understanding.
First. Remember that you have an immortal soul, which
will survive your body after it is committed to the Earth,
and that this soul will be accountable to Almighty God, the
Omnipotent, and Omniscient Creator of all things for
evervthing done by you whilst in this world. To preserve this
soul pure from contamination and corruption is the first duty of
every reasonable creature. This can be effectually guarded if
you will carefully attend to your duty towards God, and
unfeignedly listen to religious instructions, which I am happy
to say are always within your reach, either by reading the Holy
Scriptures, or hearing them expounded at public worship.
Secondly. Remember that in youth, and in manhood,
nothing contributes to the formation of a worthy ‘character,
more than filial piety in shewing affection towards, and in
dutiful respect for your parents. This is expected in return
for their care and anxiety for you, from helpless infancy
upwards.


Thirdly. Another important obligation towards attaining
perfection, as a good man, is to be affectionate and kind and
conciliating towards your brothers and sisters. Recollect
that they partake of the same flesh and blood with yourself,
and that Nature as well as duty prompt you to take as deep
an interest in their welfare and happiness as in your own.
Unless there is union and cordiality and mutual affection
between brothers and sisters during infancy, nothing but
discord, selfishness and distrust can be expected in after life.
Fourth. By attending to and acting upon the foregoing
resolution a fourth obligation will be easily performed,
namely—your duty towards your fellow creatures, both high
and low, who, in a more general sense, are to be regarded as
brothers and sisters, and are to be treated just as you would
wish they should treat you.
So much for your more general duties as a rational
creature.
There are particular and personal duties applicable to the
formation of character, which must be rigidly adhered to.
“KNOWLEDGE IS POWERS
Always keep this maxim in view as the Polar Star of your
life.
Knowledge can only be acquired by Industry and Study.
Knowledge to the mind is like money to the miser; only with
this difference, that a sensible, w T ell-informed man can never
spend or be robbed of his mental riches, whilst the sphere of
his enjoyments is every day enlarged in proportion to his
hoarding. His heart is enlarged, his soul becomes more
purified, and to the attainment of that-eminence, short only
of Divine perfection. On the other hand, look to the hoarder
of worldly pelf! Miserable, anxious wretch, in perpetual
terror of being robbed by thieves, and clinging even in the
pangs of death to the God of his Idolatry. His heart callous
to every generous emotion, and his soul contracted into
selfishness and gross insensibilities.
All that I can say to you ,as to the art of acquiring
knowledge is comprehended in the word “ Read.”
A very wise man once said (to an idle, extravagant son
when he applied to him to know how he was to enrich himself
and become great) “ Read ! Read ! Read !” In this short
advice was contained the secret of power and wealth, and
independence. I now urge upon you the same injunction.


During the course of your usual Scholastic instruction
(which I entreat you diligently to persevere in), you must
find time to read with attention, some portion every day of a
regular series of useful works. First in order, is the careful
Study of the History of that Country which gave you birth.
Second, of the Countries and Nations which preceded it in
power and greatness, Egypt, Greece and Rome. Third, of the
modern surrounding nations and governments of Europe.
In connection with this head of Study, may be read the
voyages and travels of enterprising men, who have contributed
to the knowledge of the Earth or remote countries.
As to History, I would advise you to begin with Hume’s
England, and read such portions of it daily as your mind and
memory can conveniently contain; but to go on and read it
attentively until you have got to the end. When you tire,
leave off, hut still go on, day by day, and you will be surprised
how much knowledge you have gained, and how your appetite
for useful information will have increased.
To guard against corruption of manners avoid all low and
vulgar company. Neither use nor seek to understand low
and vulgar language, be modest, polite and good humoured to
all. taking care never to be too familiar with anybody, always
recollecting the old adage, “ Too much familiarity breeds
contempt.”
Acquire habits of early rising and moderation in eating and
chunking. Be cleanly and neat in your person, without
foppery or foolery. In storing your mind do not overload it
any more than you would overload your stomach, but never
forget that, in order to form a perfect creature, wholesome food
to the mind is even more essential to human happiness than
meat for the body.
I have thus hastily sketched, my dear James, a few outlines
of your duty at the threshold of life. Recollect that the
happiness of your dear mother and mine are wrapt up in
your welfare; and if you do amiss it will embitter our lives.
Believe me always,
My Dear Boy,
Your anxiously affectionate father,
JAMES DOWLING.


On J. S. D. LEAVING FOR ENGLAND ON HIS STUDIES IN 1836.
(To he read over and over again.)
New South Wales,
15th April, 1836.
My Dear James,
Your cannot yet appreciate the feelings of a father in
parting from a son, perhaps, to see him no more, for human
life is uncertain; but I cannot suffer you to quit the paternal
roof, without assuring you that, in giving you my blessing,
my whole soul is wrapped up in your happiness and prosperity.
I say no more on the score of my personal feelings, because they
concern only myself. lam now to address you upon what
relates to yourself. You are now, my dear ooy, to be cut
adrift, as it were, sixteen thousand miles from those who have
a direct personal interest in your welfare, and although I am
anxious to impress upon your mind, that your success in life
will mainly depend upon yourself. Next to the preservation
of your bodily health (which can be secured in old age only
by a virtuously spent youth) you will have carefully to cherish
in your mind right principles. Without these, life would not
be worth holding. Whatever you may hear, wherever you
may go, tending to disparage religious impressions, I entreat
you to be on your guard. You may safely regard that man,
either a fool or a rogue, who has the courage to avow
that he has no religion, or has the bad taste to treat such
matters contemptuously. Religion is the bond of society.
On earth it is the fountain of man’s integrity and charity,
and it fills the soul with aspirations for a state of quietude and
bliss after the turmoil, littleness and anxiety of mortal life
are over. Do not, however, mistake cant and hypocrisy for
religion. These are the mere shows of piety. Let the sublime
morality of the Gospels be deeply implanted in your mind,
and endeavour to live after the principles therein contained.
With these as your guides you can never be very far wrong;
never losing sight of the obligations of religion towards God,
yourself, and your fellow creatures. It will next become your


duty to improve those mental faculties with which you have
been blessed. Your own honour and your usefulness in society
are deeply concerned in this. You are now at that time of
life when you must, if ever, lay up a store of book knowledge
which is to last you for your life. For when once embarked
on the active ocean of existence, you will have no leisure to
acquire theoretical lore to keep up the career you are to pursue.
You, my dear boy, will have greater advantages than I ever
possessed. In fact, I never had leisure to read systematically,
for the moment I was old enough to make an effort to get
my own living, 1 was pushed into the world, and have had to
work my way through life, under the greatest disadvantages.
It will be your business to avail yourself of the opportunities,
which I am exerting myself to give you, at a great sacrifice
of pecuniary means. You are to furnish your mind with all
sorts of information, and let me entreat you to lose no
opportunity of filling your mind with stores of ideas, or in
other words, of becoming a learned man. By learning I mean,
knowledge of books, men and things. A competent knowledge
of Greek and Latin are necessary to enable you to enjoy the
Literature of almost every country in Europe. This may be
acquired by perseverance. Mathematics must engage a good
deal of your attention, for nothing tends so much to improve the
reasoning faculties and clear a man’s head for the acquisition of
every branch of general science. TO l a lawyer especially it will
afford ready access to the principles of legislation. History,
Geography and Chronology must form the combined fund
of that general information which is to' fit you for the active
exercise of the mind, and the materials to work upon in
dealing with your own contemporaries. Next to these in
importance is the study of Logic, so as to enable you to make
a right use of the knowledge you have acquired either by
reading or observation. It is impossible in the short compass
of a letter to point out to you any precise course of study.
This must be left to the suggestion of those with whom you
will have an opportunity of conferring. All that lam
anxious now to impress upon your mind (and I do it with the
solemnity almost of a dying injunction), is the necessity you
labour under, of availing yourself earnestly and diligently of the
means which will be in your way of becoming hereafter
independent of ail pecuniary considerations. With a sound
education and well stored mind you must succeed in life.
Without education you would lose caste. Only be ambitious
of excelling, and in the course of a few years you will be
astonished how much, with perseverance, you will have


acquired. Proud I shall he of you if lam not disappointed
in these my hopes and expectations. I yet hope to live to see
you obtain that station in society, which will do credit to
yourself and honour to me your affectionate father, whose
anxious prayer is constantly offered up for your earthly and
eternal welfare.
During your voyage to England you must avail yourself of
every opportunity for study. Do this systematically and
perseveringly. Let no day pass over your head without
adding something to your stock of knowledge. In the hours
not devoted to reading you will find something to learn even
on board ship. You may glean from the Captain some
knowledge of Navigation, making lunar and solar observations,
and the mode of keeping a ship’s course. From the Doctox*,
whom I dare say has travelled, something may be acquired.
Of all things seek information from Mr. Forbes, whose mind
is pregnant with the most extensive reading and knowledge.
He is a mine of information in himself. You know enough
of him to know his amiable and agreeable qualities. From
him you will learn much. Observe the character of his mind,
and the delightful manner in which he communicates his
ideas. Study to acquire the good opinion of Mrs. Forbes.
She is beyond all comparison the most amiable, enlightened
and lady-like person I have ever met. Towards both, carry
yourself in the most modest, attentive, and obliging manner.
Study their comforts and win your way to their hearts, by
good nature, cheerfulness and never failing attention. You
will find your profit in this, even in a selfish point of view,
for they are well connected at home, and cannot fail to
be your friends if you have their good opinion.
Be very careful of your person in point of cleanliness.
Never appear at table like an unwashed artizan. Hands, face,
nails, and head, must be always kept critically clean. Avoid
all low, cant phrases. Avoid everything that looks like
pertness or contradiction in conversation. Be an attentive
listener, and whatever strikes you as new and interesting,
silently turn it to your own account. My ambition is to make
you a gentleman in mind, manners and conversation. I hope
I need not warn you against the low practice of grog
drinking. Avoid spirits altogether, and on no account take
more wine than is essential to your health, in this you will
he governed by your own feelings and the advice of the Doctor.
I trust in God you will have a prosperous voyage. You will
probably land at Gravesend, in which case my desire is, that


you proceed directly to your Uncle Vincent’s house, No. 4,
Norfolk Street, Strand, by a steamer. If you cannot
conveniently remove your luggage immediately, your uncle
will put you in the way of landing it when the vessel gets up
to London.
When you are fairly settled you will pursue with diligence
the course of study which you will have to follow, either at
the King’s College or the London University. Spend as
little of your time as possible in idle amusements. Let no
persuasion or example, you may read or see, divert you from
the principal object I have in view—your education.
Probably you may think it very irksome to read so long a
letter, but, relying upon your duty to yourself, if not upon a
feeling of respect and affection for me, I persuade myself that
you will carefully ponder over a letter from one who has no
other motive on earth but your own welfare, in giving you this
parting admonition upon an occasion which may separate us
for many years.
It will always give me the highest pleasure to hear of your
well doing, and I shall look to hear from yourself by every
opportunity that presents itself. When you do write,
remember that I shall expect to see some improvement in
penmanship, an accomplishment not to be despised even by
the profoundest scholar. Composition and style may
sometimes be obscured by a slovenly handwriting. Study to
acquire a free hand, perfectly legible, and at the same time
neat, with a careful regard to the completion of every word
before the pen leaves it.
When you arrive in England, observe as golden rules, to
avoid low Company, be wary of making intimate acquaintances
with persons of loose habits and morals. Make a point of
attending Divine worship every Sunday, rise early and go to
bed early. Apportion your time to study systematically, any
book you are advised to read, go through it diligently to the
end, so of any work or task to be performed. Nothing is so
destructive to a proper course of education as a loose,
desultory, bit by bit course of reading. Acquire a habit of
personal cleanliness and gentlemanly neatness, without foppery
and dandyism in your appearance. Outward show is often a
fair index to what is passing within. I am, in short, desirous
of seeing you a manly, intelligent, well informed, gentlemanly
young fellow, whose society is agreeable to persons of worth
and honour, and who is to cut his own way through the


world by personal merit. I have hastily touched upon the
topics I wish to impress upon your mind at this our parting,
to me a matter of deep personal anxiety, considering your
youth and inexperience. Let wdiat I say he engraved on your
memory, and if it is productive of good fruits, you will make
the evening of my life a season of honest pride and delightful
gratification.
Through weal and through woe you carry the blessing of
your affectionate father,
JAMES DOWLING.
The Commercial Publishing Co. of Sydney, Ltd , 37 Pitt-street, Sydney.






Chief Justice Dowling.
the notes of the late Sir James Dowling, the
second Chief Justice of New South Wales, and
grandfather of the gentleman who has made
the valuable donation. Mr. J. A. Dowling,
it should be mentioned, has been a trustee of
the N.S.W. Free Public Library since 1904,
and the presentation by him of this latest ad-
dition to the treasury of colonial records is in
keeping with the keen interest he has always
displayed in matters relating to the adminis-
tration and welfare of that great institution.
The volumes cover the period from 1828 to
1844, and contain judgments, notes of evidence,
as well as correspondence relating to various
public and social matters. Many historical
law cases now in print were taken from his
Honor’s notebooks. The excellent order in
which everything was kept is evidence of the
deceased Judge’s well-known accuracy and
methodical preciseness. There is a complete
general index, and each notebook has an index
of its own. All is in the fine, clear, beauti-
fully formed writing of the late Judge. Some
of the volumes show that his Honor made
extensive' use of his skill as a shorthand
writer, atid there are many pages filled) with
evidence rapidly penned with the aid of this
system of expeditious note taking.
- During the period covered by the notebooks
many notable cases were dealt with. Among
other matters, it is shown that the law cf
libel was well ventilated;, while the famous
Sudds and Thompson matter, the wholesale
Myall Creek murder, when 28 aborigines were
killed, and other notable cases, are to be
found within their pages. There is also some
interesting correspondence regarding the ju-
dicial precedence; and an interesting record
on the subject of the distribution of profes-
sional practitioners. This last matter was
considered during the yeax; 1829.
The late Sir James Dowling (then Mr. Justice
Dowling) was appointed a Judge by the King’s
Commission on August 6, 1827, and Acting
Chief Justice on April 16, 1836. His appoint-
ment to the Chief Justiceship of the colony
was made by warrant of the late Queen Vic-
toria of August 30, 1837. The honor of
knighthood was conferred on November 28,
1838. His Honor’s notebooks, now presented
by Mr. Dowling, and added to the Mit-
chell Library, is the largest addition which has
been made to that exceedingly valuable col-
lection, and is the second largest gift made to
the State Library generally. The value of
the donation is recognised and appreciated,
and Mr. Dowling’s action in this direction will,
it is hoped, prove an inspiration to others.
In addition, Mr. Dowling has present d a
portrait of the late Chief Justice, executed in
crayons, by Earl, a colonial artist of rep< :!;
during the period covered hy the note books.
This'portrait is believed to be the only speci-
men of the artist’s work in the Mitchell col-
lection.
Almost inexpressibly rich in itself, the fa-
mous Mitchell Library, now the property of
the State of New South Wales, and adequately
housed in the fine new building opposite the
main entrance to the Botanic Gardens, has
been added to by a very valuable gift by Mr.
Arthur Dowling, solicitor, of Pitt-street,
Sydney. The gift embraces 296 volumes of
A VALUABLE GIFT,
LIBRARY.
ADDED TO THE MITCHELL
CHIEF JUSTICE DOW-
LING'S NOTEBOOKS.
