

• LETTERS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS
RELATING TO
'Ebt ®oitjs£cration anti tEntfironorant
OF THE
jfost fifo, fit* |isfn»p of fgripeg,
METROPOLITAN AND PRIMATE.
: * ‘ . ‘I o'


1
‘ '* . ' /’ > '• % "9
’% * * • 1 • * V' •’* k
• • . • . * - •? * • ♦ ‘ V ¥i
'* , ’fp. ,9
: - ■ ■ */■-.;
• 'll
- 11 ... 1P ..J. 1
.•■ * - ■* ‘. •- • , • . ■»
► *’ « * „'
■ ■ . •• • - « . . ■■ .
' .• • ■ . * . • '
-


LETTERS and other Documents relating to the Consecration and
Enthronement of the Most Reverend the Bishop of Sydney
Metropolitan and Primate.
Letter from Senior Bishop to the Administrator of the Diocese of
Sydney.
Synod Hall, Sydney,
20th March, 1890.
Very Reverend and Dear Sir,
It is my duty to inform you officially that the Reverend William
Saumarez Smith, D.D., Principal of St. Aidan’s College, Birkenhead,
has this day been duly elected Primate of the Dioceses constituting the
General Synod, Metropolitan of the Province of New Sohth Wales, and
Bishop of Sydney (in accordance with the provisions of the Determina-
tion I. Session 1881 made on the 19th of October, 1881), by concurrent
majorities of the Bishops of the said Province and of the Bishops of the
said Dioceses in Australia and Tasmania and by the unanimous vote
of the Committee appointed by the Synod of the Diocese of Sydney to
act with the aforesaid Bishops in that behalf.
I have the honor to remain,
Very Reverend and Dear Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) M. GOULBURN,
Senior Bishop of Australia
The Very Reverend and Tasmania.
The Dean of Sydney,
President of the Synod of the Diocese of Sydney.


Cablegram from the Administrator of the Diocese of Sydney
to the Bev. Dr. Saumarez Smith.
“ Duly elected Bishop, Metropolitan, Primate, send acceptance.’
March 20th, 1890.
j ßeply from Dr. Saumarez Smith.
“ Acceptance sent.’’
March 21st, 1890.
Letter from the Administrator of the Diocese of Sydney to
His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Sydney Diocesan Registry,
March 24th, 1890.
My Lord Archbishop,
I do myself the honour of again addressing your Grace with
reference to the Consecration of the Bev. William Saumarez Smith,
D.D., as Bishop of Sydney, Metropolitan of New South Wales, and
Primate of the Dioceses in Australia and Tasmania.
In consequence of the difficulties which arose in connection with his
election to this office in the month of August last, and your Grace s
having informed him that your action in the matter was barred by the
protest of the Bishop of Adelaide and his petition to her Majesty not to
issue the mandate authorizing his consecration, Dr. Smith withdrew
his acceptance of the office to which he believed himself to have been
duly and validly elected.
The way was thus open, in accordance with the provisions of our
local Church Ordinance for a fresh election. And I have now the
honour to inform your Grace that, at a meeting of the Bishops of Aus-
tralia and Tasmania, the Bishops of the Province of New South Wales,
and a Committee chosen and appointed by the Synod of the Diocese of
Sydney, held in the Chapter House on the 19th and 20th instant, Dr.
Saumarez Smith was duly and canonically elected to fill the vacant
office of Primate, Metropolitan and Bishop of Sydney.
WUivu IT A. w •/
I enclose herewith a copy of the Certificate of the Senior Bishop, the
Bishop of Goulburn, who presided over the Assembly.
JJiOJJIVJJ v* vivv*.~v. 7 JT u
The Bishop of Goulburh preferred to forward this Certificate with a
letter from himself.
Accompanying this are also other papers and documents which are
required to be in your Grace’s possession, with a view to the Consecra-
tion of the Bishop Elect.


I have now, in conclusion, at the instance of the Standing Committee
of our Diocese, to pray that your Grace will be pleased to consecrate
the aforesaid Dr. William Saumarez Smith to be our Bishop, with the
higher offices annexed thereto.
I ought to add that the Bishop of Adelaide has promised to make
such representations to your Grace, and to the Colonial Office as to
remove the obstacles which his action had placed in the way of the
Bishop’s Consecration.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord Archbishop,
Your Grace’s most obedient servant,
WILLIAM M. COWPER,
Administrator of the Diocese of Sydney.
To His Grace
The Right Honorable, and Most Reverend,
The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
Documents forwarded with the foregoing letter.
1. Public Notification given in the Cathedral of St. Andrew on
Sunday , the 23rd day of March , 1890.
In accordance with the provisions of an Ordinance for the appoint-
ment of Bishops to the See of Sydney it is hereby notified by authority
of the President of the Synod of the Diocese that the Rev. William
Saumarez Smith Principal of St. Aidan’s College Birkenhead and Canon
of Chester Cathedral, Doctor in Divinity has been duly elected Bishop of
this Diocese, and as such Bishop he is Metropolitan of the Province of
New South Wales and Primate of the Dioceses constituting the
General Synod of the Dioceses in Australia and Tasmania.
(Signed) WILLIAM M. COWPER,
President.
I certify that the foregoing notification was given in the Cathedral of
St. Andrew Sydney during the time of Divine Service on Sunday the
23rd day of March a.d. 1890.
(Signed) WILLIAM M. COWPER,
Dean.


2. Determination I. of General Synod Session 1881 (made Wednes-
day 19th October 1881.) “ General Buies for the formation of
Provinces and the regulation of matters connected therewith.
3. Ordinance for the appointment of Bishops to the See of Sydney
1882.
4. Proceedings of the meeting of Synod of the Diocese of Sydney
New South Wales under the Ordinance for the appointment of Bishops
to the See of Sydney 1882 for filling up the vacancy of the See.
5. Copy of Certificate of the Bishop of Goulburn, Senior Bishop, of
the election of the Bev. Dr. Saumarez Smith.
To the Bight Honorable and Most Beverend Edward White by Divine
Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
This is to certify to your Grace that we, Mesac by Divine Permission
Bishop of Goulburn, Senior Bishop in Australia and Tasmania, presided
over a Conference of the Bishops of Australia and Tasmania, that is to
say of the Bight Beverend the Lord Bishop of Goulburn, New South
Wales, the Bight Beverend the Bishop of Grafton and Armidale, New
South Wales, the Bight Beverend the Bishop of Ballarat, Victoria, the
Bight Beverend the Bishop of Northern Queensland, Townsville, the
Eight Beverend the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, South Australia, the
Bight Beverend the Bishop of Biverina, New South Wales, the Bight
Beverend the Lord Bishop of Brisbane, Queensland, the Bight Beverend
the Lord Bishop of Melbourne, Victoria, the Eight Beverend the Bishop
of Bathurst, New South Wales, and the Bight Beverend the Lord
Bishop of Tasmania, Hobart; and of the Bishops of Goulburn, Grafton
and Armidale, Biverina and Bathurst aforesaid of the Province of New
South Wales, together with a Committee elected by the Synod of the
Diocese of Sydney on the 25th day of February, 1890, that is to say
the Very Beverend the Dean of Sydney, President of the Sydney Synod,
the Venerable the Archdeacon of Cumberland, the Eeverends Arthur
Wellesley Pain, 8.A., Alfred Yarnold and John D. Langley, Mr. Justice
Foster, the Worshipful the Chancellor of the Diocese (W. Gregory
Walker, Esq.), the Honorable Edward Knox, member of the Legislative
Council, and Bichard Jones, Esq., all of whom were duly qualified and
duly summoned (together with the Lord Bishop of Perth, who was
unable to attend) for the purpose of electing, by concurrent majorities,
a duly qualified person to be Primate of the Dioceses in Australia and
Tasmania, Metropolitan of the Province of New South Wales and
Bishop of Sydneyand that accordingly the Beverend William
Saumarez Smith, Doctor in Divinity, Principal of Saint Aidan’s
College, Birkenhead, in accordance with the Determination No. 1.1881


of the General Synod of Australia, and the Ordinance of the Synod of
the Diocese of Sydney, was duly and canonically elected, in the Synod
Hall, Sydney, on the 20th day of March, 1890, to the above position of
Primate, Metropolitan, and Bishop, by concurrent majorities of the
Bishops of Australia and Tasmania, including the Bishop of Adelaide
and of the Bishops of the Province of New South Wales, and by the
unanimous vote of the said Committee of the Synod of the Diocese of
Sydney.
As witness our hand and seal this twenty-sixth day of March in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety and in the
twenty-eighth year of our Consecration.
[L.S.] M. GOULBURN.
Bishopthorpe, Goulburn,
New South Wales.
Letter from the Bishop-elect to the Administrator of the Diocese of
Sydney.
Principal’s Lodge,
St. Aidan’s College,
Birkenhead,
20th March. 1890.
My Dear Mr. Dean,
I have received your telegraphic message informing me that I have
been “ duly elected Bishop Metropolitan Primate.”
It is with great thankfulness that I find myself relieved from the
somewhat painful position of uncertainty in which I had been placed
by the disputed views concerning the former election.
I accept the proffered post to which I seem now to be definitely
called, and (in words used by me before), I pray that grace and wisdom
may he given to me so that I may fulfil the honorable and difficult
duties connected with that position wisely and faithfully.
I may add that I shall endeavour to use all expedition in my pre-
parations for coming to you ; and I ask for a continuance of interces-
sions on my behalf that I may come to you in the fulness of the bles-
sing of Christ.
Your’s very sincerely,
(Signed) WM. SAUMAREZ SMITH,
(Bishop-Elect.)
The Very Reverend
The Dean of Sydney, &c., &c


Notarial Act of the Consecration of the Rev. William Saumarez
Smith , D.D., to be a Bishop.
On Tuesday, the Twenty-fourth day of June, in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and ninety (being the Feast of The
Nativity of St. John the Baptist) and in the Eighth year of the Trans-
lation of the Right Honorable and Most Reverend Father in God
Edward White, by Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England and Metropolitan in the Cathedral Church of
Saint Paul, in the City of London.
The said Eight Honorable and Most Reverend Father the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury by virtue and authority of a certain Royal
Mandate or Warrant under the Royal signet and sign manual of Her
Most Gracious Majesty and our Sovereign Lady Victoria, by the
Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
Queen Defender of the Faith and so forth directed to him of the tenor
following to wit:—“Victoria Reg.: Victoria, by the Grace of God of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen Defender of
the Faith To the Most Reverend Father in God Edward White by
Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England and Metropolitan, Greeting Whereas you the said Archbishop
have humbly applied to us for our License by Warrant under our
sign manual and signet authorizing and empowering you to consecrate
our Trusty and Well beloved William Saumarez Smith, Doctor of
Divinity, Clerk in Holy Orders, to be a Bishop to the intent that he
should exercise his functions in one of our possessions abroad: Now it
is our will and pleasure and we do by this our license under our sign
manual and signet authorize and empower you the said Archbishop to
consecrate the said William Saumarez Smith to be a Bishop and we do
further authorize and empower you to do perform and execute all and
singular those things which belong to your Pastoral office in respect of
such consecration as aforesaid according to the Laws Statutes and
Canons in this behalf made and provided. Given at our Court at
Balmoral this twenty-eighth day of May, 1890, in the Fifty-third year
of our Reign. By Her Majesty’s Command, Knutsford.” (The Right
Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God Frederick by Divine
Permission Lord Bishop of London, The Right Reverend Fathers in God
Harvey Lord Bishop of Carlisle, William Basil Lord Bishop of Saint
David’s, William Dalrymple Lord Bishop of Lichfield, Richard Lord
Bishop of Llandaff, Frederick Lord Bishop of Madras, The Right
Reverend Alfred Bishop Suffragan of Colchester, The Right Reverend
Alfred Bishop Suffragan of Marlborough, The Right Reverend Robert


Claudius, Bishop Suffragan of Bedford, The Right Reverend Doctor
James Colquhoun Campbell, late Bishop of Bangor, The Right Reverend
Doctor Samuel Edward Marsden, late Bishop of Bathurst, and the
Right Reverend Doctor Alfred Barry, late Bishop of Sydney, assisting
him the said Lord Archbishop) Consecrated the said Reverend William
Saumarez Smith Doctor of Divinity, to be a Bishop as mentioned in
the said Royal mandate the said William Saumarez Smith having
before the Consecration Service taken the Oath of Allegiance to Her
Majesty the Queen before the said Archbishop and in my presence in
the following form “ I William Saumarez Smith to be consecrated a
Bishop do swear that I will be faithful, and bear true Allegiance to Her
“ Majesty Queen Victoria, Her heirs and successors according to law.
“ So help me God, (signed), “William Saumarez Smith ” and the said
William Saumarez Smith having also at the appointed time in the said
Consecration Service taken the Oath of due obedience to the said Right
Honourable and Most Reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury and his successors for the time being, and to the
Metropolitical Church of Christ Canterbury in the following form
“In the name of God Amen I William Saumarez Smith to be
“consecrated a Bishop do profess and promise all due reverence
“ and obedience to the Archbishop and to the Metropolitical Church of
“ Christ Canterbury and to their Successors. So help me God through
“Jesus Christ (signed) Wm. Saumarez Smith.” The Rites circum-
stances and ceremonies anciently used in the Church of England being
observed and applied according to the form and manner prescribed in
the Book intituled “ The form and manner of making and consecrating
Bishops Priests and Deacons,” in the presence of me Sir John Hassard
Knight, Notary Public Principal Registrar of the Province of
Canterbury there being then and there present The Very Reverend
Richard William Church, D. 0. L. Dean of the said Cathedral Church,
The Venerable William Macdonald Sinclair, M.A., Archdeacon of
London, The Very Reverend Samuel Reynolds Hall, D.D. Dean of
Rochester, The Reverend Henry Wace, D.D. Principal of King’s
College, London, and the Reverend Arthur Hamilton Baynes M.A.,
the last three named being Chaplains of His said Grace and Francis
Hugh Lee, Esquire, one of his said Grace’s Secretaries with many
others then and there assembled.
Which I attest,
(Signed) JOHN HASSARD,
Principal Registrar of the Province of
Canterbury and Rotary Public.


We the undersigned Notaries Public duly admitted and sworn
residing at Doctor’s Commons, in the City of London, do hereby certify
and attest to all to whom it may concern that Sir John Hassard,
Knight, whose name is subscribed to the foregoing Act was and is a
Notary Public and that the Letters names and words thereto sub-
scribed were and are of the proper handwriting and subscription of the
said Sir John Hassard that we were present and saw him sign the
same and that full faith and credit is and ought to be given to all acts
subscriptions and attestations of the said Sir John Hassard as well in
judgment as out.
In testimony whereof We have hereunto subscribed our names to
serve and avail as occasion may require at Doctor’s Commons London
the first day of August in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and ninety.
(Signed) GEORGE H. BROOKS,
Not. Pub.
(Signed) CYRUS WADDELOVE,
Not. Pub.
Notification of the Consecration of the Rev. William Saumarez
Smith, D.D., to be a Bishop.
In the Name of God. Amen.
To all the Faithful in Christ Jesus throughout the world and especially
to the British Residents and to all others whom it may concern
in the Diocese of Sydney.
Greeting ;
Be it known unto you by these Presents That we Edward White by
Divine Providence Archbishop of Canterbury Primate of all England
anl Metropolitan having received torn her Most Gracious Majesty
Queen Victoria the Boyal license under Her Sign Manual authorizing
us to consecrate our beloved in Christ the Beverend Wilham Saumarez
Smith Doctor in Divinity to be a Bishop to the intent that he should
exercise his functions in one of our possessions abroad Dld °n ‘he
Twenty-fourth day of June (being the Feast of the Nativity St. John
the Baptist) in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
ninety in pursuance of such Boyal License Consecrate him the said
'William Saumarez Smith accordingly (calling to our assistance our
Bight Beverend Brothers in Christ the Bishops of London, Carlisle, St.


David’s, Lichfield, Llandaff, Madras, Colchester, Marlborough, Bedford,
The Right Reverend Doctor James Colquhoun Campbell, late Bishop
of Bangor, The Right Reverend Doctor Samuel Edward Marsden, late
Bishop of Bathurst, and the Right Reverend Doctor Alfred Barry, late
Bishop of Sydney) The rites of the Church of England as prescribed
in the Book intituled “ The form and manner of making ordaining and
consecrating of Bishops Priests and Deacons ” being in all things
duly observed he having first taken the oaths required in this behalf.
Given under our hand and seal this Fifteenth day of July in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety and of our
Translation the Eighth.
(Signed) EDW. CANTUAR. [L.S.]
This is to certify that the within Certificate or Notification was this
day duly recorded in the Principal Registry of the Archbishop of
Canterbury.
Dated the First day of August, 1890.
(Signed) JOHN HASSARD,
Vicar General’s Office, Principal Begistrar.
Doctor’s Commons,
London.
CERTIFICATE OF INSTALLATION.
To all to whom it may concern I William Macquarie Cowper, Master
of Arts, Vicar General of the Diocese of Sydney, and Dean of the
Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew, in the City of Sydney, and
Archdeacon of the said City and Suburbs, do hereby certify that I did
on Thursday the ninth day of October in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and ninety, in the Cathedral Church of St.
Andrew, Sydney, duly induct install and enthrone the Most Reverend
William Saumarez Smith, Doctor in Divinity, he having been duly
elected to be Bishop of the Diocese of Sydney, and having been latety
consecrated a Bishop, into possession of the Cathedral Church of Saint
Andrew, Sydney, with all its rights, honours, and appurtenances.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand at Sydney this
ninth day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and ninety.
(Signed) WILLIAM M. COWPER.
CERTIFICATE OF INSTALLATION.
On this tenth day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand
eight hundred and ninety We do hereby certify and attest unto all
whom it may concern that on the ninth day of October in the year


aforesaid the Very Reverend William Macquarie Cowper, Master of
Arts, Vicar General of the Diocese of Sydney, and Dean of the
Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew, in the City of Sydney, and
Archdeacon of the said City and Suburbs, did in our presence in the
Cathedral Church of Saint Andrew, at Sydney aforesaid, duly induct
install and enthrone the Most Reverend William Saumarez Smith,
Doctor in Divinity, into possession of the Bishopric of Sydney in the
form and manner following that is to say :
In the name of God. Amen.
I William Macquarie Cowper, Master of Arts, Vicar General of the
Diocese of Sydney, and Dean of the Cathedral Church of Saint
Andrew, in the City of Sydney, and Archdeacon of the said city and
Suburbs, Do hereby induct install and enthrone thee William Saumarez
Smith, Doctor in Divinity, having been duly elected to be Bishop of the
Diocese of Sydney, and having been lately consecrated a Bishop, into
possession of this Church with all its rights honours and appurtenances.
And the Lord preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time
forth for evermore. Amen.
And we do hereby further certify and attest that at the same time and
place the said William Saumarez Smith, Bishop of Sydney, was in
our presence by the Bishops of the Province of New South Wales
solemnly recognised as Metropolitan Bishop of the said Province in the
form and manner following that is to say: —
In the name of God. Amen.
In the presence and on behalf of the Bishops of the Province of New
South Wales, I Mesac by Divine Permission Bishop of Goulburn as
Senior Bishop of the said Province, do hereby solemnly recognise thee
Most Reverend Father in God William Saumarez Smith, Doctor in
Divinity, duly elected Lord Bishop of Sydney, and under Royal
License recently consecrated a Bishop, to be by Divine permission
Metropolitan Bishop of the said Province of New South Wales.
As Witness my hand this ninth day of October in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety.
(Signed) M. GOULBURN.
And we do hereby further certify and attest that at the same time
and place the said William Saumarez Smith Bishop of Sydney was in
our presence by the Bishops of the Dioceses in Australia and Tasmania
solemnly recognised as Primate of the said Dioceses in the form and
manner following that is to say:—


In the name of God. Amen.
In the presence and on behalf of the Bishops of the Dioceses in
Australia and Tasmania I Mesac by Divine Permission Bishop of
Goulburn as Senior Bishop of the said Bishops, do hereby solemnly
recognize thee Most Reverend Father in God William Saumarez Smith,
Doctor in Divinity, duly elected Lord Bishop of Sydney, and recently
consecrated a Bishop under Royal license, to be Primate of the Dioceses
in Australia and Tasmania.
(Signed) M. GOULBURN.
In faith and testimony whereof we have hereunto set our hands the
day and year first above written to serve and avail as occasion may
require.
(Signed)
Robert L. King,
Archdeacon of Gvmberlemd.
G. H. Moreton,
Arthur R. Rivers,
W. J. Gunther,
Archdeacon of Camden.
Edward Knox,
James S. Dowling,
Edmund Burton,
Robert Atkins,
Official Secretary
of the Diocese of Sydney.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 490, Kent Street, Sydney.


♦
*
* V ,
4
♦
* *
* ' *
ft
* • ' If 1 *
v ■ ' .* ■ .
• ■ .. f * V
*'•*** . • •* *
,
* . • •• 4 * * % * 1
•..*«* * •. * • * ■ * ■ .«f •'
... . i va* -• * . • . ' • '
