

KbTH
MELBOURNE CENTENNIAL EXHIBITION OFFICES,
8, Victoria Chambers , Westminster , S.W.
1887.
I have the honour to inform you that it has been decided by the
Government of the Colony of Victoria to hold an International Exhibition of Arts,
Manufactures, Agricultural and Industrial Processes and Products, in the City
of Melbourne, in Celebration of the Centenary of the Settlement of Australia ; and
that the Exhibition will be opened on the Ist of August, 1888, and will close on the
31st of January, 1889.
An Executive Commission has been appointed by the Governor under the Seal
of the Colony to conduct the Exhibition ; and its London Committee, who have
control of all questions concerning the Exhibitors of the United Kingdom, consists of
the following gentlemen :
The Hon. Sir Graham Berry, K.C.M.G., Agent-General for Victoria, Chairman.
The Right Hon. Hugh C. E. Childers,
M.P.
The Hon J. Dennistoun Wood.
Charles E. Bright, Esq., C.M.G.
John Badcock, Esq.
Sir Henry Darkly, G.C.M.G.
Lieut.-General Sir Andrew Clarke,
R.E., G.C.M.G.
John H. Blackwood, Esq.
John Maclntyre, Esq.
John M. Paterson, Esq.
William Peterson, Esq.
Robert Rome, Esq.
Sir James McCulloch, K.C.M.G.
Sir Samuel Wilson, M.P.
The Hon. James Service,
The offices of the Commission in England will be at 8, Victoria Chambers,
Westminster, adjoining the offices of the Agent-General for the Colony, and all com-
munications should be addressed to the Secretary at that address.
Her Majesty’s Government propose to issue a Royal Commission, of which His
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales has graciously consented to be President, to co-operate
with the Government of the Colony in ensuring a due representation of the Arts and
Manufactures of the Queen’s dominions, and have promised to use their good offices
with the Governments of Foreign States, of the Indian Empire, and of the Colonies
other than those of Australasia, to make the Exhibition truly representative of the
works of all nations.
I am instructed to request your particular attention to the following figures, which
give a general view of the trade of the United Kingdom with Australasia, and which are
published on the authority of Government returns supplied to the Commission :
“ During the year 1885, Australasia, with a population of 3,500,000, imported
from Great Britain goods to the amount of The United States,
France, and Germany, whose combined populations number 133,000,000, imported
during the same period from Great Britain, to the amount of
Calculated at per head of the population, Australasia therefore imported nearly 23
times as much as the above-named countries combined ; and this in addition to a
large and increasing trade with other countries.”


The last International Exhibition held at Melbourne, in the year 1880, was followed
by a most remarkable increase in the imports of the Colony, due no doubt in great part
to the stimulus thereby given to trade. The imports of Victoria, which in 1880, the
year in which the Exhibition was held, were rose in 1881 to
and in 1882 to The capitals of the adjoining Colonies, Adelaide and
Sydney, are now connected with Melbourne by railway, and before next year the line to
Brisbane will be open, so that the population of the greater Colonies will be placed
within easy access of the Exhibition. It may thus be fairly hoped that the stimulus
given to British trade, not merely with Victoria, but with all the Australasian Colonies,
will even exceed the remarkable results which followed the Exhibition of 1880.
The main buildings erected for that Exhibition are of a permanent character and fine
design. To these will be added annexes of iron, covering, according to a telegraphic
despatch just received from the Colony, a total area of twenty-four acres. No charge
will be made for space. The detailed prospectus and forms of application can
be obtained on personal or written inquiry at the above address. Applications
for space should be returned to the London offices on or before the 31st of
August; but it is requested that, in view of the distance at which the Exhibition
is held, and the time necessarily involved in correspondence respecting the arrange-
ments for the perfect accommodation of all exhibitors, the applications may be sent in at
as early a date as possible. lam to add that every facility will be afforded to exhibitors
respecting customs, transit from wharves to Exhibition, and supply of motive-power.
In conclusion, it may be stated that the Government of Victoria are determined to
use all their influence to make the Exhibition in every way worthy of the great historical
event which it commemorates, hoping besides that it may, like its predecessor of 1880,
be the direct means of promoting a large!y-increased personal and commercial intercourse
between the Colonies and the United Kingdom. And it is in this spirit that the
Executive Commission at Melbourne invites exhibitors from all nations in the following
words :
“In view of the remarkable growth of Australasia in all things relating to
population, production, and general distribution of wealth among all classes, the
facilities for rapid, economical, and easy transit, and its many other advantages, the
Commissioners confidently invite all desirous of extending their commercial relations
with these rapidly-extending communities to exhibit the fullest and most complete
representations of their Raw Products, Skilled Industries, and Arts, at the
Centennial International Exhibition, Melbourne, 1888.”
I have the honour to be
Your obedient Servant,
J. CASHEL HOEY.


3 1508 02236154 2


