

University [?]
1922




Section G (I.)
SOCIAL AND STATISTICAL SCIENCE.
ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT,
PROFESSOR FRANCIS ANDERSON, University of Sydney.
LIBERALISM AND SOCIALISM.
It is just 40 years ago since John Bright, in reviewing the political
situation in England, said, “ We have got household suffrage ; we have
got the ballot. In a year or two we are pretty certain to have national
education ; and after that I really do not see what there is that Parlia-
ment can usefully do for reform or progress.” Many things have
happened during those 40 years. Many changes have taken place
in political theory and political practice. But the greatest change
has been a change in the way of looking at social and political problems,
a change of mental attitude. Such changes of attitude on a grand
scale are rarely sudden or spasmodic, although their results may be
made manifest in what seem sudden, even revolutionary, changes to
those who are blind to the signs of the times. Acts of legislation, even
when they appear to be leaps in the dark, breaches with an honored
past, are themselves effects and symptoms of a change in national
temperament and outlook. It is only when we hear voices from the
past, speaking words like those I have quoted, that the magnitude of
the change is made plain to us. It is a change of sentiment. Our
hopes and fears are not the same as those of the generation of English
liberals who found in John Bright their most eloquent, if not their
most thoughtful, representative. And behind the change of sentiment
there is a change of ideas. Words like progress and reform are, in them-
selves, almost meaningless. As Disraeli said, “ They are phrases, and
not facts : words to mystify the millions.” An Oxford undergraduate
luminously defined progress as “ advance in the direction in which
things happen to be moving.” But that definition would apply to
progress down a steep place into the sea. Words like progress and
reform have meaning only in reference to certain ends or ideals, and
it is clear that the ends or ideals which now govern the social and
political effort of great bodies of men, transforming and creating political
parties, and altering profoundly the character of legislation, have out-
grown the formulas which seemed to most of our predecessors to sum
up the whole faith and duty of the practical politician.
If we are content for tbe moment to use the words Liberalism and
Socialism as describing general tendencies rather than cut and dried
creeds, we may not err in calling the nineteenth century the age of liberal-
ism and in naming, in anticipation, the twentieth century the century
of socialism.
8a


Liberalism was the heir of the French Revolution. It stood for
the spirit of liberation—freedom from all control which would hamper
the individual in his task of developing his own powers, and finding
the social place for which those powers fitted him. Its motto was
“ Touies les carriires ouvertes aux talents .” So far as it uttered any
moral imperative to the individual, it called upon him not to abide
in the place, but to find the place to which he was called. So far as
it offered any practical guide to social and political effort, it called
upon society to unite in freeing itself from the restrictions which had
been inherited from the misgovernment of the past. And as those
inherited restrictions were numerous, and often excessively burdensome,
liberalism started with a practical and popular, even although it was
in the main a negative, programme of reform. The banners waved,
the trumpets sounded, and the liberal party moved from victory to
victory, until John Bright seemed to see in the immediate future—that
is, in our past—the end of any need for further legislation, the coming
of the political millenium, when there would be no work left for liberal
hands to do. We need not be disrespectful to our predecessors because
changed conditions have led to a change in sentiments and ideas. With-
out the liberalism of the nineteenth century, the socialism of the
twentieth century would not have been possible. It is a superficial
view of political evolution wdiich sees in socialism only a reaction,
more or less prolonged, against the individualism of the school of
laissez-faire. The “ swing of the pendulum ”is a convenient but mis-
leading metaphor, useful as a consolation to the political party for the
time out of office, but without scientific value as descriptive of the
actual course of social evolution. The movement of liberalism was
really a preliminary clearing of the ground for the movement of social
and political reconstruction.
Now, whenever a great movement takes place there appears,
sooner or later, a theory of the movement, and sooner or later the theory
tends to harden into a creed, which, like most creeds, may have only an
historical or polemical value. We continue to fight over the meaning
of the creed long after it has ceased to apply to the facts of life. Life
moves on, and the first postulate of all scientific explanation is that
the theory should be adequate to the facts. It is true that no theory
—and especially no social theory—ever is adequate to all the facts
of the case ; but it has always been the curse of theories of social
progress to be identified with the rough generalisations of political
practice, the results of the analysis of a particular epoch. And this
applies to the gospel of collectivism as well as to the gospel of laissez-
faire. Man cannot do without a working hypothesis, whatever be the
sphere of inquiry ; but it is harder in politics than in any other depart-
ment to avoid the fallacy which consists in interpreting the facts by
a theory which has ceased to apply to them.
Social science and social practice seem at the present moment to
be at the mercy of two conflicting dogmatisms—the dogmatism which
denies the State and the dogmatism which deifies the State. Both
forms of dogmatism have arisen as partial and opposite interpretations


of the same data. Both stand for ideals which, as they are described
in theory, never have existed, and, it is safe to say, never will exist,
in any society of human beings. And the confusion of present politics
is due to the fact that opposing parties are compelled in practice to
make illogical concessions to each other, to adopt in turn each other’s
policy, while reprobating each other’s principles, with the result that
the non-voting majority of the electors continue in their attitude of
indifference, and are more than ever convinced that politics is a game,
and a general election a kind of sham fight. Ido not urge this as
an objection to that spirit of compromise which is a necessity of practical
politics and the source of the strength and permanence of our national
institutions. We are concerned here with political science rather
than with political practice. But I would respectfully ask whether
our political practice would not gain if a clearer recognition of the
changed conditions of social life brought with it a change in the nature
of political controversy. There are so many live issues to be determined
that it seems a pity to waste our energies over the discussion of dead
ones.
The controversy over the question of Government interference
seems to me to be in great measure a fight over a dead issue. The
economic theorists of the first half of the nineteenth century were
acutely aware of the evils which stupid restrictions on industry and
commerce had engendered and fostered, and they set themselves the
task of inquiring into what would follow on the entire abolition of
such restrictions. The result of their inquiry was the establishment
of the traditional political economy which provided a mistaken political
gospel to the leaders of the great liberal movement. The mistake was
made of treating economic generalisations as moral laws of conduct.
The doctrine of non-interference was preached, and was extended from
trade relations to almost all the relations which constitute social life.
The exponents of the liberal creed did not go so far as the philosophic
anarchists of our time, who boldly demand the abolition of all Govern-
ment interference. Yet they sought, in theory and practice, to reduce
the functions of the State to a minimum which could be defined once
for all, in set terms, as the defence of the lives and property of the
individual members of society. It was thought that at last liberalism
had found a final creed, of which it could say, J’y suis, fy reste. But
political creeds represent milestones on the road, rather than per-
manent abodes.
The most effective refutation of a fallacy is to point to its practical
disproof in experience. The actual course of liberal legislation was the
experimental disproof of the narrow and negative doctrine of non-
interference with the economic organisation of society. At the same
time almost every new extension of government control, every new
successful demand that the business of the State was the organisation
of society for certain common purposes and interests, the most im-
portant of which was its own economic well-being, was met by the
assertion that the new act was only an exception, or a concession, to
circumstances, in no wise to be interpreted as a permanent departure


from the liberal faith that the best of all social worlds was that in which
the State interfered as little as possible. Even of Gladstone it has
been written (Paul’s “ Modern England,” vol. V., p. 231) : “ The
special claims of labor did not appeal to him. His service to the work-
ing classes was the removal of taxes on food and on the raw material
of industry. He had no belief in limiting by law the hours of work
for mines or factories.” It might be argued—and the course of
social and economic history supports the argument —that if the functions
of government were reduced to the required minimum what would
remain would not be free, self-governing individuals, harmoniously
co-operating with each other, but social groups, specialised associa-
tions, united for selfish interest and exploitation of society in general.
To remove the so-called despotism of the State would not be to set
up an individualistic paradise, but to leave the field free for other and
worse kinds of despotism —the despotism of the father, the despotism
of the employer, the despotism of the priest, not to speak of the tyranny
of social and commercial combinations which would have the “ outward
forms and material advantages of socialism, without its ideal the
general good of the community.” Liberalism, as well as socialism,
cannot do without Government intervention, whether we call such
intervention grandmotherly legislation, or simply the necessary exten-
sion of the economic functions of the State. The State is society
organised for the common good, for the protection of individuals
against groups, associations, unions of masters or unions of men, who,
without such common State action, would make freedom of individual
development impossible. To reduce State functions to a minimum
would be to reduce the possibility of individualism to a minimum.
Part of the strength of socialism as a fighting political creed just lies
in the recognition of this fact, and' on the emphasis that socialistic
legislation is a means, and not the final end, of politics. The eminent
French socialist and statesman, J. Jaures, declares socialism to be
“ the supreme assertion of individual right. Socialists desire to uni-
versalise human culture. For us the nature of every institution is
relative to the individual. There is nothing above the individual.
The individual is the measure of all things—of family, property,
humanity, God. Voila la logique de V idee revolutionnaire. Voila
le socialisme .”
We may, then, dismiss as a false antithesis the opposition between
individual and social interest which has been in the past, and is still,
the source of so much futile political controversy. The question of
practical politics in this respect is not different from the theoretical
question. It is not a question of the maximum or minimum of inter-
ference on the part of a Government supposed to stand outside and
aloof from the classes to be governed. It is a question of social self-
organisation, and a question not so much —except for fanatics and
extremists —of the quantity as of the quality of such social self-organisa-
tion, of how far the forms of social and political organisation will help
and not hinder the free self-development of the members of the com-
munity. In a word, the question is—How shall we help the individual


without in so doing tempting him to cease from self-help 1 It is a
matter of indifference whether we describe the social goal as the pro-
duction of the perfect man or the perfect society. From the point of
view of ethics—that is, of the ends or ideals which it seems incumbent
on humanity to realise—these two phrases are but different forms of
expression for the same fact. But from the point of view of practical
politics, the problem cannot be solved by appeal to phrases or by
verbal definitions of socialism which satisfy no one but the framer.
Nor can social science, so far as it exists at present, do more than analyse—
and that very imperfectly—the general conditions of the problem.
It cannot adequately diagnose the situation, much less provide an
infallible remedy. Social evolution represents the last and most
complex phase of the process of cosmic evolution; and the laws and
conditions of the final stage of an evolutionary process are dependent
on the laws and conditions of the previous stages. In every higher
formation the properties of the previous lower formations persist—
even when other properties appear as further manifestations of the
fundamental cosmic energy, disclosing new and higher ends to be
achieved—vital, social, and moral. And, further, every higher forma-
tion consisting of a greater number of elements and properties is subject
to a greater number of changes and combinations, resulting in specialised
forms of action which cannot be determined merely by direct deductive
application of the laws of the lower stages of evolution, but only by an
examination of the new facts and the new needs. Social science is a
new science which has still to master the complexity of the social fact,
and social problems can be solved only by that wise adaptation of means
to ends which partly follows and partly anticipates the actual course
of social evolution. It is, however, the special office of social science
to emphasize the fact that the path of social evolution is in great measure
determined by events over which the legislature has no control. “What
was decided among the historic protozoa cannot be annulled by Act of
Parliament.”
This position, however, must not be misunderstood. An Australian
statesman said some time ago that “ Every country must have a political
economy to suit its circumstances.” It is probable that what the
speaker meant was not quite the same as what he said. This sometimes
happens in the case of public speakers —even in the case of Australian
statesmen ! It would be very convenient and very pleasant if every
country could produce by legislation a meteorology to suit its circum-
stances. But since that is impossible, man invents umbrellas and
constructs irrigation works. And we may admit, what the economist
of abstract theory too often forgets, that every country has, and must
have, a politics of its own —a politics to suit its circumstances. A
political policy—even a protectionist policy, whether it be for protec-
tion of local manufactures or protection of local labor —may be in some
ways expensive ; but it is not on that account alone, foolish and damn-
able. Social science is not purely and simply an application of the
laws of the abstract science of economics, any more than it is a direct
deduction from the laws of biology. At the same time, protection,


wherever it exists, implies and is a standing proof of the validity of
economic laws, although it may sometimes afford a practical disproof
of the false deductions made by short-sighted economists. It may
be true, for example, that labor combinations are unable permanently
to maintain the remuneration of labor above a point which it would
have reached under favorable circumstances without such combination.
But the laborer himself is more concerned with the unfavorable circum-
stances, and with the fact that combination has in many cases kept
the rate of wages from sinking to a level which it would inevitably have
touched without such combination. And this may be granted without
admitting the validity of Marx’s supposed iron law of wages. A law,
in the scientific sense, is nothing more or less than a necessary relation
between any event and the conditions in which it takes place, and it
has been the misfortune, alike of the old economist and of the new
socialist, that they have been too much intent on the hypothetical
event, and too little observant of the actual conditions. The old
economists were at once too optimistic and too pessimistic. They
were too optimistic in their view of the good which would result from
a regime of unrestricted competition, from the operation of the “ natural
economic laws ” which were supposed to govern society. They were
too pessimistic with regard to the powers of man and society over those
natural laws. When the free play of economic forces seemed to produce
results which offended the moral sense of the community, the economists
for the most part contented themselves with saying that nothing could
be done to counteract them. The result, in the field of practical
politics, was that when the negative programme of the Liberal Party
was accomplished, liberalism found itself without any positive policy
for the future. It had maintained itself by attack in the past, and in
default of any positive scheme of social reconstruction it is now sug-
gested that liberalism may continue to live and fight under a banner
with a negative device —Anti-Socialism.
It is a tendency of human nature —especially of religious and
political human nature —when it loses faith in one set of dogmas to
take refuge in another set, and to assert them with the same extrava-
gance and disregard of facts. The politician in search of a gospel to
take the place of the discredited doctrine of laissez-faire is offered the
gospel according to Karl Marx as a substitute for the gospel according
to Adam Smith. I have hitherto spoken of liberalism and socialism
as general tendencies of social and political life, rather than as fixed
and stereotyped forms of political creed. To avoid ambiguity, I shall
henceforth use the word “ collectivism ” to denote that definite doctrine
which opposes the assertion that the functions of the State should be
reduced to a. minimum, with the counter assertion, equally sweeping
and equally dogmatic, that the functions of the State should be ex-
tended until the difference between society and the State is abolished,
at any rate in everything that pertains to the economic sphere. If
this extravagant state absolutism were to be regarded as identical
with the practical state socialism which promises to become the guiding
principle of the politics of the future, then anti-socialism might well


seem the prudent policy to the bewildered citizen, who is told that his
only choice is between two clenched antagonisms, or between the devil
and the deep sea. Dr. Johnson advised that we should keep our minds
free from cant. Social science bids us avoid the contagion of hysteria.
Socialism has passed through three stages during the last century,
and although enthusiasts and extremists may linger in the first or second
stage, political theory, and, in an increasing measure, political practice
are mainly concerned with the third stage. The Utopian socialism of
the early part of the nineteenth century was the work of imaginative
dreamers, or of reformers possessed by a single idea. Like the apocalyp-
tic visions of the early Christians, their schemes of social regeneration
and reconstruction were valuable mainly as signs of the times. The
second stage of socialism is that which is sometimes named scientific
socialism, but which ought rather to be called dogmatic socialism—
the socialism of abstract theory, the collectivism of Karl Marx and
his successors. The third stage is the stage of practical socialism, in
which the demands of the ideal theory are subordinated to the necessities
of the political situation, and the goal or “ objective ” of socialism is
put more or less in the background, appearing or disappearing according
to circumstances.
Collectivism, or the doctrine of state absolutism, is both unhistori-
cal and unscientific. It is one of the most striking examples of a tre-
mendous generalisation, derived from grossly inadequate data. It is
based on a narrow and dogmatic reading of history, in accordance with
an a priori doctrine of value and a fictitious law of wages. What the
great protagonist of collectivism, Karl Marx, did was, in the first place,
to analyse with great thoroughness a particular period of modern
evolution —the transition from domestic production to what he called
capitalistic production—and to treat the results of this analysis as if
they expressed a universal law or tendency. He next proceeded to
make deductions from the supposed universal law, deductions as to
what history should be, how industry and capital and labor must
develop, in fact to build up a whole philosophy of social and political
life. If the facts of history do not fit into that philosophy, then so
much the worse for history. The logical collectivist will continue to
prophesy. With that consistency which is the essence of fanaticism
he demands the system, the whole system, and nothing but the system.
In the field of prophecy, as in the realm of fiction, events move smoothly
and quickly, once the necessary assumptions are made and inconvenient
difficulties ignored. Marxism leaves out half the factors in the social
problem, and so succeeds in representing the future course of history
as a uniform progress towards the collectivist state, which will in time
swallow up every form of economic organisation into its capacious
maw.
As for its theory of value, collectivists, generally, seem to be un-
aware that though it is the corner-stone of their temple, Marx himself
practically abandoned it before his death. The supposition was that
value is determined by quantity of labor. According to Engels, perhaps
the greatest intellectual force among the collectivists, Marx admitted


(in the third volume of “ Capital,” not published until after Marx’s death,
and not yet translated into English) that the labor theory of value was
only a category of the past, roughly descriptive of an obsolete mode of
production. It ceases to be valid when applied to the complicated
system of modern industry and commerce. This is obvious enough.
The value of separate individual labor no longer coincides, granting
that it ever did coincide, with price. Quantity of labor is only one of
the factors which determine the value of a product. The decisive
factor is the capacity of the object to satisfy a given economic need.
Now, the theory of remuneration according to labor cost, as put
forward by collectivist theorists, rests upon the following assumptions.
It assumes, first, the abolition of the competition which has hitherto
been the main instrument in maintaining and extending the supply
of commodities. And in the absence of that competition it assumes
a stable and permanent equilibrium between supply and demand—
that is, between the total national supply and the total national demand.
It assumes, further, an average man, who does not exist, and an equality
between different kinds of labor, so that they can all be estimated as
regards their value—social, aesthetic, political, educational, economic—
in terms of labor time. And it assumes, finally, for its successful work-
ing—to mention no other assumptions—that the problem would not
be complicated by the ever-varying values which would be attached
to different objects in demand by different persons at particular times
and places.
Some collectivists have simplified the problem of remuneration
in the labor state by proposing to distribute the products of labor
according to the reasonable needs of the laborer. If one were tempted
to follow the example of collectivist writers, and try to shine in the high
prophetic line, one might predict that this would lead to a system of
exploitation worse than any conceivable under capitalism. It would
mean the appropriation by one set of persons of the surplus value
created by others. Laborer would exploit laborer. The lazy would
exploit the industrious. The impudent would exploit the modest.
And the demagogue would become the universal engine of exploitation.
Of course, when a man or a party has a gospel, we cannot object
to the preaching of it. The collectivist has his visions of a simplified
social state, and I wish to rob no man of his visions of a new heavens
and a new earth. It is through visions, through ideals, that man moves
on to higher things. Ideals, like poetry, enrich the blood of the world.
But it is one thing to preach ideals, another thing to impose them.
I have not a word to say against that practical State socialism which
seeks with knowledge and careful forethought to secure and maintain
the conditions under which it will be possible for every citizen to develop
his activities so as to lead a healthy and happy as well as a useful
life. But collectivism would try to attain its ideal in the wrong way —
by eliminating a necessary condition of human progress, or rather, a
necessary condition of human life itself. It is said that in the collecti-
vist state competition will not be abolished, but only competition for
profits. Competition will remain, only under another name. People


are always ready to allow themselves to be cheated by phrases. The
question is—and I do not think that this question has ever been satis-
factorily answered—Will not the change produced under the supposed
conditions of economic equilibrium be merely a change in the direction
of the competition ? The stimulus to do the best for oneself and for
one’s own, the stimulus even to get the better of one’s neighbor, will
remain. Only, on the basis of equality of reward, the competitive
stimulus will work downwards rather than upwards. To suppose that
a system of equality of reward will be sufficient for all requirements
of the collectivist state is surely one of the most extraordinary delusions
which has ever taken possession of the human mind, “ The devil
take the hindmost ” is not a maxim for a moral community or for a
moral being ; but there is, if possible, a still more objectionable maxim
—“ The devil take the foremost.”
It is, however, I must confess, almost as idle a task to attempt to
disprove the collectivist ideal as to attempt to prove it; for its realisa-
tion, like that of the New Jerusalem, is not open to verification in ex-
perience. But socialism, in entering the field of practical politics,
has itself become practical. It has been forced to surrender the pure
gospel of collectivism, and its visions of an immediate social transfor-
mation. The socialist party of the new era declares itself ready to
work for practical ends which are immediate and possible. The
revolutionary and ideal elements are put in the background, or they
are partly concealed and partly revealed in some abstract definition
of an objective to be realised in some distant future. John Stuart
Mill once said to the working men of London : “You need to be con-
vinced, first, that a revolution is necessary, and, next, that you are able
to carry it out.” The practical socialist party of to-day seems to be
convinced, first, that a revolution in the old sense is neither necessary
nor probable, and next, that the way to the desired social reconstruction
is by the path of ordinary legislation. Ido not think that it is a valid
objection to the discussion of the practical programme of the socialist
party that the ideal or objective of the party goes far beyond its im-
mediate performance or even promise. Mr. Bryan, the leader of the
American democratic party, said the other day, after advocating
nationalisation of railways ; “ I do not know that the country is ready
for public ownership. I believe in a great many things that I would
not put in a platform.” The honesty of the Labor Party in framing
its objective is as least as great as that of one of America’s representa-
tive men. In a free community the best way to treat extravagant
ideals is to let them bear the brunt of free discussion. There is a law
of natural selection, by which ideals which cannot be adapted to the
conditions of actual life perish, or live on only in the hopes of fanatics,
or in the fears of fools. But there is one thing to which valid objection
can be taken, and that is the tendency to use an abstract theory as a
practical principle of legislation in defiance or contempt of the evidence
of the facts. It may be a difficult question to determine in a given
case what a monopoly is, or when and for what reasons it ought to be
taken over by the State. But when a parliamentary commission (as
8b


in the case of the recent Tobacco Commission), supposed to be a judicial
body, issues a report which is an immediate deduction from an a priori
theory of the functions of the State, rather than a careful induction
from fact, we may reasonably assume that the education of the socialist
party has still a long way to go. Yet the important and hopeful thing
for Australian political progress is that the socialist party is learning
by experience. It is acquiring that sense of responsibility which comes
with the consciousness of power and with the consciousness of the limita-
tions before which the fanatical propagandist stands blind and helpless.
It is difficult, no doubt, for enthusiasts for co-operation to resign them-
selves to the slow movements of the processes of social evolution.
The kingdom of collectivism, it would seem, must be taken by violence.
But no radical system, not absolute individualism, and not absolute
collectivism, can do anything but fail when it tries to impose its arti-
ficially simplified solution of the social problem on an organism so com-
plex as the society of the present. And the society of the future
promises to be more complex still. He that believeth in liberty and
the law of liberty will not make haste to abolish those conditions under
which poor humanity has reached its present measure of spiritual
development, or seek to enslave men in order to unite them.
