

3,000,000 Copi«« have been Distributed in Great Britain.
7 7
PRICE THREEPENCE.
The Former
German
Ambassador
IN LONDON
BLAMES GERMANY
PRINCE
LICHOWSKY'S
REVELATIONS
WHO STARTED THE WAR ?
CASSELL AND COMPANY LIMITED,
Publishers,
LONDON AND MELBOURNE,


GERMAN PAPER CONVINCED
OF THE GUILT OF THE HUN
[Reuter]
WASHINGTON, May 7th.
A message from Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, states that the
" Germania Herold," a paper
published in the German
language, yesterday con-
demned the Kaiser’s Govern-
ment for having started the
world war, and editorially
retracted everything it had ever
said regarding Britain’s respon-
sibility. It declared that the
revelations of Prince Lich-
nowsky were convincing.
THE PRUSSIAN UPPER HOUSE has
authorised the prosecution of Prince
Lichnowsky, whose advocate invited the
prosecution as enabling Lichnowsky to
bring out the real facts.
These LICHNOWSKY , MEMOIRS were
received from the British Ministry of Infor-
mation by cable through Reuter for publica-
tion in book form by Cassell’s.




LICHNOWSKY
MEMOIRS
My Mission to London
1912—1914.
By PRINCE LICHNOWSKY,
Late German Ambassador in England.
CASSELL & COMPANY, LIMITED,
Publishers,
LONDON & MELBOURNE.


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE.
The author of the following pages, Karl Max, Prince Lichnowsky,
is a member of a family which holds estates both in German ana
Austrian Silesia, and has an hereditary seat in the Upper House
of the Prussian Diet. The father of the present Prince and his
predecessor in the title was a Prussian cavalry general, who
towards the end of his life sat for some years in the Reichstag as
a member of the Free Conservative Party.
His uncle. Prince Felix, was elected in 1848 to represent Ratibor
in the German National Assembly at Frankfort-on-Main; he was an
active member of the Conservative wing, and during the September
rising*, while ridingr with Grenenil Auerswcild in tliG neigh bom hood
of the city, was attacked and mjirdered by the mob.
The present Prince, after serving in the Prussian army, in which
he holds the rank of major, entered the diplomatic service. He was,
in 1885, for a short time attached to the German Embassy in
London, and afterwards became Councillor of Embassy in \ lenna.
Prom 1899 to 1904 he was employed in the German Foreign Office,
and received the rank and title of Minister Plenipotentiary; in
1904 he retired to his Silesian estates, and, as he states, lived for
eight years the life of a country gentleman, but read industriously
and published occasional political articles. He himself recounts
the circumstances in which he was appointed Ambassador in Lon-
don on the death of Baron Marschall von Bieberstein.
Baron Marschall, who had been .Secretary for Foreign Affairs under
the' Chancellor ships of Count Caprivi, and for a tune under Prince
Hohenlohe, had achieved great .success as Ambassador at Constan-
tinople, and also, from the German point of view, a.s chief German
plenipotentiary at the second Hague Conference m 1907. Baron
Marschall was, to us© an expression of Bismarck’s, ‘ the best horse
in Germany’s diplomatic stable,” and great things were expected of
him in London. But he lived only a few months after his appoint-
ment.
Prince Lichnowsky’s high social rank, his agreeable manners,
and the generous hospitality which he showed in London, gave him
a position in English society which facilitated the negotiations
between England and Germany, and did much to diminish the
friction that had arisen during the time that Prince Bulow held
the post of German Chancellor.
The pamphlet which is here translated gives an account of his
London mission after his return to Germany; he has lived in re-
tirement in the country, but has contributed occasional articles
to the press. The pamphlet, which was written in August, 1916, was
not intended for publication, but was distributed confidentially to
a few friends. The existence of it had long been known, but it was
only in March of this year that for the first time extracts from it
were published in the Swedish paper, Politiken. Longer extracts
have since appeared in the London press; for the first time a com-
plete translation made from the German original is now placed
before the public.


THE MEMOIRS.
MY APPOINTMENT.
In September, 1912, Baron Marschall died after he had
only been at his post in London for a few months. His
appointment which, no doubt, was principally due to his
age, and the desire of his subordinate to go to London,
was one of the many mistakes of our policy.
In spite of his striking personality and great reputa-
tion, he was too old and too tired to adjust himself to the
Anglo-Saxon world, which was completely alien to him;
lie was rather an official, and a lawyer, than a diplomat
and statesman. From the very beginning he was at great
pains to convince the English of the harmlessness of our
fleet, and naturally this only produced the contrary effect.
Much to my surprise, I was offered the post in October.
I held letiied to the country <ts 3 u pcvsoHcil vefeveut ’’
after many years of activity, there being then no suitable
post available for me. 1 passed my time between flax
and turnips, among horses and meadows, read exten-
sively, and occasionally published political essays.
fhus I had spent eight years, and it was thirteen since
1 had left the embassy at Vienna with the rank
of envoy. That had been my last real sphere of political
activity, as in those days such activity was impossible
unless one was prepared to help a half-crazy chief in
drafting his crotchety orders with their crabbed instruc-
tions.
1 do not know who was responsible for my being ap-
pointed to London. It was certainly not due to the Em-
peror alone-—I was not one of his intimates, though he
was at ah times gracious to me. I also know by experi-
ence that his nominees generally met with successful op-
position. Herr von Kiderlen had really w'anted to send
Herr von Sturnm to London! He immediately mani-
fested unmistakable ill-will towards me, and endeavoured
to intimidate me by his incivility. Herr von Bethmann
Hollweg was at that time kindly disposed towards me,
and had paid me a visit at Gratz only a short time before.
I am, therefore, inclined to think that they all agreed on
me because no other candidate was available at the


moment. But for Baron Marschall’s unexpected death, I
should no more have been called out of retirement then
than at any other time during all those previous years.
MOROCCO POLICY.
it was certainly the right, moment for a new effort to
establish better relations with England. Our enigmatic
Morocco policy had repeatedly shaken confidence m our
pacific intentions. At the very least it had given rise to
the suspicion that we did not quite know what we wanted,
or that it was our object to keep Europe on the qm vwe,
and when opportunity offered to humiliate k ranee. An
Austrian colleague who had been in bans tor a long time
said to me, “ Whenever the French begin to forget about
Revanche, you always remind them of it with a jack-
After we had repulsed M. Delcasse’s efforts to ailive
at an understanding with us about Morocco, and prior
to that had formally declared that we had no political
interests there which conformed to the traditions of the
Bismarckian policy, we suddenly discovered a second
Kruger in Abdul Aziz.. We assured him also, like the
Boers of the protection of the mighty German Einpne
with the same display, and the same result, both demon-
strations terminated with our retreat, as they were bound
to do if we had not already made up our minds to em-
bark on the world war. The distressing Congress at
Algeciras could not change this m any way, still less the
fall of M. Delcasse. T , , .
Our attitude promoted the Russo-Japanese, and later
the Anglo-Russian rapprochement. In face ot the uet-
man peril” all other differences faded into the back-
ground. The possibility of a new Franco-German war
had become apparent, and such a war could not, as m
1870, leave either Russia or England unaffected
The uselessness of the Triple Alliance had already
been shown at Algeciras, while that of the agreements
arrived at there was demonstrated shortly afterwards by
the collapse of the Sultanate, which, of course, could not
be prevented. Among the German people, however, tne
belief gained ground that our foreign policy was feeble
and was giving way before the “ encirclement -that
high-sounding phrases were succeeded by pusillammous
surrender.


It is to the credit of Herr von Kiderlen, who is other-
wise overrated as a statesman, that he wound up our
Moroccan inheritance, and accepted as they were the
facts that could no longer be altered. W hether indeed it
was necessary to alarm llic world by the Agadir incident
I will leave others to say. It was jubilantly acclaimed in
Germany, but it had caused all the more disquiet in Eng-
land because the Government were kept waiting for
three weeks for an explanation of our intentions. Lloyd
George’s speech, which was meant as a warning to us,
was the consequence. Before Delcasse’s fall, and before
Algeciras, we might have had a harbour and territory on
the west coast, but after those events it was impossible.
SIR EDWARD GREY’S PROGRAMME.
When I came to London in November, 1913, the ex-
citement over Morocco had subsided, as an agreement
with France had been reached in Berlin. It is true that
Haldane’s mission had failed, as we had required the as-
surance of neutrality instead of being content with a
treaty securing us against British attacks with British
support. Yet Sir Edward Grey had not relinquished the
idea of arriving at an understanding with us, and in the
first place tried to do this in colonial and economic ques-
tions. Conversations were in progress through the
medium of the capable and business-like envoy, von Kuhl-
mann, concerning the renewal of the Portuguese colonial
agreement, and Mesopotamia-Bagdad railway, the un-
avowed object of which was to divide both the colonies
and Asia Minor into spheres of influence.
The British statesman, after having settled all out-
standing points of difference with France and Russia,
wished to make similar agreements with us. It was not
his object to isolate us, but to the best of his power to
make us partners in the existing association. As he had
succeeded in overcoming Anglo-French and Anglo-Rus-
sian differences, so he also wished to do his best to
eliminate the Anglo-German, and by a network of treaties
which would in the end no doubt have included an agree-
ment about the troublesome question of naval arma-
ments to ensure the peace of the world after our previous
policy had led to an association—the Entente—which re-
presented a mutual insurance against the risk of war.


This was Sir Edward Grey’s plan. In his own words:
without interfering with our existing friendship with
France and Russia, which has no aggressive aims, and
does not entail any binding obligations on England to
arrive at a friendly rapprochement and understanding
with Germany “ to bring the two groups nearer.”
As with us, there were two parties in England at that
time—the optimists, who believed in an understanding,
and the pessimists, who thought that sooner or later war
was inevitable.
The former embraced Messrs. Asquith, Grey, Lord
Haldane, and most of the Ministers in the Radical
Cabinet, also the leading Liberal papers, such as the
Westminster Gazette, Manchester Guardian, Daily
Chronicle. The pessimists were mainly conservative poli-
ticians like Mr. Balfour, who repeatedly made this clear
to me, also leading army men like Lord who
pointed out the necessity of universal military service—
‘‘ the writing on the wall further, the Northcliffe press,
and the eminent English journalist, Mr. Garvin, of-the
Observer. During my period of office, however, they
abstained from all attacks, and maintained both per-
sonally and politically a friendly attitude. But our naval
policy and our attitude in 1905, 1908, and 1911, had
aroused in them the conviction that after all it would
some day come to war. Just as it is with us, the former
are v now being accused in England of short-sightedness
and simplicity, whereas the latter are looked on as the
true prophets.
THE ALBANIAN QUESTION.
The first Balkan war had led to the collapse of Turkey,
and thus to a defeat for our policy which had been iden-
tified with Turkey for a number of years. Since Turkey
in Europe could no longer be saved, there were two ways
in which we could deal with the inheritance: either we
could declare our complete disinterestedness with regard
to the frontier delimitations in the Balkans, and leave the
Balkan Powers to settle them, or we could support oui
“ Allies,” and carry on a triple alliance policy in the Near
East, thus giving up the role of mediator.
From the very beginning I advocated the former
course, but the Foreign Office emphatically favoured the
latter.


Ihe vital point was the Albanian question. Our Allies
desired the establishment of an independent Albanian
State, as the Austrians did not want the Serbs to obtain
access to the Adriatic, and the Italians did not want the
Gleeks to get to Valona, or even to the north of
Coi fu. As opposed to this, Russia, as is known, was
backing Serbia's wishes, and France those of Greece.
My advice was to treat this question as outside the
scope of the alliance, and to support neither the Austrian
nor the Italian claims. Without our aid, it would have
been impossible to set up an independent Albania, which,
as anyone could foresee, had no prospect of surviving;
Serbia would have extended to the sea, and the present
world war would have been avoided. France and Italy
would have quarrelled over Greece, and, if the Italians
had not wanted to fight France unaided, they would have
been compelled to acquiesce in Greece’s expansion to the
north of Durazzo. The greater part of Albania is Hel-
lenic. Ihe towns in the south are entirely so; and during
the conference of ambassadors, delegations from principal
towns arrived in London to obtain annexation to Greece.
Even in present-day Greece there are Albanian elements,
and the so-called Greek national dress is of Albanian
origin. Ihe inclusion of the Albanians, who are prin-
cipally orthodox and Moslem in the body of the Greek-
State, was therefore the best and most natural solution, if
you left Scutari and the north to the Serbs and Monte-
negrins. For dynastic reasons, the Emperor was also in
favour of this solution. When I supported this view in a
letter to the monarch, I received agitated reproaches
from the Chancellor; he said that I had the reputation
of being <s an opponent of Austria,” and I was to abstain
from such interference and direct correspondence.
THE NEAR EAST AND THE POLICY OF THE
TRIPLE ALLIANCE.
We ought at last to have broken with the fatal tradition
Df pursuing a triple alliance policy in the'Near East also,
and have recognised our mistake, which lay in identifying
ourselves in the south with the Turks, and in the north
with the Austro-Magyars. For the continuance of this
policy, upon which we had entered at the Berlin Con-
gress, and which we had actively pursued ever since, was
bound to lead in time to a conflict with Russia, and to


the world-war, more especially if the requisite cleverness
were lacking in high places. Instead of coming to terms
with Russia on a basis of the independence of the Sultan
whom even Petrograd did not wish to eject from Con-
stantinople, and of confining ourselves to our economic
interests in the Near East, and to the partitioning of Asia
Minor into spheres of influence, while renouncing any
intention of military or political interference, it was our
political ambition to dominate on the Bosphorus. In
Russia, they* began to think that the road to Constanti-
nople and the Mediterranean lay via Berlin. Instead of
supporting the active development of the Balkan States
—which, once liberated, are anything rather than Rus-
sian, and with which our experiences had been very satis-
factory —we took sides with the 1 urkish and Magyar
oppressors.
The fatal mistake of our Triple Alliance and Neaf
East policy- —which had forced Russia, our natural best
friend and neighbour, into the arms of France and Eng-
land, and away from its policy of Asiatic expansion—
was the more appafent as a Franco-Russian attack, which
was the sole hypothesis that justified a Triple Al-
liance policy, could be left out of our calculations.
The value of the Italian alliance needs no further re-
ference. Italy will want our money, and our tourists,
even after the war, with or without an alliance. That
this latter would fail us in case of war was patent before-
hand. Hence the alliance had no value. Austria
needs our protection in war as in peace, and has no other
support. Her dependence on us is based on political
national and economic considerations, and is the greater
the more intimate our relations with Russia are. Ihe
Bosnian crisis taught us this. Since the days of Count
Beust, no Vienna Minister has adopted such a self-con-
fident attitude towards us as Count Aehrenthal during
the later years of his life. If German policy is conducted
on right lines, cultivating relations with Russia, Austria-
Hungary is our vassal, and dependent on us even without
an alliance or recompense; if it is wrongly conducted,
then we are dependent on Austria. Hence there was no
reason for the alliance.
I knew Austria too well not to be aware that a return
to the policy of Prince Felix Schwarzenberg or Count
Moritz Esterhazy was inconceivable there. Little as the


Slavs there love us just as little do they wish to return
into a German Empire even with a 1 lapsburg-Lorraine
Emperor at its head. They are striving for a federation
in Austria on national lines—a state of things which
would have even less chance of being realised within the
German Empire than under the double eagle. The Ger-
mans of Austria, however, acknowledge Berlin as the
centre of German might and culture, and are well aware
that Austria can never again be the leading power. They
wish for as intimate a connection with the German Em-
pire as possible, not for an anti-German policy.
Since the seventies the position has fundamentally
changed in Austria much as in Bavaria. As in the latter a
return to great German separatism and old Bavaria'n
policy is not to be feared, so with the former a resuscita-
tion of the policy of Prince Kaunitz and Schwarzenberg
was not to be expected. By a federation with Austria,
however, which resembles a big Belgium since its popula-
tion, even without Galicia and Dalmatia, is only about
half Germanic, our interests would suffer as much as if
we subordinated our policy to the views of Vienna or
Budapest, thus espousing Austria’s quarrels. Hence we
were not obliged to take any notice of the desires of our
ally, they were not only unnecessary, but also dangerous,
as they would lead to a conflict with Russia if we looked
at Oriental questions through Austrian spectacles.
The development of the alliance, from a union formed
on a single hypothesis for a single specific purpose, into
a general and unlimited association, a pooling of interests
in all spheres, was the best way of producing what such a
binding contract was designed to prevent —war. Such
an “ alliance policy ” was also calculated to alienate from
us the sympathies of the strong young rising communi-
ties in the Balkans who were prepared to turn to us, and
to open their markets to us. The difference between the
power of a ruling house and a national state, between
dynastic and democratic ideas of government, had to be
decided, and, as usual, we were on the wrong side.
King Carol, of Rumania, told one of our representa-
tives that he had entered into the alliance with us on the
assumption that we retained the leadership, but if this
passed to Austria, that would alter the foundations of the
relationship, and under such circumstances he would not
be able to go on with it.


Tilings were similar in Serbia, where, contrary to our
own economic interests, we were supporting the Austrian
policy of strangulation.
Every time we have backed the wrong horse, whose
breakdown could have been foreseen—Kruger, Abdul
Aziz, Abdul Hamid, Wilhelm of Wied, ending—the most
fatal of all mistakes—with the great plunge on the Berch-
told stable.
THE CONFERENCE OF AMBASSADORS.
Shortly after my arrival in London at the end of 1913,
Sir E. Grey proposed an informal conversation to pre-
vent the Balkan war developing into a European one
after we had unfortunately refused on the outbreak of
the war to agree to the French proposal of a declaration
of disinterestedness. The British statesman from the
very beginning took up the position that England had no
interest in Albania and had no intention of going to
war over this question. He greatly wished to mediate
between the two groups as an honest broker, and smooth
over difficulties. He, therefore, by no means took sides
with the Entente, and, during the eight months or so of
the negotiations, his goodwill and his authoritative in-
fluence contributed in no small degree to the attainment
of an agreement. We, instead of adopting an attitude
similar to the English one, invariably took up the posi-
tion which was prescribed for us by Vienna. Count
Mensdorff was the leader of the Triple Alliance in Lon-
don, I was his “ second.” It was my duty to support
his proposals. That clever and experienced man, Count
Szogyenyi, was conducting affairs in Berlin. His refrain
was “ then the casus foederis will arise,” and when I
once ventured to doubt the truth of this conclusion, I was
severely reprimanded for “ Austrophobia ”; it was also
said that I had an “ hereditary weakness ” —the allusion
being to my father.
On all questions we took sides with Austria and Italy
—about Albania, a Serbian port on the Adriatic, Scutari,
and also about the delimitation of the frontiers of Al-
bania—while Sir Edward Grey hardly ever supported
the French or Russian claims. On the contrary he mostly
supported our group in order not to give a pretext like
that a dead Archduke was to furnish later on. Thus with
his assistance, it was possible to coax King Nikola out


of Scutari again. Otherwise this question would already
have led to a world-war, as we should certainly not have
ventured to induce “ our Ally ” to give way.
Sir Edward Grey conducted the negotiations with cir-
cumspection, calm and tact. When a question threatened
to become involved, he sketched a formula for agreement
which was to the point and was always accepted. His
personality inspired equal confidence in all the parti-
cipants.
, As a matter of fact, we had again successfully emerged
from one of those trials of strength which characterize
our policy. Russia had been obliged to give way to us on
all points, as she was never in a position to procure success
for the Serbian aims. Albania was established as a
vassal state of Austria, and Serbia was pressed back
from the seas. Hence this conference resulted in a fresh
humiliation for Russian self-esteem. As in 1878 and in
1908 we had opposed the Russian plans, although no
German interests were involved. Bismarck was clever
enough to mitigate the mistake of the Congress by the
secret treaty, and by his attitude in the Battenberg ques-
tion ; but we continued to pursue in London the danger-
ous path upon which we had once more entered in the
Bosnian question, nor did we leave it in time when it led
to the precipice.
The ill-humour which prevailed in Russia at that time
was shown during the conference by attacks in the Rus-
sian press against my Russian colleague, and Russian
diplomacy. The dissatisfied circles made capital of his
German descent and 'Roman Catholicism, his reputation
as a friend of Germany, and the accident that he was
related both to Count Mensdorff and to me. Without
possessing a very distinguished personality. Count
Benckendorff is endowed with a number of qualifications
that distinguish a good diplomat—tact, polished manners,
experience, courtesy, and a natural eye for men and
matters. He was always at pains to avoid a brusque atti-
tude, and was supported in this by England and France.
Later, I once remarked to him, “I presume that Russian
feeling is very anti-German?” He replied: “There are
also very strong and influential pro-German circles, but
in general people are anti-Austrian.”
Tt is hardly necessary to add that our friendship for
Austria through thick and thin was hardly calculated to


loosen the Entente, and to direct Russia towards her
Asiatic interests!
THE BALKAN CONFERENCE.
At the same time the Balkan conference was sitting in
London, and I had opportunities of coming into contact
with the leaders of the Balkan States. M. Venizelos was
certainly the most distinguished personality. At that
time he was anything but anti-German, and visited me
several times; he was especially fond of wearing the
ribbon of the Order of the Red Eagle—he even wore it
at the French embassy. His prepossessing charm and
ways of a man of the world secured him much sympathy.
Next to him M. Daneff, at that time Bulgarian Premier
and confidant of Count Berchtold, played a great part.
He gave the impression of an astute and energetic man,
and it is probably only due to the influence of his Vienna
and Budapest friends, of whose homage he sometinies
made fun, that he was induced to commit the folly of
entering upon the second Balkan war, and of refusing
Russian arbitration.
M. Take Jonescu was also frequently in London, and
then visited me regularly. I knew him from the time when
I was secretary at Bucharest. He was also one of Plerr
von Kiderlen’s friends. In London he was endeavouring
to obtain concessions to Rumania from M. Daneff by
means of negotiations, in which he was assisted by the
very able Rumanian ambassador, M. Isu. It is known
that Bulgarian opposition brought about the failure of
these negotiations. Count Berchtold and we, of course,
with him, were entirely on Bulgaria’s side, otherwise, by
putting pressure on M. Daneff, we might have secured
the desired satisfaction for Rumania, and placed her
under an obligation to us, she was finally estranged from
the Central Powers by Austria’s attitude during and after
the second Balkan war,
THE SECOND BALKAN WAR.
The defeat of Bulgaria in the second Balkan war, and
the victory of Serbia with the Rumanian invasion,
naturally constituted a humiliation for Austria. The
plan to rectify this by an expedition against Serbia seems
to have been evolved in Vienna soon after. The Italian
revelations prove this, and it may be assumed that


Marquis Sail Gililiano, who described the plan---most
aptly —as a pericolossima aventura, saved us from being
involved in a world-war as early as the summer of 19.1*1.
Owing to the intimacy of Russo-Italian relations the
Vienna plan was doubtless known in Petrograd. In
any case M. Sazonov openly declared at Constanza, as M.
Take Jonescu told me, that an Austrian attack on Serbia
would be a casus belli for Russia.
When one of my staff returned from leave in Vienna,
in the spring of 1911, he said that Herr von Tschirschky
had declared that there would soon be war. As I, how-
ever, was always left in ignorance about important
events, I considered this pessimism to be unfounded.
As a matter of fact, it would appear that ever since the
peace of Bucharest, Vienna was bent on securing a re-
vision of the treaty by h er own effort, and was apparently
only waiting for a favourable pretext. Vienna statesmen
could, of course, depend on our support. They were
aware of that, as they had been repeatedly accused of
lack of firmness; in fact, Berlin was pressing for a “ re-
habilitation of Austria.”
LIMAN VON SANDERS.
When I returned to London in December, 1913, from
a lengthy leave, the Liman von Sanders question had led
to a fresh crisis in our relations with Russia. Sir Ed-
ward Grey, not without concern, pointed out to me the
excitement there was in Petrograd over it. “ I have
never seen them so excited.” t
I received instructions from Berlin to request tne
Minister to exert a restraining influence in Petrograd,
and to assist us in settling the dispute. Sir Edward
gladly did this, and his intervention contributed in no
small degree to smooth the matter over. My good re-
lations with Sir Edward and his great influence in Petro-
grad were repeatedly made use of in similar manner,
when we wished to attain anything there, as our repre-
sentative proved himself quite useless for such a purpose.
During the fateful days of July, 1914, Sir Edward said
to me, “ When you want to obtain anything in Petrograd
you always apply to me, but if I appeal to you for your
influence in Vienna, you refuse to support me.”
THE COLONIAL TREATY.
The good and confidential relations which I had sue


ceedea in establishing, not only with society and the most
influential people like Sir Edward Grey and Mr. Asquith,
but also with the great public at public dinners, produced
a marked impression in the relations of the two countries.
Sir Edward honestly tried to confirm this rapprochement,
and his intentions were most apparent on two ques-
tions the Colonial and the Bagdad railway treaties.
In 1898 Count Hatzfeld and Mr. Balfour had signed
a secret agreement dividing the Portuguese colonies into
economic spheres of influence between us and England.
As the Government of Portugal had neither the power nor
the means to open up her extended possessions or to ad-
minister them properly, she had already thought of sell-
ing them before, and thus relieving her financial burdens.
An agreement had been come to between us and Eng-
land, which defined the interests of both parties, and
which was of the greater value because Portugal is en-
tirely dependent on England, as is generally known.
On the face of it this agreement was to safeguard the
integrity and independence of the Portuguese State and
merely declared the intention of being of financial and
economic assistance to the Portuguese. Literally, there-
fore, it did not contravene the ancient Anglo-Portuguese
alliance of the fifteenth century, which was last renewed
under Charles lE, and gave a reciprocal territorial
guarantee.
In spite of this, owing to the endeavours of Marquis
Several, who was presumably aware of the Anglo-Ger-
man agreement, a new treaty—the so-called treaty of
Windsor—was concluded between England and Portugal
in 1899, confirming the old agreements which had al-
ways remained in force.
I he object of negotiations between us and England,
which had commenced before my arrival, was to amend
and improve our agreement of 1898, as it had proved
unsatisfactory on several points, as regards geographical
delimitation. Thanks to the accommodating attitude
of the British Government, I succeeded in making the new
agreement fully accord with our wishes and interests.
The whole of Angola, up to the twentieth degree of
longitude, was assigned to ns, so that we stretched up to
the Congo State from the south; we also acquired the
valuable islands of San Thome and Principe, which are
north of the Equator, and therefore really in the French


sphere of influence, a fact which caused my French col-
leagues to enter strong but unavailing protests. Further,
we obtained the northern part of Mozambique, the
Licango formed the boundary.
The British Government showed the greatest con-
sideration for our interests and wishes. Sir Edwaid
Grey intended to demonstrate Ins goodwill towards us,
but he also wished to assist our colonial development
as a whole, as England hoped to divert the German de-
velopment of strength from the North Sea and Western
Europe to the ocean, and to Africa. “We don’t want to
grudge Germany her colonial development/’ a member
of the Cabinet said to me.
The British Government originally suggested the in-
clusion of the Congo State in the agreement, which would
have given us the right of pre-emption, and enabled us to
penetrate it economically. We refused this offer, alleg-
ing consideration for Belgian susceptibilities. Perhaps
we wished to be economical of successes? With regard
also to the practical realisation of its real, though unex-
pressed, intention —the later actual partition of the Por-
tuguese colonies—the treaty in its new form showed
marked improvement and advantages as compared with
the old ones. Cases had been specified which empowered
us to take steps to guard our interests in the districts
assigned to us. These were drafted in such wide terms
that it was really left to us to decide when “ vital ” in-
terests arose, so that, with Portugal entirely dependent
on England, it was only necessary to cultivate further
good relations with England in order to carry out our
joint intention's at a later date with English assent.
Sir Edward Grey showed the sincerity of the British
Government’s desire to respect our rights by referring to
us Englishmen who wished to invest capital, and asked
for the support of the British Government in the dis-
tricts assigned to us by the new agreement, even before
this was completed and signed, and by informing them
that their enterprise belonged to our sphere of influence.
The agreement was practically completed at the time
of the King’s visit to Berlin in May, 1913. At that time
a conference took place in Berlin under the presidency of
the Imperial Chancellor; in this conference I also took
part; and certain further wishes of ours were defined.
On my return to London, I succeeded, with the assistance


of Councillor of Legation von Kuhlmann, who was work-
ing at the agreement with Mr. Parker, in having our last
proposals incorporated so that the whole agreement could
be initialled by Sir Edward Grey and by me in August,
1913, before 1 went on leave.
But now fresh difficulties were to arise which pre-
vented its being signed, and 1 did not obtain the author-
isation to conclude it till a year later —that is shortly
before the outbreak of war. It was, however, never signed.
Sir Edward Grey was only willing to sign if the agree-
ment were published together with those of iBpB and
jßgg. England had, as he said, no other secret treaties
besides these, and it was contrary to established principles
to keep binding agreements secret. Therefore he could
not take any agreement without publishing it. He was,
however, willing to accede to our wishes with regard to
the time and manner of publication, provided that such
publication took place at latest within one year from die
date of signature.
At our Foreign Office, where my London successes
had caused increasing dissatisfaction, and where an in-
fluential personage, who acted the part of Herr von Hol-
stein, wanted the London post for himself, I was informed
that the publication would endanger our interests in the
colonies as the Portuguese would then not give us any
more concessions.
The futility of this objection is apparent from the con-
sideration that the Portuguese, in view of the closeness
of Anglo-Portuguese relations, were most probably just
as well aware of the old agreement as of our new
arrangements, and that the influence which England pos-
sesses at Lisbon renders their Government completely im-
potent in face of an Anglo-German agreement.
Another pretext had, therefore, to be found for wreck-
ing the treaty. It was suggested that the publication of
the treaty of Windsor, which had been concluded during
the time of Prince Hohenlohe —though it was only a re-
newal of the treaty of Charles 11., which had always re-
mained in .force-—might endanger the position of Herr
von Bethmann Hollweg as a proof of British hypocrisy
and perfidy!
I pointed out that the preamble of our agreement ex-
pressed the same thing as the treaty of Windsor, and as
other similar treaties, namely, that we would protect the


sovereign rights of Portugal and the inviolability of its
possessions. In vain! In spite of repeated discussions
with Sir Edward Grey, at which he made many fresh
suggestions for the publication, the Foreign Office per-
sisted in its attitude, and finally arranged with Sir E.
Goschen that matters should be left as they were!
The treaty, which offered us extraordinary advantages,
the result of more than a year’s work, was thus dropped
because it would have been a public success for me.
When I mentioned the subject to Mr. Harcourt, at a
dinner at the embassy in the spring of 1914, the Minister
for the Colonies told me that he was placed in a difficult
position, and did not know how to act. The present posi-
tion was intolerable—he wished to safeguard our in-
terests, but was in doubt whether he should proceed on
the terms of the old or the new treaty. It was, therefore,
urgently desirable to clear up the situation, and to settle
the matter, which had dragged on for such a long time.
In reply to a dispatch in this sense, I received instruc-
tions couched in terms which showed more alarm than
civility, telling me to abstain from any further inter-
ference in the matter.
I now regret that I did not immediately travel to Berlin
and place my post at the disposal of the monarch, and
that I did not abandon the hope of arriving at an under-
standing with those in authority, a sinister mistake, which
was to bring its nemesis a few months later in such a
tragical way.
However little I even then enjoyed the goodwill of the
highest official of the Empire, as he feared that I was
aspiring to his post, yet I must, in justice to him, say that,
cut ring our last interview before the outbreak of war at
the end of June, 1914, to which I will refer later, he gave
me his assent for the signature and publication of the
treaty. In spite of this, it required repeated applications
on my part, which were supported by Herr Doctor Solf,
in Berlin, before sanction was at last obtained in July,
1914. As the Serbian crisis, at that time already im-
perilled the peace of Europe, the completion of the treaty
had to be postponed. It also is one of the sacrifices of this
war.
THE BAGDAD TREATY.
At the same time, I was negotiating in London with
the able support of Herr von Kuhlmann, about the so


called Bagdad treaty. The real object of this was to
divide up Asia Minor into spheres of influence, although
this term was anxiously avoided, in view of the rights
of the Sultan. Sir Edward Grey also repeatedly stated
that there were in existence no agreements with France
and Russia about the partition of Asia Minor.
In consultation with a Turkish representative, Hakki
Pasha, all economic questions concerning German under-
takings, were settled in the main according to the wishes
of the Deutsche Bank. The most important concession
Sir Edward Grey made to me personally was the con-
tinuation of the railway as far as Basra. We had
dropped this point in favour of the connection to Alex-
andretta; up to that time Bagdad had been the terminal
point of the railway. An international commission was
to regulate navigation on the Shat-el-Arab. We were also
to have a share in the harbour works at Basra, and re-
ceived rights for the navigation of the Tigris, which
hitherto had been a monopoly of the firm of Lynch.
By this treaty the whole of Mesopotamia, as far as
Basra, was included within our sphere of influence
[without prejudice to already existing British navigation
rights on the Tigris, and the rights of the Wilcox irriga-
tion work], as well as the whole district of the Bagdad
and Anatolian railway.
The coast of the Persian Gulf and the Smyrna-Aidin
railway were recognised as the British economy sphere,
Syria as the French, and Armenia as the Russian. If
both treaties were executed and published, an agreement
with England would be reached which would preclude all
doubts about the possibility of an “ Anglo-German co-
operation.”
THE QUESTION OF THE NAVY.
The naval question was, and is, the most delicate of all.
It is not always quite correctly judged.
The creation of a powerful fleet on the other side of
the North Sea—the development of the greatest military
power of the Continent into the greatest naval power as
well —was bound to be felt in England as at least “ in-
convenient ”; there can be no doubt about this in any rea-
sonable view. In order to maintain the necessary
superiority, and not to become dependent, in order to
secure the rule over the sea, which is essential for her if


slie is not to starve, she was compelled to take armaments
and expenditure, which weighed heavily 'on the tax-
payers. England’s international position would be threat-
ened, however, if our policy created the belief that war-
ike developments might ensue—a state of affairs which
had almost been reached during the time of the Morocco
crisis and the Bosnian problem.
Great Britain had become reconciled to our fleet within
its then appointed limits, but it was certainly not wel-
come, and was one of the causes—though not the only
cause, and perhaps not the most important— of her ad-
hesion to France and Russia; but on account of these
alone, England would not have drawn the sword any
more than on account of our trade, which has been
alleged to have produced jealousy and, finally, war.
From the very beginning I maintained that, notzvith-
slanding the fleet, it would be possible to arrive at a
friendly understanding, and rapprochement, if we did
not introduce a new Navy Bill, and our policy were in-
aubitably pacific. I also avoided mention of the fleet, and
the word never passed between Sir Edward Grey and me.
On one occasion Sir Edward Grey said at a meeting of
the Cabinet: “ Ihe present German ambassador has never
mentioned the fleet to me.”
During my tenure of office, Mr. Churchill, then First
ii 1 i u Adn ?iralty, proposed, as is known, the so-
called naval holiday,” and suggested, for financial rea-
sons, and probably also to meet the pacific wishes of his
party, a year’s pause in armaments. Officially, Sir Ed-
ward Grey did not support the proposal; he never men-
tioned it to me, but Mr. Churchill repeatedly spoke to me
about it.
I am convinced that his suggestion was honest, as pre-
varication is altogether foreign to the English nature. It
would have been a great success for Mr. Churchill if he
could have come before the country with reductions of
expenditure and freed it from the nightmare of arma-
ments that weighed on the people.
I replied that for technical reasons it would be difficult
to agree to his plan. What was to become of the work-
men who were engaged for this purpose, and what of
the technical staff . J Our naval programme had been de-
cided on, and it would be difficult to alter it in any way.
On the other hand we had no intention of exceeding it.


But he reverted to it again, and pointed olit that the sums
used for enormous armaments might better be employed
for other and useful purposes. I replied that this ex-
penditure. too, benefited our home industries.
Through interviews with Sir VV. lyrell (Sn Edwaid
Grey’s principal private secretary), I managed to have
the question removed from the agenda without causing
any ill-feeling, although it was again referred to m Par-
liament, and to prevent any official proposal being made.
It was
COMMERCIAL JEALOUSY.
The “ commercial jealousy,” about which we heai so
much, is based on a wrong conception of the circum-
stances. Certainly, Germany’s rise as a commercial powei
after the war of 1870, and during the following decades,
was a menace to British commercial circles, which, with
their industries and export houses, had held a viituai
monopoly of trade. The increasing commerce with Ger-
many, which was the leading country in Europe as re-
gards British exports—a fact to which I invariably re-
ferred in my public speeches—had, however, given rise
to the wish to maintain friendly relations with their best
customer and business friend, and had driven all othei
considerations into the background, however, a pet idea
of Mr. Churchill’s, and the Government s, and i think
that by entering upon this plan, and the formula 16 to 10
for battleships, we might have given tangible proof ot
our goodwill and strengthened and encouraged the ten-
dency [which already prevailed in the GovernmentJ to
enter into closer relations with us.
But, as I have said, it was possible to arrive at an
understanding in spite of the fleet, and without a naval
holiday.” I had always regarded my mission from this
point of view, and I liad also succeeded in realising my
plans when the outbreak of the war destroyed everything
I had achieved. , . ~ ,
The Briton is matter of fact—he takes things as they
are and does not tilt against windmills. Notably m com-
mercial circles, I encountered the most friendly spirit,
and the endeavour to further our common economic
interests. As a matter of fact, nobody m them took any
interest in the Russian, Italian, Austrian, or even m the
French representative, in spite of his striking peisonality


and his political successes. Only the German and
American ambassadors attracted public attention.
In order to get into touch with important commercial
circles, I accepted invitations from the United Chambers
of Commerce, and from the London and Bradford
Chamber, and was the guest of the cities of Newcastle
and Liverpool. I was well received everywhere; Man-
chester, Glasgow and Edinburgh had also invited me, and
I intended to go there later.
People who did not understand British conditions, and
did not realise the importance of “ public dinners,” also
people to whom my successes were unwelcome, re-
proached me with having done harm with my speeches.
I believe on the contrary that by appearing in public, and
emphasising common commercial interests, I contributed
in no small measure to the improvement of relations
quite apart from the fact that it would have been clumsy
and churlish to refuse all invitations.
In all other circles I also met with the most friendly
leception and hearty co-operation—at court, in society,
and from the Government.
THE COURT AND SOCIETY.
The King, although not a genius, is a simple and well-
meaning man, with sound commonsense; he demonstrated
his goodwill towards me, and was frankly desirous of
furthering my task. Although the British constitution
leaves only very limited powers to the Crown, yet the
monarch, in virtue of his position, can exercise a con-
siderable influence on opinion, both in society, and in
the Government.
We were received in London with open arms, and both
parties rivalled one another in courtesy towards us. In
view of the close relationship between politics and society
in England, it would be wrong to undervalue social rela-
tions even when the majority of the upper ten thousand
are in opposition to the Government.
Hence the social adaptability of a representative no-
where plays a greater role than in England. A hos-
pitable house, with pleasant hosts, is worth more than the
most profound scientific knowledge; a savant, with pro-
vincial manners and small means, would,gain no influence
in spite of all his learning.


The Briton loathes a bore, a schemer, and a prig; he
likes a good fellow.
SIR EDWARD GREY.
Sir Edward Grey’s influence in all matters of foreign
policy was almost unlimited. On important occasions he
used indeed to say, “ 1 must first bring it before the
Cabinet”; but this always agreed to his views. His
authority was undisputed. He was returned to Parlia-
ment as a young man, and soon began to interest himself
in foreign affairs. Under Lord Rosebery, he was Under
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and became Sec-
retary of State in 1906, under Mr. Campbell-Bannerman;
he has now held the post for some ten years.
The scion of an old north country family, which had
already furnished Grey, the well-known statesman, he
joined the left wing of his party, and sympathised with
socialists and pacifists. You may call him a socialist in
the ideal sense, as he carries the theory into his private
life, and lives very simply and unpretentiously, although
he has extensive means.
The simplicity and honesty of his ways secured him
the esteem even of his opponents, who were to be found
rather in the sphere of home affairs than of foreign
policy. Lies and intrigue are equally repugnant to him.
The calm quiet of his British nature is not lacking in a
sense of humour. Once when he was lunching with us
and the children, and heard them talking German, he
said, “ I can’t help thinking how clever these children are
to talk German so well,” and was pleased with his joke.
This is a true picture of the man who is decried as
“ Liar Grey,” and instigator of the world-war.
MR. ASQUITH.
Asquith is a man of an entirely different stamp. A
jovial bon vivant, fond of the ladies, especially the young
and pretty ones; he is partial to cheerful society and good
cooking. Formerly a well-known barrister, with a large
income, and for a number of years in Parliament, then a
Minister under Mr. Gladstone, a pacifist like his friend
Grey, and, favouring an understanding with Germany, he
treated all questions with the cheery calm and assurance
of an experienced man of business. His daughters were
at school in Germany, and spoke German fluently.


Only on rare occasions did he concern himself with
foreign politics; when important questions arose, then, of
course, liis decision was final. During the critical
of July, Mrs. Asquith repeatedly came to us to warn
us, and, in the end. she was quite distraught at the tragic
turn of events. Mr. Asquith also, when 1 called on him
on August 2, to make a last effort in the direction of
expectant neutrality, was quite broken, though absolutely
calm. Tears were coursing down his cheeks.
ATTITUDE OF GERMAN FOREIGN OFFICE.
Nothing can describe the rage of certain gentlemen at
my London successes, and the position which I had man-
aged to make for myself in a short time. They devised
vexatious instructions to render my office more difficult.
I was left in complete ignorance of the most important
matters, and was confined to the handling of dull and
unimportant reports. Secret agents’ reports on matters
about which I could not learn without espionage and the
necessary funds were never available to me, and it was
not till the last days of July, 1914, that I learnt quite by
chance from the naval attache of the secret Anglo-French
agreement concerning the co-operation of the two fleets
in case of wars. The knowledge of other important
events which had been known to the office for a long
time, like the correspondence between Grey and Gambon,
was kept from me.
IN CASE OF WAR.
Soon after my arrival I obtained the conviction that
under no circumstances had we to fear a British attack
or British support for any foreign attack, but that under
any circumstances England would protect the French.
I expressed this view in repeated dispatches, with minute
proof, and great emphasis, but did not obtain any cre-
dence, although Lord ITaldane’s refusal to assent to the
neutrality formula and England’s attitude during the
Morocco crisis had been pretty obvious indications. In
addition, there were the secret agreements, which I have
referred to, and which were known to the Office.
I always pointed out that, in the event of a: war be-
tween European Powers. England, as a commercial State,
would suffer enormously, and would therefore do her
best to prevent a conflict, but, on the other hand, she


would never tolerate a weakening or annihilation of
France, because of the necessity of maintaining the Euro-
pean balance of power, and of preventing a German
superiority of force. Lord Flaldane had told me this
shortly after my arrival, and all the leading people had
expressed themselves in the same sense.
THE- SERBIAN CRISIS.
AtThe end of June, I went to Kiel by command of the
Emperor. A few weeks prior to this, I had been made
an honorary D.C.L. of Oxford, an honour which had not
been conferred on any German ambassador since Herr
von Bunsen. On board the Meteor we learned of the
death of the Archduke. The Emperor regretted that his
efforts to win him over to his way of thinking had thus
been rendered vain. I do not know whether the plan of
an active policy against Serbia had already been decided
on at Konopischt.
As I was not instructed about views and events in
Vienna, I did not attach very great importance to this
occurrence. Later on I could only remark that amongst
Austrian aristocrats a feeling of relief outweighed other
sentiments. On board the Meteor there was also an
Austrian guest of the Emperor’s, Count Felix Thun. He
had remained in his cabin all the time suffering from
sea sickness in spite of the splendid weather, but on re-
ceiving the news, he recovered. The fright or joy had
cured him.
On my arrival in Berlin, I saw the Chancellor, and
told him that I considered the state of our foreign rela-
tions very satisfactory, as we were on better term? with
England than we had been for a long time, wh Ist in
France also the Government was in the hands of a
pacifist Ministry.
Fieri- von Bethmann Flollweg did not appear to share
my optimism, and complained about Russian armaments.
L sought to reassure him, emphasising the fact that
Russia had no interest in attacking us, and that such
an attack would never receive Anglo-French support, as
both countries wanted peace. Thereupon, I went to Dr.
Zimmerman, who was acting for Herr yon Jagow, and
he told' me that Russia was about to raise 900,000 ad-
ditional troops. His language betrayed unmistakable
annoyance with Russia, which was “ everywhere in our


way >y ; there were also difficulties in. economic policy.
Of course, I was not told that General von Moltke was
pressing for war, but I learned that Herr von 1 schir-
schky had been reprimanded because he reported that he
had counselled moderation towards Serbia in Vienna. .
On my return from Silesia to London, I stopped only
a few hours in Berlin, where I heard that Austria in-
tended to take steps against Serbia in order to put an
end to an impossible situation.
I regret that at the moment I underestimated the im-
portance of the news. I thought that nothing would
come of it this time either, and that matters could easily
be settled, even if Russia became threatening. I now
regret that I did not stay in Berlin, and at once declare
that I would not co-operate in a policy of this kind.
Subsequently, 1 ascertained that at the decisive confer-
ence at Potsdam on July 5, the Vienna enquiry received
the unqualified assent of all the leading people, and with
the rider that no harm would be done if a war with
Russia should result. Thus it was expressed, at any
rate, in the Austrian Protocol, which Count Mensdorff
received in London. Soon afterwards Herr von Jagow
was in Vienna to consult Count Berchtold about all these
matters. . . ,
At that time I received instructions to induce the British
press to adopt a friendly attitude should Austria ad-
minister the coup de grace to the “ Great Serbia ’ move-
ment. and to exert my personal influence to prevent
public opinion from becoming inimical to Austria. If
one remembered England’s attitude during the annexa-
tion crisis, when public opinion showed sympathy for the
Serbian rights in Bosnia, as well as her benevolent
furtherance of national movements in the days of Lord
Byron and Garibaldi, the probability that she would sup-
port the intended punitive expedition against the nun-
derers of the Prince appeared so remote, that I found
myself obliged to give an urgent warning. But 1 also
warned them against the whole plan, which I charac-
terized as adventurous and dangerous, and advised them
to counsel the Austrians to moderation , as 1 did not be-
lieve that the conflict could be localised.
Herr von jagow replied to me that Russia was not
ready ; there would probably be some fuss, but the more
firmly' We took sides with Austria, the more would Russia


give way. As it was Austria was accusing us of weak-
ness, and therefore we dare not leave her in the lurch.
Public opinion in Russia on the other hand was becoming
more and more anti-German, so we must just risk it.
In view of this attitude which, as I found later, was
based on reports from Count Pourtales, that Russia
would not move under any circumstances, and which
caused us to spur Count Berchtold on to the utmost
energy, I hoped for salvation through British mediation,
as 1 knew that Sir Edward Grey's great influence in
Petrograd could be used in the direction of peace. 1
therefore availed myself of my friendly relations with
the Minister to request him in confidence to advise
moderation in Russia in case Austria, as seemed likely,
demanded satisfaction from Serbia.
At first the English press preserved calm, and was
friendly to Austria because the murder was generally
condemned. But gradually more and more voices were
heard insisting emphatically that, however much the
crime merited punishment, its exploitation for political
purposes could not be justified. Austria was strongly
exhorted to use moderation.
When the ultimatum was published, all the papers, with
the exception of the Standard, were unanimous in con-
demnation. The whole world, excepting Berlin and
Vienna, realised that it meant war—indeed “ the world-
war;” the British fleet, which happened to have assembled
for a naval review, was not demobilised.
My efforts were in the first place directed towards ob-
taining as conciliatory a reply from Serbia as was pos-
sible since the attitude of the Russian Government left
room for no doubts about the gravity of the situation.
Serbia responded favourably to the British efforts, as
M. Pasitch had really agreed to everything excepting two
points, about which, however, he declared his willingness
to negotiate. If Russia and England had wanted the
war in order to attack us, a hint to Belgrade would have
been enough, and the unprecedented note would not have
been answered.
Sir Edward Grey went through the Serbian reply with me
and pointed out the conciliatory attitude of the Govern-
ment of Belgrade. Thereupon we discussed his proposal
of mediation, which was to include a formula acceptable
to both parties for clearing up the two points. His fmo


posal was that a committee, consisting of M. Cambon, the
Marquis Imperials and myself should assemble under
his presidency, and it would have been an easy matter foi
us to find an acceptable formula, for the points at issue,
which mainly concerned the collaboration of Austrian
Imperial officials at the investigations in Belgrade. Given
goodwill, everything could have been settled at one or
two sittings, and the mere acceptance of the British pro-
posal would have brought about a relaxation of the ten-
sion, and would have further improved our relations
with England. I therefore strongly backed the proposal
on the ground that otherwise there was danger of the
world-war, through which we stood to gain nothing, and
lose all, but in vain. It was derogatory to the dignity of
Austria; we did not intend to interfere m Serbian
matters; we left these to our ally. I was to work for
“ the localisation of the conflict.”
Needless to say a mere hint from Berlin would have de-
cided Count Berchtold to content himself with a diplomatic
success, and to accept the Serbian reply. This hint was
not given; on the contrary, they pressed on in the direc-
tion of war; it would have been such a splendid success^
After our refusal, Sir Edward requested us to submit
a proposal. We insisted on war. I could not obtain any
reply, but that Austria had shown an exceedingly “ ac-
commodating spirit ” by not demanding an extension of
territory.
Sir Edward rightly pointed out that even without an
extension of territory it is possible to reduce a State to
a condition of vassalage, and that Russia would see a
humiliation in this, and would not suffer it.
The impression grows stronger and stronger that we
wanted war under any circumstances. It was impossible
to interpret our attitude on a question which did not
directly concern us in any other way. Ihe urgent re-
quests and definite assurances of M, Sazonov, followed
by the Czar’s positively humble telegrams, the repeated
proposals of Sir Edward Grey, the warnings of the
Marquis San Giuliano and Signor Bollati, my urgent
counsels, all were of no avail. Berlin persisted; Serbia
must be massacred. .
The more I pressed the less were they inclined to come
round, were it only to deny me the success of a\ citing
war in conjunction with Sir Edward Grey.


Finally on the 29th, the latter decided on the famous
warning. I replied that I had invariably reported that
we should have to reckon with English opposition if it
came to a war with Fiance. Repeatedly the Minister
said to me: “ If war breaks out, it will be the greatest
catastrophe the world has ever seen.”
After that events followed each other rapidly. When
at last Count Berchtold, who up till then had, at the
behest of Berlin, played the strong man, decided to come
round, we replied to the Russia mobilization—after
Russia had negotiated and waited for a whole week in
vain—with the ultimatum and the declaration of war.
THE ENGLISH DECLARATION OF WAR.
Sir Edward was still looking for new ways of avoiding
the catastrophe. Sir W. Tyrrell, his secretary, called on
me the morning of August 1, to tell me that his chief
still hoped to find a way out. Would we remain neutral
if France did? 1 took this to mean that we should then
agree to spare France, but he had meant that we should
remain altogether neutral —towards Russia also. That
was the well-known “ misunderstanding.” Sir Edward
had asked me to call in the afternoon. As he was at a
meeting of the Cabinet, he called me up on the telephone,
Sir W. Tyrrell having hurried to him at once. In the
afternoon, however, he talked only about Belgian neu-
trality, and the possibility that we and France might
force one another in arms without attacking.
Thus, this was not a proposal at all, but a question
without any liability, as our interview, which I have men-
tioned before, was to take place soon afterwards. Berlin,
however, without waiting for the interview, made this
report the foundation for far-reaching measures. Then
there came Monsieur Poincare’s letter, Bonar Law’s
letter, King Albert’s telegram. The waverers in the
Cabinet —excepting three members who resigned —were
converted.
Till the very last moment I had hoped that England
would adopt a waiting attitude. Nor did my French col-
league feel at all confident, as I heard from a private
source. Even on August 1, the King had given the Pre-
sident an evasive reply. But England was already men-
tioned as an opponent in the telegram from Berlin, an


nouncing the imminent danger of warn Berlin was there-
fore already reckoning on war with England.
Before my departure, Sir Edward Grey received me
on the sth at his house. I had called at his request. 1c
was deeply moved. He told me he would always be pre-
pared to mediate, “ we don’t want*to crush Geimany.
Unfortunately, this confidential interview was made
public, and Herr von Bethmann Holweg thus destroyed
the last chance of gaining peace through England.
The anangements for our departure wcie peitect }
dignified, and quiet. The King had previously sent his
equerry, Sir E. Ponsonby, to express his regrets at my
•departure, and that he could not see me himself. Pnncess
Louise wrote to me that the whole family were sorry we
were leaving. Mrs. Asquith and other friends came to
the embassy to take leave. . , . ,
A special train took us to Harwich, where a guard o
honour was drawn up for me. I was treated like a
departing sovereign. Such was the end of my London
mission. It was wrecked, not by the perfidy of the
British, but by that of our own policy.
Count Mens dor IT and his staff had come to the station
in London. He was cheerful, and gave me to understand
that perhaps he would remain there, but he told the Eng-
lish that we, and not Austria, had wanted the war.
RETROSPECT.
Looking back after two years, I come to the conclusion
that I realised too late that there was no room for me m
a system that for years had lived on routine and tradi-
tions alone, and that only tolerated representatives who
reported that which their superiors wished to read. Ab-
sence of prejudice, and an independent judgment are re-
sented. Lack of ability and want of character are praised
and esteemed, while successes meet with disfavour and
excite alarm. . . , . ,
I had given up my opposition to the insane triple
Alliance policy, as I realised that it was useless, and that
my warnings were attributed to “ Austrophobia, to m>
idee fixe. In politics which are neither acrobatics, nor a
crame of red tape, but the main business of the firm there
?s no “ phil,” or “ phobe,” but only the interest of the
community. A policy, however, that is based only on


Austrians, Magyars and Turks, must come into conflict
with Russia, and finally lead to a catastrophe.
In spite of former mistakes, all might still have been
put right in July, 1914. An understanding with England
had been reached. We ought to have sent a representa-
tive to Petrograd who was at least of average political
capacity, and to have convinced Russia that we wished
neither to control the Straits nor to strangle Serbia.
“ Drop Austria, and we will drop the French,” M.
Sazonov said to us. And M. Gambon told Herr von
jagow, “ You need not follow Austria everywhere.”
We needed neither wars nor alliances; we needed only
treaties that would safeguard us and others, and secure
our economic development, which was without its like in
history. If Russia had been freed in the west, she could
again turn to the east, and the Anglo-Russia rivalry
would have been re-established automatically, and with-
out our intervention, and not less certainly also the Russo-
Japanese.
We could also have considered the question of the reduction
of armaments, and need no longer have troubled ourselves about
Austrian complications. Then Austria would have become the.
vassal of the German Empire without any alliance—and especially
without our seeking her good graces, a proceeding ultimately
leading to war for the liberation of Poland and the destruction
of Serbia, although German interest demanded the exact con-
trary.
I had to support in London a policy the heresy of which I
recognised. That brought down vengeance on me, because it
was a sin against the Holy Ghost.
MY RETURN.
As soon as I arrived in Berlin, I saw that I was to be made
tue scapegoat for the catastrophe for which our Government had
made itseit responsible against my advice and warnings.
The report was deliberately circulated by official quarters that
1 had allowed myself to be deceived bv Sir Edward Grey be-
cause, it he had not wanted war, Russia would not have
mobilized. Count Pourtales, whose reports could be relied on
was to be protected not least on account of his relationship!
re had conducted himself magnificently”; he was praised
enthusiastically, and I was blamed the more severely.
“What does Serbia matter to Russia?” this statesman said
to me after eight vears in office at Petrograd. The whole thing
was a British trick, that I had not noticed. At the Foreign
mm l °r> d n - e that ,Y a . r wo V ,d in a "y case have come in
iVib. then Russia would have been ready, therefore it was
better pow- '


THE QUESTION OF RESPONSIBILITY.
As is evident from all officiall publications—and this is not
refuted by our White Book, whicch, owing to the poverty of its
contents, and to its omissions, iss a gravely self-accusing docu-
ment —
1. We encouraged Count Bercrhtold to attack Serbia, although
German interests were not invollved, and the danger of a world-
war must have been known toj us. Whether we were aware
of the wording of the ultimatum! is completely immaterial.
2. During the time between July 23 and 30, 1914, when M.
Sazonov emphatically declared that he would not tolerate any
attack on we rejected llhe British proposals of media-
tion, although Serbia, under Russian and British pressure,
had accepted almost the whole of the ultimatum, and, al-
though an agreement about tthe two points. at issue could
easily have been reached, and Count Berchtold was even pre-
pared to content himself with ithe Serbian reply.
3. On July 30, Count Berchtold wanted to come to terms;
we sent an ultimatum to Petrograd, merely because of the
Russian mobilization, although Austria had not been attacked;
and, on July 31, we declared war on Russia, although the Czar
pledged his word that he would not order a man to march as
long as negotiations were proceeding—thus deliberately de-
stroying the possibility of a peaceful settlement.
In view of the above undeniable facts, it is no wonder that the
whole of the civilised world outside Germany places the entire
responsibility for the world-war upon our shoulders.
THE ENEMY POINT OF VIEW.
Is it not intelligible that our enemies should declare that they
will not rest before a system is destroyed which is a constant
menace to our neighbours? Muist they not otherwise fear that
in a fewmyears’ time they will ajgain have to take up arms, and
again see their provinces overran, and their towns and villages
destroyed? Have not they proved to be right who declared
that the spirit of Trcitschke and Bernhardi governed the Ger-
man people, that spirit which glorified war as such, and did not
loathe it as an evil, that with u;s the feudal knight and junker,
the warrior caste, still rule, and form ideals and values, not the
civilian gentleman; that the love of the duel, which animates our
academic youth, still persists in those who control the destinies
of the people? Did not the Zabern incident, and the Parliamen-
tary discussions about it, clearly demonstrate to foreign countries
the* value we place on the rights and liberties of the citizen, if
these collide with questions of military power?
BISMARCK.
Bismarck, like Napoleon, loved conflict for itself. As a states-
man lie avoided fresh wars, the folly of which he recognised.
Pie was content with bloodless battles. After he had, in rapid
succession, vanquished Christian Francis Joseph and Napoleon,
it was the turn of Arnim, Pius, and Augusta. That did not suffice


him. Gortschakow, who thought himself the greater, had re
peatedly annoyed him. The conflict was carried almost to the
point of war —even by depriving him of his railway saloon. This
gave rise to the miserable Triple Alliance. At last came the
conflict with William, in which the mighty one was Vanquished
as Napoleon was by Alexander.
Political life and death unions only prosper if founded on a
constitutional basis, and not on an international one. They are
all the more questionable if the partner is feeble. Bismarck
never meant the alliance to take this form.
He always treated the English with forbearance; he knew
that this was wiser. He always paid marked respect to the old
Queen Victoria, despite his hatred of her daughter, and of poli-
tical Anglomania; the learned Heaconsfield and the worldly wise
Salisbury he courted; and even that strange Gladstone, whom he
aid not like, really had nothing to complain about.
The ultimatum to Serbia was the culminating point of the
policy of the Berlin Congress, the Bosnian crisis, the conference
of Loudon: but there was yet time to turn back.
We were completely successful in achieving that which above
all other things should have been avoided—the breach with
Russia and England.
OUR FUTURE.
After two years’ fighting it is obvious that we dare not hope
for an unconditional victory over the Russians, English, French,
Italians, Rumanians, and Americans, or reckon on being able
to wear our enemies down.' But we can obtain a peace by com-
promise, only by evacuating the occupied territory, the retention
of which would in any event be a burden and cause of weakness
to us, and would involve the Anglo-Saxon will to dominate them.
France, exhausted by the war, will only attach herself still more
closely to Great Britain, nor will Spain continue to resist for
long.
And in Asia the Russians and Japanese will spread, and will
carry their customs with their frontiers, and the south will
remain to the British.
The world will belong to the Anglo-Saxons, Russians and
Japanese, and the German will remain alone with Austria and
Hungary. His rule will be that of thought and of commerce,
not that of the bureaucrat and the soldier. He made his appear-
ance too late, and his last chance of making good the past, that
of founding a colonial empire, was annihilated by the world-war.
For we shall not supplant the sons of Ichwe. Then will be
realised the plan of the great Rhodes, who saw the salvation of
humanity in the expansion of Britondom—in British Im-
perialism.
Tu reg ere imperio populos, Romanc, memento: hae tibi erunl
artes pacisque imponere mortem, parcere subjectis et debellarc
superbos.


HERR MAXIMILIAN HARDEN
writing in his paper
"Zukunft,"
stated that—
No impartial court could
condemn Prince Lichnow-
sky, formerly German Am-
bassador to Britain, whose
memorandum contains no essen-
tial statement and no main idea
which can he contradicted.
PRINCE LICHNOWSKY, though he has
not been arrested, is being detained in
Berlin at the disposal of the authorities.


Wholly Set Up
and Printed in
Australia by the
Osborne Print.
