



HiWwII’S 3Crial.
AN
AUTHENTIC REPORT
OF THE
TRIAL
OF
THOMAS LIDWELL, ESQ.
ON AN INDICTMENT FOR A
RAPE
COMMITTED UPON THE BODY OF
MRS. SARAH SUTTON,
WIFE OF JACOB SUTTON, ESQj OF PORTARLINGTON, (HJEEN’s COUNTY.
TRIED at NAAS, ASSIZES, xBoo,
BEFORE THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
LORD VISCOUNT CARLETON,
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS,
AND A
RESPECTABLE. JURY OF THE COUNTY OF KILDARE,
IN THE KIN i)OM OF IRELAND.
By permission of the Court.
DUBLIN:
33ctnteo fig IRofiert sparcPanfc,
FOR W. WILSON, No. 16, CORK-HILL,
OPPOSITE THE ROYAL. EXCHANGE.


INTRODUCTION.
FIRST INFORMATION of SARAH SUTTON, of Glass-
House, in the King’s County; sworn 21st October, 1799,
before the Honourable Judge DOWNES.
That an intimacy hath fubfided between informant’s
hufband, and Thomas Lidwell, of Portarlington, tor up-
wards of a year, and informant vifited Mrs Lidwell, wife of
faid Thomas, and deponent went with the knowledge and
approbation of her hufband, on Saturday the 28th day of
Sep'ember, 1 799, with Mifs Mary Lid well, onlydaughter
of Thomas Lidwell, of Portarlington, in the King’s coun-
ty, to the faid Thomas Lid well’s houfe, that lie lately took
by the name of Ofberdown, in the county of Kildare, and
the the faid Sarah Sutton went there by the invitation of
the wife of faid Thomas Lidwell, who with his wife had
been there feme days-before; that they arrived there 'at or
about the hour of three o’clock in the afternoon that fame
day, (28th September,) and told her hufband and mother
the would remain ’till Wednefday; that in the courfe of
Saturday evening, Mr. Lidwell had behaved, both by his
wprds and adfions, in a manner that the (Sarah Sutton) did
not like, and told him fo ; and therefore file the faid Sarah
determined in her own mind to return on Monday, and
mentioned to Mr. Mrs. and Mifs Lidwell on Sunday even-
ing fhe mud go home the next day, which Mr, and Mrs;
Lidwell then faid fhe fliould not, but told her if fhe would
wait ’till Tuefday they would return with,her; that orr
Monday morning in her bed-chamber, fhe the faid Sarah
Sutton told Mifs Lidwell that fhe mud bring her home that
day, which Mifs Lidwell then fa d fhe would. In the courfe
of breakfad that fame morning, (September 30,) fhe the
faid Sarah Sutton mentioned fhe withed to get half a done
of the fird fine flour from the mill, (near the faid houfe of
Ofberdown,) as fhe could not procure fuch flour in or about
Portarlington, and accordingly Mr. Mrs. and Mifs Lidwell
and fife agreed to walk there to buy it, which Mr. and Mifs
Lidwell and fhe attempted, but the roads being fo wet and
a dirty.


dirty, prevented them, and obliged them to return, and
then Mr. Lidwell ordered the gig, which (he, the faid Sarah
Sutton went into, accompanied by Mr. Lidwell, as Mifs
Lidwell, who had promifed to go with her, had got a head-
ache. Mr. Lidwell drove her down to the mill, where (he
bought the flour, and on returning told the faid Sarah Sut-
ton, he would bring her a fmall round to (hewherfome im-
provements ; and that to the bed: of her belief, about a mile
from the faid mill, he'the faid Thomas Lidwell drove the
gig down into a gravel pit, adjoining the high road, and
there by force pulled the faid Sarah out of the gig, and con-
trary to her entreaties, defire, or wi(h, committed a rape
on her; that after he committed the aft, he told her, he
wifhed to God (he would live with him for ever; that (he
the faid Sarah Sutton did not, on returning to his houfe of
Ofberftowir with him, (hew any agitation or diftrefs from
his conduft, as there was not any pcrfon there but his wife
and daughter, and did not wi(h to difturb their peace of
mind at that time; (he the faid Sarah not having any con-
veyance or perfon to take care home. That about
the hour of two o’clock that fame day, (Monday, Sept. 30.)
Mifs Lidwell drove her the faid Sarah Sutton home toGlafe-
Houfe near Portarlington, and arrived there by eight o’clock
in the-evening; that on Tuefday morning (next day) (he
the faid Sarah Sutton mentioned the whole bufinefs to her
mother at Glaft-Houfe, who earneftly and- anxioufly re-
quefled (he the faid Sarah would not inform her hufband of
it, as (he knowing he was a warm determined man, might,
on fuch a tranfaftion being mentioned to him, forfake her,
or go. in purfuit of Mr. Lidwell and lofe his life ; and ac-
cordingly influenced by fuch entreaties and reprefentations
of her mother, did not at that immediate time inform her
hufband of the bufinefs; but that, notwithftanding her mo-
ther's application, (he could not, on refleftion, endure the
thoughts of ; concealing faid tranfaftion, or from informing
her hufband ;-and on Sunday the 13th day of Oftober, be-
tween twelve, and one o’clock, without her mother’s know-
ledge, did infoim her hufband Jacob Sutton of the con-
duft of .Mr.-Lidwell to her. He.the faid Jacob ordered his
carriage, and took.: the .faid Sarah Sutton to the town of
Wexfprd, t.q mention the bufinefs to her friends, before any
profccution


profecutlon Ihould be commenced, and from thence inform-
ant and her hufband immediately came to Dublin, where
they arrived yefterday.
A Warrant was granted by Judge Downes upon the
foregoing Information ; and Mr. Lidwell having been arrefled,
was brought before him on the evening of the I'itb Obiober,
who dejired that Mrs. Sutton fnould attend . She did fo, and
was again fworn and examined by the learned Judge, in the
prefence of Mr. Lidwell , who was allowed to take notes of
her depofttion, and to fuggeji queftions. Airs. Sutton's depo-
fitton upon this accafton was to the following effeti:
' SECOND INFORMATION, fworn.
SAITH, that on Saturday the 2§th of September laft, in-
formant went to the houfe of the prifoner, on an invitation
of Mrs. Lidwell, wife of Thomas Lidwell; Mifs Lidwell,
daughter of faid Mr. Lidwell, and faid Lidwell walked to-
gether, and Mifs Lidwell having got wet in her feet, faid
Thomas Lidwell defired her to go home to change her fhoes
and {lockings for fear of cold; informant had then no idea
of any ill intention of faid Lidwell; upon Mifs Lidweli’s
going away, he prefled informant to his bofom feveral times,
and this happened about feven in the evening when dulkilh,
within view of the houfe; informant refilled thefe approaches
fo far as words Would do, told him not to attempt to go on in
that manner, that it was a dreadful thing and (hocking, and
what (he did not expe£l; faith, they were in the road, about
the length of a fmall field from the houfe, when fuch con-
verfation happened ; faith, that at the time of his prefling
informant to his bofom, they were in the road, and had left
the field in which Mifs Lidwell had left them ; and faith,
he then dragged heralong the road into the fame field, againfl,
her will, and he.flill repeated the prefling her to his bofom,
and which file refilled (o far as words, but not otherwife; he
then threw her down againfl her will; fhe got up immedi-.
ately, and he did not cffeft any criminal purpofe at that
time; faith, they then walked home to faid houfe; and
faith, that during that walk, informant told him he was a
dreadful man, and exprefled her difapprobation of thofe at-
tempts, both by looks and words and manner. ‘lnformant
during


during that evening kept in the company of Mrs. and Mifs,
Lidwell, and wherever they went informant followed them.
On the next day, (Sunday,) Mrs. Mifs Lidwell and inform-
ant went to church in Mr. Lidwell’s. carriage ; and then
went to fee the country; and then returned to the houfe,
and avoided faid -Lidwell that day as much as (he could.
She .did not on Saturday or Sunday mention any thing that
had pa(Ted to Mrs. or Mifs Lidwell, or any other perfon,
as fhe had no friend there to mention it to; confideied them
as friends, but could not mention (uch a matter to them, as
they were fo nearly related to him. And faith, fhe did not
then confider the conduQ: of Mr. Lidwell in throwing her
down as above mentioned, as indicating any criminal intent.
Saith, that on the evening of Sunday, fhe faid to Mr. Mrs.
and Mifs Lidwell (as the believes) that Are would go home
on Monday (next day); before fhe left home, fhe told her
mother and hulband that fhe would flay at Mr. 'Lidwell’s,
at 'Ofberftown, until Wednefday, but did not doubt but
fhe might ftay longer ; and before fhe went to Ofberftown,
Mifs Lidwell laid, fhe would bring her home whenever Ate
pleafed; and on Monday morning fhe told Mifs Lidwell that
fhe would go home that morning. Saith, that on Saturday
fhe formed’ the refolution in her own-mind of leaving his
houfe on Monday, from the condu£t of faid Lidwell, but
did not exprefs that refolution until Sunday ; that fhe wifhed.
to go on Sunday, but thought that a day would not Agnify,
and the horfes had been ordered for going to church. Now
fays, fhe thinks that on Sunday fhe firft formed the refolu-
tion of going on Monday; the left home with the know-
ledge and approbation of her hufband, and a ftri£t intimacy
had fubfifted before between her family and Mr. Lidwell’s.
Saith, on Monday the 30th of September, at breakfaA, {he
faid fhe would go home; Mr. and Mrs. Lidwell, and (be-
lieves) Mifs Lidwell was prefect; Mr. and Mrs. Lidwell
prefied her much to Aay. Saith, when Are firft went to
Ofberllown, the mentioned her vvifh to get fome flour, and
at breakfaft mentioned that fhe wifhed to get it. The flour
'was to be got about half a mile from the houfe, at Mor.t :
gomery’s mill; Mr. Mrs. and Mifs Lidwell agreed to walk
with informant to tiro mill. Mrs. Lidwell was going, but
Mifs Lidwell objected to her going, on account of her mo-
ther s


ther’s petticoat being yellow; Mr. Lidwell, Mifs Lidwell
and, informant proceeded part of the way towards the mill
walking together, witnefs faid the road was fo dirty fhe
would not go; Mr. Lidwell then propofed going in the gig,
to which informant objected, faying fhe would not go .with
him ; faid Lidwell faid, I don’t want you'to go with me,
Mary 'will go with you, (meaning his daughter Mifs Lidwell,
who as witnefs underflood agreed to do fo,) when wimefs
faid very well. They returned home, and fhe (laid above
flairs until the gig was brought to the door, and whilfl it
was getting ready. When fhe came down flairs, the par-
lour door was open, Mifs Lidwell was there, and witnefs
afked her whether fhe was coming; fhe faid fhe got an head-
ache,but her father would come with her. Informant then
went in the gig with Mr. Lidwell; they weht to the mill,
and got the flour; he faid he would take her round to
fee a little of the country. Saith, that to the bed
of her knowledge, fhe thinks fhe faid to Mr. Lidwell (lie
, wifhed to go home, (meaning his houfe, from whence flic
meant to go to her own houfe); don’t recollefl; whether he
made any anfwer, but fhe proceeded with him in the gig.
Saith, that about a mile from the mill, as the believes. Or
thereabouts, .but cannot exa£Uy fay, and as fire believes,
.towards his own houfe, that on a hill, very near the top of
it, on the road, faid Lidwell turned his horfe down off the
road into a gravel pit adjoining the road. Saith, that when
fhe faw him going to turn the horfe, fhe took hold of the
reins to prevent his going down there, thinking that he was
going wrong, but not thinking that he had any bad inten-
tions. And faith, he flopped his horfe at the fide of the
.pit, at fome diflance from the road, about 30 or 40 yards
as fhe believes, the horfe being at the ontfide of the gravel
. pit as fhe believes. Saith, the pit was a place where travel
was cut at different places, and where a horfe could pafs
with fuch a carriage as that. Saith, faid Lidwell then
alighted from the carriage, and begged of informant to walk
out; informant faith fhe would not; he begged file would
get out; fhe flill perfifled in denying, and faid fhe never
would get out; he repeatedly begged her to do fo, but file
refufed him in as peremptory a manner as fhe could; and
faid, there was nothing for her to fee which could induce
her


her to walk out. Now fays, fhe thought to-that effes,,
viz. that there was nothing for her to fee, and therefore
could not get out, but did not exprefs that thought; He;,
continued anxious to get her out, and feeing him riftng . f&i
try to get her out, (he took hold of the carriage, and kept
hold of it as long as fhe had power, calling out, “ oh;!
good God, is there no one to aftifl me?” he having then
laid hold of her, and was, trying to pull her out, fixe looked
round, and did not fee. a cabin, or any perfon hear her.
Saith, he tore her out with the greateft violence, and left
her totally without power, from his pulling her out and
fright. And faith, he marked her arms iri three or four'
places with the hold he took of them, which marks conti-
nued three or four days. Saith, fhe refilled afterwards as
long as fhe could, and about a minute after he had taken her
out of the gig, he threw her down ; informant refilled as
much as fhe could, but had it not in her power to refift
him completely and effeQually, fo as to prevent hispurpofe.
Saith, fhe was ready to faint with weaknefs, fo as not to
know what fhe faid or did. And faith, he did effeS his
purpofe, and committed a rape on her* Saith, that the
fame was committed by force, and againll thisr informant’s
will. Saith,, fhe did not , know what to do, whether to
walk home, orgo in the carriage. Saith, that fhe thought
if fhe was to walk to Ofberflown' without faid Thomas, and
on foot, it would make a difturbance in the family, and
fhe might not have had the means of going home to Port-
arlington; faid Thomas put her up into the carriage, and
fhe went,to the houfe at Ofberflown; and faith, he fpoke
to her feverfll times, but fhe would not anfwer him for feme
time; he faid he vvifhed to God fhe would live’ with him
for ever; fhe told him fhe had got too good an hufband,
and that he was a moll defperate man to want fo feduce
her from her family; he called her a poor little whiner; (he
told him as long as fhe lived fhe would never put her foot
jnfide his doers after fhe would leave his houfe that day.
Saith, fhe was determined on telling her hufband and her
mother what had pafied; he carried her to Ofberftown,
Saith, about an hour after fhe returned, Mifs Lidweil and
fhe fet out in the fame gig for her own houfe at Portar-
lington, which is about 20 miles, and between two and
three


three o’clock left Ofberftown, and arrived home about
o’clock. Saith, Mr. and Mrs. Lidwell prefled her
to flay at Ofberflown, which fhe refuted,. and went home.
Saith, that the next morning, as foon as fhe had an oppor-
tunity, flie told her mother of the violence fo committed
on her, as fhe wifhed to inform her mother of it before
(he told her hnfband; and her mother flept in the fame
room with her and her hnfband; her mother begged her
for God’s fake not to tell her hufband, as he was fo de-
termined a man, that he might leave’her and’her children
forever, or lofe his life. Saith,-fhe was - thereby deterred
from telling for a long time her hufband what had happened;
it was about a fortnight after the faft; fhe afterwards told
her hufband without her mother’s knowing it. She could
not bear the idea of concealing it longer from fo good an
hufband. Saith, fhe hath not told her mother that fhe
mentioned it to her hufband, but her hufband told her, as
flie believes. Saith, that on her telling her hufband, he
ordered the carriage, and faid he would take her to her
friends to advife what fhould be done, which he did, and took
her to Wexford, where her brothers were, and from thence
fhe came to Dublin on Sunday the 20th of Oflober, and
the next day fwore informations before Judge Downes.
Saith, that laft January fhe lay-in ; faith, in confequence
of her lying-in, fhe had a complaint which phyficians call-
ed the whites, and came to the falt-water to Booterftown
to be cured, and her health was eftablifhed. And faith,
that from the violence fhe had received, fhe thought fhe
had got ai return of faid complaint. And faith, when fhe
mentioned faid violence to her hufband, fhe had no fufpicion
that fhe had any other but a return of the fame com-
plaint; but faith, that after fhe had mentioned faid vio-
lence to her hufband, he faid, he (meaning faid-Lidwell)
has deflroyed you too, for I never had any communi-
cation with any woman but you fince I was married,
and I have got an extraordinary complaint, meaning feme
venereal complaint, which, he had mentioned to Dr. Blair ;
nad faith,, fhe-mentioned to her hufband the violence com-
mitted on*her, before-he had faid that he had got any
complaint; and further faith, faid Lidwell had never be-
fore


fore the facts .before ftated, paid any addrefies, or taken any
improper freedom with examinant, or received any planner
of encouragement from her to do fo, and had a very high’
opinion of him as a friend, and as the particular friend of
her hufband ; and therefore informant, though at the time
of the conduQ: of faid Thomas, Hie. did not like or ap-
prove of the faid condudb did not then think that he had
any criminal intent.
INFORMATION of Mrs. Naomie Reade, fworn the
25th Odtober, 1799, before William Weldon
Tarlton, Efq; aMagiftrateof the King’s County.
DEPOSETH, that on the morning of Tuefday the ift
day of Odober inftant, her daughter, Mrs. Sarah Sutton,
informed her of the infamous condud of Thomas Lid-
well, Efq; towards the faid Sarah, upon which examinant
immediately begged and entreated her daughter not to ac-
quaint Mr. Sutton, her hufband of it, knowing him to be
a very determined man; and alfo told her, he might leave
her and her four children, or go to (hoot him, and lofe his
life; which the faid Sarah Sutton promifed not to dost that
time, (he agreed it might be of bad confequence.
AN


AN
AUTHENTIC REPORT, &c.
Naas, Lent Affixes, Tuefday, 22d April, 1800.
At Three o’Clock on Tnefday, 22d April, 1800, Thomas
Lidwell, Efq; was brought into Court, and arraigned
upon the following indi&ment; ■
The King againft Thomas Lidwell, Efq.‘
INDICTMENT.
County of T H E Jurors for our Lord the King upon
Kildare, > their Oath, fay and prefent, that Tho-
to wit, jmas Lidwell, late of Ofberftown, .in the
County of Kildare, Efq. on the 30th' day of September,
in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Reign of our; Sovereign,
Lord George the Third, by the Grace of God of Great’
Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
and fo forth, with force and arms, that is to fay, with
fwords, flicks, and fo forth, at Ofberftown, in the county
of Kildare, in and upon one Sarah Sutton, the Wife
of Jacob Sutton, Efq. a true.and faithful fubjefl of
our faid Lt>rd the King, in the peace of God and of'our
faid Lord the King, then and there being, felonioufly did
B m ake


make an aflault, and her the faid Sarah Sutton, then and
there, by force, and contrary to the will and confent of
her the faid Sarah Sutton, felonioufly did ravilh, and car-
nally did know, contrary to the peace of our faid Lord the
King, his crown and dignity, and contrary to the form of
the flatute in fuch cafe made and provided.
Clerk of .the Crown. How fay you, Thomas Lidwell, are
you guilty of this felony in manner and form as you (land
indifled and arraigned, or not?
Prifoner . Not guilty.
Clerk of the Crown- Culprit, how will you.be tried?
Prifoner. By God and my country.
Clerk of the Crown. God fend you a good deliverance.'
Are you ready for. your trial ?
Prifoner. I am.
- Lord Carleton. Your trial will be proceeded on to-
morrow Morning at ten o’Clock. {Upon which the prifoner
was remanded to gaol.]
Counfel for the .profecution,
W. C. Plunket, Efq.
A. Moore, Efq.
W. Johnson, Efq.
W- Ridgeway, Efq.
Agent, Ml R. Waddy;
Counfel for the prifoner.
J. P. Curran, Efq.
S.' o‘Grady, Efq.
J. Barrington, Efq
R. Espinasse, Efq.
L. Mc.Nally, Efq. -
S. Montgomery, Efq.
Agent, Mr. H.G. Grady.
Wcdnefday, 23d April, 1800.
The court fat at 10 o’clock, and the prifoner being put
to the bar, the fheriff was ordered to return'his pannel,
from which'
The following Jury were Jwtrn.
Samuel Mills, Foreman,
, "Robert Montgomery,
William Brunton,
George Paine,
George Pillfworth,
John Hayftcd,-
Matthew Coates,
Benjamin Braddell,-
> John Chapman,
Charles Fitz, Gerald,
Samuel Leonard,
George Leonard.
Mr.


Mr. Ridgeway opened the ihdi&thent.
Mr. Plunket,
My Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury,
I am in this cafe of. counfel for the profecutiorv
It is a profecution brought forward on the part of
Mrs* Sarah Sutton, the wife of Jacob Sutton, of
Portarlington, in the Queen's County, Efquire, a
gentleman of refpedtable family and connexions,
and of confiderable property in this kingdom; agaihft
theprifoner at the bar, Thomas Lidwell, Efq. for-
merly of Portarlington, but now of Ofberftown, iq.
this county; who is alfo a gentleman of confiderable
property, and of a family highly refpeftable. Gentle-'
men, you muft be apprifed from having heard the
indidtment read, of the nature of the crime with
which Mr. Lidwell ftands charged, it is,--that, by force
and violence and again!! the will and confent of Mrs<
Sutton, he did ravifli and carnally know her; a
crime which by the laws of this country and of every
civilized nation, has the punifhment of death annex-
ed to it ; a crime which the wifdom of the law has
guarded again!!, in order to protect the weaknefs of
female refiftance from the attempts of brutal vio-
lence ; a law which guards the chaftity of the wife,
that it may preferve the honour of the hufband, and
provide for the happinefs of the child; it is a law
which prevents one of the moft powerful emotions
of the human mind from degenerating into brutality
-—to offer violence to a woman is unfuited to the
nature of man—this honourable feeling God and na-
ture have implanted in every liberal heart, and the
pofitive law of the land'only comes in aid of the
unalterable dictates of nature. The prefent cafe isnpt
a common one, it is aggravated by every breach .of
honour and of hofpitality,and accompanied by circuni-
ftances of peculiar depravity. It is a cafe, that if you
give credit to the witnelfcs that will be produced in
fupport


fupport of the profecution, however if mult be lament-
ed to fee a man of the character and the family of Mr.
Lid well handing at the bar of this court,yon are bound
to find him guilty; but if, on the other hand, when you
have heard the evidence, which 1 think cannot be
controverted, and attended to fuch obfervations as
the learned Judge fhall make, you feel a reafonable
doubt upon your minds, you are by your oaths bound
to acquit him ; for, gentlemen, you are the foie judges
in matters of fadt, an d the degree of the credit
which the witnefles on both ftdes are entitled to.
To the Lady, who is this day to tell the tale of her
own fhame and wretchedncfs; a woman of family
and refptdtabiliiy; a woman of liberal education and
of virtuous fentiments; it mufi be mifery to be obliged
to come forward in fuch i profecution: to her huf-
band, ,to her family, to every perfon connedted with
her, it is a fcene of diflrds and melancholy ; ,to. the
wretched man at the bar, be the event of the trial
what it may, it is an awful moment; a gentleman
brought as a culprit to the bar of a court of juf-
tice, charged with one of the fouleft crimes that
human depravity could commit;, a. crime by which
his memory mull be for, ever ftained.—-Gentle-
meij, I call upon you to divetl. your minds of
every report you may have heard to the dlfadvantage
of theprifoner: 1 entreat of you to exclude from
your feelings whatever influence fuch reports may
have; you are to decide upon the evidence that
will be offered to your confideration, and on that
alone; and if, as 1 before mentioned, a reafonable
doubt (hall arife, it is your duty to acquit the pri-
ioner; but if a plain and uncontradidled ftoryfis told
you, by which you are perfectly fatisfied in your
minds, and have no reafonable doubt, itisalfoyour
duty to find him gtiilty,
• Gentlemen, I will ftate the fads to you as I am
Inftiudfed,' they will be given in evidence, and. in
doing, I will not omit the mod minute circum-
fiance


fiance in favour of the prifoner. —[Here Mr. Plunkct
Rated the fafts''fully, commenting particularly on
fuch parts of the cafe as might be thought favoura-
ble tq the prifoner. But as the fafts are hereinafter
given exaftly as they came from the lips of the wit-
nefles, it is therefore thought unneceffary to give
the fiatemeht at length.]
After Rating the evidence, Mr. Plunket proceeded
to obferve on fuch parts of it as might be relied on
by the prifoner in his defence. The circumftance of
her returning to the houfe of the prifoner after the
firft rudenefs which he had offered her on Saturday
night; her afterwards going alone with him in the
gig; her returning with him after the aft commit-
ted ; her affumed compofure before the family ; her
partaking' of refrefhment; her permitting him to
falute her at parting, and her fubfequent conceal-
ment of the fadf from her hufband ; —all thefe were
fafts demanding the drift attention of the jury, and
which, if not fatisfaftorily explained, ought to make
a firong impreflion on their mind on behalf of the
prifoner. On the other hand, they were to confider
the fituafion in which Mrs. Sutton was at the houfe
of the prifoner; her refenting his firft rudenefs, and
determining to quit the Houfe on the Monday fol-
lowing, although her original intention had been to
remain there until the Wednefday; the accidental
and unexpefted manner in which (he was betrayed
into accompanying him into the gig on Monday;
as to the not immediately difclofing the aft of out-
rage in the gravel pit; what was fhe to do ? whom
had (he to complain to? fome minds undoubtedly
there were fo conflituted that they could not have
concealed; a woman of a ftrong and determined
difpofition would have probably given immediate
vent to her juft refentment; (he ' would have burft
into a paflionate declaration of her injuries to the
; firft ftranger whom (he (aw on the road, or to the
family


family £is foon as fhe returned; but other difpofitions
would be differently affeded. Mrs. Sutton was a
woman gentle, timid, retiring, a mind the feverfe
of a ftrong or firm one, in a ftrange country, with-
out a friend or acquaintance ; fhe did not proclaim
upon the public road the hiftory of her own fhams
and forrpw, nor did fhe difclofe to the wife and to
the daughter the crime, which the hufband and the
father had committed; fhe had two lines of condud
to chufe between, one of them, immediately to tell
the whole tranfadion; the other, to alfume compo-
fure, and endeavour to return home without exciting
fufpicion as to what (he meant to do; fhe adopted
the latter, and if the jury would once account for
Her doing that, the reft of her condud, until fhe
arrived at the houfe of her hufband, was the' necef-
fary fequel of it. As to the not difdofing to her huf-
band immediately on her return, it was a circum-
ftance which called for ferious confidcration; this
however was certain, that the moment fhe was alone
with her mother, the very morning after her return,
fhe burft into an agony of grief, and difclofed the
whole tranfadion; her mother enjoined her in the
name of God, as fhe , valued peace of herfelf and
of her hufband, not,to inform him; that he might
perhaps abandon her and her children, or might lofe
his life by feeking vengeance. This appeared na-
tural advice for a mother to give, and certainly not
very unnatural for her daughter to liften to; fhe firft
determined to conceal it, but fhe was not able to
ad the part which fhe had affumedi She pined un-
der the confcioufnefs of what had pafled; her huf-
band ufed to find her pillow wet with her tears, and
after an interval of about ten days, when fhe heard
that Lidwell had returned to Portarlington, and ap-
prehended that her hufband would ftill continue his
intimacy with him, and that fhe might again be
cxppfed to hisvifits, flic told the whole tranfadion
to


to her huflband, without confultlng her mother fur-
ther, on the fubjeCl; and this without'having the
flighteft fufpicion that (he had received or communi-
cated any venereal taint. 7
The cafe of the prifoper retted not upon the denial
of his having done the but that he had committed
it with the confent of the Lady; that (he was a wilful
adultrefs: was it the conduct of an adultrefs to
abridge her vifit houfe of the' man with whom
(he wifhed to intrigue, and where (he had full oppor-
tunity, and to chufe for the fcene of her gratifica-
tion a gravel pit ? was it the conduct of an adultrefs,
to return home, and communicate every thing which
had happened to her mother ? was it the conduct of
a woman of licentious morals to droop and weep
under the recollection of her enjoyments, and finally
to make a difcovery to her hufband ? If the jury
believed all this; if they believed that this Lady,
whofe whole life has been marked by delicacy ana
virtue, had at once become profligate in her morals,*
and engaged in a criminal commerce with an old
man, the intimate friend of her huflband ; if they
believed that, on her fufpeCling that (he had com-
municated infection to her hufband, to fcreen her
own guilt, (he told the ftory of the rape ; if they be-
lieved that the mother perjured herfelf by fwearing
to the immediate difclofure; if, they believed that the
daughter perjured herfelf by fwearing to the rape;
if they believed that fhe committed that perjury for
the purpofe of effecting an atrocious murder under
the form and colour of law; if they believed all this
in favour of a man whofe defence was, that be had
debauched the : mind and polluted the body of the
wife of his intimate friend, who was under the pro-
tection of his roof, ,and at a, diftance-from her huf-
band and connexions, they, ought to acquit the pri-
foner; - or, if they! had on their minds a rational doubt
whether thefe things.were (b, they ought to incline
to the fide of mercy, and to acquit; but if they
found the teftimony of witneffes, whofe character


was above impeachment, reconcileable with every cir-
cumftance anting in the cafe; and if they, in their
confciences, were fatisfied that an adt of brutal vio-
lence had been offered to this Lady, they were bound,
as honelf men, adfing under the obligation of a fo-
lemn oath, to bring in a verdidl of guilty.
Mr. Curran. My Lord, a very able addrefs
has been made to the jury, whofe feelings muff be'
confiderably influenced thereby. We fhould hope,
on the part of the prifoner, that an equal indulgence
might be extended to his counfcl.
Lord Carleton. It is the privilege of the crown,
to have a cafe flated on behalf of the profecutor,
and I could not deprive the counfel for the profecution
of that right; but the law has drawn the line,and
confers no fuch right upon a prifoner in cafes like the
prefent.
Mrs. Sarah Sutton , fworn.
Examined by Mr. Moore.
Qi You are the daughter of Mr. Reed, of Wex-
ford?
A. Yes.
Q. Is your father living, or dead ?
A. He is dead, he died fome years ago.
Q. Is your mother living ?
A. She is.
Qj_ When did you marry Mr. Sutton ?
A. In the year 1793.
Have you any children by him ?
•A. Yes, four children, who are living.
<i. Do you know of what age you are ?
A. I was 26 my laft birth-day.
Where is your hufband’s and your refidence ?
A. We refided firft at Bray, then at Galway, and
latterly


latterly at Glafs Houle, near portarlirlgton, fince the
year 1797. . , ■
<L. Were not your huiband and you frequently
vifited by the principal gentry at and near Portar-
lington ?
A. Yes. .
Was your huiband intimately acquainted with
the prifoner at the bar?
A. Yes. My huiband arid he were very intimate;
they were brother yeomen iri the Portnahinch ca-
valry.- ■ . . . .
Q. Was Mrs. and Mifs Lidwell vifited by your
rnother aridyourfelf?,
A. Yes* my mother, my huiband and myfelff
very frequently vifited Mr. and Mrs. and Mifs Lid-
well ; we were very intimate.
Did Mr. Lidwell, Mr. Sutton, and you go up
to Dublin in 1798? -
A. We did ; Mr. Sutton and Mr. Carey travelled
on horfeback, and Mr. Lidwell going up in gig,
and as'l had then a violent tooth-ach, I travelled up
Iri the gig., - ,
CL Were you advifed, by a phyfician to make ufe
of fea-bathing after your lying-in ?
A. Yes, and for that purpofe my huiband took
a lodging for me at Booterftown.
Q. Did.you receive any benefit by fea-bathing?
A. I was very delicate and weak after lying-in,
and my health in a very Ihort time was reftored by
fea-bathing.
CL When you were at lodgings' at Booterftown,
where did your huiband refide ?
A. He refided principally at Glafs Houfe with his
•children, and came up to Booterftown once a fort-
night to fee me ?
<L Who were with you at Booterftown?
A. Mrs. Reed, my mother, Mifs o‘Grady, and
Mifs Robinfon, and fometimes Mifs Harvey.
C O. Did


„Q. Did the prifoner at the bar vifit you at Hooters-*
town ?
A. He did two or three times £ as he was the inti-
mate acquaintance of my hulband, and as I then
confidered Mr. Lidwell as a man of honour and pro-
priety of conduct. He was very polite and refpeft-
ful to me.
Q: Did you return to Glafs Houfe after the refto-
tation of your health ?
■ A. I did.
Q. Upon what terms were you and your hufband ?
A. My hufband and I were as happy as any cou-
ple could be, I confidered him as an attentive affec-
tionate hufband, no one could be more fo.
Q; Your' hulband, I prefume. Madam, had an
high opinion of the honour and integrity of Mr. Lid-
well ?
A. Yes, he had; they were as intimate as poffible,
and as much attached to each other as could be.
Qi Did there an intimacy fubfift between your
family and Mr. Lidwell’s family at Portarlington in
September laft ?
A. There did; we were more intimate with his
family than any other in the town; there was a family
connexion, Mrs. LidwelPs mother was married to
my mother's brother.
Were you invited to go any where in that
month ?
A. I was. Mrs. and Mifs Lidwell invited me to
go to Ofberftown, in the co, of Kildare, and ftay a
few days, to fee the houfe which Mr. Lidwell had
lately taken there.
Q_. Did you go there?
A. i did, in company with Mifs Lidwell.
Q. On what day ?
A. On Saturday 28th September laft.
You went there with the approbation of Mr.
Sutton ?
A. Undoubt-


A. Undoubtedly.
Did he accompany you?
A. No, he did not. He remained at home.
Had you determined upon the period of your
vifit ?
A. I told him and my mother at going away I
fhould ftay till the Wednefday following, and per-
haps a day or two longer. I had the greateft opinion
of Mr. Lidwell as a friend, he had never before this
time offered the leaft rudenefs to me in after in fpeech.
At what hour did you arrive at Ofberftown ?
A, About three o’clock.
How were you received ? .
A. In the moft friendly manner by all the family.
Q. Had you any other acquaintances in that neigh-
bourhood?
A. I had not. 1 never had been in that part of
the country before, and did not know any of the
people there.
Did you take any walk in the evening?
A, Yes. We dined at five, and afterwards Mr.
and Mifs Lidwell and I went to walk as far as Mr.,
Montgomery’s mills.
Did you walk together ? :
A. We walked put together, but upon our return
home, 'Mifs Lidwell wet her feet*. and her father de-.
fired her to make hafte home; fhe left us.
Where was this ?
A. If was within view of the road.
How far from the houfe ?
A. About the length of a field.
About what hour was that ?
A. It was about feven, and dufkifh.
Did fhe return to your company ?.-
A. No.
Q. Did you continue your walk ?
A. Yes,
CL Did,


0. Did any thing particular happen during that
walk? '
A. On returning towards the houfe,. Mr. Lidwell
began to be very rude, he caught me in his arms,
and preffed me to his bofom, as we walked.
Q. Did you exprefs any difapprbbation of this
conduft ? •
A. I did not like it, but did not think he meant
any thing bad.
a. Did you fay any thing to him ?
A. To the belt of my knowledge, I told him it
was a rudenefs I did not like.
CL Did any thing further happen in the courfe'of
that evening I
A, When 'we came to the porter’s lodge, Mr. Lid-
well put his hands round my waift again, and faid
we thould walk more,
CL What anfwer did you make to him ? ,
A. I faid, we had walked enough, that it was time
to return, and I did not like to go any farther.
Q, Did he agree to return home ?
A. No, he hill preffed me along, keeping his hand
round me. , i
CL. Where was this?
A. On the road. He then brought me into a
fmall field, where we were before.
CL. Did he do any thing there ?
A. He tripped me up,—l fell upon my knees,-—.
I immediately got up,—l locked difpleafed,—told
him he was very rude,—it was a conduct I did not
like, —that 1 would not walk any further, but go in
immediately.
Q. What reply did he make ?
A, To the belt of my knowledge he laughed, and
he gave me his hand ten aflift me to rife, and made
tome apology.
Did you confider he had any criminal inten-
tion ;
A. Not


A.. Not in the lead: I faid it was rude and fa-
miliar.
At what time did you and, he return '.to the
houfe ?
A. It was dufkifli.
Q. Did you mention his condudt to Mrs. and
Mils Lidwell on your return to the houfe ?
A. I did not; but I determined to return Kome
if poflible the next Morning, Sunday.
Did you return on Sunday ?
A. I did not. I would have mentioned my defirc
to go home on Sunday, but Mr. Lidwell on Saturday
•night ordered the horfes for church next day, and
this prevented my mentioning it.
Why did you determine upon this, when you
had intended! to remain till Wednefday ?
A. In conference of the freedom of Mr. Lid-
■ well’s conduct. '
Q. What was his behaviour on Sunday ?
A. He was very civil, but offered no freedom; I
was lefs in his compantq only for a minute or two;
and whenever Mrs. and Mils Lidwell left the room,
I went out with them, not liking to encourage him.
Did you mention your intention of returning
home after this ?
A. I mentioned my intention of going home to
Mr. and Mrs. Lidwell, and I think to Mifs Lidwell.
I told them ip the evening of Sunday; and next morn-
ing I told Mifs Lidwell, that I mufl go away after
breakfaft.
Did Mr. Lidwell or the family comply with,
your requeft ?
A, They prefled me as much as poflible to flay,
faying they would fee me home on T f uefday.
Did you. confent to flay ?
A. No, J determined to go home.
Why did you fo determine ?
' A. In


A. In confequence of the rudcncfs of Mr. Lid-
well.
CL Had you any apprehenfion that he entertained
any bad intention ?
A. 1 had no idea he intended to commit any vio-
lence.
Was it fettled, that you fhould return home ?
A. Mifs Lidwell faid, that if I ftaid till one o’clock,
fhe would go with me, and we might fee fome of the
country in the mean time, and that we might go fee
the aqueduft.
Q. Was it propofed to go to any other place ?
A. I mentioned a wifh to go to the mills to get
fome fine flour, which 1 wanted, as we were to have
fome company at Portarlington, Mr. Warburton’s
family, and others of the neighbourhood, and we
could not get flour of that quality there.
Had .you invited them before you went to
Ofber flown ?
A. I had not invited them. I had fpoken to Mrs.
Warburton of it, but the day was not fixed.
Did the family agree to go to the mills ?.
A. Yes, we all meant to walk; but Mrs. Lidwell
had a yellow petticoat on, and her daughter objeftcd
to her going, on account of the colour; upon which
Mrs. Lidwell remained, and faid fhe would have a,
fnack for us.
Q. Did you go to the mills?
A. We went about ico yards, but the road was
dirty, and we returned back,
Q. Was any other mode of going to the millspro-
pofed ?
. A. Mr. Lidwell propofed the gig to me: I told,
him I would not go with him.
CL Was any perfon prefent at this?
A. Mifs Lidwell was prefent.
O'. Did he make any anfwer?
A. He


A. He'faid, “Sure I do not want you to go with
** me, Mary will go with you.”
Qi Did Mils Lidwell agree to go with you ?
A. She did, and I was well pleafed.
Q. Was the gig ordered ?
A. It was, and while it was getting ready, we
went into the houfe;! remained up ikirs until the
gig was ready, and then came down.
Whom did you fee then?
A. I faw Mils Lidwell, there was no one with her.
Q. Did fhe accompany you ?
A. No, (he faid fhe was ill with an head-ach ; and
as fhe had to go with me a journey of 20 miles to
Portarhngton, fhe therefore was afraid of fatiguing
herfelf too much.
CL Did you go to Montgomery’s flour-mills with
any perfon, and whom ?
A. As Mifs Lidwell declined going, fhe faid, her
father would go with me; he and Mrs. Lidwell at
this time came out ? I did not know how to fhew
any diflike before the family.
Q. Did you go into the gig ?
A. I did. 1
Who accompanied you ?
A. Mr. Lidwell.
How did it happen that you Contented to go
now, having objected before ?
A. I did not look upon his condudl at that time in
a bad light.
Q. Where did you go to ?
A. To Mr. Montgomery’s mills.
Did you purchafe the flour ?
A. We did.
Ck Did yoit bring it home in the gig ?
A. No; as Mr. Lidwell faid he would not diflurb
me to get up in the gig to put the flour into the well,
he ordered it to be left at his houfe.
O. Had you any fervant at this time?
A. No,


A. No, Sir.
Q. How far was this from Ofberliovvn ?
A. It is about three miles. I thought it was about
two, but I have heard it is three.
Q. Was it the fame mill you had been going to
on Saturday evening ?
A. No, it was not.
CL Where did yoii go to from thence ?
A. Mr. Lidwell fa'id he would take me a fhort
drive round Ofberfiowh, and fhew me the beauties
of the Country. We went about two miles, and I
perceived Mr. Lidwell was turning the horfe into a
gravel pit, as I then thought it; but I find fince it was
a fand pit.
CL Have you feeti the place fince ?
A. I was there laft week* Mr. Sutton wifhed to
fee the place, and he brought me there.
CL How far is it from the road ?
A. He brought me about 30 yards from the road.
CL Did you aflent to his going there ?
A. I did riot..
CL Did you make any objeilion ?
A. 1 could not think what he meant by going irifo
fuch a place. Talked him what was the reatbn he
went there, and took hold of, the reins, thinking the
bead was going wrong. I had no other thought at
the time. ,
CL Defcribe what his conduit Was?
A. Mr. Lidwell alighted from the carriage, and
begged of me to.alight; I did not like to go out of
it; 1 faw nothing to induce me to get out.
Q. Did yougefout of the carriage?
A. He preffcd me very much,' took hold of the.
fkirts of my habit, and I then fufpefted from his po-
filive wifli to get me out, that he had fome improper
defign ; I took hold of the carriage, and declared I
never would, get out.,
, Q. What did he do upon this?
•A. He


A. He firft pulled me by the habit, and then got
up on one fide of the carriage, or the wheel,'and
declared Hhouid get out.
Q;_ Did he fuffer you to remain f
A. No •, I did what I could to difengage myfelf
from him, but did not fucceed ; he pulled me into
his arms, and forced me out of the carriage. I
looked around to try if I could fee any perfon, or
any houfe or cabin, but could not. I exclaimed,
“My God! is there no one to help me.”
Q. What did Mr. Lidwell do, upon getting you
out of the carriage ?
A. When he took me out, he put me on my feet,
and forced me along a little beyond the horfc’s head,
-—he threw me violently upon the ground.
Q. What did he do after this ?
A. He did with me as he pleafed.
Q. Did you give him any refiftance ?
A. As long as my ftrength would enable me.
Q. Madam, it is painful to afk you to give evi-
dence of it, but as you are a married woman, you
can anfwer whether he did ufc your perfon as a mar-
ried man would ufe his wife ?
A. He did, except that he did it by force.
Mr. Curran. My Lord, we with to occafion
as little uneafinefs as poffible. This part of the exa-
mination need not be prefled further. We admit the
faft as proved fufficiently to fupport the indidment,
provided the jury (hall, upon the whole of the cafe,
give credit to the ftory.
Lord Carleton. That is extremely fair.
Mr. Moore. My Lord, I feel it is, and there-
fore I fhall proceed to the other parts of the cafe.
It was not with your confent ?
• A. It was entirely againft my confent j—as long as ;
I was able I refilled.
D CL After


Q;_ After this what did you do ?
A. I really did not know what to do. I got dilen:
gaged from him; but was weak after the abufe; he
lifted me into the gig, I faw not a foul there; there
was no one within view.
Did he return with you in the gig'to his own
houfe ?
A. He did; I did not meet any perfon on the
road that I knew ; he fpoke feveral times to me on
the way about the beauties of the country, to which I
made no reply. He faid at one time, “ I wilh to God,
my Sally, you would confent to live with - me for
ever,” I told him he was a moll defperate man to
feduce—to want to feduce me from my hufband and
family; that I never would forgive him ; and declared
1 never would enter the doors of his houfe again, as
long as I lived! . '
Q;, What happened on your return to the prifoner’s
houfe?
• A. On my return there, I faw Mrs. and Mifs Lid-
well; I judged it moft prudent not to tell them what
had palfed, but to keep up appearances as if nothing
had happened, to prevent anydifturbance there, that
might prevent my going to my own houfe, being
in a part of the country where I had never been be-
fore.
Q;, Did you communicate to them, any thing of
what had puffed ?
A. I did not. I confidcred it belt to keep it fc-
cret, till I got home to my own friends; it would be
no advantage to me to tell his family; they would
not believe me.
Ch Did you partake of any refrelhment ?
A. Mts. Lidwell had prepared a fnack for me and
her daughter to partake of, before we fet off for Por-
tarlington, and I attempted to take lhare of fome
,fowl, which Mrs. Lidwell helped me to, and a glafs
of


of wine, to keep up appeararices, and not let them
fufpedl any thing.
Mr. Lidwell in the room during this time?
A. He was.
Q. How long did you remain there ?
A. 1 fnppofe about an hour.
Where did you go from thence?
A. To Fortarlington.
Who accompanied you ?
A. Mifs Lidwell accompanied me in the carriage,
and we wereattended by a fervant.
Qi, Did you take leave, and in what manner did
you part ?
A. We parted on good terms in appearance; I
thought it the bell way, in order to get home, hav-
ing no mode of conveyance of my own, ■ ••
Did you falute any of the family upon part-
ing ? , '
A. Mis.,Lidwell killed me on taking leave, and he
followed me, and took me by the hand, and laid,
“ Sure you will not go without taking leave of me,”
and then killed me. 1
.What time did you arrive atGlafs Houfe?
A. About eight o’clock. -
Q. Did you mention any thing of the matter to
Mifs Lidwell ?
A. I did not. I thought it bed to, - or>*-‘*'al it till I
got tame. ■"*. en, ‘ .
Q. Whom did you meet upon your return home?
A. I met myhulband, my mother, and my children.
1 was very ill, and went to bed at about ten. ■
Q. Did you mention the tranfadlion that night?
A. No. I was determined to tell my mother, but
had no oppprtunity fo to do that night, as my mother
flept in the fame room in which Mr. Sutton and I
flept, as there was no other place, except for fer-
vants. The next morning after breakfafl I had a con-
verfation with my mother, and I told her that Mr.
Lidwell


Lidwell was a villain, and that he had on-the preced-
ing day driven me in a'gig,to Montgomery’s mills,
and from thence into a bye-road, between two and
three miles from the houfe, and then turned into a
gravel or fand-pit, and there did what he pleafed with
me ; and I told her all the circumftances of that
tranfadion.
Why did you not tell your hufband firft ?
A. I was fearful to tell Mr. Sutton firll, and wifh-
ed to know what my mother thought of it.
Qi. What advice did your mother give you ?
A. She intreated, (he begged for the love of God,
and for the fake of myfelf and my children, not to
acquaint my hufband of it; (he faid (he was appre-
henfive that he would forfake me and my children ;
and feek him who had abufed me, and perhaps lofe his
life *, (he conjured me to keep it a fecret to the hour
of my death, as the confequence of telling my huf-
band might be dreadful.
What followed?
A. I promifed my mother I would take her advice,
and not tell my hufband.
Did you afterwards tell your hufband of it ?
A. 1 did. I endeavoured whenever in his com-
pany to keep up my fpirits, but whenever I was alone
I would throw myfelf on the bed, and vent my grief
in tears. ■ 1 y&s fo miferable, that nothing could be
equal to itjaflfed ?
Did your hufband take notice of your melan-
choly and dejedtion ?
A. Yes. He obferved the pillow was wet with
tears, and he urged me to tell him the occafion
of my mifery ; I ftrove to adhere to my mother’s
advice, and therefore I told him I was in fo much
grief becaufe I believed my mother was dying. He
often faid to mej “ Sally, my heart, what grief is it
thatcaufes you to be fo-melancholy.”
Q^Your


Your mother, no doubt, was greatly affli&ed
at ybur misfortune ?
A. Infomuch fo, that I really feared (he would lofc
her life.
What further happened ?
A. Monday following I had a party to tea and
cards; 1 was very low fpirited and dejedled, but I
ftrove to keep up appearances, and to be chearful in
the prefence of my hufband and the vifitors.
Who invited the company ?
A. Mr. Sutton did. •It was at his inflance, and
the party was intended before I went toOfberitown.
Q. Who were of the company ?
A. Mr. Warburton’s family and others.
Were any of Mr. Lidwell’s friends there?
A. Mifs Lidwell, and Mifs O’Grady wer,e there.
How did you conduct yourfelf upon this occa-
fion ?
A. I was very low.
Did you mention this outrage at any time to
, your hufband ?
A. 1 did. On Sunday morning tne 13th of Oc-
tober.
Ql How came you to mention it ?
A. While we were at breakfaft Dr. Blair came in;
and when he was going away, Mr. Sutton mentioned
his intention of dining with Mr. Lidwell that day.-
After Dr. Blair was gone, I inftantly entreated *my
hufband not to dine with Mr.Lidwell on any account.
I then told him I had a melancholy tale to tell him,
and defired him to go with me into the garden, and
I would tell him; on going out of the room I told
'my hufband that that villain Lidwell had ruined me;
I then with my hufband went into the garden ; I told
him I was afraid he would forfake me arid my chil-
dren, he declared he would never forfake me. I told
my hufband every particular of that tranfadion, as I
have told it here.
QWVas


Qj_ Was the conduct of Mr. Sutton towards you
altered upon this difclofure ?
A. Not,at all; he killed me, and faid, he never
would upbraid me of it.
Q. Had you any reafon to think he knew, or fuf-
peded the matter before you mentioned it ?
A. Not in the lea It.
Was it a voluntary difclofure on your part ?
A. Entirely fo.
Did he impute any criminality to you ?
A. He did not •, he faid he was fatisfied of my in-
nocence. To this hour he has not imputed any cri-
minality to me.
Did any further converfation pafs ?
A. Yes, After I had told him of the matter, he
alked me how I was aflfeded in my health 5 I told
him I believed my dillrefs occafioned by Lidwell’s
condud to me, and what I had fufFered in my mind,
had brought on a return of my old complaint.
Q;_ By the old complaint, you mean the weaknefs
which afflided you after your lying-in ?
A. Yes, Sir,
any fufpicion that you had contraded
a foul complaint ?
A. I had not: but Mr. Sutton faid, he fuppbfed
I was difordered in the fame manner he was himfelf.
- It was therefore a new complaint which then
aflfeded your health ?
A. It was a venereal complaint.
Pleafe to relate what followed ?
A. He then propofed we (hould immediately go
to my friends at Wexford, to acquaint them of this
misfortune, and to confult with them about profecut-
ing‘Lid well.
,Q.. Did you tell your mother you intended to tell
it to your hufband, or that you had told him ?
A. I did not. I told my mother we were going to
Galway,


Galway; and a letter coming to Mr. Sutton after-
wards, it was fent by my mother to Galway for him.
Qj_ On your going to Wexford what followed ?
A. We were advifed to fvvear examinations againft
the prifoner at the bar, and bring him to trial.
Q;_ Did you fwear examinations ?
A. I did, firft before a magiftrate in the country,
in which I defcribed the place where the prifoner com-
mitted this crime to be a gravel pit; my hulbahd and
I went to the place, and found it to be a fand-pit,
and I fwore a fecond examination before Judge
Downes. The prifoner at the bar was apprehended,
and brought before Judge Downes.
Was he there confronted with you ?
A. He was.
About what time was the prifoner apprehended ?
A. The 27th of Odtober laft.
Had you ever given Mr. Lid well any encou-
ragement for this rudenefs ?
.A. Not the flighteft.
Q. It is neceflary. Madam, to trouble you with
one painful queftion, to afle you, can you identify the
prifoner ?
[Mrs. Sutton was here much embarraffed, and
after fome time, raifing her hand, and for the firft
time during her examination, looked towards the
dock, and pointing to the prifoner, faid, “ that is he."]
Crofs Examined. By Mr. Curran.
Qj_ You are of a Wexford family ?
A. Yes, Sir.
Q. Of the name of Reed ?
A. Yes.
Q. You have lived fome time near Portarlington ?
A. Yes. -
CL Was that your firft acquaintance with Mr. Lid*-
well ?
A. It


A. It was fince we went there we became ac-
quainted with him.
Mr. Lidwell had a grown-up daughter?
A. He had, (he is fince married.
What age is Mr. Lidwell?
A. I do not know his age.
Q. What age do you (uppofe him to be ?
A. I (uppofe him to be between 40 and 50,
Q. Has he not been frequently afflidled with the
gout ?
A. I have heard fo.
Have you not often feen him in that ftate ?
A. Four or five times.
Q. Have you not feen him in his bed-room in that
fiat??
A. I have: but his family were there.
Q. Have you ever been alone with him in his bed-
chamber ?
A. Never: I have been fometimes in his bed-
chamber when he had the gout, but never alone;
others of his family were always prefent.
Did he ever call you by any more familiar name
than Mrs. Sutton ?.
A. He once called me by my chriftian name, after
his cohduft, but never before.
CL Do you recolledt your travelling from Portar-
lington to Dublin in the beginning of the year 1798 ?
A. I do.
You travelled in company with Mr. Lidwell?
A. I went in the gig with him, my hufband and
Mr. Carey were with us on horfeback.
Q. What fort of weather had you upon your re-
turn ? .
•A. I do not recollect.
Q. Pray, Madam, did it not rain exceedingly?
A., Now, I do recoiled!,. I believe it was wet.
QL The gig had no-head?
A. It had not..
Q.lf


Q. If you had met any refpedtable perfon in a
covered carriage, you would have gone into it?
A. Ido not know that I would.
Q. Would you have preferred the company of
Mr. Lidwell ? . ,
A. I had the higheft opinion of Mr. Lidwell as a
friend.
Q. Nothing more, Madam? '
A. I had every friendlhip for him as a friend.
Qi You found him an agreeable man ?
A. I never found him in the leaft rude ; I always
confidered him a very pleafing man. if Mr. Sutton
had been from home, there is no man to whom I
would have gone for advice, fooner than Mr. Lid-
well. ■
The firft time you went to Dublin, was to have
your teeth examined ?
A. I had a bad tooth, which I wilhed to have look-
ed at.
Did you get your teeth drelfed ?
A. No, Sir.
Q. Pray, how long did you remain in Dublin ?
A. Four or five days. Mr, Sutton was detained
in Dublin, and I remained with him.
Q. Where did you lodge ?
A. In Grafton-ilreet.
Q. Where did Mr. Lidwell lodge?
A. In Grafton-ftreet.
Q; In the fame houfe ?
A. Yes, Mr. Carey alfo lodged there.
You went to Dublin a fecond time ?
A. Yes, Sir.
For what purpofe ?
A. To bathe in the falt-water: Mr. Sutton; took
lodgings in Bootcrftown. , ’
How long did you remain at the falt-water ?
A. From the 15th of May to September.
Q. Did Mr. Sutton refide there with you ?
V E A. He


, A. He did not; he refided atGHafs-Houfe, but
came often to fee me.
You were not very anxious to return to Glafs-
Houfe ?
A. I was not.
Q. Mr. Sutton, however, was very anxious, that
you fhould return home ?
‘A. I thought I had no occafion to go homey, till I
was to go to the co. of Galway.
Mr. Lidwell vifited you at Booterltown ?
A. He did.
How often ?
A. Two or three times, I cannot exadly tell how
often.
He came to fee you without Mr. Sutton ?
A. He came once'or twice without him ; he faid,
if I wanted money, he would let me have it, as my
hufband could remit it to him.
'Qi By virtue of your oath, Madam, did he not
go oftener ? • •
A. Ido not doubt, but he might have come three
times without Mr. Sutton.
Q. Pray, Madam, do you not believe he went
four times ?
-A. I do not think he did, but I am not certain.
Q. How long were you at Booterftown before your
health was reftored ?
A. I was not there a month till I,was quite well.
Then you continued there two months after
your recovery ?
A. I did. i .
Q;_Did not Mr. Lidwell vifit you at a houfe in
Dublin ? . •'
A. I do not recoiled any houfe in Dublin where
Mr. Lidwell vifited me.
Qi Recoiled yourfelf. Madam ?
A. I never knew of any houfe in Dublin, where
Mr. Lidwell could have vifited me, but where he
lodged


lodged in the fame houfc upon our firft going to
Dublin, '
Qi Did he never meet you at any other houfe in
Dublin ?
A. I do recoiled, that I met him one morning at
Mifs Harvey’s.
Qj have afked you thefe general queftions, Ma-
dam,, to give you time to recover yourfelf from yqur
agitation of mind; I (hall now, Madam, atk you
a few queftions, more particularly relative to the pre-
fect charge againft the prifoner: I think you faid in
your dired examination, that about the 27th of Sep-
tember you went to Ofberftown ?
A. I did, on the invitation of Mrs. and Mifs Lid-
well. • •
Q. What quantity of cloathsdid you take with
you ? - -
A. I had my habit, and fufficient changes of hand-
kerchiefs and cravats, to, flay till Wednefday; lam
not fure as to (lockings.
What day was fixed for your return home?
A. The Wednefday following.
Q. Are you fure you did not agree ro return the
Mondayfollowing?
A. No; on fetting out I did tell my hiifband I
would flay until .Wednefday, or perhaps a day , or
two longer. . \
Q. By virtue of your oath, did you not tell Mifs
Lidwell that you would return on Monday ?
A. I might have faid to Mifs Lidwell that I would
be home on Monday, but was determined in my own-
mind to flay till Wednefday, if I liked the place.
Qi, How many Ihifts did you take with you ? 7
A. I do not recolledt that I took more than one.
How many pair of (lockings did you take
with you?
A. I can’t tell that I took more than one pair.
,Q. The pair which you wore ?
A. ifes.


A. Yes.
So you intended to flay from Saturday till
Wednefday, and took no change of linen or (lock-
ings?
A. There was no company expeded, and the
things I took might have laded.
Q. By virtue of your oath, Madam, did you take
more deaths with you than what you adlually wore ?
A. I am not certain, except cravats and handker-
chiefs ; my maid might know.
What is her name ?
A. Molly.
Qj. I recoiled to have heard of her. Mr. Sutton
and you had Tome difference about her ?
- A. No, Sir.
Q. Was not Mr. Sutton difpleafcd with the cbn-
dud of that woman ?
A. He had fome words with her, but would not
lilce to turn her off without my content.
Pray, Madam, what was the caufe of his dif-
pleafure ?
A. Mr. Sutton faid, that (he and the fervant man
did not behave themfelves as they ought.
Q/Was not the mifbehaviour this, that (he was
found in bed with the fervant man ?
A. I don’t doubt it.
Q;_ Did not Mr. Sutton tell you fo ?
A. No, he faid, he had heard things of her he
did not approve of.
Q! You did not put her away ?
A. She was an extremely good fervant; but if Mr.
Sutton had defined to put her off, I-would have con-
fented.
Then Molly lives with you-yet ? ,
A. She does.
At whafhour did you dine the day you arrived
at Ofberftown ?
A. About five.
a n


It was dufkifh when you went to walk ?
A. No, Sir, it was dufkifh when we returned, but
not when we fet out.
Mifs Lidwell flipt in pafling over a ftreara, and
wet her feet ?
A. Yes.
Qs_ It was dufkifh then ?
A. It was.
Mifs Lidwell went home very faft ?
A. I do not recoiled, I did not take notice, I
fuppofe the might have walked pretty faft, or at her
ufual rate.
You might have walked as faft if you pleafed ?
A. I might. I recoiled her father bid her run on.
Qi, You did not hurry on ?
A. No, I did not, 1 did not think there was any
occafion.
The porter’s lodge was the dired way to go to
thehoufe?
A. It was.
Q;. When Mr. Lidwell afked you to walk more,
what did he fay ?
A. He faid, “ Mrs. Sutton, we may walk a, little
more.”
At this time he had his arm about your waift ?
A. He had.
You made no objedion to continuing the walk?
A. I had no fufpicion he had any improper inten-
tions, or I would not have walked with him.
No doubt, Madam; but you did not make any
objedion ?
A. I did not with to walk further, I thought it
was time to go in, but thought walking a little more
of no confequcnce.
Q;_ Then you contented to prolong the walk ?
A. Mr. Lidwell was fuch a friend, I had no idea
of any bad intention, I thought myfelf perfedly
fafe with him.
Q. So


CL So, infiead of going horns to the houfe, when
it was dufkilh, you continued the walk?
A. I went back, becaufe Mr, Lidwell prcffed me,
and I had fuch a confidence in him, that 1 fufpedted
nothing bad. , •
CL Then you did not think it improper to walk
alone with him fo late in the evening, with his arm
round your waift ? -
A. Not with fuch a friend, as he was confidered.
CL When he tripped you up, as you fay, how was
it he did it?
A. With his foot,
Q. You fell upon your knees, you faid?
A. I did, but got up immediately, and to the beft
of my knowledge he gave me his hand to help me
up. ■ : - :
<L Did no other familiarity pafs upon that occa-
fion ?
A. None.
CL By virtue of your oath, did he not lay his hand
upon fome part of your perfon ?
A. He did not.
Qv Did he not kifs you ?
A. He did not.
_ Qt. Will you fay, upon your oath, that he never
kiffed you ? • •
•A. He never did, but when L was leaving his
houfe.
(L Do you fay then, that nothing more paffed on
the Saturday evening, but what you have mentioned?.
A. Nothing more.
<L Did you fay any thing at the time ?
A. I faid it was behaviour 1 did not like, and that I
would not walk more.
<L You had no fufpicion after all this paffed?
A. I'did not think he meant any thing upon my
honour.'
CL Pray,


Pray, Madam, did he throw you down a fe-
cond time ?
A. He did not.
If fuch 'a tranfadlion pafled, do you think it
poflible it mighfhave been feen ?
A. I fuppofe it might, but no fuch thing pafled.
CL Do you recolledl whether there was any hedge
from which a perfon might make obfervation ?
A. I do not.
Was there any ditch to the field, into which
you and Mr. Lidwell walked ?
A.-1 believe there was.
Q. If any perfon were concealed there, could he
fee you and Mr. Lidwell?
A. I fuppofe fo.
Q. When you returned to the houfe, whom did
you find there ? - .
A. Mrs. Lidwell and Mifs Lidwell.
Did they make any enquiries as to your delay ?
A. They did not.
Q. Were you and Mr. Lidwell left alone for any
time that evening afterwards ? , ■ ■
A. 1 believe we were left alone for about a minute
when Mrs. Lidwell went,for tea,
Q. You did not feem muchfurprized at;Mr. Lid-
well’s condudt; it might be matter of curiofity to
know how far a man might proceed without exciting
alarm ? '
A. T thought it*was very rude; it was what I did
not like. •
Qt, Confequently you avoided his company after-
wards? ’ ■
A. I did not wilh to be alone with him ; I did not
wifh to encourage any man.
Q: With refpedt to Sunday, it was a dayof reft,
therefore I pafs it over: when youfet out firft for the
mills on Monday, you walked in company with Mr.
Lidwell ?
A. I


A. I did, but objected as I found the roads dirty.
CL You then returned to the houfe ?
A. We did.
<L What part of the houfe did you retire to ?
A. I went up Hairs to change my fhoes, which
were dirty.
Q. You faid Mifs Lidwell declined accompanying
you. Did you not hear her before that time com-
plain of being ill ?
A. She complained of a head-ach the night be-,
fore ?
CL You helped Mr. Lidwell into the gig ?
A. No, Sir.
CL By virtue of your oath, Madam, did you not
help him into it, or out of it upon his retipn ?
A. I did not.
Q. You fay you did not go to the fame mills you
had been, at on Saturday evening ?
A. We went there firft, but they had not the flour
we wanted, then we went to the others.
Qj. The place where this alleged tranfadlion hap-
pened, you now defcribe to be a fand-pit ?
A. Yes, Sir.
CL You had. defcribed it otherwife before ?-
A. I had defcribed it in my firft information as a
gravel-pit.
Q. Was it fuch a place as a carriage could drive
into?
A.'l believe a carriage of that kind could drive
into it ? -
<L The carriage however was not concealed in it?
A. I believe the carriage was concealed from the
road at the time.
•Qi At which fide of the road, as you drove frbm
the mills, was the fand-pit ?
A. On the left fide.
CL At what diftance ?
A. Mr.


A. Mr. Sutton thinks it about three miles frolti
Ofberftown, but I can’t be certain,
Q. Did not feme familiarities pafs before you ar-
rived at the mills ?
A. When \ye firfi fet out, about a quarter of a
mile from the houfe, he put his arm round my waift;
I put it away, and faid, if he did fo again, 1 .would
get out and walk.
had no fufpicion then, Madam?
A. I had no thought there was any thing in his
head ?
What, Madam, although you remonftrated
with him?
A. I did not wifh to encourage the freedom,, but
did not think he meant any thing by it.
Qi Did he fay any thing at the time ?
A. He laid, “ Sure you won’t walk in the' dirt,”
and immediately defilled.
Qi. Did he put his arm about-you again ?
A. No, he did not.
Q. Did nothing more pafs ?
A. We chatted about indifferent matters;
Can’t you recoiled fome of the particulars ?
' A. He prelfed me very much to flay that day. I
told him I would not, and faid it was his freedom
prevented me. .
Afthe lime you went to the fand-pit, arc you :
pofitive you did not fee any perfon ?
A. I am fure there was no perfon within view. I
looked attentively about, when Mr. Lidwell went to
get out of the gig, and could fee nobody,
Mr. Lidwell was.fhortly before this ill in the
gout ?
A. He was. , ,
Q. You did not fufped he had any criminal de-
fign?
A. Whe n I faw he was determined to get me out,
I fufpeded his purpofe. When he took me in his
F arms ?


arms, I fufpedted him, and looked about for alfift-
ance.
You did not make any noife?
A. If I had feenanyone, I would have called.
Qi Then the truth is, you did not ?
A. I did exclaim, “ Good God ! what (hall I do,
is there no one to help me." I would have called
out more vehemently and fcre?ched, if I had Teen
any one to aflift me.
But the truth is, Madam, you did not
fcreech ?
A. I did not.'
How far diftant was the road ?
A. About 30 yards.
Qj_ You don’t fay, that the prifoner deprived you
of fpeech, he did not knock you down ?
A. He did not. He took me violently, and left
me without power.
Q. You faid he put you on your feet ?
A. He did; and pulled me violently above the
head of the horfc.
Q. Some time muft have elapfed by your account,
how long were you in the pit ?
A. I fuppofe five or fix minutes, while he was per-
petrating his purpofe*
Q. And during all that time you never fcreeched
out ?
A. I did not.
Pray, Madam, how was the horfe fattened P
A. I do not know whether he was fattened or not.
Q. You fpeak of violence, was much force ufed ?
A. He ufed much force, fo as to effedt his purpofc,
he left me without power.
Q/ You fay you made no refiftance ?
A. I ttruggled as far as I was able.
Q, Pray, Madam, was your habit, or your deaths
dirtied ?
A. Mr.


r ■ '■ s)
■ ,; .v" /
Qyp-?/dU>.
A. Mr. Lidwell fliook my habit, when he put me
bn my feet.
Q. Was there no obferyatioq made upon your
drefs, when you returned to Oflberftown ?
A. No, Sir.
Q. Nor upon his ? >
A. Not that I heard; I fuppofe the fand was dean,
and that, was the reafon of it.
Q:_ Did no perfon obferve on your appearance,
when you returned to Oflberftown ?
A. Nobody. I endeavoured to keep up every
appearance.
Q. Mr. Lidwell was in the room, when you par-
took of the fnack ?
A. He was.
Qi Youfaw him there?
A. I did.
Q;_ You had your eyes upon him ?
A. Sometimes I had.
Qj_You did not faint at that time ?
A. No, Sir.
You were not fo much affeded then as you
appeared to be to-day, at feeing him in tKe dock ?
A. I could not help my emotions at feeing him.
Qi. Pray, Madam, when did you firft take up the
refolution of profecuting Mr. Lidwell?
A. The wifli came into my tnind as foon as ever
I fpoke to Mr. Sutton.
Q;_ It was he fuggefted the idea to you ?
A. He fa'id, “ With your afliftance, I will punifti
him ; ” and i faid I was very willing to do fo.
You did not intend to tell Mr. Sutton ?
A. I did, but at firft: my mother dilfuaded me.
You knew if you told him it muft be made
public ?
A. I did not care.
Qi.Why did you not complain at Ofberftown?
A. I was afraid'Mr. Lidwell might have run off
with
35


with me, and I could not get home; he might have
prevented my profecuting him.
You did not tell the tranfaftion to any of the
family there ?
A. It would be no advantage to me to difturb the
family, and perhaps Mifs Lidwell would not believe
me.
Qt You were cheerful on the road to Portarling-'
ton ?
A. No, Sir.
Q. Did you not fmg a fong in the gig while re-
turning with Mifs Lidwell ?
A. 1 did not.
Qt Nora verfe of a fong ?
A. No, Sir.
There was a fervant attending you ?
A. There was,
Qi You cracked no joke with him ?
A. No, Sir.
Qi. Do you remember a Lady and Gentleman paf-
fing, and fomething being faid about the wheel of
the carriage being loofe?
A. I do.
What was it was faid ?
A. The fervant told the gentleman the wheel was
loofe, and the gentleman anfWered him harflily.
Q. Was that all ?
A. - It was.
You made no remark?
A. No, Sir.
CL By virtue of your oath, Madam, did you not
fay, “ Davy, fee what you got for that,” or fome-
thing like that ?
A. I did not.
Q; You had determined not to tell Mr. Sutton of
this tranfaftion ? ’
AV I was determined when I got home, to tell
my


my mother firft, and I was alfo determined to tell*
Mr. Sutton.
What time did you arrive at Glafs-Houfe ?
A. About eight o’clock.
What time did you go to reft ?
A, Between ten and eleven.
Q. How foon did you know of the return of the
old complaint, as you thought it ?
A, In about five days after.
Q. You told Mr. Sutton of that before you men-
tioned Mr. Lidwell’s conduct? , ,
A. No, I told him of Mr. Lid well, before I men-
tioned the complaint.
Did you tell your mother of the return of your
“complaint? ;
A. I did not.
Ck Did you ever tell her of it ?
A. I never told-her till Mr. Sutton tpld her.
Q. You fay you told Mr. Sutton freely?
A. I did. -
Qi. What reafon had you for telling him upon that
day ?
A. Becaufe he was going to dine with Mr. Lid-;
well that day,
he not aiked you fomething about it, be-
fore you told him ?
A. He.had not; I told him without his atking
any thing. .
' CL Had not Mr. Sutton found himfelf difordered
before you told him ?
A. I can’t anfwer as to that.
CL Had he not been talking to Dr. Blair upon the
fubjeft? ,
A. I think it was the day before, that he was talk-
ing to Dr. Blair, as Mr. Sutton told me.
CL When did Mr. Sutton tell you fo ?
A. On Sunday, when I told him of Mr. Lidwell’s
condudl; -he told me he had been fpeaking to
Dr.


Dr. Blair, and that he had found he was difordered,
and that heTuppofed I was as he was.
Had he not mentioned fomcthing of it before
that day ?
A. Never, till Sunday.
Mr. Sutton flept with you on Saturday night ?
: A. He did.
Q. Did he not betray fome fymptoms of difcon-
tent and paflion ?
A. I did not perceive any.
Q. Mr. Sutton might haVe contradted the diforder
by his own libertinifm ?
A. I believe he was confcious he had not.
But you cannot undertake to anfwer for that ?
A. If I could anfwer for any man, I believe he
had no intercourfe with any woman but myfelf, fince
our marriage.
Did you make nfe of any particular expreffion,
when you found your hulband knew he had contradt-
ed a foul difeafe from you ?
A. I did not.
Such as that you mull go to pot, or fomebody’s
life be facrificed ?
A. I did not.
Q. No perfon faw the tranfadlion in the fand-pit ?
A. There did not.
You are certain that no perfon can .be called,
as to what pa(Ted there, but yourfelf?
A. I am fure of it.
Q. Then, Madam, you know you are fwearing
where you are fafe from contradidtion ?
A. It would be a very (hocking thing, if I could
think of taking away any one’s life, if I was not
conlcious of my own innocence?
You feel that you are attacking this man's life.
Do you not feel that it is a Itruggle between his life
and your own charadler ?
A. His


A. His behaviour was againft my confent, and I
think it more juft he Ihould fuffer than me.
Had not your hufband an intention at firft of
bringing an adion againft Mr. Lidwell ?
A. He had not.
CL Was it not debated among your family, whe-
ther he fhould bring an adion of crim. con. or
not ?
A. I never heard it,
CL You have fcen the examinations which you
fwore ?
A. Mr. Waddy gave me a copy of them.
CL Did any one fpeak to you as you came into
court, as to what you were to fay ?
-A. There did not.
Q. Did no one fay to you, “ Be firm, and go
thro’ with it, —all depends upon it ?”
A. No j I was defired to be firm, and tell the
truth.
[Here the examination of Mrs. Sutton clofed, and
Ihc was conduded out of court. It is to be obfervcd
that upon the application of Mr. LidwelTs counfel,
all the witnefles on both Tides were ordered out of
court, except the perfon under examination, in or-
der that they might not hear each other’s teftimony,]
Mrs. Naomie Reed, fworn.
Examined by Mr. Johnson.
Qj_ You are the mother of Mrs. Sutton ?
A. Yes, Sir.
(L And the widow of Mr. Reed, who lived in
the town of Wexford ?
A. Yes, Sir.
<L He is dead Tome years ?
A, He is.
CL Mrs.


Q. Mrs. Sutton is your only- child ?
A. She is.
Q. Where was fhc educated ?
A. At home.
Q_. Where have you lived fmce your daughter’s
• marriage? • C
A. I have generally refided with Mr. Sutton.
CL Upon what terms,,did Mr. and Mrs. Sutton
appear to be ? .
A. They always appeared to be a very happy
couple.
Q. Did you accompany Mrs. Sutton to' Booterf-
town?.
A. I did.
CL Was Mr. Sutton’s family intimate with Mr.
Lidwell’s ?
A. Very intimate.
CL Do you recoiled Mrs. Sutton’s going to Ofberf-
town upon a Saturday, in the month of September
laft?,
A,. I do,
CL Did fhe fay any thing to you upon that occa-
fjon ?
A> She told me Ihe believed her flay would be till
about Wednefday.
CL Do you know on what day fhe did return ?
A. She returned on the Monday evening, and we
were greatly furprized to fee her return fo foon.
CL Whom did fhe return with ?
A. With Mifs Lidwell in a gig, attended by a fer-
vant on horfeback.
CL At what hour did fhe return ?
A. At about eight in the evening,
CL In what difpofition did fhe appear to be ?
A. Very low fpirited and-.dejeded; fhe went to
bed between ten and eleven.
CL In what part of the houfe did you fleep ?
A. At


A. At that time I flept in the fame room with Mr.
and Mrs. Sutton.
CL Did your daughter relate any thing particular
.to you that night?
A. Not that night * but on Tuefday morning after
breakfaft, the told me the had a raoft melancholy
ftory to tell. She told me (lie had gone out with Mr.
Lidwell in a gig, to get fome flour at the mills, and'
that on his return he drove her into a gravel pit, and
did what he pleafed with her.
CL. Did the mention the injury committed ?
A. She faid, he violated her perfon.
CL Did you give your (daughter any advice upon
this occafion ?
A. I urged her in the mod folemn manner, for the
fake of herfelf and her children, to keep the matter
a fecret from her hutband to the day of her death*'
fearing, if the told him, he would forfake her and
her children, fire at Mr. Lidwell, and perhaps lofe
his own life.
Q. Did your daughter acquiefce in your advice ?
A. She promifed me fhe would not tell him.
CK What was the appearance of your daughter at
this time ?
A. It was molt melancholy and diftrefling.
CL, How long did this appearance continue ?*
A. Until they left Portarlington,
CL. Did they tell you where they were going ?
A. They told me, they were going to Galway,
but I find fmee, that they went to Wexford.
CL. Did your daughter tell you, that the would
difclofe the matter to her hutband ?
A. She did not.
CL You had recommended filence to her?
A. I had earnefily preffed her to be filent.
CL Did you ever fee any thing in the condudt of
your daughter, to make you regret the pains you
had taken in her education ?
G A. I


A. I did not.
Q;_ Did you ever oblerve any thing of levity in her
condud towards men ? '
A. I never did, of all women in the world.
CL Did you obferve any thing particular in her
condud towards Mr. Lidwell ?
A. I never did.
Q. Did you obferve any thing particular in his
tondud towards her ?
A. By no means.
Do you know Mifs O'Grady ?
A. I do, Ihe is fifter to Mr. Lidwell’s wife.
She was intimate with your family.
A. She was.
Do you recoiled the particular exprefiions } ? ou
made ufe of to your daughter, when you recom-
mended to her to befilent?
A. I begged and entreated of her, for the love of
God Almighty, not to tell her hufband,
Qi Could you obferve from her behaviour, what
her fenfatiqns were ?
A. Her behaviour (hewed much forrowand grief;
(he. was conftantly crying when we were together ?
Crofs Examined. By Mr. o‘Graby.
Qi Your daughter has frequently talked over this
melancholy ftory with you?.
A. She has.
Q. She fpoke to you upon the evening of her re-
turn from Ofberftown ?
A. She did, but not upon thi- fubjed.
Q;. You faid (he appeared v ry melancholy that
evening ?
A. She did.
Q.. You did not a(k her the reafon of it?
A. I did not.
Qt You


CL You did not obferve any thing unufual in her
drefs ?
A. I did not.
Q. She came into the houfe, in appearance, as if
nothing had happened ?
A. She did.
She feemed eafy in-herfelf?
A. She feemed quiet, but was Hid,
Q. Who went to bed firll that evening ?
A. I did.
Q. Mr. Sutton did not go to bed fof fomc time
after ?
A. He did foon after.
What room were the beds in ?
A. In the parlour ?
Ch Did Mr. Sutton remain in the parlour while
you were going to bed ?
A. No, he went out to give me an opportunity of
going to bed. .
Mrs. Sutton remained in the room that timer
A. She did.
Q. And faid nothing ? s
A. Nothing particular: fhe went to bed foon after
me, fome Ihort time before Mr. Sutton returned. 1 '
Q. Who got up firlt in the morning ?
A. I do not recoiled.
Q. Did you rife early?
A. We were all up a very fhort time before break-
fall. ' >
Q; Mrs, Sutton eat breakfaft with you?
A. She did ; but was very low in herfelf all that
morning.
Mr. Sutton did not perceive any thing parti-
cular in her manner ?
A. I believe not.
How foon did your daughter tell you of the
tranfadion ? -
A. Immediately after breakfaft.
Qi Has


Q. Has any one ever told you to be particular as
to the dav ?
A. Nobody.
Q. Don’t you believe Mr. Sutton would have been
difTitisfied with your daughter, if he thought the
contented to an intercourfe with, Mr. Lidwell?
A. I do.
Q. Do you not believe he would immediately quit
her ?
A. I do; but I believe he would continue to live
wth her, if he thought it was committed by force.
Q;_ Mrs. Sutton invited feme company after the
told you of this matter ?
A. Jt was Mr. Sutton’s with to have company be-
fore he left the country.
CL Do you not believe that Mrs. Sutton invited
the company ?
A. She atked fome of the company, by her huf-
band’s defire.
Q. Did you, yourfelf, atk any of the company ?
A. I did not.
Q;. Did you hear of your daughter’s illnefs return-
ing upon her ? •
A. Never, till Mr. Sutton told me of it.
Did Mrs. Sutton never tell you of it ?
A. .Never, until after Mr. Sutton had told me
of .it:
Q. It was in the year 1799, Mrs. Sutton had
the weaknefs for which the went to bathe ?
A. It was.
Q. Did you not hear of her illnefs afterwards ?
A. Not till after their return from Dublin, when
Mr. Sutton told me.
Qj. Did the tell you that Mr. Lid well had offered
her any other freedom ?
. A. She did not.
Do you confider it a freedom for him to put
his arm round her waift ?
A. I


A. I confider a friend might do.it,
Q. And prefs her to his bofom £ .
A. That might depend upon theft, acquaintance.
CL. Should you. think throwing a lady upon her
knees an impropriety ?
A. I fhould.
CL, Would you think it fufficient to caufe of fuf-
picion ? .
A. I do not think (he could imagine Mr. Lidwell
would be guilty of any thing improper,
CL. Was Mifs Lidwell with you when you had the
company at Portarllngton ?
A. She was.
Ch Who filled out the tea that evening?
A. I can’t tell.
CL. Mifs Lidwell might have done it ?
A. To' be fure (he might, without my knowing it;
I was at cards.
Examined by the Court.
. CL. Have you often fpoke to your daughter upon
the fubjefl; ? '
A. Frequently; • almoft every day.
CL In what manner did (he exprefs herfelf con-
cerning it ?
A. She faid, that Mr. Lidwell had ufed her fo ill,
and (he was fo (hocked, that (he would not care if
(he loft her lifei
.: 'Qi, You fwore examinations relative to this matter?
A. I did.
CL. Upon your daughter’s account ?
A. Yes.
CL. You then underftood that your daughter had
fworn examinations ?
A. Mr. Sutton told me fo, when he returned from
Dublin.
[Here


[Here a card was (hewn to the witnefs, which, (he
faid, fhe believed was Mrs. Sutton’s hand-writing.]
Jacob Sutton , Efq.
Examined by Mr. Ridgeway.
_ Q. You are the hulband of Mrs. Sutton?
A. 1 am.
How long have you been married ?
A. Seven years next May.
Q. Upon what terms have you and Mrs. Sutton
lived during that time ?
A. We lived as happy as any couple, I fuppofe,
in the univerfe;
At what time did you go to the neighbourhood
of Portarlington ?
A. in February 1798. >
CK Did.you become acquainted with the prifoner?
A. I did; the greateft intimacy poffible fubfrft-
cd between us.
What opinion did you entertain of Mr. Lid-
well ?
A. Sir, my opinion of him was fuch, that if I
had been bafe enough to commit an ad, for which the
laws of my country would have fentenced me ta
Botany Bay, I Ihould have confidered that , man
(pointing to the prifoner) as the beft protedor with'
whom to leave my wife and children.
Do you recoiled your going to Dublin in the
fummer of 1798?
A, Ido; I went to Dublin in July 1798.
Qi. Who accompanied you ?
' A. Mr. Lidwell, Mr. Carey, and Mrs. Sutton.
Qi, Where did you lodge ?
A. We flept the lirft night at Cope-ftreet hotel,
and next day we took lodgings in Grafton-ftreet ?
Q? Did you all lodge in the fame houfe ?
A. We


A. We did. I kept the mefs-book, and Mr. Lid-,
well and Mr. Carey each paid a third.
, CL What occafioned your going to Dublin at that
time ?
A. I was appointed by the Portnahinch cavalry to
buy cloathing, and I was detained fome days in get-.
ling it. Mrs. Sutton had a bad tooth, and expreffed
a wifh to go to Dublin.
QJn what manner did you travel ?
A. Mr. Lidweir drove Mrs. Sutton in a gig; Mr.
Carey and I rode.
Q. In what manner did you return ?
A. In the fame way ?
Q. What kind of weather had you upon your
return ?
A. The morning was bluftery, and the evening
was very wet.
CL Do you recoiled the circumttance of a feat in
a carriage having been offered to Mrs. Sutton ?
A, I do; and it was refufed by my defire.
CL. When did Mrs. Sutton go to the fait-water ?
A. On the 15th of May 1759.
CL F° r what purpofe did fhe go there ?
A. On account of an illnefs, for which fhe had
found the falt-water an remedy three years
before.
, <L While fhe was at the falt-water did you vifit
her?
A. I went up to fee her every fortnight or three
weeks.
Q. Did you know whether Mr. Lid Well vifited
her there?
A. I know he went there once, and another time
he accompanied me in a hack from Dublin# but re-
fufed to go into the houfe.
Q. Do you recoiled Mrs. Sutton’s going to Of-
berftown ?
A. I do.
Q. Was


Q. Was that vilit with your knowledge ?
A. It was.
And with your confent, I prefinne?
A. It was.
Q. Do you recolledl what Iky the intended to
make.
A. 1 allied her how long the would fiav ; “ fhe
faid, till Wednefday, or perhaps 1 may flay longer.”
Q, When did file return ?
A. On Monday evening about eight o’clock.
Q. Did you find any alteration in her temper or
difpofition after this ?
A. A very great one. Every night, when I went
to bed, I found her crying; 1 alked her, “ Sally,
my heart, what’s the matter with you r 1” to which
fhe would.xcply, fhe feared hermother was dying.
you recolledl Dr. Blair’s vifiung you on a
Sunday morning?
A. I do. I had defired him on Saturday to come
and fee Mrs. Read and Mrs. Sutton ; I had dined
with him that day at Dr. Clarke’s. In the courfe of
the evening I found very extraordinary fymptoms,
and I faid to them, if I had connexion with woman-
kind, except my wife, - I would fwear I was diforder-
ed. Dr. Blair faid, it was nothing, it was the eflfedl
of fomeftrain, and I refted contented. . '
After this declaration by Dr. Blair, did you
think yourfelf difordered ?
~ A. I did not.
Did Dr. Blair come in the morning ?
I A. He did.' , ' s
Did any thing pafs between you and Dr. Blair
refpe&ing Mr. Lidwell? , ■
. A.. After breakfaft, I faid, w We (hall meet in
town, as 1 intend to dine with Lidwell to-day.’’
~ Q. Mr.‘ Lidwell had by this time returned from
Ofberftown ? .
A. He had; he came to the fair of Portarlington.
CL. Why


Qj_ Why did you defire Dr. Blair to call upon you ?
A. To fee Mrs. Reed, who Ithought was unwell;
and Mrs. Sutton was in a mod melancholy date; I
often found the pillow wet with her tears.
Did any thing particular happen after Dr. ?lair
left you?
A. Immediately after he went away, I was at my
deflc in the parlour; Mrs. Sutton came to me much
agitated; I aflced her, what was the matter? flie
faid, fhe had a circumftance to tell me, but was
afraid of her life. My God, faid I, what have you,
to tell me? “Oh,” fays fhe, “ I am afraid. You
muft promife not to leave me.’* I promifed her
faithfully I would not; fhe : then took me to the gar-
den, and on the way fhe burlt into a flood of tears,
and faid, “ that villain, Lidwell, drove me into a
fand-pit, (or gravel-pit, I don’t recoiled; which,)
and did what he liked.” My mind was fo confufed,
J walked up and down the garden for fome .time,
and then told her, I would like her better than ever
for telling me.
Did any further convention pafs between you
and Mrs. Sutton in the garden ? , ,
A. After we had walked up and down very much
agitated, I faid to her, “ With your afliftance, I’ll
be fatisfied.”
Q. Did fhe make any reply?
A. She faid, “ There’s nothing to do to punifli
him, but I will do, think of the villain wanting me
to forfake you, and my four children, and my mo-
ther, and go live with him.” I then aflced her, did the
find any difference in her health for fome days paft.
“ No, my heart,”replied flie, “ nothing extraordinary;
I have got a return of my old complaint from my
diftrefs.” “ No,” faid I, “ he has difordered you,
and you have difordered me.”
Q. Was this the fir It time you fufpefled you were
difordered ?
H A. It


A, It was. I had perceived fome fymptom on
Saturday, but thought nothing of it till this time. •
Did Mrs. Sutton mention any further particu-
lars refpedting Mr. Lidwell’s condudl while the was
at Ofberftown ? ‘
A. She told me he !>d offered her fome rudenefs
on the Saturday before.
fne mention this to you at the fame time
that fhe difclofed the tranfadtion ?
A, On the very fame day.
Have you feen the fand-pit ?
A. I have; I brought Mrs. Sutton there twice;
the laft time was laft Thurfday:
Whereabouts is it fituated ?
A. It is on the road from Johnftown to Sallins,
on the hill, about half a mile from Mr. Hendrick’s
houfe.
Upon which fide of the road ?
A. On the left-hand fide of the road*
What diftance is it from the road ?
A. The end of it is about 50 yards from the road.
Q. Is it deep ?
A. Part of it is deep. When I flood in it, tho’ I
am a tall man, I could not fee any houfe, not even
the paper-mills.
Were informations fworn again ft the prifoner?
A. Not immediately.
Why fo ?
A. I intended firft to go up to Dublin to Mr. Wad-
dy; but I afterwards thought it right to go to her
friends.
Q. Did you go any where in confequence of this
refolution?’
A., We went immediately to the town of Wex-
ford.
What was determined upon after confulting
with her friends ?
A. It


A. It was determined by me and her friends to
profccute the prifoner.
Q, Had you any intention of bringing an adtion
for damages ?
A. Never.
Q. Where did you go to from Wexford ?
A. I went to fee my brother, and from thence to
Dublin on Sunday, and the examinations were
fworn on Monday.
How foon did you return to Portarlington ?
A. I returned on Tuefday with the warrant.
Qi Had you any converfation with Mrs. Reed on
this fubjed ?
A. I had after my return to Portarlington.
Had you any converfation with her before you
left Glafs-Houfe for the co. of Wexford ?
A. I had not.
Q. Did you communicate to her your intention
of going to Wexford ? ■
A. I did not. My wife defired me not. When I
returned I found two ladies with her; as foon as they
were gone, I told Mrs. Reed, that I was in full pof-
feflion of the affair, and had the warrant againft Mr.
I/idwell,
Crofs Examined. By Mr . Barrington.
You have been in the habit of talking la
Mrs. Sutton upon this bufinefs?
A. I have.
You knew what (he would fay ?
■ A. I beheve I did.
She fwore two examinations ?
. A. She did.
You have often read them ?
A. Never, fmee they were lodged with Judge
Downes. . ,
You muft feel that it would be very unplcafant
to


to have any contradiction between your teftimony
and Mrs. Sutton’s ?
A. Nothing more unpleafant.
Q. You heard the purport of the two informations?
A. I never heard particularly the purport of the
fecond information.
Q.- What diftance did you fay the fand-pit was
from the mills ?
A. The neareft road, it is about a mile and quar-
ter from the mills. ’ •
Q. You could fee it eafily from the road ?
A. No, indeed, Mrs, Sutton had great difficulty
in finding it out; we traverfed the roads for Tome
time, and at laft found it; it ahfwered her account
exactly.
Q. Is there not fome houfe near it ?
A. The neareft cabins are about a quarter of a
mile. ■
(L When you firft went to Dublin, it was to pur-
thafe cloathing for the yeomanry?
.A. It was.
, Qj. Mrs. Sutton had no neceflity for-going at that
time ?
A. It was intended fhe fhould not go; but
on account of a. bad tooth, fhe mentioned a wifti to
go to Mr. Hudfon. -
Q. And yet when you arrived in Dublin, you did
not go to Mr. Hudfon ?
A. We did.
Q. How did it happen then that nothing was
done ?
A. I left her there fome minutes, and returned ;
Mr. Hudfon thought it dangerous to meddle with
her teeth, as fhe was pregnant, and got into hyf-
terics and convulfions; he advifed that nothing
fhould be then done to them.
CL You remained in Dublin after this?
A. About five days.
‘ CL Had


Q. Had not Mr. Lid well been confined in the
gout for feme time, previous to Mrs. Sutton’s going
to Ofberftown ?
A. He had for five or fix weeks.
CL You have yourfelf indulged in gallantry?
A. I am pofitive 1 never knew tvoman thefc
five years, but my wife.
Where were you when fhe returned from Of-
berftown ?
, A. I met her and Mifs Lidwell at the 'gate.
You, at that time, did not obferve her to be in
a melancholy ftate ?
A. Ldid not. I paid more attention to Mifs Lid-
well than to her. ■
CL. Was Mrs. Reed ill when Mrs. Sutton was at
Ofberftown ?
A. She was not.
CL Did not Dr. Blair attend her at that time ?'
A. He did not.
<L Mrs. Reed’s death would not be an unpleafant
dreumftance in a pecuniary way ?
A.. I fhould be forry any thing happened to her.
Q. She has a comfortable jointure, has (he not ? • ;
A. She has; but fhe has other children, and di-
vides her property. , , -
Qj Did not you tell Dr. Blair you had a connexion
with fome woman ?
A. I did not.
<L Did you not mention fomething of the harveft
women ?
A. I did not.
<L Was it not fomething of that kind that led you
to fufped the diforder ?
A. ft was not. I would hot have fuppofed it was
that diforder in any courfe of time, without the dif-
coVery of the tranfadion, '< - ' -
Q. Do you recoiled Mrs. Sutton’s telling you
fome dream fhe had about Mr. Lidwell?
V


A. I do not.
Q. Did you ever mention fuch a thing in joke or
carneft ?
A. I never did.
Q;. When you returned from Dublin, after the
informations were fworn, did not Mr. Lidwell call
to fee you ?
A. The day after my return he called upon me.
Q;_ Were you not invited to dine with him that
day ?
A. I was afked to dine with him that day.
Q v Why was not the warrant executed at that
time ?
A. I waited the arrival of my brother; I would
not truft it to any one elfe.
Was any part of Mrs. Sutton’s evidence re-
ported to you before you came upon the table ?. =’•
A. It was not; but I was told the was perfectly
confident. . •
Qi Did you give her any directions about her
evidence?
A. None but thefe: I bid her be firm, tell the
truth, and fear no man.
jfojhua Sutton, Efq.
Examined by Mr. Moore.
q. You are brother to Mr. Jacob Sutton ?
A. I am.
Q. Do you recolledt going to Portarlington laft
year, and upon what occafion ?
A. 1 went there in the month of October, in con-
fequence of a letter I received from my brother, that
he had a warrant againft the prifoner.
Q. The prifoner was arrefted under that war-
rant ?
A. He was,
Q.D5d


Qt Did you hear him fay any thing upon that oc-
cafion ?
A..Whilft I was guarding hint in a room, he faid
to me,, “• Sir, if you and your brother will liilen to
me difpaffionately, I would prove to you,- in a few
minutes, by the teftimony of phyficians, that it was
impoffible for me to commit the ad.” The prifoner
alfo faid, “ he had not knowledge of his wife for fe-
yeral years, that he had phyficians attending him for
a dreadful gleet, which totally debilitated him.” I
replied to him, “ You, villain, if there was any thing
neceflary to convince me, it is what you have men-
tioned; you have communicated your diforder to
JVlrs. Sutton, and flie to her hufband?’
Q. What kind of woman was Mrs. Sutton in her
behaviour ?
A. A very properly behaved young woman; her
habits were retired, and (he had not much know-
ledge of the world.
Q. Upon what terms did Mr. and Mrs. Sutton
liver
A. I did not fuppofe there could be a more happy
couple.
Cro/s Examined. By Mr. Mc.Nally.
CK You were not very tranquil in your mind at the
time you arrefted this gentleman ?
A. I was not. I was irritated at hearing what he
had done.
Then you were not difpofechto give him a pa-
tient hearing ?
A. I certainly would give him a temperate hear-
ing.
Qi And as a fpecimen of your temper and your
humanity, you called him “ a villain !”
A. I called him a villain, when he faid he had a
gleet, which difabled him.
Q. Did


Ql. Did Mrs. Sutton communicate any particulars
of this tranfadtion to you ?
A. She did not.
Q. Of whofe underflandin'g have you the better
opinion; your brother’s or your own?
A. 1 think he is wifer than I am.
You probably know what a gleet is?
A. 1 do : I have had feveral.
CL Is not the cffedl of a gleet to debilitate a man?
A. I never was debilitated by them.
CL At the time of the converfation you mention
with the prifoner, did he not beg to have Dr. Blair
fent for ?
A. Mr. Lid well wanted to know if he could have
Dr, Blair.
Q. And in your humanity he was refufed ?
A. No: Dr. Blair was brought into the room.
CL What palled afterwards ? • - •
A. I left the room, not thinking it proper to re-
main.
CL, Do you not think that an acquittal of the pri-
foner will affedt the honour of your family ?
A. I do. . -
Q. And that a convidtion will clear the charadter
of Mrs. Sutton?
, A. It will.
Q. You heard Mrs. Sutton fay, Hie did notftrug-
gle, nor cry out ?
A. I did.
Q. You are an athletic man, much younger, and
ftronger than the prifoner, and have had connedtions,
by your own confeflion, with women. Now, on your
oath, Sir, might not any of thole women have pre-
vented fuch connexion had they ftruggled ? or had
they cried out ?
A. I can’t tell, for I never met a woman that was
aiot as willing as myfelf.
Q. Then the prifoner might have met in the Lady
who


who profecutesi a woman as willing as him’felf?—
I won’t prefs the queilion; you can’t fwear the- con-
trary?
A, I cannot.
CL Then, Sir,;all you can fay on the queftion
is : this, that you heard' from ybur brother,
that he heard from his wife,'' thofe circumftances
which the jury have heard from you?
A. .Certainly.
Mrs. Elizabeth' Ogle. '■
Examined by Mr; Johnson
CL You arevthe wife of the Rt. Hon. George
Ogle ?
A. I am.
Q. Do you know Mrs. Sutton ?
A. Yes;
Q. Where did you know tier hrlt ?
’A. c lh Wexford.
CL How long have you known her ?
A. Since Ihc was an: infant.
-:;<L What .was her condudfand behaviour ?
A. A.moft innocent girl, and the beft conducted
in every particular.
Crofs 'Examined. By Mr. Montgomery.
' • CL-You have: not known much of this lady, fmce
her marriage ? ' - >
A; Not fo'much as before, but I have heard of
her. • . ■ ’
Richard'Neville , Elq.
Examined by Mr. Ridgeway.
Q. Do you know Mrs: Sutton ?
I A. I


„Ido:
- Qi. How long have you knowmbcr? ;
A, I knew her when flie was Mils Reed, ftioflly
fmcc flie was born ? • >
:; .Qt What was her conduct and behaviour ?' . >■
A. I always Heard (he was remarkably 'well be-
haved and wcllcondu&ed.
Grefs Examined. By Mr. BARRINCTON'i
Q. Have you known much v of her fmcc her mar-
riage ?
A. Not much* bilt may have feen hcrl
Mrs.' Elizabeth Sutton.'
Examined bv Mr. Tohnsonv
You are the mother of Mr. Sutton ?
A. I am.
long have you known .his. wife,.Mrs;
Sutton ?
A. Since (he was eight years old.
Then of courfe you had frequent opportuni-
ties of obfervirtg hef iconduft ? . 0
A. I certainly had.
Qi, How did flie condudt herfelf?
A..' Inovery particular with the greateft propriety,
and what one would wifli from the neareft relative.
What has been her character, fmce'her mar-
riage ?
A.: Of-the’ rooft'delightful, innocent thara&er*
Q. Have you obferved whether flic indulged id
any kind of levity with men
A, Quite the reverfe.
Crofs


Crofs Examined. By Mr. Espinassb.
<L Have you been much in this Lady’s company,
fince May twelvemonth ?
A. I have not. I have been in England: \
Were you with your * fon and his family iq
Portarlington ?
A. .1 was hot.
CL Then you had no opportunity of obfervingher
conduct in that town ?
A. I had not. , , _
Q. For the laft two years you had no opportunity
of knowing her cohduft. .
A. No, except from charader. ■
[Here the evidence for the profecution clofed.}
The Prifoner was called upon for his defence, and
he was alked, whether he wilhed to fay any thingj
or, leave his defence to his counfel ?
Prifoner. My Lord, I thank you, I will lcave f my
defence to my counfel.
DEFENCE.
Mrs. Mary Grady,
Examined by Mr. CURRAN.
Q. You are the prifoner’s daughter ?
AT Yes. ,
Q, You jived with him in September, Odobcr,
and November laft ?
A. Yes. *
<L You have been fincc married ?
A, I have.
CL Your


Q. Your father in September laft was very ill in
the’ gout ?
A. He had been confined for feveral weeks in
a violent fit of the gout, from Bth Augitft to latter
end of September; in all about five or fix.weeks. ;
Q. In what ftate was he after, his recovery ? . ,
A. I never faw him ; after a,,fit fo weak in.his
limbs.
Q. Was he fubjeft to that complaint ?
. A. He was very fubjedt to- the gout..
Sutton, I underftand, -was invited-to
OfberftoWn ?.
.. A. Mrs. Sutton had been alked by Mrs. Lidwell,
on account of her exprefiing a with to fee it; .we.
had fcarcely any furniture there; Mrs. Sutton, left
Portarlington with me, with a fixed refolution to re-
turn on Monday. : .
Did you hear her fay fo ?
I A. She exprelfed that refolution in my prefence in
Portarlington. •
Q. Had Mr. Lidwell gone to Ofb pr (town before
you and Mrs. Sutton went there,?
" ' A. Mr. Lidwell and .Mrs. Lidwell had .gone to,
Ofberftown the day before.
Do you recolledl in what flate of health your
father was at that time r
A. I never faw.any thing fo infirni as he was the
day we got to Ofberftown; when we walked out, he
was fo weak he could not walk without tfte affiftance
of my arm and Mrs, Sutton’s, which fhe offered him.
Did you all return to the houfe together after
your walk. . • "
A. I returned in confequence of wetting my feet,
by fiepping into the water, from my father’s weak- ;
nefs in helping me over a ftream ; I - returned by
Mrs. Sutton’s defire.
At what time did Mrs. Sutton and Mr. Lid-
well return?
A. Mrs,


A. Mrs, Sutton and Mr. Lid well returned in about
half an hour; tea was ready.
Did you obferve Mrs. Sutton’s appearance on
her return ? .
A. I did.
Ci_ Did you fee any thing particular ? :
A. I faw nothing particular in it, but juft as on
former occafions.
Qt Were they alone together for any time after?
A. I left the room about domeftic bufinefswhen
I returned, I;found no;one in the parlour but Mrs.
Sutton and mv father, for rny mother had alfo gone
out. ■
Q. How did you fpend Sunday?
A. We went to church.
In what manner ?
A.. Mrs. Sutton, my mother, and :I : wentin the
chaife, and Mr. Lidvvell on horfeback. :
Q/Did you all return at the fame time?
A. No; :Mr. Lidwell remained in Naas ;• we went
to drive after church. : . ,
Did you on that day hear Mrs. Sutton lay any
thing about returning to Portarlington ?
A. I heard Mrs. Sutton fay, fhe would return, to
Portarlington next day, according to her original in-
tention.
CL Do you recolleft any converfatioh next day
about the purchafe,of fomeflour? > .
A". Mrs. Sutton faid, Ihe wanted. to buy half a
Hone of flour, and faid Ihe believed Mr.. Montg-
omery’s was the beft place. . .
Q. Was it agreed to go there?
A. We propofcd to walk to the mill, but Mrs;
Sutton feared to get wet in her feet.
CL What was done in confequence?
A. My father propofed to go in the gig, and pro
pofed that I fhbuld drive, which I declined to do,
haying


having twenty miles to drive that day, and thinking
it would fatigue me too much. ' : ; ,
! Q. Did you decline this in the hearing of Mrs.
Sutton?
A- 1 did *, (he heard me.
1 Q. Did yoii fee your father and Mrs, Sutton return
from the mills ?
A. I did.
Q. Had they any flour with them when they’ re-
turned? •
A. They brought. no flour; I aiked Mrs. Sutton
why, and (he faid, my father would not give her
the trouble of ftanding up in the gig, to have it put
in the well. "
Did you happen to fee who firft got out of the
gig?
A. I was fitting by the fire in the breakfaft room,
when I faw the gig return, and I went to the hall
door. Mrs. Sutton got but firft, and allifted 'Mr.
Lidwell with her arm, and a fcrvant alfo aflifted
him j (he had got ot& at the oppbfite fide from the
door, came round fide itext the door, and.'af-
jfifted him by turning, her (houlder for him to leait
on.' " 1 r; '• • ’■ ‘ ■■ -
Q. Did you perceive any alteration'in Mrs. Sifti
ton?
A- J did not perceive the fmalleft: alteration id her
drefs, nor the fmalleft in her countenance.'
Q. Do you recoiled whether anv refreftiment was
prepared?
A. My mother had a fnack prepared for us.
Had you any converfation with Mrs! Sutton
refpecting the jaunt ?
A. I a(ked Mrs. Sutton how far (he went j (he an-
fwered, Ihe did not know the roads, but (he had a
very pleafant jaunt.
Q. Did Mrs. Sutton partake of the fnack ?
A. 1


A.; I never faw her ea* Artier ; (he drank three
or four glaffes of wine. ,
• 'Qt. Do you ; recoiled the rnanneriiq which Mrs.
Sutton took leave ?
, ; A. My father and mother accompanied ustp the
dpprii Mrs. Sutton Ihook hands with, and killed my
father on going away,
Q;_ Did Ibe dp that willingly, orothcrwile?
A. Perfectly willingly.
. Qi. How did M rs Sutton annpar to vou during the
journey?
- A. I never faw her more chearful s fhewas iuftas
I had always feen her. ,
Q_Had you any attendant upon that occafion f
A. We were attended by a.fervant of.my father’s,
Q; What is his name ?
A. David Fitzgerald.
Q. Had you:told him the time ypu would return
to Pprtarlingtpn ? , , • . . ~
A. I told , him, and every fervant in the houfe, pp,
leaving Portarjington, we would return on Monday.
Do you remember anv narticula* - incident hap-
pening on the road ?,■
A., I remember particularly,a gig with a gentle-
man and. lady. gpingby, ; and defiring the fervant tp
tell them, the wheel was in danger j they tookno
potice, and Mrs. Sutton, on the feryanl’s return, told
Him, he got nothing by . telling: them, and he might
have ftaid where he was.
.. Did either you or Mrs. Sutton fmg a long dur-
ing the journey ? '
A; Mrs. Sutton fungfeveral fongs.
Qv Did (he merely hum a tune, or did Ihe fing the
words?
A. She fung the words of two or three fongs, tp
amufe us both on the road. " . ;. , ..
: As: you arrived at <the, end of your journey,
what conversation palled between you.,
A. I


A. Talked her to dine; (he declined it, not know-
ing whether her hufband and Mrs. Retd were gone to
the coUnty of Galway. I then drove on, to enquire
at our own houfe ; the fervants told us, Mr. Sutton
and Mrs. Reed were at home; 1 then afked her to
dine, as the had-no excufe, but the declined,’•'and
faid it was too late.
fooh after that evening did you lee Mrs,
Sutton ? • 1
; A. I faw Mrs. Sutton the evening after at Glafs-
Houfe, with Mr. Sutton and Mrs. Reed,
- Qt, How were you received ?
A. I was received cordially and friendly as ufual. 1
Q/ Did Mrs. Reed manifeft any difference ini her
behaviour towards you-'? . 1 : ;; ; -
A. I obferved no difference in Mrs, Reed’s beha-
viour? ’
At what hour were you tnere i
A. It was in the evening, about fix ; or feven,* we
•’drank tea there, and ftaid till abbiltnine,
•' Q. Do you recoiled any thing faid by Mrs. snrmn
in the courfe of the evening? •
A. Mrs, Sutton faid, fhe was - glad we came, as
fhe had & riote written to afk me and MifsO’Grady to
r dirie the next day; : of any day we would fix.
: Q/ Did you fee the note ?■•■’■-
'A :.■> She gave me the note in her own hand^-writings
,'Qif Did you accept of the invitation ? -
A. I did not accept the invitation immediately.
: Q.Did : you agree to dine with her upon any fu-
ture day ? . . ,
A. The Saturday following was the firlt day i was
difengaged, and I dined there in-the family -way. -’
Q. What was the condud of Mrs. Sutton and the
family towards you? ; -
A. Their behaviour was as friendly as before. ■ :::
• Do you recoiled ; Mrs. Sutton’s bavins fofne
company after this time ?;
A. I


A. I heard her fpeakof an intended invitation tb
Colonel Warburton’s family, and (he faid Ihe would
bring me with her toGarryhinch to alk them.
Qr Do you know at whofe inftance this company
was invited?
A. Mr. Sutton told me it was a party of Mrs. Sut-
ton’s own making.
Q. Did Mrs. Sutton go to Garryhinch for the pur-
pofc you mentioned ?
A. Mrs. Sutton went to Garryhinch to fix the day,
and Monday was fixed; I was one of the company.
Q. How did Mrs. Sutton appear during the even-
ing? ;
A. She was juft as chearful .as ever I had feen her.
Mrs. Sutton, on my driving up to the door, came out
to me, and brought me into the diningroom to adjutt
my drefs, and walked with me to the drawing-room,
leaning on my arm.
Was there much' company ?
A. There was a good deal of company.
CL Do you recoiled whether Mrs. Sutton borrow-
ed any articles from your houfe for the evening ?
A. Mrs. Sutton, as ufual, borrowed every thing
Ihe wanted from Mr. Lidwell, and a fervant to at-
tend ;■ he was the fervant who attended us from Of-
berftown. ■ -
CL Was any thing faid refpeding Mr. Lidwell at
this time ? -;
A. I expeded my father and mother home the day
before Mr. Sutton called on me, and on my telling
him fo, Mr. Sutton faid, there were places at the ta-
ble, and he was fure his friend would not ftand on
ceremony.
Q. Did you obferve any alteration in Mrs. Sutton’s
behavioltr? - .
A. I never obferved any alteration whatever in her
behaviour. •
K Crofs


Crofs Examined: By Mr. Plunket.
Ch You know, Madam, that your father is on trial
for his life ?
A. I do, Sir.
Qj Did you ever mention any of the circumftances
you have now detailed, upon any former occafion ?
A. I never mentioned the circumftances, but where
it was neceffary. ■
Pray, Madam, when did you mention them
laft?
A. I cain’t fay when I did fo laft; it’s fo long ago
fince 1 gave the notes, I can’t remember.
Q. You took notes of the particular circumftances
which you have mentioned in the courfe of your evi-
dence?
■ A, I did.
Q. When did you firfl: hear of any charge made
againft your father refpedling this bufinefs ?
A. There was no charge made againft my father
for three weeks after Mrs. Sutton had been at Olberf-
tov/n..
. CK It was, of courfe, Madam, a matter of much
fujprife to you ?
A. I never experienced fuch furpiife in my life.
Q. You had no fufpicion of any thing of the kind
from the condudt of Mrs. Sutton ?
A. Not in the leaft. ■
. Then you made no memorandum at the time
of what 'paired, or as to Mrs. Sutton’s appearance ?
A. I did not.
Mrs. Sutton at that time fhewed no refent-
ment, nor any appearance of it? ■
A." It was impoflible Ihe could have Ihewn any
without my obferving it.; •
Q. At what time was it you took the notes, which
you fay you gave to fome other perfdn ?
A. The


A. The morning after my father was taken, I fat
down to recolledi the circumitances.
Then, Madam, all you can fay is, that you
do not recolleft any particular or extraordinary cir-
cunrfiance ftriking your obfervation ?
A. If Mrs. Sutton had fhewn any change of con-
duct, I would have feen it, and I would have en-
quired into it. ....
Q;_ Mrs. Sutton, you fay, was very fprightly upon
the road ?
A. She was; She was finging all the way, both
going to and coming from Ofberftown.
You are pofitive too, the intended to-return
on Monday ?
A. She mentioned in Portarlington, before the
went to Ofberftown, that fhe would return on
day. A Mrs. Cowley was prefent on Monday morn-
ing at breakfaft, and was engaged to dine with me
on her return to Portarlington. • •
Q. Mrs. Sutton however was preffed to flay
longer ? -
A. She was'preffed on Saturday evening by Mrs.
Lidwell to ftay, but fhe faid, fhe muft return on
Monday. . . ;
She refufed to comply with this prefiing re-
queft ?
A. She did.
Q. And you thought fhe was obfiinate, and told
Mr. Sutton, fhe was the moil obfiinate Lady you
had ever feen, and that nothing could prevail upon
her to ftay till Monday ?
A. I never did fay fo to any of the family.
Q. Nor any thing to that import or effeft?
A. I did riot.
Qj_ You were very intimate with Mrs. Sutton I
A, I was intimate with her, fo far as vifiting.
Q; You had no objedion, it feeras, to her com-
pany ?
A-I


A. I had no objedlion to her vifiting at my father’s
houfe.
Did you confider there was any intrigue be-
tween your father and Mrs. Sutton ?
A,, .1 did not.
You never fufpedled any thing like an intrigue
between your father and Mrs. Sutton?
A. I never did, Mrs, Sutton’s conduct was al-
ways the fame. ( ' ... .
Your father, you fay, was very recently reco-
vered from the gout?
A.-He was not more than eight days recovered.
And by your account he was in, a very feeble
ftatef ' •.
• A.’ He was juft able to crawl about with a ftick,
and fome body to lean on,
... Poor decrepid old gentleman ! —How did you
all contrive to get over the ftream ?
A. Mrs. Sutton fprung over the drain or ditch ; but
I was not fo adtive; therefore, my father helped me;’
and not being able to’aftift me, 1 fell in.
Q, Poor feeble man ! How did he get over?
A. He, Sir, got over" as well as he could: he
crawled over.
- Q;_ On Monday, when your father returned, you
obferved nothing particular in his drefs ?
A. I faw nothing particular in his drefs.
’ But if there was any thing particular, you, to
be fure, from the natural (hrewdnefs which you dis-
play, mull have obferved it ?
A. If there was any thing paiticular, I rnuft have
obferved it.
Q. I wifh you would deferibe a little more ex-
actly the manner in which your father, and you, and
Mrs, Sutton got over the ftream ?
A. Mrs. Sutton and 1 aflifted my father in getting
over firft, and then he gave his hand to aflift me, and
I fell in. ■ ;
Q. Then


Qj. Then Mrs. Sutton followed you and your fa-
ther ?
A. Yes, Ihe jumped over after us. .
Q. I thought you faid, your father was.fo feeble,
that he crawled over ?
. A. So he did.
Q. How did it happen, that he crawled over a
ditch, after you had patfed, and yet affifted you in get-
ting over ?
A. It was a fiream, and the banks were level ; he
got overfirft, and affifted us afterwards; :
I underhand, Madam •, the account is very fa-
tisfadlory ; he was fo feeble on Saturday, he could
fcarcely crawl over a ftream or ditch, you don’t know
which; and on Monday, I fuppofe, was unable to
get into a gig ?
A. He was not able, on Monday, to get in or out
of the gig, without afliftance,, , ; i, .
Q. Who helped him into tfie gig on Monday ?
A. Mrs. Sutton did.
And who helped him out p
A. Mrs. Sutton.
He was, on that day, in a very feeble ftate, by
your account ?
A. I think a child would affift him, he was (b weak.
Qt Don’t you think you yourfclf could have affili-
ed him in and out of the gig ?
A. I think, with my afliftance, he could have got
out with fome difficulty; but I think he could not
get in without the afliftance of two; indeed two were
neceflary to get him both in and out. .
Q. Did any fervant accompany your father, the
day he went in the gig ? . -
A. No fervant went with my father when he went
in the gig.
Qi. You heard. Madam, that driving Mrs. Sutton
to a fand-pit, was part of the crime alleged againft
your father ?
A. I


a. i did.
Qi. And therefore, you know, it.was neceflary to
fhew he could not get out of the gig by himfelf ?
A. 1 am well fatisfied he could not get out of the
gig, without afliftance,
Qi, Mr. and Mrs. Sutton have lived upon terms of
harmony and affection ?
A. I have feveral times feen Mr, Sutton propofe
things, which the has oppofed moft pofitively.
Q-. Was the flour brought home?
A. I fent a fervant for the flour, by Mrs. Sutton’s
direbtions. ' :
Qi, Your father, who was fo feeble bn his limbs, as
you deferibe, propofed to walk all the way to the mills?
A. I do hot fuppofe my father would have been
able to walk half the way.
Qi Pray, Madam, how do you fuppofe he was to
manage; he fet out for the purpofe of going there ?
A. I fuppofe he would have walked half way, and
ftaid in a cabin for us to return.
Q. Very probable, indeed, Madam. hJow, by
virtue of your oath, dp you. not believe a criminal
intercourfe took place on that Monday between your
father and Mrs. Sutton ?, .
A. Ido not know, Sir.—l can’t fay.
Q;_ What do you believe, Madam ?
A. It is difficult for me to fay. —I cannot form a
belief.
a Juror. The day you dined with Mrs.
Sutton, did fhe exprete any defire to fee your father
and mother among the company on that day ?
A, She did not; Mr, Sutton did.
Dr. John Blair.
Examined by Mr. Espinasse.
Q. You arc a phyfician?
A. I am. QiDo


Q. Do you know the prifoner?
A. I do. , " ,
Q. Do you remember him in a fit of the gout,
laft fummer?-
A. I dohe was confined fix or feven weeks.
What time did his confinement terminate ?
,A. He got out of confinement about the middle
or latter end of September, and walked feebly about.
• Q.- Was he at that time afflidted with any venereal
complaint? ' '
A. I never heard mention of any venereal com-
plaint xiuring that illnefs.
CL How long have you been attending Mr. Lid-
well?
' A. I have been in the habit of attending him and
his family, ten years.
CL Have you been confidential with him and his
family?
’ A. I have.
CL Do you remember his arreft?
A. I do.,
Q: Did you then hear of the alleged rape, and the
infedtion ?
A. I did. The prifoner then fent for me to in-
fpedt him ; I found no marks of the venereal difeafe
about him. .
Ck_Did you examine him attentively?,
A. I made a minute infpedtiori, as the prifoner told
me, I was to be brought forward, to be examined.
Q. Do you recolledt Mrs. Sutton going to the fait-
water ?
A. I do. . ,
CL Did you hear Mr. Sutton fay any thing at that
time refpedting her?
A. I recolledt meeting Mr. Sutton one day at Mr.
Lidwell’s, when he had brought home his children,
and Mifs O’Grady ; he faid, he had gone up for Mrs.
Sutton ; that (he had gone to the falt-water for her
health.


health, but was in Dublin, inftead of being there,
and he could not get her back; 'but he would hrinw
back the children'.
Qj. Do you remember a wooa cutting by Mr. Sut-
ton laft fummer ?
A. I do. "
Q_Did you hear Mr. Sutton fay any thing upon
that'bccafion ? : • '
A. I heard Mr. Sutton fay jokingly, he had had
fun with the girls who were picking bark off the trees.
What did you uhderftand by fun ?
A. I underftood a connexion with them; he lpoK.c
in the joking way as a man will over a bottle.
Q. Did you hear him fay any thing elfe fefpefting
his own condudt ? ‘ ■
A. I have heard him fay in the fame fort 'of man-
ner, he had had a bed-fellow in Mrs. Sutton’s abfence.
Q. Did he fay this in fuch a manner as that you
would believe him ? .
A. He has faid fo at times in fuch a manner
that I believed him..
Crofs Examined. By Mr. Moore.
Pray, Dodtor, what opinion have you ot Mr.
Sutton’s veracity ?
A. I have a high reliance oh Mr. Sutton’s veracity.
Qi Pray, Sir, would you believe his oath in a court
of jufiice ?
A. I would.
Would you believe it, rather than loofe conver-
fation over a bottle ? .
A. 1 would. "
Q. Would you believe Mrs. Sutton on her oath?
‘ A. 1 moll certainly would. , ’
' Qi Have you any reafon to think (he would fwear
falfe in a court of jufiice ?
A. I have not.
Q. Have


Have not Mr. and Mrs. Sutton, to your know-
ledge, lived upon happy terms ?
A. I always confidered Mr, and Mrs. Sutton to be
the happieft couple that could be.
Q. JDo you pradlfe furgery ?
A. I never pradifed furgery; but I was bred to it
as well as phytic.
Q, May not a gonorrhoea be in the blood, and be
concealed?
A. No, Sir.
A gonorrhoea may be cured in a month ? '
A. Moft certainly.
When did you examine Mr. Lidwell ?
A. I,examined Mr. Lidwell the day he was taken
prifoner.
Q. What day was that ?
A. The 27th of October.
Q. By the Court. According to your prefentfyf-
tem, do you cure by injedion, or by pill ?
A* The prefent mode of cure is by injedion.
Q. Would not an inveterate gleet have manifefted
itfelf ?
A. Certainly.
By virtue of your oath, Sir, did you fee any
fyraptoms of one, when you examined Mr. Lidwell ?
A. I did not.
' Q. Did you know Mr. Smith of Portarlington?
A: I did.
How long fince he left that town ?
A. About a month fince Mr. Smith, left Portar-
Jington. ■
He was of the medical profellion ?
A. He was a praditioner in all branches of medicine.
Q. Did not he vifit Mr. Lidwell ?
A. I don’t believe any of the fiories I have heard
about him.
Qj_ Has he not abfeonded fomc fhort time ago ?
L A. I


A. I believe he has abfconded about a month.
.Q. Was-not his difappearance fudden ?
A. His difappearance was fudden; but was long
cxpefted. Dr. Smith, was cmbarrafled in his circum-
itances; he had been foliating a furgeoncy from Sir
Ralph Abercrombie; he told me fo; and he had it!
in. his contemplation-to.leave Portarlington.
CL Can you form an opinion whether he left Por-
tarlington at the inftigation of any one ?
A. I cannot.
Do you not believe that Dn Smith had attend-
ed Mr. Lidwell ? - .
r A. I believe he did.
CL Can you form a belief whether he attended Mr.
Lidwell for a venereal complaint? .
A. I have no reafon to believe, nor have 1 ever
heard, that he attended him for a venereal complaint,
but he attended with me when Mr. Lidwell was Ja
the gout.
Q/ Do you know the complaint called the whites?
: A. I do., ,
‘ CL It arifes fometimes from weaknefs ?
A. it does.
.CL ,The fymptoms are very like thofc of a go-
norrhoea? ' .
A. No; they are very different from thofe of a
gonorrhoea, there is only one fimilar, the difeharge;
the diffimilar ones are the fmarting or fealding in the
gonorrhoea,
CL The fealding depends on the virulence of the
diforder ?
A. It does.
CL, Mr. Sutton has fpeken to you fince about the
former converfaiion ?
, A. Mr. Sutton afked Mr. Clarke, whether he did
not mention to Him and me, that lie had every fyrnp-
tom of a gonorrhoea ? Mr. Clarke find, he had not any
recollection of it, nor have! any.
Counfel


Counfel for the Prifoner y
Q;_ What is the general character of the prifoncr,
as far as refpeds the prefent charge ?
A. His general charader is, that of a man not
capable of forcing a woman againft herwill.
Do you think the laft Hay you faw him, (the
day before he left Portarlington,) he was in a ftate of
bodily ftrength, to force a woman againft her will ?
A. I do not,
Crofs Examined.
You are now fpeaking in general, Do you take
into confideration, the comparative llrength and weak-
nefs of Mr. Lidwcll and Mrs. Sutton ?
: A. 1 can’t pretend to fay what Mrs. Sutton Vner-
vous ftate may be j I fpcak from her appearance.
you fay what was her ftate of bodily ftrength
at the time ? . ’
A. I don’t pretend to afcertain Mrs. Sutton’s
ftrength, when the fad is alleged to becommitted.
The laft day you law Mr. Lidwell in Portae
lington, was he not walking about ?
-A; The day I faw him in Portarlington, he 'was
walking about feebly with a flick.
Q.' The pavement of that town is not good ?
! A. It i? not.
[lt was admitted by the w for the profecu-
tion, that there was no attempt on the prilbner’s pact
to fly from juftice.],
A. Hardings Giffard, Efq.
Q. Did you obferve Mrs. Sutton as Ihe came into
court?
A. I faw Mrs. Sutton coming into court, accom-
panied by a gentleman and a lady j the lady I un*
derftood


dcrftoodto be the elder Mrs. Sutton.- I made room,
(for I was (landing in the fide bar) and I Hood out-
,fide of them. Mrs, Sutton was in great agitation:
the gentleman made ufe of one expreffion, which
:made a ftrohg impreffion on me, it was, “ Be deter-
mined, and go through with the bufinefs, every
thing depends on it.” It (truck me as a very odd
expreffion? and, after (he had gone through part of
her. teftimony, I rrientioned it to a gentleman of the
bar, who concurred with me in opinion, and I
handed a note of .it to the prifoner’s counfel, Mr.
Montgomery.
Crofs Examined.. By Mr. Johnson.
Q. Who was the gentleman of the bar, to whom
you mentioned the circumftance ?.
,A. . Mr. Charles Ball.
Q. And the name by which you deferibed the lady
.was, the woman?.
. A. It was.
Then you did not feel any great refpedt for the
lady ? .
, A. I did not, at the moment, feel very great re-
Ipedt for her.
Was (he not in a fiate of great agitation ?
. A. When fitting at the fide bar, the lady appeared
to be very much agitated.
Qi Do you mean bv this, to infinuate it was but
.an appearance.?...
A. I do.—l believe many, worthy persons in court
did not think (he was adting a part; and that the
gentleman who fpoke to her, might be one of thofe.
Qi And do you think. Sir, that we who fat round
the table were adting a part, when we burft into tears
at the melancholy narrative ?
A. Tears may be the effedt of wcaknefs.
Qi. If


Q. If the words conveyed an exhortation to for-
titude, would you think them fair ? ~ ’
A. I would.-—The words were fo loud, t looked
up to the Jury, ; to fee whether they heard them.
Q. Do you mean to fay, upon your oath,, that
Mrs. Sutton depofed falfely upon hef examination ? -
A. By no means.
Mr. James Dunti.
Examined by Mf, O‘GftADV,
Where do you live ?
A. In Portarlingtph.
Q. Do you know Dr. Smith?
A. I do,
Q. He has lately left Portarlington ?
A. He has.
Qi, Did you hear Mr. Sutton fay any thing refpeft-
Ing him ? '
A. I heard Mr. Sutton fay, he did not regard the
teftimony of Dr. Smith; he knew where he was,and-
could put his finger on him.
"Crofs Examined. . By Mr, Ridge waV.
When was this converfation ?
A. This converfation may be about three weeks
or a month ago,
[A card of invitation was read, dated Odlober 4,
from Mr. and Mrs. Sutton,'to Mr. and Mrs. Lidweil.
to a dinner, in Mrs. Sutton’s hand-writing.]
Mr. Rkhard Clarke.
Examined by Mf. Barrington,
Where do you live ?
A. In Portarlington. Q. What


Q. What profcflton are you ?
A. An apothecary.
You had Mr. Sutton to dine with you on tho
fair day of Portarlington :
A. ihadj it was the t2thof Oddber.
you any other, company ?
A. Dr, Blair came in when we were taking a glafs
of wine.
Qi Do you recoiled Mr. Sutton faying any thing
of a venereal complaint ? • •
A. I recoiled Mr. Sutton alking me of his fpeak-
ing to me that night of a venereal attack. I faid, it
might be fo, but I did not hear it. Mr. Sutton faid,
may be. Dr. Blair rccolleded it.
Q. Did you fpeak to Dr.-Blair of it ?
A. I afkcd Dr. Blair, who laid, he did not hear it.
Q. Had you any. further conyerfation with Mr.
Sutton upon this fubjed ?
. A. Sometime after the ift day of November, I'
had fome convention with Mr. Sutton; he told me,
it was true enough, he found the day after the con-
verfation, it grew fomewhat worfc, and he had men-
tioned if-to Mrs, Sutton v and-Mrs. Sutton then did
tell fome tranfadions that had happened.
Q. Have you furnifhed- Mr. Lidwell with medi-
cines ?
A. I have nine or ten years,
You can guefs at the nature of a difeafe from,
the medicines ?
A,. I can. ■
Did you ever fupply him with medicines for-
the venereal complaint ?-
'A. I never did ; and lam fure, trom his confidence
in me, he would have communicated it tp me.
Crofs Examined . By Mr, Plunket.
1 How long have you lived in Portarlington ?■
A,


A. I have lived twenty-five years in Portarlington.
Q. There might have been much converfation
that night, which you forgot next morning ?
A. There might.
Indeed, Sir, you look like a gentleman wHb
took more port than rhubarb. Pray, is it not the
practice in Portarlington, for furgeons to fupply me-
dicines for gonorrhoeas ?
1 A. It is not.
Qj_ Did not Mr. Suttoh tell you, he difcbvered the
diforder after the converfation with Mrs. Sutton ?
A. Mr. Sutton told me, if was in confequence of
what he faid to his wife, Ihe told him the tranfadlon.
Now, Sir, can you fwear pofitively as to that f
A. 1 do not think I would fwear it pofitively,
Qj_ Well then, Dodtor, you may be certain of this
perhaps, that this lafi converfation was after Mr. Sut-
ton had laid, he would bring a fadt out from you on
your oath, which you did not appear willing to ac-
knowledge.
A. It was.
Q;_ And this converfation was after the examina-
tions had been fworn in Dublin ?
A. it was.
Michael Cullen.
Examined by Mr. Espinasse.
Q. You are a clerk at Mr. Montgomery’s mills?
A. I am.
Q, Do you recoiled! a gentleman and lady coming
to buy flour ?
. A, I do; on the 30th of September, I entered it-
in the book.
Who ordered the flour ?
A. The lady ordered it,' and the gentleman’s fcr-
vant called for it. ,
[This witncfs was not crofs-examined.] David,


David Fitzgerald.
Examined by Mr. Mac,NAbbV.
<L Did you live with Mr. Lidwell laft September?.
A. I did, Sir.
Q. Do you recoiled attending Mifs Lidwell from
Portarlington to Oflberflown ?
A. I got orders for the gig to go from Portarling-
ton to Ofberftown; and I attended Mils Lidwell and
Mrs. Sutton from Pprtarjington. /
From whom did you receive your directions ? .
A. I got the directions from Mr. Lidwell on Thurf-
day, and was told he was to flay at Qiberflown ’fill
Monday.
. CL By whom were you told fo ?
. A. Firft, by my mafter, and after by Mifs Lid*,
well.
CL When did you return, to Portarlington ?
A. I accompanied Mifs Lidwell and Mrs. Sutton"
on Monday back ; 1 rode behind.
Q. Did you obferve any thing particular refpeCtv
ing Mrs. Sutton ?
A. I faw nothing particular on Mrs. Sutton, only
as merry as ever, and I heard herfing.
Q. Were you in the parlour at Olberftpwn when
the fnack was laid ?
A. I attended at the fnack, and faw her eat fome
beef-flake, and drink wine;
Did (he appear dilfatisfied ?
A. I faw nothing the matter with her.
Did you attend company at Mr. Sutton’s after
this i
A.‘ I attended afterwards on Monday at Mrs, Sut-
ton’s.
CL $y whpfe directions ?
A. J


■ A. I was told by Mr. Sutton, that I was to attend
that day. ,
Q. Did you obferve any thing particular in Mrs;
Sutton’s cohdudt that day ? '
A. I faw nothing particular in her behaviour that
day. ’ ’ ■ '' ■ ‘
Po.•.you, recalled.meeting a gig on tnt iuaa
from Olberllown to Portarlington ?
A. ,1 recplleft the gig palling with a lady rind
gentleman, and I told the lady and gentleman that
the wheel was in danger; they paid no attention; and
Mrs. Sutton faid, Ha, Davy ! you got nothing’ for
your pains.-
Ciofs Examined. By Mr. Moore:.
When did you tell this ftory' to‘any orie ?
A. I told it a few day's after my matter was taken?
becaufe I thought it might be material to make every
remark I couldi ■ i ! ' ’ ■
Q; Did you not hear'Mr, Lidwell prefs Mrs. Sut-
ton to (lay longer than Monday ?
A. I heard them a Ik- her on Sunday to flay longe. ,
Ihe faid, The mutt. return , on Monday, as' (he had
promifed Mr. Sutton. • ■
■ I thoughtyou faid, your matter told vou; that
you were to return on Monday ?'
A. My matter told me, I was to return on Mon-
day, and 1 could riot bring more cloaths. :
Pray, Sir, did you hear Mrs, Sutton firig oil
the road to Olberftown ?
; A, I did not, .
Where did you fee Mr. Sutton when .you re-,
turned? ...
. A. When we’returned p faw Mr. Sutton at, the
gate.
Q. What did he fay ?
M A. I


, A. I did not take notice what he faid; but he wel-
comed them home.
[Here the evidence for the prifoner clofed.J
On the part of the Crown, Jacob Sutton , Efq. was
again examined by Mr. Ridgeway.
Q. Did you hear the teftimony of Mrs. Grady and
David Fitzgerald ?
A. I did.
. Do you recoiled feeing Mrs. Grady and Mrs;
Sutton when they returned from Ofberftown ? ;
A. On the ladies’ return from Ofberftown, I was
returning from a field of corn'. I faw the fervant, Da-
vid, ride up. I faid, “ Is any thing the matter ?” he
anfwered, No. I faid to the ladies, “ I did notexpeft
you home.” Mrs. Grady faid, “ I declare to God, I
“ never met fo obftinate a woman*, all the entreaties'
“ of my father and mother could not keep her.”
• What diflance was the fervant from you at this
time ? ;
: A. The fervant was not five yards off.
• Ql Did you borrow any articles from Mr. Lid well’s
houfe at the time you had company ?
- A. As to borrowing the things, on Saturday after
they came home, MifsLidwell and. Mifs Grady came
to us,- and faid, th 6 moment they got Mrs.-Cowley
out, they ran up to us: Mifs Lidwell offered .the
plate, knives, &c. and I .myfelf, : two hours!before
the dinner, afkcd the fervant to attendi
Qi. Are you certain that Mrs. Sutton did not afk
the-plate ? ■
A. I am,
; Qi! Did you tell Mf.Cr3rke what be dated of Mrs.
Sutton’s difclofing this affair, in confequence of your
telling her of the diforder ?
A. Moft


A. Molt certainly not: Mr. Clarke is a very wor-
thy man, but I thipk Him miftaken.
Jofepb Daly , Efq.
Examined by Mr. Johnson.
Were you in court when Mrs. Sutton came in?
A. I was; 1 was in the feat where (he was,after-
wards.
Q;_ Defcribe what ftate of mind fhe was in ?..
A... I never faw a. woman more completely embar-
rafled and agitated. I gave her every affiftance; I
fent, opt for water, and fent to an apothecary for
drops; : , i
Did you fee the gentleman who attended her ?
A. I didr I underftand, he is her brother, and a
clergyman. • •
Q.. Did you hear the words he made ufe of?
A. I did; the import of them was, “Summon up
“ fortitude, &c. you are going to do juftice; tell the
“ truth, that is all you have to do.”
Crofs Examined.
'■ Q. Did you hear the words ftated by Mr. Giffard ?
A. I heard what Mr. Giffard ftated; and-1 think,
if fuch words were ufed, I muft have heard them;
and I think no words were ufed but of the import I
have mentioned.
The cafe having been clofed on both fides,
Lord Carleton proceeded to fum up the evidence
to the Jury: his Lordlhip prefaced his charge, by Hair-
ing the indictment againft the prifoner, who had
pleaded Not Guilty, and for trial put himfelf upon
his country. —The Jury were now to afeertain and
determine, whether the prifoner was guilty of the
crime


crime imputed to Him ? and for tHat purpofe it'was
rheir duty to weigh, and deliberately cnnfider the
evidence which had been adduced in fupport of'the
profecution; as alfo the evidence which had been
adduced on the part of the prifoner. That the evi-
dence of Mis. Sutton, if credited, eftablifhed the
prifoner’s guilt; and the queflion for their confidera-
tion would ultimately be, “ Whether her tefiimdny
(corroborated in feme inftances, and weakened in
others by the refidue of the evidence given during
the trial) deferved to be credited ?” —To afliit the
Jury in the difeharge of this important duty, his
Lordfhip faid, he would detail the teflimony of the
-feveral witnefl'es.—[His Lordfhip then recapitulated,
in the mod accurate, impartial, and fatisfadtory man-
ner, the whole of the evidence which had been given
•on both fides, accompanying this laborious flatement
with occafional comments upon the witnefl'es, the
manner and the nature of their teflimony.—-It is
'impoflible to 'do juflice to this part of the cafe, with-
out repeating what appears in the foregoing pages,
which it is hoped'will be excufed, as leading to an
unneceflary length ; and the remainder of this re-
port contains only a very fhort fketch of fome of the
'leading points,’which he referred to 1 the confideration
of the Jury,, without our . profefling to follow his
.Lordfhip, either as to order, manner, of matter.]
• —-The-noble and learned Judge- earneflly ■ and
ftrongly imprelfed upon the Jury, that it was then
exclufive province , and duly to weigh, with the
greateft caution-and attention, the teflimony of the
witnefl'es, and to' decide upon the degree of credit
'they were entitled ‘ to, where any contradictions
appeared. He drew-the attention of the. Jury to the
(diflerenTperiods vyhich deferved confideration ; that
is to fay, of 'Mrs. Sutton’s vifit to Dublin, —of her
lying-in^ —of her vifit to Bootetfiown, —of her return
. home,


home, —of the vifit to Olberftown, —of the day on
which the crime was alleged to have been commit-
ted, —of the difclofure to her mother, —of the firft
appearance of the venereal complaint,—of the dif-
cjofure to her hufband, —of fwearing the different
informations, —and of the arreft of the prifoner.—
The vifits to Dublin and Booterftown feemed to have
been referred to on the part of the prifoner, in order
to draw an inference that “ Mrs, Sutton had had a
criminal communication during thofe vifits, either
with the prifoner, or with fome body elfe, and that
in the latter of thofe vifits, (he had contracted the
venereal complaint;” but the circumftances were too
flight to warrant fuch an inference, and if (he had
contracted a venereal. complaint during her vifit to
Booterftown, the probability was, that the hufband
muft have been fenfible at an earlier period, than
the 12th of October, that he had received the taint,
as fhe had returned home upon the ift of Septem-
ber. Her lying-in had been fucceeded by a feminine
weaknefs, and her vifit to Booterftown was material, as
having relieved her from that complaint. He referred
to the behaviour of the prifoner, on the evening of
the 28th of September; and left it to the Jury to
confider, whether it was not an indication of an in-
tention to take greater liberties with her ; and whe-
ther it did not furnifh a caution to her, not again to
expofe herfelf to a repetition of fuch, and perhaps
greater freedoms.—He ftated her evidence with re-
IpeCt to the idea fhe entertained of the tendency of
the prifoner’s conduct upon that occafion; and faid
it was for the Jury to confider whether they were fa-
tisfied with her evidence in that refpect; and whether
the character and turn of her mind, did fufficiently
explain, and account for,her conduct in that inftance,
and in others which are difclofed by the evidence.—
That night fhe determined to go home on Monday,\ho'
Ihe


(he fwore (he had intended to have .ftaid until IVed-
nefday and that change of her intention- was,attri-
buted by her, to the, conduct of the prifoner on the
evening of the 28th,—'That (he had originally ini-
tended to (lay ’till the IVednefday following, was
fworn to by her, and her- evidence .in , that refped
received fupport from the teftimoriy of her mother
and hufhand, but was oppofed. by the evidence of
Mrs.,Grady;. and: of Fitzgerald, and by the, fcanti-
nefs of, the fupply of clean linen which (he carried
with her.—HisLord(hip then ftated the circumftances
which took place at Olberftown'ortMonday morning*
previous to Mrs.'Sutton’s going in the gig; and mem
tinned'.that the Jury ought .to confider,. whether the
xcafoa- which (he afligned for venturing: herfelf in
company with the prifoner alone, on Monday morn-
ing,- after her experience of his condud on the Sa-
turday preceding ; and ; after having, on Monday
morning, : in the prefence of Mrs. Grady* refuted to
go alone with him, was fatisfaddry.—His Lordlhip
then adverted to the circumftances ; attending the
committal of. the fad, and particularly her evi-
dence refpeding her not having cried out;—to the
diftance of the pit from any habitation.-r-to-the weak-
•nefs.of her tbodily frame, and to the conliderabie
depth of the, pit, and to its being a fand-pit.—As to
the obfervatien, that (he ought, not to have returned
home with him, after having been ill-treated * —it was
to. be obferved, his Lordlhip faid* that (he was at a
confiderable dillance from home, —was alone with
the. prifoner,—-and had no mode of getting home,
but by the afliftance of the prifoner. As to her com
dud, during her ftay at Olberftown, and her appear-
ance after the committal of the crime, and during
her journey to Portarlington, it deferved the very
ferious attention of the Jury.—Part of thofe circum-
fianccs appeared from her own -evidence,—and the
other


othßr p’aft depended upon the teftimony of Mrs. Gr-
ady and Fitzgerald;—and it was neceffary for the Jury
to weigh the credit of thefc two witneffes.~As to
Mrs. Grady’s evidence, with refpeft to the extreme
imbecility of her father, it feemed not very eafy to
credit it, confidering the other circumftances difdofed
in the evidence.—His Lordfhip then made fome ob-
fcrvations on different parts of the teftimony of thofe
two witneffcs, as being material in weighing the de-
gree of credit which they might be entitled to.—-
The difclofure of the tranfaftion to her mother, on
the morning: of the ift of O&ober, (which was as
early as fhe could well have made the communica-
tion, confidering the hour at which the returned home
the night before, and the hufband’s remaining in the
room almoft the entire of that evening,) greatly
corroborated the teftimony of -Mrs. Sutton, provided
the Jury believed that fa£t to be, as it was reprefent-
ed by Mrs. Sutton, and her mother.—The postponing
the difclofure to her hufband, until the 13th of
bcr, had a contrary tendency, unlefs the Jury were
fatisfietl, that-it was attributable to the reafon afligned
by the mother and daughter.—Between the Ift and
the 13th of Gftober, Mrs, Sutton knew that'fhewas
ill,—ln -weighing the credit due to the teftimony of
the mother and daughter, it would be very material
to find out, if poffible, whether Mrs. Sutton, before
ftie informed her hufband Of the violence offered to
her by the prifoner, knew the real nature of her dif-
order, or confidered'it merely as a renewal of her old
complaint.— ; And his Lordfhip recapitulated that part
of -the - evidence which (hewed in what refpeft the
two complaints agreed, and in what they- differed.—
If the former Were the cafe, it would become a 'ma-
terial object of enquiry, whether thfe evidence of the
mother was not calculated to prop the falling reputa-
tion of the’daughter; and whether the concealment
of


of eleven days was not put an end to, by Mrs. Sut-
ton’s confcioufnefs of her having a venerea! complaint,
which could no longer be concealed, and which could
leave infidelity no longer doubtful. But if fhe ima-
gined that fhe had only a return of her old complaint,
the mother’s preffing felicitation might in reality have
delayed the dilclofure to the hufband until the i ath ;
and the circumftance alluded to by Mrs. Sutton in
her evidence, co-operating with the diftrefsof mind,
which (according to the hufband’s evidence) the la-
boured under, might have, in reality, induced Mrs.
Sutton to difclofe to her hufband on the r ath, what fhe
had concealed from him until that time,—The credit
of the mother deferved to be weighed moftattentively,
its eitablifhment would give confiderable additional
Itrength to the evidence of Mrs. Sutton ; and on the
contrary, were the credit of the mother deftroyed,
the evidence of Mrs. Sutton would have its moft
eflential lupport withdrawn from it.—The evidence
of Mrs. Sutton’s demeanor, fubfequent to the {ft of
September, as difeinted on the part of the prifoner,
tends to weaken her credit; but on the other hand,
the teftimony of her hufband, as to the extreme diftrefs
which fine appeared to labour under, during the interval
between the ift and 13th of Oftober, tends to fupport
her credit. In weighing the evidence, the general cha-
racter and demeanor of Mrs. Sutton, and the other wit-
neftes were to be attended to. —HisLordfhip faid,itwas
his duty to inform them upon legal points, if any had
anlen in the progrefs of the caufe ; but there was ho
difficulty in this refpeft. The Jury was fully ap-
prifed of the nature of the crime charged upon the
prifoner; in every country it attached the penalty of
death upon the criminal. The prefent cafe was pe-
culiarly adapted to the decifion of a Jury ; it was a
queiiicn of fa ft, which involved no point of law
w hatever; it was a cafe, in which if the Jury had
a reafbnable doubt on their minds, whether the
prifoner


prifoner was guilty of the foul crime with which
he flood charged, it was their duty to acquit
him; but on the other hand, if the Jury, after
maturely weighing and confidering the evidence
to fupport the profecution, and the evidence pro-
duced by the prifoner to rebut that teftimony, had
not fuch a doubt on their minds as a reafonable man
could have, but were convinced on their oaths, that
the prifoner was guilty, however painful it muft be
to their feelings to bring in fuch a verdift againtt a
roan of family and education, fuch as the prifoner
was, yet it was their duty to do fo ; and his Lordfhip
was convinced, from the refpedfability and character
of the Jury, that whatever their verdict might be, it
would be grounded on a true conviction, arifmg
from the credit to be given to the teftimony, and
fuch as could not fail to give general fatisfaction.
The Jury then retired, and Lord Carleton,
after having fat eighteen hours, adjourned the court
for a fhort time.—But the Jury not having fignified
any difpofition to agree, the court was not opened
again’till ten o’clock, when Lord Kilwarden pre*
fided at the trials of feveral criminals.—About one
o’clock, the Jury fent a letter to his Lordfhip, which
he declined to read, and ordered them to come into
court; when their names were called over.
Lord Kilwarden. Gentlemen, it is irregular to
fend a letter to any perfon, while you are enclofed
for the purpofe of confidering your verdict. If
you have any application to make, it muft be in
open court, and in the prefence or the whole Jury.
Have you agreed to your verdict ?
Foreman. No, my Lord, nor are we likely to
agree.
Lord Kilwarden. Then you muft return to
your room,
N The


f The Jury retired, and in about four hours after
they fent word they had agreed. They were then
conducted into the court, where Lord Carleton,
who had tried the caufe, was fitting;' and being afked,
if they had agreed to their verdid? they faid they had;
and the foreman returned a verdid of GUILTY.
After the verdid was returned, the Jury requeued
to recommend the prifoner to mercy. -
Lorgl Carleton alked them, If it was from any
donbt on their minds, that they recommended him ?
bccaufe, if they had any doubt, they ought to go
back, and reconfider their verdid ; for in, a'cafe of
life and death, a reafonable doubt ought to operate
In favour of a prifoner,
The Jury faid it was not from any doubt on the
cafe ;- but the previous uniform • good charader of
theprifoner.
The verdid was then recorded.
Mr. Ltd-wells'- My Lord, I with, before the awful
fantence. (hall be : pronounced, to fay a few words.
To you, my Lord, before whom I was tried, Ire-
turn my mofi grateful thanks, for the patience and
humanity with which you attended to? and difcriminat-
ed the Weight of the evidence that had beenproduced
on the trial. To the fheriff, I alfo return my thanks,
for the honourable and refpedable Jury he procured
for the trial of a ,man ,who was a ftranger in the coun-
try ; and to.whofe veidid, though it pronounced
me guilty, I bow with fubmlfiion. When'that awful
moment (hall-come in which I fhall be about to
return an account to my Goo, I will then make a
public declaration of the facts; .’till then I will
forbear


forbear. —[Lord Carleton having mentioned that
the Jury had recommended him,]
lAt.Lidwdl. And have the Jury recommended me
too ? that is an additional inftance of the humanity
with which I have been treated!
He then requefted that the court would allow as
much time as the nature of his cafe would admit,
between his fentence and execution, that he might
arrange his diftracted affairs and property, which was
very confiderable ; and be better prepared to meet
with refignation that melancholy fate to which he
was to be configned.
The fentence was then pronounced.
Lord Carleton. (After fome obfervations on
the nature of the crime of which the prifoner had
been convi&ed.) You, Thomas Lidwell, are to
be taken Irom the bar of the court, where you now
(land, to the place from whence you came, the gaol,
-—there your irons arc to be knocked off; and from
thence you are to be conveyed to the common place
of execution, the gallows, where you are to be hanged
by the neck, until you are dead; and'the Lord have
mercy on your foul I
The prifoner bowed, and retired. .
Wednefday, the toth of May, was tire day ap-
pointed for the execution.:
His Excellency the Lord Lieutenant has fince been
gracioufly pleated to refpite the prifoner until further
orders.
THE END,
