

£unsfiine mingled
A TRUE AUSTRALIAN STORY.
“SOLUS”
Author of “’Mid Saltbush and Mallee.”
[COPYRIGHT.]
• * ADELAIDE:
SCRYMGOUR & PRINTERS, 113 KING WILLIAM STREET.
1897.
•►H




SHIERUW & CO,
16 and 18, HINDLEY STREET,
Tailors, Men’s Hatters, Clothiers, and
Shirtmakers.
Here you will obtain the best value in the City.
Grawford & Go.,
GROCERS,
Tea Merchants, Italian Warehousemen,
and Wine and Spirit Merchants,
70 KING WIUIAM STNEET
(And at MOUNT LOFTY).
Importers of all kinds of English and Continental Delicacies.
DRINK
DOWRER & CO.’s
AERATED WATERS
JUBILEE EXHIBITION,
7 FIRST PRIZES AGAINST THE WORLD.
COMMENT IS NEEDLESS


J. MILLER ANDERSON * CO
20 and 22 HINDLEY STREET,
Are now showing an extensive and varied selection of
Suitable for Christmas Presents.
Japanese Porcelain Ware. Beautiful Antimony Goods.
Leather Goods. Basketware in great variety.
A - A -
CYCLE WORKS.
46 O’CONNELL STREET,
. . NORTH ADELAIDE.
REPAIRING A SPECIALITY, by Experienced Workmen.
11 ALMA CHAMBERS, GRENFELL ST., ADELAIDE
(behind bkookman’s building).
We can supply a complete 1 -plate Outfit, with full instructions and
Chemical Cabinet, for 455. Illustrated Catalogues Free.


108703
Jjife’s olouds,
WITH
§unsfiine fjfntermingled
A TRUE AUSTRALIAN STORY.
“SOLUS,”
Author of “’Mid Saltbush and Mallee.”
[COPYRIGHT.!
ADELAIDE :
Scrymgour & Sons, Printers, 113 King William Street.




PREFACE.
This story is intended to show the hard lines which the
Australian farmers had to endure in the early days of
the colony. Then a traveller Avas fortunate if he got a
lift in a bullock dray ; now a man can travel the same
route in a cushioned railway carriage, furnished with
every comfort, a fitting evidence of the true courage,
cleverness, and hard Avork of our Australian pioneers.
ALICE F. PATERSON,
South Australia, 1897.


LIFE’S CLOUDS, WITH SUNSHINE
INTERMINGLED.
Chapter I.
The question is often asked, “ Why are not books written
like real life 1” and ’tis often admitted that “truth is stranger
than fiction,” therefore I have written this small story on real,
true life.
In an economically furnished room sat two ladies, mother and
daughter, and their faces looked full of trouble, but with the
hopefulness of youth the daughter strove to comfort her mother,
saying—
“ I would do anything for you, mother dear,” in reply to a
remark by the elder woman; “ but my step-father is really too
hard, and how are you to manage alone; it is false economy when
you are not strong enough. Oh ! it makes my heart ache to think
how you will drudge on day after day. Why did you marry Mr.
Grey 1 I will not call him father.”
“My dear,” returned her mother, “in my first few years of
widowhood I was so lonely, and you were a delicate little girl.
I met Mr. Grey, he proposed, and I accepted, thinking his com-
panionship and advice would help me, I being a woman inclined
to lean on others for help and courage, and he was then in fair
circumstances. I had some means of my own, but his gift of
language painted what our married life would be, and it seemed
a bright prospect. Men are apt, my dear, to be very sanguine
when it is a matter that concerns themselves, and women are
such trusting fools. I had been happy with your dear father,


and hoped for happiness again ; but this retrenchment seems to
have tried Mr. Grey, so lie is really scarcely himself at times,”
“ Yet, mother, it is no excuse for him to be so unreasonable to
me. Have I not always worked hard at the housekeeping ? ”
“ Yes, dear, but you will learn that men never reason when
they want to carry out a selfish act, so I fear me that you and I
must part,” and the tears came now while the trembling hands
gently stroked the fair girl’s hair.
“Oh don’t, mother, ’tis nearly tea time and here come the
children.”
There came in at this moment a bright little girl and her
tall brother.
“ Oh, mother,” cried the little girl, “we are learning such a
pretty piece of poety, it is called ‘The Weary Wooden Soldier.’
Shall I say it to you ? ”
“ Yes, my dear.”
And the little girl began—
“ My wooden head is cracked across,
I’ve lost my youthful charms.
I have lost alack one wooden leg
And both my wooden arms.
“ Full many a fight have I been in
Twixt Fred and brother Hugh,
I’ve been an officer and private,
I’ve been ammunition too.
“ I’ve been used to poke the fire with,
I’ve been dipped into the ink.
And I made a perilous journey
Adown the kitchen sink.
“ I’ve been drowned and I’ve been married,
I’ve been buried and dug up.
I’ve been worried round the garden
By that seven months’ old pup.
“ In short, this mortal life is such.
That though I am truly brave,
I long with all my wooden heart
For just a quiet grave,”


“ Thank you, Pollie, that is a funny little piece,” and the
mother murmured to herself—
“ I long with all my wooden heart
For just a quiet grave.”
“ If,” she said “ wooden hearts are weary, ’tis no wonder then
that ofttimes human hearts and bodies are a-weary of this great
world.”
“ Come, mother, tea is ready,” said Clara.
The gentle mother took her place, while the the daughter satis-
fied the children’s wants by ample supplies of bi’ead-and-butter.
It has been often said that to live without eating would save a
vast amount of trouble, and yet the social meal is one of the
enjoyable things of life.
The mother glanced at the dear daughter from whom she was
too soon to be parted ; her heart throbbed on in its dull ache,
yet she smiled on the pleasant faces with a certain thankfulness
that the enjoyment of their presence gave.
The young folks presently retired to work at their home
lessons.
Clara brought out the sewing-machine, saying—“ I must get
these school things made before I leave you, mother. How Bob
gets through so many suits is a mystery to me ; his knees are
through the last new knickers. You know that in America
they have knickers made with riveted seams and leather knees-
I wish you would send and get a suit for him.”
“ Yes, dear, I know he is a tear-coat; yet, ’tis a sign of health.
Do you remember how ill he was two years ago with that
dreadful typhoid 1”
“ Oh, mother, I fancy I can see his pinched face now whenever
I think of it, and, oh, the weary nights of watching ! ”
“ I do not forget how you toiled on, when I broke down,
Clara, until your face was nearly as thin as his. ’Twas the good
nursing pulled him through, the doctor said. Yet, although Bob
almost owes his life to you, his father would send you adrift.
Oh, how can he T sighed the mother.


“Never mind, mother, he shall not break my heart
or yours either; come, put away that patching and I will
sing.”
Clara opened the old-fashioned Broad wood, whose tones were
very sweet, and sang “ Oh, rest in the Lord,”
The next morning the mother tried with all the reasoning
power she possessed to move Mr. Grey to a sense of justice with
regard to her daughter leaving home.
Mr. Grey, who was a thin, stern, handsome looking man, sat
with his arms folded during the discussion, and regarded himself
as a very much injured individual at being, as he termed it,
burdened with a step-daughter.
“ I remember you called her a bright little darling when you
and I first met, John.”
“ Ha, humph ! well, my dear, a man is not accountable for all
the sweet things he says when he is courting.”
“ Then they should not say them; ’tis a species of hypocrisy
by which a man would make a woman believe he is almost
perfect.”
“ No man or woman ever called me hypocrite before ; I’ll have
you to understand I am a man of few words ; I believe you love
the girl more than you do me, Mary.”
“ Then, that is your reason for sending her away. I have
never heard of a woman being called to account for loving her
child. Shakespeare may well say jealousy is as cruel as the
grave. You never found fault with me for loving our children
overmuch.”
“ I wish you would not let your tongue wag so much, Mary—
but there is my bus.” Mr, Grey caught up his hat and departed
in seeming haste.
“ I wish, mother, you would not try to turn Mr. Grey from his
set purpose to rid himself of an obnoxious step-daughter; you
only reason fruitlessly; you may say, as Queen Mary did to
Philip of Spain, ‘I am broken on a rock.’ But here is the post-
man with a letter from Aunt Susan.”
“ Read it, Clara.”


Clara read as follows :
My Dear Mary—
I am sorry that you are so worried about parting with
Clara, and although ’tis hard for you both, ’tis best, because you might
as well fight a windmill as Don Quixote did, as to combat John’s fixed
resolve ; his intense obstinacy blinds his sense of justice, so he blunders
on. But do not worry, you have your other children ; let Clara come to
me, she is so clever with her needle, 1 know I can get her plenty to do in the
course of time; there are so many hard-worked farmers’ wives here who
would be only too glad to get sewing done, and Clara could go for two or
three days at a time amongst the people I know; so now make up your
mind, it is very hard, I know; if, my dear, you had only taken our
advice and not married again—but there, that sounds unfair, and we all
buy our experience at a dear price; send Clara, and I’ll be a mother to
her as far as possible, the change here will be good for her—yet I am
afraid the household work will be too much for you, but what you can-
not do, leave undone.
With love to the children,
Your loving sister,
Susan Sumners.
“ Now, mother,” said Clara, “ here is the very thing. I’ll go
and be perfectly independent, and can earn my own living, and
will take with me a stock of the newest fashion journals and
patterns ; there will be a noted improvement in the farmers’ wives
and children’s dresses since the arrival of Miss Jessop. There now,
mother, that is what will be said, and you will be proud of your
daughter’s abilities; now for packing my boxes. How delighted
Pollie will be when she comes home to find I am really routing
outmy boxes. After all there is always a bright side to everything.”
“ Dear Susan,” said Mrs. Grey, “ I always thought she was so
homely and matter-of-fact in our single days, and am afraid I did
not credit all her goodness of heart, but now she comes to me
like an angel of help, and it softens the blow to know that you
will be in such good hands, dear.
But all day Mrs. Grey wearily performed her household duties,
with a pretence of resignation she was far from feeling. The
carrier called next day to take Clara’s trunks, and it seemed like
a tearing of her heart-string as the boxes were carried out one by
one.


Mr. Grey being absent the last evening, Clara, with little
Pollie on her knee, seated herself near her motheT, and they
spent their last evening together.
“ Oh, Clara, I will write to you. My teacher put me into
small-hand to-day, and I can write a real letter now.”
“ There, you see, mother, Pollie teaches us a lesson with the
ever bright hopefulness of childhood, so let us look forward to
each other’s long letters. What a blessing pen and ink is !
Little Pollie, growing sleepy, clung to her step-sister lovingl} 7 .
“ Come and hear my prayers to-night, Clarie, because you are
going away to-morrow j then sing me to sleep like you did when
my throat was bad. Sing ‘ Lads and lassies to your places, up
the middle and down again’; then you can sing ‘ There’s a home
for little children.’ ”
“ Come, then, childie, say good-night to mother. I’ll carry you
on my back, although you are almost too big.”
“ Oh,” said the little one, climbing on to her sister’s shoulders,
“ will you run down the passage ? You can be my horse,
Clarie, when I get big yi u shall live in my house and never go
away—never any more.”
After the little one was asleep Clara sat down to help Bob
with his lessons.
“ For the last time, Bob, so I’ll work out all your sums to-
night ; you can put them in the book.”
“ It’s a jolly shame you are going, Clarie, but 111 not forget
you when I am a man.”
And, true to his word, Robert did not forget her.
Chapter 11.
So the day of parting came. Clara took her seat in one of
Rounsevelle’s coaches for Aunt Susan’s southern farm, the
mother accompanying her to the coach and begging the driver
to kindly consider Miss Jessop under his care.


He glanced at the care-worn face of the mother and replied
heartily, “ She 11 be as safe as the bank, and if anyone says any-
thing to her he 11 have to answer to Jim Keough,” and the warm-
hearted man was true to his word ; Clara never had a truer
knight on a day’s journey.
Inside the coach was a woman and three children. Clara took
her seat beside her ; the middle seat was occupied by two farmers,
the third by a policeman and a prisoner handcuffed, who sat
sullen and still.
The young trooper cast an admiring glance at Clara, but failing
to attract her attention he unbuckled his sword and laid it full
length on the bottom of the coach, and it gradually jolted towards
where Clara sat; its progress not being sufficiently quick, the
young man pushed it slyly with his foot until it touched Clara’s
feet. Then he jumped up, exclaiming, “Ten thousand pardons, I
hope the sword has not hurt your foot.”
Clara replied with a frigid smile, “ Oh, not at all,” she having
seen how intentionally it was done.
Just then, however, the coach stopped.
“Now then,’ thought the young gallant, is my chance. “I’ll ask
the young lady if she will take some refreshment,” so giving his
moustache a becoming twist, and running his fingers through his
really pretty hair, he came round to the side of the coach where
Clara sat, and lifting his cap said—
“ \\ ill you allow me to bring you some lemonade, and what
will you take ?” said he, turning to the mother of the three
children.
“Sure,” she replied, “I might have sat here until my tongue
was parched up before ye would have asked me, only I have got
a pretty girl beside me.”
Just then Jim Keough came round, tray in hand, containing
some lemonade, biscuits, a glass of ale, and milk and water.
“Here’s a drink for the children, a glass of ale for yourself,
Mrs. O’Brien, and some lemonade for you, Miss ; you ladies must
be almost baked in here with the heat. We are half way now,
at any rate; Miss Jessop, try and eat some biscuits, or your


mother will say I never minded ye,” and pushing the tray between
the young man and Clara, the trooper retreated, muttering
“ Confound that Jim Keough, he has got eyes in the back of his
head when there is a young lady under his care.”
Then on went the coach, a new horse had been put in the
lead — a powerful black—who, on starting, fairly reared upon its
hind legs.
“ Look out, Keough,” sang out the man at the stables. “I,
faith,” replied Jim, “ the brute will be glad to go on four legs
instead of two before I get him through the next two miles of
sand.”
The road being fairly good and a little down hill, Keough
brought his whip smartly over the black horse, who, with a
bound, went forward at a rattling good pace, as the smoking
leather skid testified. “ Here,” called Jim Keough to the man
at the next stopping place, “ pitch a bucket of water over that
skid ; I’ve got the very mischief in the team to-day; there is not a
white hair on him. I believe his horns and tail will show before
we get there,” he added in an undertone to the man.
“My word, I don’t envy Jim Keough his billet to-day; I am
an old hand with the ribbons myself, and can sympathise with
him. He is a splendid whip and a good-hearted chap, but it is
not all ‘ beer and skittles ’ to have a coach-load of people, and
half of them women and children, under his responsibility, and a
horse like the one he is driving to-day.”
“One night,” continued the man, “some years ago, I was driving
a team to Swan Hill, and we had to travel through the night
It was pitch dark, and in the depth of winter, and blowing
heaven’s hard ; limbs were breaking oft the trees. I had to pull
up now and again to be sure I was right; the water poured oft
our hat rims and nearly blinded me at times. When we started,
a thin looking chap said, ‘ Can I have the box seat, driver, I
have been ill, and think the seat outside will not shake me quite
so much.’
“ ‘ All right, my man, up you get.’ After we had gone a few
miles, I felt the man leaning against my shoulder very heavily.


“ ‘ Here, hold up mate,’ I said, ‘ you had better go inside if you
can’t sit up ; ’ but there was no answer. So at the next gate I
pulled up and called to a chap inside—
‘“I say, bear a hand here, this chap is ill, I must get him
inside.’ The man came out and, holding the coach-light to his
face, called out —
“ ‘ By jove, I believe the man’s dead ? ’
“ ‘ Well, we must get him inside. There is room on the back
seat.’ The women inside began to scream and one fainted.
“So I said— 1 Will you get up here and hold him, he leans so on
my arm I can’t drive.’
“ ‘ Not I, indeed,’ said he. ‘ I did not pay two pounds ten for
my coach journey, and then be expected to hold up dead men.’
“ ‘ Well,’ I said to him, ‘ what the deuce am Itodo 1 I can’t
leave the man’s body in the scrub to be eaten up by wild pigs
(there are a good many running wild about here), and I can’t
hold him up while I open the gates, and I shall lose my billet if
I don’t get the passengers in to meet the steamer.’
“So getting my revolver out I said —‘ You go forward and open
the gates, you confounded coward. I’ll stick to this poor dead
chap. What would his friends think if I chucked him off the
coach ? ’
“So I propped him up with my shoulder against the coach as
well as I could and drove on. When we got in, the doctor said
the man had been dead about two hours—of heart disease. He
was very weak, and the cold and the journey was too much for
him. His friends wrote me one of the nicest letters of thanks I
ever had in my life.” Here the coach stopped at the slip-panel.
“ Here you are, Miss Jessop,” called the cheery voice of the
driver, and Clara saw aunt and uncle at the roadside. So with
many thanks to Jim Keough and good-bye to fellow-passengers,
Clara took her seat beside Aunt Susan and Uncle George, a man
with a square chin that told of determination and firm will, a
short stout-built figure that meant strength.
“ Clara, my dear, you look tired out, but here we are, and now
for tea and a rest,”


The house was built of stone, at least the four front rooms.
The back was pine, and half of the storeroom had been partitioned
off to make a bedroom for Clara.
There is a single bed for you, and Nellie is the other side of the
room. I thought she would be company for you, and I know you
are used to having little Pollie with you. We really meant to
have a spare room built, but that dreadful red rust has crippled
us sadly.”
“ Oh, Aunt Susan, and now I have come to be an additional
burden.”
“ Not at all, my dear. On a farm a bit of food is never missed,
and you will help me with sewing that I should have to pay a
stranger to do ; I have a week’s work to begin with.”
So Clara’s new life began. She soon saw that life as a farmer s
wife was a toilsome one in the extreme ; up at five o’clock morn-
ing and working until 9 at night; “no eight hours here for women,”
thought Clara.
The only break was an occasional visit of a farmer s wife, 01
the hawkers cart. There were only two books in the house
beside the family Bible, and visits were few and far between.
However, that event occasionally happened, and one day Clara
accompanied aunt and uncle to a neighbouring farm, where the
people were doing fairly well considering the price of wheat.
There were also other visitors. After dinner the women
got up from the table and retired to do the necessary and ever-
recurring washing-up.
Meanwhile the men, being left in full possession of the sitting-
room, drew their chairs round the fire. There being five the
circle was completely closed round the hearth, the chair backs
nearly touching. Each man smoked a pipe and expectorated into
the fire, and sometimes perchance the fender. They talked pigs,
red rust, horses, wheat, etc , which lasted until tea-time, the only
interruption being when one of the men called out for a piece of
wood, and, although there were no servants kept, tis the last
thing any of these strong, able-bodied men ever thought of, to get
a piece of wood for themselves, It was generally brought in by a


daughter, sister, or elderly mother. In this case it was brought
in by the eldest daughter, who had had her arm broken some
time ago by a fall from a haystack, where she had been cutting
hay to feed the horses with, because the men were so tired when
they came in at night, and this girl was extremely good-natured,
and hearing the call for wood she brought it in left-handed. The
smokers turned round after she had spoken to them twice and
said, “ Here, I’ll put it on.”
The circle of men only turned their chairs round when told
that tea was ready. The afternoon had been spent by the women
in the kitchen, where they had sat so as to be company to the
farmer’s wife, who was packing butter and eggs, and had not time
to leave off. They discussed butter and jam-making, and the last
piece of wincey bought for 3|d. per yard, or some such bargain
scraped out of the egg and butter money. One woman said she
had not time to knit two pairs of socks each for the children,
so had to wash them out Saturday night after the children had
gone to bed, and hang them before the fire to dry ready for
Sunday.
“Well, lass, and how did you enjoy yourself among the farmers
to-day ?” said Uncle George.
“ I do not wish to say anything rude, but somehow I did not
care much about them; I was sorry for the women, they seemed
so hard-worked.”
“ Oh, they are all right; see what a free life they lead among
the cows and poultry. We must find a nice young farmer for
you, Clara.”
“ Heaven help me, if my life is to be like these women’s I saw
to-day, whose ‘ free life ’ is another name for work,” thought
Clara. But audibly she replied, “ Oh, never mind about a
farmer for me, uncle.” To her aunt next day she said —
“Do farmer’s wives never get new books or hear any music;
what recreation have they?”
“Well my dear, we are all too far away to get books, even if we
could squeeze the subscription out of the butter money, and the
men-folks would not pay horse stabling and lodgings for us at an


hotel. If we want to go to a concert, they consider it too extra-
vagant. We go, you know, once a year to the Show. I saw you
looked dismayed at the Thomson’s yesterday. But, Clara, don’t
despise and judge the farmers’ wives—its unwomanly, and
they cannot help it.”
“ I do not despise them, I pity them with all my heart. Fancy
the narrow limit of their lives, that appear bounded by milking pans
and cheese ; there is no recreation. Why, destitute people and
lunatics have concerts and picnics arranged for them as a real
necessary of life, and this is considered by the wisest in the land
a thing they practically need. It seems to me their lives are
what Dickens, in his ‘ Nicholas Nickelby,’ made Mr. Mantilini
call ‘ one demnition grind.’ ”
“ Oh, Clara, they are earning a living, and appear contented.”
“ In answer to that you should have heard what Miss Thomson
said to me when I offered to lend her ‘ Dombey and Son.’ She
said, ‘ Oh, that will be heavenly ; I have heard so much about
Dickens in the papers. But I shall have to read it on the sly,
because work is the god we worship here ; he reigns supreme.’ ”
“ Clara, do not let uncle hear you talk like that, he believes in
honest work.”
“And so do 1, aunt, but not overwork, especially for women
and children. I hope you will forgive me for speaking my mind
so freely. I would like to raise the women and children
standard.”
“Oh, fie, Clara, a woman’s-righter, like an American.”
“ Oh, no, aunt, I would have all women do their duty. They
and the dear little ones should be held sacred, and not treated as
working machines or an unavoidable appendage to a man’s life.
Through all that long day we spent at Thomson’s I never heard
a kind or loving word spoken to the wife or children. Machinery
had better be employed by men who do not possess any human
feeling or love. Wives and children are not necessary to such
men.”
Clara wrote home amusing letters to her mother, by whom
they were looked upon as a great treat; but the burden of the


mother’s letters were, “ I miss you, Clara, dear, but, oh, I am so
thankful that you are in good hands.” Rob and Pollie wrote
letters that were sweet to Clara, and were treasured until the
children were grown up.
A neighbouring farm was owned by a widow lady and three
sons. The eldest, having seen fit to admire Clara, began as time
went on to imagine himself in love—a sort of delusion that men
oft take upon themselves, a feeling that would be better described
as being a mixture of admiration, selfishness, and vanity. Love,
one of Heaven’s own attributes, had not yet possessed his soul or
touched his heart. The youth reasoned within himself, “My
word, if I get Clara Jessop she’ll take the cake. There are not
any of the farmers’ wives round here can hold a candle to her for
looks. Her brown eyes are so clear, her pretty coils of fair hair
so soft and fetching—and mother’s getting so old she wants
someone to help her with the cheese and butter making. Clara
is a good manager and will keep house out of the butter, cheese,
and poultry, while I knock something out of the farm.” Thus
the young man assured himself and blundered on. Had any
chance thought of prudence whispered in his ear, “ Perhaps she
will refuse you,” his vanity would have been proof against it.
“ Refuse me, indeed. Why,” he assured himself, “ I could
have any girl round here for the trouble of asking.”
His visits on pretence of talking farm matters with Uncle
George did not deceive the elder relative.
“ I say, Clara, what about a young farmer lass 1 ”
“ Oh, uncle, I cannot help Arthur Sinclair coming here, because
he comes to consult you on farm matters.”
“ Goes he, though,” replied Uncle George, and he rubbed his
chin reflectively. “ Why, before you came I wrote to him three
times about that division fence, and he never answered. Now
he comes twice a week to see about it.”
Some weeks after this, one bright moonlight evening, Mr. and
Summers, with little Nellie, strolled down the wattle drive with
Arthur Sinclair, Clara and he walking a little in advance.
When the elders talked of going home, Arthur begged Clara to


come as far as the gate, and said, “ I never get a chat with you
alone \ you have always got that tiresome little Nellie with
you.”
“I do not find her tiresome ; she is my cousin. I really love
the dear little girl.”
“ Well,” he replied nervously, “ I hope your powers of loving
are great; I wish you would love me.”
“ But you are not my cousin, Mr. Sinclair,” said Clara, blushing
furiously.
“No, but I would like to be nearer and dearer than that,” he
said, clasping her hand, which Clara found impossible to with-
draw from his grip.
“ Will you not make me happy and be my wife ?”
Poor Clara, struggling with a desire to soften the disappoint-
ment she thought he would feel, yet wishing to make him under-
stand once and for all that she could never bring herself to love
him, said tremulously, “ You have paid me the greatest com-
pliment a man can pay a woman ; but, really, I cannot do as you
wish ; it is not in my power to make you happy.”
“ Why not 1 ” he demanded aghast.
“ Because,” said Clara, “ love cannot be forced. I will not
marry any man without; it would be a sin to you and to
myself.”
“ Oh, Clara ! do not say ‘ No.’ Why, you will be the making
of a man like me.”
“ No, you are mistaken. No woman can take upon herself a
man’s failings and faults and remodel them ; ’tis a human im-
possibility. A mother’s or sister’s influence may be effectual to
a certain extent, but when a man marries he considers himself
the head of the house, and that his wife ought to obey him.
Should she offer advice that does not suit him he will very rarely
take it, and then they quarrel, or the wife yields the point.
Therefore her influence is gone, because not listened to. Now,
Mr. Sinclair, I am sure you and I should quarrel.”
“ No, we should not,” he cried.
‘ Ah, yes, I have seen you laugh at your mother’s advice.”


“ Oh, mother ! she is so old.”
“ And I, too, shall be old some day,” said Clara, with a pained
look. “ But let us part friends, Mr. Sinclair.”
“ Oh, Clara, do meet me again; do not be so hard.”
“ No,” said Clara, “ it must ever be no.”
“ Very well, 111 come up and talk to Mrs. Summers, and see if
she will say a good word for me, so good-bye.”
And Clara sped homewards.
“ Why, Clara child, how white you look !
“ Oh, Aunt, I’ve had such a painful scene. Arthur Sinclair
wanted me to marry him. Of course I said ‘ No,’ but could not
make him understand. Why are men so dense 1 ”
“ Dense, ’ echoed Aunt Susan, “he did not want to understand.
lam not sorry you refused him, Clara; you would scarcely make
a farmer’s wife. It wants someone with unfailing strength and
no aspirations after the cultured part of life ; but don’t worry,
my dear, men are pretty tough.”
“ He is coming to see you and get you to say a good word for
him.”
“ He shall have my candid opinion and a pinch of advice if he
will take it; but ‘Josh Billings’ says that there is too much
advice given in this world—' enough, in fact, to run three other
worlds.’ ”
The young man, however, was rash enough a few evenings
after this to try and enlist Aunt Susan’s sympathy to soften
Clara’s heart towards him, which he declared was as hard as a
millstone.
“It is not hardness of heart, young man, but principle. Clara
would not marry a man to avoid being called an old maid, or
because he was rich, and she would not make you a good wife.”
“ Not a good wife,” ejaculated Arthur in amazement, “ why, I
have heard you say that a better daughter than Clara never
stepped in shoe leather.”
“And I still say it,” returned Aunt Susan, “but a wife is
altogether a different matter. The intense and utter difference
of wives’ duties are so seldom recognised. Let me tell you that


very many girls would accept you and rush into marriage without
once weighing the responsibilities they in innocence and igno-
rance take upon themselves, and perhaps for fear of being an old
maid ; but better a thousand times be a so-called ‘ old maid ’ than
an unhappy wife.”
“ Does that mean that I should make her unhappy, Mrs.
Summers ?”
“Yes, it does, because it would be impossible for you to make
her otherwise if she does not love you, and she is quite unfitted
for the life she would lead. You ought to respect her firmness
and decision instead of feeling aggrieved.”
“ But, I say,” he interrupted, “ it’s jolly hard to have a nice
girl say ‘ No’ to a fellow.”
“ It would be harder in the end if she had said ‘Yes.
“ I say, Mrs. Summers, you are on the wrong track. Do you
mean to tell me that I am a brute and not fit to be trusted with
a woman’s happiness ?”
“ Yes; I can repeat your own words—not fit to be trusted.
You show you are not, because you, in the face of Clara not
caring for you, and knowing full well how much she dislikes farm
life, yet would marry on such an unsatisfactory basis, which
would really mean years of heartbreak for my poor girl and
misery for you.”
“ Oh, I say, Mrs. Summers, that is pitching it very strong. I
believe you have influenced Clara against me.”
“ I never gave her my opinion until she had refused you, but I
believe ’tis wisest for your sake, as well as her own, and you
have driven me to speak plainly, as an old woman may some-
times do. I must say from what you have told us you are not in a
position to meet the extra expenses that marriage would bring.
You think I am hard, but no man has any right to marry a girl
unless he can keep her in modest comfort —I mean food and
clothes. It is the cruellest fate for a girl to be taken from a
comfortable home, and thrown into the numberless cares of
housekeeping responsibilities, also to work with scarcely enough
money to make both ends meet. The man who does this, and


condemns his wife to such a life, does not show, any real love at
all for the girl he takes into his keeping. It is nothing but ex-
treme selfishness, and a sin upon his soul. He stands at the
altar and utters vows to love and cherish her, that he knows, if
he considers the matter all, cannot possibly be kept; and as the
years roll on, the little innocent children are ill-clad, and scarcely
nourished, and the sin falls heavily on the young shoulders,
and through the dreary stretch of years the misery meanders on
until oftimes the children are left to charity; while the mother,
the once bright and happy bride of years ago, is broken down,
and thankful for the rest that death brings.”
“ Ah, I see how it is, I am not rich enough for Miss Clara.
Yet you, Mrs. Summers, always made me welcome here ; now I
think you are very mean.”
“ Well, I could scarcely send you away, as you have been in
the habit of coming here as a neighbor, and if I had forbidden,
you to see Clara } T ou would have found a means to do so I know
full well. Remember, Clara has refused you, but I fear you have
been led away by your admiration of a nice girl. If you were
possessed of real love, and less selfishness, there might be some
hope for your future. It is very painful for me to talk to you,
but in a long life’s experience I have seen all the misery that I
speak of. If men would only marry when they could afford it,
and have more reverence and real love for good women, the world
would be a better place. Of course the woman who neglects home
and its duties is unworthy of respect and love, but the cases are
rare.”
“ Well, Mrs. Summers, I hope Clara will get her rich man, but
some of those rich men are bad lots, I can tell you.”
“ Yes,” replied Aunt Susan, “ but that is another matter for
consideration ; Clara will never marry for money alone ; neither
do I want riches for her, but I want a comfortable home and
some love for her; but, ’tis always impossible to make a man
understand. A woman is, generally speaking, supposed to lie too
emotional, and not able to fix her ideas on one subject for any
length of time; but this is a pure delusion, because you can


always reason with a woman, but never with a man. I believe
the fact is that a man will not reason. In Tennyson’s “ Locksley
Hall’’ the sorrowing lover bemoaning his lost lady love, Amy, lies
on the beach, wishing a thunderbolt would fall on Locksley Hall,
which would probably have killed Amy. Now, there was no
love in that and less reason.”
“ Ah, well, I don’t know anything about poets, but I will see
Clara once more, and perhaps have her yet.”
“ Oh, yes, I know you will buy your experience ; my advice is
fruitless, as is nearly always the case with men in love.”
True to his word Arthur Sinclair did see Clara again, although
she had tried very hard to avoid meeting him alone. Yec the
time and opportunity came. When walking home from the
little chapel, where she had gone with a girl friend, they were
met at the chapel door by a neighbour, who said to the friend,
Oh, do come and sit with mother; she is so ill, and father s
gone for the doctor.”
Clara now hurried on, and, as Arthur was not at chapel, hoped
to reach home alone, but at the turn of the road near the gate
which led into the drive Arthur came up and lifted his hat with
a “ Good evening, Miss Jessop.” Clara responded with a “ Good
evening, Mr. Sinclair,” and would have passed on, but he stepped
across her path and said, “Miss Jessop, I believe your aunt has
turned you against marriage and myself at the same time.
“ Oh, you do aunt an injustice. My views are more decided
on that subject than her own, and tis very foolish for you and I,
Mr. Sinclair, to argue such a question. Aunt will wonder what
keeps me, so good-night. ’
Here the young man lost all control and patience, and ex-
claimed, “ Now, may the deuce take your aunt. Why should her
opinions be crammed down my throat 1 ’
Clara shuddered within herself, thinking “So this is the man
that wants me to pass life with him, also to love and respect him.
I wonder if he calls this love ?” but aloud replied,
“ I love and respect aunt, Mr. Sinclair, and you must not find
fault with her in my presence,”


“ Neither would I if she had not spoilt all my chance of happi-
ness. You are under the thumb of her opinion.”
“No, lam not; I tell you once and for all, that I refused you
of my own free will for conscience sake, and I will not be forced
into marriage with you.”
“Forced, do you say? Why, many girls would jump at the
chance.”
“ Then let them jump, for I will not,” returned Clara.
Here young Sinclair, losing his head completely, called out in
an excited tone, “Look here, Clara Jessop, jou will not make a
fool of me, I can tell you.”
And to Clara’s horror he drew a loaded revolver from his
pocket, and, pointing it to his forehead, said—
“ Say you’ll have me or I’ll blow my brains out.”
Clara possessed a very muscular arm, and was an adept at
club-swinging, which stood her in good stead now. So, with one
quick step forward, she threw up his wrist, and the revolver,
with the sudden jerk, fell to the ground. Clara snatched it up
Quickly, and, stepping back, said to young Sinclair, who stood
aghast—
“ You great idiot, what are you doing ? Would you kill
yourself for a girl ?”
“ Oh, Clara,” he faltered, for what with temper and excitement
he was reduced to a state of drivel, “if you had only said ‘Yes’
this would not have happened.”
“ You are a coward, sir, to think of frightening me into saying
‘ Yes ;’ and as we shall probably never meet again, take a parting
piece of advice. Be a man, and do not try to frighten girls—’tis
unworthy of you.” Clara coolly unloaded the revolver and
handed it back to him.
Just then Uncle George came in sight, and calling out, “ Clara,
here’s your aunt in a pretty state, expecting you would be
brought home on a shutter at least. It’s nine o’clock, my girl.
Who was that man ?”
“Arthur Sinclair, uncle.”
“ Well, he might have said good-night.”


Chapter 111.
Monday’s mail brought sad news for Clara and a letter from
Mr. Grey, saying that Mrs. Grey had completely broken down.
An attack of inflammation had left her in a serious condition,
and a trained nurse was in attendance but Mr. Grey concluded
his letter by saying he could not afford this expense, so Clara had
better come home and nurse her mother round again.
“ And then, I suppose, I can go again,” said Clara, as she
folded up the letter and prepared to pack.
“ Send for me,” said Aunt Susan, “if you want help. Ido not
know what Mrs, Smith will do about the dress you promised
her.”
“ Tell her that if possible I will finish it for her.”
After the long coach journey Clara arrived, bag in hand, and
entered the old familiar gate.
Polly came running out to meet her.
“ Oh, lam so glad you are come. Mother is very ill, and nurse
won’t let me make a noise.”
Here the nurse entered the room, saying, “ I hope, Miss
Jessop, you are prepared to hear how very ill Mrs. Grey is?”
“ Oh, is mother in danger ?”
“ When any one is as weak as Mrs. Grey is there is always
danger,” replied the nurse.
“ Can I see mother ?”
“ Yes ; she has heard your voice. Mr Langly, the curate, is
with her, but come.”
When Clara entered the room Mrs. Grey was lying back on
pillows, white and emaciated, yet with a hopeful smile ; her large
eyes, though sunken, were yet lit with light that seemed to be
looking into the Better Land, and they rested on her daughter in
an unspoken welcome of love unutterable.


On the side of the bed sat a gentlemanly looking man, who
with hat in hand, prepared to leave the room.
“ This is my daughter, Mr. Langly,” said Mrs. Grey in a weak
voice. Clara bowed, and with a pleasant good-bye, Mr. Langly
quietly left the room. “ Oh, mother dear,” said Clara, “ how
dreadfully thin you are,” but she continued in a brighter tone,
“ I will make all your favorite dishes and strengthen you up
again.”
Mrs. Grey pressed her hand in silence, and sinking back on
the pillows, fell asleep.
In Clara’s ears the words “ too late ” seemed to ring with
painful iteration as she gazed on her mother’s wasted features.
It has often been written “ the hand that rocks the cradle
rules the world,” and yet the ever patient hand (the mother's)
needing all sympathy, reverence, and love, is oftimes neglected
and undervalued ; ’tis almost impossible to conceive the true
value of a good wife and mother. The only time when a woman
knows what her mother has really been to her, is when the cares
of maternity begin to fill her life with anxiety ; then, thoughts
go back to happpy childhood’s days, and the memory of the
sweet though careworn face that smiled words of encouragement
and love, though now, alas ! these are only a sweet memory
living in the daughter’s heart. We are reminded of Cowper’s
lines to his mother’s picture, “Oh those lips had language. - ’
The women’s and children’s standard of excellence wants raising
not by so-called women's rights, but by the right of veneration
and love, and good women and children should be held sacred, as
we know that the Greatest of Teachers taught with a child upon
his knee ; but, alas ! how many a hand has been raised in anger,
and many a little one left without scarcely food or clothes,
erstwhile designated “kids,” “brats,” and whatnot. Thesacied-
ness of child life is not recognized sufficiently ; there is not a
greater lesson on contentment taught than to see the little ones
playing, perfectly happy, with a few old tins and a little sand
and pieces of string. If they quarrel, ’tis all forgotten in a few
minutes, and the play goes on. But lam digressing.


Clara administered nourishment and strengthening remedies
ordered by the doctor, but at four o’clock a change came. Mrs.
Grey called “ Clara,” “ Clara.”
“ I am here, dear mother !”
“My little Poilie and Bob, Clara, try”—the rest of the
sentence was lost. The nurse, hastily roused, tried in vain to ad-
minister restoratives, while Mr. Grey hastened for the doctor, who,
however, arrived only in time to see the gentle lady s white head
sink on her daughter s shoulder, and the eyes look a last farewell.
“ How is this, doctor ?” fumed Mr. Grey.
“ My dear sir, I have done my best, but your wife was in such
a weak state, she was quite unable to battle with the disease.
If she had been stronger when the attack came I could have
pulled her through, but 1 was called too late”
The blow was almost too much for Clara.
“ Oil, mother,” she moaned, “ why did I ever leave you f
Mr. Grey busied himself with funeral arrangements, and little
Poilie clasped her arms round Clara, asking—
“ What made mother die 1 Who will cut my lunch and help
me get ready for school now she is gone 1 No one can do it like
mother; only she used to be so tired when she got me ready.
How long will it be before I go to heaven to her V
Clara comforted the little girl as best she could.
Robert accompanied his father through that last solemn rite,
and it was only by his white face and knitted brows that Clara
knew how deeply he felt his mother’s death.
A few days after this Mr. Grey said in a suave tone, “ Clara,
what are your plans for the future V
Clara replied, “ I have my needle, sir, which will keep me.”
“ Oh, yes, but that was with the good Aunt Susan. If you
have nothing better than that in view why not keep house here 1
This cottage has been left to the children, and I cannot afford to
pay a housekeeper while Poilie is so young or for Robert to board
elsewhere. If you are content with a salary of Bs. per week I
will give you housekeeping money as well, and of which you can
keep an account, and get help for sewing occasionally. As for my-


self, the firm have offered to send me as a commercial traveller in
the country districts, so that I shall be very little at home.”
Clara’s heart rebelled at this, the old sore was fresh in her
mind ; but it probably never occurred to Mr. Grey, who was
anxious to get a cheap housekeeper and not to have any respon-
sibility with regard to the children.
But her mother’s dying look and the words, “ Try, Clara,” rang
faintly in her ears. ’Twas a sound that would last for ever. She
answered—
“Very well, Mr. Grey,” at which the gentleman brushed his
hat with care, and glancing in the glass to see that his tie was
properly adjusted, he walked out the front gate with the well
satisfied air of a man who had got rid of an unpleasant duty.
Clara gazed after him, and was forcibly reminded of Mr.
Murdstone in Dicken’s “ David Copperfield.”
But now she must set to work. A school dress must be made
for Pollie, and the neglected house set in order; but try as
Clara would, she could not shake off the feeling of apathy that
seemed to have taken possession of her. She woke early in the
morning, and watched the light stealing through the blind with
a feeling that the day’s duties were all too much for her. The
shock had been very severe, and if Clara could have had a few
months of bracing sea air, or some kind of outdoor life with
cheerful companionship, it would have helped her; but with the
weary round of monotonous house duties, and no pleasant break,
she drifted into a morbid state. Pollie was at school all day,
and Robert in a wool warehouse, as Mr. Grey had determined
that he should now try to earn his own living.
So Clara drudged on, as many a woman does, with very little
companionship or sympathy, and had no chance of visiting nor
to receive visitors, as Mr. Grey’s household was conducted on the
most rigid principles of economy.
Mr. Langly, the curate, however, paid his parochial call, and
noticed the pale, sad girl who seemed to be in a state of apathy
and indifference, which his call and friendly chat seemed to have
po power to rouse.


Mr. Langly, being a bachelor, had for his housekeeper an
elderly spinster aunt. This lady wisely took life as she found it,
but was ever ready to help and comfort the sick and needy.
Having some means of her own, and no ties other than hei
nephew, Frank Langly, she said she felt called upon to keep house
for him.
«* I say, aunt,” he said to her one day, “ cannot you find time
to call upon Miss Jessop 1 You remember the young lady who
lost her mother. She sits in Mrs. Stephen’s pew, near the door.”
“ Dear me, Frank, now you mention it, I remember how very
sad she looked. Well, I’ll call upon her this very day.”
That afternoon, when Clara, wearied with a hot morning s
work of baking bread and plain cakes over a camp oven, had sat
down to lengthen one of Pollie’s summer dresses.
A knock came at the door, and, upon opening it, Miss Bickers
presented herself with a cheerful “ Good afternoon, my dear. I
have seen you in church sometimes, and thought I should like to
call. I hope you will come and see me now and again.”
“ Thank you very much,” responded Clara, “ but I cannot leave
Pol lie, so that I am not able to return any calls, or very few.”
Miss Bickers noticed how very wearily Clara spoke, as though
all the sunshine had gone from her life. The elder lady’s heart
softened with a feeling of love towards the friendless girl.
“ You must come and spend next Wednesday afternoon with me,
and bring little Pollie, too \ it will do the child good. \ou know,
Miss Jessop, all work and no play won’t always do. Oh, how
pretty your daisies look.”
“ Yes, they were my mother’s favorite flower.”
“ Try and garden all you can, my dear. There is no better
tonic for nerves than the open air. If you once turn your
attention to cultivating a small plot of ground, and in watching
from time to time the flowers grow and bloom, it takes you out
of yourself, and we want to get away from ourselves at times.
The sunshine and flowers do us good imperceptibly without our
knowing it,” wisely concluded Miss Bickers. “So now, good bye.
I shall see you on Wednesday,”


Chapter IT.
The Wednesday following saw Clara and Pollie, who danced
with delight at the pleasant outing. On arriving at the gates
they followed the drive as it wound gently round until the
garden entrance was reached. On opening the wicket a pleasant
sight met their eyes On their right was an immense date tree,
laden with fruit. The dates were a deep yellow, and almost
ripe, but the birds were feasting upon them. The sunlight fell
through the trees, throwing beams of golden light across the
green lawn. Roses were growing in profusion round the side
and front verandahs in lovely pale yellow and pink clusters ;
a shadehouse full of fuchsias, begonias, and almost every shade
of colour. Further on the broad path wound round past a fern-
house, whose green tracery of fern leaves and fronds were
refreshing in the extreme. It was a place to rest and dream and
marvel at nature’s loveliness. In one portion of the garden the
native Australian sheoak made weird and whispering sounds, and
the wattle, with green, glossy leaves, flourished, surrounded with
native grasses. Australia has many lovely home places and
beautiful grounds. These are not famous for their antiquity,
neither do they possess the traditional family ghost; but for com-
fort and beauty they may compare very favourably with English
homes, and this charming garden smiled a bright welcome to the
tired Clara, and Pollie was open-mouthed with delight.
In answer to Clara’s knock a small maid opened the door—the
said maid being a girl that Miss Bickers had taken from the
Industrial School, with the determination to train her as a model
of perfection. She now showed Clara into the drawing-room,
with its window-sill filled with a profusion of flowers.
Miss Bickers, laying aside her knitting, came forward and
welcomed Clara warmly, saying, “ Why, how tired you look,
child, lam afraid the walk was too far for you; come, let me


give you some tea.” Miss Bickers, with gentle hands, undid
Clara’s black gossamer, and took her hat oft. At the kind words
Clara smiled a sad smile, saying, “Ah, Miss Bickers, your hands
feel like mother’s.”
“ Bless the girl,” murmured the old lady, “ she is like John’s
eldest girl, who died just before T left England j but aloud she
said, “ Come, here are tea and cake, and what does Pollie like
best ? Now we will enjoy ourselves ; ” but they were startled by a
masculine voice, saying, “ I say, aunt, have you got a cup of tea
for a thirsty soul ?” Here Frank Langly entered the room, and,
like the “ Parson of Dumford,” he believed in practical
Christianity.
“ Oh, how do you do, Miss Jessop, very pleased to see you.
I have just come from Dawson’s ; they have had their haystack
burnt down, but we managed to save the house ”
“ Dear me, Frank, what risks you run into.” Her nephew in-
terrupted her with “ Another cup of tea, aunt, please, and then
we will show these ladies the garden.” Then they wandered
round the garden. Mr. Langly supplied Pollie with a stock of
meat wherewith to feed the birds and the laughing-jacks, which
pleased the little girl for a long time. At last it was time to go.
Frank and his aunt walked down the drive with them to say
good-bye.
“ I never,” remarked Frank, “ saw a girl seem so perfectly in-
different. I tried her on every topic and subject, but only got
monosyllables. I generally find girls at her age willing to be
amused when we go round the garden, but your visitor to-day
was a dead weight to entertain. Her eyes looked just like
Evangeline’s in your picture, where she is holding her dying
lover.’ “Yes, if eyes are windows of the soul, then Clara
Jessop’s seem to reveal a sort of hopelessness indescribable,’ said
Miss Bickers.
“ You must really try to rouse her, aunt.”
“Bouse her,’’echoed Missßickers, “she has been roused too much
already—yours is a man’s view, truly, Frank. A\ hen a woman’s
spirits have been crushed, and her body probably aching with over-


work and worry, then a man says she wants rousing—she wants
practical help in the shape of a good tonic, change of air, en-
couragement, and some love, perchance.”
“ There may be something in what you say, aunt, but it does
not do for a girl to be so indifferent to everything.”
“ Indifferent ! Bhe is not indifferent. If she were there would
be some hope for her : but she is beyond that, she has scarcely
any human feeling left. I heard her story from old
Nurse Watkins, She was forced to leave her mother to earn her
own living. I hen she was sent for only when her mother is
dying, and leaving in her charge two stepchildren; and while
away living with an aunt, just previous to her mother’s death, a
country bumpkin fell in love with and threatened to shoot himself
if she did not marry him. Rousing, forsooth, humph ! You
know, Frank, when a limb has been bruised and torn and
crushed the doctors enjoin strict quietness and rest to the
patient and all the soothing the medical craft can suggest to heal
and bring back to a lively and a healthy condition the bone and
flesh. So it is with a broken spirit.”
“ W ell done, my dear aunt, you shall preach my next Sunday
sermon.”
“ Frank ! Frank ! I brought you up a model I thought,
and now you are just like a great many ordinary men. You
cannot understand what 1 mean, and when I do try to impress you
you laugh.”
“ But, my good soul,” said Frank, who was really sorry he had
pained her, “ I can quite believe you. I often note the troubled
faces of my congregation, and am sure it is a divine touch of
love they want administered to them practically, as you have said,
and it may be done through the women, who, when good, are
ministering angels.” Here Frank reached his study door, and
bid his aunt good-night; but before retiring that night he could
not help again looking at the Evangeline which hung in the
dining-room.
“ How like that poor girl’s eyes,” he soliloquised, “ and the
country bumpkin wanted to shoot himself for her. Well, that is


going a step too far.” Then Frank returned to his sermon,
which, the parishioners remarked, was not Mr. Langly’s usual
manner at all, the discourse went so disjointed, they remarked
afterwards.
Miss Bickers advised Clara to practise her music again, so
Clara began to give Pol lie lessons, the little girl showing a
decided taste for it. Miss Bickers constantly stopped her pony
carriage at the cottage on her visiting rounds, and, running in,
would say, “ Clara, I have brought you a lovely primula. It
must be put in at once ; don't forget;” and Clara was obliged to
garden for politeness sake. With Pollie’s help, the flowers, fresh
air and music began to bind up the overstrung nerve-chords ; but
to Miss Bickers, who watched her unceasingly, the progress was
slow, but she never gave up, trying with true womanliness and
spirit of faithfulness. At last the look of apathy softened, and
Clara sometimes laughed.
“ Step the first,” said her friend.
At this time it was rumored that Mr. Grey was again about to
commit matrimony. In his travels he had met a squatter’s
widow, on whom his gentlemanly manner and soft speeches had
made an impression, and found a place in her affections. Her
first husband being a man of money and no pflish, Mr. Grey
presented a striking contrast—albeit, a man of polish and no
money. The lady, having sufficient means, could afford to marry
a man whose manners would give a finishing touch to her well-
furnished mansion. The lady herself was strong in mind and
body, and was wont to declare that men wanted managing, w r ere
they gentle or rough. So with no fears for the future, some
months after this, Mr. Grey again put his head into the matri-
monial yoke, this time a golden one —n la “ Mr. Murdstone.”
But the lady was no gentle Clara Copperfield. She kept her
property strictly settled on herself, and her sharp, metallic “My
dear” brought her spouse to a dead stop when about to indulge
in any husbandly sarcasms or in endeavoring to assert his will.
He always appeared to give in, remembering that his wife was
his banker, and gave her as much respect as he would any such


person who had the power to regulate his cash account, and we
leave them in full enjoyment of matrimony. The husband was
happy in a fairly good supply of ready cash and home of ease and
comfort, and nothing to do but to enjoy the good things this
world gave him; and the wife was proud of the young husband,
yet subject to jealous fears when she beheld his fascinating
manners were exercised to amuse some of the pretty young lady
visitors, although, truth to tel), Mr. Grey would not have married
one of these portionless damsels had he been free to do so. Yet Mr.
Grey found, for his own peace, he had often to assure his wife
that she was the bright angel of his existence. Her gold was
what he meant, but breathed it not.
Mrs. Grey would have had Clara to stay with them, but the
latter politely declined, much to Mr. Grey’s relief, because the
gentle soul seemed to look out of her eyes that reminded him all
too well of his first wife. He, however, sent Pollie to a ladies’
college daily, and raised Clara’s salary, which enabled her to
keep a small maid. Now brighter days began to dawn.
Robert was promised a situation on one of Mrs. Grey’s stations,
and when there he worked hard at wool-classing, studied sheep
and cattle, books, and bookkeeping. His father wrote him long
letters, and preached pages of good advice that he never practised
himself.
The friendship begun with Miss Bickers and Mr. Langly still
continued.
A series of sixpenny concerts were got up in aid of the church
and Sunday-school, and the piogrammes consisted of readings,
children’s part songs, etc., in which little Pollie took part, and
Clara, under Miss Bickers’s chaperonage, took part in the
tableaux, and was quite a success, posing as the “ Puritan
Maiden” and “ Lady Jane Grey.”
Frank Langly up to this time had continued heart-whole on
principle, because he could not well afford to marry, but now, try
as he would, his heart was gradually slipping from his keeping.
In vain he reasoned with himself and called common-sense to his
aid, and rated himself for being a soft idiot.


“ However,” he said, “ Evangeline, ’ as he always called her,
“ will never know. ’
Clara herself showed no warmer feeling than that of friend-
ship.
“ I hope,’’ she said artlessly, “ our friendship will last for life,
Miss Bickers. When I look back to the time I lost my mother
everything seems blank, except your friendship, and now I shall
lose Robert, as he is going next week on to Mrs. Grey’s station,
and is to be a sort of ‘ pannikin overseer,’ whatever that may
mean.”
“ I am afraid it means, Miss Jessop, a small salary and plenty
to do. However, it is a beginning.”
“ Robert says I am to go up and keep house for him when he
is a full-fledged station manager,” said Clara.
“ I hope the time is far off,” said Frank, impulsively. “My
aunt, you know,” he added hurriedly, “ will miss you so.” But
Clara could not help noticing his manner and look of disappoint-
ment when she talked of going away.
“Oh dear, and is this to be another lover ? At any rate he
is too much of a man to try and frighten me into marriage.”
After Robert left home Clara had to live with her an elderly
lady, who paid for her board very liberally, as she liked a quiet
home.
Robert wmote some amusing accounts of station life, the
immense quantity of tea consumed, and the difficulty of learning
to use the stockwhip properly, and the tumbles before he could
ride the stock horses. There were horses that could almost
bring in a mob of cattle by themselves, so well trained w r ere they
to the work.
“ But I wish we had some of your scones and tea cakes, Clara,
he wrote. “ The bread we get here is something awful, not so good
as the damper we make with flour and water when we are out
camping ; and the camp-fire stories, you should hear them I
mean you should not hear, for some of them are very tall. lam
glad you warned me ; but, Clara, they go in one ear and out the
other. In fact Ido not, if I can help it, let them in my ear at


all. They are too bad There is a young fellow named Stewart,
who has come up to get colonial experience, and he and I are
chums. The men led him such a life at first. They called him
an English new chum, and very often the title had an adjective
before it. lam glad I learnt boxing, for I had to give one of
the fellows a lift under the ear. Two of them set on to Stewart
one night after supper. It is no use talking up here. The man
that can hit the hardest is the best liked, and the young station
hands consider their education quite finished when they can sit a
buck-jumping horse.
“ Steward and I were put in charge of the nine mallee
paddocks. There is a hut out there, and the first night I slept
there I thought of Pollies bush poetry. You remember, Clara,
it says the hut roof was composed of daylight and strips of bark
Our hut is the same, but we are going to ‘ cork’ the roof with
some strips of tarpaulin. We have got two sheepskins to sleep
on, two bush rugs, and one camp-oven, pannikins, and a tin of
baking powder; so we are having grand times, For the evening
I have made a slush-light in an old pannikin, filled with fat,
and a piece of Stewart’s old sock for a wick, so that we can light
up the hut; but it is rather flickering on a windy night. I wish
you would post up some more books and papers. We like to
know a little how the civilized world is going on.”
Clara sent books and papers, and the two sisters wrote long
letters, which were oftimes read aloud to Stewart, who seldom
got letters.
So life flowed on, and Frank wrestled with his hopeless love.
Clara’s garden was a pleasant sight to behold.
“ Tis like my life, brightened up,” she mused. “ I have taken
heart again and hope. I shall save enough to live upon when I
am old now that I can work, and shall settle down into quite an
amiable spinster, I believe.”
But Christmas drew on, and the anthems had to be practised.
Pollie had joined the choir, and Clara was organist on practise
nights.
Miss Bickers had arranged to give a sort of a garden party to


the choir workers, and Pollie and Clara were staying with Miss
Bickers to help with the cake-making. It had been a trying,
close, thundery day, and Miss Bickers had succumbed after
afternoon tea to a nap in the dining-room chair.
Pollie went off to feed her pet birds, and Clara strolled down to
the further end of the garden, and, having changed her cooking
dress for a pale blue gown, she walked slowly down the path,
looking more than ever like Evangeline, Frank thought, as he
looked at her from the fernhouse.
“ By the holy rood, thou art the one maid for me,” he quoted ;
“ but yet she seems to be not the one maid for me. I cannot give
her the good home she is really fitted to grace, neither can I tell if
she cares aught for me. Would she, I wonder, look with me
adown the long years of waiting ? Am I like Longfellow’s
‘ Miles Standish,’ ” he further soliloquised, “ that I would rather
encounter shot from the mouth of a cannon than the downright
‘ No’ from the mouth of a woman 1 No, surely I am not a
coward 1 Where is my British pluck 1 I surely shame my
English credit. If Clara will not mind waiting for me I'll wait
for her with all the joy in life.”
So, having finished watering the ferns, Frank followed Clara
to a seat ’neath the whispering sheoak.
She smiled and said,
“ I have got such good news from Robert. He is promoted to
full management of the Lake Station, and has taken young
Stewart up with him. Dear old Robert, he wants me to go up
and manage his house for him now, and says if he does not get
better bread to eat he’ll die of indigestion, and his death will be
on my head. So I must go after such a pathetic appeal as that.
Mr. Grey also writes to say that Pollie must leave school and
either go to the Lake Station with me or Mrs. Grey will have her
at the Homestead. Heigho ! I shall be sorry to leave our little
cottage and the dear little valley church. Do you think I could
get a drawing or photo of it ? I wonder if I can cultivate flowers
up there 1” Clara had not noticed Frank’s troubled look during
this soliloquy.


“ Will not old friends help to fill memory's niche, Miss Jessop ?”
“ I should be very ungrateful, indeed, if they did not. You
know that, Mr. Langly, I believe ’tis no trifle that we cherish
when we find and prove a friend. After lam established at the
station, and have got the house comfortable, I have planned in
my own mind to ask Miss Bickers and yourself for a nice
long holiday. There will be all the wild bush scenery and bush
customs to amuse your aunt, and Robert will do all he can to
make the visit enjoyable for you, and we shall have the old times
over again. I am so glad to look forward to it; it will be
charming, because I will be able to return a small iota of the
gratitude I feel towards your aunt and yourself. You both
stepped into my life when it lay like a dreary path stretched out,
and you so kindly dug me out of the slough of despondency, and
started me on again.”
“ Your feelings do credit to your fondness of heart. I, too,
Miss Jessop, sometimes go back on memory’s track, which leads
me to a solemn day, when I sat beside a dying parishioner, whose
last wish was to see a dear daughter. Then the door opened,
and there came in a daughter of the gods, divinely tall and most
divinely fair, who went to her mother with these words, ‘ I am
here, dear mother.’ I left them then, but carried with me the
image of the loving, gentle girl, who had walked straight into my
heart without any bidding or asking, and with scarce a glance at
me. With the footstep of an angel you stole all unconsciously
into the citadel of my heart. I said within myself, * Get hence,
gentle spirit, lam too poor to entertain an angel.’ But you are
still there, dear Clara, and will be there until I die.” Frank
leant back pale and sad.
“ Oh,” exclaimed Clara, “ I am so sorry you care so much, and
if you mean that you would marry me if you could afford it, T am
glad that you cannot. I have no love to give, and have often
quoted to myself, ‘ What can this love be that cometh to others
and not to me ?’ The difference is that it does come to me, but
T cannot return it; I can only say that the capacity or faculty
of loving a man is dead. It died with my mother’s death. I will


explain. From my childhood, my love for my mother was part
of my being—she was my ideal, and almost my God. Her marriage
with Mr. Grey I felt sadly, but we clung on just the same, and
when hard times came I left school to help her, and the times
grew harder. My step-father decreed that I should go to earn
my own living, and laid down the law with an iron will, and
mother persuaded me to go for the sake of peace, even at a time
when her health needed all my care and she required rest. I
returned to hear the doctor’s verdict, that the patient was run
down, but under circumstances of an easy life and comforts she
would live to be an old woman. In my sorrow I said a man
hath done this thing, ’tis slow murder. I have opened my heart
to you, Mr. Langly, as I would to a Father Confessor. You
come nearer to my ideal of what a man should be, fori never
heard you speak harshly to a woman, be she rich or poor. My
warmest friendship is yours, but love to your sex is dead. You
say you have no power to govern your liking—(“Love,” interrupted
Frank) —for me ; neither have I any power to love you. Love
is dead, or gone; I can’t explain further,” said Clara, putting her
hand to her head with a weary gesture.
“ Then,” said Frank, “ could you not promise that in a few
years, when I have made a home ”
“ Then, Mr. Langly, I hope to see some gentle girl, who will
love you as you deserve ”
But Frank interrupted her with a pathetic look that moved
Clara almost to tears. Recovering himself, he said : “ Come,
Miss Jessop, I am sure you want your tea ; there is the bell,
and chatted to his aunt cheerfully, like a true Christian that lie
really was. Some time later Frank bade the sisters good-night,
and retired to his study to wrestle with his trouble as best he
might.
Packing occupied Clara and Pollie for the next day or so.
Then a long journey by river and rail, when they were met by
the station trap, Robert proudly driving the four-in-hand, accom-
panied by Stewart, who straightway fell in love with Pollie.
The girls were fully occupied for the next few months in getting


the bachelors’ establishment in something like order. Soon after
this poor Robert, in mounting a young horse, while at the head
station, had his leg broken. Mrs. Grey, who had a strong liking
for her stepson, sent off for the doctor, who set the limb, but
Robert had to rest for some six or seven weeks. It happened at
a time when Mrs. Grey had invited a number of friends from
Melbourne, as she was fond of doing. Amongst them was an
elderly widower with an only daughter, a man who had been
successful in the early gold diggings, and was now rich in
properties, with only one daughter to leave it to. Now, this
wilful damsel, who was never denied anything that money could
buy, took into her head to think that Robert Grey was the
nicest young man she had ever met. Mrs. Grey had made a
point of having afternoon tea carried into Robert’s room during
his convalescence. So the intimacy began, much to the father’s
annoyance, who had made up his mind that his daughter should
marry a title at least; but love laughs at locksmiths and fathers
alike, and although her father had summarily taken her home, the
little maid remained true to her bush lover, although she never
mentioned him. Some months after this Robert took a trip to
Melbourne on business of importance that Mrs. Grey had
entrusted to him.
“If I send you there on a message from myself ‘ Moneybags’
can scarcely be rude to you,” said Mrs. Grey, who sympathised
with the lovers. Accordingly Robert presented himself at the
family mansion, and the litle maid was delighted to see him.
Afternoon tea was in full swing, and the pater was
in the city. A stroll round the garden with the little
maid made Robert determined to ask papa, and on that
gentleman’s return he was shown into the study; but when
Robert asked for his daughter’s hand the reply was—
“ No, sir, I am not going to have my hard-earned money, which
I intend to leave to my daughter, thrown away and squandered
by a beggarly station jackeroo.”
At this Robert, with a very white face, replied, “ Very well,
sir, that is a sufficient answer; but I would not take such an


insult from a younger man. Tam quite able to support a
wife, or should not have asked your daughter to marry me. I
wish you good afternoon,” and turning on his heel, left the
room.
On meeting his tearful little maid he said, “ 1 cannot quarrel
with your father, little one. I have been taught to respect age,
so we must leave things as they are at present. Good-bye, And
the lovers parted.
But in course of time the stern pater relented.
“ That young Grey is a fine young fellow after all; you should
have seen the look he gave me; I believe in a man that can hold
his own. If he had whined and said he did not want my little
maid’s money I would not have let him have her, the patei-
familias remarked to Mr. Grey afterwards; but as Robert was
more than willing that the little maid’s money should be settled
absolutely on her, and he assured her father as much, the lattei
consented, and they were married soon afterwards.
Clara stayed to welcome the bride, and then wanted to go back
to the cottage.
“ No,” said Robert, “ you stuck manfully to us in poverty, and
now we will not turn you adrift. As long as I have a home you
shall share a warm corner in it.” And the little maid also said,
“ You must stay, Clara; I can’t keep house like you, and would
not like to be worried by teaching these raw recruits of eooks
like you have to, so I can’t spare you; the place is deadly dull
when Robert's away. I will give you a good housekeeper s
salary, because I know you are independent.”
Clara thanked her step-sister, and felt that she could not well
refuse. Besides, it would be a provision for old age, because she
could save nearly all her salary. And in after yeai’s, when Pollie
married Mr. Stewart, she was in constant demand, and in times
of sickness and anxiety a very angel of goodness —withal an old
maid, a name that ought to be respected, instead of being made a
subject of sarcasm —and right well did she perform her mother s
last wish of “ Try, Clara.”
Uncle George and Aunt Susan continued on the even tenor


of their way, and had saved enough to live on during a long life
of toil on the farm, where they still lived.
Aunt Susan wrote :
You will be sorry to hear that your old sweetheart married a pretty
dressmaker, and brought her home. She had never been on a farm
before. I went to see them just before old Mrs. Sinclair died; but, oh,
Clara, the pretty dressmaker is now a poor broken-hearted woman. She
was standing at the cheese-press; the newest baby lay crying in a box-
cradle. The second little one is a cripple with hip complaint; she caught
cold crawling about on the kitchen stone floor. I could not find time to
nurse her when baby was so ill and young. I had to leave her for Patty
to mind, while I milked the cows; little Patty was only five years old
then. The poor wife explained to me. Nearly all the farm work of
butter and cheese making falls on her shoulders, now his mother is
dead. Oh, Clara, Clara, if it had been you, my dear, ’twould have
broken my heart; better as you are than a neglected wife. As we passed
on going out your old flame was sitting on a fence smoking, and calling
out to one of the farm hands to put the horses in the trap for him. I
am going to ask his wife over to spend a day or so with me; my heart
aches for her and the little ones.
Clara mused as she folded up the letter, “ Oh, why can these
things be 1”
Miss Bickers comes once a year to stay with Clara, the last time
accompanied by her nephew Frank, now promoted to a large
church ; and yet again he pleaded his cause. “ No,” replied
Clara solemnly, “ Mr. Langly, we are friends for all time.”
And so this Christian man and woman fight the battle of life
alone, and still Evangeline hangs on the wall of Frank Langly’s
study. Yet these two are rich in the love of those true friends
who surround them. Why Clara could not love him must
remain unanswered, like so many “ whys” that confront us in
life s journey.
Tis not in human nature to answer such a deep question.
Finis.


31508023234208


J. W. LANE,
FAMILY GROCER,
AND
Wood, Coal, and Chaff Merchant,
JETTY ROAD, GLENELG.
COUNTRY ORDERS WILL RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION.
GENERAL STOREKEEPER
And STAMP AGENT,
SHEFFIELD STREET, MALVERN,
Respectfully solicits a call from all neighbors and friends.
ALL GOODS CITY PRICES.
JOHN LEE,
FAMILY BUTCHER,
Manufacturer of the Celebrated Fritz and other Sausages,
KING WILLIAM STREET SOUTH, ADELAIDE.
By Special Appointment to His Excellency, Siu T. Fowell
Buxton, K.C.M.G., and the Adelaide Club.
Families waited on daily for orders. The favor oi
your patronage respectfully solicited.


IVIISS SfIVRER,
FIT AND STYLE GUARANTEED.
Watch and Clock Makers
to S.A. Government.
Established
TUCKER & MURPHY
Watchmakers and Jewellers,
INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS,
57 KING WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE.
All Watches and Clocks Cleaned are Guaranteed for Twelve Months.
Jewellery made to Order and Neatly Repaired.
COUNTRY ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
When in want of any Book on any subject,
. . . go to . . .
COLE’S BOOK mm.
STATIONERY, GOOD QUALITY, LOW PRICES.
67 BUNDLE STREET
(Five doors east of Gawler Place).




