





LIFE IN THE BUSH.
CHAPTER I.
JOHN MULLIGAN.
During my stay at Adelaide, in South Australia,
while on my voyage round the world, I had the
pleasure of forming Police-Sergeant Tollmer’s
acquaintance; and the following sketch of an
adventurous trip he took to an island no great
distance from the Australian Continent, and
which gained him his lieutenancy, I heard from
his own lips. I will attempt to repeat it as
faithfully as I can.
A long time previously, a couple of “ lifers ”
had broken out of prison and fled to the bush;
but, instead of wandering about in it, which, in
the nature of things could not last lon», the
rumour was, that they had found a tribe of
blacks, and aided the latter in plundering all the
adjoining stations.
Mounted police were immediately ordered to
the spot, and they succeeded in finding and dis-
persing the indicated tribe, but did not come
across the Bushrangers. The fellows had evi-
dently gone off somewhere else, when they found
their stay with the natives becoming dangerous;
and, for a whole year, every attempt to discover
them was fruitless.
Tollmer returned about this time to Adelaide,
bringing with him a party of fugitives, who had
been wandering about in the clumps of the
Hindmarsh Swamps. The escaped criminals
were almost forgotten by this time; and it was
generally supposed that they had seized a boat
and crossed to New Zealand, or got aboard some
passing vessel—for some had already escaped in
that way.
Tollmer, however, believed nothing of the
sort. Though he knew of no certain spot where
to look for them, he could not dismiss the idea
that they were still on Australian soil; and,
during the whole period, never gave up making
the closest inquiries, though they led to no
result.
Thus, he sat one evening in the most fre-
quented hotel of Adelaide, over a bottle of ale.
Among the guests was a station-keeper from
Kangaroo Island, to the south of the Adelaide
district, which had recently been taken posses-
sion of by the English. But few persons had
hitherto settled on this island; and these chiefly
in the hope that land would eventually become
valuable there, when they might sell their
clearings at considerable profit.
This gentleman was a very eager oppodent oC
the convict system; although it procured him
very welcome workmen at shearing time, as he
allowed. But, even in his remote island, he
declared he was not secure from meeting these
ruffians at any minute in the bush; and he
always left his home with apprehension, lest
something might happen during his absence
to compromise the safety of his family.
When the other guests dropped off, one by one,
Tollmer seated himself by the settler from
Kangaroo Island, and talked with him eagerly
about the chances of eventual cultivation, mea-
dows, and agriculture, and the possibility of
obtaining labourers.. But he made no direct
inquiry about what lay most on his mind.
Still, during the conversation, and by clever
cross-questioning, Tollmer learned that there
were certain individuals in the neighbourhood
of Mr. Lindsay’s station, (that was the stranger’s
name), who lived by shooting and fishing, and
had no settled residence; and he made up his
mind to learn something more about them.
Tollmer had with him at Adelaide a policeman
of the name of Morris, in whom he placed
implicit confidence. He was still a young man,
but had been in the service for more than six
years; having been recently sent up from Sidney,
and consequently a perfect stranger to those
criminals whom the sergeant so longed to find.
His plan was soon formed. Morris should go
across to Kangaroo Island as an ordinary
bundler, and find employment at Lindsay's, or
close in his neighbourhood, as shepherd or
hut-keeper. He would thus have opportunity
to gain all possible valuable information about
the persons in the vicinity; and when he learned
what he wanted to know, he would return to
Adelaide and give in his report. Tollmer
warned him most seriously against writing a
letter, unless he had a special opportunity of
transmitting it. The mere fact of writing would,
in itself, be dangerous; for, were any one to see
him, it must arouse suspicion. A respectable
and conscientious bundler can never write more
than his own name —and not always that.
Mr. Lindsay remained some days in Adelaide,
and this period Morris employed to make his
preparations; after which, provided with a
ticket-of-leave procured for him by Tollmer, ho
proceeded to his destination.
Morns disappeared, then, from Adelaide with-
out leaving a trace —for in the island he went by
3


the name of Jack; and month after month
passed before Tollmer heard anything about
him. Could an accident have befallen him ?
had he betrayed himself, or any one recognized
him ? Tollmer began to grow restless, and was
thinking about sending off a second messenger
to acquire some certainty as to the fate of the
first. But this was not needed.
One morning Morris, in his bush attire, just
as he landed, entered Tollmer’s room; and they
remained there for several hours in close con-
versation.
The result of his voyage was so far favourable,
that he brought back the certainty that a number
of suspicious characters were living upon the
island; but whether they were the criminals
Tollmer had followed so long unsuccessfully,
was difficult to decide. The description of one
)f them, who appeared to exercise a certain
degree of influence over the others, however,
miited tolerably well the most daring of fugitives,
a certain John Mulligan, whom the Government
were most anxious to capture ; and, if he was in
hiding over there, he was sure to have his com-
rades close by. At any rate it was worth the
trouble to arrest those fellows, and find out who
they were; for they had lately been levying
black mail on the station-keepers, killing the
cattle they needed for their own consumption,
without troubling themselves as to the right of
property, and had even broken into a station—
though without the knowledge, and, as Morris
asserted, against the will of their leader, who
cleverly avoided everything that could draw the
attention of Government upon them.
Tollmer, at that time, had never visited Kan-
garoo- Island, and was not at all acquainted with
the terrain; but Moms described it to him as
remarkably favourable to these men without the
pale of the law; so that there would be great
difficulty in capturing them, if warned before-
hand. The greatest caution was therefore neces-
sary, and Tollmer acted in accordance.
They dared not sail across in a Government
cutter, for the news would have spread with
lightning speed over the island. But there was
a small schooner lying in Adelaide, which had
fetched a cargo of flax from Auckland, and which
could be easily hired for the trip. The Governor
immediately granted his sanction; and, three
days later, the schooner sailed with Tollmer and
ten men he could fully trust on board. These
were dressed, some as bundlers, others as sailors :
and all further arrangements were deferred until
the leader. had carefully studied the field of
action. t
The schooner sailed in ballast, ostensibly to
fetch wool from the island, and carry it to one
of the Australian entrepots —Sidney, Adelaide,
or Melbourne.
On arriving at the island, Tollmer learned,
concerning the hidden criminals, that they no
wnger lived together in one band, but had
separated about a week previously, in conse-
quence of a dispute. Mulligan—Lindsay knew
his name well—was living in a small back hut,
about four to five miles from Lindsay’s station ;
and the others were bushing it—that is, they
had formed their encampment in the midst ox
the bush, and near a small stream, as they
were undecided in what direction to proceed.
Morris knew only of five, but Lindsay as-
serted that there were seven in all : —John
Mulligan and two of his adherents in the back
hut, and the four others camping in the bush.
This division of the band could only be
favourable to their plan; for seven determineo
and desperate men might offer a dangerous
resistance to so small a body of police, as they
were all well armed. In two different bodies
they could be more easily mastered; and the
men decided to pay a visit to the back hut the
first thing in the morning, and begin by cap-
turing John Mulligan, the most dangerous of
them all.
For this purpose, the schooner set sail again
before daybreak, so that the police need not
land in sight of the station. Lindsay indicated
to them a small promontory further westward,
where they could lie to. There they would be
at the most a mile and a half from John Mul-
ligan’s hut, and Morris would meet them there.
The earlier they started the better, for they would
then be more certain of finding the gentleman
at home in the hut.
The hut on which the party marched through
the scrub, like thousands of others in the bush,
consisted of merely a slight framework of posts,
■with laths nailed over them, and covered with
wide pieces of the broad stringy bark. Similar
plates of bark composed the walls, and such a
dwelling looked rough enough ; but in the bush
no claims to comfort are made. It afforded pro-
tection against wind and rain, and what further
could be expected from an abode in such a
spot ?
Tollmer crept up to watch his opportunity,
and a glance at the hut proved to him that they
had not come here in vain. The blue smoke was
curling upwards between the slips of bark that
formed the roof, and hence the inmates must
be at home.
Tollmer now peered through a crevice in a
side wall, but could only perceive one person
inside. This was a man seated on a blanket in
front of the fire, and engaged in filling a short
clay pipe. At the same time he seemed to be
preparing the breakfast, for a tea-pot stood on
the coals, and the piled up ashes proved that a
“ damper ” was baking beneath them.
With this exception the hut was empty. The
small confined room could be easily surveyed, as
two strips of bark were absent from one of the
walls, the hole serving for a window. Was this
Mulligan ? Had his two comrades also quitted
him, and had he remained here alone ? At any
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


rate they must seize him as quickly as possible,
and Tollmer looked round for weapons. He could
only see a solitary musket leaning against a
corner.
The man at the fire was so engaged with his
pipe, that he had no idea of the danger impen-
ding over him. His back was turned to the
door, and as this was half open, Tollmer,
Morris, and one of his men glided in and sud-
denly threw themselves on the Bushranger, to
prevent him clutching at the musket.
“Well, hang it all!” the latter said, without
making any attempt to spring up —“ you’ll
break my pipe! a pretty business that would be,
and not another to be got in this beautiful
bush.”
“Holloa, he takes it coolly!” Morris said
laughingly.
“ Bind his arms behind his back,” Tollmer
remarked quickly; “if he fancies he is going to
humbug us, he is mistaken.”
“ Don’t be in a stew, old cove,” the man said
with a laugh; and there was no mistake that he
was a sailor. “ Stop, mate, you’ll cut my arms
to pieces.”
“ And pray what may you be doing here, my
fine fellow?” Tollmer asked, apparently not
very proud of his capture, for the man did not
behave like a detected criminal, and his face
was quite strange to him.
“ What am I doing!” the sailor replied, with
perfect coolness. “ I am watching that this
gallows damper is not burnt in the ashes, and
should have been smoking my pipe if you had
not fallen on me like savages. Just one of you
shove it in my mouth, and lay a cinder
upon it.”
“What’s your name?” Tollmer asked, while
Moms laughingly acquiesced; and the prisoner
drew lustily at his pipe.
“ Bill Hautige, mate,” was the answer; “why
the blazes have you tied up my flippers ? I can’t
take the damper out of the ashes with my
feet.”
“What are you doing here in the bush?”
Tollmer continued, without noticing his protest.
“ Precious little,” the fellow growled; “cook-
ing as you see—hut keeper I fancy they call it
hereabout.”
“ That isn’t one of the birds,” Moms whis-
pered in his superior’s ear.
“ I don’t think so cither,” the latter replied,
in an equally subdued whisper, and then added
louder—“ who lives with you here ?”
“ Two other fellows.”
“ And where are they now P”
“ Gone out to shoot a wallobi —if they don’t
find one, they’ll bring a sheep back.”
“ Indeed! hare they a flock of their own ?”
The sailor laughed, and looked quietly on the
ground.
“ How long have you been on the Island ?”
Tollmer continued.
“ Three weeks,” was the reply.
“ And where do you come from ?”
“ H’m!” the man growled, apparently not
particularly desirous to speak out. “Do you
belong to the river police?” ,
“No!”
“ Well, then, it don’t concern you.”
“ Run away from a ship ?” Tollmer asked.
The sailor was silent, and sucked at his pipe.
“ Listen here, mate,” Tollmer said, no longer
doubting but that he had here to do with a run-
away sailor —“ if you ran from a ship, I have
nothing to do with that, and no harm will hap-
pen to you, but we must watch the other two
fellows. Will you help us in it ? for I cannot
fancy you have had any further truck with
convicts.”
“Help you with my arms bound?”
Tollmer loosened his bonds without further
query, and Bill scarce felt his arms at liberty,
ere he before all plugged his pipe tighter.
“ I fancied there was something queer with
those two fellows,” he said, without altering his
position. “ Devil take ’em! lam glad to escape
from them so cheap.”
“ How soon will they be back ?”
“ Any moment. The best thing will be for
you to remain inside the hut, for I don’t know
from which side they will come.”
“ Is that musket yours ?”
“No! it belongs to one of them. John he
calls himself.”
“ John Mulligan ?’*
“How do I know what his surname is?
John’s enough to call him to dinner.”
“ There’s one coming,” Morris hurriedly whis-
pered at this moment: the bark had cracked at
a hundred places, and it was possible to see out
all round.
The police silently collected inside the hut on
both sides of the entrance to wlxich the Bush-
ranger was slowly walking, without an idea of
what awaited him.
He was dressed in the ordinary rough bush
garb, but was impeded in Iris movements, for
he earned the ready killed sheep on his shoul-
ders, and was holding his musket in his right
hand.
“ Holloa, Bill!” he shouted, on reaching tho
door —“why don’t you open?—Or is the beast
sleeping again as usual ?”
Tollmer said not a word; but as he signed to
the sailor to open the door, he showed him a
cocked pistol, as a warning of what threatened
himself if he attempted to betray them.
He gently opened the door to Lame Tom, as
he was called by his comrades, because he
limped slightly.
“ You then,” the latter said, still at the
door —“just take this sheep from me —well,
make haste. Do you want me to carry it for
an hour on my back ?”
Tollmer signed to the sailor to call Tom into
5
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


the hut, for if his comrade was near, he would
he warned by any noise outside.
“ Come in, then,” Bill said—“ or are you
afraid of soiling the carpet P”
“To stc\iu the blankets with blood, I sup-
pose p” the Bushranger replied, who had lost his
patience long ago. “ There, you can fetch it
yourself;” and he jerked the sheep on to the
ground. There was no time to be lost, so be-
fore he could raise his musket, Tollmer had
caught him round the waist and hurled him to
the earth.
“ Help! John—damn—” he said no more,
for Moms had very cleverly thrust a cloth in
his mouth to prevent any further shouts ; but it
was too late. Tollmer’s quick glance recognized
a dark form among the bush, v'hich disappeared
os quickly as it had been visible, and angrily
stamping on the ground, he shouted:
“We managed that cleverly. There’s the
chief fellow off, and we may search the whole
bush from one end to the other before we find
him again. But take that bird, at any rate,
into the hut, that we may see what we can get
out of him.”
This was done: but if he had reckoned on
Lame Tom’s assistance, he was surely thrown
out, for the prisoner did not reply to one of
his questions.
“ Devil take you!” he exclaimed, as the cloth
was taken out of his mouth —“you all fell
upon me like a pack of cowardly dogs on a
single sheep. Now do what you like with me ;
but leave me alone, for I’m blessed if I’ll help
you to catch any one else.”
CHAPTER 11.
SEBGEANT TOLLMEB.
Ik the meanwhile the men had grown hungry,
and one of them now carried the sheep into the
hut, to prepare breakfast. The damper was
baked by this time, and they made an excellent
meal with the tea and sugar they found. A
council of war was then held, as to whether
they should consider the affair a failure and put
to sea again, or first make an essay to capture
the other party of four men.
Nearly all decided for the latter; but Tollmer
would not neglect anything to get Mulligan
into his power; and as it was just possible he
was still in the neighbourhood, and would visit
the hut after their departure, two of the men
were left in hiding here to try and seize the
fellow, dead or alive. Bill the sailor offered
to remain with them, but Tollmer would not
risk that, for he was not wont to trust a
stranger after the first hour’s acquaintance. On
the other hand, the powerful seaman might be
of great use in capturing the rest, as he was
already obliged to weaken his small party by
leaving the men in the hut.
They remained in the hut till the sun neared
the horizon, for they were sure that the Bush-
rangers, being on bad terms with Mulligan,
would not come to this spot, and outside they
might too easily meet with them.
Morris, who was perfectly acquainted with
the bush, led the little band at the appoined
hour to the point where the Bushrangers
had camped. It was not yet dark enough,
however, and Tollmer therefore left his men
concealed lii a thicket, while he crept forward
to reconnoitre.
On hands and feet, employing every’ bush and
stem that could conceal him, he crawled nearer
and nearer to the fire; and as he had taken the
precaution to notice the direction of the wind,
in the event of their having dogs, he soon
drew near enough to distinguish the forms
moving round the glow. There were, though,
more than tour men there —he could clearly see
Jive —lying round the fire or moving backwards
and forwards. Could Mulligan have found and
warned them ? But in that case they would
have moved their quarters, so who could the
fifth person be ?
“ Well, all’s fish that comes to my net,” he
muttered to himself, and determined not to let
his prey escape him again. He crept back to his
men, and told them the plan he had hurriedly
formed.
The twilight in Australia is extraordinarily
short, and night sets in almost upon the depar-
ture of the sun. The police, hence, did not
need to remain long in hiding; and Tollmer
now left his accurately instructed band to carry
out his desperate design alone.
Ho crept in a wide circle round the fire, till
he brought it between himself and his party,.
then walked a short distance into the scrub
away from the Bushrangers, and gave the signal
“Coo-rr-ey” so common in Australia, and learned
from the natives.
At first all was still, and no one answered
him; but at last, after the Bushrangers had pro-
bably consulted together, and come to the
conclusion that the man who shouted so noisily
in the wood, could hardly be dangerous to
them, one of them repeated the cry, and Toil-
mer broke through the bushes, making as
much noise as he possibly could.
He soon reached the fire, where he found the
little band of criminals awaiting him with
cocked muskets.
“ Halloa!” one of them called to him; “what
are you shouting about in the wood at this time
o’ night P”
“ The Lord be praised!” Tollmer said, on
reaching open ground —“I’ve found men at
last with a decent fire. I fancied I should have
to pass the night out yonder under a tree-
How arc you all P”
6
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


“ Pretty bobbish,” one of the band answered
—“but where do you hail from ?”
“ From the north shore,” Tollmer replied,
perfectly prepared for all questions—“ and
wanted to strike Cooley’s station, but I missed
my way, and almost killed myself in these con-
founded kangaroo thorns. How far is it there,
and is there any road ?”
“ Precious little road you’ll find hereabouts.
If you don’t steer by the stars you may walk
about for a year in the bush.”
“ How far is it to the coast, th in ?” Tollmer
asked again.
“To the coast?” the first took the word
again. “ Perhaps about three miles, if you
-can go in a straight line.”
“ And a road runs along the coast, eh ?”
“ Yes. But you haven’t come across the
island ?”
“ Straight across.”
“ I am astonished that you’ve got a rag left
on you,” the Bushranger said; and as he feared
no danger from one man, he leant his gun
against the tree.
“If you have no objection, gents,” Tollmer
continued, following his example, and also
taking his double-barrel from his shoulder —
“ I’ll rest a little here. Can one have a cup of
tea and a damper for money and civility ?”
“ For money, no —for civility, yes,” the
Bushranger said, still regarding their guest
attentively. “You’re a sailor, eh?”
“A bit of one,” Tollmer said, laughingly.
“ Bolted, eh?”
“ Took French leave from a merchant
schooner that anchored off here. Devil take
the oakum picking aboard! Is there any chance
of getting across to the Continent ?”
“Possible,” the Bushranger said; “I don’t
trouble myself much about it.”
“ Damper’s ready,” another growled, who at-
tended to the cookery department. The man
who had been speaking with Tollmer, now
turned to him and said —
“ Sit down to the fire and take a share of
what we’ve got.”
“ Thank’ye; don’t want to bo told that twice.
I’ve got the rheumatics in my back, and suffer
shamefully. P’raps the fire ’ll draw it out.
By your leave,” and with these words he
cowered down to the fire, but so as to turn his
back to it, and keep his eye on the guns.
The supper occupied the entire attention of
the Bushrangers for the moment, and all sat
round the fire.
Suddenly the leader stopped eating, and said:
“ What on earth is the Blacky listening at ?
Well, what’s up, Snowball ?”
Tollmer’s heart beat so that it threatened to
burst. He knew that his men were by this
time close to the encampment, and the black
fellow, with his much sharper senses, must
have seen or heard something of them.
“Me make a light, flourbag,”* the native
said, in his would-be English.
Tollmer rose slowly and walked to the fire,
to push the embers together. He was now only
two paces from the guns.
“So, you saw something white, eh?” the
Bushranger said, following the direction in
which the black’s hand pointed.
“I’ll shoot over there,” Tollmer said; and
with these words he turned round, seized his
gun, and noiselessly set the hammers.
“Bah! let’s have no nonsense, mate,” the
other said, having no notion that any danger
could threaten them here —“who knows what
the chap saw?”
“ Perhaps ’twas an opossum,” said Tollmer.
“ Very likely; but put your gun down.”
At this moment a shrill whistle resounded
through the forest.
“ Treason!” the Bushranger shouted, as he
sprang to the gun.
“ The first who moves is a dead man!”
Tollmer cried, in a thundering voice, lifting his
own gun to his shoulder; and his men sprang
forward from all sides, while the Bushrangers,
completely surprised, did not know in their first
alarm whether to fly or defend themselves.
Ten minutes later all the Bushrangers were
handcuffed. It was, however, too venturesome
to transport them in the darkness through the
bush, where one or the other might have found
an opportunity of escape. Tollmer, therefore,
decided on remaining the night through where
he was, after setting a watch, and transporting
the convicts by schooner the following morning.
The next morning at day-break they were
ready to start, and in about two hours reached
the schooner, where the prisoners were billeted.
Tollmer, however—determined to do his utmost
to capture the fugitive Mulligan—would not run
the risk of losing any of his prisoners by keeping
them any longer on the island. He ordered the
schooner to set sail for Adelaide at once, with
two of his men as guard, and deliver the precious
cargo over to the county jail. The vessel would
then return without delay, either to fetch the
rest of the party, or remain at anchor till they
came aboard.
The great pomt was to discover John Mulli-
gan’s hiding-place, and that appeared much more
difficult than Tollmer had at first expected. Still
Tollmer set out at once in pursuit.
The men grew heartily wearied of the bush
during the day, and one or two ventured a hint
that the schooner must have returned by this
time from Adelaide, and would be expecting
them. But Tollmer remained inexorable, and
would hear nothing about the schooner and
giving up his scheme.
On the morning of the third day, while follow-
* Make a light—see; flourbag—anything white, in
the broken and mutilated English the natives learn of
the white workmen.
7
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


ing a small track which led to the coast, they
came on a water-hole, where they found the first
traces of the flying convict. He had drunk
there; the marks of his hands and knees could
he distinctly noticed on the edge of the pool.
But although the discovery encouraged them
to continue their researches, Tollmer was himself
prevented following the track with his old zeal.
During the mornirfg he had trodden on a sharp
thorn, and though he paid no particular atten-
tion to it at first, the wound grew worse through
exertion and dust to such an extent that he could
scarce walk at last.
On the path they were now following, they
noticed the Bushranger’s footsteps several times,
and Tollmer, leaning on the arm of one of his
men, limped along till they at length came in
sight of the coast, and found a small block house
erected there. It was not inhabited, but Tollmer
could go no further, and, on hearing from some
of his men he sent on, that Mulligan’s trail
was noticeable on the sand, he decided on resting
here for a couple of hours, and sending his men
on in pursuit.
If by three in the afternoon they had not
found, one of them would proceed along the
coast to meet Morris and the others, and lead
them back to him.
The men did not like to leave Tollmer alone
with his bad foot, but he sent them all off. There
was water close at hand, and he could employ
the time in bathing and tying up his foot. But
he had trusted too much to his own powers;
when he walked into the hut, and threw his
blanket over an empty bedstead, a most unusual
faintness overpowered him; his head turned
round; and he had only just time to put his gun
in a corner, and lay on the blanket, when he fell
into an unconscious condition, which must have
lasted several hours.
When he came to himself again, the sun was
high in the heavens, and he set to work earnestly
washing and binding up his foot. Then he tried
to boil a pot of tea, but he was still too weak;
so he lay down again on the bed, and looked up
at the roof till bus eyelids closed, and he sank
into a light, strengthening sleep. At his awaken-
ing a surprise awaited him.
He fancied he heard his name called, and when,
with his eyes half-opened, he turned towards the
doorway, he saw then the form of a man obscur-
ing the passage of the light.
Hia heart ceased to beat, but the next moment
restored him to all his activity.
'“ M#. Tollmer!** the voice said; and, as he
•lowly rose, not to reveal any terror, he saw the
Bushranger, John Mulligan, standing at the
door, with the double-barrelled gun in his hand,
the hammers set and pointed at him. When he
threw himself again on the bed, he had carelessly
'.eft the weapon near the door, and his life was at
this moment in the hands of the criminal, and
hnng on the pressure his forefinger
“ Halloa, Mulligan!” Tollmer said, coolly-
surveying the danger in which he now found
himself, as he sat at the bedside, though without
rising—“ so we’ve got you at last! You might
have saved yourself and us the long tramp through
the hush, for you must have known that you
could not escape so soon as we came on your
warm trail.”
“You have got me!” the fugitive said, as a
demoniac smile played over his pallid features ;
“ that’s not so had. You’re in my power, Tollmer;
and what prevents me repaying you, with one
pull of my finger, all the injury you have done
me in this world ?”
“ The fear of the gallows, Mulligan,” Tollmer
said, without the slightest change of countenance
—“ although you will hardly escape that. But
did you really think me such a fool as to leave
you a loaded gun at the door, and lay myself on
the bed in the other corner? The trick was
clumsy enough, but it has succeeded.”
“What do you mean by that?” the Bush-
ranger shouted, holding the gun more tightly,,
and casting a shy glance over his shoulder.
“ What do I mean by it ?” Tollmer continued,
quietly crossing one leg over the other —“ that
you are surrounded, and I need only blow this
whistle to have nine men round me at any
moment. You cannot get away again. They let
you in, but you cannot get out; and I was not
mistaken when I thought you would not resist,
the temptation of aiming a gun at a sleeping man.”
“ Mr. Tollmer,” Mulligan said, with a frown,
“ you will please remember that I woke you. It
was in my power to send a bullet through your
brain.”
“ From an empty barrel ?” Tollmer laughed;
“ the caps are only on it to make it look more
natural. But listen to me, Mulligan,” he hastily
continued, as the Bushranger examined the gun.
doubtfully, and seemed disposed to draw the ram-
rod ; “ leave well alone. As far as I know, there-
is no great offence charged against you, except
plundering provisions, which may be looked over,
owing to your necessities. You have not yet
shed blood ; and even if brought in again as a.
Bushranger, matters do not stand so badly with
you. One or two years of strict surveillance
will in all probability be the punishment allotted
you, and I will not make it worse for you by any
remarks of mine.”
Mulligan looked at him and hesitated.
“Am I to give the signal ?” Tollmer asked,
“ so that my men may catch you with the gun
in your hand ?”
“You are right, Mr. Tollmer,” the man said,
awed by the police officer’s calmness; and with
the words he rested the gun against the wall,
while Tollmer thrust his hand into his bosom,
where he had a loaded pistol. Now he felt him-
self safe, for he would be able to draw and fire
it before the Bushranger could catch up the gun
again.
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


“ Ah! now I see you are reasonable,” he said,
■calmly, though without producing the pistol, or
betraying for an instant that he did not feel
perfectly secure; “ but you look pale and
-wretched, Mulligan. Was it worth the trouble
of breaking your prison to lead such a dog’s life
in the bush ?”
“Itis a dog’s life!” the man hissed in a low
voice to himself —“and a dog wouldn’t lead it
any longer. Hunted like a dingo—betrayed by
your comrades—ever only on the watch to secure
your miserable life. I won’t stand it any longer;
take me back to the colony, Mr. Tollmer. I’m
sick of this vagabonding.”
“Now you talk like a sensible man,” Tollmer
replied, rising from his bed. He almost forgot
that he had a sore foot, so eager was he to get
■the gun once more into his possession. What
guarantee had he that the Bushranger would not
‘the next instant repent his submission. “ You
shall be treated properly on the voyage —if you
promise, of course, to behave properly.”
He went close to him, and now stood by his
gun, though -without touching it. If he dis-
played the slightest alarm, he knew that the
man with whom he had now to deal would
•quickly enough employ his advantage. Besides,
he could not stand firmly on his foot, and would,
"therefore, have been immediately beaten in a
struggle. Not a sound was to be heard outside;
•his men were probably still miles away.
“ Then you have nothing more to say to me ?”
Tollmer now asked, as he lifted his whistle, as if
to give the signal—“ can I call my men, now ?”
“ Nothing more, Mr. Tollmer,” Mulligan said,
almost humbly; “ but you will be my witness
that I did not intend you the slightest hurt.”
“ I give you my word of that,” the policeman
promised him, as he carelessly put out his arm
toward his gun, and took it up. A glance at
the lock assured him that the caps were still on
and ready for use ; so, when he fell back a couple
of paces from the fugitive, and pointed the gun
at him, a hundredweight of apprehension seemed
to have rolled off his head. He drew a deep
breath, and said, while Mulligan gazed at him in
amazement —
“ And now, mate, just be so good as to go
into that corner of the house—■ over there, I
mean —a little away from the door.”
The Bushranger hesitated—a notion that he
had allowed himself to be cheated rose in his
mind.
“Go into that corner, John,” Tollmer said,
sternly—“ I should not like to do you a hurt,
but I must if you make the slightest attempt at
flight or resistance.”
“ Devil!” the Bushranger hissed between his
teeth —“then that wasn’t true you first told me P”
“ Not a word of it, John,” Tollmer laughed,
as he raised his piece; “ but I’ll keep the promise
I made you. What I can say in your favour, I
will.”
“ And your men ?”
“ Are looking for you on the beach, or among
the kangaroo thorns —Lord knows where! —but
they’ll come back here, and till then I must, of
course, mount sentry over you.”
The Bushranger turned away, seated himself
in the comer, and bent his face over his knees in
fury and shame.
Tollmer felt sorry for the poor fellow, and said*
kindly—
“Be of good cheer, John; the matter may
turn out better than you think. If you keep
perfectly quiet till my men come up, and not
offer the slightest resistance, I will pretend that
you surrendered voluntarily to me. And that
will do you no harm with the Governor, as you
know.”
“And you will really do that, Mr. Tollmer P”
Mulligan said, raising his head quickly.
“ I promised it you of my own accord.”
“ Thank you, sir,” the man said, sincerely ;
“ mortal strength could not have held out any
longer. For two days, nothing has passed my
lips save a draught of water ; and with a bullet
in my shoulder I had to push my way through
the thorns all day yesterday. Prison itself is a
comfort, when compared to such a life.”
“ But why did you not give yourself up long
ago ?”
“ Liberty!” the poor fellow groaned—“ liberty!
You, who have never sat behind bars, nor heard
the sound, when the bolt is made fast behind
you, do not know what it is to be a free man.”
With these words, he sank back in his former
position, and Tollmer, who now felt tolerably
secure that for the present his prisoner would
make no attempt at flight, walked to the bedstead,
took the bread and meat lying on it, and offered
them to Mulligan.
At first he could not touch them; but he could
not see them lying by him for long. His
powerful body, now utterly exhausted, demanded
support, and so soon as he had swallowed the
first mouthful, he devoured the rest greedily.
For a full hour Tollmer had to wait, until his
men returned from their naturally fruitless search.
Morris was no little surprised to find John Mul-
ligan in Tollmer’s company, and the most im-
probable thing of all to them was that the Bush-
ranger had voluntarily surrendered. Tollmer,
however, declared it in Mulligan’s presence, and
so soon as the prisoner’s wound had been attended
to, and a horse fetched for himself from the
nearest station, as he was still unable to walk —
the small procession started.
Just opposite the place where the schooner
lay at anchor, Tollmer got off his horse. They
had given the signal that the boat should come
ashore to fetch them, and Tollmer proceeded to
fire the two old charges in his barrels, before
loading again. He walked toward a thick-
stemmed gum Mulligan, guarded by four
policemen, stood near him—took careful aim.
9
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


and fired. Clap!—the right-hand barrel missed
fire. Clap!—so did the left.
Tollmer turned slowly round to John Mulli-
gan, and their eyes met, but neither uttered a
word. The police-sergeant quietly put on fresh
caps, turned once more to the tree, arid fired both
barrels in rapid succession, so that the slugs
ratthd again against the wood.
An hour later, the schooner had all her pas-
sengers aboard —the anchor was lifted, and the
littie vessel sailed, with a favouring breeze, for
the Australian continent.
CHAPTER 111.
THE ESCAPE.
In Hyadock Yalley, to the north of Adelaide, a
gang of convicts were working in chains.
Among the prisoners was one, distinguished
from the rest not only by his cleaner clothing,
but also by his entire conduct.
He was a powerfully built and broad-
shouldered fellow, who had not given way
to excesses like the rest, and though the stamp
of sin might be on his brow, it was not ac-
companied by that of coarseness. In his whole
manner there was something that excited an
interest in him, for it almost seemed as if he did
not belong to the sad company among whom he
now found himself.
But even this slight difference appeared an
insult to the mass, who would not suffer one
of themselves to lift himself from the general
wallow. John Mulligan, whose punishment had
been so loosened by Tollmer’s intercession,
that he was only attached to this gang for a
year, was therefoi’e very soon called nothing
but the “ gentleman,” or else “ Gentleman
John,” and he had attracted on himself the
hatred of many of the prisoners, because he
would not join in an attempted flight, decided on
in spite of all the risk.
He had ceitainly, at that time, proved to his
comrades that they could not escape in that
way, and would only render their position
worse, without effecting anything. For that
they called him a cowardly dog, who had not
the courage to venture anything for his libeity,
and found that very night that “Gentleman
John ” had been perfectly in the light.
Their plan was mainly frustrated before they
had really began its execution. Three fell under
the fire of the guards. Two others were dan-
gerously wounded; and these two, with a sixth
mixed up in the affair, hung a fortnight later —
to encourage the rest.
Thus, another month slipped away, and John
Mulligan, who rarely had any traffic with his
comrades, because he knew none of them, worked
harder than ever: behaved respectfully to the
watchman, and was, in a word, the model of a
convict, being constantly held up to the others
as an example —but, could they have seen his
heart and read the thoughts burning day and
in his brain, which drove him almost to
distraction !
Only one of his comrades appeared on friendly
terms with John, and that was an Irishman,
whose fiery head had gained for him the nick-
name of Red-head. I may remark thdt scarcely
one of the prisoners was known by his right
name, for the incessant Jacks and Johns and
Jims would have led to utter confusion.
Read-head ate out of the same pannikin with
John; and though, owing to his foul tongue, he
had hitherto been constantly writhing under the
overseer’s lash, a remarkable improvement had
taken place in him since he had grown on more
friendly terms with Mulligan.
Naturally the authorities ascribed this change
solely to the beneficial influence John exercised
over him, and the latter rose higher in their
respect.
This went on for a while, till the head
overseer, under whom they had been, was
removed to another post. In his place came a
Scotchman, who, coming from another gang,
brought with him the conviction that every
' word was lost on chain ganger's, and it was the
best to talk with them only through the lash.
John Mulligan, or Gentleman John, as he was
generally called, was working this day with
Red-head upon a powerful stringy bark-tree,
which stood in the centre of the pathway, and
therefore had to be removed. Six or eight of
their comrades were at work a little below with
crowbars in removing a gigantic block of stone,
which they could have blown up in half the time
with gunpowder.
Around them stood the police with loaded
guns; and the new overseer, with a whip of un-
tanned leather in his hand instead of a walking
stick, walked from group to group, and by his
mere presence forced them to unwonted exertions.
At this moment he was standing over those
at the stone, though still turning his eyes in
every direction.
“ I say, John, I can’t stand it any longer. I
have listened to you till now, and pretended to be
submissive, and you promised every day that we
should make a bolt of it. I have waited for you,
but now it’s all up, for with this new cove as
overseer and flogger, I’m blowed if I stand it any
longei’. They may hang or shoot me, if matters
turn out queer, but to be hanged and shot every
day, is more than human nature can endme.”
“ Have you rubbed a sore under your leg ring,
as I said to you yesterday ?” John asked, cau-
tiously.
“ I did so, bet what good will that do ?” was
the hasty reply. “If you fancy they’ll feel any
compassion for a fellow, you are foolishly mis-
taken.”
10
LIFE IN THE HUSH


“So soon as wo have felled this tree,” John
■continued, calmly, for the ovei'seer was now
walking in their dii'ection, “ we shall be sent up
to the crest of the hill. Then do you limp and
groan, and pretend to be in great pain: then,
leave the rest to me. I will manage so that
your ring shall be taken off.”
“ But your’s ?” Red-head asked, in surprise,
<l ar’nt you coming with me ?”
“ It’s a dog’s life in the bush,” John muttered
to himself, “ and unhappily I know it too well
already. But after all, it’s liberty; and this time
they shan’t humbug me as they did befoi’e, like
the ass I was, and deserved my punishment.”
“ Then you’ll go with me ?”
“My ring is filed through,” John hurriedly
replied; “ the slightest blow with a stone upon it,
and I’m free.”
“ But the muskets ?”
“ We must guard ourselves against those—
hut now be quiet, here’s our overseer!” and
with powerful blows he drove the axe into the
soft roots of the gum tree, so that it trembled to
the top.
“ You’re humbugging about for an age with
that pole,” the overseer said, as he walked up to
them. “ Two strong fellows to dawdle over that
twig a whole morning. I fancy I was wanting
■with nxy ‘leather axe,’ to help you a little. Well,
are you going to be all day at it ?”
“Ay, ay, sir,” John said, humbly, striking
Into the roots with all his strength. Red-head
helped him to the best of his ability, and before
long the summit of the tree bent over, first
slowly, then more and more rapidly, till it fell to
the ground with a terrible crash, breaking off all
«its branches.
“ Good; and now get the wood out of the way
as quick as quick as you can,” the overseer
■ordered; “ first cut away the branches, and I’ll
send up a couple of fellows from below to saw it
■through. After that you can roll it out of the
way: by dinner time there must not be a trace
of it left.”
“ Ay, ay, sir,” was the only reply of the two
men, as a sign that the order had been heax-d
and would be obeyed ; and the overseer stood by
them, swinging his whip as if sorry that the two
men did not give him the slightest excuse for
punishing them —but he found nothing to com-
plain about, and was obliged at last to go to
another gang, who might perhaps have been less
-industrious.
Red-head cast a savage glance at him as he
left them, and muttered:
“ That such a spider of a man dare thrash
such fellows as we are ! John, I would give the
little finger of my right hand to dash in that
thief’s brains, before we started.”
“It would cost you your neck,” John re-
marked drily.
“ But that is gone so soon as we make the
■attempt and are caught,” Red-head replied de-
fiantly, “ but what’s the odd’s—we shall be
hanged once, sooner or later, and till then we
will enjoy life.”
“In the bush ?” John asked, shaking his
head.
“Bah, mate,” the other said, with a grin,
“ you’re always thinking of your blessed Kan-
garoo Island, where you suffered hunger and
want, because you set about matters badly. Just
you see if I don’t take you to a place where we
can lead a jolly life.”
“In the bush?” John repeated, still incre-
dulous.
“ Yes, in the bush,” the Irishman said, con-
fidently ; “ but, of course, we daxo not live in a
brick hut like the settlers, and only walk out
when we’re starving. But if we find the tribe
of blacks with whom I’m on friendly terms,
then you’ll see if I have told you any lies.”
“ Do they live anywhere near here ?”
“We are not ten miles from their hunting
ground, and once there, are out of all danger.
So now get ready for these confounded irons to
be taken off our legs, or I’ll risk it alone.”
After dinner the column was again formed,
and marched out to work guarded by soldiers.
Red-head limped considerably, and leant on
Mulligan’s arm, who supported him.
John, too, did not seem very firm on his feet,
and had thrust a couple of cotton rags into his
left iron, one of which displayed traces of blood.
Red-head had fastened up his leg entirely, and
moved forward with great difficulty in keeping
time.
As John had known beforehand, they were
sent this afternoon to the crest of the hill, to
break out suitable stones to make a road. The
crest hung rather steeply over the side where
the road ran, and the loosened stones rolled down
of themselves into the vale. On the other side,
a less precipitous slope led down to the bush.
On the crest itself, among the labourers, stood
the guai’ds with their loaded muskets, and if the
convicts attempted any flight, impeded as they
were with chains, they must be shot.
“What’s the matter with you, again?” the
chief overseer said, as he walked up to Red-head
—“ what’s up with your leg ?”
“ I can’t go any further, sir,” the man groaned.
“ I have dragged myself up here, but I can’t
stand it any longer; my leg is inflamed and
swollen: it is pricking me like knives. If you
would have the chain removed to the other leg,
perhaps I could work then; but if not, I shall
not be able even to walk down again.”
“ There’s always something the matter with
you villains,” the overseer growled. “You
couldn’t open your mouth when were down
there, and the surgeon could have looked at it.”
“ It’s nothing, your honour—only the chain
px-essing an old sore,” John said, respectfully;
“if you would permit me, I would soon have
him on his feet a^aiu.”
11
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


“ How so ?”
“ Just move his chain, as he asks, on to the
other leg—that will help, at any rate, till the
sore is cured. There are soldiers enough here to
fasten it on.”
“ Hang me,” the overseer said, “if I don’t
believe the fellow’s shirking work, and shamming
lameness. But that won’t help you much with
me,” and with these words he gave him a couple
of savage blows. Red-head writhed beneath the
lash, and tried to obey the order, by attempting
to get up ; but it was of no use. He could not
stand on his feet, but broke down again, falling
against a tree, which cut his forehead open.
“If your honour will allow me,” John said,
in his old tone —“ I would carry him down the
hill again. My leg is sore, too; but one of the
soldiers will, perhaps, help me; the poor fellow
will never be able to manage it else.”
“ I will see what’s the matter with his leg,”
the overseer said, suspiciously, although the last
fall had almost persuaded him of Red-head’s
sincerity. “We can’t put any faith in you
scoundrels, for you cheat and take us in in every
way. There, lie down, Scarlet —do you hear ?
or shall I make you active P”
Red-head crawled to the spot indicated, and
the overseer produced his key, signed to two of
the soldiers to draw nearer, and then bent down
to examine the prisoner’s hurt.
John was remarkably busy in supporting him,
and arranged a block of stone, on which the
overseer sat down comfortably. Then, lifting
Red-head’s leg, he thrust his own under it to
keep it up, and supported himself with his right
on the ground.
The official cautiously unfastened the padlock,
and the prisoner groaned and whined the while;
but, all this time, John Mulligan, in deadly ap-
prehension, was pressing below the broad iron
ring which surrounded his own ancle. Secretly
in the night, for many and many a month, he
had filed at the ring with a piece of a file he had
managed to procure—often only a couple of rasps
during the night, through fear of alarming the
sentries. He had at length rendered it so thin
that he fancied it must yield to the slightest
pressure; he was now afraid to work at it more,
lest the chain might fall off his leg before the
right moment arrived. Now, then, at the de-
cisive moment, while pretending to support his
mate with one arm, his other hand was pressing
against the filed ring, so that the blood threatened
to burst from under his finger nails, but it was
of no use.
“ Here —look out, and hold him tight,” the
•overseer said, as he removed the padlock and let
the chain fall off the prisoner’s leg. “Well,
where’s this terrible wound ? but, stop, mate —
suppose we put the ring on the other leg first,
and then we can examine this one at our ease.”
“It’s of no consequence, sir,” John said —“he
.won’t run away.”
“ You’ll be good enough to give your opinion
when asked for it; let that leg go, and lift up
the other. But, what’s the matter with you—
your face is as red as a lobster—up with the leg.”
“Ay, ay, sir!” John said, and desperation
lent him a giant’s strength. One moment more,
and their plan would be foiled—perhaps for ever
—but, as he now pressed against the ring, it bent
beneath his efforts.
“ Come, look sharp!” the overseer shouted.
“A moment, sir—my chain has caught in
something down here, but I’ll loosen it in a
second.”
He let Red-head’s wounded leg drop, and while
seizing his chain with the other hand, the broad
ring snapped beneath his powerful grasp like
glass. For a second he had twisted it back,
though the sharp edges lacerated his fingers,
and the overseer, who could not help noticing
this sudden movement, cried in surprise—
“ Halloa! what are you up to, my lad?”
“ I am curing my leg, sir,” John said, laugh-
ingly, while Red-head sprang up with lightning
speed.
“ Is it time ?” the latter asked.
“ Seize him !” was the sole reply, and at the
same time the terrified overseer shouted for help.
And he had reason to do so, for there were not
four stronger arms in the colony than those
which now held him and lifted him on their
backs. Red-head seized him round the body,
John by the knees; and whilst, according to their
arrangement, they held the little fellow behind
them, as a protection against bullets, they sprang
with wild leaps down the hill side, and straight
for the nearest thicket.
“Help! help!” the overseer yelled, but the
soldiers dared not leave their posts, as they did
not know whether there might not be a general
design of escape among the prisoners. They
cocked their guns, however, and with their old
habit, tossed them to their shoulders—but they
dared not fire, as the bullets must pass through
the body of their superior officer.
“ Help ! help !” the cry was again heard from
below, and the overseer had been attempting
in vain to draw one of his pistols from the breast
pocket of his coat. But Red-head would not
suffer this; he pressed his arms together as in a
vice, and when the bushes lashed his face, he
was utterly unable to defend himself.
The next moment, however, a heavy bough
tore him from the grasp of the two convicts,
while the fall drew a shriek of pain from him.
“ He can lie here,” Red-head said,.laughingly,
“ for we can’t drag him any further through the
scrub; but we must trouble him for his pistols.”
“ Not forgetting the powder-flask and bullets,”
John added.
“ Quick, then! for the scoundrels are at our
heels!”
“ They are of no use in the bush; here, with
the weapons, you skunk!”
12
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


“Mercy! mercy!’’ the official implored, on
his knees, and in mortal fear.
“ That’s the. mercy you deserve!” Red-head
shouted, and striking at him with his concen-
trated strength and fury, he stretched him life-
less on the dry leaves. In a second they tore off
his coat, took his watch from his pocket, and
then, on hearing their pursuers breaking through
the bushes, they fled into the densest part of the
forest.
A band of mounted police, hastily summoned,
searched the forest in every direction that night
and the following days; but though large re-
wards were offered by Government, and soldiers
and police were engaged for months in trying to
capture the two daring convicts, it was all of no
avail. Gentleman John and Red-head had dis-
appeared, and only recalled themselves to the
memory of the public when a couple of bold and
impudent robberies brought their names afresh
to the lips of the bush denizens and travellers.
CHAPTER IY.
GENTLEMAN JOHN.
It was in April that, on a somewnat rainy and
unpleasant day, the royal mail, from Melbourne
to Adelaide, more than usually loaded with
passengers, rolled along the rain-softened road;
while the grumbling passengers, wrapped in their
cloaks, and bespattered by the clumsy vehicle,
again began to pluck up a spirit, on reaching one
of the sparse stations, at which half an hour’s rest
was granted them to swallow a hurried dinner.
The travellers were all of the male sex, as
ladies only employed this rough mode of loco-
motion when absolutely compelled, and then but
for short stages. As the population in Australia
is strangely mingled, thus eveiy stratum of
colonial society appeared represented in this
party. A highly respectable gentleman, dressed
all in black, with a heavy gold chain, white
linen, and kid gloves, who did not seem to har-
monise with the company, represented the
colonial merchant. It was a Mr. Warrell,
from Melbourne, proceeding by mail to Adelaide,
in order to sell a cargo of goods he had sent to
that city shortly before from Melbourne by
sailing vessel.
The second most important personage was a
squatter from the Adelaide district, with a
huge beard, a cabbage-palm hat, coat, trowsers
and waistcoat of English leather-stuff, heavy
bush shoes, and a red silk neck- handkerchief,
which, fastened beneath ■ his snow-white collar,
left his sun-burnt neck quite bare.
But, quite contrary to the other passengers,
this gentleman seemed to despise the thought of
surrendering to any robber who might be lurking
about. In the broad girdle, fastened round his
waist, was a short, heavy bush knife, and a pair
of handsomely inlaid pistols, while, in addition to
them, he carried an English double-barrel gun,
loaded, as he said, with slugs, which he held
between his legs during the journey, ready for
use at any moment.
He was seated on the front seatand the third
passenger, who was squeezed in between him and
the driver, was a thin, pale little man, also an
Englishman, but at any rate a Jew ; who, though
dressed in very shabby clothes and an old hat,
had hitherto, in spite of his apparent poverty,
evidenced the greatest alarm about attack, and
constantly regarded his well-armed neighbour
with distrustful glances.
The mail had only two seats —the one that on
which the coachman sat —and the passengers by
his side had a view over the horses’ heads.
On the second bench, close behind this one,
and poorly covered with leather, the pas-
sengers sat with their backs to the horses, and
the low iron railing attached to it seemed as
much for their protection as comfort, as they
clutched hold of it when the vehicle ascended a
steep hill. If they neglected this, they were
mercilessly tilted out behind.
The third place next to him, and back to back
with the squatter, was occupied by a cross be-
tween a settler and a workman. He was a power-
fully built man, with sun-burnt face, far from
ugly features, and something impudent and droll
in his manner. He had got up at Wannibat, and
had, up to the present, been the only passenger
who introduced any life into the drooping con-
versation by his humour, in spite of weather and
the wretched vehicle, although even he had en-
dured the last shower with considerable impa-
tience. But now, in the dry, with a bottle of*
sherry on one side, and a pint of porter on the
other, he quickly thawed again, and he succeeded
in getting up a rather animated conversation
with his silent companions.
One reason for it was before all presented by
the little timid Jew, who at every halting place
had collected more and more horrible stories
about the Bushrangers. Here, too, his first bu-
siness had been to apply for information to a
species of ostler, who was unharnessing the
newly arrived horses, to allow them, for mutual
convenience, to go and seek their food in the
bush.
This fellow, however, a cunning Paddy, and a
convict to boot, let loose on a ticket-of-leave,
soon saw with what man he had to deal with,
and soon served up a couple of such horrible
murders, that Mr. Moses rushed with pale face
into the passengers’ room, to tell his fearful news
as quickly as possible to the rest.
“All falsehoods, Mr. Moses, nothing but false-
hoods,” Mr. Warrell responded, with great cool-
ness. “ Whom did you allow to cram you with
such stuff?”
“ Who?” the little man replied, in great ini-
13
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


tation, “ why, the fellow who looks after the
horses.”
“ What, Tom the Irishman!” the lady of the
house said, who was just about carving a prime
round of beef. “ Why, my good sir, you mus’nt
ask him about such things, for when he sees any
one who is afraid of the Bushrangers, he tells
them the most frightful stories he can furbish
U P”
I “ Who says afraid?” Mr. Moses said, shaking
his head—“who told him that Moses was afraid ?
Afraid of what? My clothes are old and bad
enough, and they can make no use of my skin.
I have no more about me than fourteen shillings
in cash for my travelling expenses.”
“ Well, it would not be a matter of such in-
difference to me,” the squatter muttered, in his
beard, being very busily engaged with a tempt-
ing slice of beef, “for I should’nt like to fall
into the vagabonds’ hands this time. But, hang
me, before they get my money, they shall first
make acquaintance with my powder and lead,
and I think I have enough of those about me to
spoil their appetite.”
“ You are certainly not a man for the Bush-
rangers, my dear sir,” the passenger from Wan-
nibat, who called himself Mr. Bush, said with a
.laugh, “ for as you are steel and iron from head
to foot, the poor devils will get more kicks than
halfpence from you: but our friend in black, to
whom I should feel greatly obliged if he would
pass the sherry, seems more kindly disposed to
them, for he has enough gold about him to make
their mouths water again.”
“May God help me, if it isn’t true,” Mr. Moses
agreed, with a rather awkward confusion of
anguage; “ I know a better place to show off
gold chains and watches, than the bush-road
between Adelaide and Melbourne.”
The merchant laughed, and ate on quietly for
a time; but at last he said, still smiling:
“ I am glad that you take me to be so green
as to wish to make a show here with such gew-
gaws. But, if we are really surprised by the
Bushrangers, I wish them joy of the lot with all
my heart. In money I have only a couple of
pounds about me, and if they rob me of that and
my watch and chain, they will be delighted, and
perhaps thank me in the bargain.”
“ A silver chain would do the same service,”
the Israelite expressed his opinion, “Why throw
good gold in such rogues’ faces ?”
“ Gold!” the merchant laughed with a cun-
ning glance across the table at Mr. Bush—“the
watch and chain cost me just ten shillings in
Melbourne—the case is pinchbeck, and the
works not worth sixpence.”
“ Ha, ha, ha!” laughed Mr. Bush; “ that is
famous, and the plan first-rate. When the
Bushrangers have taken watch and purse from a
gentleman, they search him no further.”
“ And if they searched me,” Warrell said —“ I
have nothing more about me. But supposing
I reach Adelaide cleaned out, old Warrell’s
handwriting is know well enough at the hank to
procure me credit.”
“Mr. Warrell, really!” This he said bowing
to him respectfully. “Ah, I can believe that
you need not be an hour without money either
in Adelaide or Melbourne; but our friend Moses
here must hide his capital more cautiously.”
“ I ?” said the little man, much startled, and
let his knife and fork fall on his plate. “ God
the righteous ! where shall I have hidden mo-
nish ? In my pockets, perhaps, or in my
cracked boots ? God help me, if I know how to
pay my living in Adelaide for a week, as the
hotels are so terribly dear.”
“ Well, well,” Bush said, with a laugh—“it’s
all the same to me, and I need not trouble my-
self about it. Besides, we shall have nothing
to fear, for my well-armed neighbour here will
keep the rogues at a respectful distance. I hope
your pistols are loaded, and not quakers, like
Mr. Warrell’s watch and chain?”
“Oh, they’re loaded,” the squatter replied,
still all attention to the roast beef—“ and I’ll be
hanged if I don’t put them to a proper use.
Have you no weapons about you ?”
“I ? of course I have,” Bush replied. “I do
not share the opinion of gentlemen who volun-
tarily surrender to the Bushrangers. You may
have to do here and there with a good-tempered
fellow ; but it is a painful feeling to know your
life’s at the mercy of such men. So long as I
can defend my own skin, I do not see why
I should not at least make the attempt.”
“ Then you’re the man for me,” the squatter
said, clapping him on the back.
“Bah!” Mr. Warrell said, “the whole story
about Bushrangers is only the idle gossip of pas-
sengers who, on reaching their destination in
safety, cannot refrain from boasting about some
terrific adventure they have gone through. In
this country we have no tigers or other wild
beasts, and so the Bushrangers have to supply
the materials for the tale. I’ll wager £lOO that
we do not see a single one daring the whole
journey.”
“Done!” Mr. Bush suddenly said; “I’ll
take your bet, sir, and it will be a good bargain
for me at any rate.”
“ Even if you lose ?” Mr. Warrell remarked.
“ Then most,” the young man replied laugh”
ingly. “ I have just sold a flock of 15,000
sheep, and have the price about me in notes and
bills, and will gladly pay £lOO to carry the rest
in safety to Adelaide; but if lam robbed of it,
your hundred pounds will be a good start
for me.”
At this moment the driver, who had been
eating his dinner the while in the kitchen, ap-
peared at this moment in the doorway to inform
the passengers that time was up, and the
“ Koyal Mail” ready to start again.
The mail cart had not jolted any great dis«
14
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


tance through the forest, ere the driver saw two
heavy branches of a gum, one lying in the road
just before him, which must be removed before
he could pass. Not far off, beneath a tree, sate
a foot passenger, one of the men known as
bundlers, eating his breakfast very tranquilly in
the open air, and hardly deigning to look at the
post cart stopping go near him.
“ Holloa, mate!” the driver shouted to him,
so soon as he noticed him, “ would you have
any objection to get up for a moment and move
that bothering wood out of the way ? I cannot
let my reins loose here.”
“Well,” the fellow said, without putting
himself out of the way to any great extent —
“ all your passengers could surely hold the rib-
bons, or are they fastened on so that they
mayn’t be shaken off? Well, all right; the next
time I drive, perhaps you’ll move the wood out
of my way;” and laying his breakfast by his
side, he slowly rose and walked towards the
nearest branch, which had checked the foaming
horses.
“By jingo, mate, the wood is heavy,” he
cried, as he attempted in vain to lift one of the
branches. “ I suppose your horses don’t bite?”
“ Oh, no ! but let ’em alone. Holloa, mate!
you’re driving me into the bush. Plague take
you, you will upset the cart.”
“ All right!” the bundler said, who had now
taken the near horse by the bridle, and turned
it sideways into the bush. “It will be all right
directly, mate, there are a couple of pals who
can help me.”
“ Holloa, Bush!” the squatter said, noticing
several ragged and threatening forms emerging
right and left from the bush, and raising his
gun —“ we shall now have some work—you take
those on the right, and I the left.”
“ Cautiously, mate,” Mr. Bush said, who had
drawn a double-barrelled pistol from his pocket
at the moment the bundler walked up to the
horses. He now seized the squatter’s shoulder
with his left hand and pressed it —“ I’ve got
something to say to you.”
“ There they come, by George; hang it, mate,
you’re hurting my shoulder. What’s up —be—
what’s ”
“Silence! not a word!” Mr. Bush now said,
quietly, and the squatter saw to his horror his
comrade’s loaded pistol with the mouth of it
close to his own ear—“ the slightest move to
jour weapons, and I’ll send an ounce of lead
through your brains: you others keep quiet and
no harm shall happen to you —if any one resists
he must take the consequences on himself.”
From all sides wild-looking fellows now
sprang forward, the majority holding their guns
in their hands, from behind bushes and trees,
behind which they had hidden, while the
bundler, without troubling himself about the
passengers, cut the traces, and thus rendered
flight impossible.
“ Gentlemen,” the so-called Mr. Bush—who
was no other than Gentleman John—said at.
this moment, without altering his threatening
posture in the slightest—“ I must request you
to come down from the cart singly and quietly.
You have no fear for your lives; but any one
who resists is a dead man. Mr.Warrell, will you
have the kindness to lead the way?”
“ With pleasure,” the worthy old gentleman
said, thinking with some confusion of the self-
revealed secret of the watch and chain, as he
descended from the cart. He at once found
himself in charge of a Bushranger, who stood by
his side with a cocked gun.
“ And now it’s your turn, mate, with the sor-
rowful face and patched coat. Down with you —
don’t you hear?”
“ Ah, most gracious Bushranger,” the poor
devil uttered, as he glided like a snake between
the coachman and the squatter, over the back
of the seat, and slipped down —“ I have nothing
but my poor wretched life, and if you would be
so merciful to me, and ”
“ Stop the fellow’s mouth, Bob, if he won’t
be quiet of himself,” Gentleman John gravely
said from the mail cart; and Mr. Moses hardly
saw the fearful musket aimed at him, than he
fell on his knees whining and beseeching, and
not a sound passed his lips.
“ Now then, two of you here!” The leader
now ordered his men to approach the cart,
where he still stood on guard over the armed
squatter. “ Just take this gentleman’s weapons
and put them in a safe place. Let it he, friend,
as you can’t prevent it, and the slightest resist-
ance —stay —do not take so much trouble —mind,
Ked-head, if you are obliged to fire at the gen-
tleman, to step a little on one side, that I may
not receive part of the charge. Take away the
gun and also the pistols—unfasten his belt with
the knife in it—by Jove! what a splendid
weapon —I shall keep it in remembrance of you.
All right, my much-esteemed friend; and now,
mates, just bind his hands behind his back, that
we have no trouble with him for the present.”
“What more do you want of me?” the
squatter asked furiously; “ I have given up all
my weapons.”
“ Gently, comrade, gently—you will soon find
out,” Gentleman John said, with a friendly
nod —“ we must make you safe first of all. The
other gentlemen are wise enough to yield to our
wishes without any trouble.”
The squatter, threatened by the guns pointed
at him from all sides, was obliged to como
down from the cart, when several of the band
removed him, and fastened his elbows on his
back; and Bill, the coachman, was also ordered
to leave his box.
Gentleman John, thus having all the pas-
sengers under sure guard, began inspecting or
rather plundering the surprised men, com-
mencing with the squatter, from whom he took
15
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


a well-filled pocket-book and purse, without
troubling himself as to the contents.
Mr. Moses’s turn came next,who,with whining
assurances, declared by all that was good and
great that he was the poorest man under the
sun, and readily turned out his pockets, from
which a few shillings and some copper money
fell to the ground.
“ That is really very little,” his former tra-
velling companion said, shrugging his shoulders
sympathizingly—“ but the man who so readily
gives up all he possesses, deserves reward for it.
Here, Bedhead, first pull off the coachman’s
shoes and stockings, and trousers —he shall ex-
change with Mr. Moses.”
“ God the righteous protect me from robbing
the poor man of his warm clothes 1” Moses
cried, turning pale with terror —“I am quite
satisfied with what I have.”
“ No, no,” Gentleman John said, pleasantly—
“we know better what is proper. Hey, there!
just help him with his toilet. Hang it, boys, be
civil and attend to your guest’s wants.”
Moses tried to resist still, but it was all of no
use. A couple of the Bushrangers ran up to
him, and while one held him, the other pulled
off' his shoes and stockings, from the latter of
which various small bundles of bank notes
rapidly made their appearance.
“ And now, my dear Mr. Warrell,” the daring
Bushranger said, as he turned to the merchant,
who was awaiting his turn with perfect coolness
—“ we have a small matter to settle, which, I
trust, will turn out to our mutual satisfaction,”
“ You wish —?” the latter said politely, as
with a scarcely perceptible smile on his lips, he
proceeded to take his watch from his pocket.
“ Oh, pray, do not take that trouble,” Gen-
tleman John laughed, as he stretched out his
hand to him deprecatingly—“ I know the value
of your ornaments too well, to wish to rob you
cf them. The small sum of money you have
about you you will require for the continuation
of your journey. In return for that, however,
permit me to offer for your acceptance a bill of
five hundred pounds : it will be my care that it
reaches its destination before you can send
orders to stop payment.”
Mr. Warrell bit his lips; but he saw that he
was compelled to obey, and drily replied—
“ I have only to thank you for not requesting
as many thousands, and I am delighted at get-
ting off' so cheaply. Probably you have a stamp
about you ?”
“At any rate, we shall find a blank one in
your pocket-book,” Gentlemen John said, much
too experienced in such matters to make any
mistake; “ and in the same place, I fancy, your
signature for comparison. May I ask you for
it, then ?”
“ My pocket-book P”
“ Don’t fear that I shall rob you of your
papers,” the robber said—“ they would not
possess the slightest value to me, unless, indeed*
there were any bank notes ■”
“ Convince yourself,” the merchant answered,
handing the book to the Bushranger. He turned
the pocket over hurriedly, and, iinding no money
in it, merely took out a blank draft. From
his own pocket he then produced an ink-bottle
and a pen, employed the coachman’s hat very
unceremoniously as a table, and filled up the
draft in a hold and practised hand.
“ That’s it,” he then said, handing the pen to
Mr. Warrell, and pushing the hat towards him
—“ I should feel obliged by your signature.”
The merchant took the pen; but, as he cast a
hasty glance over the document, he looked up at
the Bushranger, and said —
“ You asked for five hundred, but you have
drawn for six.”
“ I fancied,” Gentleman John quietly re-
marked, “ that it would be most convenient for
you to pay your lost bet in that shape.”
“ Oh, yes,” Mr. Warrell said, laughingly—
“ you are right; I forgot all about that. Hoes
that satisfy you ?”
John took the draft, whqse signature he care-
fully examined and compared with one he found
in the pocket-book. Then he folded up the paper,
and said, as he pocketed it —
“I thank you, Mr. Warrell, and hope that
we shall do even a better trade together some
day or other.”
“ Well, I don’t know exactly when I ought to
join in that hope,” the merchant said: “ but
may we now continue our journey ? I do not
think that there is anything ”
“ Just one moment,” Gentleman John inter-
rupted him —“till I have examined the mail-
bags. Give me the key of the boot, Bill—but,
stay! it must be in the clothes Mr. Moses is
wealing. Might I ask you for it, my esteemed
friend?”
The key, however, was not found so quickly
as the Bushranger wished, and the hoot was
therefore broken open, the mail-hag cut, and
Gentleman John was busily engaged for nearly
an hour in breaking the seals of the various
letters and packages, and looking for money.
The harvest was unexpectedly prolific. When
Gentleman John had obtained all he wanted, he
thrust the letters carelessly back into the cut
bags, hung the squatter’s double-barrel and shot
belt on his shoulder, and said—
“ Now, Bill, I have no objection to your try-
ing to reach the next station as soon as you like.
I am afraid it will not be very pleasant walking
along the wet roads.”
“ But the horses, sir P”
“ I am very sorry, mate, but I want them
myself,” was the reply. “ I can’t afford to make
you a present of such an excellent pair. You
must reach the station as well as you can.”
“ Must we walk?” Mr. Warrell said, in alarm.
“ I am really quite vexed to cause you such
16
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


for the short distance,” John said—
“ but it can’t be helped. You will probably have
to wait, too, longer than usual at the next stage,
as I want the horses there for my men. So, good
bye, gentlemen. My friend here, the squatter,
will have the kindness to accompany us, and
carry our luggage. Not a word of refusal, sir;
it will be a warning to you the next time not
to provide yourself with unnecessary and dan-
gerous firearms.”
A few minutes later, all had disappeared be-
hind the grey gum trees, and Bill remained with
the rest of the passengers in the middle of the
road, near the unhorsed and plundered mail cart.
He certainly discharged some of his fury on
the luckless Mr. Moses, whom, in spite of
Gentleman John’s advice, he forced to restore
him his clothes. Their position was not im-
proved, though, by this, and they at length
found themselves compelled—Bill carrying the
mail hags on his shoulder —to walk to the next
station, a distance of about ten miles.
Here they were compelled to remain a day, in
order to procure horses; and they did not reach
Adelaide till the fourth day, and in a very dilapi-
idated condition.
CHAPTER Y.
THE ATTACK.
This daring robbery of the mail, as well as the
abduction of one of the passengers, who, however,
eventually turned up, torn by the thorns, and
utterly exhausted by his march, produced no
slight sensation in Adelaide.
The boldness of the robbers had, however,
been too great to he allowed to pass unnoticed.
The whole South Australian police at the moment
available were hence called out to follow up the
Bushrangers, and put a stop to their robberies,
no matter in what way. A reward of one hun-
dred pounds was put upon the head of the leader,
the notorious Gentleman John, and two hundred
pounds in the event of his being brought in
alive.
Mulligan saw that the end was coming. He
must put an end to such a state of things. Be-
sides, he was quite wearied of this wretched fife
—this constant risk—this restless wandering in
the desolate bush, and had already formed the
plan to leave Australia as soon as possible.
At a curve of the Murray river, and high
enough up that the water was not rendered un-
drinkable by the tide, they had for the moment
pitched their tent; and the stores piled up round
them, and protected by strips of bark against
the weather, seemed to indicate a lengthened
stay. But at no great distance off, and con-
cealed in the reeds, was a capital fishing boat,
and the Bushranger had secretly ordered some
of his man to fill several casks with water, and
carry provisions aboard.
The embarkation was to take place the next
morning, and he had hitherto concealed the
reason of his flight from the natives, as they
would probably have opposed it, or betrayed him
in the decisive moment, 'for he would leave them
unprotected to the vengeance of the white men.
As we have already said, the utmost exertions
had been made by the authorities to put a stop
to the robberies of the Bushrangers, and afford
some security to the colonists. The news of
such outrages, if they reached Europe, would
keep back many intended emigrants from en-
trusting their fives and property to a colony
where both were imperilled to such an imminent
degree, and, as it seemed, even the authorities
were powerless to protect them.
The chief command was, therefore, given to
our old acquaintance, Tollmer, who was
thoroughly acquainted not only with the bush,
but also with these bold and dangerous robbers.
He had once already delivered up to the autho-
rities John Mulligan, and had to thank their
carelessness, that he was again obliged to risk his
fife in securing a criminal driven to desperation.
On the evening previous to the attack Toll-
mer reconnoitred the ground, and convinced
himself of the position of the camp and the pre-
sumable strength of the enemy. But if the
enemy had been doubly as strong, Tollmer
knew that they would conquer, for, though
despair is a valiant aid to such a band in action,
the consciousness of their own good cause far
outweighed that. However, he had no knowledge
tof the boat hidden in the reeds, and had
only posted a few sharp-shooters on the other
side of the river, to fire on such of the enemy as
might attempt to reach the opposite bank,
either in a wretched native bark canoe, or by
swimming.
Two volunteers had joined the expedition, and
those old acquaintances of ours. Bill, the driver
of the royal mail, who had bid farewell to that
respectable trap, and hoped to earn his bread
in some other way, and the squatter, who was
a passenger of the plundered mail cart.
Tollmer, in the meanwhile, divided his party
into two troops; one of which he sent on the
flank, while he advanced straight ahead with the
other. He knew very well that the Bushrangers
occupied a very favourable position on the high
bank of the river, and to draw them, or at least
a portion of them, from it, he sent a small de-
tachment of soldiers in advance, with strict
orders to fire a few rounds, and so soon as the
enemy rushed towards them, slowly to retire
behind the shelter of the trees.
Gentleman John, however, was too clever to
fall into this manifest trap, and so, when the
soldiers retired before the well-sustained fire of his
men, his signal recalled the triumphant robbers
behind their breastworks*
17
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


Red-head, one of the few Bushrangers in whom
he thought he could place confidence, had, in the
meantime, attended to the shipping of the most
necessary objects for a long voyage, and em-
ployed several of the blacks not only in carrying
provisions on board, but also in filling various
small ankers with water, as the river lower down
was rendered unfit for drinking owing to the
admixture of salt. By this, however, the natives’
suspicions were aroused: for if the white men
were only anxious to move their boat to a safer
anchorage lower down the stream, they would
not require so much fresh water. If they really
put out to sea, their tribe would run an imminent
risk here of being rubbed out by the enemy.
Although Tollmer knew nothing of this dis-
union in the enemy’s camp, he had surrounded
it so closely and surely, that he hoped everything
from a decisive advance of his whole force.
They could not escape across the river, as they
would be received by his men over there. The
path into the bush was cut off by his constables
and mounted police; and a portion of the latter,
with the regulars, must either annihilate the
robbers, or drive them to the swampy bank of
the Murray, when no choice would be left them
but surrender sooner or later.
Hence, the first party had scarce fallen back
before the sharp fire of the Bushrangers—leaving
three dead on the field of battle —than Tollmer
gave the signal for a general attack, and the
military advanced with more rage at their re-
pulse than due caution on the robbers. They
were the first to reach the scene of action, and
the Bushrangers, who fancied that they had here
the entire force of the enemy before them,
directed their whole deadly fire on the red
uniforms, so easily distinguished and so ill
adapted for bush fighting. Even the men posted
on their right flank fired their muskets in that
direction, and raised a shout of victory, when
they saw what an effect their bullets produced
on the small compact party of soldiers.
But before the robbers were able to reload
their guns, the constables, with Bill and the
squatter, rushed forward with a hearty cheer,
and beating a drum they had borrowed from the
soldiers—without firing a shot —they advanced
to about twenty paces from the baffled Bush-
rangers, at which deadly distance they dis-
charged their firearms, and in a second had
stormed the breastwork which hitherto protected
the robbers.
Gentlemen John had intended the natives to
act at this spot, and attack the assailants on the
Hank with their long spears. But their chief,
Bukkeel, not disposed to let the boat out of sight,
had secretly given his men contrary orders; and
while the alarmed Bushrangers fell back hurriedly
on their main body, the blacks, followed by the
women and children, slipped away to the spot
where the boat floated on the river, only covered
by a few overhanging trees.
Gentleman John saw at a glance the danger
that now threatened him. Red-head, whom ho
had made first lieutenant of the band, had cer-
tainly received instructions in case of this event,
but could he trust him P At this moment a round
of musketry from the boat answered his timid
doubts. The men posted there, obeying orders,
and with the instinct of self-preservation, had
fired at once on the friendly natives; and with a
wild howl of pain and fury, the tribe fell back
before the well directed bullets of their be-
trayers.
The sudden firing in the rear, however,
alarmed the advanced band of Bushrangers, who
had no notion of the order given, and fancied
themselves surrounded. While, therefore, John,,
employing the momentary confusion, rushed in
the direction of the boat, some of his followers, in
utter despair and believing everything lost,
leaped into the stream to swim to the opposite
bank, while others tried to pass the enemy,
and escape into the scrub.
The squatter, as well as Bill, who were en-
gaged in the victorious flank attack, had, in.
the meanwhile, singled out their common foe
among the Bushrangers; and without troubling
themselves about the rest, who were mostly shot
down or taken prisoners by the constables, the
two men rushed after the flying form of the
robber through the heart of the camp.
John knew perfectly well that he had not a:
moment to lose if he "wished to reach the boat.
What did the heartless robber care for the rest ?
in his place they would have acted in the same
way. Now was the very moment, as the enemy
were fully engaged with the fugitives. Hence,
without a glance at the men he commanded, or
troubling himself as to what became of them, he
leaped over the nearest breastwork, behind which
the last of their provisions were piled up.
From that point he could perceive the boat.
Red-head was standing at the stern with the
tiller in his hand, six or seven of his men were
holding oars and poles, to push the boat off into
river, as soon as the order was given, and two
others were busy unloosing a Kght chain which
was bound round a tree on the bank. It was
high time for him to show himself to his men,
for he did not feel quite secure that even Red-
head would wait for him, if, seeing danger to
himself, he once had the boat free from hin-
drances and floating on the river.
He was hardly a hundred paces from it, and
was just going to leap over a gum-tree lying in
his path, when the threatening form of his old
acquaintance, the squatter, rose before him, and,
with pointed gun, shouted “ Stop, you d—d
brute !” At the same moment he heard hurried
footsteps behind him, and, throwing back his
head, recognised Bill, ex-driver of the mail,
rushing alter him with his discharged gUn
clubbed.
“ Surrender, you villain !” the squatter said
18
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


in a thundering voice—“ or by heaven I will
send a charge of lead through your brains.”
“ Fire and be d—d!” the Bushranger yelled
in reply, for here he had only a choice between
death in action or the gallows; and he tried to
hound upon his foe. At this moment the squat-
ter’s finger pressed the trigger, and it would
have been all over with John, had not a friend,
probably the only one he had in the whole wide
world, come to his assistance.
It was Cloko, his black squaw, whom he had
been on the point of leaving to the enemy’s
mercy with all her tribe ; and yet, he knew how
she loved him—how she clung to him with all
that devoted fidelity of which only a woman’s
.heart is capable, even if it beat beneath a darker
skin. But what did he care —he, the outlaw?
he knew and loved himself alone.
Cloko, on the other hand, with no thought
of distrust in her heart against the man to
whom she had given herself, saw, in spite of
the bullets which, from the rifles of the treach-
erous white men, cleared the ranks of her tribe,
and killed friends and brothers at her side, only
the peril of her husband —saw him, who was
her soul, threatened by the enemy ; and with
the short war club in her hand, which she had
taken in self-defence, drove the barrel on one
side at the moment it discharged its deadly con-
tents at him. The second blow following the
first with lightning speed, was aimed at the
white man’s head, and the honest squatter fell
senseless to the ground.
John, who now saw himself menaced by only
.one, and him the least dangerous opponent, felt
fresh hope.
“ Well done, Cloko!” he said, as he cleverly
dodged the blow aimed at him by Bill —“ you
under stand it much better than this humbug.”
At this moment he attacked the less practised
driver, and Bill only felt a couple of heavy
blows the skilled vixen dealt him, ere he fell to
the ground in his turn, as if felled by a sledge
hammer.
Three or four shots were now fired by the
constables, who wore watching the encounter
from a distance, and the bullets crashed into the
trees right and left. But John, unwounded,
mow hurried, closely followed by Cloko, to the
boat, which had just cast off the chain.
“ It was high time for you to come, Johnny,”
Bed-head shouted to him; “ hang it all, we were
just going to push off. On board, I say —on
board, or we shall have the red jackets upon us
before we know it. Is the squaw to come too ?”
John looked, still doubtful, at his wife; hut
■Cloko, without noticing the question, threw
herself into the river, swam to the boat, and
climbed over the side. There was no time to
spare for consideration, and Gentleman John
was obliged to follow her example, if he did not
wish to be left behind. With his pocket-book
between his teeth, he waded into the river, and
had just seized a pole held out to him as the
first of the enemy approached the bank and ran
to stop the boat putting off. But within a few
seconds the leader of the Bushrangers was on
board, and the small party laboured with poles
and oars to reach the middle of the river, which
was at this spot rather broad and -deep.
Attracted by the shouts of the constables, a
small party of the soldiers who had penetrated
into the deserted camp, hurried up, and dis-
charged their muskets at the departing boat.
Two of the Bushrangers were killed, and John
himself received a graze on his shoulder. The
swampy bank, however, prevented any rapid
pursuit; and ere the soldiers had reloaded, the
boat was out of danger.
Still, the fugitive Bushrangers would have
had a hard time of it —for Toilmer led a party
along a path known to him lower down the
river, where it grew narrower, and would be
commanded by their guns —had not a brisk
north-west wind favoured them. After throw-
ing the two corpses overboard without further
ceremony, and thus materially lightening the
small boat, they set their sail, and glided down
the rippled stream much more rapidly than
oars would have moved them.
When the pursuers reached the before-men-
tioned spot, they could recognize the robbers’
glistening sail at the point where the Murray
flows into Victoria sea, through wood swamp,
and further pursuit without boats could not be
thought of.
Bed-head, an old sailor, who had been trans-
ported for attempted piracy, undertook the
steering of the boat, from which he had for
some time been observing the course of the surf.
He soon found that it rushed against the only
outlet with rather tall and dangerous breakers.
Between these, however, and regularly after the
thix-d, there was a slight interval of calm water,
which afforded a possibility of passing through.
The wind was favourable to them, and if they
behaved coolly and skilfully, they might easily
get out.
Without any delay the necessary preparations
were made. With its sharp how, the light boat
glided towards the waves, as if ti’embling at the
appi’oaching danger. Bed-head, however, ma-
naged the boat with great skill: the sail was
lowered so soon as they drew near the surf, and
the backwash now earned them with a hurried
current to the terrible spot. Eetreat was no
longer possible: before them towered the glassy
waves, and shook their white, sun-illumined
manes threateningly at them. The third breaker
almost hung over their heads. All at once it
dissolved like a breath, and the glistening, coil-
ing, whirling foam danced around the boat.
“ Up with the sail!”
In a second it held the wind, and bore the
boat through the foaming whirlpool. The new
wave was already beginning to lift, and under
19
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


the boat’s stern it sprung up in all its majesty.
But a few seconds and it would have engulphed
the boat, hut the backwash helped the robbers
to escape the danger. The exquisitely built boat
rushed towards the open sea, and the saved
men saluted the mighty ocean with noisy shouts
of joy!
CHAPTER YI.
KANGAEOO ISLAND.
July had arrived, ere the last scouting parties
of military and police, who had scattered Gen-
tleman John’s band in the preceding April,
after shooting some and hanging others, re-
turned to Adelaide.
In spite of the energy of their leader, and the
astounding perseverance of his men, they had
not succeeded in getting hold of Gentleman
John —the most dangerous of that band of
ruffians. Even cutters sent out to sea, which
cruized along the coast, and searched for a long
distance from land, could discover nothing of
the boat seen for the last time at the mouth
of the Murray, and there was hardly the least
doubt but that the daring robbers, though
momentarily escaping the arms of avenging
justice, had met their death in the terrific
breakers of Encounter Bay.
One of the police leaders who had been en-
gaged in the expedition did not share in the
views of the others, that Gentleman John had
perished in the waves, and that one was Mr.
Tollmer himself. He had seen the boat; he
knew too the danger of the breakers; but he
also knew that a passage was at times passable,
and gave the daring robber the credit of having
surmounted the difficulties and perils it opposed.
The two hundred pounds reward still offered
was a slighter inducement to him than the
honour of surprising and hedging in the dange-
rous and notorious robber, in spite of all his
attempts to escape; and with indefatigable
zeal, he rode through more than half the Mur-
ray valley and the desert extending to the settled
districts of the adjoining colony, and sailed
along the coasts shelving to the right and left
of Adelaide, in order to discover the possible
trail of the runaways.
It was all of no use —not the slightest trace
of the robbers was to be found; and, as the last
chance, he sailed over to Kangaroo Island, lying
opposite Hindonoff promontory. He was aware
that Gentleman John, on his first debut as a
Bushranger, had thoroughly studied the hiding
places on that island, and if he had not suc-
ceeded in hailing a ship at sea, and leaving
Australia for ever, nothing was more probable
than that he had sought shelter there.
But, without the slightest successful result,
he traversed the entire desert over there, and
crawled through the kangaroo thorns he knew
so well, in the hope of meeting with the robbers.
At the stations he received —the old complaint—
only unsatisfactory or evasive answers. No one
allowed to have seen the Bushrangers or know
anything of them, and he at length found him-
self forced, though he did so unwillingly, to give
up further pursuit. Gentleman John must
have escaped aboard a vessel, and hence they
had wasted their time in looking for him.
At Cape Borda, the north-western extremity
of the island, Mr. Tollmer stayed for the night
at a station formed there by a Mr. Bloome. He
was going to return thence to Adelaide, but was
rendered doubtful Giving to a conversation with
Mr Bloome himself. That gentleman naively
told him of a veiy rich Englishman, with whom
he was going to join shortly in equipping a
schooner and cany on trade with the Australian
Coast and New Zealand. A brother of his, for-
merly mate on board an Indiaman, had recently
proceeded to Sydney to purchase a suitable
vessel, which he expected him back with every
day.
Mr. Tollmer was first staggered by hearing
that the stranger had landed on the island as a
shipwrecked man, having lost his vessel off the
coast; and his suspicions were converted into'
certainty on hearing, during the cautiously-
managed conversation, that a black woman v/as
among the few persons saved with him.
Captain Howitt, as he called him, according
to the squatter’s statement, had gone only the
day before to Cape Marsden, on the north, side
of the island, where he had to complete a bar-
gain for the purchase of sundry merchandize.
Mr. Bloome did not expect him back before the
next week.
Tollmer’s resolve was rapidly formed. That
was, after all, his last hope to catch the fugi-
tive robbers; and though he could do nothing
against them without assistance, he determined
at any rate on seeing him and convincing him-
self whether it were really the criminal he was
in search of, and then returning to Adelaide as
quickly as possible, for the purpose of procuring
assistance.
The next morning Tollmer started at daylight
before breakfast, and walked, as far as feet would
carry him, to the somewhat distant Point Mars-
den. Impeded by thorns, scrub, and roads
rendered soft by rain, it was not till the fourth
morning, at about ten o’clock, that he reached
the fences of the farm, which, as he was told at
the last station, belonged to a Mr. Rodwell,
the same person with whom Captain Howitt was
in the habit of staying.
Tollmer called here, to prepare himself for all
possible events, should he really happen to meet
the Bushranger. He certainly had the advan-
tage, for he knew Gentleman John intimately,
and could recognize him beneath any disguise,
while the robber could not suspect his pursuer-


Still, lie must employ every stratagem to pre-
vent himself being recognized by the runaway
Bushranger, who was up to every trick. At the
slightest suspicion—especially if John had his
accomplices near at hand —he would be a lost
man, or at any rate the criminal would be
warned before he could seize him, while man to
man he had but slight hopes of mastering him,
Tollmer himself, though powerfully built, and
with a body hardened by exercise, was not equal
to the gigantic Mulligan, who was noted for his
strength; and, therefore, stratagem was his only
chance. Before, then, he proceeded to the
house, whose roof he could see at a distance
glinting through the bushes, he seated himself
on a fallen tree-trunk no great distance from
the path, and conned over the most plausible
excuse as an introduction to this Mr. Rodwell.
He had not formed any settled determination,
when he heard voices in the bush, to all appear-
ance coming from the house along the path.
Without a moment’s reflection, he glided be-
hind the huge gum trunk on which he had
been sitting, and perceived, a few minutes later,
a man and a woman slowly walking along the
path. But, ere they came close to him, they
stopped for a while at a small clearing, and con-
versed in a low tone. Tollmer listened with the
closest attention, but was unable to understand
everything, for only a few words and fragmen-
tary sentences reached his ear.
“It cannot be,” the woman said—“ indeed it
cannot be. What will become of the child ?”
Then the man seemed trying to persuade her
to do something; for she looked down on the
ground, and slowly shook her head, as if in
doubt.
She was a young and lovely woman, dressed
in the plain clothes of the Australian squatter’s
wives; she carried her bonnet in her hand, and
her full light curls fell over her white—almost
too pallid—forehead. But Tollmer could not
see the face of the man, as his back was turned
towards him. The latter bowed down to the
woman and held one of her hands between
his own.
“ Have everything in readiness,” he at last
said, in a louder tone—“ I shall come at any
rate, and you will never repent it.” He bent
over her, and then hurriedly turned away to
follow the path which Tollmer had crossed just
before.
The woman remained standing for a while at
the place where he had left her; but Tollmer’s
eyes were now fixed on the passing stranger,
whom he at the first glance recognized as the
man he was looking for.
Gentleman John had certainly changed con-
siderably for the better since the last time he
saw him. Instead of his former bush garb,
he now wore fine cloth clothes, and silk hat,
'le he carried in his hand a stick, which Toll-
saw at once contained a sword. His face,
too, was round and florid, and proved that he
put the stolen money to excellent purpose. Bu*.
some peculiar excitement seemed for the present
to have overcome him, for his eyes sparkled and
his step had become light and elastic. Thus he
hurried past Tollmer, without perceiving his
lurking foe, and ere the latter could form a deci-
sion, whether to follow him or not, he disap-
peared in the thick forest.
The woman gazed after him thoughtfully, so
long as he remained in sight, and then folded
her hands, let her lovely head droop, and stood
silent and irresolute for many a long minute.
Then she turned and walked with hesitating
steps towards the house.
After due reflection, Tollmer determined on
returning to Adelaide without loss of time. On
his arrival at this place, he immediately sent a
report to the governor, and the latter was only
too willing to give him a detachment of troops
to capture the fugitive criminals.
Still, he would not take too many men witk
him, for he hoped more from stratagem than
force; and after twenty confidential men had
offered, he only took in addition an old friend of
ours, Sergeant Morris, and ordered them to pro-
ceed to Kangaroo Island, in two boats the
government placed at his disposal.
Tollmer desired his men to land to the south
of Cape Borda, where he would make his final
arrangements. He had expedited their depar-
ture as much as he could, for he had discovered
that a schooner was purchased a few days back
in Adelaide harbour, and sailed for Cape Borda.
It must be the one in which Gentleman John
intended to take his flight, and not a minute
must be lost in preventing him.
The boats were lying in Adelaide port, pro-
vided with provisions and water; and Tollmer,
who had just fetched his final instructions, was
walking along the quay, where his sergeant was
waiting for him.
He paid but slight attention, as he hurried on,
to the men he met or those he passed, so full
was he of his thoughts and schemes, when a
name called aloud suddenly attracted his atten-
tion.
“ Mr. Rodwell!” a shrill voice cried, behind a
man walking close before him, who turned on
hearing his name. He was a tall, manly looking-
fellow, with light curly hair, blue eyes, and re-
markably pleasant open features. As Tollmer
walked past him, the little boy sent after him
had caught him up, and handed him a cigar case
he had left behind at the hotel. Rodwell thanked
the lad laughingly, and handed him a shilling,
which he pocketed with evident marks of satis-
faction.
Rodwell! Tollmer remembered that was the
name of the man on Kangaroo Island, to whom
the pleasant house and pretty wife belonged, and
he decided on finding out more about him and his
future plans, ere he let him out of sight again.
21
LIFE m THE BUSH,


Rodwell, at length, stopped at the top of one
of the steep landing stairs, and then the police-
man saw that a boat, with furled sail and oars,
was evidently waiting for him there.
“ Good wind for a trip, sir,” he addressed the
stranger without hesitation, “ it must be splen-
did sailing before the breeze out there.”
“ Think so ?” Rodwell replied, turning to him
with a pleasant smile, “ but I’m not going for a
trip, but am bound homeward.”
“ Indeed. Your station is somewhere on the
coast I suppose ?”
“ At Kangaroo Island.”
“ Ah, over there —it’s a famous place—was
over there on business a little while back, and
am just going there again.”
“ Suppose yon sail with me, then,” Rodwell
said, good-humouredly, “ there’s lots of room in
my boat, and you shall see how we shall shoot
along. What part of the island are you going
to ?”
“ Oh, that’s of no consequence. Once ashore,
and I can go wherever I like. And you really
will take me with you ?”
“ With pleasure,” was the hearty reply, “ so
fetch your traps as quick as you can.”
“ That’ll soon be done,” Tollmer said, with a
laugh, “ and they won’t bring your boat down
much in the water. I’ve got ’em lying close by,
and if you’ll wait a couple of minutes for me. I’ll
be back by that time.”
Rodwell nodded his head, and Tollmer hurried
as fast as his legs would carry him to his own
boats, which were awaiting him. He gave
Morris orders to land to the south of Cape
Borda, at a place he clearly indicated, and before
all else to inquire whether the schooner had
•arrived, and when she would be ready for sea.
Until he joined them, they had nothing to do but
prevent the vessel sailing, even by force, if no
other mode were possible.
He quickly made a bundle of his old bush
clothes, some clean linen, and a pair of double-
barrel pistols, and hurried back to his new
compagnon de voyage. The latter had been
walking up and down the wharf, quietly awaiting
him, and when he saw him coming, walked down
the steps to his boat.
Besides him, a seafaring looking man was in
the boat, who took one oar, while Rodwell
shipped the other.
“ Can you steer p” he asked Tollmer, when he
joined him.
“ Oh, of course; but had I not better pull an
oar ?”
“It is not necessary; for as soon as we get a
little way out into the channel, we can hoist our
sail. First take your seat at the tiller, and steer
us safely through all these vessels. When we
have an open sea, she will fly across.”
So soon as they reached open water, the boat-
man took his place in the bows, while Rodwell
seated himself at the stern by Tollmer’s side.
At first he remained silent, and only gazed
fixedly in a southern direction, where they could
see in the grey distance the blue promontory of
Cape Jervis. All at once he sprang up from his
seat on to the bank, through which the mast
was stepped, and joyfully swinging his straw hat,
shouted:
“ Land oh! Just behind there, stranger, is my
dear old island —is my home —is everything I can
call my own, and makes me the happiest of
men; and though our boat shoots along so
quickly, had I ray will, it should leave the sea
gale far behind in its flight.”
In the meanwhile, the boat hurried to its des-
tination. Higher and clearer Kangaroo Island
rose from the waves, and they could already dis-
tinguish the promontories, and soon after the
bush and the taller trees projecting from it.
The breeze now sank a little, and Rodwell was
almost mad with impatience, because the boat
no longer shot a-head so rapidly. But the sail
was soon swelled by the wind again, and when
the sun sank and night covered the face of the
water, they had drawn near enough to land to.
continue their progress, despite the darkness,
Rodwell knew every foot of the coast here —
every reef—and steered the boat with sure
hand toward the old accustomed landing place.
“ So, and now come, stranger —I haven’t even
asked your name,” he said, as he lightly sprang
on shore, and left the boatman to chain up the
boat, and carry up the sails and oars to the
house.
“ My name’s Barnes,” said Tollmer, following
him a little more slowly, for he did not wish to
betray himself too soon by giving his own too
well-known name.
“ Very well, then, Mr. Barnes,” Rodwell said,
kindly, “ you must be my guest for to-night, as
houses are still widely sown in my neighbour-
hood, and to-moiTOw you will have time enough
to wend your way wherever you please.”
“Is your house near here?” Tollmer asked,
for he could not find his way in the dark.
“ Just over there, behind the single tree, which
you can see standing out against the lighter sky.
Indeed, we ought to be able to see the light from
here, but I suppose my wife did not expect me
to-day.”
While thus speaking, he had hurried so fast
along the well-known path, that Tollmer was
hardly able to follow him. They now reached
the garden, but this, most unusually, was locked.
Rodwell, however, fitted it off its hinges, and led
his companion along the broad gravel walk
towards the house, whose dark outline they could
see close before them.
They reached the house door, at which Rod-
well knocked gently thrice. No one answered
him—he knocked more loudly—all remained
silent in the house : not a light was seen —not
a step was heard.
“ She can’t be asleep yet,” Rodwell uttered to
LIFE IN THE BUSH


himself—“for it’s hardly eight o’clockand he
smote more violently at the door till the sound
rushed through the house. It was no use —
nothing moved or stirred within.
Rodwell spoke not a word. He stood silent
and motionless before his own door —at the
threshold of his paradise, and a foreboding of
something terrible pierced his soul, and made
his blood stand still in his veins.
At this moment a window creaked in the
first floor just over the door, and a timid
woman’s voice cried down:
“ Who’s there ? Is that you, master ?”
“ Betsy 1” Rodwell shouted, and drew a long
breath ; he felt as if a load were rolled off his
breast. “Why don’t you open the door: and
are my wife and child so fast asleep that they do
not hear me ?”
“ I’ll come down directly and open the door,”
the girl said,' and disappeared from the window.
The two men in the meanwhile did not ex-
change a syllable. With an almost convulsive
grip Rodwell held the latch firmly in his hand,
until they heard inside the house the footsteps
of the girl as she slowly descended the stairs
and pulled back the two bolts. She then put a
key in and unlocked the door, and the next mo-
ment Rodwell stood opposite to her.
“ Oh, my dear master,” the girl exclaimed, as
tears started from her eyes—“ I cannot help it ;
I am really innocent, though I thought the
misfortune would come.”
Rodwell turned pale as death. He trembled
so that Tollmer was obliged to hold him, lest he
should sink to the earth. His glossy eye was
fixed so piercingly on the girl, that she held her
face in her hands and sobbed loud and vehe-
mently.
“What has happened, Betsy?” he at length
said, in low, utterly monotonous voice; “ where
is my wife—my child?”
“ Gone !” the girl groaned—“ gone, gone!
Oh, my God—both of them!”
“The viper!” Rodwell hissed, and Tollmer
sprang towards him and held him, for he saw
that the strong man’s knees were giving way,
and fancied he must fall. But the unhappy
man collected his strength again with almost
superhuman energy, and, seizing Tollmer’s arm,
walked slowly with him towards his bed-room—
his wife’s bed-room.
Slowly and hesitatingly the girl followed the
two men with a light, and Rodwell’s wandering
glance soon recognized a small folded note lying
on the dark table. He took it hastily up and
was about to break it open, but suddenly
checked himself, laid it on the table, and,
throwing himself on the sofa, said in a calm
firm voice:
“ Tell me what has happened here, Betsy.
I need not warn you to tell me the whole
truth —as you hope to be saved, speak, and tell
me all, even if it be terrible to hear.”
The girl could hardly speak for her violent
sobs; but by degrees Tollmer, who kept his
calmness, and had a tolerably good idea of what
had happened, drew from her all'—at any rate
all that Betsy knew.
“In what direction did the boat goP” Toll-
mer asked, as the girl finished the sad story of
her mistress’s flight with the Bushranger.
“ Straight away from shore to the mainland,”
was the reply ; and glad to escape any further
questioning, the girl quickly left the room,
bolted the house-door, and went up to bed.
“ They have gone across toAdelaide,” Rod well
then said, in so low a voice, that he seemed
almost afraid of his own sounds.
Tollmer shook his head and said quickly :
“ They are still on the island, as good as
we are.”
“ You think so P” Rodwell continued hastily.
“I am certain of it.”
“ And why so ?”
“ Because this fellow Howitt, or whatever his
name may be, would never in his life have
passed Barkstairs passage in the night and fog,
with a bottle of milk as all his provisions, and
a woman and child. Neither he nor the fellow
who has bolted with him is a sailor.”
“ Do you know him p”
“ I should think so ; and more than that, I
hope to renew my acquaintance with him in
the course of a few days.”
“ I do not understand you.”
“ And yet a few words will explain every-
thing,” the police officer said, with a smile.
“ My name is not Barnes, but Tollmer.”
“ The head of the South Australian Police ?”
Rodwell exclaimed in surprise.
“ The same. And this Captain Howitt, as he
calls himself here, is the most dangerous Bush-
ranger who has ever rendered our woods unsafe,
or perilled the life and property of our citizens.
He is the notorious Gentleman John.”
Rodwell gazed at the speaker in horror, but
as he remained silent, he had his face in his
hands, and groaned:
“My poor, poor wife—my poor child!”
Tollmer, however, though he felt the unhappy
man’s sorrow, knew too well the value of his
time to waste it in empty complaints.
For this night, of course, nothing could be
undertaken, for Rodwell was so exhausted and
broken that he could scarce move a limb. Toll-
mer begged him to lie down, and collect his
strength for the coming day, for he would really
need it. He, himself, unfolded his blanket,
which he constantly carried with him, rolled
himself up in it, and soon slept like a top, upon
the sofa.
When Rodwell entered his own sleeping-room,
and his eye fell on the empty unmade bed of his
child, all the grief of the last hour broke out in
full force. Near his child’s cradle he sank on
23
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


n chair, and laying his weary, sorrow-laden
head on the little cushions, he remained in that
'position till sleep took mercy upon him, and
allowed him to forget his sufferings for at least
a few hours.
It was a mournful awaking; and with feverish
haste he made the necessary preparations for
their march —so uncertain in its results. But
he had regained all his old firmness, he was clear
as to his object; and when Tollmer asked him
what he proposed doing, if he caught up the
fugitives, he replied in an unfaltering voice:
“I want my child back. The unhappy
woman has chosen her own lot. When she
betrayed me, who bore her on my hand and
loved her almost to idolatry, she chose her own
path, and may follow it. I will only see her
once more, to ask back from her my child, who
belongs to me, as she has thrown away her own
claim to any share in his love. She never loved
me, or she could not have broken my heart by
such behaviour.”
“ Good, then,” Tollmer said, looking at his
pistols, and thrusting them in his belt beneath
the loose bush shirt he had put on —“ all we’ve
got to do is to find the serpent, who has intro-
duced poison and misery beneath more than one
peaceful roof. By G—, the fellow’s measure is
full to overflowing, and the time has arrived to
close accounts with him!”
Rodwell, who with his decision regained all
his old firmness and calmness, had in the mean-
while gone to the stable and saddled his two
horses. After a hastily swallowed breakfast, and
packing some provisions on the back of their
saddles, the two men galloped off in the wes-
terly direction indicated by Tollmer.
Thus they reached Cape Trony, not far from
Mount Torrens. They had slept for the night in
the bush, as they usually did, and merely stopped
here to give their horses a decent supply of food.
Tollmer went down to the beach to see whe-
ther any boat might be lying at anchor. They
-could, however, detect nothing of the sort, and
were galloping towards the group of houses no
great distance off, when Tollmer suddenly seized
Rodwell’s arm, and silently pointed to an object
lying close to the roadside. It was a broken
bottle, which had once contained milk; and
Rodwell convulsively drew in his horse’s reins
so tightly, that it began prancing. These were
the first traces they had found.
“Now we are on the track,” Tollmer exclaimed
“ here is the footprint of our game; but
no, it must be the fellow whom they took into
the boat. Gentleman John sent him up to your
station for milk, while the couple remained in
the boat, and the clumsy rascal broke the bottles.
Our Captain Howitt would never have left it
lying so carelessly by the roadside.”
“Do you think we shall find them in the
bush ?” Rodwell asked, and he could scarce bring
the words out of his lips.
“Here? —dear me, no!” Tollmer replied—•
“they went on in the boat, and it is very
doubtful whether the station people know more
about them than we do. At any rate, we must
try and find out all we can from these people,
and have, at any rate, the certainty that the
child is all right, and has a good appetite.”
“ The Lord be thanked!” Rodwell groaned,
and the sigh only evidenced too clearly his ap-
prehensions about the poor little being, lor which
he could not find utterance.
As regards the traces, Tollmer was perfectly
correct. Only the marks of a bush shoe, pro-
ceeding from the sea to the station, and back
again exactly to the same spot, were traceable,
and, once convinced of this, the two horsemen
gallopped up to the house.
Their supposition was here converted into
certainty. On the previous morning a man, be-
longing to a boat waiting for him at the beach,
fetched a bottle of milk, another of rum, two
dampers, and some salt. The man had repre-
sented that the milk was for a sick woman they
had in the boat, and one of the stockmen con-
firmed this, for he had met her not far from
Torrens Mount, accompanied by a strange gen-
tleman he did not know, as well as the mate
who fetched the milk, and now carried the
luggage.
On the same evening they reached a station
belonging to an old acquaintance of Rodwell’s,
whom he had often visited in his numerous
journeys across the island. Here Gentleman
John had stayed the night with his wife, as the
station-keeper supposed her to be, and started in
the direction of Mount Torrens the first thing
in the morning. The child cried a great deal
during the night, and the lady of the house
stated that the poor woman had wept continually,
probably because she felt nervous about the
infant.
Rodwell, although he did not betray his secret,
was in a fearful state of excitement, and, taking
Tollmer aside, he insisted on not halting here,
but riding on the same evening, in spite of the
darkness setting in. The road to Mount
Torrens, at the foot of which was another
station, was tolerably good, the moon was high
in the heavens, and they could easily cover a
considerable space of ground without injury to
their horses. Tollmer, of course, was quite
agreeable to this, and, after a hastily-swallowed
meal, the two riders started again, to the great
surprise of their host.
Two hours’ sharp riding brought them in
sight of the next house, whose light they had
seen from a long distance through the scattered
clumps of trees —at least they could perceive a
bright reflection in the open air. On drawing
nearer, they discovered, however, that the light
did not proceed from a building, but from a
torch, round which several men were collected at
the foot of some gum trees.
24
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


Tollmer at first reined in his horse, for it was
just possible that instead of reaching a station,
they might fall into the clutches of a party of
Bushrangers. Cape Borda was no great distance
from this place, and Gentleman John much too
cautious to keep his men always collected there.
But the tinkling of the sheep-bells close at
hand, and the barking of the dogs, soon proved
it to be a place inhabited by white settlers, and
they could clearly distinguish among the men
assembled round the torch, a lad of about twelve
years of age. They were no Bushrangers.
After rapidly exchanging a few words they
galloped onward, while a few dogs, chasing
opossums, caught scent of them, and sprang
toward them with furious barking. A few
minutes later they stopped by the group so
quaintly illumined by the flickering torch, and
were curiously surveyed by the settlers.
“ Good evening, gentlemen,” Tollmer said,
to the eldest of the party. “ Can you give
us quarters for the night, and say, a hatful of
oats for our horses ? they have made a long day’s
march, and require something to strengthen
them.”
“Yes, stranger —willingly,” was the hospitable
reply; “just get down and lead your horses,
for there are a quantity of gum stumps between !
here and the house.”
“What have you been doing hero?” Rod-
well, who had not once turned his eye from the
group, now said, in a hoarse, fear-quivering voice
—“ you have ”
“ Been digging a grave for a poor child,” the
old man answered, in a solemn, melancholy
voice.
“ Your child ?” Rodwell said again, as the
light of the torch began dancing before his eyes,
and forming wild, confused circles.
“ Mine ? No, God be praised for having
spared me such sorrow, as } r et. It was the child
of a poor woman, who brought it to our house
dead in her arms, to have it buried at least in the
neighbourhood of white people—of Christians.”
Rodwell slipped down from his saddle, threw
off the reins, and stumbled, rather than walked,
towards the freshly-made little grave, over which
a stranger’s kind hand had just formed the low
mound.
“ A strange woman ?” Tollmer asked, quickly,
and much startled, while his compassionate
glance turned towards the poor father.
“ She came with her husband and a porter
fr om the eastern side,” the old man answered;
** their horses had strayed in the bush, as they
stated, and the husband wanted to take his wife
to Cape Borda, and then come back to look for
em.”
“ His name was— ?”
“Oh Lord! we don’t ask people who come to
our house for their names; but I fancied I had
seen the man a few weeks back at Cape Borda. I
t.binlf they called him there, Howitt.”
Rod well heard no more; there was a flash be-
fore his eyes —his knees trembled and gave way
beneath him; and with a heart-broken cry —“My
child !my poor child!” he sank sobbing on the
grave.
Tollmer, in the meanwhile, having taken his
horse by the bridle, seized the old man’s arm,
and inquired about the appearance of the
strangers, as he walked with him towards the
house.
Before long they had not the slightest doubt
but that they had been that so-called Captain
Howitt, and the wretched, misguided wife of his
poor fellow-traveller. The man, the old squatter
said, was in a great hurry, and wished to leave
the station at once, so soon as the child was
put in the ground. The woman, however, had
refused to follow him so soon, and he did not
appear inclined to leave her behind, for he re-
mained with her even almost till nightfall. Kg'
one knew what had been the matter with the
child. As it seemed to them, the wife had re-
proached the husband just before they started,
and he had made a harsh reply; then they dis-
appeared in the scrub surrounding the station.
It was with great difficulty that Rodwell
could be induced to leave his child’s grave, and
spend the night in the hut. He took no food,
and the next morning by daybreak he was again
at the dear spot.
Tollmer, too, prepared for an early start, but
Rodwell refused to accompany him.
“ Jenny,” he said, with sorrowful resignation,
—“ has destroyed the peace of my home —has
murdered my child, who could not endure the
fatigues of such a flight. By that she has
loosed herself from me. What harm she has
done me, I freely forgive; but that she could
love one —her own child, so little —may God for-
give her that; but I, a weak, sinful man, can-
not do so.”
When Tollmer now asked him what he pro-
posed doing, he stated that he intended to ex-
hume the body of h\p child, and return home
with him. All Tollmer’s representations to the
contrary were ineffectual. He insisted on his
design, but requested Tollmer to ride the horse
he had brought from Cape Marsden so long as
he pleased, and then send it back.
Tollmer, on the other hand, who was left to
cany on the pursuit alone, until he could join
his men again, determined to continue his jour-
ney a-foot. The distance from Borda was not so
great, while the old squatter’s behaviour, as well
as his reserve, led to the well-grounded supposi-
tion, that he really had neighbours here by no
means welcome, but much to be feared.
Tollmer now took a hasty farewell of Rod-
well, and promised to let him know the result of'
his undertaking. When he inquired the nearest
road to Cape Borda, which, as he assumed, Cap-
tain Howitt had also followed, the old squatter
offered to accompany him a short distance, and
25
LIFE IN THE >BUSH.


: show him a path he would have no difficulty in
following.
“ From all I have seen of you, stranger,” he
addressed Tollmer, after they had left the town
- some distance behind them—“ I believe I may
trust in you ; I am sure you do not belong to
the ‘gentlemen of the bush,’ who have been
playing their pranks here for some time past.”
“ I thought so,” Tollmer said, with a smile,
—“ You have, however, nothing to fear from
me, for it was only my wish to form the acquain-
tance of those gentlemen which brought me
here. Are you acquainted with their hiding-
place ?”
“ It is here, on Mount Torrens, close by. About
two miles on you will come to a small gulley, a
: single she oak growing close to the path. Pass
it as quickly as you can, for up the ravine, not
many hundred yards from the path, is a bark
hut, and a little way further on is their camp.
From this point you cannot miss your path;
and if you will follow my advice —that of an
old colonist —you will give the gulley as wide
an offing as you can.”
The old man then shook hands with Tollmer,
and walked back to his own house.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE SQUAW’S EEVEHGE.
’The police officer, in the meanwhile, rapidly fol-
lowed up the path, noticing as he went along, at
soft places, the track of a woman’s delicate foot.
He felt tolerably certain, too, that this Captain
Howitt would have taken his victim to the
hiding-place indicated by the old squatter, where
he would be safe from all pursuit. To his sur-
prise, however, he found, on reaching the solitary
casnarina, that only one of the horsemen, and
that the Captain himself, had turned off by the
tree up the slope, while the woman and the
porter appeared to have followed the path.
Tollmer was perfectly aware of the danger to
which he exposed himself here, if, only armed
with his two pistols, he ventured into the vicinity
of the ambushed Bushrangers. But in spite of
that he felt anxious to acquire some certitude as
to their abode, before he rejoined his own men,
for then he would be surely better able to lead
them against the enemy. Accustomed, too, to
such dangers for years, they urged him the
more to dare so hazardous an attempt. He
knew all the precautions he would have to take.
For this purpose he followed for a short dis-
tance the ordinary path to Cape Borda, that his
footsteps on the soft ground here might not be-
tray the direction he had taken, and then turned
short off into the bushes, and began ascending
the sides of the gulley, where thick gum bushes
and pieces of bark covered the ground, and ren-
dered it more difficult to follow him. Taking
advantage of the stony ground, he soon reached
the gulley again, up whose rather steep sides he
clambered, till the rising cliffs compelled him to
return nearer to the valley. In this way he
certainly progressed very slowly, but in about
half an hour he saw the roof of a bark hut just
beneath him.
This must be the house belonging to the
band he had heard of from the squatter —to a
certain extent their outpost in the mountains,
and he remained on the watch for a good hour,
trying to discover any human being inside. But
nothing was to be seen —no blue smoke arose
from the hut or near it, not a sound disturbed
the deadly silence around him, excepting the
chattering of a flock of white cockatoos which
came down the valley, and settled on the tops
of the tallest trees.
The arrival of the leader must have collected
the band at their encampment higher up, where,
in all probability, they were discussing their
future movements. Could he but crawl up and
overhear them. With the thought the bold de-
sign was formed, and Tollmer perfectly a
stranger to personal danger—glided down the
steep wall of stone, above which he had been
standing, slipped round the house, and was just
about to continue his march up the stream, when
he suddenly heard voices close before him.
A small thicket certainly concealed him for
the moment, but if the men came nearer they
must detect him. A few paces off he noticed a
casnarina, covered with rather thick cones, whose
lower branches he could easily reach with his
hand. His resolve was at once formed, and a
few seconds later the thick top of the tree con-
cealed him. Thence, himself unseen, he could
easily survey the movements of the enemy, and
retire again unnoticed, should that become
necessary.
He had hardly reached his hiding-place, ere
the first Bushranger appeared on the open ground
he had left. In front of them walked the no-
torious Gentleman John, with Red-head, his
first lieutenant, and behind them followed some
sixteen savage and desperate looking fellows, all
armed with firearms—some, indeed, with double
barrelled rifles. The two first were engaged
with a serious conversation, which, however, did
not seem very amicable. While Gentleman
John remained cool and calm, Red-head was hotly
opposing some proposition, though Tollmer could
only overhear a few isolated words,
“Enough!—enough, Red-head!” the leader
said, as he stopped beneath the very tree in
which Tollmer was, —“ I shall stick to what 1
said, and I believe I have sufficiently proved
myself your true and faithful friend for you to
trust me in this matter. Eight of you, chosen
voluntarily or by lot, will now follow me, while
the rest remain under Red-head’s command for
a few days, till the equipment of the schooner is
26
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


completed. When all is in order they may form
what suspicions they please, for it will then be
too late. But if they did so now, our lives and
liberties would be endangered, and I will not,
after going through so much trouble and anxiety,
see our plan of salvation shipwrecked just before
the moment of carrying them out. Whom will
you choose, then, to follow me, now ? Suppose
you select them. Red-head.”
While thus speaking, he stood hardly five
yards from the tree which concealed his most
dangerous foe, and his men, consulting together,
assembled round him.
“ It’s all one to me,” Red-head replied, as he
threw himself on the ground, over against the
tree, and laid his gun by his side on the leaves.
“ If I can’t have my will you can do what you
like.”
Gentleman John chose eight of the best-
looking individuals —ready choice was a difficult
one —as his companions, and then gave the rest
a few careless orders how they should behave
during the short stay, so as not to attract the
attention of the neighbouring station keepers.
“ To-morrow morning,” continued Gentleman
John, “ I will meet you at the bark hut and
will bring a supply of ammunition. And now,
good-bye! I must be at Cape Borda before twi-
light. At the proper hour I will send Broadley
to you; and do you follow him as quick as you
can.”
He turned away at these words, and, followed
by the men he had chosen, went down the valley ;
and Red-head remained, still in his old posture,
with the rest beneath the casnarina.
“ And what now ?” one of the men asked.
“Are we going back to the camp, or have you
anything for us to do ?”
“ I!” Red-head said; “the Captain, I thought,
told you plainly enough what to do—chew the
cud till he sends for you.”
“ But —”
“ Don’t trouble yourself about anything,” the
Lieutenant of the Bushrangers interrupted him.
“ You have time enough to enjoy yourselves —
with provisions for at least forty-eight hours,
and water till the next drought. Now be
good enough to go up to the camp, that our
dinners mayn’t burn. In the meanwhile I’ll
see if I can’t shoot a wallobi ”
“Very good, Lieutenant!” the fellow remarked,
—“you certainly speak plain enough, and though
Avaiting may be tedious, it’s jolly lazy work.”
The men turned away, and lounged slowly
along the path they had come down half an hour
previously. Red-head remained about fifteen
paces from the casnarina, with his face turned to
the tree, slowly returned his knife to its sheath,
and laid his double-barrel on his knees. He then
examined the nipples, cleaned them, put on fresh
caps, and certainly seemed preparing to shoot
wallobis, as he had promised. His comrades had
by this time disappeared up the gulley. Tollmer,
having now learned all he wanted to know, was
mos tanxious for the fellow under the tree to de-
part, and give him an opportunity to leave his
seat, which was becoming preciously uncomfort-
able.
Red-head, however, appeared to have no such
intention, —at least, for the present; for, with
his gun still lying on his knees, he remained in i
his old position, only nodding his head now and
then with a quiet grin. Tollmer’s position be-
came every moment more painful. His arms
and knees pained him, and yet he dared not stir.
At length the Bushranger slowly lifted up his
head to the tree on which he sat, regarded the
crows for a time, and then said, as quietly as if
speaking to one of his own men —•
“Now, mate, I’ll fancy you have done your
skulk up thei'e. Hang it! other birds leave
their nests at daybreak, but you remain till bright
mid-day in the branches, with your head under
your wing.”
Tollmer did not stir—but his heart beat like a
hammer in his breast. He still had the hope
left, however, that the Bushranger was speaking
to some one else, and not to him, and he might
still escape detection. But Red-head soon put an
end to his doubts. He got up, and pointing his
gun straight at the top of the tree, he said, in a
voice no louder than before, but with a dry, sar-
castic, and yet meaning intonation —
“ Well! are you coming, mate ? or must I
help you? I haven’t over much ammunition,
and should like to spare a charge, and the grave-
digger’s expenses. I mean you up there in the
tree —do you understand me ?”
Tollmer saw he was discovered, and though
his hand clutched at a pistol, he felt at once that
with his numbed arm, he would be unable to take
a sure aim, and in that case he would be lost.
Besides, the shot might attract the attention of
the rest. Hence, stratagem was his only re-
source.
“ Halloah! mate !” he consequently shouted,
from the tree, putting on the best face he could,
“just lower that confounded shooting-stick, for
it might go off in your hand by accident, and
I’m sure you wouldn’t shoot a pal down from a
tree like a cockatoo.”
“ A pal ?” Red-head repeated, though without
altering his menacing position—“ we must have
a nearer look at each other. Are you coming ?”
“Of course,” was the reply; “ but remember-
that my arms and legs are quite numbed. I
haven’t been sitting in an easy chair.”
While thus speaking, he cautiously slipped
down the smooth bark, and stood facing the
Bushranger’s levelled gun.
“Well!” he said, as he reached the ground,
and turned to Red-head, “is that the way to
receive a friend ? You have nothing to fear-
from me. Don’t you see lam unarmed?”
“ Externally, yes,” Red-head said, laughingly,
“ but we will look into the rest presently. But.
27
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


what were you doing up that tree ? robbing I
birds’ nests —eh P”
Tollmer had only one mode of escape. He
naturally was not in uniform, but wore his old
bush clothes, which the kangaroo thorns had
sadly mishandled. He therefore looked more like
a Bushranger than a police-officer, and his care
was to profit by it.
“If you want to learn that yarn,” he there-
fore replied, with affected calmness—“ first give
me something to eat; for when a man has been
in the accursed bush for days, and almost starved
at sea, in the hope of reaching this island, he
hasn’t much strength left him, and wants some
strengthening powder. Have you a drain of
rum ?”
“ Not a drop. But who has been chevying
you, my fine fellow?” he added, and examined
the stranger carefully from head to foot, “ I
thought the Bushrangers had grown rather
scarce over there, same as has been here.”
“ Who ? why the confounded police,” Tollmer
replied, in an angry tone.
“ Oh! you had them at your heels ? Well, I
can believe that,” the Bushranger said, with a
grin; “for Mr. Tollmer is a first-rate leader.”
“ Who P” Tollmer said, with assumed surprise.
“ Oh! you don’t know the man,” Red-head
drily remarked—“it’s a pity I haven’t a looking-
?lass here, for I could then give you a first-rate
escription of his appearance.”
“ A looking-glass ?” Tollmer said, and almost
involuntarily his hand sought the concealed
pistol; for, once recognized, he knew himself to
be lost.
“ Let your weapons be, Mr. Tollmer,” Red-
head said, uncocking his gun with perfect calm-
ness, and looking firmly in ther police officer’s
face. “ You see I know you, and neither shoot
you down, nor call my people to have an unusual
bit of fun with you. But, the truth is, you
have come just at the right moment, and it’s
only to that you owe it that I did not send a
charge of slugs through your carcase directly
you came here, and I sighted you up the tree.”
“ And supposing I was this Mr. Tollmer,” the
latter said.
“ Don’t disturb yourself,” the robber answered
him. “ I saw you once, just four years ago,
when brought before you after being taken, and
have a famous good memory for old acquain-
tances. But now to business. You have come
to Kangaroo Island, I suppose, to capture one
Gentleman John ?”
“ Yes,” Tollmer said, after a slight hesitation,
in a firm voice. “ Hang it all! I see no reason
to keep that a secret from you.”
“ Spoken like a man !” the Bushranger said;
“ but—l can hardly think you have undertaken
that trifle alone.”
“ I have help at hand,” Tollmer answered,
though still with marked hesitation.
“ Close by p’
“ H’m!” the Bushranger said; “ but you
know how uncertain your chances will be, if
John forms the slightest suspicion.”
“ Certainly,” Tollmer said, now seeing through
the fellow’s plan, and beginning to breathe more
freely; “ but you know, too, what reward
Government has offered to the man who helps
us to capture the criminal. You cannot get
away again; the schooner is watched, and cannot
set sail: and the island is not large enough to
afford you shelter for long. Will you help me to
capture this Gentleman John?”
“ Yes; but you’ll secure me a free pardon ?”
the Bushranger asked, looking at him piercingly.
“I will guarantee you that; and, in the bar-
gain, half the reward put on his head. Will that
satisfy you P”
“ Done with you!” Red-head exclaimed, of-
fering him his hand on the bargain; “ and now
to work. Have you any of your men at hand ?”
“ They are all at Cape Borda.”
“ Hem!—must we take him alive ?”
“Alive or dead!” Tollmer replied.
“ Good! then we shall need no one else. You
heard that he is going to bring me ammunition
. to-morrow morning. Where have you hidden
1 your gun p”
“ I have only pistols by me,” Tollmer said.
; “ They’re of no use; they’re not sure enough,
and we mustn’t try any larks with him. Are
you a good shot with a gun ?”
I “I can hit my man with a bullet at a hundred
> yards.”
“ Good! then you can hardly miss at fifteen
. with slugs, and can take my gun. Now go
. down the valley, and camp somewhere at the
i opening of the gulley. I daren’t take you up
; with me, for one of the other fellows might re-
cognise you as easily as I did; but I shall take
care that no one comes across you, and it will be
i to your benefit to wait for me there, so that’s
, why I trust you. To-morrow, at daybreak, I
shall be at the single she-oak, which stands close
to the path. Do you know that tree ?”
“ I passed it to-day,” Tollmer made answer.
“ Very well, then; so good bye, till we meet
again,” Red-head said, and hurried up the gulley,
leaving the police-officer to his own reflections.
Tollmer knew from his own experience
how useful the fellow might be to him, as he
fancied, probably on good grounds, that he was
betrayed by his companion. Though he could
easily prevent the schooner sailing, through his
own men, still the leader of the band, one of the
most cunning robbers who had ever rendered
the Australian forest insecure, would not bo
captured, and could easily reach the continent
again in a boat. But were Gentleman John
i once in his power, or killed out of the way, he
j might expect to master the rest easily; and, with
: the help of his newly-found friend, he had the
j hope of accomplishing this the next morning.
28
LIFE IN THE BUSH


He had scarcely any grounds to expect trea-
chery from his new confederate. He had already
been at the mercy of the robber, and his own
advantage was also at stake. Hence he obeyed
Eed-head’s instructions without any hesitation,
and camped for the night at the spot he indi-
cated, to be ready for the next morning.
Nor did Red-head keep him waiting long.
Day had scarce dawned, ere a low whistle told
Tollmer of his arrival; and the two men, after a
scanty breakfast, walked side by side to the hut
Gentleman John had indicated. On the way
the Bushranger told the police-officer his plan,
and, on reaching the hut, Tollmer concealed
himself with the robber’s gun, while the latter,
leaning his back against the thin hark wall,
seated himself on a stump, forming a species of
bench, and quietly awaited the arrival of his be-
trayed chief.
“ There’s some one coming down the side of
the hill,” Tollmer whispered, who could see over
the open heights in front of him, through a
crevice in the wall behind which he was hidden.
“That’s he!” Red-head whispered too, start-
ing, almost involuntarily; “if -we can, we will
catch him alive, hut if he smells powder, take a
good aim at him, or we shall both be dead men.”
In order to appease his old Lieutenant, and
gain the short delay during which the latter
carried the ammunition to his comrades, Mul-
ligan had agreed to bring himself what Red-
head wanted. Besides, he did not dare trust any
one of his other people; for, left alone with Red-
head, they might make common cause with him.
He certainly had no notion that the police
were already on his track ; but, for all that, he
approached the hut with extreme caution, even
though he saw his Lieutenant sitting against
the wall. He carried his gun in his hand, and
the promised ammunition in a pouch, and did
not hang his firearm on his shoulder till he per-
ceived that Red-head was perfectly unarmed.
Still, the fact that the latter remained seated so
quietly, and did not advance to meet him,
aroused his quickly-excited suspicions.
“ Well, mate,” he called to him, as he stopped
about fifty yards from the house, threw the pouch
on the ground, and stood by it, gun in hand —
“ here I am; but you seem to take matters
precious coolly! Here are your powder and
lead, which I found heavy enough—so I think
you can cany them the rest of the distance.”
“ Thank you, Captain,” said Red-head, who
would have gladly had him nearer the house, as
he now rose from his seat, and walked slowly
toward him. “ I did not know at lirst whether
it was your noble self. But come in—l have
lighted a fire, and have a juicy piece of wallobi
roasting; or—am’t you hungry r”
Gentleman John was listening attentively;
his sharp ear detected the setting of a hammer—
a sound too familiar to him —and in a second he
recognised the danger in which he was.
“ I’ve caught you, follow ! John said, with a
wild laugh of triumph, as he fell back a step and
raised his gun, though still cautiously keeping
him between himself and the house. “ Stir one
step, and you are—”
“ Curse you!” the Lieutenant yelled, as he
rushed on the incautious Bushranger, and threw
his arms around him. “Help!—here—l’ll —”
“ Thank you !” Gentleman John said, quickly.
At the same moment, however, he drew a pistol
from his pocket, and, while discharging it in his
Lieutenant’s ear, his eye was directed toward
the hut, whence Tollmer now bounded, with
cocked gun, to help his confederate.
Gentleman John tried to raise his own gun;
hut Red-head, by the weight of his falling body,
dragged it the ground, both barrels exploding as
it fell; and the Bushranger’s only chance of
escaping his better armed foe was in hurried
flight. He naturally took the second assailant
for one of the band left in the hush, who would
not dare to follow him up to the settlement, and,
placing a tree between himself and his pursuer,
he started at full speed up the side of the gulley.
Tollmer fired off his two barrels, but the
bushes soon concealed the fugitive from him,
and no other chance was left him but to join his
men as rapidly as possible, and commence open
hostilities against the convict and his party.
His shot, however, had not been without
effect, for one of the slugs had lodged in the
robber’s side, though it did not check his flight.
Still, overcoming the pain, he soon reached the
settlement, and hurried to the hut, where he
knew that Jenny was awaiting him.
The hapless woman was sitting by the
chimney, with her head resting on the arm of
the chair, in which she reclined, and did not
even move when the door opened.
“ Jenny,” John said, in a voice hoarse with
passion, and only suppressed by force —“ come —
the moment for flight has arrived —my ship is
ready to receive us. Come, darling, rouse up,
and forget your gloomy thoughts ; dead is dead,
and all the tears in the world will not recall
your poor child to life.”
“ Dead is dead!” the poor woman groaned, as
she wildly raised her pale face and tearless eyes
to him. “Do you say that to me, you mur-
derer of my baby ?”
“Nonsense, darling!” the robber cried, as he
hurriedly collected his few traps and weapons
scattered about the room. “ How could I help
it that the poor thing could not endure the
fatigues of march ? Didn’t I carry it for half
a day P But make haste—the devil knows how
the man so quickly crossed the island, but your
husband is after us, my love, and we must really
make haste to get aboard.”
The door was at this moment thrown open,
and Broadley’s terrified, deadly pale face appeared.
“ Well ! old croaker,” the Captain shouted to
him, “ what brings you here ?”
29
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


“ The schooner is taken,” the messenger of
misfortune said, fully justifying the suspicion
and his own appearance “the police have
boarded it, and struck topmasts.”
“ What!” John shouted, in alann.
“ It’s all up!” the fellow continued, “ and the
boats are pulling ashore again. We have no
other shelter than the bush.”
John gnashed his teeth savagely, but matters
could not be altered; the escape by the sea could
not now be forced, but must be attempted in some
other way. Hence, snatching up his weapons,
he turned one glance on the startled woman,
who was now gazing wildly at him, and signed
to Broadley to follow him.
So soon as he emerged from the hut, he saw
that his companion had spoken the truth. The
schooner lay at anchor oft' the Point, an apparent
wreck, and while armed men sprang ashore from
the returned boats, others were hurrying from
the chief station towards his lodging place. Did
they come as friends or foes ? he had no inclina-
tion to await their coming, and fled, closely fol-
lowed by Broadley, at full speed to the neigh-
bouring scrub.
He had already reached it, and the nearest
gum bushes concealed him from the sight of his
pursuers, when a dark form rose before him
as if from the ground, and held out her arms
imploringly to him. It was Cloko, his black
wife, with her oppossum cloak loosely hanging
on her shoulders; and her black hair floating
wildly round her forehead.
“ Stay!” she cried to him in a voice more of
menace than supplication, as he tried to hurry
past her, but she seized him by the coat, and
held him. “ Stay! false white man! Where is
your white wife, with the pale cheeks and light
hair ? and where is the child that you killed and
stamped into the ground P Where are you going
now ? —back to my tribe P—take me with you.
Cloko is starving here, and no one gives her
food.”
“ Has the devil got into the women to-day p”
John shouted, as he seized the woman’s weak
hand in his own fist, and threw it off him. But
Cloko had already twisted the other into his belt,
and cried, in a wild, shrill voice—
“ Devil! —yes, that is your word for all that
is wicked and bad —devil! That is your name.
Gentleman John, and if there is a Being
above ”
“ Off with you,” the angry robber hissed be-
tween his teeth, and struck the wretched woman
so heavy a blow on the forehead, that she was
forced to let loose his girdle, and fell back half
senseless to the ground. The next moment the
two men had disappeared into the bush.
Gentleman John had in reality no occasion to
be in such a hurry, for the people hurrying up
from the station were only Bloome and his
brother, who at first supposed that their vessel
had been surprised by Bushrangers, and wished
to summon the Captain to their aid. But they
were soon cured of their error, for, viewing their
pretended friends’ precipitate flight rendered
them distrustful; the quickly recognised uni-
form of the police destroyed their last doubt.
Tollmer, however, did not stop for any length-
ened explanations. He was quite convinced that
the flying robber, after Red-head’s death, would
at once join the rest of the band, and offer a
desperate resistance. He did not know that
Gentleman John had taken him for Ck 'e of his
own followers, and now saw a traitor in every
one of them. The only advantage, then, the
police had was in employing the first surprise of
the Bushrangers, to deal a decisive blow. Once
dispersed, he hoped to gain an easy victory over
them.
They had scarce entered the bush ere they
came across the half stunned black woman,,
whom the men were rushing past without paying
any attention to her. Tollmer, however, recog-
nised in her at once the robber’s ex-wife, and
remembering the scene at Rodwell’s house, he
ordered his men to halt, and bring the poor,
helpless creature to her senses. One of the
constables had a flask of brandy about him, and
Cloko, after her temples were rubbed with it,
and she had swallowed a few drops, recovered
sufficiently to rise.
She was astonished at finding herself sur-
rounded by so many strange white men, and
her first feeling was to fly into the bush and
escape them. But Tollmer stepped before her,
and said, kindly—
“ Fear nothing from us. We only wish to-
purity the country of those men who sow hatred
and hostility between the black and white tribes
—who live on robbery, and grow fat on blood.
Do you know whom I mean ?”
The squaw looked at him with her large
glaring eyes, and said —
“ You are looking for Gentleman John!”
“ Certainly,” Tollmer said, hastily—“ do you.
know where he is gone ?”
“Curses on him!” Cloko yelled, while the re-
membrance of the insult he had ottered her drove
the blood into her dark temples. “He has
struck me, and may God above rot the hand
that dealt the blow!”
“ It will be our care to arrange that,” Moms
said, with a laugh. “We are sure of him on
this island, and he cannot escape us.”
“And do you know where to find him?”
Cloko asked, suddenly, while her eyes eagerly
questioned their faces.
“ I think so,” Tollmer replied. “He has
probably gone back to his friends on Torrens
Mount.”
“ Friends!” Cloko cried, tossing back her
head contemptuously. “ The traitor has no
friends, since he struck Cloko! Come, come!”
she shrieked, rising with an effort, and clutching
at Tollmer’s arm. “ I will lead you. I will.
30
LIFE IN THE BUSH,


Lang on his footsteps like a dingo on the track
of a wounded kangaroo. Come!—he struck
me—my head is burning where his hand fell:
if the pain goes off' I shall probably forget my
wrongs !”
Drawing her cloak more closely round her,
she thrust hack the two men standing nearest
to her, at the place where Gentleman John had
sprung past, and began seeking his trail.
Morris had grave doubts about trusting to
the guidance of a black woman, who might
easily put them on a false scent. But Tollmer
knew the natives better. He saw what passion
was now working in the heart of the poor be-
trayed wife, and did not hesitate a moment in
following her.
In the meanwhile, Cloko had soon found the
trail of the two men, in spite of the dry soil
and the leaves scattered over it, and now fol-
lowed them, without turning a glance at the
white men. They had been reinforced by the
larger part of the other troop of constables, as
the schooner no longer offered the convicts a
■chance of flight, and it was only when Cloko
hurried past the path which, as Tollmer well
knew, led to the hiding place on Torrens Mount,
that he thought it advisable to call her attention
to the fact.
Cloko, however, made no reply. With out-
stretched hand she merely pointed to the ground
before her, on which the white could not dis-
tinguish the sign of a footstep, and walked on.
No sleek hound ever followed the trail of a
wounded deer more surely than she did that of
the man for whom she had once deserted father,
mother and tribe, and who had now dared to
illuse her.
Thus they remained on the tract of the rob-
bers till night set in, and rendered any further
pursuit impossible. They had been compelled
to pass through the scrub, and places where the
whites could only break through the kangaroo
thorns by pressing with shoulder and back.
The half-naked savage took no heed of them.
With her skin mantle wrapped around her, and
careless of the thorns lacerating her feet and
hands, she had followed the trail till the dark-
ness foi'ced her to desist, and she now cowered
down upon it beneath a tree, wrapped her head
in a cloak, and refused not only to approach the
fire now kindled by the whites, but even to ac-
cept any food from them.
In the morning they were ready to start
before daybreak, and so soon as the rising sun
threw sufficient light into the forest to allow the
trail to be distinguished, Cloko followed it with
her old zeal.
She had not proceeded more than an hour,
however, before she suddenly stopped, and
threw up her head, like a dog scenting game.
“ I smell smoke,” she said.
“ That’s very possible,” Tollmer whispered;
“the fellows could not get along by night
through, this confounded scrub, and ere long
halted. Perhaps we shall catch them asleep.”
They cautiously continued their search. But
although Cloko had correctly followed the trail,
they only found the half burnt out fire. The
two Bushrangers had continued the flight, as
they had the pursuit, at daybreak. But from
this place they seemed to have altered their
course, and Cloko, after following it for a time,
suddenly seized Tollmer’s arm and whispered:
“ The boat! —they have gone to the hidden
boat!”
“ Of course they have,” Tollmer said, angrily
stamping his foot —“ and we shall arrive on the
beach just in time to see them laughing at us.
Why didn’t I think of that boat before, and
send off’ some of my men to intercept their
flight.”
“ Come,” Cloko now said, after looking round
in every direction as if to discover where she
was—“ come with me.”
“ Halloa! darkee,” Moms however growled,
as he saw she was going off to the left of the
trail—“ why, I can see their footsteps in the
sand here, and they go straight a-head.”
“ Come !” the native said again, without no-
ticing the objection—“we shall catch him before
he enters the boat.”
“ The girl’s worth her weight in gold,” Toll-
mer said to himself, as he rubbed his hands in
delight—“ what do you say, Bill P It would
be a famous joke to take the boat under their
very noses.”
Bill, the former mail driver, who had joined
the police, and formed part of the expedition as
a volunteer, through his old wrath against the
Bushranger, nodded his head and growled:
“ Let me get within arm’s length of him, and
I’ll be hanged if he gets out of my clutches
again.”
“ There are two sides to that question,” Toll-
mer said; “but on with you, my men. The
black woman, since she has not required to look
after the trail, runs along at a tremendous pace.”
He was right. Cloko glided like the wallobi
of the forest, quickly and actively through the
low but thick scrub, so that the white men
could hardly follow her, and Tollmer was coifi-
pelled to call to her more than once, to wait till
they could catch her up. A feverish impatience
seemed to have taken possession of the black
woman, which drove her on, ever onwards, till
she at length reached the sea-shore, where the
gum bushes hung down over the rocks almost
into the water.
A small stream here trickled down to the sea,
whose course Cloko had been following for the
last ten minutes, and its wash had formed a
small bay, in which Gentleman John’s black
wife had found the boat, while jealously follow-
ing his trail, and that of the unfortunate Mrs.
Rodwell.
A stranger on the island, still her foot easily
31
LIFE IN THE BUSH.


LIFE IN
THE
BUSH.
and rapidly found the way back, with that
strange organ of locality familiar to the natives;
and a triumphant smile crossed her features as
she sprang on a projecting rock, and discovered
the boat still lying there; but no sound passed
her lips.
“ Is it there, Cloko ?” Tollmer cried, in a sup-
pressed voice.
“ Pish!” the black woman warned him, with
upraised finger, as her victorious glance and
pointing arm announced the discovery. At the
same time she carefully listened in the direction
from which she expected the fugitives. Her eye
sparkled, her whole form trembled, and her
anxiously parted lips seemed to inhale the air
which blew from that quarter in her face.
“ They are coming!” Tollmer whispered to
the nearest man. “ Off with you —hide behind
stones and bushes!”
“ All right!” Morris said, as he slipped behind
the rock on which he had just been standing.
Cloko alone did not stir; and, as she stood there
by the sea, listening, she looked like a statue
carved out of black marble, or a dusky Naid,
who had just risen, timidly and trembling, from
the waves.
With all possible respect for firearms, which
he could only manage very clumsily, he certainly
bobbed at the shot, but at the same moment,
remembering the lesson he had received before,
he rushed at the Bushranger, caught him by the
leg, and dragged him to the ground.
Again a shot w r as fired, but this time from
Tollmer’s barrel, after the escaping Broadley,
who uttered a wild yell, tottered into the bush,
and fell to the ground. Tollmer, without wasting
a moment on the wounded man, now rushed
upon the chief of the robbers, on whom three or
four policemen had already hurled themselves.
Gentleman John, however, caused his adver-
saries considerable trouble, for, getting his arm
free by a sudden jerk, he drew a broad knife,
with which he stabbed right and left, and tried
to wound his assailants. Tollmer saw the danger
in which his men were, and raised his gun to
discharge the second barrel at the desperate
ruffian, but he suddenly altered his plan. The
barrel rose, the shot thundered through the air,
and then, turning the butt round, he dealt the
Bushranger such a tremendous blow on the
forehead, that the stock flew in splinters, while
the Bushranger fell back senseless, and ap-
parently dead.
In a second, his hands and feet were bound,,
his weapons removed, and himself carried into
the boat, where Bill and another stopped to-
guard him. Broadley, who lay mortally wounded
in the bush, was also tossed in, and after his
men had bound up their gashes as well as they
could, Tollmer was just going to push off, and
cany his prisoners to Cape Borda, when his
eye fell upon Cloko, who had been kneeling all
the while on the shore.
“Down with you, Cloko,” Tollmer whispered
to her. “If he sees you all will be betrayed,
and our trouble thrown away.”
The native woman made no reply, but she
sank on her knees at the spot where she had
hitherto been standing, and buried her face in
Jier hands.
“ Hang it all, but I say yes, this must be the
place,” a rough voice said, close at hand, —“ or I
have forgotten it, and can’t find it again.”
“We didn’t sail so far with the boat,”
Broadley was then heard to object; “it must
be some way further on.”
“And here is the stream!” Gentleman John
exclaimed, now not ten paces from the clearing
where his enemies were concealed. “ I knew I
was right; and there is the sea, too. Thank
the Lord that we have at last got out of those
thorns. This is the place; I know it by the
rocks —ha! ha ! ha! —now, they can crawl up
and besiege Torrens Mount as much as they
like. Before they get on our trail we shall be
safe over there Ha ! what is that ?”
When the boat was ready to start, she rose,
however, cast a hurried glance at the prisoner,
and with one bound was at Tollmer’s side.
“ Hang it! there are too many of us aboard
already,” Morris cried, who was standing at
the stem, and trying to push the boat from
land.
“ Let her be,” Tollmer said to him, however;
“ the fellow took her from her tribe, and she
can return with us to Adelaide, when we have
settled the rest of the band. All clear there,,
forrard ?”
“ Stop !” Tollmer thundered to him, as he
sprang up before him, pointing Red-head’s gun
at him. “ Surrender, or you are a dead man.”
“ Surrender!” John shouted, as he drew a
pistol from his belt —“ to the gallows, eh ?” At
the same moment, however, his eye caught the
figures rising right and left, and firing the
pistol hap-hazard among the enemy, he tried
to regain the scrub, but here Bill the driver ran
in his way.
“ All clear, sir !”
“ Push off then, and let us put this gentle-
man in a safe place as soon as possible : the rest
will not cost us much trouble then.”
The small boat shot out to sea, with its bow
turned to the west. In the centre, however,
with the robber’s pale bleeding head on her lap,
sat Cloko, and bright tears rolled down her dark
cheeks, and mingled with the blood of the man.
she had handed over to the gallows.
END.
THE
32




