

Ik
Mart,
_» ■ W ,£ en r “ r Sa f e», tempted roe.
and I hope ray downfall will prove a sort °f pendant .and to this h« ® ald " 1 shall soon shake hsods’with thee o d
waroine'to others he ! spart.cularlycom.n n ai,ath6. Mereoeired W.on the other aide of these Walls.” Tha
visiting magistrate* oa Tbtirader with gre« i of the jury is still the subject of con!
It is extraordinary with what aridity every composure, and expired his tWkfoW«r for verI:,uon in the town, all admitting that there
morsel of intelligence rejtaing te the murderer lb« consideration shown him. Almost iraaie- ” »h* slightest moral doubt ihat it was the
John Tawell is sought sud snatched Bp by the diately alter his condemnation, the Rev. F.Cox aAminsUred the poisoc,
puVUc. Far and wide inquiry and speculation chaplia of the gsol, ilas in atlendence on bin Was oe Stttr&r br h,s , T lf “
are busily on foot concerning him, but nearer to offer the spiritual rujiefhis situation retired cp nios of hU Insane, h "
theseene of the murder he is the geaeral topic This aitenton is caressed hi. gratitude for. with thegreateit *"^1
of conversation. As may b« supposed, many hut wo understand declined. on the ground of «b* trial So far from I !■!( - th " r ® saIt of
incorrect stone* concerning himlind their way the difference of ht| religion, principle., hut « nt. a. k»» (* et v Jh. be F e ~
into circulation, but nothing can be raoreab- two seetari-d preachers hava been to see hint determination to r.tarr, tTi, u MfK ?“ her
surd than soma of the inventions which idle and prry with him;1 A cell for his reception hampstead. which she at Herk '
gossips has promulgated. Pabl o feeling is waS rbliged w,be. Spared for the occasion in a state ofcorclosioa ererJi
generaly speaking against him, and every day there hot being one fit to use, at the last ex- ter of this Us hero .j Ju 7”'
some fresh amount of crime, in the way of edition that toot plats in Ayleabery w M that coaueofed with the mmS .mi h fafii
poisoning i* attributed to him. . Sarah Hart, ofa notsnong poachy, named Bates, who mor- the secures it did fk r .r* *’ u ' C0 ? In » lr0 »
,» supposed by the eiedutous ts be by no derod the g.me of Colonel Haratamr fthea that it Uouite true namelv w “ ht
tneana the only persen upon whom he has prao- member for the;boroigh. That took (dace at 1st of jinn,,, ’a y t between tne
tl-sed knowledge of chemistry, and if isW Leighton , Jf SJSlS*
dected that while he kept his drngesfs shop in since when there baa been cohoddy nader sea- the road Ll the oris * P ‘ ek * d °P ° a
Sydney a wide field was open to him for the tence of death at Aylesbury gaol.” The wret- gone after leaving ,va f T ro Ted ,o have
exercise of his skill. His partner at Sydney is eked man is Bptllia strict surveillance of beinv known who had
said to of died suddenly, leaviag him all his the turnkeys, onecf|vhom is always ritringiip -scooters were not .blab! 'On. of rt, the pro-
property. His two a ma ar» said to have left wtfb him in the t|nde«ae4 ceH* II** be- V xv ■ - , forward, or
this world suddenly. HU first wife, it is stated harioar has been pry deconw, sad m every * 9 v ery .ittla doubt that it would have
Mi I " ' Si
fef ( IP*! _*?•» S
' '' I :
/ /
At Aylesbury for th© Murder of Sarah Hart
Moss> df IFfcirSfcg
Within a, dark ami dismal ka-dl,
! n angaiish 1 do lie,
Methiiiks;! hear the solemn knell.
Say Taweil yon most die.
My fate is sealed I must prepare.
To a death of scorn.
Exposed) a view to public gaxe,
t!n thl tree on Friday'Noon*
CHORUS.
I alas ! 4m doomed to die.
On Aylesbury's fatal scaffold high,
I wat/brought up ia Norfolk Town,
On'.a rk what I relate,
vVh.te once 1 loved a damsel keen,
lat. oh, unlucky fate,
3a»h Hart as you shall hear,
/Vasthis fair Maiden’s Name,
fb flattering tails I her sednoed, 1
And brought her down to shaava..
?any ears ago I was
As you may understand,
SatTrom my native country
Unto Van Diemonds Land,
Hiere I great riches did procure.
And 1 ben' across the main,
Tth joy unto my native land,
I aid return again.
Vhen I think of this sad affair,
I feel 1 ca.it tell how, ip.
To Salt Hill 1 removedher
Within a mile of Slough,'
1 frequent visits paid to her,
At ad early bout this rooming crowds of
people were assembled ia front of the fat! of
Aylesbury to view the execution of the unhap-
py man, John Taweii, who was convicted
at the last Assiees at Aylesbury, for the
j murder " of Sarah at Salt Hiil.
/ Tlie throngs of people were in»
< r..»* -c *»- - j--* *
plaee adjacent, or contiguous, all the avenues
aod the different turnings at the back were
completely crammed with persons of ail grades
every window in the neighbourhood was occu-
pied with the curious, all anxious to kfetch a
view of the last struggle* of the dying man.
Perhaps what has been the reason of such
curious excitement having prevailed, is, that
it is now about 1(> years since any person
was executed there. About half-past six
o’cloc the Sheriffs arrived, whera they were
received by the Govemer Mr. Cox, About
.seven o’clock they went to tH,e condemned cell
whera they found the Rev. Chaplain who was
f-jigaged in a fervent prayer with the criminal.
At half-past eight be ate a slight breakfast.
After the usual formalities had been gone
through the prisoner was conducted to the
press room where his irons were struck ofr
■’■'c executioner, w-th his assistants, then com-
pinioning Ilia arms, which operation
was quickly performed. During those awful
-reparations he sighed deepiyand appeared
t > suffer great!; • At a qaarter before eleven t'te
preparations were completed, and the mourn-
ful procession moved through the courts and
vards leading up t» the scaffold.
The ordinary then commenced reading the
burial service for the dead, in a distinct tone..
No sound except the tolling of the bell, inter-
rupted the clergyman as the procession moved
along the subterraneous passages. On arriving
at the foot of the scaffold, be turned round and
[ Tn a firm tone thanked tlie Sheriffs and Mr.
Cox, the f.oveiner of the prison, for the kind
attentions they had shown him during his con-
Snemeut. He then with a firm stepascended
(fte scaffold with the ordinary, on reaching
which the executioner placed him in the proper
position.. When the prisoner appeared upon
the scaffold the executioner adjusted the fatal
pope and drew the cap over his eyes, retired
from the-platform and on the signal being
given the bolts were with-drawn, and the
murderer John Taweil, was launched into
eternity! ..
Thus endid the career of John Taweii,
whose life will, we hope, prove a warning to
pthers. not to forsake the paths of virtue nor
give way to passion but steadily adhere to
ttuih and honesty, and h y so doing gain the
uzii! anri nTthfeir follow creatures.
good will and love of their fellow creatures.
■ s '-iyt- \ ; 7
Cspj) of a
My Dear Wife;
A few hours more and thy
unhappy husband will have ceased
to breathe in this world. Oh how
can I face the multitudes that flock
to see my fatal exit from this world?
How caa I meet my heavenly Father
Being tired of her company,
To her residence I went
And ot a ftivelous message she
Poor innocent soul 1 sent.
While the deadly dose } did prepare
To take her life away ‘ ,
And the same 1 did administer J
To her that fetal day. *
I think 1 see the fatal time
When she fer mercy cried, ■
No pity to her 1 did show.
At length she drooped and died,
1 strove, from justice to escape
But far i could not fly,
Untiil 1 apprehendid was
And sentenced for to die.
O God above look down on roe.
Since I’ra denied to live.
Have roerej on my guilty souL
And all roj sins forgive.
Oh grant me fortitude to die.
This sinful world to leave
My tender wife and children.
For me pray do not grieve.
Ail you that wander far and near
My fatal end to see, *
Look on my fate and let it be,
A warning unto thee,
Since this world I’me bound toW
1f) l-ifWl ft Io n a i
... For now alas } die.
with the horrid crimes I have com- died aaddonlv ’<? . „ ,
milled on mj head ; what most be 4t’lW dAumvteLT'bl,*!
t!i}' feelings to know that thy miser- n xlo> wJth iho warder, by no means lessen to the *em P “h*” lh * t eT!nce^. denee addaeed o H the trial * * T)K
able husband perish on the gallows his guilt By those of any know Mkeafiim. "h s f 7hi: . nholt>oC the property possessed by
for one of the most horrid crimes f£Slv " the reorder. buti, continually attacked with . tIS *»' *“•*«• X
that ever -vm.. committed, by man.„ «d *”£s“ JOtlenf paroxysms af grief and in the bitterest to the tiij W 80m ? t « a# JWtfaHu-
JVlyaear wife, these are die last hig for?-r , h **7
lines Ihou will receive from thy '«’«* .favourable impression. Cfelly
wretched husband, and dh ! how 1 a "w“ effeeted I ° h,s ™ er > helis- eycrywcrd a.fd action to “ er ' d pad who are now ' ‘
pray thou offerup thy prayers „ t | le SwIS’?" “ fA Mr ' f°”"
God of Mercy for the forg,ve« |s _of of.A c,,,i«Uf ,l» gMI *.b.Wi A “ZSS“” W
the horrid crimes I have commutes remanns withbi* request thro.gfaout Lawell, shaking bin. most heartily by the hand v," 0 ” were
ivi_ i r- i, * tae dav. as a sort nf i ~ - ■ rr t , i , . , , J /. "* Wnom had tn tm c., ~ - ’ _
on the"
bytms strange'and
the meettag broke up i„ a la rm aad
U e do not of course vouch for the a u tb eJS-
ttcity of the statement. Even if tr£ ~
would nut asstgn to it any other
than that of a strange comcidence, deriviror
waatever interest it possesses f roia b; Z
qiwnt ctreumstanaea, bat for which it would
have passed into merited oblivion If bo
ewr. TaweU was present at such a
he was then really contemplating the eommis-
sion of the enme, wh.ch be afterwards per
petra.ed, and for which he now awaits the
-final penalty of the law. there must have been
P r^r UCedl a hIS • ml ° a a tom P Ofa T susponsioa
of purpose, arising from an idea that it wa .
TZJSZTSZ?? 1 te '.* tu '™> -us.
s-s , , * • uiw wGica
tile beliefe afibrdeti
to individoak for purposes which They nrov
not at tbo tune fully tmderstaai but which
derive interpretation from the event, As vet
no kind of con.ession is known to have b4b
made by TawelL
wiaioa. Printer, Buckingham.
', J/c^-U^U-
-J /Ih. //„-£_ /C
77 ftj&L
t. v I i y ;
the horrid crimes I have
