

ONE SHILLING
LIFE-
AND DEATH
IN BELGIUM
At the coming of the Germans,
August to October, 1914.
By Ten Belgian Journalists
in Exile.
AUSTRALIA.
1917:
Critchley Parker.
Published in aid of the work of the Overseas
Committee of the British Institute of Journalists
in seeking help throughout the world for the
exiled Journalists of Belgium, their wives and
children.




COPYRIGHT.
LIFE—
AND DEATH
IN BELGIUM
At the coming of the Germans,
August to October, 1914.
By Ten Belgian Journalists
in Exile.
AUSTRALIA.
1917:
Critchley Parker.
Published in aid of the work of the Overseas
Committee of the British Institute of Journalists
in seeking help throughout the world for the
exiled Journalists of Belgium, their wives and
children.




COMMENDATORY FOREWORD.
To the Reading Public of the Commonwealth:
We beg to recommend to the favourable consideration of
the Australian reading public the letters and narratives pub-
lished in this volume. The letterpress consists of the per-
sonal narratives of ten eminent Belgian journalists, relating
their experiences in Belgium during the early months
of this great war. In common with enormous num-
bers of the Belgian people, the journalists of Belgium have
been impoverished and ruined in consequence of the unwar-
ranted invasion of that country by Germany. In order
to mitigate their sad state, the journalists of Great
Britain and the Commonwealth have suggested means
whereby the Belgian journalists may place themselves and
their story in direct communication with the British
Empire. The narrators may be left to speak for themselves.
All who subscribe to this volume will have the satisfaction
of knowing that they will be giving direct assistance to a
considerable number of eminent and deserving men, not the
least deserving section of a race which has suffered a tem-
porary eclipse owing to its magnificent attachment to


principles of honour and national rectitude which form part
and parcel of the political ideals of the British people.
T. W. Heney, Editor "Sydney Morning Herald ," Sydney.
Ed. S. Cunningham, Editor “Argus" Melbourne.
D. D. Braham, Editor “Daily Telegraph ” Sydney.
G. F. H. Schuler, Editor “Age" Melbourne.
Montague Grover, Editor “Sun" Sydney.
J. J. Knight, Editor "Courier " Brisbane.
Will. J. Sowden, Editor “Register," Adelaide.
W. H. Simmonds, Editor “Mercury" Hobart.
J- Langdon Bonython, Editor “Advertiser" Adelaide.
J. E. Davidson, Editor “Herald," Melbourne.
C. A. Macfarlane, Editor “Daily Mail" Brisbane.
W. Kraig, Editor “Daily Post" Hobart.
Jno. Gunning, Editor “Daily Telegraph," Launceston, Tas.
George Mack ay. Editor “Bendigo Advertiser,” Bendigo.
Chas. L. Smith, Editor “Ballarat Star," Ballarat.
Thos. W. Cotton, Editor “Ballarat Courier" Ballarat. '
E. A. Banks, Editor “Bendigo Independent,” Bendigo.
Alfred Langler, Editor “West Australian," Perth.
A. Lotvekin, Editor “Daily News,” Perth,


LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS.
J. Claes, Director “La Metropole” ( Antwerp daily
paper).
Belgium Before the War 3°
Lievin Huysmans, “Independance Beige” ( Brussels
daily paper).
The First Tragic Flight—Refugees from Liege
at Brussels 4°
P. Maerhoudt, “La Metropole” ( Antwerp daily
paper) .
The Flight from Antwerp 68
George Verdavaine, “Independance Beige” {Brussels
daily paper).
The Sack of Louvain 44
E. Heinzman-Savino, Editor of “Le Matin,” Ant-
werp, formerly President of the Belgian Press
Association.
A Night of Bombardment ( Antwerp, October,
1914) 7
Flor Burton, Director of “De Nieuwe Gazet,” Ant-
werp ; Chairman of the Belgian Press Associa-
tion (English-War-Time-Section), London.
The German Invasion and Belgian Women .... 62


Edw. Fontcync, Brussels. *
One Page of a Tragic Story—The Germans in
Brussels 54
Achille Chainaye, “Champal,” on the staff of the
"Chronique de Bruxelles.”
The Martyrdom of Dinant, on the Meuse .... 91
E.D.W.
At Ostend ( October , 1914) 77
L. Vandcrslyen.
....
The Belgians on the Yser! .. .; 89


GERMAN PROCLAMATIONS.
Proclamation Distributed on 4 th August, 1914 •• • • 99
Proclamation Issued by the General Commanding-in-
Chief, the 2nd Army, Von Bulow 103
Notice Posted in Hasselt on 17 th August, 1914 .. .. 107
Extract of a Proclamation to the Communal Authori-
ties of the Tozvn of Liege 109
Proclamation Posted up in Namur on 2sth August,
1914 in
Letter Sent by Lieut.-Gen. Von Nieber to the Burgo-
master of Wavre on the 27th August, 1914 .... 115
Proclamation Posted up in Grivegnee on Bth Septem-
ber, 1914 119
Summons to Surrender 129
Proclamation Posted in Brussels on 25 th September,
1914
Notice Posted in Brussels on s th October, 1914, and
Probably in Most of the Communes of the King-
dom 133
Notice Posted in Brussels, Ist November, 1914 .. ~ 135




A NIGHT OF BOMBARDMENT.
(Antwerp, October, 1914.)
E. HEINZMAN-SAVINO,
Editor “Le Matin,” Antwerp, formerly President of the
Belgian Press Association.
AND now, my dear child, I am come to the
end of this long recital—founded upon my
memory of the incidents which occurred
during the siege. It only remains for me to set
down the epilogue—the bombardment of our
city by the troops of the Kaiser—who deserves
only too well the epithet bestowed upon him by
common consent—that of the “modern Attila.”
That Antwerp escaped total destruction was
only due to the devotion of certain courageous
citizens, whose names history—more grateful
than their contemporaries—will transmit to pos-
terity. At the peril of their lives during the dark-
ness of the night, braving a thousand dangers,
they proceeded to the general headquarters of
the German army at Tildonck —situated at a dis-
tance of five or six leagues from the town, there
to confer with General Von Ressler, commander-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


in-chief of the German forces. The result of
their heroic efforts was that the bombardment
was suspended, it having- been shown that the
Belgian army had evacuated the city, and that all
resistance had ceased.
But I will resume the thread of my narrative
from the moment when the Germans, having-
passed the River Nethe, in spite of the- deter-
mined opposition of our soldiers, as already
related, understood that the few forts of the
outer circle, which still held out, could not much
longer bar their road to Antwerp—of which they
were soon to gain possession. The military
staff at Antwerp itself did not further endeavour
to hide from the inhabitants the gravity of the
situation.
The King put himself at the head of the troops
who had evacuated the town, and then began that
marvellous retreat of 200 kilometres (one kilo-
metre—lo96 yards) towards the west and the
French frontier. Its object was the river Yser
—that glorious stream on the banks of which,
for several months, our army herqically defended
that last remnant of Belgian territory against
the German hordes.
Queen Elizabeth also left the palace, in the
Place de Meir at Antwerp, in order to betake
herself to the theatre of the war—there where
her kindly presence was demanded—there where
her devotion in attending to the sick and wounded
would have full play. At the same time, the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Belgian Ministers of State and the Diplomatic
body left the city and embarked upon one of the
Belgian mail steamers for Ostend.
At least one-third of the population had already
fled; but, as soon as it became known that the
bombardment was inevitable and that the Ger-
mans could enter unopposed, then the exodus
‘from the town became general.
The city, which throughout the siege had never
been seriously disconcerted, was now abandoned,
and soon assumed a deserted, nay, lugubrious, as-
pect. The houses were closed, blinds were drawn
down, no sign of life anywhere: the place seemed
to be abandoned, the streets deserted, and, after
nightfall, one could not venture into them with-
out danger, since, as I have already explained
to you, they were no longer lighted up for fear
of a visit of the Zeppelins. Added to this was
the never ending roar of the cannons —ever in-
creasing in its sinister intensity: the passing
along the principal thoroughfares of motors
carrying the wounded or loaded with ammuni-
tion. These direful sounds alone disturbed the
silence —day and night. Picture these things,
and you can easily imagine what Antwerp was
like at this tragic period of her history.
We now come to the 7th October. In the
morning of that day the newspaper proprietors,
or their representatives, met together and
decided that the issue of that afternoon’s news-
papers should be the last to appear. The majority
of the editors and reporters had remained at their
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


posts, but the presses and machines were disor-r
ganised, and neither distributors nor sellers
answered to the call for service. It was felt that
the moment was rapidly approaching when the
newspapers must necessarily cease to appear.
As I was returning from the street of the old
Exchange, in which are situated the offices of
“Le Matin,” and near the rue Verdussen in which
we were living, I met Miss Emma 8., whose
family lived close by, and was one of the very
few families in that locality which had not quitted
the town.
“It is terrible,” she said to me, with tears in
her eyes, “to leave like this, to abandon one's
home and all the loving memories connected with
it. It is heart-rending. It is in this house that
my sister and I have always lived; it is there that
my parents died.”
“Are you going to leave?”
“One cannot do otherwise —it is not possible to
remain. The Germans will destroy the town,
and God alone knows what will then happen ?”
On her countenance there was depicted such
an expression of real terror that I gave up any
hope of being able to reassure her. As a matter
of fact, it would have been imprudent for me to
have attempted to so do, seeing that I was aware
of the events that were preparing.
Your father and his friends, Messrs. W., who
all belonged to the first battery of the Civic-
Guard Artillery, had the idea of following the
army in its retreat, and joining as volunteers.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


They had, in fact, purchased the articles neces-
sary to complete their equipment. The better
to give effect to their project, they joined them-
selves to the troops which had come from the
front and were now in our part of the city, mak-
ing their way towards the Scheldt. But, when
the party reached the movable landing-stage near
the Steen, they ran against some officers .in
authority, who rather brutally sent them back
again. They were informed that the Civic Guard
was not disbanded, and that, ponsequently, they
must rejoin their company as quickly as possible.
Whether or not this were the case, I cannot
say. I spent the whole afternoon of the 7th
October looking for your father. I have already
told you that since the month of August, when
the first Zeppelin that came to Antwerp had
destroyed several houses in our street, your
grandmother and your aunts, with yourself and
little Marie Christine had left,first for Ostend,and
then for England. Your uncle Gustave had en-
listed since the beginning of the war; your uncle
Edward was still at the Congo. Frick was liv-
ing in his own house at Berchem, and was
serving in the Civic Guard, that is to say, in an
infantry regiment, mounting guard with your
father every other night on the ramparts.
Our servants had left us a week previously.
Anne was with her sister in Holland; she had
taken with her our dog “Fox,” so that your father
and I were absolutely alone in the house. I was
very much perplexed as to “what I was going to
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


do. The newspaper had ceased to appear; the
company, of which I was one of the managing
directors, had no longer need of my services,
and there were no other duties which kept me
at Antwerp.
But I was leaving behind many dear friends
who had boldly announced to me their resolution
not to depart. This filled me with a sort of
shame; I did not like the idea of separating from
them in the hour of danger; in regard to the
danger itself this affected me but slightly. But
that which I did not fear for myself, I dreaded
for the others. There were in existence all sorts
of contradictory rumours as to how the Germans
would conduct themselves, especially in regard
to the Civic Guard, which had taken part in the
city s defence. Would they be content merely
to disarm them or would the citizen soldiers be
considered as prisoners of war? They had not
yet been disbanded; and, although it would have
been absurd to count upon them effectively ta
prolong the resistance, yet it also true that in
the last moments our Civic Guard, in conjunction
with the troops that were in some of the forts,
alone held the Germans somewhat in check,
From the tops of the glacis slopes dominating'
the space as seen from the ramparts, they had
kept watch through the unfathomable mysteries
ot the night, which menaced them with perils
of the most appalling kind.
At about 6 o clock, as I was walking along by
the side of the Park, which was absolutely de-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


serted, a voice hailed me. It was your Dncle
Frick whom chance, really miraculously, had
made to cross my path. He was on his way to
call upon some friends living close-by; we walked
on, and he, chatting with his customary good
humour, said:
“Don’t bother about me; carry out your own
plans. As for me, my bicyclette is ready at
home, and I shall know how to manage.”
In another instant, two detonations, louder
than the permanent roar of the cannon, shook
the air around us. They appeared fo come from
the south-west —close enough to the town.
“You hear,” continued your uncle, “they are
without doubt blowing up down there the last
works that remained of the defence, or perhaps
the powder magazine. lam going to see my
friends Messrs. V. in order to ascertain what they
have decided to do. In regard to ourselves (the
Civil Guard) we are not disbanded, and to-night,
if we do not wish to be cpnsidered as deserters,
we shall be obliged to go on duty on the ram-
parts. I will now leave you; it is time!”
We embraced each other cordially, and went
on our several ways, uncertain whether or not
we should ever meet again. He was soon out
of sight. I at once returned home, hoping to
find your father at the house.
But I had hardly gone a hundred yards when
I perceived him at the corner of the Chaussee
de Malines; he was carrying a portmanteau in
his hand. It appeared that for a long time we
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


had been vainly seeking the one for the other.
He also told me that his battery was still under
arms, and that he was under orders to go on duty
—that very evening at 8 o’clock—in the most
distant part of Deurne—a suburb of Antwerp.
But, in order not to be obliged to traverse the
city deserted and without light he and the
Brothers W. had retained rooms at one of the
Boulevard hotels, situated near the Athenee
Royal (High School for Boys); this was on the
direct road leading to Turnhout and to Deurne.
“One does not know what may happen to-
night,” he said, “and you can readily understand
that I am not willing to be taken by the Germans
and sent as a prisoner into Poland to fight against
the Russians. Since the Government does not
now require our services, there will always be
time to enrol us later on. Go home—get every-
thing required for travelling, and then come and
rejoin me at the hotel. As soon as we shall be
disbanded, we will leave.”
And when I objected that I had no intention
of leaving the city so abruptly, he turned upon
me and with a tone of voice that was quite foreign
to him, and looking at me steadily in the face
he said:
“It’s good—as you decide not to leave, I also
decide to remain!”
I endeavoured to calm him, and promised that
m any case I would rejoin him at the rendezvous
fixed; and thus we parted! How I did rejoin him.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


and why I, at length, decided to leave the city
with him, you will perhaps now understand. If
I had refused to follow him, he would have done
what he said: he would have remained with me.
In so doing, he would have incurred great dan-
ger. Besides, for some time past, I had been
contemplating the idea of going abroad -with a
view of being of some service to the country.
Once the Germans were in possession of the
town, it would have been difficult, if not impos-
sible, to realise this project. I, therefore, went to
our deserted house; and, having packed my port-
manteau with the things I most needed, I came
away with many painful misgivings at heart.
Turning round at the bottom of the street, I
sadly gazed for a moment at the home which I
was destined, perhaps, never to see again.
The hotel on the Boulevards, at which I arrived
about evening, was filled with officers and private
soldiers. General W., commanding the troops of
the fortress, and his Staff were lodging there. I
also found there your father and the Brothers
W., haversacks on back, rifle in hand, and ready
to go on service on the northern side of the city,
where they were posted in a wretched dug-out in
the ditch of the glacis. They were on guard over
an anti-air craft gun, and only a month previously
had they made it do good service, since they had
been able to force a Zeppelin, which hovered
directly over them at night time, to turn out of
its way. Not, however, before it had discharged
upon the gallant defenders a rain of shrapnel,
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


and also some bombs; these last did no harm,
however; they burst in the waters of the moat.
When your father and the Brothers W. were
gone, we sat down to supper. I took my place
with the officers. The meal was eaten in silence.
The faces of those in my immediate neighbour-
hood were not so much serious as hardened
by the bitterness engendered by discouragement
and distrust. From the few words which were
exchanged between the General and his officers,
I fancied that they were expecting orders from
some superior authority which never came. From
time to time express-orderlies entered, but these
did not apparently bring the news that was
expected.
After the supper the General, with his aide-de-
camp, retired to an adjoining room; but I re-
mained in the dining-room chatting with a cap-
tain whom I knew—both of us smoking cigars..
But, at about half-past ten, your father and the
Brothers W. rushed abruptly into the room;
they were without arms and without haversacks.
Scarcely were they inside than they told me
that, immediately on arrival at their post, the
commandant in charge of the battery had told
them that they were disbanded, and that they
were to go and give up their arms and equipment
to the Staff of the special corps of the Civic Guard..
This order had meant for them an hour’s march,
since the Staff in question had its quarters in
a small house in the Place Van Ryswyck, at the
other end of the town. But they never for a.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


moment thought of disobeying orders, and had
just returned from discharging this duty.
But your father told me that many of the men,
in order to get rid of their equipment as soon
as possible, and to avoid going to their homes
with the compromising articles in their posses-
sion, had simply cast them aside on their way
home.
At the foot of the statue of Rubens in the Place
Verte—the Square in front of the Cathedral —
there were piles of arms, great coats, and haver-
sacks thrown there pell-mell by the unnerved
Civic Guard.
Since I had entered the hotel, I remarked that
one could hear the cannons’ roar much more
distinctly there than we could in our own house.
The contrary should have been the case, as the
street in which we lived was more in the out-
skirts of the town. But, for a time, I did not
attach any importance to this fact. I must tell
you that the dull, sullen roar of the large siege
guns had been so continuous for so many weeks
that the sound was ever present to the ear; and
I seemed to hear it even in the dead of night
when all was calm and still.
At about eleven o’clock, your father, his com-
rades, and I went up to our rooms. I made haste
to undress, and, being worn out with fatigue,
got into bed. But nearer than ever seemed to
come the roar of the guns; there were moments
when I thought that firing was going on in the
centre of the town itself. I was trying, never-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


theless, to get to sleep, when suddenly someone
knocked violently at my door.
“Who is it?” I cried out, without leaving m>
bed.
“It is I,” replied your father, for it was he..
“Are you asleep?” inquired he.
“No,” I replied, “why?”
“Get up at once,” he answered, “and Come
down stairs!” I was on the fourth floor, and
he had his room on the floor below. “Don’t lose
any time,” he continued, “we will take your
portmanteau later on!”
“Well, what’s the matter?” I inquired anxi-
ously.
“The Bosches are bombarding the town; make
haste!” he cried out, and then hastily descended
the staircase.
I jumped out of bed and quickly began to
dress. I went, however, to the window, and
opened it. It was a clear and calm October
night—the neighbouring squares were filled with
the odour of the damp soil and of dead leaves—
forerunner of the winter that was so soon to
come. I had scarcely opened the window and
thrust my head outside when a hissing sound,
strident and prolonged, clove through the air
at some little distance away, and was immedi-
ately followed by an explosion; at the same in-
stant I heard a dull grinding sound as if a wall
were suddenly crumbling to pieces. And, during
the night, many such hissing noises and explo-
sions were heard by the distracted watchers in
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


the city. There was no longer room for doubt;
the noise was that of shells falling on the town;
the bombardment had commenced.
I had not finished unpacking my portmanteau;
I reclosed it, and placed it outside on the landing.
Then I went downstairs. On the next story I
saw your father and the Brothers W. coming
out of rooms which opened into a long passage.
They were loaded with parcels of clothing done
up in knotted sheets. They reminded me of the
poor creatures who had come from Lierre,
Aerschot, Duffel, Vieux Dieu, and other places
round Antwerp: daily, during the siege, had
they passed before our e}^es —men, women and
children, mad with terror and bending under the
burden of their personal effects, and even of
articles of furniture, and wending their weary
way towards the harbour!
‘’You are a good type of the fugitive!” said I
to one of the Brothers W., and, in spite of the
terrible situation in which we were, we could not
help laughing.
Arrived on the first floor, we saw, on the land-
ing, General W. He was wearing an undress
jacket, and on his head a regulation kepi, or cap,
with the gold band denoting his rank.
“What’s the matter?” he asked, in rather an
ill-tempered tone of voice.
“General!” replied one of us, “it has come at
last! The town is being bombarded.”
The intelligence seemed to make no decided
impression on him; he simply shrugged feis
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


shoulders, and, without a word, was about to
re-enter his room. But at this moment, suddenly
arrived an officer, followed by a private soldier,
who had mounted the staircase four steps at a
time.
“General!” said the officer, saluting, “all is
ready down below.”
“That’s good,” was the reply, “we will go.”
“Have you anything for us to take down,
General ?” asked the officer.
“No, not for the moment. Later on, we shall
see. I suppose that ”
But we did not stop to hear the rest of the
sentence. As a matter of fact, we ourselves went
down; and when we reached the ground floor we
found some soldiers and the hotel waiters taking
chairs from the dining-room and carrying them
down into the cellarage. They were using candles
and wax tapers to show light. The hotel was
rather an old building, and the cellars under the
circumstances constituted for us an excellent
refuge. In addition to the General and his
Staff—which consisted of three or four officers
and their orderlies—there were gathered to-
gether in the cellars a cyclist-platoon, the land-
lord and the landlady, the waiters and ourselves—
in all about twenty-eight persons. Apart from the
natural dread lest the hotel, an old building of
five stories, struck by a shell, should be demol-
ished and we buried alive, we felt no particular
apprehension, and were more or less at our ease.
So much so, that we endeavoured to raise a
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


laugh by indulging in witty criticisms of our un-
wonted situation. And if the attempt failed, it
was because we were all so worn out with fatigue
that sleep vindicated its rights; one or two of our
number were hardy enough to go upstairs and
bring down pillows, and with these placed
against the wall, we tried our best to forget our
troubles and find repose.
The German batteries were too far away for us
to hear the noise of their discharge, but large
shells of 24 and 32 inches were made to rain on
the town so regularly that it became almost
monotonous —now they seemed to burst quite
near, and now far away from the place in which
we had found shelter. You have seen from the
photographs, which I have shown to you, that the
centre of the town was terribly tried; every one
of the houses in the shoe market —where were the
offices of your uncle Frick and his father-in-law
—was levelled to the ground. The square of
houses and of old buildings which were between
this street, the egg-market, and the rue aux Lits
have likewise disappeared. And certain other
parts —like those of the south—of the south-east
of Berchem and of the Pepiniere (formerly nur-
series) have also suffered severely.
In other parts of the town fires were fiercely
burning, and from the vent-holes of the cellars in
which we had taken refuge we could clearly see
their reflection in the sky.
Once or twice one of the officers or soldiers
volunteered to go out and ascertain what havoc,
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


so far, had been effected by the bombardment.
But the general energetically forbade any such
thing.
“Remain here,” said he to them. “Don’t be
foolish. Foolhardiness is not bravery!”
Several times he turned towards the members
of his staff, and asked them if they were sure that
no lights were burning overhead.
“There’s no occasion to let them know where
we are,” he rightly remarked.
The Germans were so admirably served by
their spy system, that they knew everything that
was going on in the town, and would certainly be
aware of the exact spot in which could be found
the Commander of the fortress and his staff. On
this they would direct the fire of their mortars, if
only they could rightly locate it.
Quite suddenly, about half-past one in the
morning, there was heard the ringing of a tele-
phone call. This manifestation of the outer life
in the city really made us tremble with excite-
ment—we, that is to say, your father, his com-
rades, and I, were in a tomb, and yet here was
proof chat the world still existed. The officers,
however, did not evince any surprise, since they
knew that the hotel had been connected by tele-
phone with the offices of. the General Staff. An
officer immediately went to the telephone-cabinet
and returned saying—
“ General, it is to let us know that one of the
city gates, that of Boom, has been blown up; it
had been done because about a thousand of the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


enemy was observed approaching the city in this
direction.”
“Is that all?”
“Yes, General!”
He seemed to be disappointed; he replaced his
pillow against the wall, and tried to sleep once
more. But at the end of a few moments he stood
up and called to him one of the cyclists, who,
seated on a stone step in a passage close by, was
tranquilly smoking his pipe. He whispered into
his ear certain instructions; the cyclist carried his
hand to his kepi, turned on his heel, mounted the
staircase, and was gone.
Your father, the Brothers W., and I, were still
in the cellar trying, like the others, to obtain re-
pose, without knowing, however, what we should
be called upon to do next. But the telephone
call, which we had just heard, caused us to reflect.
It might be that the Germans would enter the
city without waiting for its surrender. What
should we do then ? I fancied that I heard one of
the officers say that the general headquarters
staff had departed that very night, and left the
town for an unknown destination; if such were
the case, there was no further question of resist-
ance. In fact, as I have already said, apart from
certain detonations very distant and apparently
coming from the south-east—probably from some
fort in the lower Scheldt, the German mortars
alone caused themselves to be heard.
Dawn was now beginning to appear; I per-
ceived the first appearance through the dust-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM


covered glass of a low window in front of me. It
was time to come to some decision; we held a
consultation, and finally made up our minds what
to do. First of all, it was necessary to get down
to the harbour in any way we could —either in the
early morning, or, in any case, during the day—
and there, if it were possible, to find a place on
some vessel going to Holland.
To give you an idea of our situation, I must tell
you that your father, the Brothers W., and I de-
cided that it was first of all necessary to go out-
side and see what was happening. We reached
the street by a side door, used by the servants of
the hotel, arid opening out into a small street
which apparently was little exposed to danger.
It was beginning to be light, but the atmosphere
was heavy and damp. The broad street which
ran beside the Athenee Royal was quite empty.
In front —on the town side—the shells still con-
tinued to hiss, tracing their parabola through the
air; some of them burst above the roofs, giving
forth flames, which immediately changed into a
white thick cloud of gaseous smoke. The noise
of the bursting shells was the only sound we
heard. A profound silence reigned everywhere;
one might have said that the spirit of destruction
was operating on a town already dead.
We re-entered the hotel, and were served with
coffee and bread and butter. We took this wel-
come breakfast in the dining-room, since we were
no longer obsessed by the dread of the shells. We
spent nearly the whole morning in our prepara-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


tions for departure. At a certain moment, glanc-
ing out on the square in front of the hotel, we
there saw two or three military motor-cars,
which might have been there the evening before,
or whose arrival we had not noticed. In any case
General W. and his staff presently took their
places in them, and were carried away very
rapidly. But we were too much engrossed in our
preparations to pay much attention to what was
passing around us. The day was already rather
advanced when, having paid our score, we left the
hotel, which had afforded to us such timely shel-
ter. We were obliged to cross the famous avenue,
which at this particular point is very wide, and
then to pass down several narrow streets in order
to reach the harbour. The passage of these
streets was dangerous enough, but happily we
got through safely. We carried our luggage,
each one of us being loaded up like a pack mule;
this necessarily impeded our footsteps. The
streets were all deserted; but, as we slowly passed
down one of them, we noticed a small beer shop,
such as one finds in the populous quarter of Ant
werp ; it was open, and on the doorstep fresh sand
had just been sprinkled. At this door stood a
pan—-probably the landlord—tranquilly smok-
ing his pipe and unconcernedly chatting with
such of his neighbours who had ventured abroad.
These were two or three women of the working
class, with hair dishevelled, and one of them with
an infant in her arms! They listened attentively
but sadly to what the man was saying; these were
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM


his words as he pointed to us trudging mourn'
fully on our way to safety:—
“Look, there are some more going to the har-
bour. They’ll not find even a small boat to take
them across the river to Austreweel.”*
It was for us a sorry prognostic; happily, it did
not turn out to be a true one. We found our-
selves at last on the Quay Jordaens, where we
saw many people who were fugitives like our-
selves, and some of whom, so we were told, had
spent the whole night in the hope of being able
to find some vessel to take them away. Every-
where were heaped up all sorts of household
goods—clothing and other personal effects,
boxes, cases, bundles of kitchen utensils done up
in a sheet, articles of furniture, and even bird-
cages, with the little songsters still inside. The
river itself had a sinister aspect; the vessels
moored to the wharves appeared to be quite
empty, and without a soul on board. Here and
there, one could see barges and tugs floating with
the tide; and, as the petroleum tanks at Hoboken
had been emptied of their contents, the oil was
floating on the surface of the stream, and the ex-
halations from it were nauseous and insupport-
able.
On the opposite, or left bank, of the river, one
could perceive the Tete de Flandres, its docks and
ship-building yards half destroyed. Some cafes
*A small village on the left bank of the Scheldt, imme-
diately opposite to Antwerp.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


and pleasure gardens of the locality seemed to
have suffered the same fate. Towards the south
of the town, the shells were still wending their
rapid flight through the air. At times, during
their passage, they appeared almost to touch the
beautiful lace-like spire of the cathedral, which
stood forth alone, however, like a sentinel, im-
passively watching the terrible drama going on
around it—indifferent to the havoc and to the
ruin that was being wrought. It is certain that
the gilded dials of the clock, which for centuries
past had marked the hours of each day, had never
been witnesses of a more tragic scene.,
After a long, a very long wait on the quay, we
succeeded in finding places on board a small
barge, which very slowly got under weigh in the
wake of a steam tug. *But if we had taken the
road which, through Merxem, leads to the Dutch
frontier, it would have been worse. Your uncle
Frick, who had taken that road on his bicycle,
told me later on of the sufferings and misfortunes
of the unhappy folk who had tried to escape by
that route. The women especially, with their
little ones, fell exhausted by the wayside, and
were unable to proceed further.' Many of them
spent the night in the woods almost dead with
fatigue and hunger. And to these dreadful
miseries was added the fearful dread of being
overtaken by the Uhlans of the ruthless Huns.
To return to ourselves. I cannot relate all the
peripatetics of our interminable voyage. Some
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


of the passengers had gone down into the barge’s
cold. Others, shivering on the deck, cast —with
lack-lustre eyes —a melancholy gaze on the flow-
ing stream, but they said not a word. There were
a few moments of excitement when we passed the
fort of St. Maria Liefkenshoek, on which was still
displayed the Belgian flag. It was probably long
ere we should again see it flying freely in the
breeze. From the upper parts of the glacis, the
soldiers of the garrison watched us as we passed
down stream? What were their thoughts?
What was about to happen ?
At length, after six long hours of travelling on
the Scheldt, and the Rhine Canal, and long stop-
pages at the different locks, we reached the little
Dutch town of Hansweert. Often had I been
there before with a party of friends on pleasure
bent; since then what changes had taken place!
And what more to tell you, dear Jeannot. Your
father and I had a bad time the few days we
stayed in the township. The most cruel moment
of all, perhaps, was that when, on the very first
day of our arrival, we found ourselves towards
midnight on the embankment, amidst a profound
silence, and away from the world. Suddenly we
paused—was it a hallucination? No! was
no doubt about it! Listening attentively, we
could hear there, in the place we had so recently
quitted, a dull, sullen rumbling, the growl of
heavy guns, which lost itself in the night. And in
the same direction, above the dark horizon, we
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM


I could perceive the blood-red reflection of numer-
ous fires.
“The cruel wretches, what are they doing
now?” exclaimed your father, clenching' his fist.
For myself, I could only feel in my whole being
the anguish of despair, the cruel vehemence of a
rage just but impotent!
We remained on the spot for a few moments,
our eyes fixed on the terrible scene. We were
looking at our beloved country overthrown,
bleeding and destroyed! “One’s country!” Yes,
my dear Jeannot, you have here a phrase which
expresses a something the value of which you
can only realise when you have lost it!
And at last, when we turned to retrace our
steps, we looked before us into a dark void—into
an unknown future—there stretching before us
was the exile’s path, with all its bitter wander-
ings. ' 1
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


BELGIUM BEFORE THE WAR1
The Country Mined long anterior to the War.—
Germany’s Commercial Policy.—A Lesson
To-day.—A Duty To-morrow.
J. CLAES,
Director “Le Metropole,” Antwerp newspaper.
IT has been often said, and with truth, that the
feverish ambition which induced Germany
to bring about the war was the greatest
mistake she could possibly have made, since for
some time past, owing to the success of her com-
mercial policy, she had gained a world-wide
ascendancy in every branch of trade.
To accomplish her political ends, she fully
availed herself of the great progress she made on
the world's markets; and never scrupled to ruin,
methodically and wherever possible, her competi-
tors, in those countries where she was able to
push her wares.
She gained her influence, legitimate or other-
wise, over foreign banks and industries by the
simple expedient of introducing into them her
own men and her own capital. And when a per-
fect control was achieved, she used it to promote
the ends of her imperial policy!
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


This is how her purposes were gained; she sent
forth her sons, for the most part clever, well-
educated young men, who entered a bank, mer-
chant's office, or factory as simple clerks, at a
low salary. Or she informed herself where capi-
tal was wanted, and could be advantageously
placed—although this latter was not really mate-
rial to the object sought to be gained. The
clerk or the capitalist was not long before he
obtained a position of importance in the firm or
company, and little by little the same firm or
company became essentially a German house or
was under German control.
The clerk, as such, was not the least dangerous
of the agents employed by Imperial Germany.
Wholly imbued with the spirit of patriotism and
of duty to the Fatherland, the clerk did not al-
low any scruples to burden his conscience. He
steadily set before his eyes the hope and pros-
pect of one day being either manager or even a
partner in the firm in which he was employed.
He therefore studiously set himself out to pry
into the means by which the business of the firm
or company was extended; and obtained a com-
plete list of the customers. Then, if his imme-
diate personal aims were perchance frustrated,
he set up in business for himself; and, at once, be-
came a formidable competitor with the very men
whom he had used as the stepping stones to his
commercial success.
And German banking-houses were equally in-
different to their moral obligations towards the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


firms with which they did business. For in-
stance, certain Belgian houses, induced by fav-
ourable discount rates, applied to the German
Banks for the ordinary trade accommodation,
when they had to do with firms abroad. But
they soon found out, to their dismay, that their
business with these foreign customers was mys-
teriously snatched from them by their German
competitors in the same districts!
Such malpractices will not surprise those who
know that for some time past education in Ger-
many tended to imbue the minds of its young men
with the idea that this “sharpness” in transact-
ing business was to be encouraged rather than
otherwise. “The end justifies the means” was
the maxim to be followed whenever the interests
of the Fatherland were concerned. In a word, in
the general aspiration “Deutschland über alles”
(Germany before everything) we have the key to
the whole situation!
In his work, entitled “The German Mole,” the
writer has pointed out the different ways in
which the “burrowing” for trade relations was
effected. He has shown how odiously the Ger-
mans in Belgium abused the generous hospitality
that was accorded to them. He has narrated how
they identified themselves with every philan-
thropic and artistic movement, and that the local
influence, so acquired, was enormous.
1 o cite one instance in support: it may be said,
without fear of contradiction, that the most pro-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


minent man in Antwerp —one before whom the
whole town inclined —was a certain Baron von
X . He was very rich and very generous;
he was but the tool, however, of the German
Minister at Brussels, and of the German Consul
at Antwerp. His claim to be the leader of the
German colony was undisputed—a colony which
was admirably well organised so far as unanimity
of purpose among its members was concerned.
This colony had its own social clubs, choral
societies, gymnastic clubs, benevolent funds,
schools, churches, masonic lodges, and news-
papers in its own language. The chief of this
colony was practically the master of the city of
Antwerp.
This powerful colony, in the course of time,
succeeded in making not only Antwerp but the
whole of Belgium believe that the port of Ant-
werp owed its progress and prosperity solely to
the Germans! That without them its import-
ance would rapidly decline!
Such exaggerated pretensions could not be al-
lowed to pass, except by those Belgians who,
cleverly as they thought, had associated them-
selves with the German trading community. No
one else, who knew the real position of affairs,
could accept such an idea for a moment.
One thing, however, which gave credence to
the supposed preponderating influence of the
Germans, was the large number of them who had
settled in Antwerp. Their cafes,* shops, etc.,
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


found in all the principal thoroughfares, gave to
the city a more or less German aspect.
We have taken Belgium, and more particu-
larly Antwerp, as examples of teutonic duplicity,
because in Antwerp itself we have been able to
follow, with anxious solicitude, the gradual
economic servitude which there obtained. We
have seen politicians, merchants, and financiers
lending their support to the Germans in
midst, and going out of their way to instil into
the mind o| the populace a sentiment of grati-
tude towards Germany.
And the very neutrality of Belgium, imposing
as it did on the Government and on the Press
the exercise of much discretion in regard to
foreign politics, greatly favoured the propaganda
of the pro-Germanists,
As a matter of fact, if a Belgian, and especially
an Antwerp newspaper, happened to insert an
article adversely criticising Germany, the pro-
prietors of the journal were immediately made to
understand that notice had been taken of the
matter by the “Verein,” that is to say, by the
Committee acting as the representatives of all
the German clubs and societies.
r° be able thus to place a journal on the
“Inclex” says much—very much—for the power
exercised by the Germans in regard to the Press:
it was nothing more or less than the power to
boycott the offending journal in the matter of ad-
vertisements. If to this we add the fact that
some Belgian newspapers owed their origin
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


wholly to the exigencies of German Imperial
politics, while others were largely subsidised by
German gold, it will be readily understood to
what extent the Belgian people were made the
victims of a veritable conspiracy of silence!
For some time past, unhappily, there has been
in Belgium a domestic quarrel, due to the fact
that two languages are spoken in the country.
This quarrel was diligently fanned by German
gold. There is reason to believe, also, that Ger-
many stirred up those anti-military demonstra-
tions which, from time to time, were promoted
in the country,. Germany was astute enough to
perceive that had these demonstrations borne
fruit, a disarmed Belgium would have been left
to her tender mercies!
And it must not be forgotten that, although
Germany never ceased benevolently to smile on
Belgians in Belgium, she nevertheless never re-
laxed her efforts to sustain the pangermanist
movement, which had for its object the annexa-
tion pure and simple of our unhappy country!
Their audacity, their liberty of action, and our
simplicity were such that, in Belgium, they were
able to create sections of the “Alldeutscher Ver-
band,” or “grand Pangermanist Association.”
The foregoing is a brief sketch of the position
which the Germans were able to make for them-
selves in Belgium.
And the empire which these German societies
exercised or attempted to exercise over certain
Belgian personalities, may be perceived in the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


following incident:—ln “La Metropole,” an Ant-
werp daily paper, of which the writer was Direc-
tor, a violent attack was made by him on Ger-
many and the Germans; he was at once called
over the coals by a leading financier of the City,
who said to him :
“The day will shortly come when you will
gnaw the tips of your fingers with anguish at
having written that article!”
And, as he spoke, the German cannon, thun-
dering at our gates, seemed to give point to his
utterances. An extremely painful scene, and
one never to be forgotten!
We must, however, hasten to say that in-
stances of such complete subjection to fear were
rare. In every country there are to be found
persons whose pecuniary interests are of more
importance to them than the highest sentiments
of humanity or of patriotism. But it is not
such people to whom are confided the destinies
of nations. Yet lam inclined to believe that the
action of the Germans, combined with that of
their Belgian sympathisers and well-wishers,
would sooner or later have produced the results
which Germany wished to obtain.
Because Belgium was not ready to believe in
the political danger due to an economic subjec-
tion, she has had to suffer the scourge of a ter-
rible and unjust war. For having disappointed
the hopes of the German spies our country has
been invaded, pillaged, and tortured.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


“Oh, if we had only been wise enough to have
foreseen what was coming! Oh, that we could
have been warned of our danger! But let the
lesson given to our people in the pouring out of
their hearts’ blood —be a lesson to our allies.
May they profit by it; I have dread in my heart
to-day —after an enforced stay of several months
in England—l have dread, I say —since I witness
the same thing in this country as in Belgium,
Germans from Antwerp, and Germans who have
become Belgians only by naturalisation—more
dangerous than the Germans themselves, who
are walking about the streets of London with-
out let or hindrance, protected by a mistaken
notion of kindness which, under the circum-
stances, and in the writer’s humble opinion, is
simply criminal.
As a foreigner and a guest of this country, the
writer is not permitted to criticise too freely the
favour shown to certain Germans still resident
in England. But, as a sincere friend to this
country, as one who would have been glad if he
could have seen Great Britain earlier alive to the
political and commercial progress made by Ger-
many in Belgium, he allows himself the freedom
to say —
“Take care; you will conquer Germany by the
force of arms; you will bring her to her knees;
but you will never conquer the German spirit.
You will never eradicate, by a military victory,
that poisonous teaching—which beginning with
Fichte and ending with Bernhardi—has been
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


poured into the mind of the Germans for the last
hundred years. You will not destroy the work
of the German schoolmaster, and if vou wish to
avert the horrors of another war—fuller perhaps
of frightfulness—you will ruin Germany.” Let
her keep on saying if she will, “Deutschland
über alles,” let her dream if she will of her “Welt
politik” (Empire over the whole world), and let
her pray “Gott mit uns” (God be with us), if she
dare —but let her be deprived once and for all
of the strength to repeat her aggression! Crush
her finances under a war-indemnity, such as will
keep her hungry for the next thirty years; close
to her the markets and the ports of the entire
world, since trade for her simply means the
acquisition of means to purchase munitions of
war. In a word, compel the German people to
cry out i n bitterness of soul —
“Why such harshness?”
When that day comes, the world will have
reaped the legitimate fruits of victor}'"; it will
then have given the finishing touch to the work
of our soldiers to-day. We should never relax our
efforts to bring about such a consummation until
we know that the German schoolmaster has
ceased to inculcate the doctrine that Germany
has the right to dominate the world; that her
sons are super-men, and that their Kaiser is
obeyed by the great Ruler of the Universe!
When we shall have thoroughly taught the
Germans these things, say in sixty years hence—
the life of two generations—then, and then only,
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


shalf we be able to regard them as a civilised
[x ople. In the meantime, let us not heed those
who whine about the ferocity of such a proceed-
ing. It is only the application of their own law
of might superseding right. We ought, as a
duty to posterity, to let them experience the full
meaning of “an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth.” This is the only way to take from them
that overweening brutality which is the attri-
bute of every “good” German !
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


THE FIRST TRAGIC FLIGHT.
Refugees from Liege at Brussels.
LIEVIN HUYSMANS,
“lndependance Beige” (Brussels daily paper).
AFTER the first hours of emotion, through
which the population of Brussels passed,
when the general mobilisation of the army
was ordered, and after the indignation and
anxiety provoked by the brutal Prussian ulti-
matum had somewhat subsided, the people of
Brussels assumed an air of courage and of forti-
tude which nothing apparently could change.
The heroic bravery of our little army, defending
Liege, intoxicated public opinion to such an ex-
tent that in its over-confidence it could not be-
lieve in an invasion of Belgian soil, much less in
the occupation of the Capital by the barbarous
German hordes. The optimism of Government
officials, and more especially that of the military
chiefs, who gave to the Press—under the censor-
ship—reports that were always favourable, con-
tributed in a large measure to keep up this
strange state of mind among the populace. In
any case. General Leman was procuring for his
country a full measure of glory; the troops under
his command having ceded only under the pres-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


sure of numbers. Although not one of the forts
was taken, and in spite of an heroic resistance
which lasted several days, Liege had been in-
vested and hastily occupied. But Brussels was
unaware of the terrible drama that was being
enacted so close to her doors, and the streets of
the Capital, bathed in the brilliant sunshine of an
August day, wore everywhere a festive appear-
ance. In the evening, the cafes were crowded,
and throngs of people were promenading on the
Boulevards. In the Place Rogier, the square in
front of the Northern Railway terminus, the un-
usual animation was prolonged until a late hour
of the night.
And among this crowd, as yet unconscious of
the danger which menaced it, and reckless
owing to its over-weening confidence, there sud-
denly appeared, passing in a constant stream,
numbers of those who had fled from the burning
city of Liege—a city which had been trans-
formed into a veritable inferno by a rain of
shells and shrapnel from German guns. The
sudden appearance of the refuges was a tragic
spectacle—one that was unexpected and one
that caused the hitherto light-hearted crowds to
tremble in anguish and in dread. From two
trains, which had left Liege, one immediately
after the other, descended those poor frightened
folk —only half clad, since before flocking into
the station at Guillemins —the central station at
Liege—and huddling into the trains, they had
hardly given themselves the trouble to collect to-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


gether their personal effects. It was an odd, a fan-
tastic throng of people, all plunged into the same
common misery. In their haste to escape from
the death that menaced thern, families were scat-
teied, so that weeping mothers were searching
or their children ; husbands and wives vainly
seeking for each other, with anguish welling
from the heart lest they should never meet
again. I here were others again among the re-
fugees, who still wore the look of mute terror
they had felt when in their native city they had
seen a loved one suddenly snatched away from
them here a brother; there a loved and loving
Y lf( : s t ruc k down by the invaders’ shrapnel.
And the unfortunate refugees in crowds surged
hither and thither without knowing where to go,
where to find an asylum, what fate was await-
ing them! The Brussels folk, who are not
usually given to lose their heads, were so taken
by surprise by the arrival in their midst of these
unfortunates, that they did not for some time
know how to cope with the difficulty and afford
to their involuntary guests the much needed re-
lief.
Once the situation was realised, however,
charitable people began to offer hospitality in
their own homes to those of the refugees who
seemed to be the most worthy of their pity and
°i!*ij 1^era ‘ 10n * Others invited men, women and
children into the surrounding cafes and gave
them food and drink. Others again, more sen-
sible, and recognising the.real needs of the poor
LIFE ~ AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


refugees, took counsel with the city authorities
and arranged for some public buildings to be im-
mediately opened and utilised as shelters for the
great mass of the poor suffering folk. Bearing
these things in mind, it will be readily under-
stood that the most painful memory of that
tragic flight centred around the square in front
of the northern railway terminus.
And it was the tragedy of this sad and never-
to-be-forgotten night that shook the confidence
of the Brussels people, who, thenceforth, and in
spite of the obstinate determination of the
authorities, lost all faith in the ability of these
to hold the barbarians triumphantly in check in
the lines on the banks of the Meuse —a defence
which, though unsuccessful, is destined to live
in history!
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM .


THE SACK OF LOUVAIN.
GEORGE VERDAVAINE,
“Independance Beige" (Brussels daily paper).
THE destruction of Louvain is undoubtedly
one of the most terrible episodes of the
war; it was one of the most detestable
crimes of the German army. It was a crime com-
mitted deliberately, one for which there was not
the slightest pretext, and certainly not one for
which the shadow of justification could be found
in the attitude of the civil population. No one
fired upon the German soldiers! How could they
have done so, since they did not possess any
arms!
Before the entry of the Germans into the city,
all arms, even including fencing foils, had been
given up to the town authorities, and by them
deposited in St. Peter’s Church! The writers in
German publications of all sorts reports,
pamphlets, newspapers and books, fully under-
standing the importance of extenuating as much
as possible the blame of the Kaiser’s army for the
conflagrations and massacres at Louvain, simply
invented the ridiculous fable of the frqncs-Ureurs
who, from places of concealment, fired at Ger-
man soldiers, and that of women who are alleged
to have put out the eyes of German soldiers, and
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


to have strung them as necklaces! Could a
more puerile fable be invented?
A tissue of falsehood from beginning to end!
No testimony whatever was ever forthcoming in
support of such stupid accusations. It was false
to assert that any ambulance was ever used for
the treatment of a German soldier suffering from
deprivation of his sight under such circum-
stances !
How was it possible that the brave, gentle,
and inoffensive women of Louvain could have
stooped to the perpetration of such an atrocity ?
Under what circumstances did such a thing hap-,
pen? No particulars have ever been furnished
by the murderers; and the legend which they
attempted to spread everywhere abroad has
ceased to exist, simply because no testimony
whatever in support of its veracity has been
forthcoming.
When the Germans entered Louvain, on the
19th August, 1914. they had already per-
petrated many crimes; the line of their
march thither had been marked by the corpses
of men, women and children and by the ruins of
burnt villages. Acting in obedience to superior
orders, they had sought to terrorise Belgium
while giving free play to the bestiality of their
instincts. From and after the date of their en-
try into the university town, they gave them-
selves up to the perpetration of the most awful
excesses!
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


..uch was the state of mind of the brutal Ger-
mans when the Belgian army quitted the en-
trenched camp at Antwerp in order to prevent
e departure ot two German army corps, who
France t0 T rea ° h tHe , western sea t of the war in
r ranee. Iwo combats took place—one at
Sempst and the other at Hofstade: in both the
Germans were repulsed and forced to retreat
Consequently, m Velyorde and in Louvain, they
swore to avenge this ignominious failure and
WreTk S their emSelVeS one day the >’ w °nld
tion of these PS" 6 °" inn ° Cent P ° pula -
On the 26th of August, the opportunity for
domg so was presented to them! Late in the
evening of that day, an alarm was raised in
th°e U to a w„ Be ' Rian army had Entered
small on, 1 h . Germ ?. n ffarnson being only a
Some oft’lJr lmmedla , t f.' y seized with Panic,
the statin German soldiers marched towards
some of ?hi; and ’ ° n thelr Way ' they encountered
nTn Lnol° W a n tro ? pers who were retreating
lL fir , direction. In the obscurity of
fn, R lns lgfht ’ the one mistook the other body
for Belgians, and both opened fire. The result
-'l'ffni l<lt ?,, >OUt s,xt >’ Germans were killed The
j ffair could not be explained to the higher mil!
tary authorities; the parties concerned in it
blamed the inhabitants of Louvain for the trarric
Bui bl‘ he Sack .° f the <*y commence R C
recita, the the bare
recital ot which will cause men to shudder in
LIFE - AND DEATH BELGIUM.


ages yet to come, the Germans in Louvain had
given many proofs of their brutal and lustful
character. They had forced entrance into
houses which had been left empty, by breaking
down the doors with an axe, and had taken away
everything of value: this simply in the lust of
pillage. They had taken M. Van der Kelen,
Senator, and M. Colin, Burgomaster, as host-
ages for the good conduct of the inhabitants;
they had demanded and obtained a heavy war
indemnity, and had made requisitions on Mon-
seigneur Ladeuze, the Rector of the University,
and on other leading citizens.
The night of the 26-2yth August was terrible.
Soon after the collision between the two bodies
of Germans in the streets, above related, firing
was heard in several other parts of the town.
The terrified inhabitants were about to pay the
penalty of German error! And very soon fusil-
ades were heard in all directions; and the people,
rushing into the streets, perceived flames issuing
from the houses on all sides. Hither and
thither the distracted people fled, shot down by
the revengeful soldiery; and in every quarter of
the town scenes of horror were enacted, over the
relation of which even men of criminal instincts
would shudder. Quickly the town became one
huge brazier, the reflection of which in the sky
was seen for miles around; most of the public
buildings soon fell a prey to the flames.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


“Acting under orders,” says the official re- ;
port (which is quoted so that the writer may not
be accused of exaggeration), “the German sol-
diers bi oke open the doors of the houses and
set them alight by means of rockets lighted in
the doorway. They fired on the inhabitants
who attempted to leave their homes, and many
persons who took refuge in the cellars were
burnt alive. The same fate overtook many who
were shot down in the street and were unable to
crawl away. Many people who had succeeded
in escaping from the burning houses by taking
i efuge in their gardens, were subsequently cap-
tured and led to the square in front of the rail-
way station. Here there were soon ten corpses
lying extended on the ground, men who, before
being shot, had been separated from their wives
and children and everything of value on their
persons taken from them!”
Hut this was only the first act of the terrible
tragedy. On the 27th August, at 8 o’clock a.m.,
the inhabitants who had been spared, or who had
escaped the butchery of the previous day, were
ordered to leave the city, since it was about to
be bombarded. And then the dire destruction
was competed! Of this flourishing city, whole
quarters disappeared in the blazing " furnace
created by German frightfulness. The houses
in the street leading from the station, those on
the lurnhout boulevards and avenues, the large
square known as the “Place du People,” St.
Peter’s Church, the University library and its
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


archives —all were destroyed. The burning of
these precious documents was a crime neither
to be forgotten nor to be pardoned by anyone
in the whole world, who recognises that learning
and scientific research are indispensable to the
advance of civilisation!
Of all the public buildings, the Town Hall,
with its floral pinnacles, marvellous specimen of
architecture applied to civic buildings, alone
escaped from the conflagration. But the safety
of this edifice —the wonder and admiration of
centuries —must not be ascribed to the Germans’
love for what is beautiful in art. Those who
wilfully destroyed the Cloth Hall at Ypres and
the Cathedral at Rheims cannot lay claim to the
possession of such a sentiment! No, it was be-
cause General Manteufel, commander of the
German garrison at Louvain, had given strict
injunctions that the building was to be spared,
simply because he had his headquarters there.
The “love of art for art’s sake” had nothing
whatever to do with the German order to save
at all costs the building from the flames.
After murder and incendiarism came the lust
of plunder. It went on for a whole week, and
nothing was respected: skill in carrying out a
theft, like assassination, was reduced to a
science. The German soldier pillaged the
houses by rule and in the light of day, forthwith
dispatching his booty to the homeland by rail!
One might have thought that the world had
gone back to the days of barbarism, when mer-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


cenai} armies lived on the spoils they exacted
from the conquered. As in those times, so in
Louvain in 1914; it was indeed “Vse Victis” and
excesses of all kinds were openly perpetrated on
the helpless populace!
Before this organised looting had begun,
many of the inhabitants of Louvain had been
chased from their homes and escorted by drun-
ken soldiers along the country lanes which led
to the neighbouring town of Tirlemont. It would
be difficult to imagine a sadder, a more hopeless
exodus! Under a blazing sky the poor folk
were compelled, by blows with the butt of the
musket, to march along without halting even for
an instant; and when a superior German officer
passed along the dusty road, they were ordered,
as a salute to his rank and authority, to go down
on their knees. Some were driven into the ad-
joining fields and there were told to raise their
arms over their heads. For some minutes they
had to stand in this position, from which they
were only relieved by the ribald cries of the sol-
diers; they then perceived that they had been the
victims of a sham execution. When at last the
unfortunate folk reached the first stage of their
melancholy journey, they were dead-beat, since
it was already long since they had been allowed
to take either rest or food. To the number of
about ten thousand, from Tirlemont they were
conducted to Saint Trond and Hasselt, enduring
all the time untold miseries!
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Were they the most wretched of the citizens
of Louvain? Alas! no. On the 26tl\ August,
seventy-five persons had been arrested without
any charge against them being made, conducted
to the railway terminus and sent forthwith to
Cologne in cattle trucks! From Cologne they
were sent back to Brussels, without being given
any food whatever, and suffering under indes-
cribable tortures both physical and moral. The
journey of these unhappy folk constitutes one
of the most harrowing tales of the terrible
wrong done by German “kultur” in its frightful-
ness, and it will be remembered against the
Huns for all time.
To all these horrors one must add the tale of
the executions carried out with so-called judicial
formalities! More than twenty well-known
persons were shot in the public square near the
railway station. Father Dupierreux, of the
Jesuits, and several of his colleagues, also met
with the same fate!
All the foregoing statements —vouched for
and now recognised as authentic —come far
short of the reality according to the people of
Louvain, who were eye-witnesses of the atroci-
ties committed.
When these things were first made public,
some incredulity was manifested; but, little by
little, neutrals learned about the Zeppelin raids
on open towns; about the sinking of the s.s.
“Lusitania”; about the use, by the Germans in
the field, of asphyxiating gases. They were
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


then compelled to believe that such things as the
Louvain atrocities had indeed taken place.
To sum up:—
Since the people of Louvain, as I have already
said, had no arms, they could not have fired
upon the Germans. These were alone actuated
by a spirit of vengeance, of cupidity and of lust.
} he whole of the atrocities committed were done
in cold blood, with the unique object of terror-
ising the inhabitants of the city. The Germans
accomplished their object calmly, deliberately,
even when it involved driving poor defenceless
folk into the cellars of burning houses, the cal-
cined bones of the victims being the only evi-
dence of the cruel deed. On many a day subse-
quently, on searching the ruins, fresh proofs
were found of the terrible vengeance exacted.
Such was the Sack of Louvain! Carried out
upon a peaceful and law-abiding population,
such as that of the ancient University town, it
will remain for ever a stigma on the fair fame of
Germany, Rape, theft, incendiarism, murder,
succeeded one after the other in a tempest of
ha.te. Belgium, by the invincible courage of its
King and of the valiant little army which he
commanded, had entirely disarranged the plans
of the German military staff; the country should
be made to pay the and for its fortitude
be made to suffer the pains of hell itself. Lou-
vain was caught in this tempest, and the Huns
tortured her in all the refinement of their
cruelty.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Louvain, but yesterday adorned with all the
joys of life, vigorous alike in its learning and
in its science, with its intelligent citizens espous-
ing ideals, opposed perhaps in their significance,
but yet worthy of all respect —this fair city, I
say, is to-day a city of the dead. Shall she be
avenged?
LIFE - AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


ONE PAGE OF A TRAGIC STORY.
The Germans in Brussels.
EDW. FONTEYNE.
the 20th day of August, in the year 1914,
the Germans made their entry into the
Belgian capital, by the Louvain Chaussee
and by the Tervueren Avenue. It was a little
past noon. Overhead there was a magnificent
blue sky, and the sun was shining, in all its splen
dour, over the distressful metropolis.
During the first few days of the war, t£ie city of
Brussels bad retained its customary aspect. Only
in the immediate neighbourhood of each railway
terminus were found numerous groups of sob
diery—and before the hospitals there came fre*
quent convoys of wounded soldiers some
brought thither in ambulances and some in motor
cars. But everywhere else, the life of the citizens
followed its normal course ; one could not per*
ceive any discouragement or gloom depicted in
the countenances of the Brussels folk. The
glorious resistance which the army of their noble
King Albert was offering to the invaders, did not
astonish them; were they not their own children
who were thus fighting? And had they not a sub-
lime faith in those children’s efforts? And again
were not the Allies just arrived; had they not
LIFE ~ AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


come to aid the Belgians defend their hearths
and homes against the ruthless violators of their
soil?
But, nevertheless, when suddenly fugitives
from Limbourg and Liege began to arrive in
large numbers, confidence gave way to anxiety.
"Eagef questions were addressed to these poor
country folk—clothed only in rags —men who
yesterday had been respectable and respected,
but who to-day, alas! wore rather the aspect of
vagabonds, heartbroken in their misery. For
had they not just quitted the battle-zone, and
was not the vision of their burning homes
still present to their eyes? Questions were
anxiously but compassionately put to the
women, from whose eyes gushed forth the tears
of extreme anguish; even the children —their
feet bloodstained by their flight—could tell a tale
piteous indeed to hear. And presently when
fresh witnesses of the terrible exodus appeared
in the shape of carts and waggons laden hap-
hazard with household goods, or in the form of
cattle saved in haste and dragged forth in de-
spair, then wild confusion took possession of the
crowd and sullen gloom settled on men’s minds.
It was thus learned that, after having crossed
the Meuse, the enemy had advanced in serried
ranks towards Louvain; and, that in every place
through which he passed, he had sown the seed
of terror and of dismay; that he had cruelly
massacred every living being and burned down
their habitations; that he had practised all the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


abominations of a wild beast let loose to gratify
his blood-lust.
1 is true that our soldiers had the opportunity
of displaying their courage and lighting like
lions. But they had to deal with an enemy one
hundred times more numerous, they could only
die—their courage never failed them'
When the Belgian Government, late one even-
ing, hastily quitted the capital, in order to find
a surer seat in the fortified city of Antwerp,
panic seized the inhabitants of Brussels. The
Civic Guard received orders to dig trenches and
construct barricades in the streets. the enemy
was expected!
On the 19th August the Germans took posses-
sion of Louvain. It was then known that four-
teen army corps were marching on Brussels.
At midnight, when the civic authorities recog-
nised the fact that defence was impossible, they
gave the order to fill in the trenches and to level
the barricades; they dismissed the town guard
to their homes. Posters were placed on the
wa lls, telling the Brussels people of the calamity
which had befallen them, exhorting them to be
calm and patient in their misfortune, and pro-
claiming the city open to the undisturbed pas-
sage of the military forces of the enemy. On
the 20th August, towards noon, the Germans
presented themselves at the gates of the Capital,
and the terrible defile of their troops through
the town at once began. During forty hours
the Germans passed on unceasingly, and the cry
LIFE r~ AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


was “still they come!” They were singing
lustily—
“ln Brussels, to-day,
To-morrow in Paris we’ll be.”
During the defile, a special corps was detached
from the main army and sent to take possession
of all the public buildings and on them to re-
place our much-loved banner by the hateful Ger-
man flag.
That which gave some consolation to the
Brussels folk was the belief, to which they
firmly clung, that they were simply witnessing
the peaceful passage of an army through their
streets. They thought that the Prussians were
making for the plains of Waterloo. There
would they be defeated, and then would come
joy for the Belgians in deliverance of their
country!
But the Huns still passed on, and little by
little they began to settle down as masters;
petty vexations of all sorts at once commenced.
They threatened to shoot the inhabitants at
the least sign of rebellion; the Teuton officers
looked with insolent, lustful eyes at the woman --
folk; an order was given to remove the national
flag from the window of every shop and dwell
mg house; one was told to do this, one to dc
that —needlessly; and last of all came war con-
tributions and requisitions which were simply
crushing in their extravagance. At Uccle, a
suburb of Brussels, the inhabitants were com-
pelled to find lodging for the German soldiery.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM .


I shall now relate a few facts to illustrate the
extreme but malignant simplicity of the German
soldier.
Early one morning, the Germans caused all
the milk brought into town to be delivered
up to them. When it was collected, they either
gave it to their horses to drink or threw it down
the sewers, and this for no other reason than be-
cause they wished to mock at the sufferings of
the poor mothers who had need of the milk for
their little ones!
“Poor little kids, must they have milk?” they
cried derisively.
On another occasion they requisitioned hun-
dreds of stores of fresh meat, and this they ruth-
lessly cast into the canal!
On the Boulevard du Regent one morning
was waiting a German baggage train guarded
by German sentinels.
“Where are you going?” I asked one of thes?.
“To Antwerp!” was the reply.
“What will you do there?”
“There?—nothing—we shall go thence to
England.”
‘‘H ave y°u artillery waggons and horses?”
“Certainly, we are following the regiment.”
“But how will you reach England?”
“Why! on foot (sic). England has taken
our fleet, and we are going to recapture it. Our
officers told us so!”
The reader may perhaps think that the above
are tales taken from the imagination of the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


i writer! He would be wrong; all that is here re-
lated is absolutely authentic. But here is some-
thing better still.
One evening I found myself at the house of
a friend—the Poet X—who is a doctor practis-
ing at Uccle. There was a knock at the front
door; six soldiers came to demand a lodging.
My friend dared not refuse and conducted them
to an out-house to which were taken mattresses
and food. Scarcely had the “brave fellows”
laid aside their arms, when they began to weep
and to speak to us of their wives and children.
AH of a sudden one of them—a red-headed fel-
low with a dirty beard, cried out with a sigh of
satisfaction:
“Happily, gentlemen, peace with Belgium is
already signed.”
“Indeed!” we exclaimed.
“Yes, ’tis true. Our Kaiser arrived in Brus-
sels to-day. He has seen your King and peace
was signed. That is why we are allowed to
march across your country.”
“Who told you this?”
“Our officers—and God grant that to-morrow
peace will be signed with France.”
Upon this he showed his bare feet. They
were clotted with blood—horrible to look at—
one could have torn shreds of flesh from his
calves.
“We marched forty-five kilometres (i kilo-
metre ■= 1093.6 yards) to-day, and yesterday
sixty-five. They cannot exact too much from
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


a Prussian soldier. Our Kaiser has no heart,
and our officers are criminal. It is they who
brought about this war!” Then, softening
down, he asked—
“ How many kilometres are there between this
and the frontier?”
“Eighty!” was the reply.
“And from here to Paris?”
“Three hundred and twenty.”
“Four hundred in all,” exclaimed he.
The six soldiers looked at each other in con-
sternation, and one of them, sighing, said:
“We shall never reach Paris; we shall all be
dead before another two days are over.”
On the day following, refreshed after their rest,
the men showed quite a different attitude to-
wards us. Before leaving they allowed us to
examine their arms. Then, taking up their
bayonets, they began to make thrusts into an
imaginary body, saying: “Like this we bayonet
the English, and like that the French.”
Without their arms they were snivellers and
cowards; with them in their hands they were
braggards. I could portray the Prussian soldier
by a thousand different anecdotes, but I do not
wish to abuse the reader’s time and patience.
So far as Brussels only is concerned I have
nothing to relate more striking than the
numerous petty vexations to which the people
were subjected; and the arrests and fines for
the slightest manifestation of displeasure at the
tyranny of the Huns.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


The population of Brussels having preserved
more or less its wonted calm, has been able up
to the present to avoid any serious outbreaks;
and awaits without misgiving the day of its de-
liverance.
LIFE ~ AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


THE GERMAN INVASION AND
BELGIAN WOMEN.
FLOR BURTON,
Director of “De Nieuzve Gazet,” Antwerp; Chairman of the
Belgian Press Association (English-War-Time-Sec-
tion), London.
THE first advance works, constructed by the
Germans for the investiture of Antwerp,
had not been as successful as they had anti-
cipated and had wished! There, where patrols of
Uhlans seemed to the Germans to be sufficient to
crush opposition, a strong- resistance was of-
fered, and the enemy suffered heavy casualties at
the hands of our valiant squadrons of lancers,
supported by gendarmes, who displayed their ac-
customed calm and stoicism. The famous Prus-
sian Guard was more than decimated, by our
riflemen and other line regiments, before our men
were obliged to give way under the pressure of
numbers. The compact masses of the heavy
Pomeranians had been driven by their officers
against our lines with sabre strokes and re-
volvers !
The Germans at first established themselves
at Humbeeck, a charming spot, situated on the
Canal between Brussels and Malines; some few
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


days later, they had taken possession of the ex-
tensive wood of Buggenhout, and it was impos-
sible for our troops to drive them from their lair.
Our little army had fixed its first line of de-
fence in the immediate vicinity of the forts of
Brocchem, Duffel, Waelhem, and Liezele. And
skirmishes took place every night on the flat,
open ground of the district, the fields of oats and
ot lucerne having been converted into a vast net-
work of barbed wire entanglements. Every
morning, count was made of the casualties suf-
fered from the German night-attacks; and the
toll was found to be a heavy one! About fifty
officers and men, sometimes more, sometimes
less, paid for their patriotism with their lives.
In the trenches, which had been too rapidly con-
structed, our brave soldiers, ever on the watch,
passed hour after hour of the day in inactivity;
this in itself was intensely demoralising and it
was made infinitely more so by the shower of
shells which was constantly rained upon them.
Every day, we in Antwerp sent out, by special
messenger, copies of the newspapers then being
published in the city; our object was to give to
the troops some distraction, and at the same
time to reanimate their courage. The three
newspapers co-operating in this work were Ee
Matin” “La Metropole,” and the “Nieuwe
Gazet”; the men received the papers with the
same joy and satisfaction as that with which the
Israelites in the Wilderness received the manna
that fell from the sky!
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


One day our motor, for military reasons, was
obliged to make a long detour, since means of
determining our position along the route were
wanting, every building which had stood in the
line of fire having been demolished. Between
the barbed wire entanglements there was indeed
a path hardly wide enough to admit the pas-
sage of a motor car, and one which wound in
and out like the meandering of a brook in an un-
even country. We had lost our way, and we did
not attempt to hide a certain anxiety as to the
fate that would be ours should we fall into the
hands of any German patrol which, by chance
might happen to come that way.
Suddenly a voice, which seemed to come from
the grave, said, “Do not go any further; the
Prussians are in the wood below V*
The person who had thus spoken, an elderly
woman of uncertain age, was one of those
countryfolk, with sharp and angular features,
who, working always in the open air, had become
tanned and had lost almost all the exterior attri-
butes of her sex. Her whole worldly wealth,
over and above the raucus voice in which she
had wained us, consisted of a sack which con-
tained a personal effects and some small
kitchen utensils. On this sack she was sitting.
We took the old woman and her slender be-
longings on to the car, and then she told us that
she lived at Humbeeck and now wished to reach
the village of Willebroeck.
LIFE ~ AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


‘‘There/’ she said, “I have friends, who in re-
turn for my work in the fields, will surely give
me a corner in an outhouse where I can sleep,
and spare me a few potatoes for my food!”
“Why did you leave your native village; how
comes it that you are thus quite alone?” we
asked.
“The Germans came yesterday,” she answered,
“and this morning, at five o’clock, bugles were
sounded and the rural policeman was ordered to
go round, in company of two Prussian soldiers,
and assemble the people of the village before the
church!”
“Did they do the people harm?” we anxiously
queried.
“When we got there,” she continued, “an
officer came up, and he at once proceeded to
separate the males from the females. The men
were placed on the right and the women on the
left. Then he gave the word of command in
German, and some soldiers rushed quickly for-
ward, surrounded the men, and husbands,
fathers, brothers, sons were brutally driven away
as prisoners of the invaders.”
“Indeed!”
“ ’Tis only too true,” she said, “many of the
women threw themselves on their knees before
the soldiers, and implored for mercy, thinking
that they were going to be shot. Then the
brutes began to laugh heartily! And one of
them, who spoke Flemish as well as I or you, sir,
advanced towards a young girl and told her not
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


to be afraid; that no harm would be done either
to herself or to the others. And then the officer
—I knew that he was an officer because he or-
dered the soldiers about so brutally—said some-
thing in German to the man who spoke Flemish;
who, in his turn, speaking to the women, or-
dered them to pay great attention to what he
was about to say. We wondered what was
going to happen to us; some of the women were
still gazing anxiously down the road, hoping to
see their menfolk.
Presently the soldier called out, “All women
over forty years of age to the left.” Some of the
older ones, in the depth of their emotions, did not
understand this order, and consequently did not
move. But they were quickly pushed aside, un-
der the ribald jokes of the soldiery. Then we
were more closely scrutinised, and some more
of the women made to join the group on the left,
the soldiers calling out, as each was thrust aside,
“zu alt” (too old!).
“Then the soldier, still speaking in Flemish,
called out, “Every girl under fourteen years of
age also to the left!” Not one obeyed, so that
the soldiers themselves were obliged to make the
selection, and then the poor girls were led away!
“And 3 r ou, poor woman, have you any chil-
dren?” we asked.
“Yes, sir, my eldest is a lad in the army; I
have not heard of or from him since the month
of August. When at home he was our bread-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM .


winner, since I am a widow. As for my two
daughters, one sixteen and the other eighteen
years of age, well, they were led away with the
others! Do you think, sir, that the Germans
will kill them?”
We could not reply; emotion choked our utter-
ance.
By this time we were close to the road which
led directly to Willebroeck. The poor woman,
who until now had not shed a tear, alighted from
the car, shouldered her sack, and with heavy and
faltering step, trudged under the hot September
sun, along the road which led her, as she thought,
to her friends. Once with these, she would
doubtless find a little straw in a barn, on which
to rest, and a few potatoes for her sustenance;
these as the wages for her labour in the fields!
Poor lonely woman! The Germans will not
perhaps kill your daughters —but
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM .


THE FLIGHT FROM ANTWERP.
P. MAERHOUDT,
La Metropole ’ (Anwerp daily paper).
WHEN one is recounting any episode of the
forcible occupation, by the Germans, of a
„ Belgian town, one recalls perhaps a few
Imes of Victor Hugo, who, in the poem entitled
L Annee Terrible” (“The Terrible Year”), uses
the following words (freely translated):—
Where am I now? All the world is pouring forth,
Each face is ashen-grey; each man would hide or die!
What means this reckless flight? The stream pours on,
Eul none bestows on me e'en passing thought!
I gaze around: for me there’s nought! a void—a tomb !
W here are they now with whom I once could rest?”
In any case, the words were apposite to the feel-
ings of those who took part in the terrible exodus
from Antwerp on that autumn day of 1914, when
the inhabitants of the town fled from the ruthless
Huns.
i he dawn of that day was dull and cold; we
perceived it through the grating of the cellar in
which we had passed a terrible night. The leaden
sky was illumined here and there, by the glare of
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


a burning building close to us. It was about
five o’clock in the morning; and already, in the
streets, groups of men were standing—silent—
in front of the smouldering ruins of some factory
or workshop, or before a house, the blinds of
which were drawn close as if to shut out the hor-
rors of the night. Everywhere smashed win-
dows and heaps of stones, bricks and mortar tes-
tified to the havoc that had been wrought in the
once populous quarter of the town. In the dis-
tant sky could be heard, from time to time, a
long drawn out swish, followed by a sinister
growl and the noise of falling glass.
In all the more thickly populated parts of the
town, the people quickly prepared to abandon
their homes —and at the front doors of their
houses were stationed hand-carts of all descrip-
tions. These were soon loaded with a miscel-
laneous collection of personal and household
effects —a cradle, a harmonium, and here and
there a canary in its cage. Then, the women
and children sitting as well as they could on
their household goods, the men pushed the cart
before them, the stronger of the children help-
ing to turn the wheels; and the procession—
there were many of such carts —wended its way,
slowly, sadly, like at a funeral, towards the
harbour.
As they turned into another street the poor
folk met with many other unfortunates like
themselves, all on the same common errand bent
—to reach the Scheldt as quickly as possible,
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


that river which flowed down to Holland;
which country, once gained, would mean for
them liberty and rest from their many woes.
Mighty and beautiful river—once the home of
romance—until to-day the channel of a world-
wide trade! Thou didst afford to thy children,
three hundred thousand people, who dwelt upon
thy banks, a sure hope in their dire distress!
From every side of the city, from every suburb
there flocked a never-ending stream of people,
whose one object was to find either a tug or
even a frail bark which could aid them in their
flight. Older and wiser men, anticipating that
they would meet with insurmountable trouble
and difficulty in their efforts to find a place on
any vessel of whatever kind, were making for
the pontoon-bridge, in the hope of being thus
able to reach the opposite bank of the Scheldt,
and thence to make their way to Ostend. But
the bridge was already blocked by the Belgian
Army in its retreat* from the city! Thus
checked, they nevertheless returned to the quays,
where they patiently awaited their chance,
which, in the meantime, had considerably les-
sened owing to the arrival of more fugitives.
By this time the over-crowded state of the
wharves and quays gave rise to much anxiety,
and it was useless to expect to be able even to
fight a path over a ground every inch of which
was hotly disputed. From the people in the
foreground, nearest to the river, proceeded
heartrending cries of protest and of alarm, since
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


they ran the risk of being hurled into the flood
below. Once in the water, their chance of rescue
was indeed remote! Such was the terrible scene
which the Antwerp quays presented in the early
morning of this autumn day.
The few who had been fortunate enough to
secure a place either on a tug or on a barge, were
only too content to wait quietly for the signal to
be given for the vessel’s departure from the
wharf. Whether on deck or stowed away in the
hold, they could but remain silent; and perhaps
they then realised how dear to them had been
their native land and how hard was the exile s
lot!
And presently the faculty of thought, until
now deadened by the terrible struggle in which
they had been engaged, began to reassert itself
over the minds of those comparatively happy
persons who were thus on their way to safety.
They thought of their deserted homes, of the
places in which they were born, and then the veil
was lifted from their eyes, and though they
uttered no word, their breasts heaved with the
bitter sob of hopelessness.
And, on the quays, the crowds continued to
swell in numbers; and soon the poor unfoitun-
ates invaded every wharf and shed, from the
southern quay to the landing stage of the Red
Star line steamers; it spread itself out toward
the docks and basins, and every one seemed to
be actuated by the same hope —impossible to be
realised —of finding a place on a Relgian mail
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


steamer, which had gone down the Scheldt very
early in the morning, and was expected to return
and take more passengers on board.
Lower down the river, there by the forts St.
Marie and St, Phillipe, the noise of the bursting
shells was less frequently heard, and the silent
expectancy of the fearsome crowd was terribly
tragic in its significance!
In the town, to which we had returned when
we had abandoned all hope of securing a place
on board any craft leaving for Holland, we
found many others in the same melancholy situa-
tion as ourselves. We passed along the Avenue
de Keyser, and thence to the rue de la Commune
and the rue Carnot, with the intention of mak-
ing for Merxem. Along this road, the fugitives
were not so numerous or so excited. Butj when
we were close to the railway station at Dam—
before the level passage of the railway line —we
found a dense crowd, through which we forced
our way with the greatest difficulty. Many
country folk were there, with their cattle, these
mournfully lowing as if they understood and
shared in their master’s plight. Then, too, there
were carts, waggons and every kind of vehicle
known to the farmer. These were loaded com-
pactly with household goods and personal
effects; and on them were seated, more or less
uncomfortably, the womenfolk, the children and
the aged of both sexes. In some cases, a sick
man or woman was groaning under the discom-
fort of the hastily improvised couch; one poor
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


old fellow who apparently had been bedridden,
was luckier than the others, since he was ac-
commodated in a small carriage; and a poor
woman, in similar case, was being jolted along
in a wheelbarrow, which stopped at every ten
paces.
Bicycles, on which their owners had loaded all
that they now possessed, were moved along with
much difficulty. The confusion became worse
confounded, since the crowd was confined be-
tween the houses and was every moment aug-
mented by fresh comers; in the open space at
t h e level-crossing there was no room for another
person. The trains, mainly composed of cattle-
vans and coal-trucks, drew up at the Dam
station and departed, one after the other, as
quickly as they were filled. If by chance one
did not stop, because it had already taken more
than its full complement of passengers, people
climbed on to it while in motion, and this at the
risk of their lives.
Elbowing our way through the crowd—the
only way of making progress during this lam-
entable exodus—we succeeded in crossing the
line and reached the fortifications, on the grassy
slopes of which we found many fugitives,
thoroughly exhausted, who were there enjoying
a momentary repose and eating sparingly of their
provisions. But it was necessary to continue
our journey at all costs. Before us there ex-
tended the open plain known as the Polders,
from which we were separated by a barrier of
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


barbed wire entanglements. This difficulty
overcome, we had to pass the railway sheds at
Keckeren, cut in two by a wide trench. An
opening had been made for vehicles, but pedes-
trians had to follow along it in Indian file. This
obstacle got over, we had to take a circuitous
path in order to reach Capellen, Patte and the
Dutch frontier. Antwerp began to be blotted
out in the extreme distance; and the bursting of
shells was less distinctly heard. But, even from?
this distance, one could see numerous fires,?
which sent upward a dense black cloud, which
was carried away and lost in the dull grey sky I
towards the north-west.
I inning and gazing out into the open country,!
one could still perceive the long and intermin- 1
able line of fugitives, as they wearily wended .
their circuitous paths across the fields. Sud-|
denly, like a bolt from the blue, a Taube ap-l
peared; everybody stopped to look at it as it \
hovered, apparently overhead. Its mission had i
been, so it was supposed, to gain information ]
about the damage done by the bombardment of \
Antwerp. The aeroplane was speedily made j
the target of shrapnel fire, and the shells seemed \
to fly around it like snow flakes. But the Taube \
was untouched, and, undisturbed, passed on its !
way.
Some of the fugitives, as soon as they reached
the moat, gave themselves up to despair and 3
imew themselves on to the grassy slopes;
others, ignoring for the time all physical pain.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM .


pressed forward with fixed desire to attain their
object, namely, the Dutch frontier. This was
not very far away, but to the fugitives in their
anguish, the distance seemed tp be more than
doubled.
At Patte a train stopped. Hundreds of people
immediately besieged the carriage doors, which
opened to reveal the carriages more than lull.
But nevertheless people got in somehow, and
every available space was occupied. And when
at length the train again went the passen-
gers were only too happy, in spite of the discom-
fort at being able to find something that would
convey them to the promised land. But when
night fell, the train stopped in the open country
—no one knew why. "the anxious passengers
got out and anxiously asked each other m a
whisper—what was the cause of the delay; no
one
could tell; but, turning towards the south,
they became dumb as their eyes encountered t e
terrible glare in the sky which showed to them
that their beloved city—Antwerp—the cradle of
the fine arts, the centre of their country s trade,
had been turned into a roaring brazier by Her-
man ruthlessness.
And suddenly a sharp whistle recalled them
all to the realities of their own sad situation.
They hastily re-entered the carriages; and the
train, with its load of humanity worn out with
sufferings, physical and mental, soon steamed
into the railway station of Esschen. Here the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


valiant soldiers of hospitable Holland hastened
to offer a welcome of sorts to the fugitives, im-
mediately aiding materially all those who seemed
to be most in need of succour. The painful
odyssey was at an end!
A Dutch corporal approached a woman, who
was weeping bitterly; she held two little girls by
the hand who likewise were crying. The rouadi
soldier, his heart full of compassion, said, “Do
freer 7 ’ ‘ U 6 mother; y° u are at home here and
Free? ....
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


AT OSTEND—OCTOBER, 1914.
“Mournful End of the Season.”—“Refugees in
Crowds.” —“A City of Bathing-machines.”
—“The Germans March on Ostend.” —“Will
They be Allowed to Enter?”—“An Open
Town, but the Military Authorities make
Certain Reservations.” “Panic.” “Dis-
tracted Flight.”—“Safety at Last.”
E.D.W.
IT is already more than two months that our
small but admirable army has been fighting
incessantly in opposing to the German
hordes its extraordinary bravery and its daunt-
less courage. The Huns were being constantly
reinforced, and when driven back from
after the memorable battle of the Marne, they
threw themselves into our country, which to-
day is almost entirely overrun by the armies of
the Kaiser, William the Second.
West Flanders is almost the only part of Bel-
gian territory which was not yet defiled by the
tread of the Teuton invader. It was therefore
that to this part of the country came the greater
number of the refugees, of who had been
eye-witnesses to the spoliation of their country-
side, and who had been fortunate enough to
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


escape being shot or otherwise murdered by the
German soldiery.
Sad, very sad to behold, this lamentable defile
of poor people, with faces thin and drawn by
ci uel sufferings, and with eyes dilated by dread
—eyes which looked forth but which did not see.
f hey passed on mechanically, like herds of
frightened cattle, pursued by the relentless foe,
only to find themselves suddenly checked in
their listless flight, by the sea and its illimitable
horizon.
1 he population of Ostend, before the war, wai
about forty-two thousand inhabitants. The
Town Clerk informed me that, about the begin-
ning of October, there were more than =50,000
people in the town, not counting the thousands
who, by reason of the proximity of the French
and Belgian frontiers, daily passed through on
their way to some place abroad. Then again,
account must be taken of those who, three times
daily, embarked on one of the mail-packets
doing the cross channel service. All the large
hotels of the sea-front, like those of the interior
of the town, were filled with wounded soldiers;
all the private houses were more than full of un-
expected guests; and consequently there was not
sufficient accommodation for the temporary re-
sidents of the town. Refugees arrived daily,
and they were so numerous that they had to be
packed by means of huts in the gardens of
the royal palace; and, finally, were glad to find
shelter in the bathing-machines on the sea-shore.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Here sprung up in a night, as it were, a “Cabin-
city.” A little straw spread on the ground—
nothing more, a rudimentary idea of repose—
and yet there were many who were only too glad
to find such relief after their distressful wander-
ings ! It was so long since they had been able
to lay themselves down to sleep in safety! Fur-
thermore, only a miserable pittance of food was
doled out; although it was like a banquet to
those who were at the point of death from sheer
hunger. Where the Huns had passed, nothing
in the shape of food had been left: that which
they could not carry away they maliciously
stroyed, without caring a jot for the unoffending
famished people who unhappily found them-
selves in the path of the invader.s.
One can imagine what life was like in Ostend!
At the beginning, people were buoyed up by
hope—the poor man’s paradise. The know-
ledge that two great friendly nations would
come to the aid of the Belgians justified this
hopefulness. But mistakes were made —help
was too late in coming; and then Antwerp fell!
Intense despair then took possession of every-
body. Antwerp fallen; what was there to check
the victorious march of the German hordes?
One still hoped that they would not penetrate so
far as Ostend. How soon, alas! such an illusion
had to be abandoned!
On Tuesday, the nth August, it was reported
that a large army had entered Gand, without a
blow having been struck in defence; and it was
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


rightly supposed that this army would soon
reach Ostend. The news created consternation
everywhere; what was to be done? If the Ger-
mans did advance upon the town, would not the
English fleet, with its Dreadnoughts, pour upon
it a fierce fire from its guns, as soon as the enemy
was well within their range? The Germans, on
the other hand, would not remain quiescent; and
thus, placed between two fires, the town of
Ostend would find itself in a very critical situa-
tion. This, one could easily conceive; and the
emotion—nay, the consternation—was justifi-
able. Among the population there was only one
thought—flight! But how? The mail service
to England had been interrupted two days since,
owing to the dread of attack by a German sub-
marine which was known to be moving about in
the North Sea and in the Channel, and which,
a little jater.on, gave proof of its presence by
torpedoing several ships. The working of the
railway, exclusively reserved for the military
and the transport services, was worse than ever;
hence it was useless to even dream of leaving
the town by rail.
The Municipality of Ostend, however, wished
to know what steps they were called upon to
take under the circumstances, and they ulti-
mately decided to send a delegation to consult
the British Military Staff, which was then at
Nieuport, on the Belgian littoral. The object
was to ascertain whether or not Great Britain
was prepared to defend the Belgian coast against
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


the common enemy. On Tuesday, 13th Octo
her, at 11 a.m., the delegates met the British
military authorities; but with no immediate re-
sult, inasmuch as the War Office and the Ad-
miralty in London had to be consulted. This
was done by wireless telegraphy; and it was 5
o’clock in the afternoon before the parties again
came together. Still no answer; and it was not
until 7 o’clock that a few privileged persons knew
that England would not give any direct assur-
ance that she would even try to prevent the
enemy taking possession of the Belgian coast.
She announced her intention of defending
Bruges, and her forces were directed, towards
Eccloo. The bombardment of Ostend seemed
then to be a certainty.
Although this was kept as secret as possible,
it soon leaked out; and a veritable panic seized
upon the people in Ostend. And this panic was
more dangerous and difficult to deal with, owing
to the arrival of many members of the Belgian
civic guard who had been at Bruges or in its
neighbourhood; they had been summarily dis-
banded.
Some of them, however, at once volunteered
to join the regular army for the duration of the
War, with the idea of attaching themselves to
the Belgian forces, which had escaped from
Antwerp, and which were then marching to-
wards the north of France. Others—those
who, in their own words, were “fed up with it”—>
ransacked, every clothiers’ shop in Ostend in
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


order to find clothing which would enable them
to resume civil life; their uniforms were either
burnt or buried, so as not to fall into the hands
of the Germans.
One can judge, then, what was the state of
things obtaining in Ostend at the close of that
dull October day! Already the exodus had
commenced —that terrible retreat which, in spite
of a drizzling rain, was to last through the whole
night, and which at last caused all roads lead-
ing from the town to be blocked by frantic men,
women and children, all eager to get away, and
that as quickly as possible, out of the reach of
the merciless invader. Sad scenes were to be
witnessed along those long, dark roads. Not a
star was shining overhead to give hope to the
fugitives; they were loaded like pack-mules with
everything that they could possibly carry; their
household goods, all that they considered of
present value having been hastily packed in
sheets, counterpanes, and even curtains. Sob-
bing piteously, the women trudged along the
muddy roads; in their own bitter woe they al-
most forgot that of their children, and many of
these latter fell by the wayside, buffeted about
and at times hurled to the ground by the cruel,
cold gusts of wind, which blew from the sea.
Sick at heart, hungry and worn out, the poor
people jostled each other along the paths which
promised safety; some making for the Dutch
frontier, others trying to reach France, and still
others endeavouring to get either to Nieuport or
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


to Fumes, in both of which places they hoped
to find a refuge.
Personally, I was not at all at my ease. I was
greatly, concerned for the safety of my wife and
three children, and my one idea was to get them
away from the town. But how to effect this
was a difficult question to answer! Suddenly I
recollected that, in ordinary times, the first
train of the local railway left at 5.45 a.m., and
I at once decided to take this train and go tc
Nieuport. I imparted my idea to my wife, and
requested her to have everything in readiness
for our departure. Although it was reported
that the Germans were marching on Bruges, we
hoped by this means to get away before their
arrival in Ostend. We were at the terminus
long before the hour fixed for the departure of
the train; but as we entered the yard, with the
intention of at once taking our seats in a car-
riage, we saw that there were already fifteen
hundred other people, who, as my wife smilingly
remarked, had conceived the same idea as I my-
self. And each and every one of these folk was
loaded with parcels, boxes, chests, trunks —in
fact with everything that could hold necessary
clothing and other personal effects. How on
earth could this crowd be accommodated, to say
nothing of those who would come later! At
length, the carriages to make up the first train
were brought outside, and then began a struggle
for places which is as painful to describe as it
is to recall to mind. Man’s, selfish brutality was
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


allowed full play; and in watching- the struggle
one could easily imagine what must have been
the horror at the terrible drama, enacted a few
years ago at a charity bazaar held in Paris, at
which, it will be recalled, nearly all the victims
were women.
Here at Ostend, on that chill October morn,
men, anxious to escape from German brutality,
became brutes themselves. They kicked the
women and struck them with their fists, pushed
them violently to the ground and trampled
them underfoot as they lay on the wet paving
stones —all this terrible unseemliness to gain a
place in the train ! It was a grave scandal. And
then, when the men had achieved their purpose,
their raucous shouts of satisfaction at their suc-
cess drowned the cries and moans of the women,
the sobs of the distraught children, who un-
heeded were left, for a time at least, to their
fate. A shameful scene, and one never to be for-
gotten and ever to be deplored by those who,
unhappily, were compelled to be eye-witness
to it.
Fortunately, as soon as one train was filled,
another was made up; this consisted of fifteen
large-sized carriages, drawn by two locomo-
tives. This train took those who wished to
travel to Nieuport and to Fumes, the third and
last train being destined apparently for Knocke
and the Dutch frontier. And it was curious to
note that the majority of the people, in their
haste to get away, did not give themselves the
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


trouble to ascertain whether or not they were
travelling by the proper train. Thus it hap-
pened that many that thought to take refuge in
Holland found themselves taken to France, and
vice versa. The railway officials themselves
did not know the destination of the trains.
I had given instructions to my family that
each was to shift for herself or for himself in try-
ing to secure a place in a train, and that we
should wait for each other at the end of the
journey. Happily we. all found places in the
third or last train, although we did not know it
until we reached our destination. What would
have happened had not this miracle supervened
is fearful to contemplate!
As the train was so heavily loaded, it can be
readjly understood that its pace was very slow.
It overtook, from time to time, however, com-
panies of our soldiers, who, worn out with
fatigue and footsore, were demoralised, and con-
sequently many of them jumped on to the steps
of the carriages and hung on to the metal fit-
tings. Others more audacious climbed on to
the top of the carriage, and this caused the roof
to bend and crack in a very sinister fashion. In
each of the fifteen carriages, composing the
train, there were at least a hundred persons,
added to whom about twenty on each platform
—which made six hundred passengers more than
the train was supposed to carry. Count those
on the steps and on the roofs—fifty at least on
each—and the reader will be able to form an
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


idea of how many passengers this train trans-
ported. There were about three thousand. As
we have already said, the progress was very
slow —barely exceeding that of a man’s ordinary
walking pace. But we cared not so long as
the train carried us to the promised land of
safety.
There are about fifteen-and-a-half miles be-
tween Ostend and Fumes; and while covering
this distance the train had to stop many times
on account of the block caused by the guns, by
the ammunition and store waggons, by the
varied impedimenta, in fact, of the Belgian army
making its way slowly and with difficulty to-
wards the French frontier, where the broken
force was to be reconstituted. It was a lament-
able spectacle—our poor soldiers who had fought
so valiantly and who had given way only under
the pressure, of vastly outnumbering forces.
The movement, by the intensity of the soldiers’
sufferings, recalled the famous retreat from
Moscow under Napoleon; but it was patiently,
bravely carried out, every man knowing that he
had to do his utmost so that the stores, guns
and ammunition should not fall into the hands
of the invader.
At length we reached Fumes. This is a small
town, which, ordinarily, has a population of a
few thousands; but there were more than a hun-
dred thousand claiming its hospitality that day;
and among this vast crowd there was spread a
terrible rumour to the effect that France had
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


closed its doors to all Belgian refugees! The
reader may easily realise what a terrible situa-
tion would have been evolved had this been true!
On the one side the implacable, cruel murderers
from Dinant and Ardenne, who were advancing
rapidly westward; on the other an insurmount-
able barrier in the shape of a closed frontier!
But, happily, the rumour was without founda-
tion. Our next care was to find some food. But
there was not a mouthful of bread left in the
town, not a drop of beer* to be had for love or
money. The French frontier was twelve miles
away, and there were no vehicles to be got which
could carry thither the thousands of worn out
and distressed fugitives. Moreover, the rain
continued to fall in torrents!
It was market day, and I was fortunate
enough to discover a peasant who had brought
into the town that morning a small cart filled
with vegetables. I showed him some pieces of
five francs (the eyes of a peasant and even those
of a townsman always glisten at the sight of
this big coin), and for a certain number of them
he agreed to leave the town earlier than usual
and to convey in his cart my poor distracted wife
and such of our earthly possessions that we still
retained. As for myself and my children, al-
though half dead with fatigue, we had to do the
Journey on foot, marching all the way with a
*Note by Editor.—The consumption of beer is greater
in Flanders than in any other country.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


company of soldiers. Our pace was somewhat
quickened by the roar of cannon in our rear; it
was quite sufficient to warn us not to tarry on
the road.
W e soon reached Ghyvelde, a little frontier vil-
lage; and what was my great joy when I learned
that, later in the day, a train would pass through
the village on its way to Dunkirk, and that it
would take up passengers at the station. We
did not lose the chance, and thus reached where
we hoped to find that hospitality of which we
were so sorely in need. But the French were
more terrified than we were, and our reception
was by no means cordial—in fact, it was the re-
verse! But the people of Dunkirk and of Calais
subsequently more than atoned for the gross in-
sults to which they subjected us in those days.
We pardon them, and say no more about it.
Happily a better reception awaited us in Eng-
land; and our kind hosts have done everything
in their power to make the Belgian refugees for-
get the horrible privations to which
they had been subjected. And in England
have been formed those links in the chain of
friendship which shall bind the two peoples to-
gether in the future a friendship that shall
grow stronger and stronger as they learn to
know more and more of each other. “’Tis a
consummation devoutly to be wished!”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


THE BELGIANS ON THE YSER!
L. VANDERSLYEN.
IT is now nearly ten months that the part of
Belgian territory, which is watered by the
River Yser, has been the scene of a sustained
and bloody conflict between the troops of a
wanton invader and the valiant defenders of their
native land. This .otherwise insignificant stream
has proved itself to be an insurmountable barrier
to the progress of the Germans, although they
have sacrificed hundreds of thousands of lives in
their vain effort to cross it.
The River Yser defended the last remnant of
Belgian soil not. yet subject to the invader —a
slip of territory only about twenty-eight square
miles in extent!
But as the Germans could not render them-
selves masters of it, they resolved to lay it waste!
In the same manner, as they were not able to get
possession of Ypres, they, with their artillery,
have nearly destroyed the ancient and beautiful
town. Lest one stone should remain standing
on another, daily do they bombard the place.
And Dixmude, Fumes, Poperinghe, Nieuport, the
last townships of West Flanders, have suffered
the same fate as Ypres, But it is not only these
small towns that have been sacrificed to German
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


ruthlessness; the villages and even the hamlets
have been the object of the invaders’ wanton
barbarities.
The day that King Albert, in reply to the
Prussian ultimatum, let it be known that he
would oppose the passage of the German armies
through Belgium, the Kaiser, in his chagrin and
disappointment, let it be clearly understood that
he would show his resentment for this refusal
by the destruction of Belgium itself. All the
world knows the cruel means employed to carry
out his sinister design! Already has the country
greatly suffered, and it is to be feared that
before the Germans shall be compelled finally to
evacuate the home of the Flemish and of the
Walloon peoples, the German soldiery will do
their best to give effect to their Kaiser’s venge-
ful threat.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


THE MARTYRDOM OF DINANT, ON
THE MEUSE.
ACHILLE CHAINAYE,
“Champalon the Staff of the “Chronique de Bruxelles.”
THE massacre of the population of Dinant
constitutes one of the most disgraceful
atrocities committed by the Germans in
Belgium. The town of Dinant, seen from the
neighbouring heights, no longer possesses even
the traces of its streets. On the right bank of the
Meuse, heaps of ruined brickwork and broken
stone form the only covering of the ground be-
tween the river and the rocks. On this space was
once a fine street, with prosperous shops on each
side. Words can hardly depict the havoc wrought
by the Huns.
The famous pumpkin-shaped clock-tower, with
its carillon of silver bells, and the roof of the
parish church, both have been destroyed; all the
houses on the two sides of the street in which the
church is situated have been razed to the ground.
The clock-tower was reconstructed by the
Spaniards, when they occupied the lowlands.
The town of Dinant, which stands out clearly
defined at the base of the rocky heights which
form its background, was one of the most pic-
turesque places in Belgium—a country noted
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


from time immemorial for the architectural and
natural beauties of its cities. Dinant—l say—
was pre-eminently the most beautiful of them all.
To-day its fine houses along - the river-side, the
white fronts of which used to be so brilliantly
reflected in the waters of the swiftly flowing
Meuse, together with those of the business part
of the town, have vanished—all has been de-
stroyed. The Place Pateniers, in the centre of
which is the bust of the grand Dinant painter of
that name, placed over a fountain, has been com-
pletely demolished. Still more terrible is the de-
struction of the charming suburb of Leffe, to the
north of the town. This suburb, the people of
which were so kind and obliging to strangers, has
been, with the exception of the church, wholly
razed to the ground; it is to this church that the
Dinant folk to-day are obliged to resort for the
celebration of divine worship.
At the extreme end of the suburb, there was
formerly a very important mill for the manufac-
ture of merino cloth. For many years the man-
aging director of the establishment was Mon-
sieur Himmer, a gentleman greatly esteemed
both as a manufacturer and as Consul, in the
district, for the Argentine Republic. Only the
foundations of the mill walls are now left.
And what horrors were witnessed within those
walls! The Huns began by showing their con-
tempt for Monsieur Himmer’s public functions
by destroying the Coat of Arms of the Republic
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


which he represented, and treading it under foot.
Then they turned upon the mill-hands, to the
number of three hundred, who had taken refuge
in the factory, and accused them of having fired
upon the German troops. In vain Monsieur
Himmer protested against the allegation; in
vain did the honest workmen vigorously deny
having done so! The Germans turned a deaf
ear to master and to men! Monsieur Him-
mer offered his own life and the whole of
his fortune to the Huns with a view to appease
their ferocity. Nothing could move them; em-
ployer and employed were all cruelly shot!
In the suburb of St. Peter, which connects
Leffe with Dinant, lived two cousins of the writer
—both of them old men —one of them, aged 78,
had been Town Clerk of Dinant for forty years.
The two brothers were brewers in the town.
They were both shot; and also their forty-three
workmen, who had also taken refuge in the
brewery buildings. A nephew, who lived with
the two old gentlemen, was very ill at the time,
and had been carried to the brewery, lying on
his bed. The Germans roused him from his
agitated slumbers, accused him of simulating
sickness, led him into the courtyard, and shot
him with the rest!
And what atrocities were committed in other
parts of the town!
Old men, sitting in their arm-chairs, were
assassinated in the presence of their women folk.
Men were shot down with their white-faced
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


wives looking on with a horror that paralysed
their whole sentient being. Children were also
compelled to be witnesses of the awful spectacle.
In the rue Grande, one of the principal arteries
of the town, only seven men were left alive; in
the rue Michel, one only; and in the suburb of
Leffe, only eight survived to tell the tale of woe.
In its ancient abbey—a convent of the “Pre-
montres” (white-father missioners) —the people
had sought shelter; and there, as they thought,
had found safety; there were among them about
fifty-four men, all inhabitants of the place. Pre-
sently, the Germans came and induced these
men, under the promise of safety, to leave the
abbey. Once outside, they were told to turn
round; and this done they were all shot down like
wild beasts! The soldiers then offered to spare
the lives of the women, many of them just made
widows, if they at once produced the sum of
sixty thousand francs (£2400). The unhappy
women collected the savings of a life-time, but
could not produce the sum required. Far from
it. The White Fathers then contributed all they
themselves possessed, and the total sum got to-
gether was about six hundred pounds. With
this, the Germans saw that they had to be con-
tent, and the women were allowed to depart.
But whither to go they knew not, and the Huns
did not care.
The most terrible of all the massacres at
Dina'nt took place in the Place d’Armes. Here
stands the town prison—the cells of which have
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM .


been but little occupied—of late years at least.
Under the walls of this grim were as-
sembled a few hundreds of the poor Dinant folk.
They were discussing among themselves what
was best to be done. Suddenly the German
soldiers appeared, bringing with them machine
guns. These were instantly trained upon the
terrified mass of humanity assembled, under the
prison walls, and in a moment, men, women,
and children were mowed down like un-
der a hail of balls. Many were killed outright,
some grievously wounded and some even, by a
miracle, were untouched. These had the rare
presence of mind to lie still under the bleeding
corpses of their fellow citizens—and, when night
came and temporarily hid the shame and hor-
ror of the massacre, they disentangled them-
s selves from the still writhing heaps of bodies,
and fled to the adjoining wood-clad hills, where
for a time at least they were m comparative
safety. Since this hectacomb of human beings,
sacrificed to the German blood-lust, Dmant. has
been known as the “martyred town of fifteen
hundred widows!” Its population formerly
numbered seven thousand seven hundred souls.
To-day, alas! who can tell the tale.
The butcheries which were carried out at Din-
ant on the 23rd August, 1914, and the levelling
i of the houses in the town by artillery fire, can
only be attributed to the vengeance which the
i Germans wished to mete out to the people of
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


The
as
VA S^
Perpetual
Executors & Trustees
Association
of Australia Ltd.
Offices:
89-91 Queen Street, melbourne
Authorised Capital - £250 000
Subscribed Capital - - - - £l5O 000
Present Estates .... £3 000 000
Clients* Government Guarantee Fund - *£lo|oo<)
Directors:
W. M. HYNDMAN, Chairman.
Retired Bank Manager, Chairman of Directors of the North Broke* Hill Silver
Mining Co. Director of the Broken. Hill South Silver Minfi Company, ”
and the Northcote Brick Company, etc. etc.
Thd HON. JOHN THOMSON, Sheep Farmer and Graziar.
HARRY PERCY HENTY, of James Henty & Co.
Director of the Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd. ’
THE HON. F. G. CLARKE, M.L.G.
Diraotor of Colonial Bank. Goldsbrough, Mort & Co. Ltd., etc.
Managing Director:
ARTHUR GRENBRY OUTH WAITE.
The ASSOCIATION cfFers EFFECTIVE ADMINISTRATION combined
v/ith ABSOLUTE SECURITY, therefore
DON’T APPOINT A FRIEND OR RELATION AS EXECUTOR UNLESS JOINTLY WITH
THE ASSOCIATION.
he may die, or go away, or lose your Estate by mismanagement or fraud
or publish your affairs, or charge too much, or keep no accounts, or by some meant £
other bring rum to your wife and children as is of daily occurrence. * means »r
BUT ITH T **E Association, which is a Perpetual, safe and honest trustee
£ch riSL 7 recogmsed businessmen, and giving absolute security, you are free from all
All information and a 30-page Pamphlet on Application.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Dinant for their enthusiastic reception of the
French soldiers, who had been present in the
town and neighbourhood since the 15th of Aug-
ust. There were nine regiments of German
soldiers, and every man showed fierce exaspera-
tion against the French, who, in spite of their
smaller numbers, had performed prodigies of
valour in holding the German army in check.
Among these notable deeds, was their driving
the Germans out of the Citadel which dominates
the town, and which was deemed to be impreg-
nable against an attack of infantry.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


w Cord tyres *
The
BRITISH WAR OFFICE
And all Motorists whose Cars have
hard and constant work to do
PREFER PALMER CORDS
They are British Made through-
out, and the rubber and cord form
one homogeneous whole.
PALMER CORDS-MEAN ECONOMY
Not only In Tyre wear, but in Petrol
consumption. This has been proved
over and over again in many
stringent tests. Come and see
the TYRE.
SILVERTOWN 21 ‘ 23 Elizabeth st.,
- MELBOURNE
(Opposite Craig’s).
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


GERMAN PROCLAMATIONS
I. PROCLAMATION DISTRIBUTED ON
4 th AUGUST, 1914.
On Tuesday, 4th August, 1914,. towards 10
a.m., the first German soldiers arrived at War-
sage (on the road from Aix-la-Chapelle to Vise).
It was a small patrol of about 25 troopers, led by
an officer. The soldiers distributed among the
inhabitants several copies of a printed document,
of which the following is the exact text:—
“To the Belgian Nation.
“I feel the greatest regret that the German
troops find themselves obliged to cross
the frontier of Belgium. T hey act ac-
cording to the dictates of inevitable
necessity, Belgiaji neutrality having
been already violated by French offi-
cers, who, disguised, crossed Belgian
territory in a motor car in order to
penetrate into Germany.
“Belgians! It is our greatest wish that
means may still be found to avoid war
between two peoples which up to the
present time have been friends, and for-
merly even allies. Remember the glori-
ous day of Waterloo, when German
arms contributed to found and estab-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


W. T. HENLEY’S
TELEGRAPH WORKS Co. Ltd.
Manufacturers of insulated wires and
cables of every description for elec-
tric lighting, traction, and power
transmission, telephony, and tele-
graphy. Joint boxes and accessories
of every description.
HENLEY’S WIRING SYSTEM
Simple in design. Low cost of in-
stallation. Absolutely safe. Mechani-
cally strong. Used in all countries.
The best system of electric light in-
stallation for old as well as new
houses. Can be installed without
damage to existing decorations.
546 Collins St., Melb. 61 York St., Sydney
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


lish the independence and prosperity of
your country.
“But we must have y free passage. The de-
struction of bridges, tunnels and rail-
way lines will have to be regarded as
hostile acts.
“Belgians, you have to choose.
.“I hope that the army of the Meuse will
not be obliged to fight you. A free pas-
sage to attack those who wished to at-
tack us is all we ask.
“I give formal guarantees to the Belgian
population that it will not have to suffer
any of the horrors of war; that we will
pay in gold for the food it will be neces-
sary to take in the country; that our
soldiers will show themselves the best
friends of a people for whom we feel
the highest esteem and the greatest
sympathy.
“It depends on your wisdom and under-
standing patriotism to avoid for your
country the horrors of war.
“The General Commanding-in-Chief,
the Army of the Meuse,
“VON EMMICH.”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Bttia
-
in n
What do tKey
sell ?
“Well their business has been built up
on Engineers’ Supplies, Pumps, etc.,
supplemented with general Hardware Ifi;
Lines. Increased business proved
premises inadequate, and the above fine™®
building had to be erected to do Justice
to their increasing trade—especially lr
the Hardware branch. So now they
carry full and varied Stocks of
Builders’ Hardware, Domestic Hard-
ware, Plateware, Cutlery, Leather
Goods., Glassware, and larger Stock*
than ever in Sanitaryware, Mantel
pieces, Grates, Etc.. Etc.
The advantages of buying there are 3
fold—good quality, big selection, fall
prices. You will get fixed up satis-
factorily in every way.
■BEWillll
391-403
Bourke Street, HS™
* OHmiuuimini
Melbourne.
: i-TB
prr-
Also 324-330 Pitt Street. Sydney,
Just West of
ynsn G.P.O.
Phone 8385
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


II. PROCLAMATION ISSUED BY THE
GENERAL COMMANDING-IN-CHIEF
THE 2nd ARMY, VON BULOW.
“To the Belgian Nation.
“We have been obliged to enter into Bel-
gian territory in order to safeguard the
interests of our national defence.
“We are fighting the Belgian army solely in
order to force a passage intp France,
which your Government wrongly re-
fused us, although it tolerated a French
military reconnaissance, a fact of which
your newspapers have kept you in
ignorance.*
•It is useless to insist at length on the fantastic character
of this assertion. The Belgian Government had no French
military reconnaissance to tolerate, no violation of its ter
ri ory having been made by France. The German ulti-
matum recognised it entirely ; “The German Government has
“edTct information that the French forces
Intention of marching on the Meuse by G.vet and Namur
It is an imperious necessity of self-preservation for
Germany to forestall this attack of the enemy. ( re>
Book, No. 29.)
The Chancellor of the German Empire formally recog-
nised this in the speech he delivered in the Reichstag on
the 4th August, 1914:
“Our attitude is one of legitimate defence, and necessity
knows no law.
“Our troops have occupied Luxemburg and Perhaps Be -
eium This is in opposition to the prescriptions of the Fig Us
of Nations. France, it is true, declared in Brussels that she
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Australian Mutual Provident
- Society-
The Leading Mutual Life Office in Australasia, and
the Largest in the British Empire
Head Office: 87 PITT ST., SYDNEY
With Branch Offices in all the Australian States, the
Dominion of New Zealand, and in Great Britain.
Accumulated Funds - £36,500,000
Annual Income - - £5,000,000
Policies effected with this Society shew the best results. Write
Society is Purely Mutual.
The whole of the Cash Surplus is divided
No Shareholders,
among the Participating
Policyholders every year.
Bonus divided for 1916
Total Bonuses distributed -
£868,207
£21,560,000
at once for full particulars.
H. W. APPERLY.
General Manager.
LIFE —AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


“The peaceful population of Belgium is not
our enemy; quite the contrary, and we
will treat them with understanding for
their susceptibilities and with kindness,
provided that, by their acts, they show
proof of their peaceful sentiments.
“But we will act severely on any attempt 0}
•the population to show resistance to the
German troops, or to do injury to our
military interests.
“Given at Montjoie, 9th August, 1914*
“The General Commanding-in-Chief,
the 2nd Army,
“VON BULOW.”
was determined to respect the neutrality of Belgium as long
as her adversary did so. But we knew that I raneewas
ready to invade Belgium. France could wait. V\ e could
not A French attack on our flank in the region of the
Rhine might have become fatal. That is why we have
been obliged to ignore the just protests of Luxemburg _
Belgium." The injustice we thus commit we will repair it
as soon as our military object has been achieved.
“A state which is threatened to the extent that we are and
which is fighting for its existence, can only thi,NoVsl
means to make its position secure. (Grey Book, A • 3S-)
LIFE —■ AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Johnnie
Walker
is still
going
strong.
-55?
w
7;
'a
r
m
M
--0 J
<i
S'-
cf*
m.
m
V,
JOHNNIE WALKER
WAR CARTOON NO. 6
IT WILL COME
Deathless midst death, with stern, unhanded
eyes,
Will she, unconquered, from the flames arise ? ”
JOHN WALKER & SONS, LTD., Scotch Whisky Distillers.
KILMARNOCK.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


III. NOTICE POSTED IN HASSELT ON
17th AUGUST, 1914.
“Fellow Citizens,
“I, in agreement with the German Higher
Military Authorities, have the honour
again to request you to abstain from
any provocative manifestations, and
from all hostile.acts which might bring
terrible punishment on our City.
“You will above all abstain from all acts of
cruelty towards the German troops,
and particularly from firing on them.
“In the case of civilians shooting on the
German army, a third of the male popu-
lation will be shot.
“I remind you that the assembling of more
than five persons together is strictly
forbiddeq, and that those who break this
rule will be arrested on the spot.
“Hasselt, 17th August, 1914.
“The Burgomaster,
“FERD. PORTMANS.”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Everything' Electrical
1
rn
RSOKS
sr?4
Shades, Fans, Fittings, Lamps,
Iron Kettles, &c., &c.
BROOKS, ROBINSON,
And Co., Ltd.,
ELIZABETH STREET : MELBOURNE
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


IV. EXTRACT OF A PROCLAMATION
TO THE COMMUNAL AUTHORITIES
OF THE TOWN OF LIEGE.
“22nd August, 1914.
“The inhabitants of the town of Andenne,
after having protested their peaceful in-
tentions, made a treacherous surprise
attack on pur troops.*
“It was with my consent that the General
had the whole place burned down, and
about 100 people shot.f
“I bring this fact to the knowledge of the
town of Liege, so that its inhabitants
may know the fate with which they are
threatened, if they take up a similai at-
titude.
“The General Commanding-in-Chief,
“VON BULOW.”
♦This is a simple assertion, which is contradicted by the
inhabitants.
fin reality more than 400 persons have disappeared;
more than 200 were shot. Everything is more or less de-
stroyed For a distance, of about 8 miles all the houses
were burnt down. (Session of the Commission of Enquiry
of the nth September, 1914 —Ist witness.)
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


FRY’S
Breakfast Cocoa
COC
Two Imperial
Forces
RENDERING YEOMAN SERVICE
Q TO THE CONSTITUTION.
fT*T¥\ T PMe
J £/ i p ef?£AXFA
"Sc COCOA
THE HIGHEST COCOA VALUE ORTAINMHE
MAKERS TO H.M THE KING.
AGENTS-
Wm. Crosby and Co.
MELBOURNE
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


V. PROCLAMATION POSTED UP IN
NAMUR ON 25th AUGUST, 1914.
“i. The Belgian and French soldiers must
be delivered as prisoners of war before
4 o’clock in front of the prison. Citi-
zens who do not obey will be con-
demned to hard labour for life in Ger-
many.
“A rigorous inspection of houses will com-
mence at 4 o’clock. Every soldier
found will be immediately shot.
“2. Arms, powder and dynamite must be
given up at 4 o’clock. Penalty*, being
shot.
“Citizens who know of a store of the above
must inform the burgomaster, under
pain of hard labour for life.
“3. Every street will be occupied by a Ger-
man guard, who \vill take ten hostages
from each street, whom they will keep
under surveillance. If there is any
rising in the street, the ten hostages will
be shot.
“4. Doors may not be locked, and at night
after eight o’clock there must be lights
in three windows in every house.
“5. It is forbidden to be in the street after
eight o’clock. The inhabitants of
Namur must understand that there is
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


P-H-O-S
is a tonic syrup or Chemical Food which,
by rebuilding nerve and brain tissues,
gives that feeling of physical and mental
fitness that ipakes life worth living.
The firm was trading soundly,
!■ spite of all the war
Employes all were happier
And brisker than before.
Activity affected all
Prom stamp boy to the boss,
The reason being this—that
each
Believed in taking “PHOS."
As a children’s tonic “Phos” is un-
rivalled.
BOTTLES, 1/- EVERYWHERE.
Proprietors—
RocKe, Tompsitt & Co.
Melbourne
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


no greater and more horrible crime than
to compromise the existence of the town
and the life of its citizens by criminal
acts against the German army.
“The Commander of the Town,
“VON BULOW.”
“Namur, 25th August, 1914.”
“(Printed by Chantraine.)”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


“ROYAL
EDISWAN ”
The
ALL-BRITISH METAL
FILAMENT LAMP.
BRITISH MADE
by
BRITISH LABOUR
BRITISH CAPITAL
And of the Renowned “ EDISWAN ”
Quality. We can supply your require-
ments as usual.
Edison Swan Electric
36* LITTLE COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
with
The
CO. LTD.,
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


VI. LETTER SENT BY LIEUT-GEN. VON
NIEBER TO THE BURGOMASTER OF
WAVRE ON THE 27th AUGUST, 1914.
“On 22nd August, 1914, the General Com-
manding the 2nd Army, General von
Bulow, imposed on the town of Wavre
a war-levy of frs. 3,000,000 (£120,000),
payable up till Ist September, to ex-
piate the heinous conduct, contrary to
the Laws of the Rights of Nations and
the Customs of War, which they showed
in making a surprise attack on the Ger-
man troops.*
“The General Commanding the 2nd Army
has just ordered the General of the
Division of the 2nd Army to collect
without delay the said levy, which the
town must pay on account of the con-
duct of its inhabitants.
“I order and summon you to hand over to
the bearer of the present the two first
*At Wavre some 50 houses were set on fire. The Com-
munal Councillors, an Alderman, and a priest of Basse-
Wavre were taken as hostages. To explain their acts, the
Germans pretended that civilians had fired on their troops.
In reality, here as elsewhere, the civilians took no part in
the hostilities. A medical enquiry proved that the German
soldier who had been wounded had been hit by a German
bullet. (Session of the Commission of Enquiry of 7th Sep-
tember, 1914 —3rd witness.)
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Men in the Army use
(
m
■
for
ACTIVE
SERVICE
KRIS DENTAL DECAY GERMS IN 50 SECONDS.
BRITISH MADE .
Sooner or later you will decide to use it also
WHY NOT TO-DAY ?
Obtainable at all Chemists.
Is. per Tube
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


instalments, namely frs. 2,000,000
(£80,000) in gold.
“I also ask that a letter, duly sealed with the
town seal, should be given to the bearer,
declaring that the balance, frs 1,000,000
(£40,000), will be paid without default
on the Ist September.
“I draw the town’s attention to the fact that
in no case can it count on the delay be-
ing prolonged, for the civil population
of the town has put itself beyond the
pale of the Rights of Nations by bring
on the German troops.
“The Town of Wavre will be set on fire and
destroyed, if the payment is not made
when due; without distinction of per-
sons, the innocent will suffer with the
guilty.”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


ENTIRELY BRITISH
MADE.
100
OW
MrCS
o r. ‘A. yy r>4Ui ,w,i<R. e.
til (lIPATEMT" ‘l* _ '
amps
Obtainable from all Electricians.
Britisk General Electric
CO. LTD.
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, WELLINGTON, N.Z.,
BRISBANE, ADELAIDE.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


VII. PROCLAMATION POSTED UP IN
GRIVEGNEE ON 8th SEPTEMBER, 1914.
“Very Important Notice.
“i. Before 4 o’clock in the afternoon of the
6th inst., all arms, ammunition, explo-
sives, fire-works still in the possession
of the inhabitants must be deposited at
the Chateau des Bruyeres. Whoever
disobeys this order will be liable to be
shot. He will be shot on the spot or
else executed, unless he can prove that
he is not at fault.
“2. All the inhabitants of occupied houses
in the localities of Beyne-Heusay,
Grivegnee, Bois-de-Breux, Fleron, must
return to their houses at night-fall
(which is now at 7 p.m., German time).
The afore-mentioned houses are to be
lighted as long as any one is up. The
outer doors must be closed. Anyone
who does not obey these directions ren-
ders himself liable to be severely pun-
ished. Any resistance to orders will
be punished by death.
“3. The Commandant must not meet with
any hindrance during his domiciliary
visits. People are requested to show
all the rooms of the house without be-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


The medicine that goes hand in hand with good
health a kind of twin brother that brings
physical confidence, strength, mental energy and
clearness, is
Clements Tonic
because it possesses those specific properties that
rebuild the human constitution, strengthens its
working parts, cleanses the stomach, and purifies
the blood, thus creating new conditions with health
results to the user. If any greater proof is re-
quired of the powers of this splendid medicine,
the testimonies given afford it, written by those
who can well afford by experience to judge of its
merits. For the general good of the public
they are published, and are well worth reading.
Over 100 voluntary letters in praise of this nerve
remedy have been received during the months of
March, April and May, 1916, which may be seen
and verified at the offices of the Company, Clements
Tonic, Ltd., Rozelle, N.S.W. Get it from your
chemist or store to-day, and get well. It makes
life worth living.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


ing ordered to. Anyone who opposes
this will be severely punished.
“4. After 9 a.m. on the 7th September, I will
permit the houses in Beyne-Heusay,
Grivegnee and Bois-de-Breux to be in-
habited by the persons who lived in
them formerly, as long as these persons
are not forbidden to frequent these
localities by official prohibition.
“5. In order that the above-mentioned per-
mit may not be abused, the Burgo-
masters of Beyne-Heusay and Grive-
gnee must immediately prepare lists of
persons who will be held as hostages
for 24 hours each at Fort Fleron, from
the 6th September, 1914, at 6 p.m., till
the 7th September, at midday.
“The life of these hostages depends on the
population of the above-mentioned
Communes remaining quiet in any
circumstances.
“During the night it is severely forbidden
to show any luminous signs. Bicycles
are only permitted between 7 a.m. and 5
p.m., German time.
“6. From the list which is submitted to me
I will designate persons who shall be
hostages from midday till the following
midday. If the substitute is not there
at the correct time, the hostage must re-
main another 24 hours at the fort.
After these 24 hours, the hostage will
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


/fy OU*UM> Rutbtn Mats
■■•■• I
HiniiPnißt
(*MA ACRti)
i'v . -■
/t-W
c
is
I. .
Stuff*
5uPK e
■^r
DUNLOP
RUBBER’
GOODS’
Give Satisfaction to the User.
IF YOU REQUIRE any description of Rubber Goods, you 1
should always specify “ Dunlop” Brand, and thus ensure I
your obtaining HIGH QUALITY at a REASONABLE
FIGURE. You can buy with every confidence the follow-
ing goods through the usual retail channels
DUNLOP CYCLE. MOTOR CYCLE and CAR
TYRES and SUNDRIES. SOLID RUBBER
VEHICLE TYRES, GARDEN and OTHER
HOSES. MINING. ENGINEERING and
PLUMBERS’ REQUISITES. DUNLOP
RUBBER HEELS and SOLES.
WATERPROOF GARMENTS and
RUGS. RUBBER MATS and
MATTING. PRESERVING JAR
RINGS, WRINGER ROLLERS,
SPORTING GOODS (Tennis.
JLacrosse and Golf Balls, Football
Bladders, Handle Grips, etc.),
MEDICAL GOODS, GAS
JTUBING, RUBBER BELTING
..PACKINGS, INSERTIONS
ETC., ETC.
PRICE LISTS ON APPLICATION
DUNLOP RUBBER CO.
ALL STATES AND N.Z.
I
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


incur a penalty of death, if the substi-
tute has not presented himself.
“7- Priests, Burgomasters, and Members of
the Administration are to be taken first
as hostages.
“8. I insist that all civilians who move about
in my district, particularly those of
Beyne-Heusay, Fleron, Bois-de-Breux,
and Grivegnee, show their respect to the
German officers by taking off their
hats, or lifting their hands to their
heads in military salute. In case of
doubt, every German soldier must be
saluted. Anyone who disregards this
must expect the military to make them-
selves respected by every means.
“9. The German soldiers are permitted to
inspect all vehicles, parcels, etc., of all
inhabitants of the neighbourhood. In
this connection all resistance will be
severely punished.
“10. Whoever knows that quantities greater
than 100 litres of petroleum, benzine,
benzol or any similar liquid are to be
found at a given place in the above-
mentioned Communes, and who does
not inform the military Commandant
there, when there is no doubt as to the
place or the quantity, incurs death.
Quantities of 100 litres are only referred
to.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


HAMPERS FOR SOLDIERS!
We Pack and Post by each Mail, Hampers
crammed full of Dainties, such as Puddings,
Biscuits, Cakes, Shortbread, Chocolate,
Raisins, Sweets, Preserved Ginger, Butter,
Cheese, &c., in air-tight tins. Hampers sewn
in Canvas. Prices:
4/- 8/- 11/- 13/6 18/- 20/-
(Postage Included).
Send us your Soldier’s Full Address and
Hamper required, we’ll do the rest.
See our Window. Write for Lists.
■ : "--a
In air-tight tins, for includ-
ing in Parcels
CHOCOLATE
9 D - !/• 1/6 & 3/- EACH
Tea Merchants,
66 Elizabeth St. and 30 Flinders St., Melb,
And at SYDNEY. ADELAIDE, and BRISBANE.
LIFE AMD DEATH IN BELGIUM.


“u. Anyone who does not obey the order
‘Hands up’ makes himself guilty (sic)
of the penalty of death.
“12. Entrance to the Chateau des Bruyeres,
and also of the drives in the park, is
forbidden under penalty of death be-
tween dusk and dawn, between 6 p.m.
and 6 a.m. (German time), to all per-
sons who are not soldiers of the Ger-
man army.
“13. During the daytime entrance is only
permitted by the North-West gate,
where the guard is, to persons holding
permits. In the interests of the popula-
tion, persons are not permitted to as-
semble in the proximity of the guard.
“14. Whoever, by spreading false news,
liable to lower the moral of the German
troops, and whoever makes any plans
directed against the German army, will
be a suspect, and runs the risk of being
shot on the spot.
“15. While, by the above regulations, the
inhabitants of the district of Fortress
Illb. are threatened with severe punish-
ments if they infringe these regulations
in any way, these same people, if they
show themselves peaceable, can count
on the most benevolent protection and
help on every occasion when harm is or
might be done to them.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Ask for -
“Laurel”
Kerosene
The Soft. White Light
From all Grocers, or
Vacuum Oil Coy. Pty. Ltd.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


“16. Demands for the giving of a fixed
quantity of cattle are made daily, from
10 to 12 in the morning and from 2 to 3
in the afternoon, at the Chateau des
Bruyeres to the Cattle Commission.
“17. Whoever injures or attempts to injure
the German army by taking advantage
of the Red Cross Flag, and is discov-
ered, will be hanged.
“DIECKMANN,
“Commandant-Major.
“Grivegnee, Bth September, 1914.”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Make your Salads perfect
with
CORN WELL’S
Pure Malt
VI MEGA R
Because there is nothing better than the best, there is
no vinegar better than “CORNWELL’S.”
It is the real extract of the Golden Grain—aged and
mellowed by long storage—piquant without “sharpness”—
and free from mineral acids or added adulterants.
NO IMPORTED VINEGAR EXCELS IT.
When ordering, don’t ask for “Vinegar”—say “Cornwell’s
Vinegar, please.”
There isn’t any Health Food so good for growing
children, anaemic adults, and men who are feeling the
nervous strain of business as
Cornwell’s Malt Extract
It is at once a nerve, body, blood and brain builder.
It feeds to the tissues the right proportion of susten-
ance
It assimilates well in the stomach.
It is ALL-food and strengthening.
It is as palatable as jam, and can be eaten with bread
or scones.
CHILDREN LIKE IX—AND ASK FOR MORE
YOUR Chemist, Grocer or Storekeeper sells it, and
THE MEDICAL PROFESSION RECOMMEND IT
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


VIII. SUMMONS TO SURRENDER.
‘‘4th September, 1914.
“To the Commandant of Terrnonde and at the
same time to the Burgomaster of Terrnonde.
“The Germans have captured Terrnonde.
We have placed all round the town
siege artillery of the largest calibre.
Even now people dare to shoot from the
houses on the German troops. The
town and the fortress are summoned to
hoist the white flag immediately and to
cease fighting. If you do not agree to
this summons, the town will be razed
in a quarter of an hour by a very heavy
bombardment.
“All the armed forces of Terrnonde will im-
mediately deposit their arms at the
Brussels gate, at the South of the town.
. The arms of the inhabitants will be de-
posited at the same time and at the same
place.
“The General Commanding the German
Troops before Terrnonde,
“VON BOEHN.”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


&
o*
E 3
Vice-Regal Opticians
THE unique success of the
Barraclough Optical
= organisation is evidence
that the firm is popularly
approved as the leading opti-
cal institution in each of
the three cities in which it
operates.
J. A. Barraclough A
H. K. Barraclough {
E. K. Barraclough C
A. H. Barraclough )
D.8.0.A.
F. 1.0.
LONDON.
SYDNEY: NEWCASTLE: MELBOURNE:
385 George Street, Over Strand Thtre., 232 Collins Street,
Opp. Strand. Hunter Street. Opp. “Age” Offica.
Vi
•J
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


IX. PROCLAMATION POSTED IN BRUS-
SELS ON 25th SEPTEMBER, 1914.
“General Government in Belgium.
“It has happened in districts at present oc-
cupied by more or less strong bodies of
German troops that convoys of wagons
and of patrols have been attacked by
surprise by the inhabitants.
“I draw the attention of the public to the
fact that a ‘register’ is kept of the locali-
ties, in the neighbourhood of which such
attacks have taken place, and that they
may expect their punishment as soon as
the German troops pass near them.
“Brussels, 25th September, 1914.
“The Governor-General of Belgium,
“BARON VON DER GOLTZ,
“Field-Marshal.”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Foods
MILK FOOD fto. i MILK FOOD No. 2
From birth to three From three months
months. to seven months.
MALTED FOOD No. 3.
From seven months and upwards
THE “ALLENBURYS” RUSKS (Malted).
A valuable addition to Baby’s Dietary when
ten months old and after. They provide an
excellent, nourishing and appetising meal,
specially useful during the troublesome time
of teething. Eaten dry they mechanically aid
the cutting of teeth.
Pamphlet on Infant Feeding <Et
Management, Free on Request
Allen (Si Hanburys
Limited,
London and Sydney
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


X. NOTICE POSTED IN BRUSSELS ON
5th OCTOBER, 1914, AND PROBABLY
IN MOST OF THE COMMUNES OF
THE KINGDOM.
“During the evening of 25th September, the
railway line and the telegraph wires
were destroyed on the line Loyenjoul-
Vertryck. In consequence of this, these
two localities have had to render an ac-
count of this, and had to give hostages
in the morning of the 30th September.
“In future, the localities nearest to the place
where similar acts take place be
punished without pity; it matters little
if they are accomplices or not. For
this purpose hostages have been taken
from all localities near the railway line,
thus menaced, and at the first attempt
to destroy the railway line, or the tele-
phone or telegraph wires, they will be
immediately shot.
“Further, all the troops charged with the
duty of guarding the railway have
been ordered to shoot any person who,
in a suspicious manner, approaches the
line, or the telegraph or telephone
wires.
“The Governor-General of Belgium,
“BARON VON DER GOLTZ,
“Field-Marshal.“
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


f* Hard ie’s Building Specialties
Time has proved beyond doubt that
Fibro Ciment Sheets & Slates
are the
MOST DURABLE, MOST ECONOMICAL AND MOST SATIB-
- of all Building Materials. Fibro Ciment does
not crack, warp or split, and, used externally, does not
require painting.
SHEETS FOR WALLS- | SLATES FOR ROOFS-
,!![• ? x 4ft. x hi 8 colors. Red, Blue and
4ft., in 3 thicknesses. | Grey.
Write us for catalogue.
JAMES HAR.DIE & CO.
SSI LITTLE COLLINS 8T„ MELBOURNE.
And at Adelaide, Sydney, and Brisbane
An Ideal Ocean Excursion
r
...
-
The “Sydney" at Eden.
Leaves Melbourne alternate Wednesdays, calling at Stanley.
Oevonport <Tas.), Eden and Sydney. Fares: Saloon. £6 6
2nd Saloon. £i.
Head Office: SI KING
ST.. MELBOURNE.
Melbourne Steamship Co. Ltd.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


XI. NOTICE POSTED IN BRUSSELS ON
1st NOVEMBER, 1914.
“A legally constituted court-martial pro-
nounced the following sentences on 28th Octo-
ber :
“(1) The police constable de Ryckere was
condemned, for having attacked, in
the legal exercise of his duties, an
authorised agent of the German autho-
rities, for having voluntarily inflicted
bodily hurt in two cases, with the aid of
other persons, for having procured the
escape of a prisoner in one case, and
for having attacked a German soldier,
to
‘*s years’ imprisonment.
“(2) Police constable Seghers was con-
demned, for having attacked, in the
legal exercise of his duties, an autho-
rised agent of the German authorities,
for voluntarily inflicting bodily injury
on this German agent, and for having
procured the escape of a prisoner (all
these offences constituting one charge),
to
“3 years’ imprisonment.
“The sentences were confirmed on 31st
October by the Governor-General,
Baron von der Goltz.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


If you wish a nice, clear complexion,
take before Breakfast a little
mk
sf. •
mm
sj ? ; V \
if
Wife -i
eufc-a.
A
Splendid
Morning
Tonic
and
Mild
Aperient
All
Chemists,
at 2s. Od.
bottle.
IHC Gaso-Kero Engines
are furnished in sizes
to suit all requirements.
For stationary work the sizes
are 1. If. 24, 4, 6,8 10,12 15 and
20 h.p.; for portable work, 2i,
4, 6,8,10,12,15 and 20 h p.: and
for traction work, 16, 20, 25
THAT _ more than a quarter of a
million IHC Engines, amounting
„ to between 3,000.000 and
2,000,000 horse-power, have been
sold is evidence that should weigh
heavy with every man contem-
plating the purchase of mechanical
power.
That the present 250,000 owners
had sufficient confidence to invest
such an enormous amount of money
as £25,000,000 in these engines
proves positively the reliability and
economy of IHC power.
THIS is the power that YOU
should buy the power that has
been PROVED by hundreds of thou-
sands of users to be the most suc-
cessful and economical procurable.
and 45 h.p
SEND NOW FOR COMPLETE CATALOGUE
INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER CO. OF AOS. PTY. LTD.
BRISBANE • SYDNEY • MELBOURNE - ADELAIDE AND PERTH WITH
Depots AT TAMWORTH - ALBURY - BENDIGO and LAUNCESTON AND
AGENCIES AT ALL IMPORTANT CENTRES THROUGHOUT THE COMMONWEALTH
-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


“The town of Brussels, not including its
suburbs, has been punished for the in-
jury done by its police constable de
Ryckere to a German soldier, by an ad-
ditional fine of
“5 million francs.
“Brussels, Ist November, 1914.
“The Governor of Brussels,
“BARON VON LUETWITZ,
“General.”
Who, after reading such publications, will be
astonished at the murders, fires, pillage and de-
struction committed everywhere where the Ger-
man army encountered any resistance? If a
German corps or patrol are received at the en-
trance to a village with shots fired by soldiers
belonging to the regular troops, but who are
afterwards forced to retire, the population is de-
clared responsible; civilians are accused of hav-
ing fired or co-operated in the defence, and with-
out enquiry, the locality is given up to pillage
and fire, and a part of its inhabitants massacred.
The Commission of Enquiry has already
stated this in its report of the 10th September
(Third Report).
The facts that it has registered since then
have only confirmed its conclusions. The odious
actions committed in all parts of the territory
show such a degree of regularity that the respon-
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Australian Industries
Mach greater and more far-reaching efforts will henceforth
he made to establish Australian Industries. The successful
manufacture and distribution of goods “Made in Australia"
been . the endeavour of David Jones', who employ
ojoi (00 workpeople in their workrooms at Surry Hills
(the largest of their kind in Australia), where 24 distinct in-
dustries are represented. The Company’s reputation for quality
and reliability, which has now been es-
tablished for 70 years, is rigidly main-
tained in all goods “Made by David
- Jones',” a few of which are Costumes,
Coats, Blouses. Skirts, Underclothing,
Knitted Surf Suits, Needlework, Milli-
nery, Men’s and Boys’ Clothing. Men’s'
and Boys’ Mercery, Trunks and Bags,
, Pocket Wallets.
Eg,”
BBSS
m
&
ASK FOR AND TRY
SEAL
TEA
"IT SPEAKS FOR ITSELF”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


sibility may rest on the whole German army.
They are only the application of a preconceived
system, the putting- into practice of the instruc-
tions, which have made of the enemy troops
operating in Belgium “a horde of barbarians and
a band of incendiaries.”
Le Havre, 10th November, 1914.
To Monsieur CARTON DE WIART,
Minister of Justice.
Sir, —
Twenty-two German Universities have sent
to foreign Universities a protest against the ac-
cusations brought against the German troops.
This protest, signed by the Rectors of the
Universities of Tubingen, Berlin, Bonn, Bres-
lau, Erlangen, Frankfort, Freiburg, Giessen,
Gottingen, Greifswald, Halle, Heidelberg, Jena,
Kiel, Konigsberg, Leipzig, Marburg, Munich,
Munstein, Rostock, Strassburg, and Wurzburg,
begins as follows: —
“You all, who know that our army is not an
army of mercenaries, that it comprises
the whole nation from the first to the
last man, that it is led by the best of our
country’s sons, that at this hour thou-
sands of professors and students are
falling as officers or soldiers on the
battlefields of France or Russia, you
who have read and heard the spirit in
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


(g* Doctors Recommend
GILBEY’S DRY GIN
HIT Being unsweetened and
containing a larg'e pro-
portion of Juniper this cele-
brated Gin is specially recommended
for those suffering from Kidney
1 Complaint and Rheumatism.
See that you get Oilbey’s.
TUCKER & CO., SYDNEY.
Sole Agents.
MERCANTILE MUTUAL FIRE
INSURANCE GO. LTD.
FIRE, MARINE, AND ACCIDENT INSURANCE
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION, EMPLOYERS' LIABILITY,
and PLATE-GLASS INSURANCE
AT LOWEST RATES
Losses by Lightning, Bush Fires, and Gas Explosion
Paid. Cash Bonus to Policyholders every year.
Head Office: 120 Pitt Street, Sydney. KELSO KING, Manager.
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


which and the success with which our
youth is instructed and brought up,
who know how much we inculcate re-
spect and admiration for the master-
pieces of the human brain., whatever the
country to which it belongs, we ask you
all to be our witnesses and to say if
what our enemies report is true, and if
it is correct that the German army is a
horde of barbarians and a band of in-
cendiaries who take pleasure in killing
innocent persons and destroying vil-
lages and the monuments of art and his-
tory; and if you will respect the truth
you will be convinced with us that
where the German troops have had to
accomplish work of destruction, they
acted according to the pitiless laws of
defence in war.”
LIFE AND DEATH IN BELGIUM.


Wholly set up and printed in Australia
by Harold Smith, 376 Little Flinders-street,
Melbourne, Australia.


Some day the men
who were now fight-
ing would return.
How will it be on that
great day with those
who have not done
their duty ? How
will it be with those
who have reaped
where they have not
sown, those who re-
mained in snug re-
finement, caring no-
thing, while their
comrades went out to
die ? Be not deceived
—if you will not sow,
neither shall you
reap.
Recruiting Meeting, Martin
Place, Sydney, July 6
Hon. W. M. Hughes.
