



THE LEISURE HOUR. 213
EXTRACTS
FROM
THE LEISURE HOUR
1852-3
I
i
i
j.
I
i


LIFE IN AUSTRALIA.
CHAITEK I. —100K OUT FOE SQUALI3.
BT EET. J. B. OTO, M.A., TIC AH OF ST. MAEY’S, BILSTON, AND
CHAIRMAN OF THE UNION OF WOLVERHAMPTON.
This hint at starting is meant. to remind our
readers that it is not all plain sailing at sea, any
more than ashore. Difficulties and dangers are
pretty equally distributed in all the positions of
this life, but "there is the same wise and gracious
Providence over all and in them all. Peter was
as safe on the sea of Galilee as in the prison at
Jerusalem: in both there were dread and danger,
but in both the Angel of the covenant was on his
side. Working men! whether from the factory or
the farm, do you sufficiently realize this truth?
With all the preparations for your outfit, is faith
one of them ?—faith in Him who walked with His
people alike on the waves and in the wilderness ?
Taking Him with you, your outfit is complete,
whatever else is wanting. Not that faith is an
inoperative fanaticism, that looks to God to do for
us what He has constituted it a duty, by the dele-
gation to us of sufficient powers, to do for our-
selves. Your comfort for four months will depend
upon what you carry with you. But you must
make up your mind to an occasional roughing it
on ship-board, as yon have often had to rough it
ashore. In the improved state of navigation and
emigrant vessels, there is now, however, more fear
than danger. ■ Shall I try to paint you a bit of a
sea-storm ? Perhaps the rough likeness may bo
recognised when you meet the original.
The “ Whittington” emigrant ship, being far out
at sea, was all but becalmed for three days, when
on the fourth they caught the n.-e. trade winds.
The next day a sudden squall terribly dismayed
them. The air had been close and stifling as
an atmospheric asthma all the previous evening.
Sullen flashes of lightning began after midnight,
in slow and lazy intervals, to spread a hasty and as
if reluctant glare upon the dark world of waters,
which still lay slumbering peacefully, as if the sea
were dreaming of home and of the everlasting
lullabies along her ancient shores. Every inch of
canvass was spread, like a great cobweb, to catch
the gentle breeze that slowly and feebly, as the
wings of a tired insect, fanned them on their
course; and the fair vessel, in her graceful robes of
white, majestically floated on the pensive mirror of
the deep, like a sea-bird that feels at home there.
The long twilight of yester-evening had tarried on
hour after hour, as if the day had nothing par-
ticular to do on the morrow, and seemed bent upon
enjoying the night. The sun had set in a slow
and lingering glory, as if be, too, were loth to part
with the placid interchange of amity between sea
and sky, which he smiled to see so sociable. They
seemed, indeed, so like each other, that heaven and
its coeval duplicate, the sea, appeared reposing in
equal beauty above and below the deep, like the
old waters of the firmament in Genesis, restored as
they were before the voice of a storm had rudely
broken their eternal silence.
The night-watch were at the moment half asleep,
when the captain’s order rang suddenly between
decks, like an alarum, to prepare for squalls. Yet
not the remotest symptom was perceptible of even
a change of wind—there was none to change—on
any point round the whole horizon. Wind and
wave were alike paired off for the night, and both
long since locked in a slumber, calm as the heavens,
sweet as home, and deep as the sea! The very sails
seemed magnetized by the influence of the scene,
and drooped languidly and sleepily from their spars
■as if they were “off duty,” and nothing but their
cordage, like a tether, kept them from tumbling
overboard. The noise increased on deck, but above
all the uproar was heard the captain’s voice order-
ing sail to be taken in, hatches to be battened
down, and lights to be extinguished, which was no
great loss, so scanty were they. “ In another five
minutes,” writes one on board, “ the squall struck
us. It smote the vessel like a stunning blow that
knocks a strong man reeling to the ground ; and
the cries of the alarmed passengers roused from
their sleep sounded as if the blow, like an electric
shock, had struck them all at the same instant.
The clamour in the elements was immediately
terrific, like the explosion following a spark; and
lightning, thunder, wind, rain, and waves, seemed
all, like the sudden outburst of a conspiracy, to
seize upon our ill-fated ship at once. Away went
the jib, shivered to pieces like a paper kite; it was
impossible to haul it down in time; a few minutes
later in taking in sail would have dismasted, if dot
wrecked her.
“ For a fierce half-hour the poor ship groaned like
a conscious thing in agony, under the fearful on-
slaught of the elements, smitten, bruised, and buf-
feted—now tossed up a mountain wave, from the
crest of which we glanced a moment at the more
distant ravages of the storm; then dashed down a
precipice of its collapsing fragments, as if the giant
of the ocean heights had flung her from his grim
territories.
“As it was our first gale—for the squall seemed to
settle into a brief one —none of us had secured our
goods and chattels against such an emergency; and
as the ship suddenly heeled over at an angle of 45°
with the horizon, as if, like a suicide, she would rush
into the arms of death to escape the horror of his
countenance, down went everything with her.
Every detached article on the windward side
rushed as if in a panic to leeward, without bidding
any other article to get out of its way. Instan-
taneously, as if the tempest had put in a ‘ distress’
to sweep away all our moveables, down the tarred
incline tumbled boxes, pannikins, plates, bottles,
books, dishes, filters, watches, clothes, boots, look-


ing-glasses, rummers, knives, forks, water-cans,
hats, bonnets, biscuits, men, women, children, bird-
cages, cats, and cockroaches, all in the most pic-
turesque confusion of shapes, posture, locality, and
fraternization, as if rehearsing a miniature earth-
quake. Amid shrieks of females, screams of chil-
dren, screeches of birds, fightings of cats and dogs,
shoutings for the steward, men scrambling to their
feet again, others .striking their irritable fists into
the lock of a heavy portmanteau, mistaken for a
messmate, and kicking the unconscious incumbents
off their stomachs; mothers picking up a bruised
child with one hand and a handful of smashed
crockery with the other; and older hands at sea-
faring helping their rawer fellow-passengers to right
themselves, which they failed to effect until the
lurched vessel set them the example. Amid the
hurly-burly of the scene between decks, the cap-
tain’s timely warning up aloft had been distinctly
heard, and his commendable vigilance, supported
by the skill and energies of his crew, under the
blessing of Him who holdeth the seas in the hollow
of His hand, brought us safely through.”
What magic art revealed the on-coming danger
to the captain F What water-witch, flying across
the ocean on her mythological broom, whispered
him the message that a storm was at hand ? How
was it he could not be taken unawares P His only
oracle was the little tube of mercury in his baro-
meter, which, rapidly falling, assured him of a
great change in the atmosphere, and he prepared
for it accordingly:—
“ This only was the witchcraft ho had used.”
He did that which wo must all do, whether at sea
or ashore, whether in temporal or spiritual affairs—
“ discern the signs of the times.” He was watch-
ful, and used the means within his reach.
One more incident of the long voyage out, and
we have done with it. “ Our own Correspondent ”
writes under date January Ist, 1816; —“ We were
the victims of another scene of general consterna-
tion last night. There is nothing more appalling
than being suddenly roused from sleep at sea;
the first impression is always alarming. You com-
mit yourself to sleep overnight with a more than
ordinary sense of your utter helplessness, and en-
tire dependence upon Divine protection. You feel
yourself to be more immediately in the hands of
God than anywhere ashore. You are not really so,
for that frail ship that floats at the mercy of the
unstable wave, and of the wind that blowcth where
it listeth, is but an epitome of the great globe it-
self, floating in its orbit through the abyss of infi-
nite space —that sea without a bed and without a
shore; the earth is but a larger vessel, whose mys-
tic circumnavigation of the sun is ordered and con-
trolled by her Divine Builder and Maker. But we
seem to bring the idea of dependence nearer to us
in the palpable motion of the ship through the
waves, conscious that the stranding of a nail, or
the starting of a plank, alone lies between us and a
watery grave. * * * I was awoke in the middle
of the night by a frightful noise and commotion
upon deck. The ship-bell was ringing furiously;
the crew were shouting franticly ; female passen-
gers rushed forth in their night dress, shrieking for
their husbands, brothers, and children, and implor-
ing to know the cause of the alarm ; three Irish
farmers on board called aloud upon their saints,
and many were upon their knees, in mingled terror
and devotion. I and others ran up to the upper
deck ‘ pale as our smocks,’ which were the only
garments wo could assume in our fright and hurry.
I dreaded some terrible disaster had occurred, or
was instantly pending. I looked around in vain
for the gallant captain, and his absence at once
suggested the terrible thought of something hav-
ing befallen him, when there burst upon us a loud
rough laughing chirup from the .seamen, ‘ ringing
the old year out, and the new year in ! ’
“ It was their midnight serenade to the new-born
1817.
“ We slunk back to our hammocks, half ashamed
at having forgotten our shove chronologies at sea,
and with a hearty laugh too, at our own expense, felt
thankful and delighted that it was nothing worse.”
In our next paper we propose furnishing our
readers with some inland sketches of Australian no-
tabilia, but we cannot conclude without one hint to
our friends the working classes. You who may
be contemplating the grand trip to the antipodes, do
not be too sanguine, nor expect too much, lest your
anticipations, like everything else in that land of
natural contradictions, turn out the reverse of what
you calculated. Go out with the idea rather of
getting work than getting wealth ; many of you
can get neither at home ; both may he your portion
there, and one of them must be. Work is abun-
dant and remunerative; and the man that emi-
grates under a fixed and habitual conviction that
labour, the law of God, is the law of human pro-
gress and prosperity—that man will succeed. God
blesses every form of obedience to His laws, and to
none more obviously and encouragingly than obedi-
ence to the law of labour. “ Replenish the earth ”
is your hible warrant for emigrating from one
land to another; “and subdue it” is your obliga-
tion to cultivate diligently what you occupy ; doing
both, however, in a spirit of filial subordination to
the hope that anticipates alike a physical and spi-
ritual fulfilment of the prophecy that bids “ the
wilderness and the solitary place be glad for them,
and the desert rejoice and blossom as the rose.”


216 THE LEISURE HOUR.


)
j
I !
i i
|j
j
i
|
j-
i
•V
I ■ I
'
LIFE IN AUSTRALIA.
THE BET. J. B. OWEST, M.A., OB BIBSTOM - .
CHAPTER 11,
ANECDOTE OF A BILSTON EMIGRANT. —LOVE OF THE HOME
COUNTRY.—THE BIND OF CHARACTERS THAT SUCCEED.—
ENGLISH RESPECT FOR THE LAW, IN THE ARREST OP A
MURDERER. —THE CHINESE ADVENTURERS. —ACCOUNTS FROM
BENDIGO, THE MOST RECENTLY-DISCOVERED GOLD-FIELD.
I have had a long chat this morning with a young j
man, one of my parishioners, who returned from |
Australia five weeks since, and who is to re-embark j
for Port Philip either to-night or to-morrow mom- |
ing. If every emigrant that leaves our shores I
were like-minded with my young friend, the colony j
would flourish in a moral and religious as well as
material point of view. He was at actual work in
: the diggings at Bendigo only twenty-four weeks, ;
! and during that period he and his partner realized
| and divided between them 22001 Instead of
squandering this money, what did our adventurer
do? I will inform the reader. He had an old
mother in England, left a widow, with his sister,
about fifteen years old, and one brother. His I
mother and sister had striven hard to live, but i
had fallen behindhand in their rent, and in various ;
ways suffered the pressure of want and poverty. i
They little dreamt that relief was on its way to I
them in the form of the absent son and brother, |
whom they often and fondly thought of and prayed j
for as one who was twenty thousand miles of weary j
sea apart from them. True, they had heard, in ■
common with all the rest of the home-folks, of the |
gold-fields, where they dug up the precious metal I
in little jack-pits, like golden colliers, and of nng- j
gets of the yellow idol that now and then were j
found smelted in some old antediluvian craters of !
extinct volcanoes, whence they ran off and hid
themselves for untold thousands of years under the j
sand, gravel, slates, and clay strata of Australia. J
They had heard of these things in their rough i
way, and wondered whether their George had yet |
anything to do with them, and whether he was j
making a fortune like some other adventurers, or j
! whether he had ever got safely over the vast seas |
I that intervened between them and him, and that \
I made their hearts ache to think of their depth and j
width, and how furious at times they were when the 1
winds and waves took to flying into each other’s i
faces. They often thought of these things, espe- j
dally on boisterous nights, when the wind howled
dismally over their chimney, as if it felt itself j
the pain which its fury inflicted; and the mother’s j
heart shook like her shaking cottage when she
thought her sea-boy might be in the blast.
It is not unlikely that they were brooding
over this subject on that afternoon in Novem-
ber last, when the short days were looking down !
coldly and darkly upon the widow and her solitary j
little homestead, and when her hit of a fire in the j
grate was opening its languid eye as if it were I
dying of hunger, and begged hard and earnestly |
for a morsel of fuel. Whatever might have been j
their reflections, however, they were interrupted j
by a single tap at the door, followed immediately
by the lifting of the latch, when, lo! in another
moment George was in the arms of his mother. j
The fire was speedily replenished, and, after a !
fashion, the fatted calf was hilled, his kinsmen |
were sent for, supper was laid, and neighbours I
dropped in one after another to see the live man !


all the way from the gold country; and no wonder
if they began to he merry.
Well, my young friend had learned “ by heart,”
as it turned out, “ the first commandment with
promise—Honour thy father and thy mother, that
thy days may be long in the land !” So he bought
six houses in a street near his mother’s dwelling,
conveying to her their rental as long as she lived,
and put in her hands some SOL to pay for any
little necessary repairs, depositing the remainder
of his money in the bank, with directions for
its interest to be paid to his mother. After five
weeks’ rest at home, he again committed himself
to the long voyage back to the gold-fields, where
the blessing and prayers of a happy and grateful
mother will follow and abide with him so long as
her affectionate heart shall boat.
There is a true nobility in such conduct as this,
which commands the homage of every good man’s
admiration. That youth will return to his labour
in the distant land with the pleasing recollection
of having left his mother in peace and comfort, the
result of his filial provision for her declining years.
He has left the conveyance deeds of his houses
with me, for safe custody until he comes back
again, if God should see fit to spare his life. I
rather liked him for that idea of coming back
again, and looking upon old England as his home,
and Australia, or any other isle, continent, or pe-
ninsula in the wide world, as only a lodging, or
station, or halting-place in his pilgrimage, where
he had something to earn, and bring it home to
be spent; not, like a public-house frequenter,
among strangers, and to enrich innkeepers, but at
homo, where wages, profits, and emoluments of all
kinds should be brought, and laid in grateful, pious
homage upon the shrine of the domestic hearth.
Well, the young man is gone again, and what
has he resolved, by the grace of God, to do ?
Why, to work hard, but not “ live hard,” in the
profligate’s sense of living, but to be a “ fast man”
at his vocation, to save gold as well as dig it, and
not to expect a grain of it without digging. Spade
in hand, and tin pan slung over his shoulder, and
tent pitched on the battle-field, he goes manfully
to the fight, with all possible obstacles, disap-
pointments, delays, and difficulties, resolved to
delve on, and wash on, and prospect on, until he
has undermined the secret hoards of Australian
treasure, and compelled her to surrender at discre-
tion to the indomitable perseverance of her be-
sieger. If any of our readers contemplate the
gold-trip, theirs must be a similar determination,
or they had better stay where they are. It is true
that the immense yield of gold is chiefly realized
by the labouring classes, for even as regards the pre-
cious metals the rule holds good of the class above
them —“ they cannot dig but there is no getting
the gold without cither digging, or labouring in
some other shape for them that dig. Many of the
most fortunate diggers belong to the convict class;
and the sudden and, in many instances, consider-
able accession of wealth in such hands has not
been by any means favourable to the moral deve-
lopment of the colony. “ Lightly come, lightly
o-o,” is the obvious motto of thousands. Intoxica-
tion and profligacy of various kinds prevail, setting
authority and order at defiance; street robberies
and violent assaults are of frequent occurrence,
whereby the towns and their suburbs are rendered
unsafe for walking after dusk.
Still, as a set-off to this state of things, I was
gratified on perusing a statement in the Jdcenincj
Mail of December Bth, 1852, to the effect that,
with all this lawlessness on the part of individuals,
the public adherence to the law is unabated. The
writer says; “ English love of law and common
sense predominate among the great majority of
those adventurers from all parts of the empire who
are now collected in Australia, without any organ-
ization that we can see, without a government,
and almost without a police force. There is a
good deal of thieving, especially of horses and
cattle, but we meet with none of the scenes which
have so frequently disgraced the gold-hunting
population of California. The last crime at Ben-
digo gave occasion to a very satisfactory display of
public feeling, and to still more satisfactory public
action. A man had quarrelled with his mate and
stabbed him thrice, in three parts of the body;
the bystanders seized the murderer and bound him
to a tree till next morning, when they delivered
him up to the police! There is no mention of
murder or aggravated robbery at the other dig-
gings.”
One peculiar feature in these modern gold disco-
veries is the fact of their having opened the jealous
gates of China, at least for her own children to
walk out, and perhaps preliminary to the children
of other lands walking in. There is already a vast
colony of Chinamen in California, and their num-
bers are increasing weekly in the Australian gold-
fields. Their simple subordination to the autho-
rities who have accompanied them, and who
govern them by their own laws, is highly exem-
plary. They will see, alas! little to recommend
the religion of the English m the heterogeneous
mass of the diggers ; but it is to bo hoped some
means may be speedily adopted to teach the poor
Buddhists of China the difference between Chris-
tianity and the lives of many “ who profess and
call themselves Christians;” that thus, by the
mercy of God, they who came seeking gold may
find “the pearl of great price,” and carry back in
their own hearts and lives specimens of the precious
discovery to their benighted and captive kinsfolk.
The Chinese immigrants are described, in both
the American and British diggings, as an orderly,
sober, quiet, industrious people. A writer from
Geelong says : “ One Chinaman found a cheque in
the bush and delivered it up to the police, and only
one of them has been sent to the workhouse at
Geelong as destitute and homeless.”
The tide of speculation has now turned towards
Bendigo. Every man who was dissatisfied with
his gettings at other places, struck tent, shoul-
dered pick and hoe, and marched off for Bendigo.
Tatiara Gully appears to be one of the most pro-
ductive of these new diggings. No one has yet left
it who once began to work it. The metal is nearly
all round and “ nuggetty scarcely any is found
in fine flakes, the sizes ranging from a pin’s head
to a horse-bean. Its singularly pale colour seems
to indicate a considerable natural alloy of silver.
If the conjecture be verified, there may yet be
found fields of silver to compete with those of
gold, which will tend to sustain the present re-
lative values of these metals.


When my young friend, before referred to
reached Bendigo, the tents were few and the
forest was dense ; within a fortnight of his arrival,
however, the forest was cleared away and. con-
sumed as fire-wood or used as tent-poles, while the
gully, far and near, was covered with the locations
of the miners. He complained bitterly of the
scarcity of water, the nearest to be had being- seven
miles and a half distant, through the bush, with
no road to the spot, and in consequence the horses
suffered fearfully. A horse of his own, maddened
with thirst, thrust its head into a little deserted
hole where the slight exudations of moisture from
the soil had left a foot or two of mud ; it could not
extricate itself until, by ropes passed round its
neck, it was dragged but by another horse. Im-
mediately, however, that it was at liberty, it rushed
head foremost back again, and was suffocated
before it could be again enlarged. My friend
being- accustomed to see our iron and lime-stone
stacked about his native place, did the same here
with his gold-soil, thereby avoiding the expense
and labour of daily taking it down to the creek to
be washed. He stacked on for two months in
this way until the floods came, which, filling every
gully-hole and channel, enabled him to wash at
his leisure—at a time, too, when the rains pre-
vented him from doing anything else. It was
from this heap he and his “ butty ” cleared 2000 Z.
between them. Their example was afterwards
followed by most of the district. lie showed me
a common pea-jacket, which, with waistcoat and
trousers of strong but inferior cloth, cost him HZ.;
and a pair of Wellington boots, worth in England
about 11s., for which he -was compelled to pay
3 1, os., or embark barefoot with his 1200 Z. He
did not bring his money with him, which it is
never safe to do, but consigned it through the
usual channels of conveyance, by which precaution
he received it, on payment of a reasonable per-
centage for commission, on his arrival in England.
Our readers should advise their friends in Aus-
tralia to remit their money through the authorized
channel, and neither to trust any other nor bring
it themselves, large sums having been not unfre-
quently lost in this way.
Bendigo is only about 105 miles from Port
Philip, and a good road is in process of formation,
or is perhaps completed by this date. The dig-
gings are highly productive, several pounds of
gold being ordinarily extracted from every cart-
load of soil. Provisions, however, by the latest
accounts, were dear. Flour generally fetched 20Z.
per bag of 200 Bos. ; sugar Is. 'id. per lb., and butter
and cheese 3s. Gd. per lb. The escort conveying
the gold from the diggings to the towns goes to
and fro every week, and the weekly average from
the Bendigo district exceeds 80,000 ounces* or
about 300,0001. Another lugubrious correspondent
writes: “It is pleasant to come out of the hole
and hear the cradle-man say, ‘ Ten ounces each to-
day, lads.' ’ (that is, about 30Z. each for the day’s
work). But it is very annoying, after three weeks’
toil, to hear your mate say; ‘ A miserable half-
ounce among four of us ; the fifth hole done with-
out a speck; funds almost exhausted, and a
southerly wind in the flour-bags.’ ” Well, be it
so; men must “ take things as they come,” or,
rather, as God sends them, at home and abroad,
in gold-fields or coal-fields. Mining- is not all
plain sailing. Green rock, elunt, and other ob-
stacles to profit, will be found in some shape or
other in all trades. Mo man should venture out
to the diggings expecting to get an ounce of gold
without what we call in Staffordshire “ a hard
scrap.’’ You must search wide, and dig deep,
and wash well, ancl work hard, and sooner or later
you will reap your yellow harvests. Mono need
despair—this is the invariable and universal testi-
mony now —who have courage, health, and perse-
verance to work, and moral character and prudence
to husband their earnings.
My friend says, it is believed that there arc up-
wards of 60,000 persons now working at the various
diggings all over the colony, and that none but
diggers or dealers with the diggers can afford to
live. The commonest workmen are far better off
than clerks or officials at salaries of 200 Z. a-ycar;
such men are starved with present prices of rent,
clothing, and provisions, while every handicrafts-
man is growing rich. For instance, a carter,
with no other capital than his whip, makes 12Z.
a-week; his expenses perhaps are 4 1., and thus he
saves, or could do so if he were sober, at least
41 6Z. a-year, without including perquisites worth
100 Z. a-year more, A cab-driver makes his 30Z, to
40Z. a-week, or above 1400 Z. a-year. Masons and
carpenters IZ. a-day, and few of them will work for
so little. A load of water costs 18s.; a load of
wood 4Z.; a pair of shoes, worth at Stafford or
Korthampton 75., fetches 21,; jack-boots for the
diggings, ’ll. Pistols, almost literally, are “ worth
their weight in gold.” Some men’s good fortune
is almost fabulous. I was credibly informed that
one man, who was one of a party of three diggers
who worked together seven weeks, realized each
4300 Z. in the time. One of his brothers died the
day after they shared their gold, and left him his
share, making his amount 8600 Z.; and yet, six
months afterwards, the third man had squandered
or been plundered of his 4300 Z., and returned to
Mount Alexander or Ballarat as penniless as when
he first visited it.
Instances of such large realizations of course are
rare, and ought never to be calculated on; but it
is painful to reflect upon the monstrous and pro-
fligate expenditure of money going on in the
Australian towns. The letter of an Indian officer,
in the Times of December 6th, 1852, dated
from Melbourne, June, 1852, states: “ There is
no distinction of class hero now; every man calls
himself a gentleman; cabmen, porters, carters,
policemen, and public-house keepers, in speaking
to you, call themselves gentlemen, for they are
quite as rich as any, much more so than most of
the government officials. They say themselves,
‘ This is the poor man’s country,’ and that the
gold has been sent by God to them alone, to give
them their day. They don’t interfere with ‘ swells,’
as they call them, but look down upon them; they
say that many a swell works as hard as they do,
but it is scarcely known of any of them making
money by digging, and this they imagine proves
it was sent for the poor man. There is scarcely a
man you meet in the streets who has not his
pocket full of notes. The common waiters at the
hotel we are living at get 200 Z. a-year each, and
‘ the boots ’ above 100 Z. !”


i
I
II
I
I
i
I ■
i
i
i:
ii
II
1 !
ii ;
ii
| i
I {
Ii
i I
ji
ii
'
i
i
j This state of confusion is highly prejudicial to
! the best interests of the colony, social as well as
l moral; and the sooner the homo authorities inter-
I pose some salutary check upon the insubordination
j and excess which are rapidly disorganizing the
I whole fabric of the settlement, the better will it
; | be for the settlers themselves and for their fellow-
j citizens who are yet to follow them. Mammon, I
II alas !is the god of Australia ! If the parent state
; | does not vigorously address its powers and appli- |
j ances to the better regulation of the mischiefs and ,
disorders of the present condition of the colony, i
she will be only' getting rid of her children here -
by making them to pass through the fire to the ;
I Moloch there! *


LIFE IN AUSTRALIA.
BT IHE KEV. J. B. OWEN, M.A., OB BILSTON.
CHAPTER 111.
THE ABORIGINES: —THEIR MENDICITY AND INDOLENCE —NOT
TO BK TRUSTED INDISCRIMINATELY—IGNORANCE OP THEIR
COUNTRY. —TREASURES. —SKETCH OP A NATIVE ENCAMP-
MENT. —EVIL EFFECTS OF THE WHITE MAN’S DRINKING
EXAMPLE.—OPPOSITE ITCTURE OP NATIVE EVANGELIZATION.
—ACCOUNT OP A GOOD SQUATTER.
I once thought that the importunity of a tho-
rough-bred Irish mendicant bore the palm in the
world of beggary; hut poor, patched, penury-
stricken Paddy must yield the had pre-eminence to
the Australian aborigines. They often linger about
in groups when the diggers are at their meals,
begging, in voluble cant English, at every mouthful
which our countrymen swallow. They will zea-
lously help them at meals, but refuse the slightest
co-operation with them at their work. They seem
too indolent to have ever washed themselves, if
only for the curiosity of the new sensation of clean-
liness. There is scarcely a bird or beast in Aus-
tralia which does not occupy as much time at its
toilet as the Australian human creatures.
“ They look at us in the gulleys,” said one man
with whom I conversed, “as if they thought what
blockheads we were to work so hard for these bits
of yellow stuff.” There was never a grain of gold,
nor precious stone, nor anything else bearing any
value, found in the hands of'a single native. “A
black woman, called a luhra, begged of mo one
day,” said my informant, “ and first asked, in
broken English, 1 Damper, damper.’ I gave her a
hit of damper. ‘ Bit meat, bit meat,’ immediately
followed as her next request. I gave her some.
‘ Bit tea, hit tea,’ she next asked; and, determined
to humour her, and ascertain the extent of her
mendicant impudence, I gave her a screw of tea.
‘ Bit soogar, bit soogar.’ Sugar was boon number
four, and I gave her a little. She then opened a
fresh account with, ‘ Bit damper, picaninny ;’ that
is, a bit for her child. ‘ Bit meat;’ I gave it; but
then I burst out laughing, and she saw through
me, and timidly slunk away; but in ten minutes
after, she sent her husband, who had stood sulkily
and apathetically witnessing from a little distance
her manoeuvres, and he began the same catechism,
‘ Bit damper,’ and would no doubt have rehearsed
every article, but that I reached my hand towards
the cart-whip lying on the cask, when my sable
petitioner shook his head, shrugged his shoulders,
and heat an ignominious retreat. We should be
glad to feed, clothe, and pay them wages, or build
them houses, if they would only do a day’s work
now and then, but they have not the sense of a
kangaroo.”
I reminded my friend how thankful we ought
to be that we had been better reared and taught,
and that their abject condition rather appealed to
our pity than contempt. To convey some idea of
the habits of the natives, I will here present our
readers with a description of
AN ENCAMPMENT OP THE ABORIGINES.
I had been nearly three days on my trackless
route, says a pilgrim of the bush, steering myself
by my pocket compass as if I were a vessel at sea.
I had only passed one station on the whole weary
way. The sense of loneliness at times grew over-
powering. I felt as if all nature were a prison in
which I stalked to and fro in solitary confinement,
unable to escape even my own sensations. The
long silence at times was so awful and magnetic
that I realized a kind of coma that disabled me
from any effort to break it, even by a whistle, lest
the echo should only make the stillness more pain-
fully obvious. Your echo in the bush is like
nature rejecting your voice, and forcing you to eat
your own words. Ah ! what is that light yonder
that greets my wistful gaze as the day is closing
in, and the peremptory twilight of Australia shuts
its dark door in the face of heaven as soon as the
sun’s back is turned ? To the hungry, weary bush-
ranger, the gleam of a hut-fire shines hrightlier
than a star in the cold far-off heavens, which you
never think of getting nearer to, as you hope to do
at yonder hearth. As I approach, 1 discover it is
a group of aborigines squatted round a primitive
fire of their forefathers, under the same “ miamia”
as when their intercourse with Europeans com-
menced half a generation ago. These primogeni-
tive lords of the soil seem scarcely above par with
the settlers’ dogs. The neighbourship of civiliza-
tion hitherto has done little for them, the zealous
labours of the missionary being frustrated by the
immoralities of his irreligious countrymen. The
apathetic savage has naturally preferred the vicious
affinities of the latter to the more arduous virtues
of the former, and learns to treat the man of God
with much the same indifference which ho meets
with from the white men of the world.
What a mere mob of grotesque, disordered figures
the rude light of the logwood gleams upon, half
clad as they are, if clad at all, in the cast-off clothes
of the colonists ! Any one of these poor black chap-
men would willingly exchange a skin worth a sove-
reign tor an old hat not worth sixpence. Wandering
on the maiden sward of his native bush, the abo-
riginal man, with his opossum rug thrown grace-
fully over his shoulder, like a primaeval robe, moves
in a wild unconscious dignity among the trees, like
a natural lord of the manor; but, bedizened in the
vulgar ragged slops of the squatters, ho is reduced
to the level of a vagabond. There is one armed
cap-a-pie, the parenthesis of entire nakedness in
his person relieved by a military hat on his head,
and a pair of worn-out top-hoots on his feet. An-
other minces about with an awkward imitation of
some dandy settler, having on only a venerable blue
dress coat, whose brass buttons are still bright
and glittering, and its tails hanging down on the
dark skin calf as naturally as over a pair of panta-
loons. A third has packed his loins into a pair of
plethoric unmentionables, which have cracked and
peeled upon the wearer, like the bark of the na-
tive trees, and they have evidently occupied their
position since the proud day of their first invest-
iture. A fourth stalks to and fro in a loose dirty
cotton night-shirt, as if he had been suddenly
roused out of bed some months ago, and had never
got back again to complete his toilet. A fifth
wears merely a red plush waistcoat; while another,
with equal economy, contents himself with a ser-
geant’s uniform coat, gold stripes and all. In the
midst of them rose about three fully-equipped
bronze folk, in the brave accoutrements of the
mounted police, from which corps they have pro-
bably absconded some months before, to appease
among their squalid fellow-savages the fit of nos


talg-ia which sickened them with the settlements
of the white men. Excepting, perhaps, a dozen
of them, wrapped, in cerecloth fashion, in the
blankets annually presented to a limited number of
the natives by the colonial governor, all the rest
were entirely naked, save a bandage round their
loins. One man, evidently a renegade European,
by the ease with which he wore his garments, his
skin of a gipsey hue almost emulating the duskier
tinge of his associates, moved about from one to
another part of the fire as the whim seized him,
dispossessing at each turn some drowsy native of
his lair, and mimicking the airs and annoyances of
a more civilized jack-in-office. The black men
growled, grinned, and grimly yielded to his vulgar
despotism, but kept up a grunt of sullen reluctance
for minutes afterwards.
There appeared to be about forty of these strange
figures, counting them in my approach as well as
the increasing- darkness would permit me. All
were smoking, even to the women, and some of the
elder boys. If there be any zoological philosophy
in the naturalist’s classification of man as a cook-
ing animal, the pretensions of the Australian
savage are of the humblest order. Their hthras,
or native wives, are seen, on our drawing near, to
be engaged in smothering opossums, wild turkeys,
and one or two kangaroos, amongst the hot ashes,
without skinning or disembowelling the entrails of
a single creature ; and before they are half baked,
their impatient lords snatch their respective meals
from the burning embers with their bare hands,
brush off' the singed hair or leathers, as the case
may he, with the other hand, and without further
ceremony tear off a mouthful with their teeth, and
then pass the mangled morsels to their luhras to
take their bite in their turn. Receiving their
share, thrown over their lords’ shoulders, the ladies
with equal nonchalance toss the creatures again
into the fire, when the same process of mastication,
precedence, and succession is repeated, until the
bones are picked as clean as if a pack of hungry
dogs had gnawed them.
Though afraid of the white men, the aborigines
have the reputation of being treacherous and cruel
on occasions when they can reckon upon impunity;
so I do not choose to introduce myself too sud-
denly into a company where the odds in point of
numbers are against me. Mounting a bushy tree
hard by, I conceal myself, and overhear or rather
overlook their numceuvres. The voracious meal
over, the horrid drinking-can—a debasing import-
ation of the white man —is passed round the
savage group, out of which each adult male takes
a heavy draught of the raw, fiery whisky. Every
moment increases the boisterous barbarism and
delirium of some of them, the sullen, sottish stu-
pidity of others, the melancholy or malice of still
more, and betrays, in their worst forms, the secret
idiosyncrasies of all. Grim laces, which had been
innocent of soap and water since they were faces,
grew more grim as the shades of evening deepened
against their unwashed profiles, the fire illuminat-
ing at fitful intervals their gaunt and scowling
impression. How and then, the sounds of hateful
brawl, succeeded by a scratch, a tearing, or a
reciprocated kick, like the warfare of the beasts of
the field, indicated, like a drink-dial, the progress
of the debauch. The scream of a burnt child,
dropped by its drunken mother on the embers, is
drowned by a volley of native imprecations from
the equally drunken father, who beats them both
for the accident. Then a heavy savage rolls over
insensibly upon an irritable little creature of the
group, who fastens upon him with his teeth like a
dog, and is immediately worried and bit off by his
superincumbent antagonist, like another dog, and
the two continue to exhibit their white teeth, and
growl and snap at each other for minutes after.
A dozen others, starting to their feet, with a mad
shout of inarticulate revelry, grasp at each other’s
hands so fiercely that you doubt whether fun or
a fight, or both, is to be the sequel; and, after a
fixed, ferocious gaze into each other’s eyes lor a
minute, they rush into a wild, delirious dance
round the miamia, treading upon their drowsy
companions on the line of their jig, ever and anon
thrusting one of their fellow-dancers into the lire,
and ringing- the scandalized woods with the echoes
of their discordant laughter, as their angry victims
scramble out again, screeching with the pain of
their burns. Many of them have at length fallen
into a sleep heavy as their draughts and deep as
their awful debasement; others are dropping off,
one by one, torpid and inanimate as a snake after
a gorge. The laughter, the dancing, the shouting,
the screeching, brawling-, fighting, and swearing
grow more and more languid and declining, like
their expiring fire. The dancers drop off breath-
less, exhausted, and sinking to sleep where they
fell; and by and by, only one solitary, yawning,
half-drunken savage their idiot sentinel sits
moping like an owl, winking his eye at the fire,
and gaping- into its ever-shifting embers, as if he
saw marvels in its rude kaleidoscope which fasci-
nated his gaze and chained it there. Sleep—if it
were not almost irreverent to the attributes of
natural slumber to call such a scene of stupefaction
by that name —laid a deadening hand upon their
debauch, and the whole group lay powerless and
insensible, as if the “ unclean spirit ” of drink had
smitten each of them on the head and left
them stunned and insensible under the blow ! If
the wild animals of the bush could moralise as in
iEsop’s days, they might have blushed at the
spectacle of their human aristocracy debasing
themselves to .1 level r far beneath their own.
This wac l.to port' jt, of the aborigines in a state
of nature and iuteivourse with mere civilization.
Hot a long while after, I saw a group of the abo-
rigines brought under the influence of grace and
evangelical renovation. The latter were a much
smaller assembly, a mere fireside circle—eleven
persons in all —sitting- round the blazing hearth
in the large common room or hall of a thriving
squatter on the Liverpool plains. Except himself,
wife, and two children under twelve years old,
every adult about his comparatively little farm was
a native. Half missionary, half grazier, this man,
originally a shepherd, had” lost no time in acquir-
ing the language, nor opportunity of getting access
to the natives that fell in with him on his solitary
sheep-walk. He began at once with the sublime
but simple story of Jesus —told them of the Son
of God coming down from heaven, assuming a
man’s flesh and a man’s heart —rehearsed again
and again the tale of his sorrows and sufferings,
his miracles and mercies, his cross and crown —


opened the doctrine of repentance, beginning with
tears and ending in triumph; and he scarcely ever
varied his teaching, until at length one and then
another of the natives stopped to hear more, and
these were joined by others. Thus this shepherd-
preacher in the wilderness gathered a little band
of a dozen natives, including three of their wives,
whom he taught to build huts about his own
sheeling, and, in return for his instructions, they
began to help him with his sheep. By-and-by
he bought the station, as it was a remote one, and
small, and within his well-husbanded means. His
group of converts clung to him. With their aid,
in another spring, he built his large timbered
homestead, surrounding it with huts for his friends,
so that they wrought, and worshipped, and lived
in peace together. Their sabbaths were days of
rest and devotion. They seemed to grow in grace
and knowledge; and Christianity, their great
civilizer, had taught them higher tastes and nobler
aims than the rude traditions of their lathers.
They learned to save, also, as well as to earn. They
will be the founders of future native families of
real lords of the soil. Their example will spread.
They and theirs will form an unanswerable illus-
tration of the sacred canon, “ Godliness is profit-
able unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.”
Alas! that such instances as that just described
should be so rare as to appear almost incredible.
The informant from whom the writer received the
materials of both this and the former sketch re-
presented the happiness and quiet comfort of the
squatter’s home-circle as a refreshing contrast to
many even of the white men’s families which he
visited. One can readily imagine the patriarchal
settler in the midst of his mingled group of white
and black faces, sitting, at the week’s end, on the
Saturday night, preparing, in the spirit of the
Levitical prescript, for “ the morrow of the holy
sabbath.” Enthroned in his high-backed chair,
hollowed out from some ancient oak, the gnarls
and the fissures in which are retained in the pictu-
resque shape in which the sportive hand of time
had left them, “ the good man of the house ” is
reading the bible —one of the very few volumes he
still possesses as cherished relics of connection
with his own tongue and mother country. A hymn
is sung, and, their simple offering of praise ended,
the good man rises in his place, and looking round
as it were on the steps of his domestic altar to see
if all were there, and none inattentive, vacant, or
irreverent, he feels in the deepest secrets of his
fatherly heart the joy and thankfulness of the
conviction, “ Here am I, and the children thou
gavest mewhile no minster pomp nor cloistered
awe ever reached the touching solemnity of his
simple utterance of the words, “ Let us pray!”
The evening breezes seem to cease, as if some one
bade them, for nothing should interrupt the sacred
breathings of “ the wind that bloweth where it
listeth,” that all there might “ hear the sound
thereof.” As they separate for the night, each
one seems to bear away in his countenance some
indications of that light that lingered on the face
of Moses after his communings on the mount;
and it prepares and attunes them, like an unction
from above, for the high and holy celebrations of
the morrow’s sabbath day.


THE LEISUKE HOUfi,


THE LEISURE HOUR. 270
l
I
| .


I
I
LIRE IN AUSTRALIA.
THE BET. J. B. OWEN, M.A., OF BILSTON.
CHAPTER IV.
EFFECTS OF THE GOLD DISCOVERIES ON SOCIETY IN THE
COLONIAL TOWNS—FLUCTUATIONS IN THE FOPULATION OF
MELBOURNE —PRICE OF HORSES —INTER-COLONIAL MIGRA-
TION ACT —EFFECT UPON COLONIAL MORALS AND HEALTH
—EXORBITANT PRICK OF LAND AND DISPROPORTIONATE
VALUE OF HOUSES—COLLECTION OF THE DIGGERS* LICENCE
FEE—THE CORPS OF ESCORT—AUSTRALIA AN ILLUSTRATION
OF THE EVILS OF “THE LOVE OF MONEY. 5 '
The “yellow fever” superinduced by the rumoured
exhalations of the gold-fields has attacked the whole
staff and corps of public functionaries. Police,
seamen, soldiers, 'secretaries, clerks, agents, and
subordinates of all kinds, desert their salaried
straitnesses for the chance of getting a share in
the golden showers at the diggings. The colonial
' government has been at length driven to a general
advance of official incomes, in some penurious pro-
portion to the almost fabulous rise in the price of
i the necessaries of life, yet without avail; for while
salaries have advanced 50 per cent., expenses have
increased 75 per cent. Physical labour, and not
clerkly faculties, nor educational acquirements,
commands the market. The social position of men
seems assimilating the contradictions of every-
thing else which the new world presents to the
economies of the old. By way of illustration, the
post-office letter-carriers are better paid than the
majority of the clerks, it being easier to keep a
clerk to his pen, than to detain a labourer from the
diggings. The interior of the colonies, especially
Victoria, is nearly drained of its usual agricultural
population ; for, as yet, notwithstanding the con-
stantly increasing and accumulating tide of emigra-
tion which has set in from Europe, 80,00Q out of
! the 100,000 persons already engaged at the dig-
gings, both in New South Wales and Victoria,
have been drafted, not as fresh recruits to the
colony from Europe, but from the usual avocations
of the colonists themselves. The results for the
time being are disastrous to every other interest,
except to those in immediate trade or exchange
; with the gold-diggers.
'Notwithstanding the enormous rise m price, and
multiplication of markets for provisions, the agri-
cultural interest has suffered, and is still suffering
seriously. It is of little comfort to the farmer to
offer him cent, per cent, upon old prices of corn
and meat, if he has no hands to gather his crops or
tend his herds. Admitting all the legislative diffi-
culties in the way of dealing with so sudden and
unprecedented an attack upon all the quiet pursuits
and normal habits of civilized life which this dis-
covery of gold has occasioned, the ordering and
government of the colony must not be abandoned
without an effort to reclaim its sobriety.
The first effects of the gold-field discoveries
! upon the thriving towns of Melbourne and Gee-
long were quite alarming. It might be likened
to the diversion of a river’s course, that leaves a
dry barren bed of stones and desolation, where so
recently flowed living waters along banks of ferti-
lity and beauty. Poor Melbourne, now suffering
from a plethora of population, was for some time
like a town in a rapid decline. There Was a hollow
wheezing in the very air of the streets, that came
up from the empty cellars and stores like a pulmo-
nary cough. The tall blades of grass waved in


sickly triumph over the pavements of the still and
almost deserted streets. Houses and shops to be
sold or let were to be seen chalked up on every
other shutter and board you passed, like epitaphs
to the memory of their departed occupiers. There
was scarcely the type of a congregation in the
churches; ministers without a beadle, bankers and
merchants without a clerk, judges and commission-
ers without a groom, were the order of the day.
The expression of many an old colonial face, like
the lopsided aspect of a vessel left high and dry on
the mud, was too ludicrous to be wholly pathetic;
but the sense of being somehow left to their own
resources, aggravated by the doubt as to how they
should do, became the epidemic symptom of the
times. It was a contingency too sudden and un-
foreseen to be provided for. It seized the colony
like a squall in fair weather, and fairly laid her on
her beam-ends. Such was the state of things less
than twelve months ago; but now, owing to the
floods of emigrants that have poured into this and
its sister towns, everything is again marvellously
altered. The deserted houses are crowded with
occupants, and the very streets and outskirts of the
town are thronged with homeless strangers. In
the trying times to which we have been referring,
however—and the remark is perhaps equally ap-
plicable at the present period—hordes of dissolute
diggers would every now and then wander hack
again to the towns, to spend in riot, in intoxica-
tion, and every species of debauch, the gold which
they had earned. Hence, a recent correspondent
writes ;—“ It is almost dangerous now-a-days to
traverse the streets, as hundreds of low black-
guards are continually racing up and down like so
many highwaymen under pursuit; most of the
public conveyances are employed by the same class,
either wholly inebriated, or in a state of semi-
intoxication, forcibly reminding one of some of the
seaport towns during the height of the war, after
the crews of a dozen line-of-battle ships had been
paid off. Rut no scenes in those days can in point
of depravity at all come up to what, unhappily,
is at all times to be witnessed here, and which far
exceeds, moreover, anything prevailing at the dig-
gings, where they are comparatively orderly and
quiet. It is the rule with thousands to come down
to Melbourne periodically for a holiday, vulgo ‘ a
spree; ’ and when satiated or out of funds, to re-
turn to the diggings with the view of obtaining
fresh supplies, to renew the like course of life in
town ; so that there is a regular stream continually
passing to and fro on the road, mostly on horse-
back.”
The great demand for horses employed on this
transit, and for the convoy of gold to and fro, in
addition to the ordinary trade of the colony, has
more than doubled the number formerly in use,
and quadrupled the price. The bush has been
nearly exhausted of its horse-flesh, from a year old
and upwards ; the greatest portion of the animals
have never been broken in, but are mounted at
once, as in South America. There is scarcely one
horse in ten but what is a “jibber ” in harness, or
a “ back-jumper ” with a rider. The price of aver-
age draught horses ranges from 50k to 601. , and
very recent accounts quote as high as 100k, being
the description of animals that fetched only 15k
twelve months ago. Old carts and drays are
eagerly purchased at three times the former cost
of new ones.
Wages at Adelaide, in November, 1852, were
high enough, but they grow higher every month.
Three steerage passengers reached Adelaide by the
same vessel in that month. One engaged himself
to a butcher at 30s. a week, board and lodging
found him. Another with a baker, at 40«. a week,
also lodged and boarded; and the third with an-
other butcher, at 3k per week, also lodged and
boarded, to ride about on horseback collecting
orders and delivering meat. Printers’ wages
average from 70s. to 41. a week; but the journey-
man printer having to find his own board and
lodging, the ratio of remuneration, as compared
with English wages, is in favour of the journeyman
butcher.
Sometimes as many as a thousand persons arrive
at Melbourne by sea in a single week, Irom the
neighbouring colonies. The poorest class find
their way overland, from Adelaide direct to the
diggings, a distance of about COO miles, many with
merely some flour and salt meat and tea for pro-
visions, and a blanket or opossum rug to sleep in.
This journey is generally performed on foot,
and through the bush never trodden before by the
foot of a white man, with sometimes an interval
of thirty to fifty miles without water. Others
adopt the same route, as a sort of backdoor escape
from South Australia, a recent Act of the South
Australian Legislature having prohibited any one
leaving the colony who was indebted to any one
party the sum of 40s. and upwards. At Ade-
laide, in the early part of November, 1851, as
many as 800 persons left in one week by sea alone;
and up to the middle of the summer of 1852, fully
10,000 must have left this infant city, out of a
population then about 30,000. The Act above re-
ferred to had scarcely affected the evil of that ex-
cessive emigration from the colonial towns and
sheep-walks, which it was intended, though not
ostensibly, to check. According to the latest ac-
counts, however, the state of things here has
much improved. Large numbers of those who so
precipitately left their homes under the influence
of the “ gold fever ” have returned; some in dis-
appointment and disgust, and others with the
golden fruits of their labours, which they have
in many cases invested in land and stock. But
perhaps the discovery of prolific gold-fields in the
vicinity of Adelaide has done more than anything
else to restore the equilibrium of the population.
Although Australia is extensive enough to out up
into a couple of full-sized Europes, the value of land
in such towns as Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide,
in good business situations, fully equals any price
paid in the chief towns of England; hence, from
the large investment for land alone, the ground is
covered generally with a very miserable class of
houses; as though the proprietors had nearly ex-
hausted their capital in the exorbitant purchase of
their sites, and had doomed themselves to illustrate
the difference between a landlord and a householder,
in a sense not familiar in the home country. Col-
lins-street, the principal business street, the Cheap-
side of Melbourne, contains scores of houses with
only the ground-floor. The original plan of the
town projected the streets to be all of the same
width (90 feet), running at right angles, with a


roadway in the rear of each, as a back entrance to
the several premises and stabling; but the colonial
government not having stipulated for the non-sub-
division of the allotments, and owing to the high
price of land, the rear of every allotment has been
subdivided and re-sold, and what were intended
for the back entrances, and would have secured
wholesome ventilation, as well as beauty of appear-
ance, have been converted into little dirty low pa-
rallels and their neighbouring streets. Thus, every
main street has its little offspring, as “Little”
Collins-street, “ Little ” Bourke-street, forming a
series of so many little St. Gileses in the rear or the
principal houses, intersecting the properties, block-
ading their approaches, and precluding their future
extension. “ Seers ”do not abound in colonial
offices. There are “ overseers,” whose oversights
equivocate their titles, and almost suggest a social
etymology derived from their overlooking just the
very points that most required their attention.
The result of this crowding is, that in these
towns there is actually more epidemic disease
than in towns of a similar size in England. An
intelligent medical resident at Melbourne has au-
thenticated this fact, and it is one which the local
officials should look to in time, or Australia, with
all its boundless space of unoccupied land, will
have entailed upon her population the anti-sana-
tory nuisances, mischiefs, and miseries of the ple-
thoric cities of Europe.
Another painful feature in the towns of Austra-
lia is the alarming increase in the consumption of
ardent spirits. We say “ the towns,” for very
little as yet finds its way to the diggings. There
the men work hard and fare hard; but it is in the
majority of cases only to furnish the means for a
trip to the towns to drink hard. The consumption
of spirits and tobacco in Melbourne and Geelong
was trebled last year ! Scarcely any male is ever
mot without the filthy appendage of a pipe in his
mouth. Strange, anomalous luxury, that a man
should convert his palate into a chimney for the
smoke of a weed, and his lungs into a pair of
bellows to keep the fire alive !
The licence paid to government for the per-
mission to dig for gold is 30s. per month; but the
amount derived from this source is no infallible
criterion of the population engaged in digging, as it
is impossible for some dozen or two of commissioners
to collect the tax from 80,000 to 100,000 people
scattered over miles of a country abounding in bill
and dale, ravine and gully, with thousands at
work in holes or jack-pits varying from thirty to
forty feet deep, and many completely out of sight,
“ driving the headings,” in mining phrase. Al-
though the regulation is for all parties to bring
their licence-money to the commissioners’ tents,
thousands evade it; so that the sums really col-
lected, or, more properly speaking, received, may be
nearly all termed “ voluntary subscriptions.” This
requires amendment, as a colony with such re-
sources ought not only to defray every shilling of
its governmental expenditure, but perhaps to con-
tribute from its surplus to aid the mother country
in her management of less favoured colonies, par-
ticularly such colonies as may afford an outlet and
investment for the otherwise comparatively useless
metal of Australia.
Further, it is to be observed, that the quantity
of gold procured cannot be correctly estimated,
either by the amounts brought down by escort, or
from the customs returns of shipments, because
very considerable quantities arc brought down
by individuals and by private escorts. A large
amount is purchased at Melbourne on account of
Sydney merchants, which on its arrival in England
may mislead many as being the produce ot Hew
South Wales instead of Victoria; and all shipped
from Adelaide to England has also, until the re-
cent discoveries of rich gold-fields in South Aus-
tralia, been the produce of this colony.
The Government charge for conveyance is one
per cent., and that of the private escort is 7s. 6 d. per
ounce. The escort body is neither a military nor
a police force, but a sort of civil guard, comprising
from twelve to fifteen men in each guard, well
mounted and armed in cavalry fashion, mostly con-
sisting of men above the ordinary class of military;
many gentlemen, who “ cannot dig, and to beg are
ashamed,” are enrolled in this quasi-military
corps. Their emolument averages now 7>l. a week
and upwards.
In concluding this chapter, we remind our read-
ers how painfully and even awfully the present
position of the gold colonies verifies the scripture
statement that “ the love of money is the root of
all evil, which while some coveted after, they have
erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows.” It tempts the seaman to de-
sert his ship; and thousands and hundreds of thou-
sands of tons of merchant shipping have been lying
rotting in the ports of Australia these tw'O years,
ruining their captains and owners, because men
cannot be found to work them home. It tempts
the servant to break faith with his master; and
hundreds, perhaps thousands of contracts, binding
upon any honest, conscientious mind, have been
violated under the temptation to fly to the gold-
fields. It has unsettled the whole theory of prices,
rendering trade a universal speculation, and con-
verting every transaction of colonial life into a
gamble or a scramble. Society is a circle of the
most unhealthy excitement, threatening the very
barriers of civilization. Without a more efficient
regulation of the gold trade, and a more competent
police and military to enforce it, it is alarming to
anticipate the results of the vast and still accumu-
lating mass of unruly spirits congregating in an
ungovernable numerical majority at the other end
of the world, four or five months distant from
the possibility of any effectual interposition of the
home legislature. It would cost the government
less men and money, and serve the colony more ef-
fectually in whatever it did, to do it quickly. “ Bis
dat qui dat cito,” is the motto for the colonial of-
fice ; a timely injection of wholesome restraint and
rule, and, above all, an immediate and extensive
reinforcement of the limited amount of moral and
religious machinery brought to bear upon the gold-
seekers, may yet prevent the discovery from be-
coming a splendid curse to the colony, and a per-
manent plague to the mother country. California
has been all along a commonwealth of Lynch law,
alternating with a more private series of murders,
robberies, and debaucheries. Australia, happily,
has never yet sunk so low. It has still its mother
country’s love and reverence for the law in the
main; but if that law, by its inadequate provisions,


— . - I
283 |
!
i
f
t
i
(
i
i
i
i
i
(
i
i
i
i'
I
i
5
I
i
I
1
i
I
i
j
( :
i i
|
i
!
I
|
I tempts its subjects to rebellion, from tbeir despair
of its protection, the government that permits it
will be involved, as an accessory before the fact, in ,
the guilt of their disorganization. I
In the meantime, until some steps are taken to !
remedy existing evils, and to obviate their exten- j
sion, we cannot be parties to advise parents to i
suggest to their children emigration even to the !
gold-fields. Not all its almost fabulous prizes can i
recompense the loss of virtue, character, principle, j
and, it may be, life. There is something better :
worth living for and striving for than gold, and ,
that is the present peace, and the prospect, through |
grace, of future and eternal happiness, which gold
cannot buy, nor the poorest Christian afford to sell. |
Australia may offer more than the poor bribe of !
Judas and Ids thirty pieces of silver; but if our j
Christianity is to be the sacrifice in exchange, the
scripture will be awfully verified to its burning
letter: “ They that will be rich fall into temptation i
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown men in destruction and perdition.”


284, THE LEISURE HOUR.
4
I
i
I
j




OuArt
M 7 \?&
W -0$
0 y
