





LIFE OH AN EMIGBAH! SHIP,
BEING TWELVE NUMBERS OF A SHIPS
NEWSPAPER
ESTTITUBI*
The Wlnefred Marvel
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE SHIP “ WINEPRED,”
DURING- HER VOYAGE FROM LONDON TO AUSTRALIA,
WITH 500 EMIGRANTS UNDER THE PERSONAL
CONDUCT OF
F. W. HETHERINGTON,
CONTAINING, BESIDES SOME
Useful Jafopatiou to Jutemliitij Emigrants,
A COMPLETE AND INTERESTING \
_ . _
CHRONICLE OF lUCIDE^TES,
WHICH OCCURRED FROM DAY TO DAY, DURING A LENGTHENED
PASSAGE; DEPICTING IN PLAIN, UNEXAGGERATBD LANGUAGE'
* THE REAL NATURE OF
“ Jl %xit an tlj£ (Baan
AND AN
EMIGRANT’S VOYAGE TO THE LAND OF PROMISE
UXBRIDGE :
F. W. HETHERINGTON, FREE EMIGRATION OFFICE.




j^REFACB
HE Publisher of the Winefred Marvel in offering the Tliird
I Edition of this work to the public, wiohes to thank those who have
rV f ill 80 readily purchased the previous editions and also to mention
liiypi'; the obligation he is under to the magizines and newspapers
that have so favourably noticed its contents. This book is offered as a
complete and interesting chronicle of events which occurred from day to
day during the passage of the Winefred emigrant ship from England to
Australia, and as such will no doubt prove entertaining to those who are
contemplating emigrating or who have friends abroad. Among landsmen,
many of whom may never have seen a ship, and consequently have no idea of
what a three month’s sail on the sea would be like, many curious and errone-
ous opinions arise with the thought of leaving their native land. Mothers,
whose influence weighs much in the family council, instead of conjuring up
exaggerated pictures of perils and dangers of the sea, should know that them-
selves and their loved ones would be benefitted by the change of air and
climate experienced on the passage to Australia. Its average duration is 85
days by sailing ship, and has been proved, by long experience, to bo un-
usually safe and pleasant, if undertaken in one of the fine liners now
trading to the Australian Colonies. The labouring man would feel thankful
for the season of rest it would give him. It would enable him to arrive at
his destination with buoyant spirits, bodily health, and, from the favourable
conditions of colonial life, with well-assured hope for the future. The
voyage would be looked back upon as one of the pleasant halting places of
his career. But nearly the whole of the information received with regard to
maritime matters comes through the channel of the newspapers, which, as
ships usually arrive safe at their destination, take very little notice of them
till a fearful shipwreck or a mutiny occurs when the press teems the
'harrowing details. Another source from which information of ship life is
derived is from novels —historical or romantic—in which fact is strangely
interwoven with fiction in order to bring out the brave qualities of the hero
in some naval engagement ; or to show the convenience afforded on board
for the courtship on which the whole interest of the book is concentrated,
that they give very real instruction on the subject of the routine life on beard.
The consequence often is that when an intending Emigrant his
mind to leave his native land, he does so completely in the dark as to what is
likely to befall him on the journey across the water to the land in which he
intends making his home. He is even worse off than if he were really in
the dark, for his mind is haunted by visions of piratical encounters and tales
«f shipwreck are ringing in his ears. To enlighten those who have such views


Mr. F. W. Hetherington has reprinted the Winefred Marvel, which was
first printed as a newspaper on board the Winefred, in which he accom-
panied 600 Emigrants and it claims to be the only newspaper ever
actually printed on board a sailing ship. The book is a faithful journal of
what occurred during the voyage of sufficient interest to be recorded, and
without doubt will go a great way to give instruction of what is likely to occur
on board any emigrant ship. The work is reprinted verbatim as it was issued
to the passengers and, excepting this preface, without note or comment of any
kind, it was first intended as a logbook for the passengers to be preserved
as a heirloom by their children as a momento of the voyage, or to be sent
home to friends in the “ the Old Country” to give them more information
on the subject of their passage than an ordinary letter would. The history
of one voyage on the sea is as much like the history of another, as a
narrative of one person on a certain railway would be like that of another
who travelled down the same line, so that the history of the events of the
voyage of the Winefred on the occasion on which Mr. F. W. Hetherington
first printed this minature newspaper will suffice for sometime as a chronicle
of events that are likely to occur. Travelling on ship board for safety
compares very favourably with the same amount of traffic on any of the
English lines of railway, as is proved by the fact that since 1864, when
emigration to Queensland was first began nearly 80,000 persons proceeded
to that colony under the arrangements of the Government in 200 ships—
and averaging 400 passengers in each vessel. Up to the present not one
death of a passenger has occured from any marine casualty and all the ship
have arrived safe at their destination.


ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 1.
Tuesday, December, 22, 1874.
One Penny.
TO OUR READERS.
BipfiN introducing to the notice of our fellow-passengers the first
|jj| number of the Winefred Marvel , we are actuated by the belief
that many of them will feel interested in the variety of in-
-1 cidents which will possibly occur during our passage over to
Brisbane. Friendships will spring up, and acquaintances will be formed,
mahiy of which may prove of lasting duration, and when our goal is reached
and all of us once more on terra firma, about to disperse in various direc-
tions—some of us, perhaps, never to meet again—ours may not have been
an unthankful task, and the record of our voyage which will be embodied
in the pages of our little journal may serve as a pleasing memento of the
then past. To many, also, this paper will be acceptable, as it will enable
them at little trouble to despatch home to their friends a faithful picture
of their every day life “ upon the ocean.” Our columns will be open to
all, and we gladly invite contributions, but at the same time wo shall
endeavour strictly to eschew matters of party politics, sectarianism, and
personalities. Our first number is printed off Gravesend, and we may now
be fairly said to have started on our journey. Up to the present tkne all


lias gone v. T ell with us, and we trust (God willing) that the rest of our
voyage will be equally prosperous. Our next number will probably not
see the light until we are many miles away from Old England, and have
conquered the inevitable mol de mer which will likely be for a shark time
the lot of many of us, and we must hope for a little indulgence from our
readers if our little printing-office should also be sea-sick for a brief period;
in the meantime we launch The Winefred upon the sea of public opinion,
trusting that its sails may be filled with your approval, and that your good
wishes may send it safely to a haven.
Off Gravesend,
22nd, December, 1874.
HETHEEINGTON’S
PERSONALLY-CONDUCTED EMIGRATION PARTY.
ENTERTAINMENT AT THE TOWN HALL, UXBEIDGE.
Friday evening, Dec. 4th, Mr. E. H. Allen gave his entertaia-
1/ fpf mnet, entitled “ Pictures of Queensland,” consisting of dissolving
4fef J| views (displayed by aid of the lime-light) with descriptive and
explanatory remarks, songs, glees, and choruses appropriate to
the occasion, rendered by the Uxbridge Harmonic Society. At the com-
mencement of the entertainment, a part song, “ Let the hills resound,”
was given and received with an enthusiastic encore, but owing to the length
of the programme all encores were strictly ignored. Mr. Allen observed
that the views he wes about to show were photographs of Queensland
scenery, including the principal public buildings of Brisbane, "the capital,
and the principal towns, and as many of the audience would doubtless be
passengers by the next ship The Winefred, he would first show a photograph
of the vessel.
During the evening the following gentlemen gave with great ability a
number of songs, which pleased the audience much and added to tha
success of the evening’s entertainment. Mr. Pitkin sang “The Irish
Emigrant,” and also “ Far on the deep blue sea;” Mr. G. Matthews, “A
Life on the Ocean Wave,” also “ She was my Boyhood’s Dream” ; Mr. W.
11. Matthews, “ The Eoad to Fortune,” also “ Hurrah ! for the Bright Eed
Gold”; Mr. Buckingham, “The Winefred” and “Advance Australia”;
Mr. T. Perryman, “ The English Emigrant,” also “Friends of Old”; th®
Choir, “ Auld Lang Syne.”


A capital photograph of Mr. F. Hetherington was welcomed with long
and prolonged applause, and for some minutes silence could not be obtained
while the picture remained, Mr. Buckingham sung, with great taste and
feeling, a song which was peculiarly appropriate to the occasion ;
“ Good friends, adieu ! I’m shortly sailing
To Queensland, o’er the tractless sea ;
And when I’m far from home and kindred,
I pray you all remember me.”
Mr. F. W. Hetherington wished his friends good-bye, and proposed three
cheers for Mr. Allen. A faithful picture of Mr. Allen was then displayed
amidst load applause and cheering, and after he had shortly returned
thanks, the choir sang “ God save the Queen,” and the audience dispersed.
The entertainment was a complete success, upwards of 590 persons being
in the room, and so eager were many persons to be present that crowds had
assembled outside the Town Hall an hour before the time for opening the
doors had arrived, and numbers were unable to gain admission.
We are pleased to add that a silver star bearing the names of twenty
gentlemen interested in Mr. F. W. Hetherington’s undertaking was pre-
sented to him on Tuesday evening.
FAREWELL ADDRESS TO THE EMIGRANTS.
B' "N Tuesday evening last a special evening service was held at
seven o’clock in Uxbridge Church, and at its conclusion the
Rev. T. W. James, vicar of Uxbridge, delivered a farewell
_____ address to the emigrants who were intending to proceed to
Queensland by the Winefred. The Church was well filled, a number of
emigrants attending with friends and relations, and we were pleased to
notice also a large gathering of ladies and gentlemen residing in Uxbridge
whose only motive for their attendance must have been the interest they
felt in the expedition.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the “ Winefred Marvel.”
Dear Sir,
I am very glad to find that you have not only arranged to bring the
printing press and materials, but have actually got them in working order
on board. I have no fear for the success of the paper ; the amount
of instruction and amusement given by such means to the passengers by
the Winefred cannot be estimated, and not only on the passage out but


but afterwards in the Colony the Winefred Marvel will be read with great
pleasure. I sincerely wish yourself and all on board the Winefred a
pleasant and speedy passage, and should you be favored with this you ought
to have a jolly time of it for the next three months —indeed I almost envy
you. Dr. Concanon, the Surgeon-Superintendent, Captain Maxted, and
all the Officers, will, I feel sure, do all they can to make the passage a
happy one. The ship is splendidly found in stores and all she requires,
and all her passengers have to do is to obey the plain and simple rules of
the Queensland Government, framed, after many years’ experience, for
their comfort. Let them bear this in mind, should they think your
Surgeon-Superintendent or his subordinates appear at any time a little
strict, all that he may do will, I feel satisfied, be for the welfare of his
passengers, and you having now had some years’ experience in our emigra-
tion trade, will, lam sure, assist him should he require it. Again wishing
you a prosperous voyage to Queensland, and hoping soon to see you back
fully impressed with the advantages of our Colony as a field for emigration.
I am, yours very truly, *•
' Gravesend, R. H. ALLEN, Dispatching Officer
December 21st, 1874.
SERYIOB.—The Rev. J. T. Gadsdun, Chaplain of the
P Thames Church Mission, and Honorary Chaplain to the
$ Queensland ships while at Gravesend, came on board on.
Sunday morning and held a short but hearty service in the fore-
castle with the sailors. He based his remarks upon the words, “ What
must Idoto be saved? Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt
be saved.” All present listened very attentively to the address, and
appeared to appreciate it.
In the afternoon he came on board again and held a very interesting
service with the single women. About 160 assembled ; two hymns were
very nicely sung, and the address from the words “We know that all
things work together for good to themlthat love God” was heard with great
attention. Another service was held in the married couples’ compartment.
A short sermon was delivered from the words “ If any man have not the
spirit of Christ he is none of His.” Neary all who belong to this part of
the-ship assembled and appeared to enjoy Ithe meeting. Being very tired
Mr. Gadsdun postponed his service wi th the young men until this
(Monday) morning. A very large number was collected by the constables,
and a very hearty interesting meeting was held. A long address was
given from the words of Joshua, “ Choose you this day whom ye will
serve.” Perfect silence prevailed during the whole of a very interesting
farewell service. $ _ *•
Mr. Gadsdun gave away on behalf of the Religious Tract Society, of
London, 185 Adult Emigrants, Packets, also 24 smaller packets of books
for the children, tie also offered to every person in the ship not having a
Bible, a small Testament as a present from the British and Foreign Bible
Society ; 119 of these very suitable farewell presents were accepted with
much pleasure.


ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 2.
Tuesday, December 29, 1874.
One Penny.
ireVrw] HE first week of our voyage is passed, and the second number of
YAe Winefred Marvel makes its appearance. How fortunate
mnN for us that we asked in last number some indulgence in case “ our
little printing-office should be sea-sick.” Not only has our office
been suffering from the malady in question, but our fellow-passengers have
been so “ out of sorts” that we feel certain had our little paper been issued
earlier very few readers would have cared anything about it. Now that the
isckness always attendant on a sea voyage is nearly abated, passengers
begin to assemble on deck and enjoy the refreshing qualities of the sea
breeze.
Since the tug and the pilot left us in the Downs, we have had a succession
of favorable winds, and with the exception of the dense fog on Tuesday
night in the Channel, the weather has been all that could be expected at
this season of the year. The fact of the ship being under such a gallant
commander as we find in Captain Maxtert assures us that the last wish of
our friends at parting, “ that we should be favored with a prosperous
voyage,” will be fully realized.
On Thursday last our Captain signalled a steamer homeward-bound, so
that our dear friends in England have noticed in the columns of our
London contemporaries that the good ship Winefred was spoken with.
On Wednesday last Dr. Concanon visited the different compartments
; tween decks, and addressed the occupants upon the propriety of obeying


the rules and regulations for the government of the ship. His remark
were listened to with deep attention, and a promise from him to stand a
glass of grog all round on Christmas-day was received amidst great cheer-
ing. Unfortunately the weather on this festive day was but
favorable, and the passengers not in the best of moods ; under the circum-
stances the agreeable beverage was not distributed. However, Dr. Concanon
fully intends to redeem his promise on old Ohristmaa-day, on which
occasion it is intended to have numerous amusements, and every effort will
be made to make the day a happy one.
In conclusion, we must beg of our readers not to be too hasty in com-
plaining of treatment they may consider harsh or unkind. It will be quiet
another week before everything is in quite ship-shape order. As we proceed
on our voyage the comforts provided will be better appreciated. In th 6
meantime, rest assured that everything is being done for your welfare that
circumstances will permit of.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
PRIZES! Prizes! I Prizes!! Prizes !! !—A GRAND SINGING- CONTEST will take place
on Friday Afternoon next, on the Poop Square. Open to all Men. Name ot intending Com-
petitors, with the titles of their song, to he posted in the Editor’s box on or before Thorsdny,
6 p.m. A Committee will be chosen from the first and second cabins to decide the merits of the
various Competitors. Captain Maxted, umpire. Arrangements will be subsequently made for a
simiwr Contest among our fairar passengers.
WANTED TO PURCHASE, any quantity of Revolver Cartridges. Please submit specimens
to the Editor.
m\VO SHILLINGS REWARD I —LOST, a pair of CLOTH SLIPPERS, with india-rubber soles,
J. quite new. The above Reward will be paid to the restorer. No questions “ asked.”
FOUND, A KNIFE.—The owner can have it upon giving description and paying for this
advertisement. Apply to Neptune.
A FEW WORDS FROM OUR CAPTAIN.
ET us hope that the old adage will still prove true. The Winefred
p p|a| began her journey in a fog, so the end will be fine and clear.
I The only thing required to make the passage pleasant is for
P each one to do his duty cheerfully and well, and to join in all
the little amusements the good Medico may get up for us. I, for one, will
do all in my power to help to carry out anything that may tend to the enjoy-
ment of all. So far we have been very fortunate both in wind and weather,
and I have not the least doubt when Father Neptune has had his dues
fairly paid, all will enjoy the next few weeks of fine weather. Wishing all
a good and quick passage and every blessing in the new land they are
bound for.
I am, yours truly,
G. M. MAXTED.


OUR DIARY.
Tuesday, December 22nd.—Towed down the river by the “ Cambria.” Pilot
left about six p.m., sent our last farewell to those at home. Yery thick
fog at night.
Wednesday, December 23rd.—Cambria left about 3 a.m. Head winds.
Thursday, December 24th. —Head winds. Strong breeze.
Friday, December 25th.—Head winds. Sighted the Start. “Old England
lost to view.”
Saturday, December 26th.—Strong breeze.
Sunday, December 27th. —Strong breeze.
Monday, December 28th. —Nearly a dead calm.
Tuesday, December 29th. —Light bailling head winds.
pcYfrpOTTINCS FROM THE SALOON.—On Thursday we made our
felt)! first general expedition to the forecastle. On tne first step or
'o~s. the ladder, to "the bewilderment of the uninitiated, we were,
with the exception of two, each chalked on the boot bv a hidden
foe. A canny Scot however succeeded in gaining the deck without tne
mark, and, anticipating a catch, with his native caution, attempted to bolt.
A smart A.B. made a rush, and slipping up, grabbed him by the knees and
administered the chalk with unsparing hands. The hardy Northensr turned
pale, and wo expected to see him discharge a volley of liquid grape-shot
over the enemy, but it turned out that fear of being thrown overboard was
the cause of the change of color. The only one of the party who escaped
to tell the talc was a “ knowing gintleman” from the “ sister-island, who
could not be “ blarneyed” into leaving his sacred poop again.
A PRIZE CONUNDRUM.
A noun there is of plural number,
Foe to rest and peaceful slumber ;
Now any other noun you take,
By adding “ s” you plural make ;
But if you add an “ s” to this,
Strange is the metamorphosis.
Plural is plural now no more,
And sweet what bitter was before.
Captain Maxted offers a prize to any passenger who can give a corsctot
answer to the above.
pipggs PORTING.—On Saturday the poop was enlivened by a little Sll
■a practice from six-chamber Deringers, and sundry other kinJAof
destructive weapons. The shooting was not very good,
at the gulls or the bottle, but a board which was twirling in Jte
air, in "Si very short time shewed several holes through it. On Moncray
morning one poor gull, having incautiously ventured to near the vessel, pf>d


the penalty with its life. "We have had very little time as yet to get up
games, but quoits have made their appearance, and we hope soon to show
the art of self-defence with singlestick, and to have a bout with boxing
gloves. ' VIGILANT.
OSITION OF THE SHIP WINEFRED.—Oft fhe N.W. Cape
EPjj of Spain, and, for the time of year, we have done much better
iSSI than could have been expected. Two or three more days of fair
JoSal wind and we shall change the sea-gull for the flying-fish.
December 28th, 1874.
THE GOOD SHIP “ WINEFRED.”
Air —“ I will stand hy my Friend."
When swiftly sailing o’er the main,
Old England lost to view.
One thought shall cheer us on our way,
One hope sustain us through.
Although we leave our native land,
And parting tears have shed,
We’re bound for a new and happy home
In the good ship Winef red.
Chorus —We’re bound for a new and happy home, &c.
Though clouds obscure the azure sky,
And winds may whistle shrill,
Our bark will bravely breast the wave,
The gale our sails will fill.
And as she proudly ploughs the deep,
Well know no thought of dread,
But trust in God and our gallant bark
The good ship Winefred.
But trust in God, &c-
And when our ship is speeding fast,
With sunshine on our lee,
The thought of pleasant days to come,
Shall glad us on the sea.
Yet we will not forget old friends
When o’er the wave we’ve speed,
But say God bless old England, dear I
And the good ship Winef red.
But say God bless, &c.
New faces soon will Avelcome us
Across the mighty main,
And if we leave dear ones behind;
New friends we hope to gain.
And when our new home’s shore shall loom
With Brisbane’s Port ahead,
We will give a last and parting cheer,
For the good ship Winef red.
Wo will give a last, &c.


ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
URING the last week, the favoring winds we experienced at the
commencement of our voyage have deserted us. One day our
bow points towards America and the next in the direction of
Africa. With such baffling winds and zigzag courses as we are
compelled to take our progress is greatly interrupted.
Divine service, followed by the reading of a short sermon, was held by
Dr. Concanon on the poop, on Sundays, the 27th and 3rd, but on the 10th
the weather being unfavorable, it took place in the married people’s com-
partment. We may hope in the course of two or three Sundays to have
a very efficient choir, as we have discovered many good voices, and con-
siderable knowledge of sacred music among the female portion of our
community. At a quarter before eleven on each Sunday the bells from
the forecastle and poop peel out the chimes, and remind us forcibly of the
Sabbath-day at home. It is pleasing to observe the solemn silence which
reigns throughout the ship during the hours of divine service, and the
decorum with which everything is conducted.
V' During the late gale our good ship has suffered somewhat in her spars
and sails, but all have been repaired excepting the foretopsail-yard ; that
in a day or two will be replaced, providing our good passengers will give
Mr. Chips elbow-room.
One Penny
Thursday, January 14, 1875,
No. 3.


The only loss ©f life that we heard of up to going to press is the
melancholy suicide of a poor blind duck, much regretted in Coop-row.
On Saturday a singing contest was to have taken place, but a scratch
concert was arranged instead. It proved verj amusing, and several young
ladies took part. 'Wo defer a detailed account to our next issue. The
change in the arrangements arose in rather a ludicrous manner, some of
the single men who were to have competed got a foolishly boyish motion
into their omniums that because in this as in other Queensland ships they
are kept to that portion of the vessel over their own compartment they
would not come aft on other occasions. In pursuing this course, however,
they will annoy no one but themselves, as they will debar themselves, from
all amusements—penny readings, concerts, &c.—that may be got up during
the voyage. In not taking part in the projected contest they undoubtedly
had a right to please themselves, but we were surprised at some of them
attempting in a noisy manner to destroy the enjoyment of the audience on
the poop.' Our surprise was the greater that from the way in which the
Sui• con- h uperintendent has hitherto spoken of the single male passengers,
and the praise he has given them, we were led to expect very different
conduct on their part. We did notice that those who joined in the noisy
demonstration were solely composed of boys, hobbledehoys, and the least
presentable portion of the forward passengers ; and we must assure our
readers that they must not judge the whole of our single men (among
whom we have many of the greatest respectability) by the contemptible
conduct of a few foolish youths.
P.S. —We may add in confirmation of our view of the occurrence that
we have received several letters from single male passengers, stating that
for their own respectability they wished it to be known tiiat they had had
no part in the late rowdyism.
OUR DIARY.
Dec. 30th.—Head wind and sea.
Dec. 31st. —Similar wind but more sea.
Jan. Ist to 12th. —Has been a continuation of head winds, gales, and high
seas. Still we have been fortunate, both the sea and the barometer tell
us there has been very bad weather to N.W. By clearing the Channel
as we did. we have escaped the heaviest part of it. We have beat to
windward 500 miles against wind and sea. On the 11th sighted the
island of Porto Santo, and on the 12th saw the same island from a
position 20 miles south of the day before.
Jan. 13th.—Head wind and smooth sea.
Jan. 14th. —Head wind and hazy weather.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WANTED, a situation as companion to a gentleman who is accustomed
to look after his own affairs, a middle-aged idle fellow, of some education and respeefti-
bility. He would undertake to be punctual at dinner time; listen patiently to all the family
talk ; sit out tiresome visitors; and make himself generally useless. As his object is sothdWo
obtain a good salary than a comfortless home, it is hoped that no one will apply that canno&afßJjd.
to pav him well for the loss of his time. Two or three tradesmen with whom he has had some
dealings, and who are anxious to see him in the receipt of some money, will bear testiraotspof hia
character. He is rather inclined to be serious, but would not object to smile at a good Joke.


Answer to Prize Conundrum. —Cares-s.
The following passengers have sent correct replies in answer to the
Captain’s prize conundrum which appeared in our last issue, and have
received their prizes :—Ann Chiddell, Martin J. Meagher, John May, and
J. Twopenny.
=m|OTTINGS FROM THE SALOON.—An exciting chase took place
the other day in the main rigging. Three youngsters of fearless
8? disposition, mounted to the main-topmast crosstrees, but per-
<ySl ceiving that they were followed by soim of the crew, on evil
thoughts intent, they took to the backstays, and coming down with a run,
arrived in safety on deck, amid loud applause. Their second attempt,
however, was less successful, as although two succeeded in evading their
pursuers, the third and smartest was pounced upon from beneath the top,
and only released upon his promise of ransom.
An unpleasant exposee was threatened on Thursday last, and was only
hushed up in pity for the youth and hunger of the delinquent. The story
was as follows :—The night before at midnight, the peaceful slumbers of a
gentleman of equal length of ancestry and limb (connected by marriage
with the Royal Family) were disturbed by the sound of a stealthy footstep.
Fearful of violence, he tried to restrain his loudly beating heart, and leaning
over, watched eagerly. The intruder made one stride towards his feet, and
bending down seized A sound as of clashing steel proved too much for
the nerves of our outraged fellow-passenger, and he sank into a state of in-
sensibility, not however, he avers, without identifying the burglar.
Editorial Note.—We hear that three biscuits were missing from a tin
case below his bunk the morning after.
ACCIDENTS.
rsTTsSE have to record the occurrence of two or three mishaps since our
last issue, one being nearly attended with a fatal result. On
ila aiS Monday, the 28th of December, Miss Adelaide Beatrice Revia,
laflllal one of the single girls, fell down the ladder leading to her com-
partment, striking her head with such violence as to produce symptoms of
concussions of the brain, followed by compression, succeeded by repeated
and severe epileptic fits, alternating with attacks of syncope. For some
days her state caused much anxiety, life hovering in the balance. She is
now however considered out of danger, and we may soon hope to find her
released from hospital durance and regimen, and see her bright face on deck
again.
The pitching and rolling of our vessel during the past few days has
caused many stumbles and tumbles, and we regret to find our energetic
matron, Mrs. Adams, confined to bed from the result of one. Although
much shaken, we hear that she is not in danger, and we hope soon to see
her resume her place amongst us.
On the Bth inst., as one of the single men was standing in the hatch lead-
ing to his compartment, a cask, insecurely fixed above, broke away and
precipitated him in its company to the bottom. Beyond a temporary stun,
a severe contusion, and much shaking, he has escaped from what might
have been a very serious injury.


POET’S CORNER,—A Warning to Single Girls.
I’ve lost my friend, my dog and wife
Sav’ed only horse and purse;
Yet when I think on human life.
Thank heaven it is to worse.
My friend was sickly, poor, and old.
Was peevish, blind, and crippled;
My wife was ugly, and a scol d
I rather think she tippled.
My dog was faithful, fond, and true,
In sporting gave me pleasure;
I should not care for t’other two.
If I had sav’d this treasure.
Neptune.
Our bodies are like shoes which off we cast,
Physic then cobbler is, and Death the last— Neptune.
Correspondence,
To the Editor of the “WINEFRED MARVEL.”
Sir, —I beg you will favor me by allowing the following to appear in your valued
and interesting paper, the Winefred Marvel , as I think it my duty to let every one on boary
the Winefred know of the great skill and kindness of Dr. Concanon, who, du ring mr
illness (which was of such a serious nature that my life was all but despaired of) neves
faltered in his duty as doctor, and I may say, friend ; not a friend to me only, but it
one to all on board, and I do hope all will value him as I do, and join me in my earnest
thanks to God and our good doctor for my safe recovery. Now I must also say a few
words about our good matron, who was all attention and kindness to me, and was never
absent when assistance was required, day or night. There are some on board who think her
harsh and unkind, but all I have to say is she will be as kind a friend to all as she has
been to me, and I hope all on board will soon value and thank her as heartily as 1 do.
I also owe a few words of thanks to Mrs. Gribbin, the nurse, who was never absent from
her post night or day till I was out of danger ; and also Miss Gayton, who was always
at hand to administer every comfort possible to me . to both I give my sincere thanks,
nd to the Captain and Mr. Chapman, who offered me everything that was likely to
help me to recover. Hoping all on board will soon know how to value and thank the
above-named ladies and gentleman,
I remain, your humble and obedient servant,
ADELAIDE B. REVIA.
To the Editor of the “WINEFRED MARVEL.”
Sir, —I hope the alarm of fire we had the other evening will be a warning to all, not
on any account to strike a match and smoke below. None but those who have gone
through the awful ordeal can have any idea of that fearful cry— FlßE —at sea. I have
been burnt out at sea 1000 miles from land ; have watched the ship burn, and finally blow
up; been obliged to leave her and take to the boats in which we remained for nine days,
and then, by God’s blessing, were seen by a ship and taken on board, helpless through
cramp and salt water. While the ship was burning, ALL on board obeyed and carried
out quickly all my orders ; that, with God’s help, enabled us to leave the ship without
an accident, and all were safe from the ship, when, like a drunken man, she reeled and
•went down. No words can express the dreadful hopelessness of leaving a ship at sea;
so I hope that the accident last week will do good as a warning to all. I am, sir, yours
truly, G. M. MAXTED.
Conundrums.
When may our ship be said to be in love ?
Why was the sermon last Sunday like a lady’s necklace ?
Advertisements.
WANTED to purchase, at 6d. each, two copies of No. 1, of the Winefred
Marvel. Apply to the Editor.
TENDERS will be received at our office, on an early date, for the
destruction of certain game imported into this floating town by a few of the inhabitants.
The game is peculiar, powder and shot not having any effect. We believe a good application ot
scissors, soap, and water, are the best means of exterminating this fast increasing pest.


ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
Saturday, January 23, 1875.
One Penny
No. 4.
OW we are now about 14 degrees off the line, our ship having
SKaI i accomplished something like 3600 miles of our journey. We
I have every reason to be proud of our commander Captain
Maxted, and the remainder of the officers. From the
moment we saw the skipper at Gravesend we were impressed with the
belief that he was “ every inch a sailor.” His courtesy to the passengers
in complying with their many little requests has often been manifested.
Mr. Henshaw, chief officer, and Mr. Thomas, second officer, are men in
whom we have every confidence, and are evidently well up in their pro-
fession. Of the crew generally we cannot be otherwise than satisfied,
always ready at their officers’ order to perform any duty with cheerful-
ness. Every movement they perform with alacrity, and appear to be
thoroughly satisfied witn everything except the time given them
“ To knock a man down.”
Of the Winefred we are confident everyone will speak with pride.
Yesterday week at about four o’clock in the afternoon the wind veered
round to the N.E., at which point it has been steady ever since, and there
seems every prospect of our recovering the time lost, owing to the vexatioqs
head winds which kept us beating-up so long, and now we may fairly expert
to cross the fine in the course of five or six days. We experienced tropical


heat for the first time on Sunday, when we were off Palma, the most
westerly of the Canary Islands, but the pleasant breeze with which we are
favored kills two birds with one stone, both moderating the temperature
and sending us along merrily. Wind sails have now been fitted up to the
compartments occupied by the single women, so that with the awning to
protect them from the sun by day and the air conducted by these con-
trivances at night, they, at least we may hope, will suffer little from the
intense heat.
On Sunday last divine service was well attended. The singing was
certainly an improvement on the previous Sunday, although perhaps it will
be as well not to attempt such difficult chants in future. Captain Masted
assisted Dr. Concanon in reading the prayers. At the same time on the
forecastle a Roman Catholic service was held, at which about fifty persons
attended.
OUR DIARY.
Since our last date we have made better progress,
Jan. 15th—Light S.W. breeze and cloudy.
Jan. 16th—Similar winds.
Jan. 17th —Pair wind at last, after so many days of head winds. How welcome it is,
especially to our Skipper, whose stock of good temper evidently was Just run out, but,
with the fair breezes, now returns to him. Isles of Palma and Ferro in sight.
Jan. 18th to 21st—Spoke the barque Daniel Rankin, 28 days from the Tyne, bound for
Rio. We are now fairly in the tropics, and shall pass the Isle of St. Antonio to-night
Our good ship has run 248 miles this 24 hours, placing us about 1200 miles from the
CONUNDRUM.
HERE is in a town, and may be seen daily by the curious, a most wonderful
|siw prophet, whose generation is truthfully asserted. He was before Adam :he
Ko Cpaj was with Noah in the ark; he was with our Saviour before, and when
Oj jeO crucified; he was with Columbus when he discovered America; he was
jpiSLJLbji with Captain Cook in his voyage round the world ;he was with Nelson at
•the glorious battle of the Nile; he followed Bonaparte into Russia and at the battle of
Waterloo; he knew not his father nor his mother; his clothes are neither hair, cotton,
silk, nor woollen, neither knit nor spun, they are not made with hands, they are of a
lovely color, yet never dyed; his beard is of a most splendid shade, and is seldom or
ever cut ; he goes barefoot like a grey friar ; he cares not for the pomp and vanity of
this world, but would rather live in out-houses and barns, than dwell in the palace of
kings and princes, he never takes money, the most he was known to take was a single
grain; he has never yet lain in a bed or sat in a chair ; he cries out on the wickedness
of the world with out-stretched arms ; the scripture speak of him as no imposture, for
he constantly proclaims the day of the Lord; he is rather inclined to popery ; he keeps
Lent strictly ; be is well skilled in the ancient and modern languages ; he leaves all
men alone with regard to their religion : he believes not in the resurrection of the
dead, yet there is not an article of faith he denies; he walks boldly in the face of his
enemies, without either gun or pistol, sword or staff, yet has a weapon of defence ; he
is strickly temperate, drinks nothing but water; those that fellow his example will be
likely to attain a good old age : he looks upon the English as a barbarous nation, and
thinks that he shall one day be cruelly martyred by them ; he wears neither hat, cap, or
wig, and sleeps taking his rest either standing or crouching; he is composed of fiesh
and» blood; always comes when called for, yet never spoke; still he preached one
sermon that was so convincing to a great and good man that he did not rest until h©
was thoroughly converted. He is not the wandering Jew, nor John the Baptist, ae-
Bome may suppose; but pray who is he?


■jr* 1 ... - •
ALOON JOTTINGS.—In the absence of a Christmas pan-
tomime, an impromtu imitation of one was performed on
poop last Monday week, by a marvellously talented com-
pany of artists. The plot of the melo-dramatio part of the
entertainment was perhaps, as our American cousins would say, “rather
mixed,” but at all events there was no lack of blood and murder ; though
our fair audience might have liked the introduction of a little sentiment.
There is a limit however to everything, and, certainly, dramatic talent is no
exeeption to the rule, so that vivid as the imagination of the Romeo might
be, he failed to utter rhapsodies in praise of the beauty of his marvel of a
Juliet. Notwithstanding this defect in the construction of the play, there
was no want of applause on the conclusion of the first act. The second or
pantomimic part was even more successful, Mr. R. Hunter making up
capitally as a most active and mischievous harlequin, always turning up in
the wrong place, and Messrs. Hetherington and Pigott performing a most
seductive (?) bolero. At the fall of the curtain the company was greeted
with rapturous applause by their very appreciative audience ; but we were
sorry to remark the artists eagerly scrambling for large showers of small
coin (2/3f), six thimbles, a knife, and an Aunt Sally, with which it was
accompanied.
On Monday a set-to with the gloves took place between the Hibernian
Infant and the Perthshire Nigger, in which the baby had slightly the best
of it; after which, a few smartish rounds were fought between the Darky
and the Norfolk Bully, but no decision was arrived at. We must mention
that the nigger had the advantage of the service and experience of an old
habitue of the ring. Let us hope that all amusements of this rough nature
will be conducted with the same good temper which was shown the other
evening. •$
NIGMA. —The following is by Miss Seward, and found in her will
|y (thirty years ago), with directions to her executors to pay the
:®| sum of £5O to the person who shall discover the true solution.
(It still remains a mystery.)
The noblest object in the work of art;
The brightest scene that nature can impart;
The well-known signal in the time of peace;
The point essential in the tenant’s lease ;
The farmer’s comfort when ho holds the plough;
The soldier’s duty, and the lover’s vow ;
A contract made before the nuptial tie ;
A blessing ribhes never can supply;
A spot that adds now charms to pretty faces;
An engine used in some essential cases ;
A planet seen between the earth and sun ;
A prize which merit never yet has won ;
A loss which prudence never can retrieve;
The death of Judas and the fall of Eve ;
A part between your ancle and your knee;
A patriot’s toast and a physician’s fee ;
A wife’s ambition and a parson’s dues;
A misers idol, and badge of Jews.
If now your happy genius can define
The corresponding verse to every line;
By the first letters plainly will be found
An ancient city that is much renowned.


Correspondence.
S the punishment o£ Laura Cherry appears to have been greatly
exaggerated by the numerous reports in circulation, and in
justice to Dr. Concanon we publish a statement made by the
poor girl in the presence of our Captain and Matron,
To the Editor of the “WIKEFRED MARVEL.”
Sir, —Thursday morning, January 7th, I was put into punishment for
being impertinent to the doctor. I was then put on biscuits and water for
one day, then I was taken ill. The doctor came to me on Friday night and
gave me some brandy. I then continued to get worse. About the irons, no
one need trouble about them, for they were not on me, I am confident, not
more than three minutes, for they were big enough for my neck. I don’t
say that my illness sprang from my punishment, for I am confident it did not.
I am naturally of a weak constitution ; it is God’s doings, not the doctor’s
but I am thankful to say that the doctor, the matron, the nurse, Miss Blake'
and Miss Gayton, have done all in their power to relieve my suffering. It
all depends upon the will of God whether I have my health restored to me
again. lam quite willing and ready for whatever may happen, knowing it
to be all for the best. .A few more words 1 must say,—they may be my
last, —that the doctor has been very, very kind indeed to me. I can’t
compare it to a father or mother, for it is beyond it. I cannot express my
feelings enough, but it must be left to God who rewardeth all good workes,
including the matron and the nurse, and those I have mentioned before. I
think I have said all that is needful. I conclude with my heart full of
gratitude to every one who may feel anxious about me. I will say good-bye
for the present. Believe me to be, dear friends, a humble penitent girl.
Witnesses to ) E. Adams. Laura Louisa Cherry.
Signature j G- Maxted.
To the Editor of the “ Winefred Marvel.”
Sir, —Knowing your tolerant spirit and tender regard for the conscien-
tious conviction of every denomination on board, I know you will be pleased
to hear that these denomination vie with one another in praising and thank-
ing the Author of Life and Giver of Every Good and Perfect Gift. Last
Sunday, while the English Church services were being performed on the
poop, the Roman Catholics on board assembled on the forecastle ; Mr.
Meagher recited |the prayers, and those requiring responses were answered
with a fervour that was truly edifying. The services terminated with
prayers for a happy and prosperous voyage, and our safe arrival in Queens-
land, M.
ANSWERS TO CONUNDRUMS.
The following answers have been received to last week’s conundrums
No. I.—When she is attached to a bouy (boy).
When she is surrounded by swells.
When she is attached to a peer (pier).
When she is running after the Lord Admiral.
No. 2.—Because it was a dec (k) oration.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Pro boko publico. —You will receive every attention on arrival,
Mentor.—We cannot insert such vile productions.


ON BOARD THE WJNEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 5.
Thursday, January 30, 1875,
One Penny.
H HOLLY HOT !is the exclamation we hear throughout the ship,
W Well, yes, when we find the thermometer indulging in a quiet
nap for a ■week or so at 86 deg. in the shade, we must agree with
S| our fellow-passengers that it is “jolly hot.” With the excessive
heat we appear to be tolerably healthy and comfortable. We have had
however several cases of scarlet fever, and one man is suffering from the
effects of sunstroke We are happy to report that under the skilful
attention of Dr. Concanon all the patients are in a fair way of recovery ;
even Laura Cherry, whose case was decidedly the worst, and whose life is in
great danger, is still amongst us. Our doctor the last week has directed the
attention of all in the vessel to the great importance of keeping their berths
clean, rising early, and remaining on deck as much as possible. In fact the
single and married compartments are completely emptied, and the
partitions taken down, in order to cause a current of air between decks to
pass from stem to stern without interruption. The advisability of this
arrangement for ventilating the ship must be patent to all. Numerous are
the enquiries respecting the distance we are off the line, and most
tantalising are the replies received. All are anxious to send letters home to
dear friends in England, and on Monday last a ship was sighted, supposed
to be homeward-bound, causing an immense rush for pens, ink, and paper ;
but alas, we were disappointed, and the many affectionate letters remain


unposted to this date. We trust however that the loving epistles may yet
find a free passage by some good natured ship it may be our luck to mee»t.
Our evenings are now very enjoyable, vocal and instrumental music are
heard throughout the ship. Many of our young women on the poop
evidently possess very fine voices. In fact it would not surprise us very
much to road that one of our fair passengers appeared before a Brisbane
audience, as a Queensland “ Jenny Lind.”
ENTERTAINMENT.
The second public entertainment was held on the poop on Thursday
afternoon, in the presence of a very large house, which was evidently
gifted, if not with the discrimination of Cato, at least, with good humour
and with a determination to be pleased, which is certain to attain its own
object. We must not forget to mention the magnificently printed poster
which at the risk of his being smothered, was gallantly nailed to the mast
by the P.C. Some may consider that he was not justified in heading the
announcement with the royal coat of arms ; but they forget that although
the relationship is not so close as it might be, still the fact of the noble and
gifted member of the clan Campbell honoring the entertainment with his
presence and somewhat qualified approval, was sufficient to justify this
apparent breach of etiquette. The programme was as follows:
% Overture —Bagpipe Mr. H. Ross.
Song—“ Act on the Square” Mr. Woolard.
Song—“ It’s funny when you feel that way ” Miss Owen.
Recitation —“ Temperance ” Mr. Chapman.
Piccolo —Selections Mr. Ireson.
Stump Speech —“ Bow Street ” Mr. Turner.
Song —“ Annie Laurie ” ... Miss L. Spokes.
Song-—“ Love not ” ... Mr. G. Hunter.
Song—“ I wish I was a bee ” Miss Bryning,
Song —“ Dream of Napoleon ” Mr. Edwards.
Song—“ The Gipsy Girl ” Miss Mason.
Song —“ Rock the cradle, John ” Mr. Hetherington.
Song —“ The Hights of Alma” Mr. Twopenny.
Recitation —“ hhe Bridge of Sighs ” Dr. Concanon.
Song —“ Rambling through the town ” ... Mr. Crawley.
Song —“ The Spanish Cavalier ” Miss Owen.
Song —“ My rattling Mare and I ” Mr. Clark,
Song—“ Fifty bright Guineas ” Miss A. Mackif
Song—“ Fifty bright Guineas ” Miss A. Mackie.
Song —“ Empress of the Wave ” Miss Edwards.
Reading—“ The Emigrant’s Departure ” ... Dr. Concanon.
Quartett —“ Be kind to thy Father ” ... Mdlles. Edwards, Fortescuc,
Mason and Revia.
Finale —“ National Anthem ” Company.
Space will not allow of our entering fully into details, but we must
mention two or three pieces which received the most notice. Among the
ladies •Miss-Owen (better known as Langham) sang two capital comic songs
■with much spirit ; and Miss Mason’s “ Gipsy Girl” was charmingly rendered
Mr. Edwards (Captain Iseptune) obtained an enthusiastic encore which
he gracefully acknowledged. Either Mr. Pigott showed a lamentable want


of command of his risible faculties, or else he took the burlesquest burlesque
view of the “Conspirator’s Chorus ”we ever heard of. It is hard to pick a
favorite amongst the many capital songs by the single men, but we fancy that
Mr. Woolard and Mr. Turner carried off the palm. We must not omit to
mention the instrumental music which was led by Mr. Chapman and well
supported by Messrs. Ireson and Ross.
SANITARY REPORT.
ANT of space prevented ns from recording in our last the outbreak
re, u |/ ; i of scarlet fever on board. About three weeks since, it suddenly
appeared in two families simultaneously. They were at once
removed to the hospital, which was quarantined. Their bedding
&c., was destroyed, and the ’tween decks were subsequently disinfected and
whitewashed. There are now six cases under treatment ; they are going
on favorably with the exception of one, in which the fever assumed a
malignant type, but although he is not yet considered out of danger, he is
doing better than was anticipated. The stringent measures adopted by
the S urgeon-Superintendent on the outbreak of the fever, so far prevented,
with God’s blessing, the further spread of the disease ; and the ready and
cheerful acquiescence in all Dr. Concanon’s instructions and arrangements
shown by Mr. and Mrs. Young and Mr. and Mrs. Gay (the parents of the
sick children) cannot be too highly commended. It is with deep regret we
must also record the occurrence of typhus-fever, which appeared in the
single men’s compartment a few days ago. The patient, on the nature of
his complaint manifesting itself, was at once removed to one of the boats,
where a temporary hospital was constructed. The disease was ushered in
with symptoms of grave import, and yesterday the poor fellow succumbed
to the virulence of the attack. Dr. Ooncanon is using every effort to stay
the spread of the two pestilential fevers which have made their grim
presence amongst us and have already struck down one of our number.
Miss Cherry continues in a very precarious condition slight hopes are now
entertained of her ultimate recovery.
OUR DIARY.
Jan. 22.—Onr run to-day is 251 miles, and with a good breeze our ship will make up the
300,
Jan. 23.—240 miles to-day.
Jan. 24.—0n1y 188 miles, and the last of the wind._ How for the most trying time of
the passage. Light winds, thunder, lightning, rain, calms, and heat up to the 29th.
Jan. 29,—Spoke a Dutch barque, but the sad and solemn ceremony about to bo per-
formed prevented us from boarding her.
Jan. —Since the 21st we have been straight on our course 1109 miles : and I believe now
we have the first of the wished-for S.E. trades, and an end to the doldrums.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“Ye FAIR ONE WITH THE YE GOLDEN LOCKS.’’ —Meet me by the mizen alone.
Bewaie the Doctor's eagle eye, DARKIE.


CAPTAIN MAXTED offers a prize of 21bs. of tobacco or its equivalent,
to the author of the best conundrum, the subject to be respecting the ship.
FROM THE SALOON.—It is a wonderful thing
pi how small amusements go down on board ship. The good
||i temper and application of humour shown by the audience on.
the lee side of the poop is very encouraging to a gentleman who
s unaccustomed to public speaking. Hence the following ;—A little
Christy Minstrel business was very amusingly performed by Messrs.
Hetherington and G. Hunter in correct black costume, and they only
wanted some bones to appear “ to the manner born.”
CONUNDRUMS.
My whole it is a female name,
And one we all trust in ;
But if you take the half away
It’s a friend that tries to win
The kind regards of every one
That comes beneath his care ;
But if you take much of my first
Of your head have a care.
J. Twopenny
I’ll candidly tell you it’s a vowel,
My third, a shortened christiau name,
And one of universal fame ;
And now to mystify your pate,
On Prussia’s soil he’s called “ the
Why did I leave my peaceful home
To cross the fearful ocean’s foam?
Why did I leave my native land
To sojourn on a distant strand •
Ah, why! ah, whj ! my first reply.
My second is a little letter,
You’ll surely find it doubled in better :
And lest you feel inclined to growl,
Great.”
My whole’s a ship of goodly state;
Now riddle me, or hold your prate,
M.
ANSWER TO CONUNDRUM.
The following answer has been received to last week’s conundrum : —A ROOSTER.
LINES WRITTEN BY AN EMIGRANT GIRL ON THE DEATH OP
MICHAEL BURKE.
In peaceful slumber 1 sleepeth he,
No more will he prevail.
Dangers we have upon the sea,
As well as those on land;
And all must go when death doth call,
Bach one at the command.
Death on board has taken place,
Before we could arrive ;
No more will he be seen at home,
Of life he is deprived.
He lies within the ocean depths
Where nothing can assail;
ADVERTISEMENT.
MATRIMONY.
A gentleman of prepossessing appearance is anxious to meet with a young
lady, wbo, on arrival in Brisbane, will commence li foin his company as the partner of his
joys and sorrows. She must take him fer better or worse, and if worse predominates, take it
cheerily. He may state that ho is a Scotchman, tall and finely formed, and, though slight at
present, hopes to fill out under the fostering care of a wife. Hair dark, moustache and beard
same hue, but they have been recently shorn. He has an income entirely dependent on his own
exertions, and as great expectations. The young lady must be under 25, fortune no object •.hut
a loving heart and the daily use of a tooth-brush iudispensable. Answers and photographs td tie
sent under care of the Editor, addressed—“ lam the Maiden ale for-Lobn.”
DEATH. —Burke. —On the 29th inst. at 10.30 a.m. Michael Burke, aged 27,


ON BOARD THE WINEFUED DURING HER VOYAGE
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
FROM
No. 6.
Saturday, February 6, 1875,
One Penny,
' a bet was Hid by a knowing gentleman of
l’:A wl I 6 to 1 that we did not cross the line by the next Sunday at 2
sb\4il $1 noon ‘ According as the time approached, the observations
were invested with increasing interest ; and when, on the
morning of the final day, the Captain informed us it would be only a
question of a mile or two one way or other, the takers of theh eavy bet was
observed anxiously trying to hedge to advantage. At 12 o’clock, to his
and every one else’s great satisfaction, a notice wa= posted through the
ship that we were in lat. o'o3 S., on which many ladies declared that they
liad felt a severe bump a few minutes before, and one young lady remarked
‘T feel a little more decomposed to the sea now that we have got over.” We
have now got into the S.E. trades, and are going along merrily, and may fairly
expect to make a better voyage than at one time seemed probable. There
have been several severe pugilistic encounters forward, with, however, but
a small effusion of blood. We hope that these little affairs will create
a more lasting friendship than enmity. On Friday we sighted the ship
Doi othy , from Greenock to Kurrachee. After a lengthy conversation with
the flags, our Mr. Henshaw (the chief officer) accompanied by Mr. Pigott
went in the life-boat (?) and boarded the visitor, somp chloride of lime and
pump leather being required.


ENTERTAINMENT.
On Tuesday we had another entertainment on the poop deck, which
passed off equally as successful as its predecessors. The following is the
programme :
Overture —Bagpipe ... ... ... Mr. H. Ross
Song—“ Barney O’Hea” ... ... ... Miss Mason
Recitation —“ My First Love” ... ... Mr. J. Moore
Song —“ Trifles light as air” ... ... Mr. G. Hunter
Song —“ Kitty Mavourneen” ... ... Miss Christopher
S'eng —“ The Bailiff’s Daughter” ... ... Mr. Hetheringtoa
Sermon —“ (Kigger) ... ... Mr. Pigott
Solo —Piccolo ... ... ... Mr. Ireson
Song —'■ Red, White and Blue” ... Mrs. Williamson
Song —“ The Married Man” ... ... Mr. Turner
Song —“ Robinson Crusoe” ... ... Mr. Woolard
Song —“ St. Patrick” ... ... Mr. Hickson
Reading —“ Mrs. Bilberry’s Experience” ... Capt. Maxted
Song —“ I married a wife” ... ... Mr. R. Hunter
Song —“ Mollcy darling” ... ... Miss L. Spokes
Reading —“ Handy Andy” ... ... Hr. Concanon
Song —“ Rhine Wine” ... ... Mr. S. Galium
Recitation — 1 “ Temperance Alphabet” ... ... Mr. Chapman
Song —“ Tally Ho!” ... ... ... Mr. Edwards
“ God Save the Queen.”
Among the most amusing and deserving of notice were the charming
songs of Miss Mason’s “ Barney O'Hea” and Miss Christopher’s “ Kitty
Mavourneen.” The latter lady made her first appearance at our entertain-
ments, and from the applause which greeted and followed her song, at once
stamped her a favorite. Mr. Pigott, who is ever ready to lend his valuable
assistance in the various entertainments, created quite a “ furore” on his
appearance. His “ get up” as a negro orator and the manner in which he
delivered his impressive sermon on “ female beauty” was enough to excite
the risibles of the most solemnsides. Mr. Turner sang the comic song
“ Poor married man” in first-rate style, not bringing down the house but a
shower of coppers. Both the Captain and Doctor succeeded in amusing
the audience with capital readings. We must not however forget to
mention the married women’s representative, Mrs. Williamson, who sang
“ The red, white and blue” very nicely. We trust that she is only the
pioneer to break the ice for many others from her compartment.
The next Entertainment will take place on Monday afternoon, at two
o’clock, consisting of readings interspersed with vocal and instrumental
music.
OUR DIARY.
Jan, 31st.—Crossed the line at 11.15 a.m. Light southerly breeze and fine.
Feb. sth.—Since the last date we have had light trades and fine weather, distance
800 miies. We are now half way across the tropic Capricorn, and 3000 miles from
the Cape. Oh! foi a good stiff breeze, and some of Job’s patience.
Feb. 6th,—Light breeze. Distance 1000 miles.


ALOON JOTTINGS. —An amusing impromtu performance was
i held on the poop by lamplight the other evening, wholly
supported by female niggers, under the able direction of Miss
Owen. The chief features of the entertainment were some
capital songs and breakdowns, and a touching little dramatic scene between
Miss Owen and Mr. Chapman. On Friday we had a visit from Messrs.
Moore and Burgess, accompanied by two of the most talented of their
troupe. Our reader will remember these Christy Minstrels are so remark-
able for never having performed out of London, but hearing that the
passengers of the Winefred wished to judge of their excellence, they con-
sented to give a short performance in the afternoon, on condition that they
should be allowed to return to St. James’ Hall in time to fulfil their
engagement at 8 o’clock. They were introduced to a large audience in a
humorous speech by the doctor, who kindly allowed five of the young
ladies, viz. Mdlles. Bryning, Owen, Fortescue, Mason, and Pendell to give
their vocal assistance in the entr’actes. Among the nigger songs were
“ The moon behind the hill,” “ the little wee dog,” “ God bless the little
church,” and many others, all of which were well received. As far as we
were able to discover from the applause and laughter, the entertainment
gave universal satisfaction, and we hope that if they again favor us they
will be equally successful.
Editorial” Note. —We hear that a rumour, emanating from usually
well-informed circles, is rapidly gaining credence that an action for piracy
of copyright is threatened by Messrs. Moore and Burgess, against Messrs.
Hetherington, Chapman, Pigott, and Twopenny, who are accused of having
personated their unique troupe. We hope that in the event of heavy
damages being awarded, the passengers will indemnify these gentlemen.
We (the editor) have headed the subscription with £5O and we expect that
others will be equally liberal.
UNERAL —It Is our painful duty to record the death of Micha©
M Burke, a single man, a native of Ireland, who died on Friday
H the 29th ult., of typhus fever. The poor man was ill only a
short time, the fever appearing in its worst form. During his
illness he received every attenion from our doctor, but death only relieved
him of his sufferings. We must not forget to mention the kindness shewn
towards him by two single young men, Messrs. W. Edwards and George
Parnell, who volunteered to nurse him during his dreadful disease. We
are surprised that none of his own countrymen could be found willing to
perform this last act of Christian charity. At sundown on the same day his
remains were committed to the deep, the rites of the Roman Catholic
Church being read by the schoolmaster, Mr. Meagher.
SANITARY REPORT.
The three passenger compartments have undergone a most thorough over-
hauling during the past week, and the passengers seem to have been in a
constant state of fetching up and carrying down their various goods and


chattels, plcnicing about the decks or standing sentry over their property
The work commenced on Monday by the single men’s compartment getting
a complete scraping, scrubbing, and disinfecting, Captain Maxted kindly
sending his crew to assist under his own superintendence and that of th«
officers. The men slept on deck all night under awnings, and we have no
doubt that the twenty-four hours spent in the open air with the consequent
ventilation of their compartment, must help to disseminate any lingering
germs of fever which may be lurking among them. Many complained that
they could not sleep owing to being so closely packed, but when the voice of
the doctor was heard through the daikness proclaiming as a soothing
sedative a glass of grog round on the morrow, there was not a dissentient
voice, and slumber soon descended on the peaceful innocents. Next day
the married men worked with a will at their own compartment, and
yesterday the young ladies’ habitation was taken in hand. If there is any
dirt or noxious matter remaining in the ’tween decks, it must he of exceed-
ingly microscopical dimensions. No fresh cases of typhus or scarlet-fe.ver
has occurred, and the sufferers from the latter disease are going on
favourably. Laura Cherry is somewhat better, but the occurrences of
white swelling in the knee joint is a grave addition to her other ailment
CORRESPONDENCE.
ANSWERS TO MATRIMONIAL ADVERTISEMENT.
(1) “I am the Maiden all for-Lorn.” —Sir, —l have read with deep
attention your advertisement in. last week’s Marvel ; its manly tone and deeply hidden pathos,
not to mention the income made so nobly by your own exertions, appealed directly to the deepest
feelings of my nature, striking hidden chords of passon I was hitherto ignorant of possessing. I
dream, I think; I hope, I know you—know that tall fine form yon sp oak of —it must he you who
advertises, my heart tell me that it is. I have so long watched you with love and admiration
untold to all, but welling up within my bosom until my many feelings became too many for me.
How nobly you have looked sitting apart in dignified composure, scorning to join in the noisy
gambols of others. But to myselfl am but 18, fair and blue-eyed, musical, and dance divinely
(round-dance, jig, or can-can). Having lived in a magnificent hotel, I could cook those delicacies
which, with my care and kisses, would help to fill out that slight but splendid form my soul
adores. Will you, oh, will you accept me, star of my heart! and make me the aurora borealis
which will lighten the gloomy darkness of your hitherto unmoved Northern heart ? Address,
L*n*h*m, after compartment, berth 19.
(2) Sir, —Seeing your advertisement in tbe Winefred Marvel that on
arrival in Brisbane you wish to meet with a partner to share your joys and sorrows, I beg to say
that I, being very fond of Scotchmen, would be most happy if I could receive fromyou a few lines
in private, also your ''holograph; when, on receiving them, will be most happy to forward
through the editor, t _ubograph and full particulars of myself. Till I hear from you,
I remain, with much love, aneetionately yours,
THE MAIDEN ALL FOE-LORN
ENIGMA.
Oft standing near the crowded mill. When from yon ivy-mantled tower
Or whore beneath the flow r-deck’d hill The bell tolls out the midnight hour,
The beehives stand, with joyous thrill, 1 wake and start to feel the power
I hear my first. My second holds.
When lovers, hand and hand, by night.
Gaze on the moonlight sea, and plight
A troth of never-ending might,
I know my whole.
A pound of tobacco or its equivalent, to the firjt who finds a correct answer to the abov#
J. CHAPMAN


ON BOAED THE WINE FRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 7
One Penny.
Tuesday, February 16, 1875.
jragrgi N Monday last another entertainment took place which afforded
1 11'\\ $ the usual amount of amusement. Our young ladies on the poop
revel each evening in singing and dancing to their hearts’
1 -fc| content, Messrs. Chapman, (violin) and Hetherington (piccolo)
forming a proficient band for these occasions. Polkas, jigs, and Scotch
reels are danced with great spirit. Varied with a little vocal music, the
evenings are made exceedingly pleasant; the eager votaries of Terpsichore
are only interrupted when the well-known voice of the macron is heard
exclaiming, “All down, girls !” It is not always after spending such an
evening as described that our young women are disposed to retire to rest.
It is not for some hours after their going, that all is quiet and tranquil.
On Thursday at midnight, for instance, loud shrieks and yells were heard
issuing from the after compartment, awaking the captain and doctor and
nearly everybody else on the ship from their slumbers ; their fii st thoughts
evidently being that it was a case of fire. The captain and doctor made
their descent by means of the windsail to our young ladies’ quarters, and
discovered that the cause of the alarm was a foolish freak of one of their
number imitating a man’s voice, whilst another dragged a companion from
her bunk by the hair of her head, and tickled the feet of a third. These
practical jokes were carried on until a general outburst of screaming and


yelling took place, the outragers evidently being as much frightened as their
victims. The perpetrators of this disturbance have not yet been discovered
should they be, we can assure them that a punishment as yet unexampled
in severity, will be their well-merited portion.
ENTERTAINMENT.
We subjoin "he programme of the entertainment given on Monday, which
passed off very agreeably, both the attendance and attention shown must
have been highly encouraging to the numerous performers who took part.
Overture —Bagpipe
Mr. H, Ross
f Miss A. Mackie
\ Miss Edwards
Mr. L. H. Campbell
Miss M. Carter
Mr. R. Hunter
Mr. Woolard
Duet —Hunting Tower ” ... ...
Song —“ Early Morning ”
Song —“ Box of Specimens ”...
Song —“ Under the Willows ”
Song —“ The Winefred " (original)
Song—“ I would not marry an old man ”
Song —“ Alonzo and Imogene ’
Recitation — “ Hell” ... ...
Miss Anderson
Mr. Turner
Mr. J. Moore
Miss M. White
Mr. S. Culham
f Miss Ashman
( Miss L. Spokes
Mr. Hetherington
Capt. Maxted.
Miss Edwards
Mr. Sparshot
Dr. Concanon
Miss J. Babes
Mrs. Willimson
Mr. G. Hunter
Miss. Smith
Mr. W. R. Ford
Song
Song —“'Union Jack”
Duet—“ My native home ” ...
Song —“ Some folks do ”
Reading —“ Mrs. Bilberry’s Experience ”
Song —“ The Ship-boy’s Letter ”
Song —“ Put me in my little bed ”
Reading —“ The Little Vulgar Boy” ...
Song—- 1 The "Marble Arch ”...
Song —“ The Young Recruit ”
Song —“ The Blind Girl to her harp ” ...
Song —“ The Bells a-ringing for Sarah ”
Song —“ The Death of Nelson ”
“ God Save the Queen
CORRESPONDENCE
SAINT VALENTINE’S DAY.
To the Editor of the “Winefred Marvel.”
Sir, —Allow me through your columns to thank the promoters who mad©
arrangements for the distribution of valentines throughout the ship. lam
sure it gave much pleasure to all the passengers, and reminded us of home,
where perhaps it would have been our fortune to have received a greater
number, but I am sure it would be impossible to have received more
affectionate or harmless love-letters than those that came to our hands on
Monday last. The distribution of valentines on the Winefred was as a magic
spring, bringing a new life into our existence. There is nothing like mutual
and kindly feeling one towards another, and I amsur nothing is so likely to
create and maintainits existence as affairs of this sort and the entertainments


that are occasionally given to relieve the monotony of the voyage; and I am
sure one and ail are thankful for the part you take in our amusements.
Yours very truly,
E. MASON.
OUR DIARY.
Since onr last date (Feb. 6th) we have had a very trying week of very light breezes,
calms, and hot weather. We have just been able to getaway from the tropics, but
not the heat. The only thing to cure our complaint is a spanking fair breeze.
Distance 660 miles.
MUTINY.
Ill® are sorry to have to chronicle this week a most serious offence
by our sailors, who hitherto had behaved themselves admirably,
iSj and gained the good opinion of all the passengers. The distur-
banco occurred under the following paltry circumstances. It
appears that the pea-soup served out to the port watch was not properly
cooked. One of the men complained to the captain who promised to see
into the matter, and had in fact ordered fresh meat to be cooked for their
tea. This it appears did not satisfy them, but the whole of the watch
must come aft and make a complaint on the same subject. This evidently
riled the captain, who ordered them off the poop. Soon after both watches
refused to work —a proceeding unpardonable under any circumstances—-
and amounting to open “mutiny on the high seas,” with which offence
they were at once charged and put in irons. Captain Masted suggested
that a volunteer crew should be selected from the emigrants. The saloon
passengers gave in their names immediately, and twenty-five from the
steerage were found willing to form the two watches. Our captain also
received the following letter :—The second cabin passengers present their
compliments to Captain Masted, and beg to assure him that he can rely
upon any assistance in their power under the present uutow r ard circumstances
which have arisen. It must have been gratifying to Captain Aaxted to
find sufficient passengers to support bis power and help to rc aintain the
discipline. We are happy to say that the disturbances (which at one time
looked very serious) came to a most satisfactory conclusion. The sailors
(sixteen in all) were quite willing to return to their work next morning.
Captain Maxted at once released them from irons upon these conditions,
and the offenders “buckled to” most willingly to their duties. We are
requested by Captain Maxted to tender his best thanks to all those
passengers who so pomptly came forward to support him on the occasion
of the late mutinous act of the sailors, and to express his agreeable surprise
at the seamanlike manner in which the sails were taken in and furled.
ANSWER TO CORRESPONDENT.—CRITIQUE.— Your letter received and
forwarded to the director*, who will no doubt consider your proposition


POET’S CORNER
A YOUNG MAN’S LAMENT.
How very hard it seems to be,
That we our sweethearts cannot see,
They’re kept so carefully on the poop,
It’s a breach of the peace if you dare to look.
But after all we suppose it’s right,
For no doubt some larks would be up at night.
The results from which would be hard to say,
So keep yourself quiet the rest of the way.
Sympathy.
MIDNIGHT INSPIRATION ON BOARD THE WINEFRED.
We went to bed last night, The matron rose dismayed,
And when in the midst of dreams, She trembled in her walk,
We were suddenly roused up She was so much afraid,
By the single women’s screams. That she could hardly talk.
The row increased, all folks did shout, The doctor he rushed in,
Out flew the people all, Inquiring, “ What’s the matter ?”
And every soul cried out, “ What’s up.” A voice amidst the din,
As loud as he could bawl. Cries, “ Doctor, who’s your hatter ?’
At first we thought ’twas fire, The captain now appears,
And then we hoped ’twas slaughter, His anger fairly rose,
But when we did enquire, He vowed if they were hot,
We found ’twaa only “water.” He’d cool them with the hose.
There is a gate we know full well
That stands ’twixt heaven, earth and hell,
Where many for a passage venture,
Yet very few are found to enter;
Although ’tis open night and day,
They for that reason shun this way;
Both dukes and lords abhor its wood,
They can’t come near it for their blood;
What other way they take to go,
This threat put all things right,
They tumbled into bed,
And slept as quiet all night
As if they all were dead.
RIDDLE.
Yet commoners, with greatest ease,
Can find an entrance when they please,
The poorest hither march in state,
(Or they can never pass the gate),
Like Roman generals triumphant,
And then they take a turn and jump on t,
If gravest parsons here advance,
They cannot pass before they dance;
There’s not a soul that does resort here,
Another time I’ll let you know, But strips himself to pay the porter
Dr-, Concanon will give a pound of tobacco or its equivalent to the first steerage passen-
ger who gives a correct answer.
ANSWER TO ENIGMA.
The following answer has been received to last week’s enigma : HUMBUG by Mr,
O’Brien
One old lady, on being told that the world was coming to an end, shortly
exclaimed, “ 0 dear, what shall I do for snuff.”


s)N BOARD THE WINE FRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 8.
Saturday, February 27, 1875,
One Penny
ARDLY anything of interest has taken place during the past
lEm f week, our entertainments, &c., having been almost put a stop to
SO3 <j by the wind and weather. We are quite willing to sacrifice our
gJsiyil little amusements for a good fresh wind. The fine fresh breeze
which we have been favored with this last day or two, makes us hope that
we may now make a quicker passage than was expected.
St. Valentine was not forgotten on our ship. No less than 480 of
charming little love tokens were posted on Sunday. We cannot say that
all the valentines were manufactured of lace paper, being manuscript
specimens which were discovered during transit through the post. Many
of these were not couched as letters of love ; on the contrary, they
exhibited unmistakable signs of the comic element. The delivery of these
happy remembrances of St. Valentine was anxiously looked forwarded to.
Many a fair maid turned out of her bunk the next morning three hours
before her usual time of rising, in hopes that the postman would be on his
round early. In this however they were disappointed, the mail not
arriving till late (or some other cause). The postman did not commence
his delivery till 9 o’clock, when he was heralded in by the enchanting notes
of a “ fog-horn.” Then ensued a general rush ; every one expecting
letters, and answering to their names. One or two young ladies, we under-


stand, received each no less than ten very affectionate and loving epistles.
With the single men, the delivery caused no end of fun. The recipient of
each valentine was hoisted on the shoulders of his companions, who
cheered the favored one loudly.
On Tuesday, February 16th, about twenty young ladies invited Mr.
Hetherington and Mr. Chapman (the purser) to a tea-party on the poop
square. The table was bedecked with numerous choice gifts from
the doctor and captain. The affair, unfortunately, did not pass off so
pleasantly as we should have wished ; a petty feeling of jealously on the
part of many who did not join the tea-party giving rise to some open
disturbance.
OUR DIARY.
February 17th to 22nd.— We had very light and unfavorable breezes. Passed several
vessels bound north.
February 22nd.—Two little strangers have made their appearance on board, and I wish
them health and long life, and their mothers a speedy recovery. It may be interest-
ing to their parents to know the spot on the South Atlantic Ocean where they first
drew the breath of life, viz.: lat. 32 deg. 20 min. south, long. 28 deg. 37 min. west.
February 23rd.—Moderate fair breeze. Distance 193 miles.
February 24th. —Strong fair wind. The good Winefred making up for lost time.
Distance run 276 miles.
February 25th.—Had the wind lasted until noon, we could have shown 300 miles
of 266. lam sure a little wet and rain will not be minded providing it
' brings the long wished-for fair wind.
We have now no land between us and Australia, but a long clear run ; so let us
pray for the brave west winds.—G. M. MAXTED, CAPTAIN.
OUR INACCURACIES.
nHE Winefred Marvel presents no exception to the general
periodicals of the day in its freedom from inaccuracies. We
have had errors, orthographical and syntactical, and ofttimes
from sources whence they might least have been expected.
There is however one feature incur Journal that cannot be called in
question. Our grammatical construction of sentences, and our method of
spelling words may have been egregiously inaccurate, but we shall be able
to pride ourselves on the fact that, after careful revision, the printer’s
devil will (with the aid of the compositor) publish nothing but facts.
The very best authenticated annals present manifold instances of what
(in a figurative style) may be called tracts of debateable ground, between
the regious of “ reality ” and “ romance,” where the received facts are
decorated with all thegraniture of “ pomp and circumstances —for instance
it is recorded that the Abbe Yertot, who wrote the details of an important
siege before the official account had been given, exclaimed (upon receiving
the correct details) *T have no occasion for them now, my siege is complete,”


—so much for the romance of history. There is another amusing instance
of penmanship in Smollett’s English History. In his description of the
ancient Britons at the time of Caesar’s invasion, he says “ they were living
in cottages thatched with ‘ straw,’ and feeding herds of cattle ; yet ‘ they
sowed no corn, but lived on flesh and milk ' ” It is difficult to understand
how the Israelites-could make bricks without straw.
But now we cry a truce to all that is in any way disagreeable. Let us
bury all personal antipathies—in a few weeks our haven will be in view, the
cry of “ land !” will raise in all our hearts a throb of grateful thankful ness,
and leaving behind us our sea-legs, we shall very soon walk bravely on
terra-Jirma.
ENTERTAINMENT,
ppsagai N Monday, February 22nd, the passengers were entertained by
another troupe of nigger minstrels, who sung some first-rate
Jiii/J Ethiopian songs. The powerful company (six in number)
consisted of Messrs. Sparshot, Grant, Comley, G. Hunter, R.
Hunter, and Hetherington, who opened the concert by forming a
procession (Indian file) and promenading the ship from stem to stern,
singing quite an original breakdown. On taking their seats, the entertain-
ment commenced with a first-rate opening chorus of “ Nelly Gray ” by the
darkies. The following is the programme : —Miss Wigton; “ Annie Lisle;
Mr. Hetherington, “Rosalie, the Prairie Flower Miss Haines, “ The
Young Maid Mr. R. Hunter, “Fair, fair, with golden hair the Misses
S. and F. Symonds, “ Our gallant ship Mr. Grant, “I am here Miss
M’Connell, “Wait till I’m ready Mr. Comley, “ Down among the coals
Miss Hissard, “ Give me thy "blessing;” Mr. Hetherington, “Nelly Bly;”
Miss Shendon, “ The old mill stream Mr. Sparshot “ I wish I was in
Queensland Miss Mason, “ The old Arm-chair Mr. G. Hunter; “ Trifles
light as air Mesdmes. Brian and Hayden, “ The Soldier ;” Mr. Hether-
ington, “ My bonnie barque ;” Miss Bayning, “ Many happy returns of the
day ;” Mr. Sparshot, “ Hen Convention ; ” Miss Spokes, “ The Irish Emi-
grant; ” Company, National Anthem.
SANITARY REPORT
“There is no rose without a thorn,” and most things may be looked at from
two sides of the question ; e.g. in our case, while our faces brighten at the
change in the wmds and weather during last few days, tending as it does
to our speedier arrival at the long and anxiously looked-for “promised
land ;” yet, on the other hand, it has interfered sadly with sanitary arrange-
ments, airing of beds, &c., and has delayed another general cleaning fore
and aft, which is again necessary. Many mayjexclaim, “and a good job too!”'
but to those who are responsible for the health and hygiene of the vessel
it is not so light a matter as some might imagine •


Mr. Charles Pitkin and Mr. Jacobson, the two patients in the hospital-
boat, are approaching the most critical period of their disease, but the
sailor’s chances of recovery are lessened by the addition of grave lung
complication.
Their malady must not be confounded with typhus-fever, to which poop
Burke fell a victim, as the fever from which they are suffering is enteric or
typhoid; the same disease which carried off the Prince Consort, and so nearly
proved fatal to the Prince of Wales. While it is not nearly so contagious
as typhus, yet the possibility—nay, the probability—of other cases occurring
can neither be disguised or overlooked.
The sufferers from scar let-fever are all now well and out of danger, and
no other case up to this time has appeared.
Among the single women there are two or three patients in a very
serious condition, including Laura Cherry, whose strength is much diminished
while the disease in her kidneys is making rapid progress.
Turning from the gloomy side of affairs, we have pleasure in announcing
an addition to our population, presented to us by Mrs. Gay and Mrs. Child,
in the shape of two little daughters. Up to the time of going to press, the
mothers with their little Winefreds are doing as well as can be expected
under the circumstances.
In conclusion, we would advise all on board to pay special attention to
the changes of temperature we are experiencing, by clothing themselves
more warmly when on deck, and taking sufficient exercise to keep the blood
in circulation, and we hope that with due regard to these precautions the
fairer portion of our community will not allow a cold day or fresh breeze
to keep them below, as the more they are in the open air, the more their
health will improve, the more will be the enquiries for the cook, the less for
the doctor.
ANSWER 10 RIDDLE.
The following answer has been received to last week’s riddle: THE GALLO WS-—by
Mr, P. Coxnley.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
MATRIMONY.
A YOUNG LADY, age 20, very fair, with dark brown eyes; very
domesticated, good tempered, and highly amusing, wishes to meet with a suitable partner
He must be over 20, fair complexion preferred, rather tall, good natured, very indulgent, and
willing to leave all housekeeping managements to her skilful arrangements; his funds must never
fail, but she has no idea of being too exorbitant in her demands for her weekly orders. Answera
must be sent to L. J., berth 76, with carte enclosed.
■pYTOTICE.—Can any one oblige the Editor with a copy of Tennyson’s
May Queen! . . .
LOST, a red Morocco POCKET BOOK, containing £2 10s. in gold, a
little gold Engine, a 25-cent. piece (American), and several other small articles. Whoever
has found the same and will return it to Mr. Leech (married compartment), will be rewarded.
It OST, a bunch of KEYS ; rather rusty, on gilt ring and pink string*
A The finder will be rewarded on returning it to the Editor.


ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 9.
Saturday, March 6, 1875.
One Penny.
URING the past week the Winefred has made very satisfactory
fi progress, which must be gratifying and cheering to ail the
k| passengers, who have now been onboard over eleven weeks. That
we shall make a somewhat long voyage is certain ; Father
Nepiune cannot be thanked for granting us many favouring winds, but for
such pleasant weather as we have experienced we cannot but feel grateful.
No doubt it will astonish many of our friends at home to hear that, with
the exception of a day, or two at the commencement of our voyage, the
motion of our ship has scarcely been felt at all, and never so disagreeable
as we have experienced whilst riding a long journey in an omnibus or
railway train on terra-firma.
We have no doubt that many of our readers, although they entertain no
foolish idea of gathering money by handfuls for the mere picking up, as in
the mystical town of ‘‘ Tiddler’s ground,” yet hopefully look forward to the
day of landing, when we can assure them they may readily secure
employment, and obtain a handsome reward for their exertions. Yet it
will be a source of deep regret with many of us to be compelled to part with
our new-formed friends ; whatever may be our object on arrival at Brisbane,
the heart must grieve at quitting the society of those with whom we haT9


been so long intimate, and we shall often look back with pleasure on the
laappy hours spent on board the Winefred.
We notice that Dr. Concanon has deemed it advisable, in order to
suppress any fresh outbreak of fever, to have all the pigs killed. We
cannot commend him too highly for the step he has taken in this matter,
as the stench from the stye was simply abominable, and their excrement
flowing across the deck was undoutedly carried ’tween decks by the feet of
the passengers. Since their removal all foetid smells have entirely
disappeared forward. Whilst speaking of our live or rather “ dead ” stock,
we may record the fact that a pretty little lamb was discovered in our sheep
pen on Monday morning last. The little stranger will evidently become
a great pet amongst us as soon as it strong enough to leave its “Ma. ”
SANITARY REPORT.
Having had an interval of dry weather (unfortunately accompanied by
‘Sght winds) the ’tween decks have been again thoroughly cleansed and
disinfected fore and aft. The fears expressed in our last, respecting the
ultimate recovery of the seaman Jacobson have proved but to well grounded,
as the poor fellow succumbed to the disease on the 28th ultimo. There
has been more sickness during the week than in any corresponding one of
the voyage, and among the patients we regret to find the Matron, Sub-
Matron, and both Nurses, one of whom is suffering from acute rheumatic-
fever. q Laura Cherry has passed through a most critical week, at one
period of which it was feared that exhausted nature could hold out no longer.
The patients in the hospital-boat are going on favorably. In Mr. Proctor’s
case, the diseased has been arrested before its worst features had
develope themselves ; there is still however the possibility of a relapse.
The scarlet-fever hospital is now empty, the convalescents having resumed
their place among the passengers, every precaution necessary to secure
perfect disinfection having first been taken. We congratulate them on the
fact that whereas their number on entering the hospital was eleven, instead
of being diminished during their seven weeks’ sojourn there, it has grown
into a dozen; and indeed, had they remained a little longer that dozen
might possibly have became a “baker’s.” Mrs. Gay and Mrs. Child are
•making progress towards recovery, Mrs. Child being almost out of danger.
OUR DIARY.
Feb. 26th to Mar. 6th.—Distance run 1548 miles.
Our passage up to the present time has been the most remarkable that I have ever
made; the least rain, the least sea, the most fine weather, and least wind. Even now
in lat. 44 S, we have quite a trade sky and light winds. The sea is and has been so
very smooth, making one think there has not been any wind for weeks.
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.
On Saturday last great excitement and amusement was caused through-
out the ship by the capture of albatrosses, two by the Captain, one by Mr


Hickson, and one by Mr. G. Hunter. The first, which measured twelve
feet across the wings, was released after having a note put round its neck,
but the rest paid forfeit with their lives for their attachment to fat pork.
Their remains have been put to various uses, the pinions making capital
pipe stems, while their feet form large watertight tobacco pouches, and the
feathers in all probability will be converted into different articles of ladies
wearing apparel.
DEATH OF A SAILOR.
It is our melancholy duty to record the death of one of our A.B.
seamen named John Jacobson, who died on Sunday last, and was buried
early the following morning.
ENTERTAINMENT.
'pywV| 1 N Entertainment took place on Saturday, February 27th, and was
well attended. We append the programme;—“Act on the
Wstfm Square,” Mr. Woolard; “ Belle of the Ball,” Miss Bryning;
PlilJil “ Ship Winifred," Mr. Crawley ; recitation, “The Wreck of the
Hesperus,” Mr. Moore; “Fairy Queen,” Miss Ellis; “Pat’s Leather
Breeches,” Mr. Turner ; “Banks of Dundee,” Miss Lock ; “Advance
Australia,” Sir Hetherington ; “Spanish Cavalier,” Miss Owen; Solo,
Piccolo, Mr. Ireson I would not let you in,” Miss Pendell ; ‘Jenny
Grey,” Mr. Culham ; recitation. Miss Levin ; “ Minstrel Boy,” Miss Hatter ;
“ Good friends, adieu,” Miss Haines and Miss Wigton,
afternoon, March 2nd, a first-rate entertainment was
Wd pas held on the poop square. The following is the programme Mr.
pH Woolard “ The Fisherman’s Daughter ;” Miss Lock, “On board
of the Kangaroo ;” Mr. S. King, “ The Anchor’s Weighed,”
(encore): Miss Connell, “ The Orphan Boy Mr. Clarke, “Teddy O'Neil;”
Miss Andersen, “ Weary on the barley brew ;” a Reading, by Mr. Sedgwick,
“ The Compass, with variations ;” Mr. Edwards, “ The King of the Canni-
bal Islands ;” Miss Mason, “Pretty Jane;” Mr. Hetherington, “O’er the
heaving ocean ;” Miss Mason, “In dreams I see my mother ;” Miss Babbs,
“ Mother’s parting gift;” Mr. Pigott, “ Our life on the ocean wave ;” Miss
Ather, “The Minstrel Boy;” Mr. Grant, “Charming Young Widow”
(encore) ; Miss Wigton, “ Mother says I mus’nt ’ (encore); Mr. Turner,
“ Christmas Party” (encore) ; Miss Grace, “ Love among the Roses ;” Miss
Owen, “ It’s funny when you feel that way ’ (encore) / Mr. Twopenny,
“ Hole in the Shutter” (encore); “ God Save the Queen.”
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the “Winefrhd Marvel.
Sir, —will you kindly allow me through your valuable paper to express
tny sincere thanks to Dr. Coucanon and Captain Maxted tot their kind


attention to me during my late illness, also to Messrs. Moss, Twopenny,
May, and JDuffield, who have been very kind to me in every respect ; and
it is with heartfelt thankfulness that 1 have heard of so many anxious
enquiries concerning me, both fore and aft the ship. I am happy to say
I am getting on very nicely excepting my “ understanding,” and they almost
refused to carry me. Trusting soon to be able to resume my duties.
I am, sir, yours truly,
March Ist. J. CHAPMAN, Purser.
To the Editor of the “ Winefred Marvel.”
Dear Sir.—Will you kindly allow me through the medium of the
Winefred Marvel to thank the many subscribers who so kindly contributed
in raising a fund to restore to me the value of my purse, the money
contained therein amounting to £3 10s., which I had the misfortune
to lose whilst on the ship. 1 shall ever remember the benevolent act of my
fellow passengers, and trust that the good feeling existing amongst us may
long continue. W. T. LEACH.
POET’S CORNER.
“I WISH I WAS IN QUEENSLAND! ”
(Air, —“Dixie’s Land.”}
Dedicated to the single girls, by H. J. S., on board the Winefred.
Oh! we’re bound away in the Winefred
Commanded by G. M. ivlaxted,
To the land, to the land ! &c.
Single, married, and children too,
With doctor and matron to look after you
To the land, to the land ! <fec.
I wish I was in Queensland.
Heigho, heigho!
In that lovely land I’ll take my stand
I’ll live and die in Queensland,
Heigho, heigho!
I’ll live and die in Queensland.
We’ve lots of jolly single girls,
So nobby with their teeth and curls,
To the land, to the land ! &c.
And just as many single men,
Who take delight in looking at them,
To the land, to the land! &c.
I wish I was, &c,
Oh! when we get to this land of clover,
We’ll stick to cocktails, bandy and soda,
To the land, to the land &c.
And if we can’t get that, d’ye see,
We’ll stick to mutton, damper and tea.
To the land, to the land! &c.
I wish I was, &c,
Now girls cheer up for Moreton Bay,
And wish for a fair wind every day,
To the land, to the land, <fec
Take my advice and never despair,
You’ll find it better to “act on the square”
To the land, to the land. &c.
I wish I was &c.
Success to the good ship Winefred,
And to the captain, G. M. Maxted ;
To the land, to the land, &c.
Success to the officers and . the crew,
Who work the ship and l#eer so true,
To the land, to the land, Ac.
I wish I was, &c.
Suceess to the doctor and matron too,
Who strive to keep the down hullabaloo,
To the land, to the land, &c.
Success to us all on board this ship,
For there’s many a slip ’tween the cup and
the lip,
To the land, to the land. &c.
I wish I was, &c,


ON BOARD THE WINE FRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
E are now experiencing the cold weather in real earnest; the
decks are completely deserted towards evening. If we take the
a O trouble to look ’tween decks, motley groups of noisy individuals
Mail may be observed around the tables. Diminoes, cats and mice,
fox and geese, all fours, brag, and draughts appear to be the favorite
games in the married and single men’s quarters. Our young ladies
evidently find but little amusement in cards, the most scientific and
popular game amongst them is “beat my neighbour,” but for this and
“ telling fortunes,” playing cards would never been seen. Numerous other
pastimes are however introduced/ we hear of all kinds of impromtu
dramas, pantomimes, and farces being performed with great success each
evening at eight, but as these representations are of a striaftly private
character, the caste and audience being composed of ladies only, we are
unable to form any idea of the performers’ capabilities, but understand
however that the walking gentleman and low comedian are special favorites.
The girls, now we are approaching our journey’s end, are arranging a
series of tea parties, each mess saving for a week previous from their not
over-abundant supply of rations sufficient stores for a sumptuous repast
to which we generally have the honor to receive an invitation.
One Penny.
Saturday, March 20, 1875.
No. 10


NEWS FROM HOME!
Special Submarine Pigeon.
London, March 15th, 1875.
Dear Mr. Marvel, —Receiving private information that your voyage has
oeen more protracted than you had anticipated, I have put together a few
notes of what has been going on in town lately, which I hope may prove
acceptable to your readers.
As was predicted, the winter has been tremendously severe, and to
crown all, the Thames was frozen so hard in the middle of February that
a monster fair was held on the river on the 11th, 12th, aud 13th at which
oxen and sheep were roasted whole, aud all sorts of games in imitation of
old times were in full swing. All the frost has now disappeared, and with
the exception of the petition in favor of “ Female Rights” which was
escorted to the Houses of Parliament by a procession of 70,000 of probably
the worst women in England, there has been little to excite us lately at
home Abroad, however, affairs are different; the Spanish troops under
Marshal Serrano met Don Carlos on the old battle field of Yittoria, and after
having their right turned by a brilliant piece of generalship, the Govern-
ment left went over in a body to the Royalists, and Don Carlos following
up his victory with lightning speed, was received with open arms by
Madrid, and the whole of the South declaring for him, he has been ack-
nowledged by Europe as King of Spain. What a turn-up ! Considerable
anxiety for the safety of the Winefred was felt in London on the 22nd
December on the discovery of a case containing twelve tumblers and two
lamps directed “Saloon, Winefred 1 ' but I hope no inconvenience was caused
by the want of them. It may interest your sporting readers to hear that
“ Peasant Boy” has at last carried off the “ Waterloo Cup,” after running
up two years in succession. Tho Derby betting has been very brisk,
“ Galopin” still being favorite at 6 to 1, while “ Dreadnought” has reached
“ sevens”, and “ Holy Friar’s ” roaring infirmity has sent him to “ thirties”
offered. I had to refuse to send any special messages from your fellow-
passengers’ friends as they would fill a good-sized letter-bag if put on
paper, but I may safely say that the news of your safe arrival at Brisbane
will be received with joy by thousands of anxious enquirers.
NUNQUAM DORMIO
N.B.—A cheque by return pigeon will oblige.
ST. PATRICK’S DAY.
St. Patrick’s day will long be remembered by the passengers of the
Winefred, who had what may be termed a “ jolly spree,” different however
to what “ Pat” likes on his own native sail. Instead of broken skulls and
black eyes, nothing but harmony existed throughout our ship. On the
eve of St. Patrick the Captain and Mr. Hickson (a fine speciman of a real
Irish gintleman) gave a glass of grog to all the single and married men.


Dr. Concanon, Surgeon-Superintendent, did the same thing on the Saint’s
day. The single women gavo a grand tea party to the Doctor and their
“ Personal Conductor” in the afternoon. The cloth being removed,
wine, (?) was served out to them (a gift of the saloon passengers). The
Irish girls, who numbered about twenty, came to the front and gave three
cheers for the “ English girls,” who responded to the toast, and drank to
the health of the fair daughters of the Emerald Isle. The Doctor made
an appropriate speech, and was rewarded with three hearty cheers and one
cheer more. Cheers were also given for the Matron, Mr. Hetherington,
and the saloon passengers. It was not until all were thoroughly tired (?)
out with songs, toasts, and sentiments that the ladies were found willing
to retire to their bunks and enjoy their peaceful slumbers, as usual. Many
of them, we may venture to say, will remember the St. Patrick’s Day they
spent on the Winefred for years to come, as a bright spot in their voyage
to the home of their adoption. On the following day Captain Maxted
gave a glass of grog to all the single and married people by way of finish-
pig up St. Patrick’s day. No doubt it will be a source of regret to many
■Jhat we are not likely to have another day dedicated to the patron Sain%
di old Ireland with such festivities on the ship. Let us hope that on the
anniversary of the day one and all of us may be in a better position than
jye are at present; at the same time may we never forget St. Patrick’s
day of 1875.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the “ Winefred Marvel.”
Sir, —Will you kindly allow me through your useful little paper to thank
Dr. Concanon for his kindness and attention to my children during the
time they were in the hospital under his treatment for scarlet-fever. They
certainly received from him such consideration and attention as my previous
experiences had not led me to expect on board an emigrant vessel, and I
can honestly say of Dr. Concanon that I believe him to be a thoroughly
skilful medical man, always ready and willing by day or night to attend to
those under his charge who need his services, and in all his dealings with
his fellow men to be in every sense of the word a perfect gentleman
Hoping I have not intruded too much on your space.
I remain, sir, yours truly,
JOHN Wm. YOUNG.
To the Editor of the “ Winefred Marvel.”
Sir, —Will you kindly allow me through your valuable paper to express
my sincere thanks to Dr. Concanon for his kind attention to my children
during their severe illness, also his kind attention to my wife during her
lying-in, © I am, sir, yours truly,
March 9th, 1875. JACOB GAT.


OTJR DIARY.
March 19th.—Since onr last date (the 6th instant) we hare had a continua-
tion of the fine weather that has made our passage so remarkable, and
the very moderate gale we had off the Cape did not last 24 hours, so we
have not up to this date had a good run.
We are bound to make a long passage, but still I trust a safe one. Distance
run, 2000 miles. G-. M. MAXTED, Captain.
Why is all so quite and still around,
And those? groups so eagerly talking.
And naught disturbed by the slightest
sound,
As the vessel’s onward walking ?
’Tis that monster Death, with an iron
hand,
Has seized on one of our crew
Of the Winefred tax from the land
Of his birth, to say adieu.
LINES ON
Ten thousand miles we have been,
Yet Brisbane’s port we have not seen;
Our Winefred is speeding fast,
We hope to meet that land at last.
Our voyage true has been full long,
But the wind has not been strong
That carries us across the main,
To that land we hope to gain.
THE SAILOR’S
Sleep, noble salt, the tapering mast,
Ho more you’ll climb on high,
To scan the ocean wide and vast,
And sing out “ Ship Ahoy.”
THE VOYAGE.
POET’S CORNER.
DEATH.
To his aged father, with silver hair,
Who longs for his absent son,
And vainly calls on the evening air,
To send back him that is gone.
Ah! little he thinks that the ocean
deep
Holds the last of his roving boy
And that now he sleep* Hie long, long
sleep,
In a land of eternal joy.
Now of calms we have had enough,
And have changed the smooth tor rough,
Yet Brisbane’s port is far away;
Go, Winefred without delay.
On the eighth of March we passed
The Cape of Good Hope at last,
And by the skill of G. Maxted,
To Brisbane goes «ur Winefred.
G. HUNTER
ADVERTISEMENTS.
TO OUR READERS.
The whole of the numbers of the Winefred Marvel , will, on our arrival at Queens-
land, be forwarded to England by the first mail leaving Brisbane, to be reprinted in
book form. Passengers wishing their friends to have a copy of the same, should,
when they write home, recommend them to procure the publication from
Mr. HETHERINGTON,
“MARVEL OFFICE,” UXBRIDGE, MIDDLESEX ;
or the Editor on this ship will, upon the receipt of One SHILLING-, undertake to send
a copy of the work, as soon as it is ready, to any address, either in Queensland 01
England, POST FREE.
BIRTHS.—Feb. 22nd, the wife of Mr. Jacob Gay, of a daughter.
Feb, 22nd, the wife of Mr. George Child, of a daughter.


ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 11,
Saturday, March 27, 1875,
One Penny .
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the “ Winefeed Marvel.”
IR, —I beg to disagree in a statement made in the Wine free! Marvel
of 20th inst., viz : —“ On the eve of S. Patrick a glass of grog
was given to all the single and married men, and on Saint’s-day
Now, sir, I was neither the donor or receiver; at the same time it would
have given me much pleasure to have been on the donor’s side.
I think the words “ steerage passengeis” should have been adepd to the
clause I have brought before your notice.
lam, sir, yours most respectfully. H. J. SPARSHOTT.
[We had no intention of giving offence to any of the second cabin
passengers in the notice referred to, and were greatly surprised at receiving
the above.— Ed. W. M.]
To the Editor of the “ Wiitefred Marvel.”
Dear Sir, —Kindly allow me a small corner of your paper to publicly
thank Dr. Concanon for is kind attention to my wife during her confinement,
and the illness which followed it. I am sure that no gentleman could
be more attentive to the sick then he is, and I thank God for placing us


under such a skilful man. It is entirely owing to his careful treatment that
my wife, who was in great danger, is indebted for her recovery.
I am, sir, yours truly, GEORGE CHILD.
OUR VOYAGE.
We have not had a hard gale or squall, and only a few hours’ heavy sea
The strong winds we have had never lasted the whole twenty-four hours
277 miles being the best run, and that was in West longitude. Thirty
days the distance was under 100 miles ; and twenty-nine days over, but
under one hundred and fifty, yet only twenty-one hours’ calm, and about
1$ in., of rain.
Highest temperature in tropics, 88 deg.; mean, 84 deg.
In IST. zone, 60 dog.; S. zone, 55 deg. Throughout the passage barometer
has been low ; sea very smooth ; atmosphere hazy ; lightning very little.
ABSTRACT LOG OF THE WINEFEED'S PASSAGE
From the Start, t)ec. 25th, 1874 to Mar. 25th, 1875,
ing the daily and hourly average for every twenty days, number of
miles sailed, and distance from Moreton Bay.
March 25th.
G. M. MAXTED, 'Captain;


WITH THE WATER NYMPHS.
HAST Sunday evening the occupants of the lower deck, in the single
women’s compartment, were thrown into a great state of
excitement. On that evening we experienced (for the first time
during the voyage) a really heavy sea, causing but little
discomforture or alarm to any of the passengers until about half-past ten
o’clock, when loud shrieks were heard issuing from our youngladies’ quarters
Miss Ohiddellwho, during the illness of the Matron, has undertaken many
of her arduous duties at once descended to the scene, and being unable to
convince the frightened occupants that nothing was the matter, it became
necessary for her to send for the Surgeon-Superintendent, who, in company
with Mr Hethermgton, proceeded to the abode of the fair nymphs, in
order to quell the disturbance. On their arrival, a scene presented itself not
likely to be forgotten for many years. It appears that the hatchway
leading to the married people's compartment had not been sufficiently
battened down, an immense wave had the audacity to precipitate itself
immediately over it forcing about a ton of water into the ’tween decks. This
soon found its way into the girls’ compartment, who became so alarmed at
Neptune’s intrusion that it was quite a difficult task to assure them of their
safety. The cries of the poor girls were painful, at the same time most
laughable Oh, save us !” “What is tire matter!” “We are being drowned,”
“lam not ready to die !” “ The ship has sprung a leak !” “Lordsave us in
our wickedness!” and such like exclamations were heard from all sides.
Many poor girls -were found in tears, whilst others laughed. Here and there
fair forms, clothed only in night dresses, could be discerned making an
effort to quit their wet beds, and obtain shelter in a friend’s bunk above.
Others attempted to cross over to the opposite side, but in their journey
came only to grief. The amount of water all over the deck, and the rolling
of the ship caused many a damsel to measure her length on the wet floor.
Dr. Concanon in the dilemma, called all the married constables into the
compartment, who, under his direction, and with the assistance of Mr. Moss
(the popular and obliging third officer), went to work with innumerable
buckets, swabs, &c., and finally succeeded in bailing out the water, and
making the place dry and comfortable again. It was not for two hours
afterwards that the girls were satisfied that no danger existed, in spite of
the humorous statements made by their worthy Doctor to convince them.
As a final, and to cause a joke, Dr. Concanon, with Mr. Hetherington
carrying a large umbrella over himself, visited all round, and wished one
and all a good night, amid roars of laughter, which made them soon forget
their troubles, and look upon the whole affair as a jolly piece of amusement.
LECTURE.
Dr. Concanon will one day during the ensuing week, deliver a lecture
Bibject, “ Queensland, and its Advantages to Emigrants.”


SANITARY REPORT.
The favourable winds which we have experienced gince our last report
bring with them the cheering prospect of a speedier arrival in Queensland
than we at that time anticipated. This seems to have acted as a powerful,
tonic on the minds and bodies of our fellow-voyagers and to have exercised
a salutary effect on the health of the invalids.
If our present freedom from infectious disease continues, we have reason-
able prospects of escaping the much-dreaded quarantine. Meantime, while
the Surgeon-Superintendent thanks his passengers for the ready way in
which they have hitherto co-operated with him, in his endeavours to main-
tain, health and cleanliness in the vessel, he trusts that the approaching
termination of the voyage will not appear to them a reason for relaxing
their efforts in this respect.
Mr. Charles Pitkin has now been for some time convalescent from his
long and severe attack of typhoid fever, during which period his patience in
suffering, and gratitude for any slight attention showed him have been
equally manifested. His recovery is in a great measure due to the unweary-
ing and unremitting attendance given him by Messrs. Edwards and Parnell,
the two young men who so unselfishly volunteered to act as nurses on the
first outbreak of the fever.
It is our painful duty to have to record the second death among the
passengers; on the 22nd. inst., a fine little boy*aged three and a half years
(the son of Mr. and Mrs. Ross) expired in convulsions, caused by apoplectic
congestion of the brain ; he was only taken ill a few hours previously.
The health on the vessel is in a much more satisfactory condition, with
the exception of Mr. Dalrymple, a gentleman belonging to the second cabin
who is suffering from acute pueumonia (inflammation of the lungs), and
lies in a state of the utmost danger. Laura Cherry is still keeping up the
struggle for existence, which she has maintained for twelve long and anxious
weeks and we have now more hope of taking her to Brisbane. It is with
feelings of unmingled pleasure that we report the slow but sure return to
convalescence of the respected matron, Mrs. Adams.
This morning we had another addition to our population, as a young
married woman in the after compartment (going out to join her husband
who sailed a few months previous to us), was safely delivered of a little
“ocean” babe, a son of Neptune. In conclusion, we trust that the good
feeling now prevailing among the passengers will increase rather than
diminish, during the brief time they are to remain together on the bosom
of the deep.


•raw
ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE
FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
No. 12.
Saturday, March 20, 1875.
One Penny■
AHEAD ! Hurrah ! A few hours from now and we
JJa may probably drop anchor in the deep blue waters of Moreton
Bay. Hope animates every heart, and the eyes of all are
jM' continually strained landwards to gain the first sight of the
country that many of us may adopt, and in which all are anxious to realize
competence, if not wealth. Our looked-for haven is well-nigh in view;
thousand of miles of the mighty deep intervene between us and our native
homes,
‘•Yet we will not forget old friends, I But say ‘God bless old England dear,
When o’re the wave we’ve sped, | And the good ship Winefred.’ ”
Many a time and oft does memory recall the faces of our loving friends
left behind, in spite of the numerous acquaintances formed during the
passage ; to part from those who have shared the many little troubles and
pleasures of the voyage with us for the past three mouths, and whom we
have learned to regard as sisters or brothers, will cause many a tear to flow
when again separated from friends whom they love.
This in all probability, will be the last number we shall be able to print on
the ship. We cannot, therefore, conclude without a word or two respecting
the officials more closely connected with the passengers, viz. : the Surgeon-
Superintendent and the Matron (having made some remarks upon the


officers of the ship in a former number). To Dr. Concanon our warmest
thanks are due, for his unceasing efforts to promote the comfort of the
passengers ; and, as possessing the supreme authority over them, for hia
readiness in attending to grievances which have been brought before his
notice, which on this ship, as in all others, are neither few nor far between.
Dr. Concanon is a gentleman well-fitted for such an important position, and
our thanks are due to the Government authorities for having placed himt
over us. The onerous duties that devolve upon the Surgeon-Superintendent
of a ship carrying so many souls as are on board the Winefred, can only be
appreciated by those who have witnessed the untiring exertions of Dr.
Concanon; whose unremitted efforts to meet all the emergencies of the
voyage, and to contribute at once to the bodily health and to the moral and
mental 5 elevation of the emigrants committed to his charged, have called
forth our warmest approbation.
We have found a kind and considerate Matron in Mrs, Adams, who is
very generally liked by the single women under her care. Her arduous
duties connected with the management of nearly two hundred girls, evidently
produced the long illness from which only within the last few days she has
recovered. In her capacity we have always found her strict and impartial
but never severe, which has secured the respect due to her position.
OUR MATRON.
Respectfully dedicated to Mrs. ADAMS, the Matron, by an Emigrant Girl
Who greets us each mom with a smile,
E'en though her head may ache the
while,
Invents new studies time to wile ?
Our Matron.
Who moves about with gentle tread,
To see we all are safe in bed,
That sleep enshrouds each weary head ?
Our Matron,
Who cares for us when we are ill,
And sees we lack not dose or pill,
Secures for us the doctor’s skill,
Our Matron.
May fortune kind, from plenteous store,
Her richest favors on her pour,
God bless her, then, on sea and shore.—Our Matron.
TEA-PARTIES.
Who enters into all our fun,
When o’er the brim our spirits run,
With smiles as bright as anyone,
Our Matron.
Who helps to pass each weary day,
Sometimes with work, sometimes with
play,
And strives to chase dull care away,
Our Matron.
Who so patient, kind, and true ?
If we this voyage get safely through,
Our hearts will often turn to you,
Our Matron.
The last few weeks, numerous tea-parties have taken place in the single
Womens’ compartment to which the Surgeon-Superintendent Mr. Hethering-
ton and many constables’ wives have been invited. The most important of
these meetings have been under the direction of the Misses Owen, Smith, and
Pearson, one bottle of wine being given to each mess by Mr. Hetherington*


The evenings have been made very enjoyable by the harmony and good
feeling which prevailed. Numerous songs and speeches, as a matter of
course, followed each repast, much to the gratification of all concerned.
On G-ood-Friday a tea-party was given by the girls of “ Tinpot Alley” and
“Alexandra Terrace,” (names given to two rows of bunks on the upper
deck) under the conduct of Miss Rose Kimberley. Numerous dramas and
farces have been given by the girls, the characters being sustained by them
very creditably causing no end of enjoyment amongst them.
LECTURE.
Tuesday afternoon last we had a most interesting lecture from
Dr. Concanon, about the land of our adoption—Queensland
ft J There was a very large gathering of passengers, in fact, nearly
a n crowded the poop to hear something of the colony they were
so much interested in. When we consider how very heavy the duties of our
respected doctor are, we ought to give him double thanks for his kindness
in devoting any spare time to giving us a lecture so full of instruction and
amusement. On mounting the platform, the lecturer, who was loudly
appluded, suggested that the song “ Advance, Australia! which was an
appropriate one for the occasion, and known to nearly all the passengers
should be sung. This was accordingly done, and the doctor, after a few
humorous remarks, commenced by giving a brief general outline of Austra-
lia, its size and progress, geographical position, divisions, climate, &c._
Passing on more particulary to Queensland, he entered at length into its
formation into an independent colony, its exact geographical position; mode
©f government / religion and education. He then entered into the question
of the climate and productions of the colony, speaking of its fertility and
natural resources. One fact brought before our notice created much impres-
sion, viz., that while this rich and fei’tile country was eleven times the size of
England, its whole population did not amount to more thanthau of Plymouth
showing, unmistakeably, the field it afforded for enterprize and energy. The
doctor then summed up the advantages Queensland held forth as a field for
emigration, compared with America or other portions of Australia, stating
that when one looked at its vast extent of territory, its healthy climate.,
natural resources, mineral wealth, and extensive seaboard, combined with its
sapid development within the last few years, it must be seen that it only
required an increasing influx of labour and capital, to become the wealthiest
and most important division of Australia. He then advised those possess-
ing capital to gain some experienced of the colony before investing it; and
in the course of a few kind and encouraging remarks, told those who had to
depend solely on their strong arms and willing hearts, to remember the
respect entertained for labor in the colonies, and advise them to accept tha
first situations which were offered, and not to be too particular as to the
precise nature of ths work. He also refeired to the evils produced by
drink in hot climates, and warned his hearers to resist its temptation.


Turning to topics connected with the voyage, Dr. Concanon congratulated
the passengers on the small per-centage of deaths, the fevers not having
spread, and our prospect of escaping the much-dreaded quarantine. He then
thanked them for their exceptionally good conduct during the voyage, and
their ready acquiescence in all his arrangements, and after enlarging a little
on this subject, he spoke in the highest manner of Mr. Meagher, the school-
master, and also of the constables ; with regard to the latter, he said that if
ne had to make another selection he would pick exactly the same men whom
he selected four months ago.
Addressing each compartment seperately, he told the young women how
scarce domestic servants were in Queensland, and how much they were
valued, receiving high wages, much liberty, and consideration from their
mistresses. He reminded them that they were going out under exception-
ally favourable circumstances, being conducted by Mr. Hetherington, a
gentleman of great experience in emigration, and who not only
had shewn himself their best friend on board the ship, but would exert
himself to get them good and comfortable situations on landing.
The doctor regretted that his duties had prevented him from partici-
pating as much as he could have wished in the various amusements which
had gone on, but said that Mr. Hetherington had been most zealous and
untiring in his efforts to produce enjoyment and good spirits, and had given
much time and energy to the preparation and publication of his marvellous
little paper, which had been a source of much pleasure to so many on board
and which would be so interesting a momento of the voyage to send to our
friends at home. He went on to say that it must be very gratifying to Mr.
Hetherington to know that his exertions had been rewarded by the general
popularity which he so deservedly enjoyed.
In reference to himself, Dr. Concanon stated that it had been his constant
object to carry out the instructions of the Queensland Government, and to
promote the health and comfort of the passengers ; and his duties had been
made more pleasant by the feelings of respect and sympathy which he enter-
tained towards them; respect for the pluck and enterprizethey had exhibited
in voluntarily leaving their native country to cross the mighty ocean and settle
in a new and distant land; sympathy, for their present position, far from
home and friends.
He went on to say, that when some who were now present saw in after
years their children and grand-children thriving and prosperous, some
earning their bread in comfort, others in positions of independence, and
others perhaps wealthy and among the great ones of that land, by which
that time would itself be great; and when they contrasted their position in
Queensland with that which it would have been at home, striving to earn a
bare subsistence, jostled by their fellow-workers in the daily struggle for
existence; and when they look back and remember that they owed their
prosperity to the step which they were now taking, in so wisely and bravely-
leaving the over-populated country of their birth, they would bless the day
they left Great Britain, and the good old ship that carried them over. At


this point the doctor was interrupted by a burst of applause, after which he
resumed, saying, that the picture which he set before them was no fool’s
paradise, but likely to turn out a reality to all those who would combine
perseverance with sobriety and industry. Without these, he reminded his
hearers, success could not be achieved ; and he bade them bear this in mind
that in every country, new or old, the drunkard and the idler must sink into
poverty and obscurity.
He concluded his remarks by thanking the audience for the kind way in
which they had listened to him ; and assured them, that when the time of
parting came, and he wished them “ God-speed.” they would carry with
them his warmest wishes for their health, long life, and prosperity in their
new homes.
On the conclusion of the lecture (which occupied about an hour and a
half), the audience, which throughout had been most attentive, sang the
song entitled, “The good Ship Winefred,”and gave three hearty cheers to Dr.
Concanon, for the interesting treat he had afforded. The lecturer’s style
was particularly clear and easy, one subject appeared to follow the other so
naturally that the attention of the hearers was kept up throughout. Every
one present must have gained much valuable information; the road seems so
clear to success and fortune in Queensland, that it is indeed a matter of
surprise that any difficulty is experienced in England in persuading people
to come at once to such a prosperous and flourishing country.
POET’S CORNER.
“CAFFLING MARTIN.”
The hour was late, and most in bed
On board the good ship Winefred,
And surely time upon the deep
For peaceful men to go to sleep;
Where no night gambols ever be
Upon the lonesome trackless sea;
But no, it could not be the case
Which made night walkers in the place;
The “process sarver’’told the whole,
And Martin says he’d smash his poll,
And swears by the deck on which he stood
He’d left his country for his country’s
A table and a pack of cards [good.
Were in the midst of four blackguards,
The queen was quickly led by Thady,
Jack threw the king and deuced the lady;
Pat Murphy stole a lonely trump,
Martin levelled him ’neath the bunk;
Tin pots flew round in every quarter,
The wooden floor was drenched with
water.
Hunter called out for the watch,
In oaths half English and half Scotch ;
The watch came to the scene of riot,
And soon put things again to quiet.
The combatants were soon arrested,
But Martin got off unmolested,
For lying gently in his bunk
He showed a face would shame
monk
Hunter looked as he was parting,
And saw a grin on '• Caffling Martin.”
BIRTH.—On the 10th inst., the
DEATH.—On the 3rd inst., Mr.
the wife of Mr. W. Lancefi
Mr. Alfred Hoole, aged 20.
■. W. Lancefield, of a daughter.


POET’S CORKER
MORNING MEDITATION.
Whoever she is, and wherever she dwells,
Over the land, or over the sea :
However she looks, and whatever she thinks,
Somehow or somewhere she will meet with me ;
What is her stature, great or small;
Does she walk the poop with a queenly tread 5
Or glides she forth like a starry saint,
Meekly bowing her gentle head.
Whet are her eyes? what hue? what form?
Is it brown, or gold, her hair ?
Is she some maiden sweet and shy,
Or is she a lady, proud and fair.
What are her thoughts, are they light or wise,
Does she laugh and sing, as the days go by;
Or sits she pensive upon the poop,
Building up castles, in yon broad sky?
Ok THE DEATH of JOHN JACOBSON, A.B. SEAMAN,
Who died on the Winefred,
February 28th, 1875.
What is this that steals along our ship? I The
It is death ! H is
Which soon shall quench the vital Bey
flame
The monster, Death, has lost his sting.
His happy soul is on the wing,
Beyond the grave he now doth sing
Before his King.
Tune tune your hearts, ye heavenly
throng,
Bright angels are from glory come,
They wait to waft his spirit home,
To that bright land
The same cold death so soon may come,
And call thee forth to meet thy doom
Before thy Judge.
Come, then, ye young and thoughtless
Of life
If this is death, we soon slall be
From every pain and sorrow free,
And shall the King of Glory see,
If all is well.
But hush! another soul is stepping bn the
shore,
He struggles and his trial is nearly o’er,
Hark the death knell
His soul is free from every fear,
We hope he now can read his title clear,
Before his Judge.
Cease, cease to weep ye friends so dear,
Christ can pardon, set him free
From all his sins
ones
What is your hope beyond the tomb ?
From folly turn.
Come, then, begin the Christian race
And seek your God.
MARGARET ANDERSON
His limbs are stiff; he moves not; he is dead;
They buried him ; the Captain the prayers read.
Wide was the field around, but ’twas not land,
He lies beneath the billows on the sand ;
His pillow has no cover but the surf,
He has no mark arou»d, nor any turf,
In his cold bed he slumbers ’neath the wave,
Then let ua love the sea because it is—his grave.
J. Chapman*


ON BOARD THE WINEFRED DURING HER VOYAGE
FROM
LONDON TO BRISBANE.
Supplementary Number.
The following is an extract from the “ Toowoomba Chronicle a Queen-
sland Newspaper, of August, 7.
On Saturday night last thirty single women, thirty-one single men
and one married couple arrived at the Toowoomba depßt, many of
them having been engaged at Brisbane depot for this district. On
Monday last we had an opportunity of seeing some of the new ar-
rivals, who appear to be of a class most suitable to the colony. Of the
single girls we cannot speak too highly, evidently they are superior to
the immigrants usually sent to us. The Winefred has actually intro-
duced a first-rate lot of domestic servants (nearly 200) who have been
carefully selected by one of Mr. Daintree’s most energetic agents, a
Mr. F. W. Hetherington who we understand, has already succeeded
in forwarding to the Australian colonies no less than 8000 persons.
Mr. Hetherington personally conducts the young women having un-
dertaken to procure employment for every one who would accompany
him to Queensland, a promise which he will have no difficulty in ful-
filling. as nearly all of his party have effected engagements at a fair
rate of wages. Mr. Hetherington intends to remain in the colony for
a few weeks in order, before leaving for England, to obtain a thorough
knowledge, from personal observation of the southern labour market


so that he may be able to point out from his own observation, ene
great material advantages offered by Queensland to all kinds of labour,
but especially to domestic servants in which class he more particularly
interests himself.
The Winefred has had a somewhat lengthy voyage the passenger®
having been on board no less than 1,28 days. To relieve the
the voyage a ship paper entitled the Winefred Marvel was printed
and published nearly every week on board by Mr. Hetherington,
sold to the passengers at one penny per copy. It is printed on a
quarto and contains the usual ship news, reports of entertain nents,
poetry, &c. The circulation of this marvellous newspaper exceeded,
we are informed 300 per week, and must have served to create much
amusement on board. We shall probably make some extracts from i^
on a future occasion.
On arrival of the Winefred at Moreton Bay, Mr. Hetherington was
called unexpectedly to the Poop-square, where all the young women
had assembled, when one of their number read aloud the following
very pleasing address.
, “ Ship Winefred, April 9th, 1875.
From the Single Women’s compartment.
To Mr. F. W. Hetherington.
Dear Mr. Hetherington, at the close of our voyage from London to
Brisbane, we feel that we cannot part from you without endeavouring,
however inadequately, to express our since gratitude for your uniform
kindness, and untiring atteniton to us during the voyage. We thorough-
ly appreciate the many acts of kindness you have shown us, and are
exceedingly grateful for the efforts you have made to relieve the
monotony of the voyage, by the concerts and other entertainments
you were the means of promoting. We now reluctantly bid you fare-
well, wishing you a pleasant sojourn in Queensland, a rapid and safe
passage back to England, and a future career of happiness and
prosperity.” [ Here follows 170 signatures.]
Mr. Hetherington expressed his thanks, and made an appropriate
reply to this public mark of respect in which he stated that he should
ever remember the happy hours he had spent whilst on the Winefred,
and the pleasant faces that then surrounded him. He assured them
that when the time of parting came they would carry with them his
warmest wishes for their future welfare. He remided them that it
was his intention to remain in the colony for a short time and during
his stay should they need a friend to help them in any difficulty, to
lely upon him.
[The number of emigrants remaining in the depot, and engaged at 9
p.m., last evening were—Single women, 4 ; single men, 14. Total, 18.7


LETTERS
FROM
FOUNG WOMEN IN QUEENSLAND
Salt Bush Park, St. Lawrence,
Ist October, 1 '
Dear Sir,
i I now take this opportunity of acceding to your request
that I would write and let you know how I liked the colony. lam
glad to be able to say I like it very much indeed. I have been here
eleven months, and five months of the time in the heart of the bush,
being about fifteen or sixteen miles from any house, and although
when I first came out here I was really quite useless as to anything
that is required of servants out here, I found ladies were not only
willing, but able to shew you what they wished done and how to do
it. And although you cannot get parlourmaids’, and, in fact, not many
housemaids’ situations, yet I have given a fair trial, and I think
service out here is far preferable to service at home. I am getting
£32 a year which is exactly double what I had at home, and I never
had such good health in my life as I have had since I have been out
here. The voyage was not so bad as I expected it would be, of course
at first I was very sick, and it was not very pleasant, but after the
first month I really enjoyed it. Ido not think there are many of my
shipmates that regret coming, and I am quite sure I do not. Trusting
you are well, I remain, yours truly,
~X FANNY KING.
To Mr. Hetherington.
■ G
[We are favoured by Mrs. Squire, of 55, Montague Road, Uxbridge ,
with the following letter just received by her parents from her sister.]
Queensland, July 25th, 1874.
My Dearest Father and Mother,
You must be anxiously waiting to hear from me. In the first


place I must tell you this really is a beautiful country. We had a
very good passage out indeed. The matron was not quite strict
enough, it was her first voyage out, also the doctor’s. We fared very
well on board. The passengers’ cook used to fry us pancakes and
make us pies and bake us potatoes, and we used to club together and
the matron would have a cup with us. The girls used to be allowed
to see their friends from two till four o’clock ; directly the four bells
rung the matron used to go and fetch them up on their own deck.
When we were in the tropics we were allowed to stay up on deck
until ten o’clock. We had five deaths on board, one poor man left a
widow and five children ; the captain’s cook was another, he died of
consumption, and there were three babies. I received your letter about
four days after I had been at the depot and I got the_ order changed
all right. We had as much as we could eat on the ship and used to
have soft bread every other day. Everything is dreadfully dear out
here, cheese is Is. Bd. a lb., butter, 2s. ; meat is very cheap ; bonnet
shapes are 2s. each. You should see the people stare at us when we
walk out; they call us the “ new chums.” Our vessel only went as
far as Keppel Bay and then the steamer came and took us on to
Rockhampton ; we arrived there at about 11 o’clock at night. There
were numbers of people there waiting to see us come in ; they say in
the afternoon there were thousands waiting. There is a great demand
for servants and barmaids. The next day there was a lot of people
come for girls — one lady took quite a fancy to and pressed me bo
hard to go with her, that I have given up all thoughts of the telegraph,
and have took a general servant’s place at this lady’s ; she is going to
give me 15s. a week—fancy, mother, getting that in England. I must
tell you when you arrive here at the depot they are very particular
who you go to and what place you take. I must say the Queensland
emigration people do the thing properly ; they carry out every-
thing to the letter, and if girls want to get on I say come out to
Queensland. When you write address the letter to Miss E. Smith,
Port Mackay, Queensland, Australia, to be left till called for. They
have meat and potatoes here every meal; this is the country to live.
"Where I live is in the bush, close to a sugar plantation. When Igo to
town I have to go on a horse. I have had four offers of marriage
since I have been here, but I thought it best to wait a little while. I
had an offer while I was on board, a good offer too, a gentlemen going
out to a farm he has there. He said he had to come to England on
business, but as that was finished he was going out again. He said he
should not lose sight of me. Give my love to' Loo and Arthur. I
will write next mail a longer letter as Ido not want to miss this. I
remain, dearest father and mother, your affectionate daughter,
E. SMITH.
Ipswich, Queensland, June,
My Dear Sister,
I dare say you have received my first letter by this time;


I received yours a fortnight after I landed. I am getting on first-rate.
I stayed in Brisbane five weeks, but I like Ipswich much better. It is
a very clean, pretty little town. I have a room with Sarah , now
Mrs. , whom I had the pleasure of meeting out here, and go out
dressmaking from eight in the morning to six in the evening ; so I
have my Sundays and my evenings to myself, and I am out of the
bondage of service. As I look back at the past I can truly say that
the best day’s work I ever did was to come out here. I only wish you
would come, and dear father how he would enjoy the change! Every-
thing has turned out lucky for me, I have the promise of constant
work, and I hope by the time you receive this letter I shall have a
machine of my own to work at home in the evening. I hope you do
not fret about me. I speak as I find it, and I have a great deal to be
grateful for. Try and get your courage up to come. The sea is not
so dreadful as people make out it is. There is the sea sickness, but
you get over that. Emma was quite wrong about our not wanting
our silk dresses out here. I can assure you we like to dress here as
well as at home, and it is just the same style of dress, only the
fashions do not get out here till two months after you have them in
England. I have left Ellen in Brisbane, because her time was not up,
so when you receive this I hope to have her with me. We shall get
on very well, I think, if, please God, we have our health. It is not
so hot as people say it is ; it is cold night and morning in this our
winter; but I am in just the same clothing as I would be at home in
the spring or autumn ; and we have such lovely sunsets, —you never
see the like at home. Servants have to work very hard, but they get
very high wages. I had a pound note for my first fortnight’s pay ; I
might have stayed in England for ever and a day and not got that. I
did a lot of work coming over. There was a box of work, and any
one who liked to make the things had them on landing. Ellen, too,
did some. So you see we are bound to get on. I would like to cress
and re-cross the sea once more; but that I daresay will newer be, and
I can make myself very comfortable here. I carry a lighter heart
than I have for many a long day. Brisbane is a topping place. I
must tell you more about it next time.
Your ever time and loving sister,
MAEY BETTS.
[ The following is a letter from Fanny Court , one of the young women
who accompanied Mr. F. W. Hetherivgton , in his emigration pturty to
Queensland , hy the good ship “ Winefred .”
Toowomba,
July 14th, 1875.
Dear Grandfather and Grandmother, _ _
I write you those few lines hoping to find you in good health
as this leaves me well at present. I landed safe in Brisbane. When
1 first went on board I was sea sick for about a week, and then I en->


joyed myself for the remainder of the voyage. We used to have con-
certs on board all the way over, and we had a very good matron and
doctor. I did not stay at Brisbane, but went on to Toowomba.
Some of the girls got married in Brisbane, and some stayed there.
I stayed in Toowomba depot for one day and night, and then I en-
gaged with Mrs. McGoldrich. I had two chances of being married,
and would not accept them, from monied men. I enclose you a por-
trait that I got taken : I thought it would please you. You can get
any sort of meat for 4d. a pound. Tell Mrs. Hancock I oould not
find out her sister anywhere. So I must conclude with fond love to
you, to Mrs. Shekel! and Miss Shekell, and Mr. Rogers, and all en-
quiring friends. 000
Your beloved grandchild,
FANNY COURT.
WIEY IT©'BJ]S'Cr WOMES «•© QXTJEEarSXJLW® ?
1. Because they can obtain employment, as soon as they land,
at from £26 to £4O per annum with board and lodging.
2. Because the excess of male over female population is so
great, and the proportion of marriages so high, that they have oppor-
tunities of bettering their condition not offered in older countries ;
and thus the demand for servants is likely to continue for many
years, and wages rule high.
3, Because the interval between servants and mistress is not so
great as in Britain, and the latter position, the laudable ambition of
all deserving females, is more easily reached.
4. Because being a yonng colony in course of development,
females have a better opportunity of following pursuits congenial to
their wishes.
5. Because the institutions of the colony are British, education
free, and untrammelled by State.
6. Because, if married, and their husbands are prudent, they
would have less harassing anxiety about the future of their children ;
youths have better prospects than in an overcrowded country.
8. Because no girls are required to work at rough or degrading
employment.
9. Because the climate is temperate, equable and healthy.
10. The native-born Queenslanders are a temperate people ; the
use of fruits, which grow so luxuriously, happily takes the place of
strong drink.
11. Because, although they go as free passengers, female domes-
tic servants are left entirely free to engage with whom they please,
at whatever terms their services can command, or persue any calling
they choose to follow.


LETTERS
FROM
YOUNG MEN IN QUEENSLAND.
Rockhampton,
June 22 1874.
Dear Mother and Father,
I write these few lines to you hoping to find you quite well,
as it leaves me at present. lam now taking the pleasure of sending
you £5 which I promised you. I should have sent it before but did
not know how far I should have to travel. No doubt you thought 1
had quite forgot you, but I kept my word as I said I would. Pleas*
pay the little I owe. They don’t think no more of a pound out
here than you do of five shillings at home. Dear Mother, I have
had this letter registered right from here to England, it will not
be paid to any one but you. All you have to do is to take it to the
post office and get the money. Tell father that I cannot send him any
tobacco home, it is rather too far off; but be sure dnd get him some
out of the money. If I had him over here with me I would soon
put some money in his pocket far easier than knocking them boards
about for 15s. a-week. I have now plenty of clothes to my back,
and more pounds in my pocket than I should have had pence if I
had stopped in England, If you are in any trouble or want, please
write to me at once, say how much you want, and I shall be pleased
to send it at once. If any ask you about the country, tell them,
from me, that if they are already comfortable to stop where they
are, but if they want money to come out here. I never regret the
day when I left old England, If I have luck I shall have a run
home in a few years time, but I do not say that I shall stop. Give
my love to Mrs. Hawthorne, George Cripps, and all enquiring friends,
I remsin your affectionate son,
GEORGE TAPLIN.
To Mrs. Taplin, Harlington, sear Uxbridge.


Queensland, Sept. 3.
Sir,
I write to tell you that we arrived out here quite safe on
the 4th of August, and we bad a good voyage out here. We had no
sickness out, and I like the country very much. I got into work as
soon as we landed at Brisbane in the depot. You can do as you
like with this letter, sir. I only wish that I had come out here be-
fore, as I am getting my 7s. per day for eight hours. I only wish
my brother would come out here, and all my friends, for this is thr
country to live in. Beef for breakfast, dinner, and supper, and I
know they cannot live on beef all day in England. Everything 's
cheap out here ; you can buy horses for 10s. each. You can ge* a
house and eight acres of land for £7 a year; and you cannot rent a
house in England for that money. I should like for any working-
man to come out here —not to work for 15s. a-week when they can
get it in two days out here. Who would not come to Queensland,
sir? I am eighteen miles north of Brisbane, what they call Pine
Eiver. Tell them all to come out here to do well and to save a for-
tune, and not starve in England as they do.
From yours obediently,
ANDREW GURDLER,
To Mr. F. W. Hetherington Formerly of Uxbridge
March Gth,
My Dear Mother,
I sit down to write these few lines to you hoping they will
find you happy and well as, thank God, it leaves mo at present. We
got to London quite safe, and afterwards embarked on the ship
and towed away by the “ John Bull” steam ship out of
the East India Bocks as far as Greenhitho, we laid at anchor
there for the night, and then we steamed away for Gravesend,
and there laid at anchor till Saturday morning, when we
took a farewell look at England. Our ship was piloted by the steam-
ship ail round the coast by the Isle of Wight and Dover and Calais.
We had such a lovely view of the once dear old England, where wo
had spent so many happy hours. When we got to the mouth of the
Channel the steam pilot left, and we gave three hearty cheers, and
parted for the new land, or what we may call the “ new home.” We
sailed round the Bay of Biscay, where we had some rough weather,
but we kept up our spirits by singing and playing at cards. I very
much enjoyed the sailing of the ship : the sailors called me “happy
go-lucky.” lam always busy on deck, and when the meals are ready
they call me. Dear mother I have fallen in with two cronies, and
we are jolly enough together, smoking, singing, and dancing. I will tell
you their names, Mr. Blake and family and Thomas Marks, and now
we are fairly out on the high seas. We have passed many islands
and are now passing the coast of Spain, whose peak stands twelve
thousand one hundred and ninety-two feet in height. The Islands


tere are all inhabited. We have Divine Service on Sunday morning
and afternoon, and we have a concert twice a week—vocal and in-
strumental which we all enjoy very much. We see many fishes,
such as porpoises, whales, sharks, and flying fish. We have such a
jolly game at trying to harpoon them, but they are too knowing to
let us do so. June Ist.—We arrived in the bay near Port Denison
and lay at anchor till the 4th of June ; the water was so low that wo
had to be landed in small boats ; then we went into the depot to get
our new masters, who were there very soon and engaged such as they
wanted. After a week’s spree we started on our journey which was
40 miles distant. We arrived here June 12th. We travelled in
bullock drays through the bush, where the blacks run wild, but they
are afraid of you, for as soon as they see you they utter a yell and
run away. I and a mate are engaged to the same masters and we are very
happy, we are in the bush about a mile and a half from the masters
house. We are engaged at 35 h a year with rations which are four-
teen pounds of beef with tea and sugar for a week, and is brought to
us. We have plenty of sport, shooting the wild pigs and kangeroos,
of which there are plenty. When we want a horse we go and catch
one. Give my love to my sister and that “ torment,” tell her to be
a good girl, for she has only her poor dear grandmother to look up to.
Tell her that if she is a good girl her uncle will think of her when he
takes some money. Give my kindest love to Mr. and Mrs. Maulden.
So now X conclude with love to all, from your ever truly as.d obe-
dient son,
ALBERT EDWARD TEAGUE.
(Formerly of Uxbridge.)
———o
Too-woomba, Queensland.
January 10th, i
[After requesting that we will communicate with his wife’s father
and mother and family, and obtain free passages for them to Too
woomba to join him, the writer goes on to say,]—Dear Sir, —This is a
small letter that you can put in print from me. I am very glad that
I came out here, for this is a fine country for any young man to come
to ; there is plenty of beef to be got, that is what there is not in Eng-
land; and if you know any body that is any way backward in coming
out, you can tell them from me that it would be the best day’s work
they ever did is to come out here, for the wages are double they are
at home, and I should like to see some one come fromWoolwich. There
is no one coming from that quarter, and I think if there was anyone to
go to that place, there is any amount that would come from there. If this
should meet the eye of any of my old mates in Woolwich, I take the
liberty to advise them to leave a place of starvation and come to a
country where there is plenty, for I am very glad that I left England
and come out to Queensland —for if I worked at home all Bay life


time, I should not get anymore than 18s.per week, but out here yo*
can get from 365. to 60s. per week, and any one that is steady can put
by a little for their old age, but in England I am sure they cannot
live on their wages, so it either comes to begging or the union in the
latter end. I should advise any one to come out here, and if there
is anyone coming, and they will enquire for me, I will give them all the
information I can, for Queensland is the place to emigrate to. This is
from an old resident of Woolwich.
GEORGE TINKER,
Lately employed in the Royal Dockyard
To Mr. F. W. Hetherington.
October 4th,
Bundalberg.
Sir, —Having experienced two months’ in the colony, I now take
the pleasure of writing these few lines to you. I was an emigrant by
the ship St. James , which left Gravesend in April, 1874, bound for
Maryborough; she was a splendid ship, and made an excellent passage.
We had a splendid time of it coming out, with concerts several times
a week, which usually lasted two or three hours ; and plenty of pro-
visions there is no mistake about it. This is a splendid country, plenty
of everything that anybody could wish for; there is no stint of any
thing. There is a great demand for labour here and wages are very
high and getting higher every month; the w r ages here for farm
labourers is forty-five pounds a-year, and all found, and it was only
this week that I was offered fifty, which I should have took had I not
been under an engagement. I send this letter hoping you will publish
it in your abstracts as you asked me to do at Gravesend, hoping it
will meet the eyes of the existing poor wretches of farm labourers
who now, at the present time, are striving with a wife and family on
eighteen shillings per week in the old country. Had I have thought
that this country was half so flourishing as it is, I would have been
out here years ago. I do not write this to entice my fellow countrymen
out here to a country sixteen thousand miles from home. This I hope
wiil bring hundreds of poor creatures to a country flowing with milk
and honey; it is now summer time coming and it is pretty warm. I
would advise anyone coming out here not to bring any more clothing
than is absolutely necessary for the voyage, because it is putting them
to a lot of expense at home where they might have that much in their
pocket, and not only that, for while they have the home style on them
they have the pleasure of sseinc; a new chum while thev wear them
Please to put this in print fy t
THOS. JAMES.




f— FOR
'EBORATIOB AST BDFFIR6
INTELLIGENCE
of your nearest News-agent
Order
This paper is devoted to the interests of the
working Class ; and should be read by all who have
any Idea of EMIGRATING or by those SEEKING
(EMPLOYMENT IN ENGLAND.
Any person can insert in the New Weekly Newspaper, the
“Universal Register, ” j
which circulates throughout England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales,
AN ADVERTISEMENT FOR ONE PENNY.
The Best and Cheapest Medium for notices of
Situations (vacant or wanted),to be Sold,Let,orExchanged '
& Such Advertisements are inserted at the uniform
rate of One Penny Per Line of Nine Words
, and may be sent direct to the Publisher—
Mr F. Hetherington, 185, High Street,
Uxbridge, W.
ondon— Jd aeshall & Sons, i 2 3.
N '-x , 'LL-. —, _ ~~ ~
