









On the Bth of March, 1806, two years after the founding
of Hobart by Collins, a boy was born at London Place,
Hackney, London, to whom was given the name of Frederick.
His ancestors had apparently been Londoners for genera-
tions, for there is a record of the marriage of his grandfather,
John Miller, on 30th January, 1758, at St. Martin’s-in-the-
Fields.
Of John Miller’s 14 children, four only had survived
infancy, viz., two daughters, and two sons, Henry and John.
At the time when this story opens, Llenry Miller was in
the service of the Bank of England, but he died in January,
1815, at the age of 45, leaving his widow with two daughters,
Susanna and Wilhelmina, and one son, Frederick.
The loss of his father gave a shock to this boy of tender
years, from which he never entirely recovered.
Fie was, in due course, sent to school, at an Academy at
Cambridge Heath, London, conducted by a Mr. Thompson.
Fie was duly confirmed in the Church of England,
attending a Church called the Episcopal Jews’ Chapel, with his
mother and sisters; but, in spite of the earnestness of the
clergyman, and his mother’s piety, Mr. Miller’s outlook
on life, as he grew up and began to prepare for his chosen
profession of an Architect, was mainly through the medium
of novels and plays.
He was conscious of receiving an impression from a con-
versation with a minister, a Mr. Hawtrey, and later from a
.sermon by John Angela James, of Birmingham, and at last
he began to study the Bible, but only to weary himself with
fruitless speculations on the mysteries of God’s providence and
government.
In July, 1825, he heard with feelings of most intense
interest and anxiety a series of sermons on the work of the
1


Holy Spirit, preached in the Caledonian Church, Hatton
Garden, by the Rev. Mr. Irving, and the crisis of his life was
reached at a service conducted by the Rev. Dr. Burder, whose
text was “Who is on the Lord’s side?”
Mr. Miller, being then 19 years of age, joined Dr.
Burder’s Church, which met in the Independent Chapel, St.
Thomas’s Square, London.
Two years later, he entered Highbury College, Islington,
as a student for the Ministry.
He had thus definitely abandoned the position of a
spectator of the drama of human life, and had enlisted for
active service in the army of the Cross.
While he was at the College, the Resident Tutor informed
the students that he had received from the London Missionary
Society a letter written to them by Mr. and Mrs. Henry
Hopkins, asking if the Society would send a Minister to Hobart
Town, and assist in building a Chapel there, and saying that
they would be glad to entertain the Minister till the Church
to be formed could support him.
The London Missionary Society, feeling that such work
was beyond their province, suggested that any student, who
might be led to volunteer, should communicate with the Com-
mittee of the College.
At length Mr. Miller, with the approval of the College
Committee, accepted this opportunity for Service, arrangements
for his passage being made by a then well-known gentleman,
Mr. Thomas Wilson, of Highbury, London, and other friends.
Mr. Miller was then engaged to his cousin, Elizabeth
Miller, who lived at Greenwich, and, on 7th February, 1830,
at St. John’s Church, Hackney, they were married, he being
nearly 24, and she about two years younger.
Mr. Miller was ordained on 23rd April, 1830, at Dr.
Burder’s Church, St. Thomas’s Square, Hackney. The fol-
lowing Ministers took part in the service':— .


The Rev. Joseph Slatterie, of Chatham, the Rev. Robert
Halley, the Rev. George Collison, Tutor at Hackney Academy,
the Rev. John Pye Smith, D.D., Theological Tutor
at Homerton College, and the Rev. Henry Townley, formerly
Missionary at Calcutta.
The Charge was delivered by the Rev. Dr. Burder from
1 Timothy iv.: 15, 16. “Meditate upon these things; give
“ thyself wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all.
“Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue
“in them: for in doing this- thou shalt both save thyself, and
“ them that hear thee.”
In the course of the Charge, Dr. Burder said: —“You, my
“ dear Brother, if a guardian providence permit, are to settle
“ in a far distant land, but little known to us.
“You will naturally feel interested in inquiring into its
“ peculiarities of soil and climate and production. This
“ curiosity will not need to be altogether repressed, but it will
“ need to be restrained within the limits of due subordination.
“It is important to keep in mind that you are not to be
“ ambitious of the reputation of a naturalist, or a botanist, or
“ a mineralogist, any more than you are to be ambitious of the
gains of an agriculturist, or a merchant.
“You go out with higher aims. You are to be occupied
“in nobler pursuits. Your concern is not with the soil or its
“ productions, but with its living and dying population. You
“ go to save souls from death —souls in danger of the wrath to
“ come.”
Mr. Miller made-the following declaration;—“ I purpose,
“ in the strength of my Lord and Master, to embrace every
“ opportunity of preaching, with the utmost plainness, faith-
“ fulness, and affection, the glorious gospel of the ever blessed
“ God.
“In order to further advance the cause of pure and
“ undefiled religion, I shall likewise endeavour to promote, by
“ all the means in my power, the distribution of tracts, and


“ employ such other modes of doing good, as may from time
“ to time be found practicable.
“With the same view I purpose to promote the establish-
“ ment of Sabbath, Day, and Infant Schools.”
How faithfully he carried out this promise, the succeeding
pages will show.
Mr. and Mrs. Miller left England on the 16th of May,
1830, in the ship “Lang,” 360 tons, with a commission to
establish a Church in what has been described as the Sodom of
the Southern Hemisphere; an island which was the abode of
bushrangers, and the scene of conflicts between naked savages
and clothed ones; the place whose mere name would then send
a shudder through a boy in England—Van Diemen’s Land.
One is not surprised that he had as his favourite hymn:—
The God of Abraham praise,
At whose supreme command,
From earth I rise, and seek the joys
At His right hand.
I all on earth forsake,
Its wisdom, fame, and power;
And Him my only portion make,
My Shield and Tower.
The ship arrived at Hobart Town on Wednesday, 22nd
September, 1830, and a house in Brisbane Street was taken,
and furnished by Mr. Hopkins with surplus furniture from his
own residence.
That house in Brisbane Street still stands in 1930, being
one of the first set of semi-detached dwellings past the Church
buildings. In it their first child, Elizabeth, was born, in
August, 1831.


Mr. Miller began to conduct services on Sunday, 17th
October, 1830, preaching, from Isaiah Ixi., 1-3, to about thirty
persons in the reading room over Mr. J. P. Deane’s library in
Elizabeth Street, near Wellington Bridge, next to a Chemist’s
shop, and opposite to what was then known as Cat and Fiddle
Alley. This building, also, is still standing, though it is now
three storeys high, instead of two.
As the young man walked through the streets of Hobart
Town —manifestly a new arrival —with his*ederical dress, his
somewhat delicate appearance, his neat,'SligHc figure, and his
“gentlemanly deportment,” no doubt many conjectures sprang
up in the minds of those who saw him, as to what manner of
man he would turn out to be.
From the first, the Governor seems to have taken an
interest in him. Colonel Arthur had had such a difficult task
in enforcing respect for the Ten Commandl-ntel that he must
have welcomed this young preacher of righteousness as a
valuable acquisition.
The Governor attended the opening of the Chapel in
1832, contributing £25 to the Church funds.
In 1836, when the Church had a debt on the buildings of
£ 500 or £ 600, he made them a grant of £ 500, which had
apparently been applied for some time before.
But he now went further, and induced the Legislative
Council to vote Mr. Miller a salary of £ 200 a year.
This offer seemed to give the young man a shock. He
evidently realised that, if he accepted the salary, he would
practically become the paid servant of the Government, instead
of the trusted pastor of his people; that, instead of establishing
Congregationalism, he would be conniving at the setting
up of a semi-state church —and would thus forfeit the confi-
dence of those who had ordained him.
Had he left London, and come to the ends of the earth,
only to accomplish this ?
So, in spite of the financial weakness of his Church, and
his own impaired health, and his responsibilty for the little
family that was growing up around him, the offer of a salary
was respectfully and thankfully declined.


This should not be regarded as the act of a man with
private means, for, as far as is known, Mr. Miller never owned
any money, except that which he received as minister of his
Church.
Shortly afterwards, Mr. Miller realised that the Church,
even more than he, should be freed from the consciousness of
being indebted to State support, and he consequently informed
the Governor (apparently with the Church’s approval) that the
grant of £ 500 could only be looked upon as a loan, which
would be repaid, as soon as possible. The Governor made the
kind suggestion that it might perhaps be regarded as a per-
sonal donation from him, but this way of escape Mr. Miller
could not accept; and he held to his purpose, though it was 20
years before the money was repaid, and, when the time came,
he bore his share of the burden.
We may be justified in regarding this renunciation as
Mr. Miller’s final act of consecration —the proof of the sin-
cerity of his profession —the purchase of freedom for himself
and the Church to do the will of Christ in the community—
the foundation of the prosperity of the Church, and of the
great influence which he wielded, and the deep respect with
which he was regarded, throughout the whole community.
In giving an acdount of his Ministry, we can only speak
in general terms, quoted largely from matter published at the
time of his death.
He certainly made full use of his freedom to work among
the people, for it was said that the outcasts of society were not
outcasts to him, and that he became more familiar with the
interior of the gaols than of the houses of his friends.
Possibly he obtained acquaintance with the poor through
his three Sunday Schools (at the Chapel in Brisbane Street,
and in Liverpool Street, and at Battery Point), for he used to
have a week night service in each.


There certainly must have been a very strong bond between
him and the unfortunate classes, as it was at last said that,
among thousands of the poor, scattered through the remoter
districts of the Colony, his name was held in universal honour.
He induced many of the poor people, whom he visited,
to take the total abstinence pledge; he co-operated with Messrs.
Backhouse and Walker in forming the first Temperance
Society in the town, and he lectured and preached on total
abstinence.
Many of the local religious societies originated with him,
and he laid himself out most assiduously to foster and advance
their objects and interests.
He was the means of forming a Council of Churches
called the Evangelical Union, and he exerted himself on all
occasions, in the interest of peace, to maintain the principles
of the Union, so as to bring together the members of the differ-
ent Churches, for devotion and co-operation in advancing the
great objects of Christain brotherhood.
He had likewise the honour of originating the Bethel
Union (or Mission to Seamen). He convened the preliminary
meetings, communicated with Governor Arthur as to obtain-
ing accommodation, and, in conjunction with other members of
the Committee, succeeded in securing the appropriation of a
building on the New Wharf, for the purposes of a Bethel
Chapel.
For 25 years he was the indefatigable Secretary of the
Bible Society. He was also Secretary to the local auxiliary
of the London Missionary Society, and he always manifested
a deep interest in the operations of the Sunday Schools, and
of the Tract Society, and he took part in the establishment of
the Hobart City Mission, in 1852.
The great number of young persons who belonged to his
congregation, and identified themselves with his Church,
showed the facility with which he could gain upon the young
affections.
He had the happiness of receiving numbers, as members
of his Church, whom he had known as children in the Sunday
Schools.


He was eminently a peacemaker. When differences
occurred, his judgment was appealed to, and his kindly aid
secured to heal the breach.
His services were eminently valued as a visitor of the
sick and dying. He was ready at all hours of the day and
night to leave his study, or his bed, to minister to their com-
fort, and that without respect of persons.
The privilege of his counsel and prayers was desired
by many a poor sinner, and not a few of the pious and the
excellent of the earth. Ministers of the several denominations
felt cheered with his visits of condolence and sympathy; and
some, who passed away, showed their estimate of his worth
and catholicity, by desiring that he should be sent for to attend
their sick and dying beds.
He was a true friend of education. He was accustomed,
when in health, to take his turn in visiting the public schools,
and affording religious instruction at the times allowed.
In 1839, when a controversy arose over a proposal of the
Governor (Sir John Franklin) to allow Ministers of all de-
nominations freedom to give such instruction, Mr. Miller wrote
to the Governor, expressing the satisfaction of the Congre-
gational Union at the prospect of obtaining this privilege.
The Theological College, established about 1860 in Hobart
Town, was aided in its advance to completion by his unweary-
ing efforts, by which the conditions of a bequest of £ 500, by
Miss Ann Watkins, were fulfilled, within the time limited
by her, and the Institute was opened.
Those who knew him testified that, as a preacher he sought
to exalt, not himself, but Jesus Christ, and Film crucified.
He was a wise and practical expounder of God’s Holy
Word, presenting the results of careful study and indepen-
dent research, but never troubling his audience with the pro-
cesses by which these results were obtained. He was very
attentive to the proportion of truth, putting the chief things in
the chief place, and never claiming, for that which is secondary,
the importance of first principles. The conversion of sinners,
and the edification of saints, comprise all the objects he sought
to secure.


Of the few sermons that have been preserved, the earlier
ones appear as impassioned appeals, largely in Scriptural
language, insisting on the radical difference between right
and wrong, good and evil, sin and righteousness, life and
death. His texts, throughout his ministry, seem to have been
almost always taken from the books of Psalms, Proverbs, or
Ecclesiastes, or the Song of Solomon,
It may be noted that his voice—at any rate in his later
years—was high pitched, and feeble.
Mr. Miller’s character was thus summed up by Mr. Henry
Hopkins (when laying the foundation stone of the Memorial
Church) in 1870:
“He was a man of piety and energy, and he felt a great
“ love for the people, and for every cause, which had for its
“ object the glory of God, and the good of his fellow men.”
The Rev. George Clarke said in 1911: —“Mr. Miller was,
“ I think, the most zealous and indefatigable minister I have
“ ever known. He was possessed by the duties of his calling.
“He had a very tender feeling for the sick and sorrowful, and
“ for all little children, and he was a large-hearted man. While
“ holding steadily to his own principles, he would never let
“ differences of Church polity limit his sympathy and co-opera-
“ tion with all good men. And he had the rare faculty of
“ making everyone around him set themselves to do some de-
“ finite Christian work. No wonder that Brisbane Street has
“ shown a long succession of good men and women, who tried
“to serve their generation by the will of God before they fell
on sleep.”
This last statement is confirmed by James Bonwick, wdio
wrote of the Brisbane Street Church:—“Perhaps no associa-
“ tion, for its means, accomplished so much for the general
“ good of their fellows, as that under the pastorate of the Rev.
“ F. Miller.”
With such a record of activities, achieved by a man of a
delicate nervous frame, it is not surprising that his health was
continually breaking down.


The only means adopted of restoring his health seems to
have been a holiday, with a sea voyage.
It was his practice always to endeavour to turn his sick
leave to good use, or, at least, to regard his suffering as
intended to enforce on him some needful lesson.
The first occasion came quite early, only two years after
the opening of the Chapel.
To quote Mr. Miller’s own words (published in 1857) :
“In 1834 the Pastor of the only Congregational Church
then in Van Diemen’s Land was constrained by ill-health to
leave his flock without any ministerial supply, and for the
first time visited Sydney.
“He conferred especially with the Pastor of the only Con-
gregational Church then in New South Wales, on the urgent
need of ministerial help in these Colonies, and agreed with
him to address the Congregational Union of England and
Wales on the subject.
“The communications thus transmitted were published in
the Congregational Magazine, and, in connection with the
pressing representations of Drs. Reed and Matheson, con-
cerning Canada, and of other parties, had some influence in
inducing the formation of the Colonial Missionary Society
(which was formed in England for the evangelisation of the
sparsely populated new Colonies).
“One who pleaded with special urgency for a field, from
which he anticipated an early removal, was in after years
reminded, by an officer of the Congregational Union, of the
happy result to which his sickness had contributed, and of the
deep thankfulness which was due to Him, who had graciously
rendered the season of trial subservient to His cause.
“As another illustration, it may be named that the re-
newed illness of their pastor, after returning from Sydney,
led the Congregational Church in Hobart Town to send to
England an appeal for help, which, through the kindness of
Mr. Thomas Wilson, resulted in the arrival (in August, 1835)
■of the Rev. J. Nisbet, who subsequently became the pastor of
:a second Church in Hobart Town.


“In December, 1848, impaired health demanded renewed
journeyings, and I was thus led to visit first Auckland and
then Wellington.
“In the former town, a welcome was accorded by Mr. John
Rout, who eighteen years before (being then resident in
London) had taken an active part in securing the first minister
for Tasmania, and in arranging for his passage.
“At the time of this visit, there was no Congregational
minister in Auckland, but Mr. Rout and other friends were
advised to look to Sydney for help.”
(As a result, an ex-Missionary was sent to Auckland from
Sydney, while another Minister arrived through the agency of
the Colonial Missionary Society, and so there were two
Churches formed there.)
Not all Mr. Miller’s travels were caused through ill-
health. In 1843 he exchanged pulpits for six months with the
Minister of Collins Street Church, Melbourne.
In July, 1856, he wrote of having been recently to Mel-
bourne and Geelong.
He was in Sydney a second time in October, 184#, and
once more in February, 1857, when he acted as Chairman of
an inter-Colonial Conference of Congregational Churches.
Mr. Miller’s final breakdown occurred in 1860. He then
felt that his work was done. He had in his mind a certain
Minister of eminence in England that he would have liked to
recommend as his successor. The Church, however, having
obtained a medical report of his condition, thereon decided to
send him on a voyage to England, and gave him a sum of
money to cover the expense of the holiday, while undertaking
to continue the payment of his usual stipend, and to bear the
expense of pulpit supplies.
He was then only 54, and there seemed every prospect
that he might once again recover his health.


1 he Diary, in which he kept a record of the events of this
holiday, from April, 1861, to July, 1862, appears as an illus-
tration of his life’s work, in miniature.
On the voyage to England in the ship “Norfolk,” he dis-
tributed tracts, visited the sick, buried the dead, conducted
regular services, gave occasional lectures, and organised a
Sunday School.
When in England he visited many people and places,,
attended many meetings, and spoke and conducted services
fairly frequently.
At the same time he wrote to every member of his Church,
and collected about a thousand books for the use of the Theo-
logical College in Hobart Town.
He also paid particular attention to the young ladies
at his sisters’ boarding school at Hackney, which was his head-
quarters in England. He gave them invitations, at family
worship, for private conversation on spiritual matters, and
when leaving England he wrote them a farewell letter ac-
companied by a hymn composed for their benefit.
His health, while he was in England, had seemed fairly
good, though he found himself easily tired. But, after setting
out on his return journey in the “Moravian” to take up his
duties again, as the burdens of life pressed heavily upon him,
while the actual storms and calms of a voyage in a sailing
ship each in their turn took their toll, his strength at last gave
way, heart disease showed itself plainly, and, when on 14th
July he reached Launceston, it was evident that he had only
returned to his beloved Tasmania to die.
A hired carriage being supplied by Mr. Kermode, Mr.
Miller, accompanied by his wife, was brought by easy stages to.
Hobart Town, where he lingered for about three months.
VII.
As his life drew near to a close, he was much humbled by
the review of his labour, and spoke in most affecting terms of
the defects and faults that had mingled with all his earnest


endeavour to fulfil his course. There was one point, on which
he often expressed sorrowful reflections, and which, had his
life been spared, he would have set himself to correct. He
thought that he had not given sufficient prominence to the more
cheerful and hopeful aspects of the Gospel, and had dwelt too
uniformly on the more sombre and depressing views and
prospects of our fallen humanity.
It was in part the result of that infirmity which belongs
to broken bodily health, and a shattered nervous system. It
■was under the influence of such reflections that he had com-
posed the sermon he intended to deliver on his first resump-
tion of his work on “The Cheerfulness of the Christian Life,
as instanced in the salutations and greetings of the Bible.”
He also, in these last days, charged himself with having
neglected his own children. Yet who of them could blame
him? He had at any rate left them a very precious memory,
for the daughter, who recorded this self accusation, also stated
that she had never heard him speak harshly to any of them.
The letters, preserved by another of his daughters,
written to her at intervals from her 7th to her 21st year, show
what a deep and tender interest he took in her welfare; while
even one of his grandchildren can speak of his having taken
her into his study on her 7th birthday to pray with her.
His heart had been wrung by the death of his daughter
Emily in 1843, and that of his eldest daughter Elizabeth, in
the first year of her married life, but he had been able to com-
mit their souls to God, as their bodies were returned to the
earth.
He had, in fact, been greatly comforted by finding
Emily’s Bible (she was seven years old) with the leaf turned
down at the words;—“He shall gather the lambs with his
arm.”
But now, dying, as he was, practically in middle life, the
great burden on his heart was that, after giving all his energies
to the welfare of others, he was leaving his wife and younger
children, and even little grandchildren, in the world, unpro-
tected and unprovided for.


No doubt, before his death he received an assurance from
the Church of their intention to provide for his widow, and,
if he could have looked forward to 1930, he would have seen his
grandchildren’s grandchildren safely sheltered in middle class
homes.
His dying moments were oppressed by physical distress,
and by grief and pain. There was none of that rapture, which
sometimes marks the departure of a good man, but he was
able to resign himself calmly into the hands of his Saviour.
In the greatest distress he was resigned, and his heart con-
tinually turned to the rest of God, and the refuge of Christ.
On Sunday, 12th October, he had his family collected
around him, and fervently commended them to God, to whom
his soul was evidently soon to be gathered.
He died in the afternoon of the following day, in the
presence of his wife and several of his children, and, though
unable to speak, endeavoured to do so, and was conscious to the
last.
He was buried, in a tomb prepared by Mr. Henry Hop-
kins, on Friday, 17th October, 1862, the same date as that
on which, in 1830, he had preached his first sermon in the
Colony.
On the following Sunday a funeral service was held in the
Melville Street Wesleyan Church, conducted by the Rev.
George Clarke, and attended by about 2,000 persons.
In the course of the service, the declaration made by Mr.
Miller at his ordination was read, and the congregation was
called upon to bear witness to the way in which he had carried
out that pledge.


MR. MILLER’S FAREWELL LETTER.
To the Church and Congregation assembling at Brisbane
Street Chapel.
Beloved Brethren and Friends,
Although mental effort at this time is difficult, and to some
extent injurious to me, yet I cannot refrain from addressing
a few lines to you.
Little did I think on leaving England, that I should have
to address you thus. While in the Old Country, I collected
information and adopted other means, which I hoped might
lead to your advantage on my return. But active labour is to
be exchanged for suffering. Will you pray for me, that God
may be glorified in this altered scene.
I feel very thankful for all the kindness and sympathy
which you and other friends have manifested, and for the many
tokens of goodwill which I have experienced during my long
residence in this Colony. Above all, I desire to thank God
for His unspeakable gift, and would once more commend to
you that mighty living Saviour, of whose grace I have been
permitted to speak to you in by-gone times, and to whom alone
I can now look for all that I need. What could I do, without
the assurance that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, or without His own precious promise, “Him that
cometh to me T will in no wise cast out.”
I sometimes wish that I had dwelt, in my ministry
among you, more fully on the bright hopes of the Gospel,
and the abundant encouragement which the word of God sup-
plies to men, in all their great struggles and necessities.
Ask God to encourage you with His smile. Ask Him b>
show' you His glory and His love.
Believe me to remain,
Yours faithfully, and affectionately,
FREDK. MILLER.
Hobart Town,
August 2, 1862.


Peace in death! Be this thy blessing,
Cheer’d with hopes of heaven above !
Rest from guilt’s alarms possessing,
Trusting in a Saviour’s love.
Christian! in that hour beholding
Mercy’s power to save from sin,
God no gift of grace withholding,
Thou wilt Christ and glory win!
Thou hast tasted bitter sorrow,
Care and grief have filled thy breast;
But bright joys thy tears shall follow,
Thou shalt be forever blest.
What though nature bid thee tremble,
As thou viewest death’s dark shade;
Thou shalt many a saint resemble,
Dying, more than conqueror made.
If disease thy soul should darken,
Struggling in death’s agonies;
Soon thy God will bid thee hearken
To the music of the skies.
Care not then for toil or weeping,
Yield not to desponding fears;
Hallowed trust in Jesus keeping.
God will wipe away thy tears,
F. MILLER,
August, 1860.


✓


v
.
