

LIFE,
DEATH, and
RESURRECTION.
A LAY SERMON
E. A. R. (£
/ Reprinted from the
“ Australian Christian World,”
2nd December, 1898. v
“Christian World” Printing and Publishing Houce,
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Brisbane.




~eath and Resurrection.
Text. —For the law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus hath made me free fram the law
of sin and death.—Romans, chap. 8 verse 2.
These words are an explanation of
the conclusion stated in the previous
verse to which the Apostle Paul had
arrived after a most interesting and in- .
cisive examination he had made into
the meaning of a conflict he had ex-
perienced between life and death in his
own soul. His conclusion that “ there
is therefore now no condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit,” required an explanation neces-
sary for its application to and adoption by
others than himself, and so he makes the
logical explanation of the conclusion as
regards his own ease the basis of an ex-
tended investigation into the operation
generally of the leading principles in-
volved in that conclusion.
Those leading principles may be
traced throughout Scripture from Gen-
esis to Revelation and may be briefly
summarized in the words, “Life,”
Death,” and “ Resurrection.” Com-
bined they may fairly be taken as af-
fording a key to explain much that
without such key could not readily be
understood. Separately each of these


ideas carries a student of truth a good
way along certain lines of meditation,
but neither individually nor collectively
can he attain to any satisfactory result
beyond this—that in Jesus Christ alone
are found to be set forth the end and
purpose of God in the gift of life to
mankind, —in the appointment of death
—and in the restoration of life in cer-
tain circumstances.
At the very beginning “ Life ” and
“ Death ” were set forth before man as
alternatives, and immediately upon
“Death” becoming the character of his
existence, a prophecy of deliverance
was conveyed in the judgment God pro-
nounced upon the serpent for his guile,
which in the light of subsequent history
has been and is regarded as a revelation
of “ Resurrection,” only finally mani-
fested in the resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ from the dead.
In the discussion of any subject such
as that contained in the passage now
under review, it is needful in the first
instance to clearly define what is meant
by the ideas themselves, and by the
words in which those ideas are ex-
pressed.
The chief prominence perhaps in the
verse quoted is the idea of “Law,” and
the operation of a principle of “Law” in
two specified directions. What then is
to be understood by the term “ Law ” 1
In its ordinary use it is the written ex-
pression of will—of the will of God—or


of the will of man as an individual—or
of the will of a community of men con-
stituted in a State empowered to regu-
late the relations between man and his
fellows. But whatever may be the
form of words expressive of that will—
the form of words is not the “ Law,*'
which exists prior to and independent
of any symbols that may be devised to
describe it. In other words the letter
and the principle of a written law are
not always (if ever absolutely) at one in
the thoughts or the conduct of men.
This is clearly illustrated in our Lord’s
interpretation of the sixth and seventh
of the ten special commandments, given
in the Sermon on the Mount.
Facts are results of law or of .prin-
ciples in action. A fact may be stated,
and the reason given for it may be that
such fact invariably follows the opera-
tion of one or more principles,—or in
the expression of several facts in com-
bination—each of which is of itself so
uniform in its existence as to become
an axiom or a law. Twice the number
2 equal the number 4 is an absolute
fact, or truth, or axiom, or law. But it
is also absolutely true or axiomatic that
to reach the number four there may be
employed individually or combinedly
the four primary rules of arithmetic,
which, however, are but variations of
one principle or law that runs through
all calculations of figures whatever their
extent may be.


Any real law is axiomatic in prin-
ciple and automatic in operation and
no commandment to do or not to do
certain things can have any force if the
result of obedience thereto be a viola-
tion of the fundamental conditions
which constitute true law. The only
true law is God's law—and that law is
perfect in its expression and in its oper-
ation. Human laws are invariably im-
perfect because they are framed on the
limited views of the framers, who can-
not possibly see the end from the be-
ginning as God alone can, and Who is
Himself the embodiment of the law
under which the universe exists.. What-
ever God says therefore is His means of
explaining Himself as the foundation,
the well spring of the operation of law —
and the only law as regards mankind
that is binding on the conscience of the
children of men is that which He de-
clares by His Son, Who is His Word
and Living Expression—or by the life-
giving energy of His Holy Spirit.
Two conditions are stated in the text
as results of axiomatic and automatic
law —Life and Death—the one being
the condition of those who walk after
the Spirit ; and the other the condition
of those who walk after tne flesh.
Here again it is necessary to define
what is meant by the “ Spirit ” and the
“ flesh.” To walk after either is to
“live’’ in or by it, and the character of
such life is according to the one —a life


of faith ; and according to the other —
a life by sight.
A life by sight only is dependent for
its sustenance upon the things which
are seen and temporal—that is, have
only a fleeting existence. When such
things are withdrawn and their exist-
ence comes to an end, the life sustained
by them must necessarily cease to exist.
“ All flesh " (the visible clothing of
things which are not seen) “is as grass,
and all the goodliness thereof is as the
flower of the field ” —“ the grass wither-
eth, the flower fadeth ” —or in other
words the sight-life in due time dies for
want of sustenance according to the law
of its existence.
A life by faith on the contrary does
not and cannot die, because it it not’ de-
pendent on the things of time and
sense, save only as these are mediums
through which the unseen Spirit speaks
of things to come as the meaning of
things present. We may see and under-
stand in a measure how the circum-
stances of the hour have been brought
about, but it is entirely out of our
power to pronounce for what future
purpose those circumstances and con-
ditions have come to be.
To any condition, or circumstance, or
to any combination of conditions or
circumstances in which any human life
is found, there is attached a certain in-
fluence which moulds the character of
a life so conditioned and circumstanced.


The influence thus exerted and the con-
sequent result being found to be invari-
able, becomes the “ law ” of such con-
ditions and circumstances without the
expression of it in so many words, the
experience by the individual life being
sufficient to make it acquainted with
that “ law.”
But conditions and circumstances
seldom remain the same in any life for
any length of time, nay, in some sense
they change every hour or even every
moment. If it were not so the inevit-
ableness of the operation of law as de-
scribed above would be an intolerable
burden from which there would and
could be no escape. But while the
operation of law is uniform and inevit-
able in any circumstances or conditions,
the operation itself is dependent on the
existence, and happily the variations, of
those conditions and circumstances
whether for good or evil, but “ law ” is
always active in either direction, or in
other words the “ Law ” of law is not
stagnation, but activity. In this fact
lies the foundation of the sinner’s hope
of transfer from subjection to the
“ law of sin and death ” to the
liberty and promised joy of the “law of
the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus.” A
comparison of the 19th, 51st, and 119th
Psalms among many other Scriptures
shows this clearly.
Now the Scriptures leave no ground
for disputing the fact that death is the


■direct result of sin, for all Scripture is
built up on that law, not obviously the
death of the body, for the body lives and
multiplies, while the spirit is •* dead in
trespasses and sins.” The statements
that “In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shalt surely die,” “The soul that
sinneth it shall die,” “ There is none
righteous ; no, not one,” “ All have
sinned,” “In Adam all die,” and
similar ones proclaim that the law of
sin is death, absolute, axiomatic, and
automatic from which there is no es-
cape. We may rest assured therefore
that unless sin itself be killed —that
work of the devil be destroyed—there can
be no resurrection. “ Except a man be
born again he cannot see the Kingdom
of God.” “That which is born of the
flesh is flesh ; and that which is born
of the Spirit is Spirit ” —each subject
to its respective law.
This condition of things is very em-
phatically set forth in the verses follow-
ing the second in this eighth chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans where St.
Paul declares among other things that
•“ to be carnally minded ” (to possess the
mind of the flesh) “is death “ but
to be spiritually minded ” (to possess
the mind of the Spirit) “ is life and
peace”—the reason for which assertions
of law being “ because the carnal
(fleshly) mind is enmity against God,
for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be ” —“therefore . . .


if ye live after the flesh ye shall die,
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body ye shall live.”
“ If Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin, but the Spirit is life be-
cause of righteousness.”
From such statements as these it
may be gathered that prior to a new
birth —a regeneration—a human life is
neither more nor less than a life in death
—that subsequent to a regeneration a
human life becomes a compound one in
which there is begun a struggle for de-
liverance from the bondage of corrup-
tion (the body of death) into the glori-
ous liberty of the children of God, or
as expressed in another Epistle, “ the
flesh lusteth against the Spirit and the
Spirit against the flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other, so that
ye cannot do the things which ye
would.” The Spirit and the flesh exist
together therefore even in a regenerated
human life, but the warfare between
those two powerful factors must issue in
victory for the Spirit when it is once be-
gun “ being confident of this very
thing that He who hath begun a good
work in your hearts will perform it un-
til the day of Jesus Christ.”
The actual relationship of a human
life to God consequent on its being
quickened by the Holy Spirit from
death in trespasses and sins does not
therefore result in immediate and per-
fect deliverance from sin and from the


power for evil which it exercises through
indulgence in it. Nor does it result in
the immediate and perfect establish-
ment of the supremacy of the Spirit of
Life over the spirit of sin and death.
Each of the elements of sin and death
has to be overcome in detail, so to speak,
by a corresponding antidote applied by
the Spirit of Holiness—the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus—and that, as in the
healing of the diseases of the bodily
frame, by a continuous series of influ-
ences or operations until each special
form of sin is slain and its place occu-
pied by a corresponding fruit of the
Spirit,
The elements of sin and death are ex-
haustively given by the Apostle’s
Epistle to the Galatians, chapter v.,
verses 19 to 21 as follow ;
“ Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these : adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
idolatory, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, envyings, murders, drunken-
ness, revellings, and such like : of the
which I told you before, as I have also-
told you in time past, that they which
do such things shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God.”
On the other hand there are given in
the following verses 22 to 24 the de-
tailed results of the victory of the Spirit
over the flesh—the resurrection from the
death in trespasses and sins.


k I “But the fruit of the Spirit is love,
' v joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance:
against such there is no law. And they
that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts.”
The Apostle’s own experience was :
“The law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus hath made me free from the law
of sin and death.”
“ The last enemy that shall be des-
troyed is death l Cor. xv. 26.
E, A. R.
