

LIFE
AND TIMES
OF
JEM PUNCH
BY
Thatcher
Richmond




LIFE AND TIMES
OF
JEM PUNCH
BY
RICHMOND THATCHER
Being an account of the life of a worthy, brave-hearted citizen,
with some information respecting certain remarkable people
of his time, and containing a number of Historical
Facts and Dates regarding New South Wales
Sgftneg:
TURNER AND HENDERSON
1885




LIFE AND TIMES OF JEM PUNCH


MONTEFIORE, METCALF & Co.,
65. PITT STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
Agents for New South Wales & Queensland.
Among the many specifics introduced to the public for the cure of dyspepsia, indigestion,
derangements of various kinds, and as a general family medicine, none have met with such
genuine appreciation as Hop Bitters. Introduced to this country but a comparative short time
since to meet the great demand for a pure, safe, and perfect family medicine, they have rapidly
increased in favour, until they are without question the most popular and valuable medicine
known. Its world-wide renown is not due to the advertising it has received ; it is famous by
reason of its inherent virtues. It does all that is claimed for it. It discharges its durative
powers without any of the evil effects of other bitters or medicine, being perfectly safe and
harmless for the most frail woman, smallest child, and weakest invalid to use.
3NHIN3O
AINO 3Hi
fill
so
p
I?
©
v.- - :
I
I
L 1
£
m
m
S.BinOS 4Q
*aa.vii{\| NHnj* ‘X|tu4 sinoA ‘luk j
•}insna poaisAp rsqj ipi.vv A'squuuAin pnu ‘jjaeui oqi 03 dn jpsunq a; nsp tiunpou sasn
‘.red A\opq SuijjaS jpsuuq spuq oq iDAAuoq.w avou pue ‘lunpuoi pjeq qjiM dn jpstuiq paipouq peq i>qA\ ‘ueiu
ssei.i-jsii.q pjojxQ «b 03 umqj pacjujfe.-ud | 'sju.-mutfuejap suoqiq ui *e jp.w su ‘sAAupijj oq3 jo uoijsoltuoA jo sasbd
ui jnpsn Aqep.ids umqi puuuj j ■oupip.mi snopeAqp [.in; niusvqd u se iusqi puaiuuiuD.-u Apjms weo pue
‘sasniy do j-j qjiA\ swipo pue jpsa'ui uo s3u.mlu.AdxA pau3 SAeq {— ‘uau.iAfiu.'U)— oj an.!. oj,
'ZSSI ‘M36 'MAd -qSanquipg p ojjhq aq} ’H H'H °J
Xjßuipjo-ui-urejduqQ pus ‘appsaax-ui-uopippipj jcuopay '-ypj ‘saNiipj -f-Asy aqj uio.iy
HEAD OPPICB IN AUSTRALASIA
129 SPRING STREET, MELBOURNE (VIC.)


DEDICATION.
TO THE HONORABLE WILLIAM BEDE DALLEY.
Sir, —Nothingcould.be more appropriate than the dedication of
this memoir to you. Its subject was, like yourself, a native of this
great country, and, by descent, of the same nationality. He was
also a co-religionist, and one who, like yourself, while holding his
own dearest in estimation, regarded all his fellows with that broad
spirit of catholicity characteristic of the true patriot.
Like yourself, he won admiration for Australia by an action as
bold and decisive—though not so brilliant or productive of such
world-wide eclat —as your own. He, however, escaped such calumnies
and slanders as were heaped upon you by a section of the people’s
mis-representatives when all should have been united in according
praise and thanks.
I do not intend to offer you a sympathy which to one of your
noble nature would, doubtless, be offensive; for when I hear of the
efforts to decry or condemn you for your action in offering and
affording help to the Mother Country in the Soudan, I always think
of an American patriot who alluded to his detractors as “ curious
little daws of men who came to peck at him.” Trusting, sir, that
you may live long to enjoy the distinction and esteem to which your
high talents and past distinguished services entitle you,
I am,
Yours very truly,
RICHMOND THATCHER.


INTRODUCTION.
This memoir is given in pursuance of a resolve I formed when I
first heard, totally unexpectedly and with great regret, of the death of
my friend, its subject. I had just landed at Melbourne after my last
visit to my native country, when an acquaintance remarked, “Well,
poor Jem Punch!” The sad truth flashed upon me; he was dead, and
as soon as I recovered from the first shock which the mournful
intelligence gave me, I determined that, failing any other attempt to,
in some measure, perpetuate the memory of a man who must be too
soon forgotten, because of his unobtrusiveness when in life, I would
undertake the task. Its completion has been long deferred, owing to
a variety of causes, the principal one being the impossibility of
centering one’s attention upon serious work when in “public”
business.
That chief obstacle being removed, here is “ The Life and Times
of Jem Punch.”
No one is more alive to its shortcomings than I myself. The
ground to be traversed precluded aught but generalising in toto
with regard to the “times,” and comprehensiveness only was possible.
The materials too for a “ life” were so numerous that 1 suffered
from an embarrassment of riches. Punch’s life might be summed
up in a paragraph or made to fill volumes, but a middle course pre-
sented insurmountable difficulties. I have, then, confined myself
pretty well to such information as I was in possession of personally, %
and, with the exception of referring to such records of his career as
appeared in newspapers and Heaton’s “ Dictionary of Dates,”
the “ Life of Jem Punch” is a recollection rather than a history.
Messrs. Harry Mostyn and John Hunt have kindly furnished me
with contributions, whose njerits will, I am sure, be duly appreciated;
the more so for such gems being surrounded by so poor a setting.
Other friends promised to assist me in my labors but were pre-
vented by pressure of business, and I thank them much as


the defeated candidate thanks those who voted against him at his
non-election. I am, perhaps, anticipating adverse criticism and
invite it. Some may say they would rather have had a Life of Dick
Thatcher by Jem Punch, others that in my book, what is new is not
true, while that which is true is not new; such scathing things have
been said before of other memoirs. However, here I launch it on the
tide of popular opinion with all its imperfections on its head, only
claiming for my own portion that it has been a labor of love. I know
that many will read and keep it, because, however poor, it is a
tribute to the memory of a man worth remembering, while others
cannot fail to find it of some little service as a handy book of
reference to the dates of some of the notable events in the history
of New South Wales.
If I succeed in my main object, viz., giving in some shape a record
of a worthy life, I shall not have written in vain.
I am,
The Public’s obedient servant,
RICHMOND THATCHER.
Drynckmore, Randwick,
December, 1885.


LIFE AND TIMES OF JEM PUNCH.
The record of the life of a man like “Jem” Punch must
necessarily be the history of the people amongst whom he lived;
because, though he was, in the common acceptance of the word, not
a “ public” man, never having sought either civic or parliamentary
honors, or been placed upon the list of patrons of this or that
institution, he was essentially a man of the people. His blood
pulsated with that of the embryo nation of which he was an individual.
Nothing of importance occurred from the time of his attaining
manhood till his comparatively premature death that he was not
cognisant of, and did not take some more or less active part in.
Though he was never at the helm of public affairs he was, so to
speak, a boatswain of the ship of state. No person in the colony
was, in his time, so exalted as to ignore, designedly or through want
of acquaintance, Jem Punch, while the humblest had always the
benefit of his acquaintance, his opinion and his counsel. There arise
in all countries and at all times men such as he was ; central figures,
familiar to the masses and recognised by their rulers as powerful
factors in the direction of public affairs. Sometimes their mission is
in the legislature, or on the battle field, or the platform ; again, as in
Punch’s case, they display “ masterly inactivity.” The glorious
progress of Australia, its evolution from a terra incognita to its rank
in the place of the nations of the earth has hitherto been bloodless,
stainless, unsurpassed, and almost unprecedented. England had
profited by its experience in America, and its relationship to New
South Wales—Australia in fact—was well defined and understood ;
and though necessarily there was in the early history of the colony
some difference of opinion as to the latter’s status ; its emancipation
(which was only a tightening of the bonds, of union) was worked
out on lines upon which no philanthropist or political economist
could improve.


Jem Punch was then not called upon to display any of those
qualifications which transform quiescent, matter-of-fact men into
patriots such as Bolivar, Garibaldi or Washington, or otherwise he
might have become illustrious instead of remarkable. I cannot do
better in allotting him his place in the rank of colonists than quote
the words of Mr. Dailey, the most prominent of all Australians of
modern times ; a man upon whom the eyes of the whole world has
of late been centred, and who in his characteristically courteous reply
to my desire to dedicate to him this little tribute to the memory of a
passed away hero, wrote :
“ He was a good, intelligent, patriotic citizen, with hearty generous
sympathies with all that contributed to the advancement of his
country and the happiness of his fellow citizens ”
This is indeed “ praise from Sir Hubert Stanley/’ and, moreover,
well deserved.
The influx of population to New South Wales by means of im-
migration and natural increase is so rapid that already many people
will ask “ who was Jem Punch ?” a question that would have been
quite unnecessary in his time, because he was known of and to all.
His fame was in a measure ephemeral, owing to his obscurity,
i.e. obscurity to public record as a citizen. Even the part he took in
wresting the sculling championship from the mother country will be
in a few years forgotten by or unknown to the masses who will
simply be told or taught that Trickett was the victor in the memorable
contest.
Such men as Jem Punch have not the honor to say post cinere , &c.
To our ashes our fame will be accorded.
He reaped the emoluments of his actions when in life, and his
memory may be held dear only by those who knew him in his
life time. But of no man could it be said more truly “To live in the
hearts of those we leave behind is not to die/’ It is customary to
say of one who has passed away “that he left a large circle of
rela'ives, friends, and acquaintances to mourn their loss.” In Punch’s
case the trite record was remarkably true. To know the man was
to love him, and Mr. Dailey’s tribute to his memory, viz., that his
life, well told, would give pleasure to numbers who never had the
happiness of knowing “ a worthy , large-hearted , brave man ” is one


of the happiest sayings of a gentleman remarkable for utteringthings
that must pass into pleasurable classics. With regard to his birth
and early history, the period was really an “epoch,” a “remarkable
period of time,” to quote from the dictionary. Punch’s advent to
life and youth was simultaneous with the introduction into Australia
of the three greatest factors of the happiness and convenience of
mankind, viz., railways, gas and telegraphs. Nay, more; with his
birth there dawned upon his native country, just as he first saw
it, the first rays of freedom. His infantile optics winked and blinked
at the sight of gas ere he was twelve months old (1841), the
antipodean metropolis being lit by it then for the first time. He was a
grown lad earning his living before the first railway wasopened, viz.,
that between Sydney and Parramatta. Stephenson, acting upon the
crude investigations and unsatisfactory results of Trevethick, Pease
and Grey, had, ten years before Punch’s birth, inaugurated a system
of railways by opening a line for traffic between Liverpool and
Manchester. In 1846 there was held in Sydney a meetingof colonists
to inquire into the working of railways, and the result was that in
1855 the first line in the colony was formally opened. In 1851, when
Punch was eleven years of age, the first telegraphic communication
between any two places in the colony was effected. One may only
imagine the complete revolution in the mode of life effected by these
mighty innovations. How circumscribed “ cribbed, cabined, and
confined” would the world, and this part of the world especially,
have been but for these three great discoveries and their early intro-
duction into a convict settlement, remote from any other civilization ?
But a still greater blessing came to the people of whom Punch was
one, long before he had the sense to appreciate it, viz., political
liberty. It will be well here to consider the political state of
Australia (then New South Wales) at the time of Punch’s birth.
Sovernor Gipps had assumed the reins of office two years before, and
I cannot do better than quote from my friend Mr. John Shaw, who
in his “ Concise History of Australia ” a work which should be in
the hands of every colonial schoolboy, says of Her Majesty's
representative : —“Sir George Gipps, who had distinguished himself
as an officer of Engineers, in the Peninsular War, arrived in Sydney
in February, 1838. He was a man capable of an immense amount of


work, scrupulously conscientious, but impetuous, autocratic, and
utterly devoid of that graciousness and tact which, where
parliamentary institutions have been established, it is essential the
executive chief should possess, if his relations with the governed are
to be agreeable. His quick temper and jealousy of the least
assumption of power by the quasi-representative body with which he
had to deal, were foibles destined to embitter his years of office.
And yet, with all his faults, Governor Gipps served the colony truly,
labouring for its best interests with earnestness and zeal. The term
of his administration was a period of transition, social as well as
political. It was also in part a period of severe commercial
depression But at the same time it forms a period of the history of
New- South Wales well deserving the attention of the patriotic
student, inasmuch as it contains the record of an honourable and
persevering effort on the part of colonial statesmen to secure for
their country a full measure of political freedom. Prior to leaving
he was presented with an address very numerously signed, regretting
his departure and extolling in terms that he really merited the
singular industry and impartiality of his gubernatorial career. Gipps,
if not as great a man as Bourke, was an honest and an able one. He
was more fit to have been a departmental chief than to have held a
quasi-irresponsible rule over a young country entrusted with a first
instalment of parliamentary rights. He felt himself to be more
Liberal than many about him who mouthed Liberalism to serve their
own ends ; and he was too patently contemptuous in his manner
towards them. Hence, strife. Yet, as careless of Downing-street
rebuff as of Pastoral Association reproach—both equally unmerited
—he pursued the consistent tenor of his way, dealing uprightly and
conscientiously, if not tactfully, in all matters of duty, so winning the
praise of being a faithful servant of the state and a truth-loving,
God-fearing man, ' without fear and without reproach.' ” Sir
Gipps deserves well of this country if only for the determined stand
he made against the piratical demands of the mighty Wentworth.
This great patriot, often called, like Washington, *' the father of his
country,” wished to be the '* uncle ” of New Zealand, and deserved to
have had the three balls of the proud Italian family emblazoned
upon his escutcheon. He bought (!) ten millions of acres of some


of the fairest country on God’s earth from nine Maori chiefs for a few
beads, blankets, and pounds of tobacco, and with all the majesty of
his eloquence defended his action and maintained his right to the
territory, in the Legislative Council of New South Wales. The
oratory of such a man as Wentworth, as a rule, carried everything
before it as a flood does, but Gipps was adamant. Doctor Lang in
his “History of New South Wales," cruelly but aptly styled by
Sir James Martin “ A History of Dr. Lang with a little about New
South Wales,” says of the Governor in relation to this claim of
Wentworth’s, in which Mr. Shaw admits that “ his avarice prevented
his sagacity from seeing the monstrous iniquity of such a one-sided
bargain”:—“Sir George deserves the highest credit for the ability
with which he exposed and set aside this peculiarly barefaced and
impudent claim, setting forth at great length the practice of all
European nations since the discovery of America, as well as of the
United States of that country, in regard to the purchase and sale of
the lands of the aborigines ; showing that the right of pre-emption
was uniformly asserted by the colonising power; exhibiting the
injury and ruin that would inevitably result from a different
practice; pleading the principle which his own immediate
predecessor had established, and the Imperial Government had
recognised, in the case of Port Phillip ; and concluding by literally
overwhelming Mr. Wentworth and his notorious attempt to
appropriate, for his own private benefit, the country which might
otherwise become the happy home of myriads of hisfellowcountrymen
from the United Kingdom with a torrent of sarcasm which it is no
marvel that that gentleman has never been able either to forgive or
to forget.”
" Gentlemen,” said Gipps, in concluding his speech, "it has been
said, that the principles on which this Bill is founded are derived
from the times of Cortez and Pizarro; times, when not only the
rights of uncivilised nations, but the rights also of humanity were
disregarded. To this I answer, that whatever may be the changes
(and thank Heaven they are many) which the progress of religion
and enlightenment have produced amongst us, they are all in favour
of the savage, and not against him.
“ Mr. Wentworth’s opinions, Gentlemen, have been advanced; I


will not insult you by supposing that they are yours. You, I hope,
will believe that there is such a thing as public virtue; and that
integrity is not utterly banished from the bosoms of men in office.
To your hands, therefore, I commit this Bill. You will, I am sure,
deal with it according to your consciences, and with that indepen-
dence which you ought to exercise; having a due regard for the
honour of the Crown and interests of the subject; whilst for myself,
in respect to this occupation of New Zealand by Her Majesty, I may,
I trust, be permitted to exclaim, as did the standard-bearer of the
Tenth Legion, when Caesar first took possession of Great Britain —
'Et ego certe officium meum , Republics, atque Imperatoraprcestitero; 1
fearless alike of what people may say or think of me, I will perform
my duty to the Queen and the public.”
The bill was rejected by a large majority.
No wonder Wentworth, who seven years before, at his memorable
orgie at Vaucluse Bay (1831), had howled Governor Darling out of
the colony, went again into the cold shades of opposition. His feud
with Gipps’s predecessor of whom the people said —
“ For six long years he sang like a starling.
Oh, what a tyrant was Governor Darling,”
was a righteous one, and Mr. Wentworth nobly fought the battle of
the people, while his services in connection with the conferring of a
Constitution on the colony and demanding the liberties of the Press
entitle him to the everlasting gratitude of his countrymen; but in
this instance Gipps showed himself to be the true patriot and not
Wentworth.
All this matter may seem apropos de bottes in a life of a citizen
like Punch, but it is interesting to learn the political and social state
of his native country at his birth and during his boyhood. We have
seen, then, that the epoch embraced the greatest blessings of
civilization ; gas, railways, and electric telegraphs, and that as he
first drew breath so did the colony, for up- to his time it had been
subject to the tyranny and caprice of the sovereign’s representative
and the Home Office. Up till 1838 the public and even the press were
excluded from the deliberations of the miserable subterfuge of a
Government at which the destinies of the people were decided by the
Chief Justice, the Attorney-General, the Collector of Customs, the


Auditor-General and some half-dozen other pure merinoes. It was
not until 1843, three years after the birth of Jem Punch, that New
South Wales saw even the apology for popular representation, but it
marked, as the first introduction of representative government, a new
era, and it will be as well to give the list of members.
( Wentworth, W. C.
S y dne y (. Bland, William
Parramatta Macarthur, H. H.
Cumberland Burghs Bowman, William
Northumberland Burghs Wentworth, D’Arcy
_ , , , _ i Lawson, William
Cumberland County , Cowper , Charles
Northumberland County Foster, William
Argyle County Bradley, William
St. Vincent and Auckland Coghill, John
Murray, King, and Georgiana Murray, Terence A.
Roxburgh, Philip, and Wellington Suttor, William H.
Bathurst Lord, Francis
Brisbane, Bligh and Hunter Dumaresq, William
Durham Windeyer, Richard
Gloucester, Macquarie & Stanley Counties.. Macleay, Alexander
Cook and Westmoreland Panton, John
Camden Therry, Roger
Melbourne Town Condell, Henry
(Mayor of Melbourne).
lEbden, Charles Hobson
Walker, Thomas
Nicholson, Charles
Thomas, Alexander
Lang, John Dunmore
Not one of these representatives is now alive.
It was not until the end of 1857, fourteen years after the thin end
of the wedge of political liberty was inserted, that New South Wales
had Responsible Government, and Punch was then a young man
taking part in the elections. Of this Parliament the Hon.W. B. Dailey,
of Soudan fame; Mr. William Macleay, the princely patron of
scientific investigation ; Sir James Martin, the present Chief Justice;
Sir John Robertson, the Knight of Clovelly and leader of Her Majesty’s
Opposition ; the Hons. Thos. Holt and W. R. Piddington, still two


sturdy veterans, only survive. It is not within my province or space
to give a full history of the times of Punch from his birth. Those
interested in the early affairs of the colony have a good choice of
works in the public library, where they will find Peron's, Collins’s
and Phillip's voyages, Bennett's History of Colonization, a
remarkably able and comprehensive work, Dr. Lang’s History of
New South Wales, Flanagan’s History, andother works of marvellous
interest. Of late vears Mr. Henneker Heaton, who possesses the
finest and largest collection of books upon Australia in the world, has
published an “Australian Dictionary of Dates and Men of the Times,”
a perfect encyclopaedia of Australian information, a new edition of
which comes out in London in i 836. Mr. Shaw has issued his
“ Concise History,” from which I have quoted. Mr. Richards the
Government Printer has given us this year an “Official History,” a
terse and invaluable compilation, and Mr. David Blair of Melbourne
has also brought out a very fine work on Australia. These books,
with Mr. Greville’s “ Year Book,” and Messrs. Gordon and Gotch’s
Hand Book, comprise a liberal library of works of reference, but it is
to be regretted that the Government does not republish some of the
old histories of the colony for the use of students and school children.
Dr. Cox of this city, who possesses an extensive collection of such
treasures, has for years been endeavouring to persuade different
Colonial Treasurers and Secretaries to undertake the task, without
effect.
THE PRESS.
The truculent and venal Gazette ended its miserable and
contemptible existence three years after Punch’s birth (1843), while
the Herald came out as a daily the very year of it (1840), so that
true journalism may be said to have come in with his existence.
The same year the Melbourne Herald and Perth (Western Australia)
Inquirer were established. New Zealand had its first newspaper
in the subsequent year, viz., the Herald and Auckland Gazette.
The Melbourne Argus was five years later (1846), and the ever
memorable Empire was first issued in 1850, and ceased in 1874.
Evening News started 1867.
Apropos to newspapers and newspaper literature, Punch, though


nearly what is called a self-taught as well as a self-made man, was
very fond of letters, and affected much the company of pressmen.
He was one of the greatest students of Shakespeare in the colony,
and could repeat the principal speeches from all his plays ; not in
parrot fashion, but with true discernment and appreciation of their
import. When he became landlord of the celebrated “ corner ” the
house was much frequented by Bohemians, notably pressmen and
actors. At one time the staff of Sydney Ptinch met there. This was
in the good old days of the now defunct paper, though Deniehy,
George Morton, Robert Sealy, and Charles Harpur had ceased to
grace its columns, and the pens of Parkes, Martin, and William
Forster were laid by. Such men as W. B. Dailey and Dr. Badham
were on the paper and frequently contributed, but though they were
not habitues of Punch’s, many other men of eminence in the world
of letters did not think it infra dig to frequent the place and hold
revel and discussions in the spaces round the bar, for this was in the days
when the modern cafe and bogus respectability were unknown to
Bohemians. Samuel Bennett, proprietor of the Evening News and
Town and Country Journal , a giant of literature, would often at
night take possession of the window looking from the bar into the
dining-room and claim the right to disburse the cash for all liquors
that went into the room. A literary nobleman he, yet one so modest
that no one could ever persuade him to sit for a portrait, not even a
photograph. He would be often accompanied by his friends Richard
Taylor, Andrew Allen, Tom Richards, and his Town Talker Frank
Hutchison, who would drop in to let out some spiteful smart thing he
had written or said. Hicks would be there, the ruler of the Punch staff:
solemn, staid, and always well dressed. Hicks as an editorial reviser
has no living equal. Poor Walter Cooper could be seen there daily.
Punch was a true friend to Walter, as he was to many other needy and
improvident pressmen. There are no needy and improvident pressmen
now. Grosvenor (Jack) Bunster haunted the place, always, however,
just on the point of starting for England to take possession
of his estates. Grosvenor is though still doing good work on the
Melbourne papers. Stephen-Harold, the new M.L.A., would be there
screeching out some wonderful discovery in art, science, or philosophy
which he had made, and laying down truths which were incontrovertible,
B


and with him would be invariably his henchman Kavanagh.
Kavanagh still consorts with the newly-fledged legislator. I must
tell a splendid story of him. One night, when taking tickets at the
School of Arts, one.of the “ more orders ” (marauders) who had got
possession of the Punch free pass, sailed up the passage with a gaily-
bedizened dame and presented it. Kavanagh looked at the ticket and
read —“ Admit artist and lady ; ” then turning to the holder, said :
" Here, this wo’nt do ; you are not an artist, and this is not a
lady. The witticism cost him his billet, but it was splendid. Garnet
Walch, spectacled, sturdy, genial to a fault, was often at Jem’s when
he should have been at Parramatta working on his paper. Garnet
could never be prosaic, and one day nearly convulsed the veteran
scholar and philosopher Burney to death by vowing that he gave up
the secretaryship of the Melbourne Athenaeum because he couldn't
stand the restraint of office, the joke being that he was notoriously
never at his office. They tell me that Garnet is a confirmed invalid
and by no means his old self. He never writes me, but I can imagine he
is not the Walch of old, as he has just edited or written
an advertising concoction for a Yankee showman. Ye gods!
and this from the pen of the author of “ A Bit of Biscuit,”
“ A Little Tin Plate," and a thousand and one other charm-
ing tales and lyrics. To such base uses must we come
indeed. Kendall the pitiably neglected poet might be seen
laughing hysterically, or moving round with moist eye and
melancholy air. A favourite mode with him of raising the wind was
to put a ridiculous advertisement in the Herald and then satirise it in
Punch. This exquisite poet, cne of the very few that Australia ever
produced, was put to queer straits : not but what Parkes and Dailey
and other ofhis collaborateurs tried, without avail, to befriend him.
Pern Murray, now a proud Capting in the colonial force, even then
haughty and aristocratic, a member of the News staff, afterwards the
Herald , deigned to drop in occasionally, and Moser, at present on the
leading and leaden paper, was to be seen at Punch's; as was Percy
Oswald, Tanner the artist, a genius in his way, and a well born
helpless swell who was drowned from a raft that put off from the
wrecked exploring ship Maria, bound for New Guinea. Charles de
Boos the genial author of “John Smith of Congewoi,” one of the


finest pieces of Australian genre painting, and Edward Reeve the
antiquarian, a fellow member of the Herald staff, the former now a
gold fields warden and the latter P.M. at Gosford, looked
in at Punch’s almost as a matter of duty; as did the stately
St. Julian, afterwards Chief Justice of Fiji, the great Organ’s
law reporter. Harry Mostyn, the Perennial (Pegasus), who still seems
to periodically renew his lease of life and good health,
might be seen with the “coming” sporting scribe Rowley
Pickering, comparing notes; and Coleri%e, a lineal descendant of
the great man of that name, a now (the former) forgotten genius;
would strut and fret his short hour, Wilkes of theAfem, almost worn
out, but still trenchant and able to smite, would hobble in with Rushton,
“ old Daddy,” as we irreverently used to call him, the “ sub” of the
News. Daddy is alive and well yet —and Sam Banks the weirdpoet and
grievance-monger, vowing that the world of literature was phalanxed
against him. George Eld of th t Herald, afterwards the Mail, now of
Hansard , always laughing and good-humored, who, after lunch,
always took the best billiard table for an hour as a matter of right,
was a conspicuous figure at Punch’s ; and there was Montagu
(Henry Neville) “Biron” the arbiter of the fates .of actors in the
Town and Country , peering through his specs and interviewing
managers and members of the “ perfesh,” little dreaming that he
would one day own the Regent Circus of Sydney. John Ferguson
the Johnsonian bookseller and newspaper proprietor—aggressive as
is the wont of his countrymen, might be heard vowing that he knew
Rabelais and other classics better than any other man on the press,
and calling his fellow craftsmen dunces and dolts ; and J. E. Kelly
the sledge-hammer of the Stockwhip never failed to drop in at
Punch’s ; nor did, when in town, for he was then editor of the Yass
Courier , John Shaw, a smart hitterand boldfree lance; or A. G. Jones
the grass grabber and proprietor of the Wagga Wagga Advertiser, one
of the best letter writers who ever held a pen. Richard Egan Lee,
an eccentric but very able all round pressman, ever ready at a
moment’s notice, if properly primed, to dash off a leader or turn a
set of verses, would be about; he was then proprietor of a paper at
Hill End and afterwards died miserably at Ade’aide. Morgan was
then, as now, at Dubbo, delighting the bush-whackers with his


lucubrations. Grisbrook had come from Banana Land to the more
southern metropolis. Eipper had gone to Maitland, where he has
anchored ever since, ruling the destinies of the Mercury with no small
skill and ability. Hogue, now editor of the News, had at this time
joined the staff of that paper, as had Charley Lyne and John Lang,
two studious, reliable reporters. Tarplee, whom even the dull
stupidity of the Herald could not tame, and who would at times
break out into crucially funny ‘‘pars” in its columns, had left
Maitland for Sydney; and so had the Maxted boys, who threw up
their Newcastle paper to take well-earned billets got for them by
their grateful patron G. A. Llpyd. Rogers, son of the great old
comedian, was and had been for years on the Herald. Sinclair
reviewed then, as he does now, shrewdly and carefully, for the Town
and Country. Cummings had not got his good thing in the
Exhibition line that he now enjoys, and slaved for the Fairfaxes.
Tom Wilton had not gone into coal but owned the Times at Bathurst,
and had only the Whites to oppose him with the Free Press. Dan
Mayne had not flashed his virgin pen in the Western Independent,
and Hunt’s bright light was still under the bushel of obscurity. Both
the editors of the metropolitan dailies were clergymen, Dr. West on
the Herald , and the Rev. William Ridley being the great chief of the
Empire and News. I must not forget the commercial editors of the
News, joe Lee and John Haynes who fought fiercely forpre-eminence
in the market report column, and the samples <xf monstrous cabbages
and double-yelked eggs sent in for notices. Poor Joe has been gathered
to his fathers for years, while John, after making his journalistic
abilities apparent in many ways, now runs his own Weekly, as a
great many humbugs know to their cost. Nor can I omit to pay a
passing tribute to the memory of poor Ted Aldis. Ted was the
most extraordinary member of the Sydney press. Having squandered
a liberal patrimony he drifted into news grubbing. It mattered not
what catastrophe or noteworthy occurrence ruffled the calm current
of social life, Ted was there. He was great at all fires, street
accidents or fights. He seemed to divine subjects for pars, or
perhaps an all-wise Providence put them in his weary way. His
conviviality, however, killed him, for he was found dead or dying in
the streets.


Later on came Mistah Ellis, black bearded like a pard, precise in
speech, and telling strange thing’s of life on the press of the country
famed for strange things, California; and Julian Thomas, the
Vagabond, both of whom have had considerably varied experiences
in Australia, but are of a later date, and I mention them because the
former has returned to Sydney as an editor, and the latter meteoric and
nomadic indivdual, has lately been connected with the Herald. For a
little more chat about old members of the fourth estate see further on*
I write now of the time when Punch was in his prime, a young
man, little more than thirty years of age ; prosperous, popular, gener-
ous, enthusiastic, and attracted round him the brightest intellects and
wits of the metropolis. Besides pressmen, his house was used by artists
and kindred souls —clever Habbe, always “ dolled up,” as the actors say,
“to the nines,” sarcastic and scandal-loving, but genial and kindly at
heart; Montagu Scott, with redundant moustache; thegiftedClint,
full of wild and incomprehensible diatribes and Jeremiads, especially
when, like his flats, well primed ; Wangenheim, the famous—who
had a “ pub” of his own, by the way ; and Lascelles, the happiest of
all our caricaturists. Poor Archibald Murray, the wood carver and
playwright ; Mr. M‘Leod (never much of a convivialist) now turning
out some of the best work ever done in the colony for the Picturesque
Atlas, would all at times resort to Punch’s asking to be told some
new thing. These are all the pressmen and artists I can remember
just now, the bulk of whom used Punch’s much the same as the
giants of English literature—Johnson, Goldsmith, and, later on,
Charles Dickens —the greatest of all novelists, who commenced their
careers as journalists ; and who by the by, died at the period to which
I now refer —used to fraternise in the old “inns,” some of which
still exist in the vicinity of Fleet-street and the Strand; and be on
friendly terms with the aged waiters, and love rather than be ashamed
to be seen in the quaint hostelries, with their antique furniture and
fittings and good cheer. Times are not changed for the better, I take
it, in spite of the fashionable clubs for newspaper men, and the smug
propriety which now characterises most of the new men.
I have dwelt at some length on this epoch of Punch’s life, not only
because he then was in his prime, but because Sydney commenced a great
transition. Although the colony had made almost unprecedented


progress from the time of Punch’s birth, it was from the first portion
of the decade 1870-80 that it took its great stride towards its pre-
sent proud position. Up till 1870 Sydney was looked upon as a
village ; its buildings were, in the main, conspicuous for their mean-
ness and irregularity, and there were many vacant spaces in its
principal streets. Soon afterwards wool rose in value, the mining
mania unlocked millions of capital, a totally different class of steam-
ships between England and Australia made Port Jackson their
terminus. City lots advanced in price as with a leap. A new order
of things commenced, and with it new men came in—the personnel
of the citizens began to change, so much so that the names of many
of the then well-known persons whom I have mentioned may not be
knwn to the majority of the present generation, and are merely the
theme for reminiscences by old stagers.
THEATRES.
The Victoria Theatre was opened in 1838, two years before
Punch’s birth, and a temporary theatre, the “ Olympic,” after it
(1842). In 1843 the City Theatre wes started in Market-street,
while Thespis first found a home in Port Phillip in 1845, when the
old Queen’s Theatre, Melbourne, was opened. Brooke first came to
Australia in 1855 (drowned 1866). John Gordon Griffiths first
appeared in Sydney under the auspices of Mr. Joseph Wyatt, at the
Victoria Theatre, 1842. Francis Nesbitt (M‘Cron), made his anti-
podean dehut at the Victoria Theatre, in 1841. Charles Young was
about a year latter. George Coppin, the veteran actor, publican,
legislator, and speculator arrived in Sydney, in 1843. Punch, in his
youth, saw the finest companies performing together that ever
appeared on one stage. Brooke, Young, the Yonges, Rogers, Lam-
bert, Coppin, Hoskins, Stewart. J. P. Hydes, Dunn, Greville, and
others, who would all now, individually, be “ starring” on their own
account.
Punch’s was called "The Corner,” more on account of the actors
who were engaged at the old Victoria and Prince of Wales Theatres
congregating there, than any other. It would take too much space
to give any list, however imperfect, of those who exchanged notes
and discussed the topics of the day outside Punch’s, as at some time


or another all the members of the profession of that period in
Australia pretty well asked quid nunc? on the flags or in the
parlors or bar of the hotel. I must, however, bring up memories of
poor Jem Booty, once the butterfly and afterwards the most unfortu-
nate of the brotherhood. He was treasurer of the new Royal, and died
miserable and alone, and was followed to the grave by two persons ; of
whom his brother was one and I the other. Bartlett the portly, a jovial
and clever actor, “Bill” Andrews, most unctuous and superb of come-
dians in some parts. Sam Lazar, who allowed Booty to starve,
though he had served him with dog-like fidelity, and who (it was
discovered when he died in a madhouse), disinherited his sister,
mother of Johnny Moore, the most humorous and reckless of varlets,
and his brother, Uncle Abe.
Frank Bates, found dead, and in all probability murdered, near the
Haymarket, Melbourne, was also frequently on the corner.
SPORTING.
Although a love of sport was deeply implanted in the minds of
the natives and residents of the colony, and keenly contested races
and cricket and rowing matches were of common occurrence, the old
true sports were not of that engrossing character or followed with
that regard to etiquette that marks the games of the present day.
I cannot do better than give the following article from the pen of
that prince of humorists, John Hunt, “Flaneur” of the Freeman , who
thus gives a comprehensive grasp of the ideas with which men of
the day regarded one phase of sports. He says :
CRICKET AS IT WAS SLUNG IN YE OLDEN TIME.
With the exception of the Insolvency Court and religion I am of
opinion that the most popular and best patronised institution in New
South Wales to-day is the manly game of cricket. Time was when
an intercolonial match caused no more excitement here than a
double-barrelled earthquake, or a civil war would ; but now-a-days,
it seems as if the future welfare of every man, woman, child, and
Chinaman in the land depended solely upon their knowledge of this
noble pastime. Men forget their wives and all other woes in the


wild excitement which follows a splendid catch by Bannerman ; cul-
chawed ladies adore the athlete who snicks Cooper away to “ leg”
for two, or pokes Garrett up against the fence for four, and when
Bonnor lifts a ball over one of Jupiter’s moons, or Spofforth lays a
troublesome hen-coop low, it seems as if the millennium had arrived,
and even twins unborn begin to frolic round in their premature
jackass joy. During the course of a grand match, business is com-
pletely upended, banks are closed, and religious lectures, teetotal
bun-worries and other lasciviiies are left unheeded. The terror in-
spiring judge nods cheerfully to the trembling prisoner at the bar as
he plaj'fully observes, “ My friend, I’m about to boost you over the
Berrima wall for a fiver,” the barrister cheerfully leaves his barrow,
the doctor forgets his patient (and the patient feels all the better for
it), the grocer neglects to sand his sugar, and respectable Govern-
ment clerks would as soon think of cutting their throats with a bar
of soap, or of paying their debts, as they would of going down to the
Siberian slavery mines of their offices to work on the eventful days
of a tussle with an All-England team, or a chosen band from the
Cabbage Garden. Nature herself stands still; old Phoebus hoists
his heels over the side of his car and gazes intently on the scene, and
even our own very gods themselves descend from their Olympian
thrones in Macquarie-street, and so far unbend as to mix, and even
drink with the plebeian throng —always providing that the said throng
has the means of satisfying the barmen’s pressing claims. On the
ground the greatest excitement prevails ; everyone knows exactly
what should be done, and who should do it; thousands of able-bodied
intelligent citizens, who ought to be at home cutting wood, or earning
their living between the shafts of a navvy’s barouche are to be seen
on the battle-field from 6 a.m. until the sun pulls the clouds over his
head and sinks to rest in the roseate blankets of the golden west;
those who can indulge in the luxury of a “ k’rectcard, score away
with all the energy and care of a city auditor, and the unhappy few
who cannot raise the 6d. look sadly on and go through the motions.
Panem et circensum ! “Bread and the circus” was the cry of
Ancient Rome, and bread and cricket bids fair to be the watchword
of ourselves. lam not aware if others have noticed the fact/but
it seems to me that we don’t play cricket now the same as the mighty


men of old did some five and twenty years ago. In those days I
think Nat Thompson, good old Jem Punch, Gilbert, Harry Hilliard,
Bill H , and poor Ted Sadler, were about the best players in the
known world, but I doubt if the style of some of the veterans would
command very great respect at the present day. My friend Bill
H , who balanced the beam at fifteen stone, was, without doubt,
the best all-round man of his time, although, certainly, as far as the
roundness went, the natural abilities of the Hon. John Lucas were bv
no means to be despised. It was hard to say in which branch of the
noble art William most excelled ; but he was particularly adapted
for the field, inasmuch as he could sit longer in the one spot, and
make a bigger hole where he sat than any other man this side of the
equatorial line. I once knew William to become so thoroughly
absorbed in the duties of long-field on, during a match played in
Hyde Park, that he actually fielded for his own side and the opposite
team as well without noticing any remarkable difference in the new
arrangement, and if it hadn’t been for the eloquent persuasion of the
park ranger he would probably have fielded away until the next
morning. As a batsman, William was a perfect Sampson with all
his hair on, but I have some doubts as to whether his defensive
tactics would answer in the case of a bowler like the Demon, or the
cannon balls of the mighty Allen. When William went to the wicket
it was his custom to grasp the bat as if there was but one bat in the
world, and even that had not been paid for, and he furthermore
assumed an air of such ferocity, that the insurance companies at last
refused to take risks on any rash young man who felt disposed to
trundle at him. This clause was afterwards extended to wicket-
keepers, because when William got fairly warmed to his work,
nothing living was safe within half-a-miie of him. When the bowler
proceeded to deliver the ball, William’s ferocity became most
ferocious, his grasp tightened closer and closer, and his whole ap-
pearance was highly suggestive of Ajax defying the lightning, or a
hog preparing to make war against the potato patch of a Chinaman’s
market garden. This fierceness was, however, considerably relaxed
when the ball left the bowler’s hands ; William then became more
of the crafty Ulysses, and his favourite plan of defence was to turn
round stern on, with his breast “ expanding for the ball,” as


Don Caesar sings, and a look on his face something akin to that
generally found on the countenance of a man who is endeavouring
to shave a chin ornamented with the purple dome of a'blind boll. As
I before observed, this style of batting is scarcely suited to the
present day ; two overs from Spofforth or Allen would either drive a
tunnel through William’s back premises, or at least bring on an un-
natural desire to pass the rest of his life standing up. Unless the
umpire was an unusually smart man with his fists, William seldom
returned to the pavilion without having had from four to a dozen
innings, and even then, when he did consent to resign, the triumphant
air with which he shouldered his bat and marched off to slow music,
was worth all the money paid for admission. Taking him as an all
round—or a square—or a three-cornered cricketer, or any way we
will, he was the noblest Roman of them all. In those days the
paraphernalia of the cricketing field was slightly different to what it
is at present, the articles in use being as a rule decidedly more useful
than ornamental. A paling hauled out of a neighbouringfence made
an excellent bat, and an empty oil-can or the head of a dead cow
generally did duty instead of stumps, whilst the ball took all forms,
from the real “ Duke ” down to an old sock, in the heel of which a
deadly junk of blue metal was carefully stowed away. It was also
the custom to pitch the wickets nice and “ adjacint ” to a brick wall
or a very high fence, in order to simplify the business of the
long-stopper, and a pleasing variety was given to the otherwise mono-
tonous “ overs ” by allowing the number of balls to range from three
up to five and thirty. The fielders usually started business by
standing round the wickets in a circle ; but as the game went on, and
the apple-women and nurse-girls began to arrive, the circle got
demoralised, and the fielding, and several other matters which there
is no necessity to record now, became decidedly loose and unreliable.
Some of the fielders had certain other customs peculiar to themselves,'
which would probably be considered out of place at the present date,
as for instance, the practice poor Ted Sadler and Jem Punch had
of sauntering off to the “ Fig-tree ” for a swim just at the critical
moment when the result of the game depended upon their watchful-
ness and activity in the field. Others had a happy knack of goingto
sleep behinda “ plantation ” fence until it came to their turn to take


an innings, and in cases where a hard-hitter happened to “collar the
bowling ” it was nothing unusual for the majority of the “scouts'’
to put on their coats and go home disgusted. A “stonewaller” like
Bannerman or Murdoch wouldn’t be allowed to play at all in those
ancient times, and a man who could lift a ball like Bonnor would
have his head belted in with the butt end of a wicket before he got
through a single innings. The uniform of the leading clubs generally
consisted of two bare feet and a straw hat, but the captain was
always distinguished by having a red cotton handkerchief tied round
his head, and for special matches he invariably had his hair cut with
a horse-clipping machine, smoked a pipe that smelt like a rag-mill
on fire, and put on as many frills as a Solomon Islander’s wooden god
that could boast of two changes of underclothing. On taking the
field, each of the ancients had half a dozen of soda and a flask of
brandy carefully planted in the caves of his moleskin breeches ; the
bosom of his shirt held about four dozen beef sandwiches, half a ham
and a jar of pickles, and his general appearance was that of a man
going down the harbor to an eight-hours demonstration picnic, or
starting off to tramp across to the Gulf of Carpentaria. The umpire
was selected on the strength of his pugilistic abilities, and it was
nothing unusual for a grand match to be adjourned until this gentle-
man convinced a batsman in ten or twelve rounds that to be bowled
four times and stumped twice was equivalent to being legally out.
according to the lawful rules of cricket. These were the good old
days when cricket was a pastime, not a profession ; when “ gate-
money ” was a thing unknown, and a Spofforth didn’t rank exactly
quite as high as a Tennyson.
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL.
The social condition of the metropolis when Punch was in his
prime, and his house the principal rendezvous for the wits and beaux
of Sydney, or those down from the country, was different to what it is
now. It can scarcely be said that then, —
fi None were for party,
But all we. e for the State,”
because party feeling ran very high, but it was quite true that
“ The rich man helped the poor.
And the poor man loved the great.”


The most exalted personages did not think it bad form to go in
“ the corner,” and Punch being a popular man, and one liked and
esteemed by all classes, was the repository of many confidences, an 1 in
a measure an oracle. Nearly every morning in those days, the bold
military figure of Captain Macdonald might be seen. He would
invariably bail up and pass the time of day and latest bit of news
with the landlord.
“ Jem,” he said one day, as a great statesmen passed by, “ there
goes a man who has attained to the highest position in this country
simply by goingabout and calling other people by bad names.”
“ Dick'’ Driver—even as a Minister of the Crown he was Dick —
was a stauch friend of Punch's, and so was Hoskins, and the latter
I think, was one of the pall bearers at his funeral. Thousands of
stories might be told of Dick Driver and the *' natiff *' party, as
John Lucas called it. William Dind was one of Jem’s firmest
friends, and when the old Prince of Wales Theatre, now the Royal,
was standing, would be always found at some time of the morning
chattering with him. They were cronies, and think William first
took Jem to school. John Bennett, the other entrepreneur, lessee of
the old Victoria, now Harris and Ackman’s auction rooms, was not
so often there, not being a " clubbable” man. The “ perfesh” used
to call him Slippery John. There was an exit through the end of his
dress circle down to the stage and out into George-street by the
Royal Hotel, and John had a cheerful way of asking people to wait
for a moment and slipping out of by this, leaving them to cool
their heels while he was off on business ; but as his clientelle , in the
main, consisted of persons who wanted to beg orders, borrow money,
or growl about their “ parts.” he was, perhaps, justified in his action.
A rich man now, owner of an estate and a race course, John is still
as active and as busy as when a bad house brought woe to him. His
brothers, Tom (now of the Glasgow Arms), Joe (late of Auckland,
and another John for speculating), and poor Bill, were often at the
corner. Farnell, the denounced of Abbott and father of the Land
Act he is not allowed to administer, was often at Punch’s in those
days. It is said that once meeting Driver there, he began to rub
the least honorable portion of his person, whereupon Dick asked
what was the matter. '* Well,” said Farnell, “ I went in to see


Mr. Sadler (of whom more anon) and sitting down received a sharp
stab from some tack or pin or something/'
Why/’ said Dick in amazement, “ they've been giving you the
Flying Horse! ”
This was a cheerful instrument of torture, a sail-needle rove
though the bottom of a chair and set in motion by pulling a string.
Off went Driver to Sadler to ask how be dared give a Minister of
the Crown the horse, but it appeared that Ted was innocent, as the
apprentice was the culprit. Ted Sadler had a small boot shop up King-
street next (now) Hodge’s, then Camb’s, and thither Driver repaired
but Ted was away as usual, apron on arm, laying down some law with
clenched fist in the bar, a half-emptied glass before him. On being
told of the joke he rushed into his place, collared the lad and asked how
he dared usurp his prerogative and give great men the freedom of
the city, but the apprentice explained that the eminent man had sat
down, and the string being at hand, he could not resist the temptation
to pull it, so he was forgiven. They say that Sadler on occasions
would poll this apprentice, differently attired, and at various booths,
about a dozen times a day. This Sadler was a character, a sort of
colonial Falstaff. He really was, like Muldoon the solid man, a
person of great influence, and his support was of value at all elec-
tions, but he regarded life as one great lark and spree. Punch’s then
was like the grocery in some American village, where the boys gather
together to put up jobs on one another or unsuspecting strangers, and
Jem, who was always fond of a lark, aided and abetted them. There
were a pugilist, not then rich and boss of his own “ pub/' a
cricketer, some small bookmakers, an ex-pugilist, a tailor, a school-
master, a dyer, and some others, who were always up to some devil-
ment. To induce some one to take their (?) cab and go and order
a supper at Horne's, and then repudiate the whole transaction, was
one of their favourite pastimes. Anon they would send a present of
some very bad fish to some person, and afterwards put the inspector
on to him, and give him all sorts of trouble to rid himself of the
incubus. The would subsidise “ Phil, the flower man,” a half-witted
character who used to knock about the town, to take Punch’s fly-
cage and liberate its contents in the bar of the hotel opposite, and
when Phil would come come back in haste with glasses and stones


flying after him, it was pie and joy to them. One night some of
the boys said to him :
“ You're a pretty fellow to pretend to be a friend of Jem’s, and let
that fellow, pointing to an inebriated pressman (there are no inebri-
ated pressmen now-a-days) annoy and abuse him.”
Phil incontinently rolled into the man of letters, who responded
heartily, and in a moment the pair were mixed up together in the
gutter. Along came a policeman who took them to the Central and
locked them in. In the morning the scribe sent over to the
Freeman office, and Butler —brother of the great Paddy, a giant in
intellect, and a mighty orator, whom Parkes treated so scurvily over
the Chief Justiceship—like a brick (morose as he looks) as he is, I
learn, sent over the amount of the fine; "dhrunk and disorderly,
yer washup/’ and Jack was released. He then repaired to the
Freeman , wrote a screed, entitled " A Night in the Lock-up, by one
who has been there,” and with the proceeds released Phil, and
the pair went back in triumph to Jem's, and made a day
of it.
The jokes then were of the roughest, and Sadler was ever the
ringleader of the gang. One night he brought down the house (the
old Queen’s, once the Lyceum ; the greatest Temple 'of Thespis
in the city), by an unrehearsed effect. John Bryan, the man-
mountain, was essaying the part of Tosser in the “ Area Belle,”
when Sadler, who led a party of friendly claquqrs in the circle,
suddenly struck him in the midriff with a huge cabbage.
Sometimes the joke was against the chief, as for instance, once
when some of the boys decoyed Sadler into Camb’s (an easy task)
to get a drink, while another threw a dead cat under his counter
amongst the scraps of leather and old newspapers. The cat, already
in an advanced state of decomposition, soon asserted itself, and
Ted, who had had occasion to complain of his neighbour’s premises
—there was*only a partition between the two shops —called in the
inspector who instituted a search for the nuisance, going so far as
to pull down part of the supposed offender’s wall. When an opening
was made into Ted’s place, there was immediate nasal evidence as to
where the nuisance originated and the cat was discovered. Ted had
to square an action for slander and injury to premises, and for a


whole week never went near the corner, while the sound of “ miau ”
had the same effect on him as a red rag has on a bull.
These were a few of the jokes played by the impenitent boys in
those days, and I give them merely to show their idea of fun. Any
old stager who reads the foregoing can doubtless think of hundreds
of funnier things that occurred. The world was not so busy then,
and grown men and men of standing engaged in and enjoyed jokes
which now would seem derogatory or childish.
The corner, frivolous as it was, was an important place —it made
or marred ministries, and during electoral campaigns the most
important and political speeches were delivered from the balcony.
We had then little more than half of the present number of mem-
bers, and few had to ask in reading the debates, {t So and so ; who
the deuce is he?” as we have now-a-days. The new men were few,
for the old stagers had a sort of vested interest in their seats or some
seat in the House. They were known as Toby Ryan, Joe Eckford,
Davy Buchanan, Tom Garrett, Joe Raphael. Joe, by-the-bye, was
a "new man,’’ and lasted only a session. He was defeated when
seeking re-election, and thus addressed the electors of West
Sydney: —
“ Good night, my love, good night, my love,
Pray do not weep for me ;
My trunk is packed, my cab is here.
And I’m going home to tea.”
And go home he did, never to return to political life, though he
adorned the bench for some years afterwards, and an applicant for a
license, or any old pal could always depend upon Joe for a vote, roster
or no roster. His old familiar face and dog, his kindly heart and
rough voice were missed when he was gathered to his fathers. May
the turf lie lightly on his breast. The standard legislators then
were, besides the great chiefs, Martin, Parkes, Robertson, Butler,
Farnell, Piddington, Sutherland, Innes, G. A. Lloyd, Allen, and Saul
Samuel; Garrett, Buchanan (M'Elhone had not then turned up to
purify the House, nor O’Connor to die on its flure), sturdy John
Macintosh, J. F. Burns, 11 Bob” Smith, Honest Fitzpatrick, Webb
the sallow Teece, Onslow the Captain, Geo. Thornton, James White,
rejected for Dr. Creed in his own kingdom, to the astonishment of


everybody, Hurley, Lord, Hoskins, Driver, Arnold —drowned trying
to save some pumpkins—Lackey, and some others whose names are
yet familiar.
My friend Jem Portus has compiled what he facetiously calls a
Stud Book, in which the notable men of the time are called by
characteristic names, such as the Tribune, The Squirt, The Black-
fellow’s Dog, The Offside Leader, the Bull Stag, The Scabby-headed
Cuckoo, etc. ; but it remains, except for his own delectation and use
in conversation, buried in his own capacious breast.
At the time to which I now refer, those Patagonians of our
political history, Wentworth, Bland, Robert Lowe (now Lord Sher-
bourne), Darvall, Nichols, Manning, Deas.Thompson, and Plunkett had
ceased to steer and “ con ” the ship of State, and the leaders of the
house were Martin, Parkes and Robertson.
It will be interesting to give the Ministry’s ruling about the time
of Punch’s prime. From December, 1870, to May, 1872, Martin,
Robertson, Lord, Wilson, Windeyer and Docker were in office. This
was known as the “Yes, Sir James” Ministry, and it was
hurled from power with something akin to ignominy in spite of the
great ability and high character of the autocrat who presided over
it. Then came—lß72 till s—Parkes,5 —Parkes, Piddington, Lloyd, Farnell,
Abbott, Sutherland, Butler, Innes, Samuel. They were followed by
(1875 to 7) by Robertson, Forster (afterwards Stuart), Docker,
Garrett, Barker, Lackey, Dailey, Lucas, Burns. With the exception
of Parkes, Martin, Samuel, Forster, Robertson, Sutherland, Docker,
Wilson and Burns, these Ministries were composed of men who had
held no office up till 1870. After them, before 1.880, Piddinton,
Driver, Suttor, Hoskins, Lloyd, Long, Baker, Combes, Jacob,
Davies, Fitzpatrick, Leary, Foster, and W. H. Suttor came out from
the ranks of the Assembly and got portfolios.
So much for the Ministries and Parliaments of Punch’s time, and
it only remains to give a list of Governors with their year of office
to convey as much political information as can be expected in a
work like this.


Feb. 24,1838
July 11, 1846
Gipps, Sir George.
July 12, 1846
Aug. 2. 1846
O’Connell, Sir Maurice,
Aug. 3,1846
lan. 17,1855
Fitzroy, Sir Charles A.
Jan. 20,1855
Jan. 22,1861
Denison, K.C.B., Sir William Thomas.
Jan. 23,1861
Mar. 21,1861
Kempt, Lieut.-Colonel John F„ Administrator.
Mar. 22,1861
May 15,1861
Young, K.C.B., G.C.M.G., Right Hon. Sir
John, Administrator,
May 16,1861
Dec. 24.1867
Young, K..C.B , G.C.M.G., Right Hon. Sir
John, Governor-in-Chief.
Dec. 25,1867
Jan. 7,1868
Chute, K.C.B., Sir Trevor, Administrator.
Jan. 8,1868
Feb. 22,1872
Belmore, P.C., Right Hon. Earl.
Feb. 23, 1872
June 2, 1872
Stephen, C.B., Sir Alfred, Administrator.
June 3, 1872
Mar. 19,1879
Robinson, Knt., G.C.M.G., Sir Hercules George
Robert, Governor-in-Chief.
Mar. 20,1879
Aug. 3,1879
Stephen, Knt., K.C.M.G., C.B., Sir Alfred,
Lieutenant-Governor
Aug. 4,1879
Nov. 9,1885
Loftus, P.C., G.C.B., The Right Hon. Sir
Augustus William Frederick Spencer.
Dec. 12, 1885
Carrington, Lord.
Governors of New South Wales during Punch’s life,
with dates of taking and leaving office:—
During the interregnum Sir Alfred Stephen was acting Governor.
I have given before a long list of familiar personages who in some
greater or less degree were identified with public life in Punch’s time,
and since then my memory conjures up more who might have been
seen daily at or passing “ The Corner.” Folks of all degrees—from
Captain Watson, who erected the fine statue to the memory of Cook
at Randwick and who daily drove past with Moffat, the well known
stationer (who left a third of a million, and “ sensible to the last,”
evaded payments of legacy duties), down to the Flying Pieman, who
had outlived his wondrous activity and reason and roamed the
streets noticed only by vagabond boys who teased him. Few of
those who saw this worn-out athlete, fantastically dressed and a
victim to a thousand phantasies, knew that William Francis King
was a *'gentleman born,” the son of an Esquire and Paymaster of
Accounts in the Treasury at Whitehall. He was intended for the
Church, but went to the “bar,” for after being a stock broker in
London, he sank by a series of gradations to be a clerk in the
Tower of London Treasury, a schoolmaster, and then a barman.
His performances as a pedestrian read like a romance, but they are
vouched for. He died in the Liverpool Asylum, 1874.
Sporting men took to Punch as ducks take to water, Frank
Hewitt, the most “ dashing” ped we ever saw, and still game as a
pebble—the Thompson family, one of the finest human families,
c


physically, of one stock, in the world. Old man Thompson and his
spouse, still as active as himself, celebrated their golden wedding in
Sydney lately. Tommy Kelly, the trainer, is now in a good way of
business near the corner where he often yarned with Jem. Rush,
settled on the Clarence, but when in town with Laycock, Trickett,
and all the scullers of course rallied round the veteran, as did all
votaries of sport; and pretty well all the matches were made, the
agreements drawn out, and stakes paid over, &c. The attendance
was cosmopolitan. John Bryan, then a theatrical agent, would tell
jolly John Levison whether there was “ ady doos” or not. Mat
Byrnes was ever a crony of Jem’s, so was Mannix the tailor, who is
still a man of note. E. E. Jones and J. H. White, not then able, as
they are now, to lay you £so,ooo at the market odds, and pay it like
water if they are “ struck,” but already “ solid” men, did Business at
Punch’s. E. E. was a "comp.” and reporter on the old Newcastle
Pilot, and a smart one too. Foley, the champion of the church
militant, who periodically dealt apostolic knocks to Ross in the
interests of orthodoxy, always had an auditory'for his quaint speeches,
for making which he was, and is still, famous, would be there at
times, with his patron and the founder of his fortunes, George Hill.
In the literary line I forgot to include E. Lewis Scott, the polyglot
author, Frank Brewer, for about half a century connected with the
editorial staff of the Herald, and for years its representative in London ;
who had, and doubtless has, one of the most magnificent voices that
ever was heard off the stage. Jem Hobson, the shipping reporter
for the News, now. proprietor of his own paper at St. Leonard’s.;
Sam Cook, who did a similar duty for the Herald, and who enjoys a
princely pension from the proprietors of that paper. Delany, senior,
then of Newcastle, whose trenchant satires roused the ire of the
nobility there, Sheridan Moore, the learned pundit and classical
scholar; Langley, the commercial editor of the Herald, now a
planter at Lord Howe Island; erratic, but clever Jem O’Neill, editor
of the Illustrated Sydney News ; Christy Moore, the boss of the
machinery department of the Herald, who must be reckoned
amongst the literati, for if he didn’t play the organ he blew the
bellows ; G. A. Loyau, who wrote tales ; Andy Bayliss of the News
counter, with his redundant locks; Davis, the financial pilot of the


News fortunes; J. H. Heaton, M.P., then a reporter on the paper from
which he now receives a revenue as large as that of a German
prince, and which he distributes right royally in Pall Mall, and at
his palatial mansion at Tavistock Hill; and finally, M. Maloney, a
true man of letters, though slaving for the State in the Telegraph
Department, whose Shakesperian disputations with Jem were worth
a king’s ransom to listen to. I must not forget “Joe” Carroll, the
City Auditor,who kept Punch's books and knew more of his monetary
matters than he did himself, and who looked after his estate till it was
finally divided amongst the members of his family. Joe still gets
about bravely and looks hearty, as I trust he will for years to come;
nor the lawyer of that name whose tongue was a shilalegh that
whacked sinse into the wooden heads of the most obdurate binch;
nor Joe Lowe, still a prominent police court practitioner ; nor Merri-
man, now the lucky possessor of the lucrative billet of City
Solicitor ; nor his sturdy father, lately gone to his well earned rest.
I might go on in this strain for a long time, for, as I write, old familar
faces rise up before me and the names of theirpossessors would flow
from my pen with rapidity, and should do so, but for my publisher’s
warning not to put the book beyond the pole of successful publica-
tion. I therefore conclude this portion of my work satisfied that
those I have written of so briefly, sometimes flippantly, will not
object to have their names brought in in connection with the times
of so brave, genial, and worthy a man as Jem Punch.


JEM PUNCH—HIS LIFE.
The Life of Punch himself, apart from his connection with the
political and social affairs of his time, is easily told. He was born of
respectable parents, his father being in the timber-getting trade at
Gosford, Brisbane Water, in 1840, but the family removed to Sydney
the next year. At an early age he developed a taste for aquatic
sports, notably sculling, and when only sixteen years old won the
race for amateurs in skiffs at the Balmain Regatta, beating R. Green
and J. Healy. His subsequent victories and records, which prove
him to have been one of the finest oarsmen of his, or any other time,
maybe found in all works on sporting. Punch, however, was one of
those who rowed “ with his head” as well as arms, and he soon saw
the folly of pursuing the pastime as a calling until he broke down
unfit for that or, perhaps, any other, as too many men of muscle do;
and, after arriving at man’s estate (his last professional race was in
1863), he gave it best, and went into business as a hotelkeeper. His
first start in life was as a “ hand ” in the Customs boat, but he soon
took to the water on his own account. I had it from his own lips
that on many occasions he rowed belated travellers to Manly Beach
for a crown ; for he thought the money earned even so laboriously as
that worth all that could be got in a Government billet or from
relatives; such was the sturdy independence of his nature. With
his old comrade M‘Grath, he took the City Wine Vaults in George-
street, opposite Jamison-street, and afterwards, the hotelat the corner
of King and Pitt-streets (now the Federal Bank), which hostelry he
subsequently obtained sole possession of and which he conducted,
with help of some of his brothers, with much success, until his death.
In 1876 he conceived the bold idea of endeavouring to wrest the
sculling championship of England from Sadler, the then holder of it.
Sadler’s reputation at the time has been much underrated. He was
reckoned a glutton for pulling ; one day winning a bo? trace in lumpy
water off Hastings or Brighton, in the English Channel, and a week
afterwards a first-class outrigger race on the Thames. The idea was
worthy of a great mind, and Punch who was as keen a judge of a
rower as ever lived, picked upon Trickett, who, up to that time, had
only given such evidence of his coming powers as would warrant


such a far-seeing man as he in his action. Trickett was working in
a quarry at Greenwich, on the Parramatta River—he afterwards
became landlord of a big hotel right opposite that of his benefactor,
and now runs one in Rockhampton that is fast turning him in a
fortune.
The result of Punch’s daring is well-known; how Trickett lowered
the proud flag of England’s representative amidst the plaudits of
millions, how, on news of victory being received in Sydney the
streets presented the appearance of Rome during a Carnival, and how
on their return the victors were accorded some such a triumph as
awaited a Roman emperor who had conquered a province. It is
allowed that to Punch belonged the lion’s share of the credit —for his
discovery of Trickett’s powers and their development under his care,
his conception of the idea of a contest in England and the excellent
arrangements he made throughout, from engaging the best trainer in
England, Harry Kelly, down to the most minute detail. In England,
00, to him fell the task of representing, socially, the colony. Trickett
was ever the boorish, reticent quarryman, who could pull a boat—
only this, and nothing more. London pressmen nicknamed him
Sir Saturnine Taciturn. Punch, on the contrary, was possessed of a
natural savoir faire which recommend a man to all classes at once.
Mr, Comber, an old school-fellow of mine, of the Sporting Life ,
(the “ little pink ’un”), told me that Jem was as much at home with
or as little awed by aristocrats as if he had been brought up in
“ marble halls.” The Duke of Beaufort, the noblest of all titled
“ sports” in England, said one day to him, “ Mr. Punch, what of
this race? Is the Australian kangaroo to whip the British
lion ?”
Jem looked at him and replied, “Well, my Lord, I don't often
open my mouth to fill other people’s ; but they say you're a good sort
not likely to blab to the ‘books/ and I don't mind laying you on to a
good thing. I am sure we shall win, and perhaps easily —put a
thousand on it, my lord."
“ Ah, yes, Punch,” said the Duke; “but even we dukes haven’t
always thousands with which to back fancies in boat races.”
“Then,” said Jem, "my lord, pop the family plate, and put it on
it's all over, bar accidents.”


From Punch’s return until his premature death, there is nothing
of especial interest for me to write. I was away from the colony, in
America and England most of the time, and saw little of him ; but I
always heard of him, and held him in high esteem. It was in 1881
that came the last sad scene of all. His illness was brief, though of
sufficient gravity to alarm his family, who were all summoned to his
bedside. Fatal results were not at first feared, but he soon gave
evidence that the hour of departure was nigh. Trickett’s defeat by
Hanlan preyed upon his mind, though, perhaps, it had nothing to do
actually with his malady. He was with those who thought the
Australian champion would again be the victor. I was in England
at the time, and followed the race in the Press boat, but could never
understand affairs in connection with it. When the men started,
Trickett had no backers, whereas on the Saturday previous, two days
before, bets as large as level were laid. This, by the way.
Almost before anyone outside of his own family knew that he was ill,
the news went forth, “Jem Punch is dead.” Freedom did not shriek,
as it is reported to have done, when Koscuisko fell. The world did
not hold its breath for a time, but there arose one universal expres-
sion of sorrow at the loss of such a man. He was known to, and
loved or liked of all; for, though prominent, he had incurred no
man’s resentment, nor made an enemy of a soul whose enmity was
deserved or worthy of notice. Yet, he died prematurely, and at a
time when he had amassed sufficient to allow of his enjoying the
fruits of his well-earned competence. Death, did not come “with
friendly care,” for he was capable of enjoying life for another twenty
years. He could only console himself with the reflection that —
“ There is no armour against Fate,
For Death la\s his icy hands on kings.”
No man, perhaps, who ever died in Australia received such kindly
and eulogistic obituary notices in the Press. There were no political
sins to slur over, no misunderstandings with opponents to explain
away or defend. All was praise, regret, sorrow. Newspapers of all
kinds united in doing honor to his memory in paragraphs, poems,
and “ lives ” of the departed. A collection of the principal notices
have been made and framed by his brothers, and are worthy of
perusal.


The funeral, it is needless to say, was an imposing pageant. There
were lovely flowers in profusion, the most noticeable being an offering
from Mrs. Frank Smith, of Botany, who levied liberally upon her
husband’s well-known gardens and conservatories with a lavish
hand. Four priests of the Roman Catholic Church followed in the
cortege—which was miles in length—with legislators and many
other of the prominent citizens of Sydney. The place of interment
was the Roman Catholic cemetery at Petersham, where a handsome
memorial stone and tomb mark the last resting-place of Jem Punch.
Punch —who was unmarried —left a mother, still a hale, active, old
lady, and six brothers, Four of the latter are in public business.
Ned, upon whom the mantle of Jem’s geniality has fallen in a great
degree, keeps the Captain Cook Hotel, Moore Park; Tom, the
Albion, at the corner of Elizabeth and Market-streets, one of the
best houses in the city; Patrick and Steve have also hotels in the
city. The three first-named, almost up to the time of his death
in turns, assisted Jem in the management of the hotel, which was
bought by another brother at his death.
Punch left a large sum of money —the estate realizing over
a good portion of it being profit from the land he bought in
Pitt-street, upon which Hoffnung’s palatial store stands. This he
divided in his will into shares amongst his brothers and his mother
according to their previous financial positions in life. Thus it shows
as death came on he displayed that over-weening love of kin that
characterises his race.


NOCTES PUNCHIANAE
BY O. P.
If a book is to be published with the purpose of, to some extent,
illustrating and keeping green in one’s memories, the life and times
of so universally popular a hero as was “Jem Punch,” I must cer-
tainly claim to be represented ; and with such intent I venture the
present contribution. I may fail in carrying out the the editor’s
intention in the matter of affording extensive amusement to readers,
but I will not let slip the opportunity of at least showing my respect
for Jem, whom we all respected, and who thoroughly deserved it. So,
while volunteering these lines, I crave the consideration of all who
venture to wade through them.
Looking back through my long and intimate acquaintance with
poor “Jem” and his “ Corner,” there are no hours or moments more
pleasant to recall than those passed in the old hostelrie, with another
since departed and much-regretted good friend, the late Mr. Samuel
Bennett, founder of the Evening News and Town and Country
Journal; who while living at Miller’s Point, generally spent from
eight to ten o’clock p.m. five or six evenings out of seven in his
office. Work being over we often strolled across to “ The Corner,”
Mr. Bennett taking with him any friends who had dropped in for a yarn,
of whom there were usually two or three ; and as we crossed the way
he never forgot to put coppers into the hand of his regular pensioner,
the old blind woman, who sat in front of the bar door. The place
we established ourselves was by a little window communicating
between the dining-room and the bar, and where anybody present had
to consider himself Mr, Bennett’s guest. Regular attendants knew
his determination upon this point, but those who did not, and
ventured to ask the company to imbibe, were regularly silenced with
—“ This is my window ! When you find me anywhere else in the
house, you can ‘shout,’ but not here.” I never knew him to be at
any other window except once in the passage on a Sunday night
and then all were on an equality. The party who surrounded that
hotel window generally came from the following;—the veteran Levy
of the Customs, now an octogenarian, but still good enough to have
offered himself only the other day, to the East Sydney electors, in


the interests of barmaids; Edward Combes, since made a C.M.G.,
whom Mr. Bennett was fond of twitting with being “ too plaguy-
aristocratic; ” Jem Portus; G. S. Yeo, then Inspector of Stock;
William Pritchard, J.P., one of his oldest friends; John Hugh
Davies; George Smith, of Manly, when he was in town; and the
narrator. What we didn’t discuss, at that little window, I couldn’t
tell. Somebody was sure to have a bit of new gossip, and I heard
there, some as good stories and quick repartee as could be found
knocking about.
We were also fond of “poor old Jem,” and of "Tom,” and
"Paddy,” who saw to our wants at “the window;” and during
my recollection I never knew the proprietor of the T. & C. go
anywhere else for his glass of English ale. His particular reason for
liking "Jem” Punch was the latter’s bluntness; for no one more
than he (Mr. S. B.), could forgive the absence of suaviter in modo,
so long as fortitur in re was in good supply. Wouldn’t he just have
appreciated Mr. J. P. Abbott! I’ve often thought when talking to
“ Jem,” as he stood outside his King-street side door, that there was
something in his very stolidity which drew people towards him much
more, and caused them to stick closer, than any amount of smiling
palaver would have done. Devoid of “ gush,” he was slow to make
friends ; but once made, they didn’t leave him easily. I never knew
him to lose any friends: and there was a heartiness in his friendship
that led him continually to do kindnesses, and say nothing about
them.
I was in Melbourne when he, with his protege, NedTrickett, passed
through on his way to England, and after the champion had retired
for the night at Carton’s, " Jem ” and I started out on a round of
the Bourke-street sporting houses. At this time J. M. Christie
was posing as champion sculler of the Yarra, and a great
set was made at Trickett’s mentor with the object of getting him to
let his man try conclusions. At any rate, whether Christie really
wanted a match or not, he made considerable play about one; but
the veteran Sydney rower was too hard-headed and wary to be talked
into any terms. He, however, finally offered to back Trickett, for
such a performance as completely took all the match-making out of
the opposite side, and then there was peace. After a by no means


inconsiderable “ symposium” that night, the party went on their way
next morning; and I never wasmore amused than by the way '‘Jem”
fenced with Christie on the overnight, eventually taking the attack
into his own hands, and retiring in good order with all the best of the
position.
It may not be malapropos if I tell a true, but unpublished, story
which was related one night at “the window” to Mr. Bennett espe-
cially, though there were others there, and, as it was told by the
delinquent against himself, it amused his proprietor immensely. To
make a speech for a real, live Governor falls to the lot of few “ poor
Pressmen,” and to still fewer is the privilege relegated, on account
of such a natural as well as accomplished master of language as Sir
Hercules Robinson; wherefore the little (vide Enery P.) I
am now about to relate is all the more interesting, being as it is not
only unique of its kind, but perfectly true. It fell out thus :
Shortly after Sir Hercules Robinson assumed the Viceregal
position in Sydney, the Parramatta Jockey Club obtained the use of
Homebush Race Course for a two-days’ meeting on Easter Monday
and Tuesday, with the intention of right royally entertaining His
Excellency, who, up to then, had only seen colonial racing at Rand-
wick; and a well-known newspaperman, who busied himself with the
sporting affairs of the three papers over which Mr. Samuel Bennett
then held sway, was, in office parlance, “down” for the work.
Night Pressmen of that day have certainly not forgotten poor Johnny
M'Kone’s house, where so many of us regularly found ourselves
“ after hours ; ” and among the carousers to give the needful “ three
taps on the door,” was very often the sporting scribe under notice.
It happened that his evil genius had taken him out on that Easter
Sunday night, and, having called in at “ Johnny’s,” after commencing
the evening at " Jem’s Corner,’' he made for home in company with
his friend “ Watty,” just about “ milk time.’' As was his custom
under such circumstances, in order not to disturb his belongings, he
lay down on the sofa, after taking off his boots, and was very soon
hopelessly enthralled by the insinuating “ Murphy.” Now, it so
happened that the wife and olive branches of this house were due for
a pic-nic, to which they had given most of their thoughts for weeks
past; and very early that morning they began to awake paterfamilias,


so that he might be astir before the time came for them to leave.
Here, however, all their efforts were of no effect, as the “ good
man of the house” insisted ort being left alone to sleep for another
hour or two.
Here began the trouble. The family went to their pic-nic, and the
pater awoke at three p.m., of course too late to go to Homebush ;
so, in the first place, making a reconnaisance of the safe, for he
was hungry, he began to think over the situation. The prospect,
certainly, disclosed a difficulty, but, being fertile in expedients, he
soon settled on a plan of action, and thus soliliquised : —“Yes ! Til
set to and write a short introduction ; they don't want a long one, as
the paper will be full of Easter Monday sports ; and then, when the
people are all come home, I’ll go to friend 1 Nemo', at his home,
and get the racing from him.” He then bethought him that Hi s
Excellency would, after the manner of Randwick, be " lunched ” by
his Parramatta entertainers ; that Mr. Parnell, as president of the
club, would preside, and propose the Governor’s health; and, having
settled this in his own mind, he wrote a speech in Mr. Parnell’s neat
style, also one for Sir Hercules, adopting the ideas he had heard the
new Viceroy give utterance to on previous similar occasions. At
last the time came to hunt up “Nemo;” but I need not try to describe
his feelings when he found that his friend had “ shifted house ” the
previous week, leaving no sign whither he had gone. Suddenly the
struggling scribe recollected two Gulgong men who were sure to
have been at the races ; sought them at their hotel, and from their
books and memories made up a sufficiently diffuse account of the
various races ; but, as these opportunely-found authorities were not
club room visitors, they knew nothing of the lunching business.
This and that were carefully put together, the combined authorities
deciding that the column “read well, and then the “chief con-
spirator” took his "stuff” to the office, and grandly handed it to the
overseer of the morning daily it was destined to adorn.
Next morning he made no mistake; but while standing on the steps
of the" Royal,” looking out for a mate to join in a cab, the official time-
keeper of that day happened to come along, and the pair agreed to go
together ; but, said he of the newspaper, “ let us first drive round to
the office, and get a couple of papers to read as we go.” “ Yes,”


quoth the “timist,” "and, by-the-by, where were you yesterday?”
“Nevermind,” replied our friend, “ I got a good report.” Talking
of various matters —they never looked at the papers till after getting
down “ Taverner’s Hill,” and it was too late to turn back ; but they
hadn’t read much before the chronographer burst out wildly laughing,
to the great astonishment of his companion, who declared he saw
nothing ridiculous in the race report. “ Enough to make a pig laugh! ”
shrieked the other. “ Why, Til tell you. It appears that Sir
Hercules has set his face against luncheon toasts and speeches at
race meetings ; and as yesterday was the inauguration of the new
system, neither the Governor nor Parnell made a speech !” It was too
late to turn back, so the report had to run the gauntlet of The Nooze
of the evening as well as the morning daily ; but the fun thickened
when the hero of the occasion reached the Saddling Paddock. Here,
of course, he was unmercifully “roasted;” while some officious
hangers after “ big wigs” kept pointing him out to His Excellency
and those with him, as the fellow who had made such an escapade;
but on enquiring of those who really knew, the unlucky concoctor of
the speeches learnt to his satisfaction, that Sir Hercules said “ he
never knew a better joke in his life, and didn’t think he could have
made a better speech.”
So the affair ended, per se. The perpetrator was in daily expec-
tation of hearing something from the proprietor, feeling sure that
some kind friend (?) would certainly carry the news; but never a
word came, and it must have been a year or eighteen months after-
wards, when Mr. Bennett one night at “The Window,” called on the
scribe to tell a story. Then, premising that he liked telling stories
against himself, he gave the particulars I have related above,
expressing his wonder that they had not long before reached head
quarters. I never saw folks laugh more heartily than did the whole
crowd, Mr. Bennett and our friend “Jem,” almost splitting their
sides ; and the former said, “ he never heard anything better, and it
certainly was astonishing that nobody had told him of it. Had any
one done so, the news carrier would have got the worst of it.” Very
like in disposition were Mr, Samuel Bennett and “Jem” Punch.
They were both blunt, straightforward, and truthful; both made
friends quietly and without gush, but both stuck to them fast, when


once made, and both would go to the rescue of any one, to whom
they thought the world and some of its dregs were doing an
injustice. I have only to add, that the speeeches reported to have
been delivered by Mr. Farnell and Sir Hercules Robinson on that
memorable Easter Monday, are to be found in The Empire and
Evening News of the following day.
At the risk of taking up too much of your valuable space I must tell
you another little story about “The Window,” which evidences
pointedly, that particular feeling of good nature and determined
sticking to a friend which I have already predicated as having been
so strongly developed both in one's lost friends, “ Jem” Punch and
S. B. At one of our little evening gatherings, at which I well
remember, “ Ted” Combes was present. Mr. Bennett said to the
sporting scribe the hero of the Homebush Race Story, “ O. P.,
your friend, ‘the Frenchman/ seems very anxious about your welfare.
He was sitting with me yesterday and became so d d inquisitive
that I had to send him away with a flea in his ear. He won't
cross-question me again in a hurry.”
What did he want to know? ” asked the scribe.
“ Well, he begun thus, and this was our dialogue :
Tim. —‘ How’s my dear old friend, O. P., getting on with you ?’
S. B.—“ 1 First-rate.’
Tim. —“ ( Pm glad to hear that; I thought he might be getting
drunk betimes.’
S. B. —“ ‘ That’s his business.’
Tim. —“ * Oh, but don’t you see, I thought he might be neglecting
his work betimes/
S. B.—“ ‘ That’s my business.’ ”
Of course, the dear friend who enquired so affectionately, exitted
at once when he found his game was well understood ; and S. B.
remarked to the scribe when the story was over: “ If all your friends,
are as fond of meddling with your affairs, it’s a wonder you are in
the flesh at all ; and poor old “Jem ” was delighted to find how the
meddler had been snubbed, remarking that “Mr. Bennett had served
him right, and that was the way all such fellows should be treated.”
In conclusion, “ I never saw two more truthful, more sterling ‘white-
men/ than Samuel Bennett and James Punch.”


FACTS IN AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.
I am, in the main, indebted for the following to Messrs. Heyde,
Todman and Co., Tobacco and Cigar Merchants, Wynyard-square,
who last year published a very interesting and valuable pamphlet on
the subject, which they have granted me permission to extract from: —
Mr. George Howe, who was born in the West Indies, was the first
printer of a newspaper in Australia—the Sydney Gazette and N.S.W.
Advertiser —first issued May 5, 1803.
Captain Cook discovered Australia on the morning of April 19,
1770. Land was first sighted by Lieutenant Hicks, and the locality,
which was southward of Cape Howe, Gippsland, was named by
Cook “ Point Hicks.” Cook first landed in Australia at Botany
Bay, April 28, 1770. He landed five times on the coast. His fourth
landing was June 18, at the Endeavour River, now the site of the
rich mining port, Cooktown. The river was so called by Cook, as it
was here his ship, “ The Endeavour,” was repaired, after having
struck on a rock seven days previously.
No convicts were sent to N.S.W. after Aug. 1, 1840.
Governor Phillip, the first Australian Governor, held the position
for five years. He was one of the most remarkable men of his day.
He was the son of a German. The first fleet, of which he had
command, landed 1030 souls on Australian soil.
The first white men that ever landed in Victoria were the survivors
of the exploring ship, “ Sydney Cove,” bound from India to Sydney,
which vessel was lost in Bass’ Straits in 1797. The survivors landed
at Cape Howe, and came overland to New South Wales.
The site of the first Government House in Australia was Pitt-
street, Sydney, where Vickery’s buildings now stand. The found-
ation-stone was laid January 24, 1781.
The first Legislative Council in Australia met in Sydney August
11, 1824, the members being—W. Stewart, Francis Forbes, Frederick
Goulburn, John Oxley, James Bowman, and John Macarthur,
Gold was first discovered in Australia in 1839, by Count Strezlecki,
a Polish refugee. The Blue Mountains was the locality of the
discovery. At the request of the Governor-General, Sir George
Gipps, the news was kept a profound secret, lest the news should


paralyse trade and settlement in Sydney. Mr. W. B. Clarke reported
the discovery of gold in granite. October 29, 1841. The first
practical discovery of a gold-field in Australia was made by
Mr. E. H. Hargraves, February 12, 1851, at Summer Hill.
The separation of Victoria was decreed by the Imperial Parliament
on August 5, 1850.
Tasmania was declared independent of New South Wales,
December 3, 1825.
Gold was discovered in Australia by James Mcßrlan, a surveyor,
at the Fish River, fifteen miles from Bathurst, Feb. 15, 1823. Some
convicts were said to have discovered gold in large quantities while
road-making in the Bathurst district in 1814, and their discovery was
only kept a secret by threats of flogging and imprisonment. There
is no proof of the discovery. A convict was flogged in Sydney, 1825,
for having in his possession stolen gold, which, however, he said he
had discovered in the bush.
Garden Island was proclaimed part of Sydney Domain on the yth
Sept., 1811.
In 1788 the New South Wales aboriginal population was stated at
1,000,000, of which number 3000 were between Botany and Broken
Bay. In fifteen years the numbers were reduced to 1600.
South Australia was proclaimed a colony December 28, 1836, and
Captain Hindmarsh, R.N., the first Governor.
There was a desperate fight between the military and the aborigi-
nals, near Parramatta, in March, 1797. Fifty natives were killed,
and the chief wounded and taken prisoner.' There was another
fierce aboriginal encounter (but between two hostile tribes) on the
Racecourse (now Hyde Park), Sydney, several being wounded and
one killed, on December 26, 1829.
“ Napoleon’s Land” was the name given to Australia by French
explorers, on board two French vessels, in 1802. They were not
aware that the British had previously taken formal possession of the
island.
The first ship-load of free female immigrants to Australia Were
fifty young women from an orphan school in Cork, June, 1831. The
first free male immigrant was a German, named Philip Schaeffer,
who came out with the first fleet, in 1788, as agricultural superin


tendent. The “ Beilina,” on January 16, 1792, anchored with the first
load of free immigrants, who were granted farms of eighty and one
hundred acres near Parramatta. The total free immigration to the
colonies, from August, 1838, to 1875, was 1,102,897.
On November 21, 1791, twenty male and female convicts
absconded from Sydney, under the impression that they could reach
China overland. Several perished in the bush, and remainder
returned much distressed.
The total number of convicts landed in Australia, from 1878 to
1812, was 137,161, of whom 20,319 were females.
Coal was first discovered in Australia at Port Stephens, in May,
1876. A year later it was discovered at Mount Keira, Wollongong,
by the survivors of the wrecked vessel, “ Sydney Cove.” Coal was
discovered at Newcastle Sept. 19, 1797. A Lieutenant Shortland
was proceeding northward, in pursuit of the vessel “ Cumberland,”
seized by pirates, and discovered the Hunter River, and at the same
time found coal at Newcastle, samples of which he brought back to
Sydney. The first exportation of coal was on board the “ Anna
Josepha,” bound for the Cape, where it fetched £6 per ton.
The first attempt to cross the Blue Mountains was made in 1793,
by Captains Paterson and Trench and Lieutenant Dawes. Succes-
sive attempts were made, but they were fruitless. The task, however,
was accomplished in May, 1813, by Mr. William Charles Wentworth,
Lieutenant W. Lawson (102nd Regiment), and Mr. George Blaxland.
The mountains are now crossed by the Zig-Zag railway, a piece of
engineering work unsurpassed in any part of the world.
Captain Hunter, the second Governor of New Sopth Wales, came
out to Australia with the first fleet, in 1788. He was Governor from
September 7, 1795, to September 28, 1800.
The most noted slaughterings of aboriginals took place at the
Dawson River in 1857, when, in retaliation for the massacre of the
Frazer family, sixty aboriginals were'killed; and at Medway Ranges,
Queensland, in October, 1861, when 170 blacks were slain by the
police in retaliation for the Wells massacre.
King Boongarit (Bungaru), the last Port Jackson aboriginal king
settled at George’s Head in 1815, died, and was interred at Garden
Island in 1830.




The two biggest nuggets of gold found in Australia, one at Louisa
Creek, Turon River, and the other at Burrandong, near Orange,
were valued, respectively, at and
"Australia Felix” was the name given by Major Mitchell to
Victoria when he explored it in 1836.
“ Australia” was so named by Flinders, the explorer, in 1814.
The richest return of gold known in Australia was 56:2 ounces
from 16 tons of quartz from Krohmann’s claim, Hill End, valued at
20,000; 630 lbs. weight of stone from Beyers and Holtermann’s
claim gave 12,000 worth of gold.
The earliest known map of Australia is the one in the British
Museum, executed about 1530. It is called the Dauphin Map.
Australia is here named the Greater Java.”
The first stock imported to Australia came by the fleet in 1788,
and consisted of two bulls and five cows. They were lost in the
bush immediately after arrival.
The'first Act passed in N.S.W. was a measure to make promissory
notes and bills of exchange payable in Spanish dollars —available as
if they had been drawn payable in sterling English money. Sept.
28, 1824.
The first election took place in' Sydney June 15, 1843; and the
first representative legislative body in the Council met August Ist,
1843. The first Legislative Assembly met October 10, 1851.
Responsible Government was established May 22, 1885-6 —the date
of Australian political freedom.
The first licence for mining for gold issued in Australia is dated:
“ Sydney, 24th May, 1815.”
Twenty-eight aboriginals (men, women, and children) were
brutally slaughtered at Dangar’s station, Myall Creek, in June, 1838.
Seven assigned servants, guilty of the offence, were publicly hanged,
near Fort-street school, December 18, 1838.
The days of greatest heat felt in Australia were January 21, 1845
(Central Australia), when the record was 132 in the shade; and
January 10, 1791, at Sydney, when the glass recorded 105 in the
shade.
Ludwig Leichhardt, the great Australian explorer, was a Prussian,
born in 1814, and educated in Paris. He arrived in Australia in
D


1840. His first exploration was a trip from Brisbane to Port
Essington, leaving the former place September 1, 1844, and arriving
at Port Essington December 17, 1845. When near the seaboard,
Leichhardt came across a tribe of natives who spoke broken English.
His last effort was an exploration of the country lying between his
own and Sir Thomas Mitchell’s routes. The party consisted of
Leichhardt, Stuart, Kelly, Hentig, Classen, and two blacks.
Leichhardt’s last letter was dated February 26, 1848, from Canning
Downs. The fate of the party is still, and probably will ever remain,
a mystery. The rumour that a white man, supposed to be Classen,
was still living with the blacks, has never been verified; nor have
the statements of a bushman, named Skuthorpe, that he had found
the relics of Leichhardt’s party.
Torres Straits was discovered and so named by a Spanish
navigator of that name, who reached Australia in 1606.
The first vessel that ever entered Port Philip was the “ Enterprise,”
August 15, 1835.
The first Englishman'who touched Australia was William Dampier,
in “The Bachelor’s Delight,” in 1688. His voyage round the
world lasted eight years.
Governor Macquarie was twelve years Governor of New South
Wales.
In 1605 the Dutch yacht, “The Dove,” sailed along the coast of
Carpentaria, North Australia.
The first known discoverer of Australia was Guillaume Le Testu,
a Proven9al pilot born at Grasse. A map of Australia, with his
name thereon, is in the Department of War, Paris, and bears the
date of 1342. .
The first white man buried in Australia was Forby Sutherland,
seaman on Captain Cook’s vessel, " Endeavour.” The locality of
the grave is near the entrance to Botany Bay, on the south side.
The Gulf of Carpentaria was so named in 1629 —141 years before
Cook’s time —by a Dutch navigator, who, while in charge of a
squadron, sailed along the coast of North Australia.
Tasman discovered Australia and New Zealand in 1642, and took
possession in the name of Holland.
Queensland was declared a separate colony, Dec. 12, 1856.


The first recorded horse race in Australia took place at Parramatta,
April 30, 1810. The first race held in Sydney was on Oct. 15, 1810,
on Hyde Park Racecourse.
The French discoverer, La Perouse, sailed into Botany Bay Jan.
16, IySS. Captain Phillips, of the “Sirius,” who had sailed from
England to form a settlement on the spot decribed by Captain Cook,
arrived only eight days before La Perouse. Captain Phillips found
Botany Bay unsuitable for a settlement and fixed on Sydney Cove,
Port Jackson, as the site. The British flag was raised and saluted
at Dawes Point, Circular Quay, on the 26th January, 1788, the very
day the French ship arrived to claim the country. La Perouse
sailed from Botany Bay March 10, 1788, and was never since heard
of. His two vessels and all hands are supposed to have perished at
night on the Island of Malicolo, north-east of Australia.
The first seven head of cattle imported to Australia were brought
by Governor Philip from the Cape. They escaped soon after arrival.
Seven years later, an escaped convict —who was afterwards pardoned
for his discovery —found a herd of fifty or sixty cattle; and a search
party having been instituted, it was found that the herd were the
progeny of the lost cattle. They were allowed to remain unmolested
to increase ; and the locality, which is in the Cambelltown district,
was named u The Cowpasture.”
The gallows in Sydney stood first at the corner of what is now
King and Castlereagh-streets ; then removed to the site of the Barley
Mow, Park and Castlereagh-streets ; then to the site of Barker’s
Mills, Sussex-street; then to the corner of the burial ground,
Devonshire-street; then the Sand Hills, now crossed by the Randwick
tram ; then to Gallows Hill, near Fort-street schools ; and finally,
Darlinghurst Gaol —where, for a time, the executions took place at
the gate, in public.


OLD SYDNEY.
From a work entitled Leigh & Co.’s Handbook of Sydney ,
published in 1870, I extract the following interesting article :
SYDNEY COVE —THE PUBLIC OFFICES.
This neighbourhood is full of memories. The first colonists not
merely landed here: they settled upon the spot. Where Pitt-street
debouches upon the Circular Quay was once the place where a
lovely stream emptied into Sydney Cove. It has since shared the
fate of the Fleet, in London, and been utilised as a sewer; but at the
time of which we speak, its banks were so enticing that Governor
Phillip at once decided to pitch his 11 camp ” there. Only a few
months ago a small hut was demolished in Pitt-street (near Vickery’s
splendid stores) that for years was the “ Government House ” of the
colony. This was on the east bank of the Tank Stream; and the
Government seem to have appropriated that side of the rivulet to the
officials, and to have given up all on the west bank for a township.
To a very late date the boundary of the Domain reached as far as
the site of the present Custom House. Where are now the watermen’s
stairs was once the Queen’s Wharf, which, with the exception of
Campbell’s Wharf, was the only landing place in the Cove. Between
the Queen’s Wharf and Campbell’s was the Dockyard, and the
building is yet standing that was once the Commissary’s Stores,
between George-street and the watermen’s stairs. From the Queen’s
Wharf to Bridge-street, between the bank of the Tank Stream and
George-street, was in the earliest times known as “ the Sheriff’s
Gardens,” and on the other side of George-street, opposite the
gardens, was the Gaol. Behind the Gaol, as far up as the Flagstaff
(now the Observatory), was denominated “ The Rocks,” and here
was the first collection of houses deserving the name of a township.
The huts were of all sorts and sizes, and situated in all manner of
out-of-the-way places, just as the builders found the rocky ground to
afford means for a foundation. Miller's Point, now so densely
occupied, derives its name from a windmill which one Jack the
Miller was enterprising enough to build there for grinding the corn
of the settlement, the said corn being grown mostly on the Eastern


Farms, between the Parramatta and Lane Cove rivers. It was long
after the foundation of the colony that the ground now forming
Wynyard-square was first occupied by the military barracks.
Bridge-street, at the back of the Custom House, is of very recent
formation. The Government Offices —two of them yet remaining,
the Colonial Secretary's Office and the Surveyor-General’s—were
within the Domain, and fronted Sydney Cove. Bridge-street passes
over the foundation of the second Government House, which was
last occupied by Sir George Gipps. It is in comparatively modern
times that the Domain gate has been removed back to its present
site, at the spot where Bridge-street terminates in Macquarie-street.
The visitor will remark that in Bridge-street there yet remain two
or three clumps of native trees, carefully protected by railings instead
of being cut down to make way for modern improvements. These
trees mark the spot where the citizens once held a memorable
meeting. In 1849, the Home Government, of their own motion and
without reference to the wishes of the colonists, despatched from
England the “ Hashemy,” convict ship, with orders to disembark
the convicts at Melbourne. This was ten years after transportation
to Botany Bay had been abolished, and when thousands of
immigrants, in dependence on the public faith that the practice was
never to be renewed, had arrived in the colony. The people of
Melbourne remonstrated with their Governor, and positively refused
to allow the convicts to land; but the Governor-General of New
South Wales, Sir Charles Fitzroy, happened to be in Melbourne at
the time, and he relieved Mr. Latrobe of his difficulty by advising
that the ship should come on here. On hearing this the citizens of
Sydney were indignant. It was not merely the attempt to revive
the obnoxious system of transportation which annoyed them, but the
fact that their own Governor had reckoned on their tame submission
to what the Victorians refused, fairly roused them. A meeting was
called at the gates of the Governor’s house—under his nose, as it
were; every shop in the town was instantly shut up j and the
inhabitants turned out as one man to vindicate their freedom from
the dreaded pollution. An omnibus that had brought “ the
committee” to the scene was erected into a chair for the chairman,
and with Robert Campbell (of the wharf), a native of the colony, on


the box seat of it as president, resolutions were passed denouncing
the Governor’s conduct. A deputation, one of whom was the
celebrated Robert Lowe, now M.P. for Kidderminster, was sent into
the Governor, and the assemblage only dispersed on an assurance
from their deputies that the Governor was sorry, admitted his error,
and would do his utmost to prevent further mischief. The Legisla-
ture waS subsequently appealed to to prevent these trees from
destruction in remembrance of the event.
Of the Government offices only one has a building suitable for its
object —the Treasury, which stands at the corner of Bridge and
Macquarie-streets, opposite the Domain gate we have just mentioned.
The Colonial Secretary’s Office and the Lands Office are still the
same ancient affairs, put into the shade by the Exchange beside
them. The Works Department and the Railways conduct their
business close at hand in hired private houses in Phillip-street, and
the Government Printing Office is at the corner of Phillip and Bent-
streets, on ground for many years the Immigration Depot, and the
scene of Mrs. Chisholm’s benevolent labors.


My fellow litterateur, Sheridan Moore, anent this little tribute to a
mutual friend, writes thus, dating from the University Hall,
December gth ;
11 My Dear Richmond,
“ As soon as I learned that you were preparing a biographical
sketch of my much-lamented friend, the late James Punch, I felt a
desire to bear my humble testimony to his merits in a particular
little known to the public, although ever fresh in the memory of his
survivors, who have experienced his kindness. I allude to his
sympathy with and encouragement of literary men and literary
enterprises. For myself I can gratefully acknowledge that he helped
me in many ways for over fifteen years, in promoting the circulation
of the journals and magazines which I edited during that period.
His beneficent liberality to two of my esteemed brothers-of-the-pen,
Henry Kendall and Walter Cooper—both, alas! gone over to the
majority—deserved to be commemorated. When the sad news of his
premature death reached me—which it did as I sat at an editorial
table —I wrote something to this effect: —‘ No man in these colonies,
during the last twenty years, has slipped the cable which binds us to
“ theother shore of time,” is more generally regretted or more sincerely
respected than the late James Punch. In him were harmoniously
blended many amiable and many sturdy qualities. He was at once
genial and generous—shrewd and energetic. He began at an early
age to “ paddle his own canoe,” not only in an aquatic but in a social
sense, and with admirable success in both.’ With equal fervour (and
almost impromptu) I poured out the following stanzas to his
memory :
“ His keen blade cut the limpid wave,
His strong arm braved the billows’ roll,
And sped his skiff to victory’s goal,
Where Honour crowns the skilled and brave.
“ Alas, that arm is cold and low 1
The tried and trusted oarsman's gone ;
The eye that ever friendly shone
No more shall thrill us with its glow.


t( More poignant still, his generous heart
Is hushed for evermore. The voice,
Whose low sweet tones made men rejoice,
Shall ne’er ecstatic throbs impart.
“ Of such a life, too brief the span !
Though proof he gave from Manhood’s morn
Of those rare graces which adorn
The Patriot, Christian, and the Man.
“ But higher thoughts of Hope Divine
Send solace in this hour of grief—
To sorrow give a sweet relief—
For gleams of light supernal shine !
“ I could add much more in his commendation, both as a citizen
and a gentleman who possessed in a high degree genuine bonhomie ,
did I not fear trespassing on your own special work as his
biographer. I will, however, in a sense superior to mere words,
assist you in your meritorious undertaking by promoting its
circulation, and invoking the co-operation of my friends.
“ I am, dear Richmond, yours always faithfully,
“J. SHERIDAN MOORE.”


ADDENDUM.
The foregoing matter shows that the “ Life and Times” was some
time going through the press, owing mainly to the rush of work as
Christmas approached. When the first sheet was printed an eminent
statesman was styled the Leader of Her Majesty’s Opposition. The
ink was scarcely dry when by the whirling of time he became Premier,
and if the printer delays much longer, he may be back in the "cold
shades” again, even if he really intends to march through Shrewsbury
with his regiment. lam reminded by some gentlemen who have seen
the advance sheets, that I have neglected to mention several parties
who were intimately associated with the subject of the work, viz.,
the Spencers, always liberal and enthusiastic supporters and patrons
of rowing—the Gregories, prominent representatives of another phase
of sport—cricket; Eldrige the dyer, a close friend of Jem’s;
J. G. O’Connor, a great crony of Punch’s ; Dr. Tucker, just returned
from Europe, and who has got snubbed as a reward for spending
;£ io,cooin scientific investigation and addingmorethan any other one
man to that most important branch of useful knowledge, the fittest
treatment of the insane. I ought not to have overlooked the doctor
for his delightful parties at the Cook’s River Retreat in the times
treated of were attended by many of our most celebrated men. I
might also have, I am reminded, dealt at greater length with
M'Grath, Punch’s friend and partner, but then I never knew him
personally, hence the omission. M'Grath and Punch maintained their
friendship till the death of the former, who had an extensive circle of
relatives and friends. M‘Grath’s widow now keeps the hotel in George-
street, at the foot of Jamison-street, noted for its liquors. I saw little of
Green the sculler, and so have failed to include him in the “ Men of
the Times.” My heart reproachedme too, since we first went to press,
for failing to mention two ladies in connection with two of the sterner
sex alluded to, namely, the charming cantatrice Emma, daughter of
the late Gus Wangenheim, and, in connection with J. H. White, his
wife, who plays under her maiden name, Myra Kemble, and who is
one of the most accomplished, as she certainly is the most attractive,
of Australian actresses.


The number of “good things” about Jem Punch which have been
told me since the book was announced would fill volumes, and had
they been retailed in time for use, they would have added to its
interest if not its value ; but as I consider I have given a fair idea of
the humor of his times, as well as paid the fullest tribute I am
capable of to his character and memory, I refrain from adding to the
anecdotic’ portion.


Richmond Thatcher, ex Grand Primo of the Eoyal Ante-
diluvian Order of Buffaloes, a branch of an English organisa-
tion for the promotion of philanthrophy and good-fellowship, which
has taken a strong hold in this colony, is the son of a Town
Councillor of Brighton, the queen of English watering places. He
was born there in 1842. At a very early age he went to sea as a
midshipman in the service of Mr. Duncan Dunbar, and in that
capacity visited India, China, the Cape of Good Hope, and Western
Australia. In 1861 Mr. Thatcher joined his brother, the goldfields
poet and impromisatore, and followed the New Zealand rushes.
When the poetry of gold-seeking failed; under the auspices of
Professor M'Coy, the eminent scientist, Curator of the Melbourne
University Museum, Dr. Cox, of this city, and other n .turalists,
Mr. Thatcher travelled the coasts of Australasia in search of speci-
mens of conchology, and succeeded much in assisting to make the
scientific world acquainted with our wealth of beautiful shells. In
Fiji, in 1870, Mr. Thatcher, who had previously contributed to
Sydney Punch and other periodicals, assumed the editorship of the
Fiji Times, and also acted as secretary to Mr. Sydney Burt, Premier


to Thakambau, King of that realm. Returning to Sydney in the
following year he adopted literature as a profession, and started the
Upper Hunter Courier and Murrurundi Times. He next edited the
Western Independent, at Bathurst, and afterwards accepted a position
on the staff of the Sydney Evening News , which he occupied till he
left in order to pilot Mrs. Scott Siddons through the colonies. In
that new vocation Mr. Thatcher acted as agent to the Davenport
Brothers, Mr. J. K. Emmet, Levy, the cornet player, and Miss
Ada Ward, whom he accompaaied to England and the European
Continent, and South Africa. Three years ago he again visited
England in advance of a colonial minstrel organisation and returned
with a dramatic attraction. Mr. Thatcher is still a voluminous
contributor to the press, and has an agency at 106 Castlereagh-street.
Town and Country Journal.


A. (;. CHURCHWOOD.
•' IMPORTER AND MANUFACTURER
FINEST COFFEES,
147 YORK. STREET,
> A-
1C o> #
y •
A, G. CHURCHWOOD.
OFFICES •. 147 YORK STREET.
PEPPERS, SPiCES, CONDIMENTS, SALT, BICE, & BARLEY.
o— —
MILLS: WOOLLOOMOOLOO.
®3S” Send for Price List.
