

JUj f
X o <4
Life in Northern Queensland.
at five. Now, there wa* in my office at this time
a pair of Wellington hoc ts that I had just bought :
they were too small. I i itended to take them back
to the man next day. I left them in the office till
the morning.
In the morning they vere gone! I sent for the
police—they sent for two detectives: they ques-
tioned me. Had any on ; just left my employment ?
Yes ; yesterday one of the men that worked in the
store left me: he was an off-and-on hand. I
didn’t like his looks ; bi t I didn’t think he was a
thief. I described the boots, and my visitors
departed.
Half an hour went by. A tap came to the door.
The detectives were ushered in. One of them
proceeded in silence to o Den a parcel.
“What luck?” says I.
“ You shall see, sir,”
The parcel was opened. My boots were placed
on the table.
“Where on earth dii you get them?” I asked
in amazement.
“Well, sir. Ahem! You see, sir, when a man
steals what’s no use to him, he generally sells it,
and that as soon as poss ible ; and, generally speak-
ing, to a pawnbroker. So, sir, we went to one
or two pawnbrokers. ‘Any Wellington boots
pawned?’ says we. To.’ ‘lf there are, pin the
man—boots and all—snd send for the police.’
‘ Yes, sirs.’ That was our answer from three. In
the fourth, in reply tc ‘Any Wellington boots
pawned?’—‘Yes;’ and they were landed on the
counter. ‘When?’ ‘ Tb-day.’ Then, ‘ What sort
of a man pawned them ?’ ‘ Such-and-such,’ ” and
the detective describe! him, reading from his
pocket-book.
“ That’s the man ! ” I shouted, interrupting him.
“All right, sir. He got twelve shillings for the
boots.”
And they were gone a, [ain.
An hour passed. Anotl er tap. They entered again,
and held open the dooi. Two policemen entered,
and between them a pri oner—it was the man !
“ Wherever did you ggt him ? ” I asked.
“Well, sir,” began tl e detective, “you see, sir,
when a man like him s flush of money, he must
have a ‘licker,’ and h: must ‘stand’ one to his
friends, and they ‘staiM’ one back, and he gets
drunk, and he lies dowrf in the street. The police
got him, to take him Id the station-house. We
met them, and brought him here in a cab. If it
hadn’t been for their se zing him, we should have
had to search all the public-houses in Dublin, and
perhaps not find him th m.”
I had to go to the st; tion and bind myself over,
under an enormous pe talty, to prosecute the man.
Next day he was bro ight before the magistrate,
committed for trial, an 1 finally, being a new hand,
he only got six months hard labour.
LIFE IN NORTHERN QUEENSLAND.
PART THE SECOND.
English people have happily so little experience
of a hurricane, such as it is in tropical countries,
A that a description of one which took
Hurricane. P lace latel 7 in Northern Queensland
may not be unacceptable to those
who would like to know the life their distant
friends in this part of the world are experiencing.
Hurricanes in so violent a form are not of very
frequent occurrence here, but great is the destruc-
tion they cause when they take place. This one
occurred in the month of March. There was no
previous warning, and the first intimation of it was
being awoke about eight a.m. by a gust of wind
blowing violently open the front folding-doo,rs of
the dwelling, and taking one of the back folding-
doors off its hinges, lifting it right out of the pre-
mises into a back yard. The gale passed right
through the house, nearly blowing the inmates out
and carrying them away, from its force, as it came
in at one open door and, passing through, carried
the opposite door off. The roof at the same time
showed every inclination to take flight also, having
a perceptible vibration, which occasioned all in
the house to seek shelter in a large hotel near,
which was more substantially built. The gale in-
creased into a hurricane, blowing from the inland,
the sea at the same time having a splendid ap-
pearance. One of the first buildings to fall was a
large stable and auctioneer’s premises, the owner
standing, at the hotel close by, and seeing his
property carried away and pitched on to the street
in front, nothing but the bare posts remaining.
This had an iron roof, and the whole town was now
being unroofed. The iron was flying about just
like pieces of paper, on an ordinarily windy day,
when you tear them up and throw them away.
There was no walking along the streets without
laying hold of something at every step to keep your
ground. When the wind took you off your feet,
the only way was to lie down on the ground, to
escape being blown against some house or tree
into the sea; and the adventurous man who thus
ventured out, hoping to save some of his property,
had to dodge innumerable pieces of iron which
were doing great havoc. The hurricane increased
in violence : the sea was a mass of foam, and roofs of
houses were flying off every minute. A house called
the Bachelor’s Hall, situated on a hill, was seen
to be blown over, and two or three courageous men
started for this fallen house, knowing the owners
were inside just before, and anxious to rescue them
from the ruins. They found the inmates—men,
women, and children—all crouching for shelter
under a rock close by, just big enough to afford
them a safe retreat. The cold was intense, and
they were obliged to remain many hours on the


Cassell’s Magazine.
top of this hill, under the rock, it being impossible
to venture a step beyond. They had no provisions,
but happily one of the party had a small flask of
brandy, which was passed around. After some
hours, two or three of them managed with diffi-
culty to get down the back of this hill to the
town, where destruction and havoc were still raging.
The night continued as fearful as the day had
been, and the terrified inhabitants of this un-
fortunate little town expected every gust to be their
death-knell. Early in the morning this fearful
hurricane abated ; but a scene of ruin and devasta-
tion met the eye on all sides. One good result,
however, was likely to follow—the building the
houses in a more substantial manner, and more
fitted to stand future catastrophes of this kind.
It will take many years for the town to recover
from the ill effects of this hurricane, and be restored
to its former prosperous state. Colonists, however,
possess a surprising energy and vigour, which
enables them in an incredibly short time to recover
from what in older countries would be considered
utter ruin.
It is wonderful to watch the growth of small
towns, and their rapid acquisition of all the re-
sources, habits, customs, and man-
Life* ners civilisation, and of a matured
state suddenly transplanted to these
wild shores. No sooner do a few squatters find
good pasturage for their cattle and flocks inland,
and a good port near on the coast for traffic,
than a town springs up, and in a couple or
so of years there is a mayor, town council, and
corporation, lawyers and surveyors, stores and
hotels, and all the requisites for a civilised state
of society, with probably a public hospital, a
reading-room well supplied with books and papers,
and perchance even a public museum. One great
want over the whole of Australia, and especially
in all new towns and settlements, is a larger num-
ber of sober, efficient medical men. If a few
steady, well-principled, and intelligent men in that
profession would come out here from England,
it would be greatly for our benefit, and no less so
for their own, if they had not been very successful
at home. Musical entertainments are very frequent
here, even in the youngest towns, and many of the
public performances are really very good, and
would do credit to any English country-town ; but
the famous shilling concerts and sights of London
are almost unheard of, unless it be something very
poor. High prices for everything predominate,
and, as a rule, money is so easily and quickly
gained, that it is just as quickly thrown away or
spent. Saving is a word almost unknown here, so
that, though large sums are rapidly earned, there
is often great distress and insolvency.
At the Cape River diggings, numbering from three
f to four thousand people, a good man is endeavouring
to be of use. A description of the services he holds
may not be uninteresting. The one I witnessed
was held in the evening, on a hill-
A Religious , ...
Service. slc * e c^ose to the diggings. It com-
menced by the minister giving out a
hymn. An extempore prayer followed. There was
perfect quiet and decorum throughout, and an atten-
tive audience. It was moonlight, and the service
was held in the open air, the glorious vault of
heaven the only canopy, bossed with Orion and the
Southern Cross, and studded with the innumerable
tiny torches of space. A few logs scattered about
served for seats, and the noiseless sand for pave-
ment, the only accompaniment to the voices being
the music of the heavenly spheres; and now and
then one and another digger, storekeeper, etc.,
would quietly ascend this mount of prayer, leav-
ing awhile the valley below in all its strife and
busy toil, to be for a few minutes a little nearer
heaven. Then the song of praise arose from
those hill-worshippers, and the prayer, like that of
Elijah of old, went up for rain on the parched soil,
and the dew of grace on the withered soul. The
song of the stars seemed to mingle with the song
of the worshippers, and for a few moments heaven
and earth seemed united, as with another Jacob’s
ladder. The sermon was plain and earnest. The
preacher told them of an American missionary who
bought a slave girl at an auction, and then forthwith
wrote out her ransom, which to her seemed an
incredible thing; so that, though he had no need
of her services, yet she would follow and serve
him to her life’s end, and when questioned by her
fellow-servants, would tell them the story of her
redemption. The moral he drew is obvious. This
man is doing a good work, in a simple, quiet way.
His little hut stands on this hill, apart from the
crowd below. There he quietly dwells, solitary,
planting and lifting the cross, looking down upon,
and doubtless often interceding for, the busy occu-
pants of the valley below. He cuts his wood,
draws his water, cooks his food, alone, for h«
has no companions or family with him. A little
sum has been subscribed for him, and one gold-
digger was quite indignant at not being asked
to join in the subscription, and said he would
have his revenge; and so he did, for he went
and built the lonely man a hut, or, as it is
called here, a house. The Roman Catholic bishop,
Dr. Quinn, has recently paid a visit to these
diggings.
We owe a great debt to the missionaries who
changed the savage cannibal into a useful mem-
ber of society. The poor natives of
Boomerang Australia have not been .so fortunate,
and probably have not the same
natural powers of improvement. They stand
very low in the scale of intellect, though it is
beyond a doubt that they are capable of learning,


Life in Northern Queensland.
and of carrying their own simple arts to great
perfection. Their well-known skill in throwing
their native weapon, the boomerang, proves this,
and, as far as has been ascertained, it is an art
unknown to any other A short description
will show their astonishing skill in this art. The
boomerang is of a very hard wood, cut out with
sharp flints (perhaps like the Celtic flints there is
so much controversy about), or with a tomahawk of
iron, from a piece of wood curved with the grain. It
is then scraped with glass, or some rough substance,
and afterwards trimmed and pared somewhat, with
a few cuts at the lighter end, to indicate the
handle. It is from two to three feet long, and weighs
about one pound. Its action is marvellous. You
hold it with one end from you, as it were, and then,
by a knack and a swing, send it flying up, but hori-
zontally with the earth, as boys skim oyster-shells
over a pond, the flat surface being downwards.
The marvel is the way in which the boomerang
returns to the thrower, and whether this is caused
by the peculiar curve in its form or by the knack in
throwing, is not generally known, though perhaps
some law in mathematics may explain its action.
A black man, in throwing one, will send it away right
in front of him, high up, almost out of sight; pre-
sently round it will course in the air just like a bird
wheeling in its flight, and then hover overhead,
and down it will drop within a couple of yards of
him, sometimes nearer. They can make it alight
almost on the very spot on which they stand, but
that is a little too near to be pleasant, for one blow
is enough, and would break the hardest skull. The
way it sustains its flight is excellent, but it is ex-
tremely difficult to follow its course in the air, on
account of the rapidity of movement. At times,
they will make it perform two circles in the
air, and, again, they can throw it down on the
ground a few yards from them, and it will
rise from the ground, fly up and away, making
a loop in the air, and then return to their feet.
The subject is one of much interest. How did
they find it out ? for they are not considered to be
a progressive nation in arts to any extent, though
they occasionally alter their fashions in their wea-
pons. For instance, they have lately got a new spear,
or “ waddy,” as they term it. It is barbed at one
end, and has a round bit of wood a little way up, the
object of which is to prevent its being withdrawn
from either end when it has entered into a foe’s
body; for a plain spear which strikes into the black’s
body is as easily withdrawn as a thorn from the
finger, and is not thought of any consequence by
them. They use the boomerang in their flights,
which occur now and then. The fires of their
camps are seen almost every night round the country,
on the tops of the ranges, and on the islands in
the bay, opposite the town.
The life “up country,” on a cattle station, has
many attractions for those who, gifted with strong
health and good spirits, love a roving, adventurous
life, but does not suit any who prefer
Country t^ie com^orts of civilisation and the
society of their fellow-men. We will
imagine a party starting for the interior in the
month of January, with several hundred head of
cattle, to take possession of a “new run” of pas-
turing land some hundreds of miles inland, five or six
drovers and a superintendent having charge of the
cattle. They start from the neighbourhood of Bowen,
and the first difficulty is to get safely over the river
Bowen, seventy miles from the town. The daily
routine is this: —At daybreak a start is made, the
blankets are rolled up, the breakfast soon dispatched,
horses saddled, and the cattle made to proceed. They
walk along very quietly, at the rate of about ten miles
a day, having in some cases a journey of two thou-
sand miles before them. At sunset the cattle are
“ brought up,” and the drivers “ camp them ” —that
is, bring them all together with their long stock-
whips, and form them into a circle within fires.
Some of the drivers have to watch them all night,
to see that they do not get beyond their boundary,
the fires. In rainy weather they are often very
troublesome, and try to get away, but in fine
weather they are quiet. This is no slight work,
as those in charge of the cattle have about four-
teen hours in the saddle, besides the night watch
in turns; and after a month or two of this life, most
men get very tired of it.
The most troublesome part is when a river
has to be crossed. If the current is very strong,
and the river deep, it is no easy
A C “ task to get several hundred head of
cattle safely over; and it occasionally
happens that some are carried down the stream
and lost, and others become so restive and un-
manageable that there is considerable danger
in driving them. After bringing all the cattle
to the bank of the river, and making them cross,
which will occupy a whole day generally, the
next day’s work is to take the drags and loading
across, which is done in the following manner :
Having selected two hollow trees, they are felled
and sawed so as to have about twelve feet of trunk.
The two ends are then filled in, and thus make two
first-rate canoes, with which all the “ loading ” is
taken over, probably five or six tons weight. Of
course, this will require a good many trips across,
as the canoes would carry about ten hundredweight
each time. The drags then have to be taken across,
which is done by running one into the water, and
then bringing the canoes over it and lashing them
to the drag underneath. The drag is then started
across, by six of the men swimming to guide and
push it over. They are thus got across sepa-
rately, but it takes many hours in the water to do
this.


COUNTRY — ’p. SIX.
A solitary traveller need never fear an inhos-
pitable reception at any station he comes across,
TT and the pleasure of travelling in the
Hospitality. , , . r , 0 -
bush is, you have no uncomfort-
able landlord to present you with a long bill at
the moment of departure. When you reach a
station, you just turn your horse into the pad-
dock and find a substantial dinner immediately
Jet before you without asking for it, graced, per-
chance, with as delicious cream as even Devonshire
could supply. If, however, the traveller is beguiled
by his agreeable reception into starting homeward at
a later hour than is prudent, he may chance to lose
himself in the bush, especially if he is a “new
chum.”
Much of this inland country is like our parks,
but more densely wooded, with here and there
large tracts of “ scrub,” so dense that
unting. i m p oss ibl e to ride through it
on horseback, and the pedestrian even has to
crawl through on hands and knees at every other
step. The scrub is where the blacks generally
camp. It is filled with game, such as kangaroos,
wallobies, opossums, dingoes, bears, and cattle that
have run wild, so that it affords a good hunting-
ground; but it is dangerous for “new chums,” as
the scrubs run from twenty to fifty miles. It is the
easiest'’thing imaginable to get lost, it being im-
possible to see anything except a few yards all
round, and the sky overhead.
