

"OUR HERO"
LIFE OF
GENERAL GORDON
PRICE SIXPENCE
COMPILED FROM MANY SOURCES
by GARNET WALCH
PRINTED & PUBLISHED BY
WILLIAM INGLIS & C ° . MELBOURNE & DUNEDIN.


SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT*
P®
• IMPORTERS AND CARPET WAREHOUSEMEN,
Supply the public at wholesale prices with •
Mantles, Costumes, Jackets, Ulsters, Millinery Laces, Ribbons,
Feathers, Flowers, Underclothing, Hosiery, Haberdashery, Gloves,
Umbrellas, Dress Material, Silks, Satins, kancy Goods, Blankets,
Flannels, Bed and Table Linen, Towels, Sheetings, Calicoes, Lace
and other Curtains, and every article required for personal and House-
hold use.
Also,
Gent’s Outfitting Goods,
Hats, Shirts, Collars, Ties, Handkerchiefs,
Hosiery, Gloves, Woollens, Tweeds, Suits to Measure,
and Ready made Overcoats, Ulsters, Travelling Bags, Railway Rugs,
Portmanteaus, &c., &c.
O. W. 8c T. import their own Goods, and are the
only wholesale Firm in the Colonies who transacts
business on the basis of
SELLING FOR NET CASH
and
CHARGING IMPORTERS’ RATES
For anu single article or length required.
Carpet and Furniture Warehouse:
6 ELIZABETH STREET.
Dranery Warehouse:
14 and 16 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


LIFE OF
GENERAL GORDON,
COMPILED FROM MANY SOURCES
BY
GARNET WALCH.
“By the help of God I will hold the balance level.”
— Gordon.
Melbourne :
William Inglis & Co., Printers, 37 & 38 Flinders-st., East.
MDCCCLXXXV.


Melbourne :
William Inglis & Co., Printers, 37 and 38 Flinders Street East.


PREFACE.
To write a preface to the story of a brave man’s life, and
that man General Gordon, soldier, hero, and martyr, is like
attempting to refine fine gold, to paint the lily, to add a
fresh bloom tint to the rose. Those who remember but a
few days’ ago, the desperate straits to which the cream of
the British Army were exposed, and how our arms, though
not suffering actual defeat, were day by day in woeful plight—
those who remember further back, and who were shocked by
the record of disaster, by the lives of good men and true sacri-
ficed daily by the Mahdi’s growing hordes—remember also
how there shone out in the midst of all one name that burnt
its way into the chronicles of the day—the name of Gordon.
Roused little by little to a sense of outraged rights as a
nation, of almost personal shame as individuals, the British
nation at last became fully aware of how its hero had been
left, one still strong man, but alas! one shut up in the
eastern city which was to be his tomb. Then, when too
late, the British Government were forced into action —with
what result the following pages show.
GARNET WALCH.




OUR HERO.
CHAPTER I.
the present time the name Gordon is in every English-
1K man’s mind, and the death of General Gordon is
looked upon more as a public calamity than otherwise. T. here
are not many men in our days who could say to their God, as
Gordon did—“ Here I am, a lump of clay; Thou art the potter.
Mould me as Thou in Thy wisdom wilt. Never mind my
cries. Cut my life off, so be it; prolong it, so be it. Just
as Thou wilt, but I rely on Thy unchanging guidance during
the trial. Oh, the comfort that comes of this !”
Gordon was a man who always worked for and thought
of the good he could do his fellow men, and never stopped
at any trouble. He liked despatch, and the thing that
worried him most was inaction. During his early life he
displayed great bravery coupled with a high spirit. As an ex-
ample of the latter, during the period of his cadetship, his
superior said to him, in rebuke, “You are incompetent
you will never make an officer !” With flashing eyes and
flushed cheeks, he tore the epaulettes from his shoulders and
threw them to the ground at his reprover’s feet.
Gordon was born at Woolwich on the 28th of January,
1833. He was the son of a man who lived by the “ code of
honour,” who was beloved for his generosity and kind-hearted-
ness, and who although full of humour, could be stern when
necessary. Gordon was the third soldier of the family.
One of his elder brothers became Sir Henry W. Gordon,
K.C.8., and another Major-General S. Enderby Gordon,
C. 8., Royal Artillery. . „, , . ,
Charles Geo. Gordon, or “ Chinese Gordon,” by which
name he has latterly been known, went to school at Taunton,


in Somerset, and afterwards attended the Royal Military
Academy at Woolwich. At nineteen he became a second
lieutenant of engineers. In the winter of 1854 he was
ordered to Corfu, a place where he had spent part of his
boyhood. However, he never arrived there, for he volun-
teered to go to the Crimea, and arrived at Balaclava on
New Year’s Day, 1855. For some little time he was idle,
and so had time for observation. In his letters home he
described the terrible hardships the men had to undergo
before Sebastopol. He told of the lack of supplies, of good
food being wasted where not needed while men were dying
of starvation j of the fearful cold, which did far more damage
to the English troops than the Russian guns. In February
he received orders to construct means of communication
between the English and French sentries. The men under
him grew frightened at this hazardous work and deserted
him. “In one of his letters he describes a narrow escape he
had: a bullet from the Russian rifle-pits only missed his head
by an inch ; he described the Russian bullets as being, large
and pointed.” With all this hard and perilous work to do
all he got to eat was raw pork sprinkled with rum. He was
working in the Pits all through the siege of Sebastopol, when
no less than 1000 guns were engaged, and under the hottest
fire. But all this came to an end; Sebastopol was taken,
and the Crimean War soon afterwards ceased. Lieutenant
Gordon received the Order of the Legion of Honor from the
French Government.
Gordon was now appointed assistant commissioner at
Bessarabia, in the south-west of Russia, for the purpose of
making new frontiers between Russia and d urkey j this
occupied eleven months. At the end of this period he was
ordered to Armenia to arrange the boundary in Asia, and
after being absent from England for three years he obtained
a well-earned holiday of six months, which he spent at home
with his friends. He went back to Armenia as Commissioner
until the end of 1858; 1859 he spent at Chatham as Field-
work Instructor.
About this time misunderstandings arose between England
and China. The Chinese had violated a treaty, signed on
the one hand by Great Britain, United States, France and
Russia, and on the other by the Chinese. Great Britain
would not submit to this indignity, and sent out a force to


demand satisfaction. Gordon now a caplain t** ordered
to join the force. He started in July, iB6O, and afte
travelling sixty-eight days arrived at Shanghai. Here he
found his old friends, Mr. Parks and Mn Loch, the present
Governor of Victoria; along with De Norman and other
British and French officers. These gentlemen had gone to
Tung-chow to make arrangements for a meeting of represen-
tatives of the allied armies and the Chinese As they were
returning, a quarrel with some Tartar soldiers took place
and a fight ensued; about thirty of the officers and Britis
subjects were taken prisoners by the Chinese were sent off to
various prisons and subjected to great cruelty. The f
decided to severely punish this act, and marching on I e ,
invested it, and burnt the Summer Palace to the ground.
Gordon, with the rest, was ordered to assist in the demo-
lition of this magnificent palace. He wrote home to the
effect, that after pillaging it, they burned the w hole place
and destroyed most valuable property, worth more than four
millions. He says:—“You would scarcely imagine the
beauty of the places we burnt. It made one’s heart sore to
burn them ; in fact, these palaces were so large, and we so
pressed for time, that we could not plunder them careful).
Quantities of gold ornaments were burned, ■ ™
brass. It was wretchedly demoralising work for the army.
Everybody was wild with plunder.
Gordon received about this time his brevet promotion
to the rank of major. He remained in the camp before
Pekin until the Bth November, and then moved to
Tiensin as commanding officer of the detachmen
Royal Engineers. He received for his services at Peki
a medal and clasp. During the two years he re ™ al
at Tiensin he made several excursions into the
rounding country, One he made in December, 1 »
the Great Wall of China (one of the wonders of the world).
He together with his friend Lieut. Carden, went on horse-
back They describe the cold as being so great that raw
eggs were frozen as hard as if boiled. Gordon also gives a
very vivid description of the Wall, or “ Wawli-chang, as
Wa And"now we come to the period of Gordon’s sojourn in
China, when both his moral and physical courage were pu
to severe tests. This was in connection with the Taiping


Rebellion, when he was exposed to the most hideous charges,
through which he passed, showing to the world how a true
Christian should fall in with the designs of the Almighty.
CHAPTER II.
The Taiping Rebellion originated in Kwang-tun, the
south-eastern province of the empire. In this province
great discontent had existed ever since the great opium war
of 1842, and numerous highwaymen kept the district
in a state of excitement, and fomented the popular dissatis-
faction. In 1850 a man called Hung-tsue-tseun, of the
lower class —in fact, another “ Mahdi”—-who had been a
rural schoolmaster in the Canton district, gave forth to the
people that he was possessed of a divine mission—viz., to
clear the country of the Mantchoos, and re-establish the
Ming dynasty. He speedily collected followers, many of
whom really believed he was an inspired prophet, and
thousands of others accepted him as a leader in a rising
against the Imperial Government. It is said that as far
back as 1847 this man had applied to a missionary to
baptise him, but was refused. The greater the number of
adherents to his cause became, the more extravagant grew
Hung’s pretensions. He beheld visions, and said he was
divinely appointed protector of the poor and oppressed, and
so gained great numbers who were ready to believe anybody
who offered to lead them to independence and perhaps to
wealth. Some few thought him mad, but very prudently
held their tongues. Hung announced that the restoration
of the Mings must be effected before religious reform, and
made no concealment of his aim at a political object as well
as a religious mission. He called himself the “younger
brother” of Jesus Christ, and said that God had revealed
Himself to him. Some of the missionaries asserted that this
phrase “ younger brother” was an ordinary term of courtesy used
throughout the empire, and only meant a devoted follower.
But Hung’s followers understood the words in a very different
sense, and believed him to be a divine, or at the least a


specially inspired person. He was in possession of tracts
given him by a missionary, and to these he was probably
indebted for the religious phraseology he made use of. He
had, some time before the outbreak, competed for literary
examinations essential to the assumption of a position in the
official world, but from ignorance or incapacity he had failed.
This increased his hate for the mandarins, who in return
endeavoured, when he became a leader, to destroy his
influence. .
Hung captured and occupied the large town of Taitsan,
and there received a great many followers. In the early
months of 1851 it is estimated he had under his leadership
an army of 300,000. In August, 1851, he took Yungnan,
in Quangsi, the province north of Quangtun, and -there
issued a decree, announcing himself as the Heavenly King,
and appointing five subordinate kings or wangs, at first his
own relatives ; vacancies very quickly occurred, from the
fact that he punished them with death, for very slight dis-
crepancies. The vacancies were generally filled by the
ablest fighting generals; some of them, from their sudden
elevation to so high a position, showed more ambition than
was agreeable to Hung, and one went as far as to call him-
self the'Holy Ghost, for which he lost his head. The five
Wangs were entitled the Warrior King, the Faithful King,
the Attendant King, the Western King, and the Eastern
King. They had unlimited power to decapitate and to
administer flogging, but with all their power they could not
prevent themselves being honoured with nicknames; for
instance, one was dubbed the “ One-Eyed Dog, another
the “ Yellow Tiger,” and another—perhaps he had the failing
of trying to look in two directions at the same time —gloried
in the name of “Cock Eye.” Perhaps, though, they felt
themselves flattered, as American Indians consider it com-
plimentary to be called Great Spirits, etc. _ _
In the years 1852 and 1853 Hung captured several cities,
the most important being Hang-chow, capital of the eastern
province of Che-Keang. At one time this city was capital
of the empire ; it now has a population of about three
quarters of a million, and is celebrated for its silk and
embroidery. Hung took care to hold most of the valuable
plunder for his own use, and did not adhere to the doctrine
he had taught when recruiting.


Hung and his Taiping followers had now gained such
power that the Imperialists became greatly alarmed. The
English, French, and American Powers had, up to this, held
aloof, and had not interfered with the contest between the
Imperialists and the Taipings; but now that the great seaport,
Shanghai, was threatened, and the wealthy Chinese merchants
had subscribed necessary funds to enlist an army of foreigners
to defend the city, a small force of foreigners was formed
and placed under the leadership of an American filibuster,
called Ward, who had experienced fighting in America, and
was a brave man. A man of the name of Burgevine was
second in command. The British and French authorities,
in consideration of the great interest their merchants had at
stake, decided to assist the Chinese in protecting Shanghai.
The Taipings were within twenty miles of the city and had
occupied Sung-Kiang. Ward, tempted by the offer of a
reward, tried, with a force of about ioo, to retake this town,
but was defeated. However, he made another attempt,
aided by some Chinese soldiers, and successfully drove out
the Taipings. But they returned with a large army and
drove Ward and his followers back to where they came
from.
In August, iB6O, the French and British troops in the
town joined the Imperialists and drove the Taiping leader—
Wang-chow —away; he retreated to Soochow, Hung’s head-
quarters. Admiral Hope, the British Naval Commander-in-
Chief at the Chinese Station, entered into communication
with the rebels, and came to an understanding that the city
of Shanghai should not be molested for a period of one
year. At the end of the year, they again advanced on
Shanghai; and, although warned by Admiral Hope, Chung
Wang issued a proclamation pronouncing Shanghai to be a
small place and necessary to complete the Taipings’ dominion.
The authorities resolved to clear the country of Taipings
for a space of thirty miles round the city. Severe fighting
took place. The French Admiral was killed; Admiral Hope
was wounded; and, in the latter months of the year, Ward
was killed; Burgevine took his place, but turned out a
regular rogue; he was dismissed by Li-Hung-Chang, the
Governor of the Province.
In 1863 the Chinese applied to the British for assistance.
General Stavely recommended Captain Gordon to the


command of the “ Ever Victorious Army,” as it was called.
In February he was appointed, and on the 25th of March
he assumed active command. In a letter written to his
mother he explains the reason of his taking a step which
he knew' would cause displeasure to his father, whose ideal
was a British soldier. He says —“ lam afraid you will be
much displeased at my having taken the command of the
Sung-Kiang force, but I have not taken the step without
due consideration ; I consider any one who attempts to over-
throw this rebellion is doing a humane task, and I also
consider tends a great deal to open China to civilization.
I will not act rashly, and I trust to return to England soon.
I can say that if I had not accepted the command the force
would have been broken up, and the rebellion gone on'and
increased in its misery. You must not fret about this
matter \ I think I am doing a good service.
Amongst Gordon’s first tasks he had to repress the
eagerness (the British especially) of his men to avenge the
defeat of Taitsan.
But he acted on another policy altogether. Instead ot
revenging the defeat at Taitsan, he took two steamers and
went to Foochow. From the latter place he went inland to
Chansu, a loyal city. Mr. Andrew Wilson gives an interesting
account of this town ; he says, “ The garrison of Chansu
had all been rebels, buthad changed in favour of the Imperial-
ists. No sooner had they done so, than Hung-tsue-tsuen,
4 The Heavenly King,’ attacked them, and as he wished to
intimidate them by showing them what success he had had,
he sent them the heads of the European officers, who had
been killed at Taitsan.”
Gordon was in time to relieve the people of Chansu ; he
dispersed the enemy and then entered the city, where he was
received with great rejoicing. He writes to the effect that
he saw the young chiefs who had been rebels, but who. had
now come over. They were intelligent and .beautifully
dressed; he mentions the chief mandarin as being very ill
and in a great state of anxiety. This victory revived the
spirits of Gordon’s men, and about this time several British
officers had obtained leave to go out to serve under him.
He set to work in real earnest to re-organise his army, and
with the help of Li-Hung-Chang, made vast improvements,
He agreed to pay his soldiers a month ; his lieutenants


and his colonels ; all salaries were paid monthly
in the presence of General Gordon. He had great difficulty
in arranging their uniforms, from the fact that, when he
dressed his Chinese soldiers in European uniform, they were
severely criticised by their fellow countrymen, and called
“ Imitation foreign devils.” He prepared gunboats and
steamers for the conveyance of supplies, and kept his men
well drilled, a hint that may safely be taken by our own
Government, in case troops are required for the Soudan, or
perchance a little nearer home.
CHAPTER III.
When Gordon had fully prepared everything he decided to
march on Quinsan, at which place there was an arsenal and
shot manufactory. During his march news reached him to
the effect that the -Taipings had offered to give up the town
of Taitsan to the Chinese Governor Li. Li had sent a force
of Imperial soldiers to take possession, but on their arrival
they were beheaded. Gordon immediately made up his
mind to attack Taitsan, notwithstanding that the rebels
numbered four times as many as his forces, and after a very
fierce battle, in which a gallant officer called Banner was
killed, the rebels fled in all directions, trampling one
another to death in their flight; Gordon lost from four to five
hundred men. He mentions in a letter to England, “Taitsan
was very important, and its capture well merited after
the treachery shown by the head chief. It opens a
large tract of country, and the Chinese generals were
delighted, and have said all sorts of civil things about
the force. I am now a Tsung Ping mandarin (this
being the second highest grade), and have acquired a good
deal of influence. Ido not care about that over much. I
am quite sure I was right in taking over the command, as
you would say if you saw the ruthless character of the rebels.
Taitsan is a large place, and was strongly held. It is afu
or capital city.” After the taking of Taitsan the Imperial


mandarins recognised some of the chief ringleaders of this
gross piece of treachery amongst the prisoners, and had
them tied to posts, where they remained to the public gaze,
with spears stuck into their bodies, and pieces of flesh torn
from their arms. They were afterwards beheaded. General
Gordon remonstrated with the mandarins, but to no purpose,
for he had no control over them, and they told him that
these men were not taken as prisoners of war, and therefore
should not be treated as such. As usuai, newspaper cor-
respondents in Shanghai wrote most conflicting accounts of
the cruelties the men were put to, and some accused Gordon
of being complicated. The news arrived in England, and
for a time the public feeling was against him. The Bishop
of Victoria, Hong Kong, entered into with
one of these writers, and received a most fearful account of
the executions. He at once wrote to Lord John Russell,,
describing the atrocities to him, and he added that he had
every reason to believe the stories true. Had he used a
little more discretion, and applied to General Brown, “ who
commanded Her Majesty’s forces in China, and who had
declared to the Chinese mandarins that if a repetition of their
cruelty occurred he would refuse to assist them”—he would
have found out the true state of affairs.
Gordon was perfectly innocent of all these charges, but
w&s such a commotion in both China and England,,
that he thought it necessary to write to the Shanghai
Shipping News , the following letter: —“ lam of belief that
the Chinese of this force are quite as merciful in action as
the soldiers of any Christian nation could be; and in proof
of this can point to over seven hundred prisoners taken in
the last engagement (Quinsan), who are now in our
employ. Some have entered our ranks and done service
against the rebels since their capture ; but one life has been
taken out of this number, and that one was a rebel, who
tried to induce his comrades to fall on the guard, and who
was shot on the spot. It is a great mistake to imagine that
the men of this force are worthless. They will in the heat
of action put their enemies to death, as the troops of any
nation will do; but when the fight is over they will associate
as freely together as if they had never fought. ... If
‘Observer’ and ‘Eye-witness,’ with their friend ‘Justice
and Mercy,’ (anonymous correspondents to the Shanghai


Shipping News) would come forward and communicate what
they know it would be far more satisfactory than writing
statements of the nature of those alluded to by the Bishop
of Victoria. And if any one is under the impression that
the inhabitants of the rebel districts like their rebel masters
he has only to come up here to be disabused of his idea.
I do not exaggerate when I say that upwards of one
thousand five hundred rebels were killed in their retreat
from Quinsan by the villagers, who rose en masse."
Gordon now needed all his patience and courage, for not
only was he blamed by the people in England, but he had
severe trials around him, viz., his officers and men in
disobedience to his orders had plundered. He thanked them
for their bravery, but was dissatisfied at their lack of
discipline.
At that time he was not known to men as afterwards,
and so received censure, and was suspected of mercenary
motives, but still, with all his trials and troubles, he showed
himself to be worthy of the greatest esteem and honour,
instead of rebuke.
The force Gordon had to oppose at the taking of Quinsan
was four times the strength of that which he had under his
command. He' attacked the city on the eastern side,
but seeing that he would gain a great advantage by first
taking Soochow, as Quinsan greatly depended on this
stronghold, he occupied a village a few miles from Quinsan,
and then taking merely his steamer (the Hyson) with her
crew he steamed up to the walls of Soochow and drove the
Taipings off in great numbers, they being greatly frightened
at the sight of his steamer. At Quinsan, to quote his own
words, he “gave the rebels such a licking that 15,000 of
them perished, and 2000 were taken prisoners;” the latter
were treated with great humanity, so much so that 700
joined the Imperialist army. He wrote to England saying,
“ my occupying this city enables the Imperial Government
to protect an enormous district, rich with corn, etc., and the
people around are so thankful for their release that it is
quite a pleasure. They were in a desperate plight before
our arrival, as their way lay between the rebels and Imperial-
ists. . . . You may hear of cruelties being committed;
do not believe them. I dare say I shall be loudly attacked
in the House of Commons. I really do think lam doing


good in suppressing this rebellion, and so would anybody if
he saw the delight of the villagers at getting out of the
hands of their oppressors. .
General Gordon for a time made Quinsan his head
quarters, where he had great trouble. His men mutinied; he
was under the impression that the fault lay with the non-
commissioned officers; he called them together and asked
them who it was who had issued the proclamation stating
that the men would not fall in ? They had not courage
enough to tell him, so he told them that every fifth
man would be shot, upon which they started groaning.
Gordon was sure that the man who groaned the loudest was
the ringleader, and, thereupon, seized a corporal and dragged
him from the ranks, and ordered the infantry to him,
which they did immediately. Gordon sent the rest into
confinement for one hour, with the assurance that if, by the
end of that time they had not confessed, he would carry out
his threat. However, when they fell in again, it was found
that Gordon had hit on the right man, thereby showing one
of the great powers which have helped him during his life,
viz., “ ability to read character.” After this occurrence he
had no more trouble with his men. But greater difficulties
were in store for him. General Ching grew jealous of Gordon
and sought to do him great injuries, by writing to Li Hung
Chang false statements. Gordon suffered one atrocious act
from his hands. Li fired on Gordon’s army from his gun
boats, and, afterwards, said it was a joke, and that he did
not recognise the flag. Gordon demanded satisfaction but
could not get it, and so decided to take it by the sword, but
Li Hung Chang would not allow him. After a time, Ching
was forced to apologise. It was just about this time that
Gordon became very down-hearted and resolved to throw up
his command. He seemed to meet with opposition on all
sides ; nearly half his army deserted him owing to the
Chinese Government not sending him the money that was
owing to the troops. Ching greatly added to his troubles,
and what troubled him more than anything else was that Li
thoroughly misunderstood him ; he, like many in England,
could not believe in the disinterestedness of Gordon, but
suspected that he was acting for his own sake, and not for
the sake of the country. Gordon even went to Shanghai
with the intention of resigning. But brave Christians never


give in ; he heard news when he reached Shanghai that
roused all his courage and chivalry, and he returned to his
post with greater determination than ever. Burgevine,
whose close alliance with the rebels, has been mentioned,
had, with the assistance of a man of the name of Jones,
seized a vessel, called Kiao-Chiao, and collected followers,
most of whom were low foreigners, and reached Soochow
with about 300 men, well provided with arms and fully
prepared to do any amount of plundering. Gordon, who
had retained his position, lost no time in preparing for new
complications. All his despondency disappeared; his
troubles again returned ; and his great difficulty now was
the want of a competent officer to hold a position second in
command. In a letter written from Quinsan, he mentions
his isolated position. He was greatly disappointed, in that
he was “ expecting the arrival of Captain Osborne with
steamers.” Osborne declined to fulfil his engagement; he
wrote to the effect that he was unwilling to risk his small
force against so many of the Taipings, and that he had so
many lives under his care, that they were, so to speak, at his
disposal, and he would not risk them in an enterprise he
considered to be rash.
CHAPTER IV.
General Brown now became alarmed on Gordon’s account,
and wrote to the Secretary of War, saying that, during his
absence, many of Gordon’s officers had joined the rebels
and were now serving under Burgevine. He explained that
if Gordon was defeated (as he very probably might, his
force being so small), that Shanghai and the Britishers
there would be in danger, as they had no proper means of
repelling an attack. However, Brown visited General
Gordon’s head-quarters, and there found a much better state
of matters than he expected. Soon afterwards Gordon’s
army was joined by the Imperialists ; the two armies worked
together, for a time, very well. On the 29th December,


Gordon attacked and captured the stockades at a place
called Patachow, just below Soochow. At the former
place he had a most miraculous escape. The canal was
crossed by an old bridge, three hundred yards long, and
having fifty-three arches. He removed one of these arches
to allow a steamer to pass into the lake, when twenty-six of
the arches collapsed. Two men were killed and others very
narrowly escaped. On the evening of the day of this
catastrophe, Gordon was quietly enjoying his cigarette on
the parapet of the broken bridge, when two shots struck the
stone on which he was sitting. Not wishing to receive one
of these little messengers in his body, he descended, and
was crossing over the canal to the camp, to inquire'the
reason why the shots had been fired, when the very part of
the bridge on which, a few seconds before, he had been
sitting, fell in with a terrible crash, almost overwhelming his
boat. He had another escape about this time, when he
might have lost his life through the treachery of Burgevine.
In fact his men fully believed he held a charmed life. He was
always in the front, and was only wounded on one occasion,
when he was shot in the leg. Nothing daunted, he continued
standing,'giving orders, until he fainted away and had to be
carried from the field. During action this brave man never
carried weapons, but simply a thin cane, with which he used
to direct his men. The Chinese called this cane, “ Gordon’s
Magic Wand of Victory.” They very naturally supposed
that, as he never carried any weapon but this, and always
remained unhurt, that this little wand had the power of
protecting its owner and ensuring him success. It is said
that once, when his soldiers were in a downhearted manner
attacking a fortress, he turned round and calmly lit a
cigarette, waved his wand, and cheered his soldiers on,
whereupon they went with a rush and carried the position.
At all times his own safety seems to have been his last
object.
Burgevine had proposed to Gordon that they should both
attack Soochow, drive out both rebels and Imperialists,
seize all the treasure, and then march on Pekin and there
depose the Mantchoo emperor, and that Burgevine should
reign in his stead, but he mistook his man, if he for a
moment thought that Gordon would agree to such a mean
policy.
B


And now Gordon showed great generosity. In spite of
the treachery of Burgevine he endeavoured to save him
from the punishment that would have been inflicted on him
by the Taipings when they found how badly he had treated
them. Gordon went as far as to send a letter to Chung
Wang and Moh Wang, the Taiping chiefs at Soochow, in
which he reminded them of the merciful way in which he
had treated their men when taken prisoners by him, and of
his intercession with the Imperial Government to prevent
any practice of inhumanity. He said : —“ I now ask your
Excellencies to consider the case of the Europeans in your
service. In every army each soldier must be actuated with
faithful feelings to fight well. A man made to fight against
his will is not only a bad soldier, but he is in positive
danger, causing anxiety to his leaders, and absorbing a
large force to prevent his defection. If there are any
Europeans left in Soochow, I would ask your Excellencies
if it does not seem to you much better to let these men
quietly leave the city and your service if they wish it? You
would thereby get rid of a continued source of suspicion,
gain the sympathy ot the whole of the foreign nations, and
feel that your difficulties are all from without. Your Excel-
lencies may think that decapitation will soon settle the
matter, but you would then be guilty of a crime which will
bear its fruits sooner or later. The men have committed no
crime and they have done you good service, and what they
have tried to do by escape is nothing more than any man
will do when placed in a position he does not approve of.
As far as I am personally concerned, it does not matter
whether the men leave or remain, but, as a man who wishes
to save these unfortunates, I intercede.” With this letter
he sent presents to the chiefs, together with all the rifles the
deserters had taken away with them. In consequence of
Gordon’s intervention Burgevine’s life was not taken.
Gordon thereby succeeded in saving the life of a man
who had tried hard to take his. He is known to have said
afterwards, “lam afraid he is a rogue, but I acted to the
best of my judgment.” Burgevine was delivered over to
the care of the American Consul, and in accordance with
Gordon’s request, allowed to leave the country. A question
that often presented itself to Gordon was—“ Shall I ever
take Soochow ?” and sometimes he grew disheartened. The


general opinion of his friends was that the odds against him
were too great, and he gained very little encouragement
from anyone. He, in a letter, described some of the engage-
ments he went through : —“ We started from the Arched
Bridge, and made a great detour of the lakes of Kahpoo, in
order to throw the rebels off the scent. Although Patachow
was only a mile and a half away to the west, I went round
thirty miles to confuse them, on a side they were not pre-
pared for. The night of 23rd October was very wretched,
cooped up in boats, as we were; it cleared a little at dawn.
About 7 a.m. we arrived at the stockades. I asked the
Imperialists under General Ching to defer their attack until
I became well engaged ; but as usual Ching must begiij at
half-past 5 a.m. He got a good dressing from the rebels,
and was forced to retire. He lost nineteen, and sixty-seven
were wounded; while the Taho gunboat admiral, who had
encouraged him in his tomfoolery, lost thirty men. We
lost none, only three being slightly wounded. The chief
rebel of Soochow, Moh Wang, had no idea that we were
going to Wulungchiao. He is greatly angered, and in
addition to this has had great trouble with his brother
wangs, who reproach him for having trusted the Europeans,
and for neglecting them. Eleven out of the twenty-seven
refused to go out and fight for him. A European left
Soochow yesterday afternoon and came over. I had met
him before, and consider him very brave for having remained
in Soochow. He says Moh Wang does not understand our
movements, and is terribly put out by the loss of Patachow.
They tried to get the town back again on the twenty-fifth,
but were defeated.” Gordon was again victorious at
Wokong. From his steamer he kept up a continual fire on
the rebels, and took 1300 of them prisoners. The value of
this victory was that now he had nothing to fear from his
rear ; and again at Leeku he was successful, taking the place
with a rush, capturing the Taipings’ gunboats and sixty
prisoners. On the 3rd November he again wrote —“We
yesterday took all stockades up to the eastern walls of the
city, and last night four wangs came to negotiate a surrender.
I think the heaviest part of our fighting is over. The
Taipings great trouble internally, and have to pay
heavily for food.” By this time all the surroundings of
Soochow were occupied by Imperial troops. The only
B 2


remaining place in the rebels’ hands was Wanti. This place,
although strongly fortified, fell into the hands of the
Imperialists in less than an hour.
Gordon was now quite prepared to take Soochow, he
knew well that he had to attack enormous numbers. The
Taipings in Soochow numbered 4000, with 38,000 in the
suburbs, making a total of 42,000, against his force of
3500, together with Ching’s 25,000 Imperialists.
Gordon’s first attack was a failure, he made it at night,
the rebels, although they were victorious, lost great numbers.
On the 30th November Gordon issued the following pro-
clamation : —“ The commanding officer congratulates the
officers and the men of the force on their gallant conduct.
The tenacity of the enemy, and the great strength of their
position, have, unfortunately caused many casualties, and
the loss of valuable officers and men. The enemy, how-
ever, has now felt our strength, and, although fully prepared
and animated by the presence of their most popular chiefs,
have been driven out of their position, which surpasses in
strength any yet taken from them. The loss of the stock-
ades on the east side of the city has already had its effect,
and dissension, is now rife in the garrison, who, hemmed
in on all sides, are already, in fact, negotiating defection.
The commanding officer feels most deeply for the heavy loss,
but is convinced that the same will not be experienced
again. The possession of the position of yesterday renders
the occupation of the city by the rebels untenable, and thus
victualling the city is lost to them.” A great many of the
Wangs now wished to surrender the city, and arranged a
meeting with Gordon to that effect. They asked him to
attack the city, and that they would help him to take it, on
condition that he would guarantee their safety from the
enraged Imperialists. After the city was taken, Gordon
advised them to give over one of their gates, and thus
prove their sincerity; he added that if they would not do
this they would have either to leave the city or take the
consequences of the fight.
Now these rebel chiefs were all brave men, and, after
agreeing to hand over one of the gates, they returned to
Soochow, to consult Moh Wang, their head; he would not
hear of surrender. He was remonstrated with by the other
Wangs, but all to no purpose ; they assured him that Gordon


would guarantee their safety, but Moh would not give in.
His fellow Wangs lost their tempers, and one of the most
violent, Kong Wang, threw off his robes and rushed at
Moh, with his drawn dagger, saying, “ Will you surrender
now ?” Moh Wang still refused to do so, whereupon Kong
Wang stabbed him until he died, the other Wangs then
carried their late chief out and beheaded him. Gordon
was extremely grieved to hear of Moh’s murder. Now that
the Wangs’ stumbling block was removed, they lost no time
in opening the gates of the city to the “Ever Victorious
Army,” and Gordon now saw the success which he had so
long looked for.
And now that Soochow was open to the Imperialists,
Gordon was desirous above all things that those taipings
who had surrendered should be treated according to Western
mode of treating prisoners of war, but he was alone, and
was thwarted in many ways. As far as his men where con-
cerned he determined to withhold them from plundering;
and he also sent to Li-Hung-Chang, asking him to give the
officers and men, as a reward for their bravery, two months’
extra pay. Li returned an answer offering them one month’s
extra pay: The men were greatly dissatisfied and threatened
to fall on the city and pay themselves by plundering, but
Gordon prevented this by marching his men back to
Quinsan. He then returned to Soochow, where things had
happened during his absence which caused him in the end
to throw up his commission and leave China. He had
fully understood from Li-Hung-Chang, the Imperial com-
mander, that, when Soochow was surrendered, no lives were
to be taken, and that the Wangs were to be fully pardoned.
In the face of all this Li had most treacherously put the six
Wangs to death. General Gordon states that after he had
finished his interview with Li, concerning the payment of a
reward to his men, he returned to the city and there met all
the Wangs at Nar Wang’s house, and that he inquired of
them whether everything was going on all right, and that
they appeared to think so, and told him yes; he then went
to Moh Wang’s palace and asked the people to bury the
body of their Chief, but none of them would touch it; he
then went and inspected the armed troops. Ching now
arrived to arrange terms on the part of Li. He (Gordon)
determined to make the “ Ever Victorious Army” accept Li’s


offer of one month’s salary ; he assembled them and told
them so ; they grumbled, and sohemarched them out of the
city. He further states that he kept a guard round Li’s
boat on the night of the sth December. He says, “On the
6th December I anticipated no further trouble with the
men. I ordered the steamers Tsallee and Hyson round to
Wuklungchaio, directing my chop to come up to the south
gate. I then went to the city, and having heard that the
Wangs were to go out to Li-Hung-Chang at noon, when the
city was to be finally given up. I went to Nar Wang’s house,
and reached it at half-past eleven a.m. The Wangs were all
ready on horseback and about to start for Li. I asked Nar
Wang if all was right. He said yes. I told him I was going to
Taho Lake to recover the Firefly. I asked him if he would
like me to stay ? He said no ; and I said good-by; and they
all went towards the East Gate.”
Gordon shortly after this met Ching’s soldiers, who had, ac-
cording to his request, buried Moh Wang’s body. He then
went to the east gate to pass the time until the steamers he
had ordered up should arrive. On coming near the gate he
noticed a large body of Imperialists rushing about in a
great state of excitement, yelling hideously, and firing their
guns at random. It was in vain he tried to stop them; they
were mad with the sight of plunder. As he was leaving the
place he met Ching, who seemed greatly confused on seeing
Gordon. He inquired where the Wangs were ? Ching
said he did not know, but that they had never gone to Li.
Gordon, who did not believe this tale, went back to Nar
Wang’s house. He found it thoroughly ransacked by the
Imperial soldiers. A relative of Nar’s saw Gordon and
beseeched him to save Nar’s wives. He rushed into the
palace, unarmed as usual. He was secured by Taiping
soldiers, who had not surrendered their arms as yet; they
determined to hold him as a hostage for the safety of their
Wangs. He was a prisoner all that night, but the next
morning induced his jailors to allow him to send a letter
containing instructions to arrest Li-Hung-Chang, and hold
him prisoner until the Wangs were released. The letter
was intercepted by the Imperialists, and so the rebels
allowed him to go. When he reached the south gate a
body of Imperialists seized him, on account of his being
in company with the Taiping rebels. He, however,


managed to escape, and reach his own soldiers. Gordon
would not have anything to say to Ching, but from Nar
Wang’s son he heard the fearful truth. He burst into tears
with indignation and anger ; he went to the spot where the
Wangs had been murdered, and there saw their bodies
lying covered with blood and gashes. This put Gordon
into such a terrible state of mind that he made up his mind
to demand Li-Hung-Chang’s death, to pay for this gross
atrocity. Arming himself with a revolver he repaired to
Chang’s quarters, but in the meantime Ching, who had
heard of Gordon’s intentions, hastened to Chang and
acquainted him of his danger. Chang fled, and managed
to keep completely out of Gordon’s way. Ihe latter
returned w'ith his troops to Quinsan, and told them e
could no longer be their commander, and telling them that
he should hand his position over to General Brown. In
the course of an investigation made by Mr. Mayen, at
Shanghai, it was proved that from the first Li and Ching
intended to deceive Gordon, and to kill the Wangs directly
they were in power. , _
Gordon says, in one of his letters, “ General Brown
arrived on the afternoon of the 9th of December, and took
the protection of the force. I had already spoken to the
officers and got them to leave the solution to the British
General. The disgust and abhorrence felt by all of them
was, and is, so great as to lead me to fear their going over
en masse to the Taipings ; but I have shown them that the
sin would then be visited on the Chinese people, and not on
the culprits who committed it.” ;
Gordon now awaited, with a sore heart, General Browm s
investigations; who, in a letter to Sir Frederick Bruce and
Lord de Grey, says, “ Gordon has been unable to express in
writing the intense indignation and disgust with which the
infamous and dastardly conduct of Li-Hung-Chang had
inspired him. The treachery of the Imperial authorities
had destroyed the confidence of all ranks. Their cruelties
had turned the sympathies of Europeans in favour of the
rebels, and I found it necessary to restore discipline, and to
avert, perhaps, a total defection of the men, to take Gordon
and his force formally under my command. I ascertained
that, though Li was prepared to take on himself all the
responsibility of the murder of the Wangs and the sacking


of the city, and fully exonerate Gordon from all blame, he
was either unwilling or unable to offer any explanation of
his conduct, and it only remained for me to express my
opinion and future intentions. I expressed the indignation
and grief with which the English people, together with all
civilised nations of the world, would regard his cruelty and
perfidy. I then informed him I should insist on the
promised reward of one month’s extra pay. That I deemed
it my duty to refer the whole matter to our Minister at Pekin,
and that, pending such reference, Gordon had received
instructions from me to suspend all active aid to the
Imperialist cause, further than protecting Soochow, knowing
its importance to the safety of Shanghai, and warning the
rebels to abstain from attacking his positions. I concluded
by expressing my conviction that, after what had occurred,
mj' Government would withdraw all assistance hitherto
afforded to the Imperial cause; recall Gordon and all
English subjects serving under him, and disband the Anglo-
Chinese force.’ Again, the public feeling in England was
aroused, in consequence of false reports made by certain
people who are always ready to misconstruct, and, even to
concoct downright falsehoods, amongst whom was one
Lobschied, a missionary, who describes the scenes in a
horrible manner. In one place he makes a most atrocious
attack on Gordon, “ Had Gordon, the instant this terrible
responsibility fell upon him, immediately resigned and
forsaken his assassin brother generals, he might have saved
his honour, as the word is generally used ; but now in the
estimation of every man of honour (and very many without,
I should think), he is indelibly disgraced, and the British
authorities are in the same state, through applying to
ekin, forsooth, to qualify the murders for which they alone
are to blame. Gordon, unfortunately for himself, has been
too much addicted to intrigue and encouragement of
treachery, since his elevation to a Manchoo generalship, to
have felt much surprise at the Soochow tragedy; and
probably he might have had good suspicion of it before it
happened, so was not horrified enough to throw up his 1200
taels per months. Well, every one to his taste, but I for
one would rather not be concerned in the massacre of
thirty-two thousand men, women and children, for 1200
taels a month.” O these wretched missionaries! The sooner


two-thirds of them are scouted off the surface of the earth the
better. The majority of them seek their own ends, and not
those of others, and many of them are as black-faced
villains as ever set foot on mother earth. This Lobschied
may well be classed with the latter. He could have known
very little about Gordon, when he said that he was an
object of hatred and disgust to all honest men. No, no,
Mr. Missionary, you only showed your ignorance there; for
many sensible people even then could see in Gordon a man
who, if he was spared, could and would do immense good
to any people he might happen to mix with. The very
manner in which he showed how little he cared for self, the
sacrifices, the backslidings, the meanness he had invariably
undergone, were enough to gain him a vast body of admirers
in every corner of the civilised world. Certainly there were
many who, like the man (Worthington) who introduced
Lobschied’s pamphlet to the British public, accepted the
statements as true, but the less said about these persons
the better, for they are little better than the uncivilised
creatures who were the cause of all the annoyance to
Gordon in China, and who thought of nothing but the
plunder and brutality they so frequently exacted.
At the investigation held at Pekin by the Imperial
authorities, the offences of Chang and Ching were treated
very lightly; in fact, Li-Hung-Chang received the congratu-
lations of Prince Kung, and also the yellow jacket, which
indicates the highest military honor. Gordon was compli-
mented on his bravery, and received a medal and a donation
of 1000 taels, also a decoration of the first class, together
with rewards for his soldiers. When these presents were
sent to Gordon he accepted the money for his men, but the
gifts for himself he rejected, and, it is said, beat the bearers
from the room with his “ Magic Wand.” He sent the
following reply to the Chinese Emperor :—“ Gordon
receives the approbation of his Majesty the Emperor with
every gratification, but regrets most sincerely that, owing to
circumstances which occurred since the capture of Soochow,
he is unable to receive any mark of his Majesty the
Emperor’s recognition, and therefore respectfully begs his
Majesty to receive his thanks for his intended kindness, and
to allow him to do the same.” This was the way to treat
the Chinese, and a very proper mode of showing them what


sort of stuff he was made of. But now, thought he, what is-
next to be done ? Must I really throw up my command,
and see all the good (for he knew well he was doing right)
that has been done undone again ; for although the fall of
Soochow had greatly crippled the rebels, the rebellion was
not yet completely quelled, and if left as it was would most
likely become far worse than it ever had been. Writing
home he said he cared not for money or honours; he knew
he had done right, and that was quite enough for him. He
saw that the massacre that had taken place was not looked
upon by the Chinese in the serious light he and other
Englishmen had seen it. He soon made up his mind; he was
sure that, although Li and Ching had gained all the honours,
they could do nothing without his aid. He wrote to Sir
Frederick Bruce to the effect that he had arranged with Li to
publish a proclamation exonerating him (Gordon) of all blame
concerning the murder of the Wangs, and that when this
had been done, he would again assume his command. He
added that he well knew he would be severely censured for
taking this course. Sir Frederick Bruce approved of his
action, and wrote to Gordon in the following strain : —“ My
concurrence in the step you have taken is founded in no
small measure of my knowledge of the high motives which
have guided you while in command of the Chinese force,
of the disinterested conduct you have observed in pecuniary
questions, and of the influence in favor of humanity you
exercised in rescuing Burgevineand his misguided associates
from Soochow. lam aware of the perseverance with which,
in the face of serious obstacles and much discouragement,
you have steadily pursued the pacification of the Province
of Kiangsoo ; in relieving it from being the battlefield of the
insurrection, and in restoring to its suffering inhabitants the
enjoyments of their homes, and the uninterrupted exercise
of their industry; and you may console yourself with the
assurance that you are rendering a service to true humanity
as well as to great material interests. It would be a serious
calamity and addition to our embarrassments in China, were
you compelled to leave your work incomplete, and were a
sudden dissolution or dispersion of the Chinese force to
lead to the recurrence of that state of danger and anxiety
from which, during the last two years v Shanghai has suffered.
I approve of your not awaiting the result of the inquiry of


the Futai’s (Li’s official title) proceedings at Soochow,
provided that you take care that your efforts in favour of
humanity are not, in future, defeated by Chinese authorities.
Sir Frederick Bruce, in another letter, said he had obtained
a promise from the Emperor that the customs of foreign
nations should be observed in future ; and, he reminded
Gordon, that henceforth it would be next to impossible for
scenes —such as had occurred at Soochow to be repeated,
and telling him that he would, as it were, be the protector of
the Chinese. Gordon made a fresh start and had to encounter
greater difficulties than before. From Quinsan to Woosieh
he encountered great hail and snow storms. When he
arrived at the latter place, he found that the Taipings had
been carrying on great destruction to the surrounding
district. From Woosieh he went to Yesing, and from Yesing
he pushed on to Tajowka. Ihe garrison here, soon came
to terms aud joined him. He had the same success at
Lujang. The next place he attacked was Kingtang, where
he was wounded. Suddenly, in the midst of a fierce fight,
a cry arose that “ The Commander was wounded.” Gordon
became angry at this, and ordered the man who had raised
it to bfe silent.
Although the blood was streaming from his wound he
stuck bravely to his post, and would not retire until com-
pelled to do so by Dr. Moffat. In a fainting condition he
was carried on one of the boats, dhe “Ever Victorious Army
made three unsuccessful attacks on this place. It was now
that the authorities at Pekin found out that Gordon was
their “ backbone.” Prince Kung issued the following pro-
clamation :—“ Li-Hung-Chang reports that General Gordon
some time since started from Liyang to Kingtang. He
carried with him mortars to breach the walls. At the attack
he was wounded in the leg. We are on this account deeply
moved with grief and admiration. On the other hand, we
are informed the wound is not serious. We order Li-Hung-
Chang to visit and inquire for Gordon daily, and to keep
him well informed of events, that his mind might be at rest,
and to request him to wait until his health is perfectly
restored. Respect this.”
Gordon received a letter from Sir Frederick Bruce, asking
him to be' most cautious, not on account of his army, but on
his own account. He even begged him not to look at his


position from a military point of view. He said—“ You
have done quite sufficient to ensure your reputation as a
gallant and skilful leader. Your life and ability to keep the
field are far more important than the capture of any city in
China. We all look on you as the only person fit to act with
these perverse Chinamen, and to be trusted with the great
interests at stake at Shanghai.”
CHAPTER V.
But Gordon, whose arduous spirit could not bear to be
idle, was soon (in spite of his doctors’ orders) on his legs
again, and at the head of his men. He acknowledged that
at present he could not take Kingtang, and thought his best
policy would be to fall back on Liyang. Here he received
information that Hung, the chief Taiping wang, had taken
by assault Fusham, and that the Taipings were inflicting
appalling cruelties on the inhabitants of the surrounding
districts. He immediately advanced to Wosuh, where, to
his gratification, he found that the Imperialists had driven
the rebels out. Li-Hung-Chang, the Governor, told Gordon
that Ching had been killed, and Gordon—although General
Ching had treated him on many occasions with great
treachery and meanness—heard the tidings with tears of
sorrow and extreme regret. Chanchu-fu was the next city
to be attacked, and this required great skill to do; Gordon
immediately invested it. While this was being done, he had
another miraculous escape. While superintending the con-
struction of a battery he and Major Tapp were fired on by
both the rebels and Imperialists. Some of the men on the
battery were killed, and amongst them Major Tapp—a
brave and energetic soldier. General Gordon was unhurt.
Li-Hung-Chang made the first attack on Chanchu-fu,
but was unsuccessful. Gordon now made an attempt, but
the Imperialists were not up to the mark ; so he and his few
men had to fight, and were forced to retreat; and now a
combined effort was made to take the city. The officers


led, but the men refused to follow, and so another disap-
pointment. And now they made a last grand attack. The
Imperialists led the way, and broke down the walls. They
were met by enormous numbers of the rebels, and were
nearly beaten, when Gordon came up in the nick of time*
and put an end to the fight by giving the Taipings a severe
knocking about. On the day of the final taking of the city he
wrote to England, saying,—“ I think if lam spared I shall
be home by Xmas. Ido not care one jot about my promo-
tion, or what the people say. I know I shall leave China
as poor as I entered it, but with the knowledge that, through
my weak instrumentality, upwards of eighty to one hundred
thousand lives have been spared.” Noble hearted man that
he was, never caring what criticism or rebuke he brought on
his own head, as long as he was doing good and serving
others. How many, many men who were only too ready to
cry him down, would have done far better for themselves
and for the community at large had they, instead of
believing false reports, given their sympathies to a man who
needed them sorely, and worked with him instead of against
him. These false communications gained such ground in
England, that, at last, the Government in 1864 revoked the
Order-in-Council which permitted Gordon to serve the
Chinese Government. Fortunately his work was over
before the order reached him. The rebellion now virtually
being at an end, Gordon decided to disband the “ Ever
Victorious Army.” During May he was occupied in doing this.
He paid his soldiers, and returned their arms to the Imperial
Government. The Chinese Authorities had now seen
clearly that Gordon was the man of all others they had
needed, and theygavehim whatever money he asked tor. "This
money he gave to his officers, but accepted none himself.
Although presents were showered on him, he refused them
all, and instead of being a rich man, as he could have been,
he remained as poor as ever. But what must have been his
inward satisfaction to know that now he was admired and
respected by men, who, at times, had sought to do him
harm; what must have been his feelings when he knew that
even the rebel Tapings, to whom his name had been a
terror, loved and admired him; and how highly gratified he
must have been to know that China felt in loosing
him, it lost its greatest hero, and its best friend. Before his


departure the Emperor made him a “ Thu,” which gave him
the highest rank in the Chinese army. He also received a
yellow riding jacket and a peacock’s feather, also four suits
of uniform proper to his rank of “Titu.” All these were
amongst the greatest honours China could possibly bestow.
The Emperor expressed a wish to the British Minister at
Pekin that his appreciation of Gordon’s services should be
brought before her Majesty the Queen of England; and he
even went so far as to despatch the following letter by
Prince Kung to Sir Frederick Bruce, to be forwarded to her
Majesty : —“ Lieutenant Colonel Gordon well deserves her
Majesty’s favour; tor, independently of the skill and courage
he has shown, his disinterestedness has elevated our national
character in the eyes of the Chinese. Not only has he
refused any pecuniary reward, but he has spent more than
his pay in contributing to the comfort of his officers who
served under him, and in assuaging the distress of the
starving population whom he relieved from the yoke of
their oppressors. Indeed, the feeling that impelled him to
resume operations after the fall of Soochow was one of the
purest humanity. He sought to save the people of the
districts that had been recovered from a repetition of the
misery entailed upon them by this cruel civil war*”
Gordon received from the merchants of Shanghai an
illuminated address, in which they expressed their admi-
ration and respect. General Gordon made the following
reply :—
“Shanghai, November 25th, 1864.
“ Gentlemen—I have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your handsome letter of this day’s date, and to
express to you the great satisfaction which I feel at the
honourable mention you have made therein of my services
in China.
“ It will always be a matter of gratification to me to have
received your approval; and deeply impressed with the
honour you have paid me—I have the honour to be,
gentlemen, yours obediently,
C. G. Gordon.”
* The above is a translation of the Emperor’s original letter.


CHAPTER VI.
When Gordon returned to England, people were ready to
make a great deal of him, but he would not have this,
nothing gave him more annoyance than the attempt of
people to give prominence to his achievements. A curious
anecdote is told of him by a Mr. Hake. It appears Gordon
had written a journal on the Taiping war, and had sent it
home to his family. A minister, hearing of this journal,
borrowed it, and, after reading it, sent it to the press, in order
that others might have the benefit of reading it. , Gordon
on hearing this immediately went to the minister s house,
and finding him out, hurried to the printers, where he de-
manded his journal, and ordered the copies that had
been printed to be destroyed, and the type broken
up. Soon after his arrival in England he was made
Commanding Royal Engineer at Gravesend. I his was
early in 1865. He remained at this place until 1871.
During his sojourn here he did immense good amongst
the slums and workhouses, also to the poor. He lived
at a place called Fort House j his special duty was
superintending the construction of the 1 hames defences.
To the hundreds of boys employed roundabout and on
the Thames, he was most kind, whenever he discovered any
of these boys in trouble he used to tell them to go up to
Fort House in the evening. Here they were always sure of
good counsel and help. Eva Hope, the author of Our
Queen,” in her very interesting book on the life of General
Gordon (to this book I am greatly indebted for various
anecdotes and facts), states “ that she has lately met many
people in Gravesend, who, although thirteen yeais have
elapsed since Gordon resided there, still says he was the
best man who ever lived in Gravesend. His life at
Gravesend seems to have been one of hard work, and self-
denial, in fact his home was workhouse, shool, and hospital
in turn, everybody in distress was heartily welcome. For
the benefit of the boys, he instituted classes, presiding over
himself, he procured berths on ships for many, he took a
special delight in teaching in ragged schools ; in fact this


grand example of a true Christian and Englishman, had
given himself to God, he believed that “no man had a
right to be proud of anything he did.” It was next to use-
less to try and hide anything from him, for he seemed to see
through people at once. As an example of his self-denial,
how many could put up with merely a bed, a chair, and a
box as bed-room furniture, Gordon did with these at Graves-
end, and was satisfied. His garden was open to the old and
infirm, who used to take great pleasure in walking about it.
He even allowed people to set their potatos in his ground,
and pick the crops when ripe. It is related of a young man
that Gordon saw looking very downcast, and who was going
the right way to ruin, that under the influence of the
General this youth became a thoroughly good Christian ;
poor fellow, he died of consumption. Gordon was beloved
by all in Gravesend, more especially the youngsters, by
whom he was adored; it was quite a common thing to see
written in chalk on walls and fences: “ God bless the
Kernel,” “Long life to our dear teacher, Gordon,” “C. G.
is a jolly good fellow,” and so on; it is not often that young
men say of a man, “We love him so much that we go to
the night school for the sake of being near him.” This
was often said of Gordon. Does it not seem astounding
how one man could do what he did; working hard at the
Thames defences, and filling up his evenings and nights and
early mornings by comfort to the distressed, and teaching in
the ragged schools, besides doing an immense power of good
to the middle classes ? But at the same time does it not show
us how much more good we can do in this world than we
do ? Why not follow Gordon’s example ; and, although
we may not be called upon to deny ourselves as he did, still
could we not sacrifice a little pleasure each day of our lives,
and by so doing be of great use to others in a direct or in-
direct way—as the case may be? For, although things are
not so bad with the poor out here in the colonies as at
home, still we must not run away with the idea that there is
no poverty, and that people are not suffering all around us;
for, indeed, there is a vast amount of distress in Victoria at
the present time, which could easily be done away with if
people would only act instead of talking, as so many are
fond of doing ! We cannot take a finer example than that
of the brave Englishman who has just died a glorious death


in a land where he has been continuing his good work, and
where he, “as is usual with the brave and innocent,” has
had to encounter astounding difficulties.
There are still in some of the ragged schools at Gravesend
some Chinese banners which Gordon left behind him.
These are always proudly shown to visitors. When Gordon
left Gravesend in 1871 every class regretted the loss ; and it is
said that the doctors were quite at a loss, for they had been
in the habit of calling in Gordon whenever a particular case
occurred, and never in vain. When Gordon left he was
presented with the following highly satisfactory testimony of
his worth, through the medium of a local paper :
“Our readers, without exception, will learn with regret'of
the departure of Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon, C. 8., R.E.,
from the town, in which he has resided for six years, gaining
a name by the most exquisite charity, that will long be
remembered. Nor will he be less missed than remembered ;
for in the lowly walks of life, by the bestowal of gifts, by
attendance and ministrations on the sick and dying, by the
kindly giving of advice, by attendance at the Ragged School,
Workhouse and Infirmary—in fact, by general and con-
tinuous beneficence to the poor, he has been so unwearied
in well-doing that his departure will be felt by many as a
personal calamity. There are those who even now are
reaping the rewards of his kindness. His charity was
essentially charity, and had its root in deep philanthropic
feeling and goodness of heart: shunning the light of pub-
licity, but coming even as the rain in the night time, that in
the morning is noted not, but only the flowers bloom and
give a greater fragrance. Colonel Gordon, although com-
paratively a young man, has seen service, having obtained
his brevet and order of Companion of the Bath by dis-
tinguished service in China. He is thus eminently fitted
for his new post, and there is no doubt but that he will
prove as beneficent in his station under the Foreign Office
as he was while at Gravesend. All wish him well in his
new sphere, and we have less hesitation in penning these
lines from the fact that laudatory notice will confer but little
pleasure upon him who gave with the heart and cared not
for commendation.”
Amongst the numerous anecdotes told of Gordon’s
charity and kindness while at Gravesend, I think the
D


following is as worthy as any. It is related by Eva Hope in
her “ Life of General Gordon.”
“ A boy in the employ of a tradesman in Harmer-street
robbed him. The culprit was discovered, and the master
angrily declared that he would send him to prison. The
mother of the boy was almost heartbroken, but she had
heard of General Gordon, and knew that, like his Master,
he never turned away from the sad and troubled ones who
sought his help. So with all a mother’s earnestness she
went at once to the Colonel, and trying to check her
tears, she told him the story. “ I cannot understand it, sir;
he has always been an honest boy, and I do believe that
this is the first and last time. If he could only have
another chance. But if he is sent to prison, I am afraid it
will end in his ruin.”
“I am afraid it will. I will do what I can for him : what
would you like me tq do ?”
“Oh, Sir, if you would intercede with his master, and
persuade him not to send my boy to gaol, I will be gateful
to you all my life !”
So the Colonel -went to Harmer-street, and saw the
tradesman who had been robbed. He was very angry.
He thought the boy deserved punishment, and that it would
do him good, and serve him right, and be a warning to him
and to others, if he had a few months in prison. But
Gordon pleaded very earnestly for him, and every one
respected the Colonel, and was glad to do as he requested.
“ What will become of the boy ? I cannot keep him here
now, said the tradesman.”
“ Oh, no, of course, you cannot. But if you will promise
not to prosecute him I will take charge of him, and perhaps
we can make a man out of the rascal yet : at least I should
like to try, if you will let me.”
“ Very well, Colonel. I will not punish the boy, and I
hope he may repay your kindness.”
The Colonel thanked him heartily, and then spoke very
seriously to the boy, telling him how he had barely escaped
going to prison ; but, he said, “You shall have a chance ;
your master has kindly forgiven you, and if you ask God,
He will also forgive you ; and I will help you if you behave
well in future and try to do your best. Will you ?”
“ Yes, sir, indeed I will,” said the boy.


“ How would you like to go to sea ?” asked the Colonel.
“ I should like it very much.”
“ Very well; you must go to school for a year. I will
pay for you ; you must attend to your lessons, and try to
learn as much as you can in the time.”
By the end of the year the boy went to sea, after thanking
the Colonel, which he does to the present time, and is now
a man, and has a good character. Both he and his mother
(who lives at Gravesend still, and is happy) bless the name
of Gordon, who saved the lad from prison and the mother
from disgrace.”
CHAPTER VII.
Gordon’s services at Gravesend ended on the 30th Septem-
ber, 1871. He was then appointed as British Commissioner
at Galatsy, on the Danube, in Turkey. He was well acquainted
with this part of the world, as he had, sixteen years before,
been at Bessarabia, where his services (as has already been
mentioned) were most valuable. For two years he worked
hard to render the navigation at the mouths of the Danube
free from all obstacles ; but the people of England had now
found out what sort of a man Gordon really was, and began
to wonder why he should have been sent on work which
many another would have done as well. This feeling found
a voice about eighteen months after his arrival at Galatsy.
About this time troubles with the Ashantees took place on
the coast of Africa. They had threatened the British settle-
ment at Cape Coast Castle. This necessitated the sending
out of a British force. Gordon was proposed as the leader,
but in the end Garnet (now Lord) Wolseley was chosen.
Gordon’s work at Galatsy was finished in the latter part of
1873. About a year before this he had seen Nubar Pasha,
the Egyptian Minister, who expressed a wish for a successor
to Sir Samuel Baker, whose term of office, as Governor of
the Soudan, had expired. He questioned Gordon as to
whether he knew of any suitable person to fill the vacancy.
Gordon did not give him an answer until July 1873, when
he offered his own services, on the condition that the
British Government would allow him.
D 2


CHAPTER VIII.
In 1874, the Khedive of Egypt requested the British
Government to allow Gordon to succeed Sir Samuel Baker as
Governor of the tribes in Upper Egypt. He offered Gordon
,£IO,OOO a year, but our hero said would be enough
for his wants. His energies were'brought into full force in
endeavouring to put down the slave trade. In improving the
means of communication ; in putting down war between the
tribes ; and in trying to settle matters with King John, as
regards the dispute between Abyssinia and Egypt. He
returned to England for a short time, but returned to Cairo
in February, 1877. The new Khedive appointed him
Governor-General of the Soudan, with Darfour and the
Provinces" of the Equator. Finding he could do nothing
with King John, he proceeded to Khartoum, where the slave
traders were giving trouble. Having been installed in office,
he found he was.expected to make a speech. He delighted
the people by merely saying “ With the help of GOD I will
hold the balance level!” What a lesson this to big men
who will use big words and so weary their listeners. His
undertaking was herculean, and, to use the words of one of
his biographers, he had “to give peace to a country quick
with war; to suppress slavery among a people to whom the
trade in human flesh was life, and honour and fortune; to
make an army out of, perhaps, the worst material ever seen ;
to grow a flourishing trade and a fair revenue in the wildest
anarchy in the world.” Besides these huge difficulties he
had ill-health to contend with —an enemy which, as a rule,
beats the bravest —a fearful climate, and with a class of
men which could produce nothing but cowards and traitors.
He had many enemies in the Khedive’s Court, which was
only natural, since he was their superior in mind and force
of character, and was a foreigner. The sister of the ex-
Governor of the Soudan, expressed her ill-feeling at his
appointment, by breaking a hundred and thirty of the palace
windows, and by cutting all the divans to pieces. Halid
Pasha tried, by impudence, to get the upper hand, but he
was reported and at once cashiered. To Gordon’s disgust


he found that he had to live in a palace as large as Marl-
borough House. He had two hundred servants and orderlies
to attend upon him, and was obliged to conform to a strict
code of etiquette. He could not rise to receive a guest. If
he rose every one did the same. He would make a good
deal of fun at times o.ut of this formal state of things, and
often delighted the great chiefs—his visitors—by saying in
English (not a word of which they understood), “ Now, old
bird, it is time for you to go.” It was soon known how he
had relieved the wants of so many people on his way from
Massawa to Khartoum. He was, therefore, at once besieged
by a thousand petitioners on arriving at his seat of Gdvern-
ment. He instituted, as he did on the march, a box for the
reception of these memorials. Bribery was the only means
by which the former Governors could be approached. As
much as £6OO was often paid down for an appointment
worth merely a year. He abolished the whip which
had been a great influence under Ismail Yacoub. Another
of his great reforms was having the river-water pumped up
into the town at a moderate cost, which enabled the people
living in houses far inland, to enjoy that comfort without the
immense labour they had formerly employed. Ihe Roman
Catholic missionaries gave him some trouble by persisting
in giving asylum to runaway slaves. He wrote to the Pope
requesting him to restrain his servants from interfering in
the Khedive’s administration. Having told the missionaries
what he had done, they offended no more.
Though Gordon was much needed at Khartoum, his
presence was still more important at Darfour. dhe country
was in revolt, and the Khedive’s garrisons at Fascher, Dara
and Kolkol were besieged by the rebels. In the middle of
May he left Khartoum on camelback for what turned out to
be a five months’ ride. His retinue as Governor-General
was 200 cavaliers. On his road he wrote home thus : “ I
am quite comfortable on the camel, and am happier when
on the march than in towns with all the ceremonies. Ihe
route here is over plain and bushes, quite uninteresting.
Gordon rode a fine camel, and knew how to manage it—
viz., by giving it its head \ but he had to admit that this
system, even with a camel, was not always safe. Not far
from Obeid, he writes—“ I nearly acted as Juggernaut to a
little black naked boy to-day. My camel had shaken the


nose-ring out of its nose, and ran off with me. I could not
stop it, and of course the little black ran right under the
camel, who, however, did not tread on him, though it was a
miracle he escaped being killed. Nothing is so perverse as.
a camel; when it runs away it will go anywhere.’’ He hoped
to make friends of some of the rebel tribes, that he might
have a bodyguard of subdued and converted enemies. Such
superb self-confidence was habitual to him. The Cross’s
true soldier, a mystic and a leader of men, he fights and
conquers much as Columbus voyaged, and as Cromwell
ruled. “ Praying for the people ahead of me, whom lam
about to visit,” he says, “gives me much strength : and it is
wonderful how something seems already to have passed between
us when I meet a chief (for whom I have prayed) for the
first time. On this I base my hopes of a triumphant march
to Fascher. I have really no troops with me, but I have
the Shekinah, and I do like trusting to Him, and not to men.
Remember, unless He gave me the confidence and encouraged
me to trust Him, I could not have it; and so I consider
that I have the earnest of success in this confidence.” He
was delayed a fortnight at Oomchanga (six days’ journey
from Fascher), awaiting the arrival of two or three hundred
ragamuffins he called his army. This inaction proved
almost insupportable. He had suffered too keenly to gain
comfort from retrospection, but he always did find the
consolation his soul so much desired. “It is lamentable
work,” he writes, “and over and over again, in the fearful
heat, I wish I was in the other world. When I look back
on the hours and hours of waiting for this and that, during
China and later campaigns, and here, I really think few
men have had such worries in this way. But lam wrong
in it; the lot is cast evenly on us all. We are servants ;
sometimes our Master gives us work, and at others He does
not, and our feelings in both circumstances should be the
same. AH I can say is, that this inaction, with so much to dc
elsewhere, is very trying indeed to my body. It is such a
country, so worthless, and I see nothing to be gained by its
occupation.” It was, however, a joy to him to find the
victory was so far a bloodless one. He made peace with
all the tribes round him, and half way to Fascher. At last,
on June 30th, he started for Toashia with 500 “non-
descripts,” as he calls the Egyptian military. The next


reinforcement of 35° which he met at Toashia proved to be
in a state of semi-starvation; he ordered them to be disbanded,
hoping by this to make a friend of a certain Chief (whose
brother he had released), and of getting men from him.
He was obliged to continue his march with his wretched
army of 500, armed with flint-locks and with but a single
field-piece among them. No Chief appeared with help, and
they were threatened by thousands of determined blacks.
“I prayed heartily for an issue,” he says, “but it gave
me a pain in the heart like that I had when sur-
rounded at Masindi. Ido not fear death, but I fear,
from want of faith, the result of my death, for the whole
country would have risen. It is indeed, most painful
to be in such a position; it takes a year s work out
of me.” Matters were made worse by the fact that the
contingent from Dara marched by a different route, and so
missed the main body. Fortunately no attack was made,
or Gordon and his miserable followers must have been
killed to a man. Gordon wrote:—“When I had got
through my dangers, I saw some deer, and took my
my rifle.' Of course, he (the bearer) had thrown it down
and broken the stock; thus, had I been attacked, I should
have been defenceless.” The people were astonished to see
him when he rode into Dara, on the 12th of July. They
had been six months without news from without, he says,
“it was like the relief of Lucknow.” Haroun, the pretender
to the throne, had been stirring up a revolt, and was
plotting Gordon’s death. He despatched an expedition
numbering 8,000 natives and 1,5 00 troops against the self-
crowned Sultan, and set a price on his head.
He was set about with perils —on the one hand, Haroun ,
on the other, the hostile tribes ; and in front was Suleiman,
the most desperate foeman of all. He proposed quelling
this latter enemy with friendship, or he would subdue him
by the Spirit. Before Gordon could set about these plans
he had to confer with El Nour, one of Sebehr s chiefs, whom
he knew to be faithful to government. Through him he was
well informed of the movements in the robbers den, and
also that Suleiman could not leave the sa.id den for three
months, or until the rains were over. Ihe Chief of the
Razagats (a tribe who had been maltreated by the slavers),
with 600 riders, fled to Dara, and offered to side with


Gordon this move brought numerous other tribes to take
shelter in the fort. In one respect this was good, but a loss
in another, for the country was bare, and Gordon had hardly
food for his own men. The Razagats alone could put 7000
men in the field. They move with extraordinary swiftness
for they carry no baggage, and ride without stirrups.
Another trouble was re-captured slaves being brought in
they had been unfed for thirty-six hours. The sight of thin’
wistful faces brought tears to Gordon’s eyes; of course he
ordered them corn. When his troops returned, whom he
had sent out against the tribes, he found they had left the
fighting to their allies, the friendly tribe, and, indeed, their
commander had accepted a bribe from the opposing Chief.
His nondescripts were ever backward to come forward, and
it would seem the only real help Gordon had was from the
friendly tribes. His five years’ wanderings to and from the
great lakes is a continuous account of great efforts and constant
disappointment. The Egyptian authorities at Cairo, instead
of punishing the lawless slavers, whom he would send
as prisoners, kept them in comfortable and even luxurious
quarters. He was constantly being annoyed with the slave
question; so much so, that he wished the Anti-Slavery
Society were there, that he might put it upon them to
decide. At Fascher, near where his camp was pitched, a
Muezzin was calling to prayers. The Arab Lieutenant-
Colonel, hoping to rouse the people against Gordon, ordered
t e man to desist, as it disturbed the Governor-General.
Gordon’s secretary missed the sound, made inquiries, and
discovered the culprit. “I gave the crier says
Gordon, “ and I bundled off my friend, the Lieutenant-
Colonel, into banishment.” I never hesitate a moment
in coming down on such fellows. In the midst of his
vain efforts to. put down his enemies, and his general
vexation of spirit, he is tormented with scorpions, or he is
beset by storms that even his tent is torn down in the dead
of night, and he is left shelterless and drenched to the skin.
“ I d° not suppose you could find a more useless set of
servants than I have,” he says; “the Maltese, on occasions
like this, is completly paralyzed, and sits down, leaving
everything to its fate—a regular tumble-down sort of fellow.
I have been in a towering rage with him. It is one comfort
to be utterly uncomfortable, for it cannot be worse, and


may be better.” News came that Sulieman, with his
frightful 6,000, was on the eve of attacking the Government
at Dara. Gordon lost not a moment. Ignoring nonde-
scripts and allies he mounted his camel and rode to Dara.
This tremendous ride, one of the most striking achieve-
ments in his career, is better told in his own words :—“ I
got to Dara about four p.m., long before my escort, having
ridden eighty-five miles in a day and a half. About seven
miles from Dara I got into a swarm of flies, and they
annoyed me and my camel so much that we jolted along as
fast as we could. If I had no escort of men I had a large
one of flies. I came on my people like a thunderbolt. As
soon as they had recovered the salute was fired. My poor
escort! Where is it ? Imagine to yourself a single dirty
Ted-faced man on a camel, ornamented with flies, arriving
in the divan all of a sudden. The people were paralyzed.
No dinner after my long ride, but a quiet night, forgetting
my miseries. At dawn I got up, and, putting on the golden
■armour the Khedive gave me, went out to see my troops,
and then mounted my horse, and with an escort of my
robbers of Bashi-Bazouks, rode out to the camp of the
other robbers, three miles off. I was met by the son of
Sebehr —a nice-looking lad of twenty-two years —and rode
through the robber-bands. There were about 3000 of
them —men and boys. I rode to the tent in the camp.
The whole body of chiefs were dumbfounded at my coming
among them. After a glass of water I went back, telling
the son of Sebehr to come with his family to my divan.
They all came, and sitting there in a circle I gave them in
■choice Arabic my ideas : That they meditated revolt; that
I knew it, and that they should now T have my ultimatum,
viz., that I would disarm them and break them up. They
listened in silence, and then went off to consider what I
had said. They have just sent in a letter stating their
submission, and I thank God for it. ”
They have pillaged the country all round. I can’t help
it; I feel very sorry for the poor people, for they were my
allies at Wadar, and through their absence with me their
possessions were exposed to the attacks of these scoundrels.
What misery ! But the Higher than the Highest regardeth
it and can help them —I cannot. The sort of stupefied way
in which they heard me go to the point about their doings,


the pantomime of signs, the bad Arabic, &c., was quite
absurd. Fancy, the son of Sebehr, only three days ago, took
his pistol and fired three shots close to my canvas, because
the poor fellow who was ill did not get up when he came to
him. You should have seen his face when I told him all
this; when he protested his fidelity. However, I said, it was
all forgiven. Maduppa Bey has come here, and says, when
the son of Sebehr got home, he laid down and said not a
word, and that the Arabs say I have poisoned him ! —with
coffee ! Suleiman, the ‘cub,’ as Gordon called him, was in
a towering passion at his own surrender, and would have
persuaded the chiefs to revolt, but they continued to send in
their submissions. Gordon now ordered Suleiman off to
Shaka. Before going, he applied to Gordon for robes. He
got the following answer “ I have no robes; you have not
filled me with over-much confidence in your fidelity, and
you have been very rude to me, while I have shown you
every attention, and have gone out of my way to be civil to
you—a mere boy—have done my best for you, and tried to
protect you.” The young slaver was greatly enraged at this
reply, and Gordon was, for a time, in great peril, for, if the
slavers had agreed to attack him, they might easily
have put him and his men to the sword. Suleiman, how-
ever, went away quietly to his den. On his arrival there, he
sent a letter to the Khedive, asserting that he was Gordon’s
son, and asking for a government. Gordon said to one of
the chiefs, who had conveyed the letter, “Are you a father? ”
He received a reply in the affirmative, upon which he said,
1 hen do you not think that a good flogging would do him
(the cub) good. The chief agreed that it would. This way
of dealing with the slavers was, most assuredly, the right one.
Early in September, Gordon started on a visit to (the
robbers’ den) Skako. On his arrival Suleiman gave him a
hearty welcome. His stay here only occupied two days. It
appears that Suleiman was really plotting to make him a
prisoner. He now left for Obeid ; the trip was most tedious.
On his way he came across a black soldier with a little girl,
also an Arab dealer. The soldier and the dealer were
disputing as to whose property the girl was. The dealer
said he had bought her for £4. Gordon gave the Arab £4
and so disposed of him. He (Gordon) then turned to the
girl and said, “ You belong to me; will you stay with me or


go with the soldier?” She answered that she would go to the
black soldier.” So away she went. This is the whole of
their marriage ceremony. He also picked up many slaves
on the roadside, the sight of them made him very miserable.
He arrived at Obeid on October 3rd, and at Khartoum
during the month. So quick was his pace, that he
simply astonished the people, and the cry, “ The
Pasha is coming,” was, everywhere, a signal for
action. He got through all his work at Khartoum in a
very short space of time. From Khartoum he went on a
visit to Walad-el-Michael, at Hellal, and then to Berber,
where he was most ceremoniously received. From Berber
he went to Newire, where he was met with many complaints.
He only made a stay of three hours here, when he started
again. The Khedive now sent him a telegram, urging him
to return to Cairo. At Dongola he considered the question
of the cost of a railway contract. He then started for Cairo,
but on his way he received telegrams announcing the fact of
an Abyssinian invasion. He immediately rode back to
Khartoum, and there found the invasion to be a fraud. He
then visited Walad-el-Michael, who was threatening to be
troublesome. Walad’s son met him, and declared that his
father was ill; this was a falsehood. The next day he had
an interview with Walad, who begged for more territory.
Gordon advised him to ask Johannis’s pardon, but he said
this was impossible. Gordon now went on to Massawa, and
here he waited for a reply to a letter he had sent to the
Frontier-General. He had warned Johannis that he would
not be responsible for Walad any longer, and recommended
him to seize the brigand, and send him to Cairo.
He waited for some time, but no answer came. He then
started for Khartoum, via Suakim and Berber. The Khedive,
however, telegraphed to him to proceed to Cairo, and he
reached this place at the beginning of March. The Khedive
had telegraphed to him, inviting him to dinner at eight o’clock;
but Gordon was one hour and a half late, owing to the train
being delayed. The Khedive, however, insisted on his
attending the dinner; and asked him to sit at his right
hand, and conferred on him many distinctions : he lodged
him in the Karrel Kousd, a palace set apart for the reception
of royal visitors. He was asked to take the position of
“President of the Finance Inquiry.” But all these fine


things only depressed Gordon ; the future look-out for him
was very dismal, and he left Cairo to resume his duties His
journey took him through Suez, Aden, Berberah and Zeila.
At these places nothing was talked about but war. He now
went to Harrar, where Raouf Pasha was behaving disgrace-
fully. He made this journey on horseback, and arrived on
April 28th. Ihe first scene he beheld was dying cows,
which had been slaughtered in his honour. Raouf (who, it
must be remembered , had been deposed by Gordon in 1874)
left the next day. Gordon says of him : —“I cannot help
feeling sorry for him. God grant I have not been unjust-
but seeing people, as they were, so fearfully cowed by him,'
made me feel that the sorrow of one man ought not to be
weighed against the sorrows of many men.”
At _ Harrar he did not remain long, but returned to Zeila,
reaching that place on the 9th of May. From Zeila he
I pushed on to Massawa, where he met with a hearty welcome.
He was now anxious to get back to Khartoum, and go on
with his work. His first trouble here was the refusal of
Osman, his second in command, to go to Darfour ; he there-
fore ordered him to Cairo to be dealt with by the authorities.
Everything was behind-hand. Ihe inhabitants were de-
lighted to have him back amongst them. He heard that
Walad had evacuated Egyptian territory, and had gone in
the direction of Adowa, with an eye to business. In July,
1878, news arrived that Suleiman had revolted and had
captured Bahr Gazelle. Gordon despatched his secretary,
Romulus Gessi, with a force to the south; he also seized
any of Suleiman’s family within his reach, and imprisoned
them. Gessi landed his troops at Rabatchamte, and
marched to Rumbeck, a station on the Bahr-el-Kohl, where
he was delayed until November, owing to heavy floods.
While at Rumbeck he heard that Suleiman had proclaimed
himself “Lord of the Province,” and that he had seized
Dem Idris, and massacred the garrison. It was reported
that he had 6000 followers. Gessi had only 1000 men in
all, and 700 of these were not to be relied upon. He sent
to Gordon for aid, but his letters took five months to reach
Khartoum. In the meantime his soldiers began to desert;
this he checked by the use of the lash. On the 17th
November he started on his adventurous and bold march.
On reaching the river Dyoor he sighted the enemy on the


opposite bank. He got across by the help of a friendly
chief, and marched to a village called Wan, on the river
Wan. Here he was reinforced with 700 men, and then
pushed on to Dem Idris, which he strengthened against the
coming of Suleiman. On the 27th November, Suleiman
attacked the place. He made four assaults, but was driven
back each time with great loss; he lost 1000 men. He
again, on January 12th, 1879, made an attack, but was
driven back. Gessi had by this time run short of ammuni-
tion, and had to collect the bullets fired by the enemy, and
re-cast them. On the next day Suleiman made another
attack, and was completely routed ; he was dragged off the
field by his own men. Gessi hunted his army into the
mountains.
While he was thus occupied, Gordon was at work in
Khartoum. He was greatly concerned about Gessi, and he
also feared an invasion on the part of Sebehr. He well knew
that if this took place, slavery and anarchy would return in
a worse form than ever. He met Nubar’s proposal with a
flat refusal, and he was three times ordered to return to
Cairo. He had answered to the effect that the state of affairs
was too critical, and that, if he returned, he would resign.
Soon he was relieved of one of his principal enemies, by
the dismissal of Nubar. In March he left Khartoum for
the robbers’ den, in order to drive the slave dealers away
from their retreat. Gessi, in the meantime, was not idle.
Having received a supply of ammunition, he made an attack
on Suleiman. By means of a rocket he set fire to the
enemy’s camp, and then, amidst the confusion caused by this,
he drove Suleiman and his men way in great disorder. He
was again in want of ammunition, and could not follow up his
victory. Fever now broke out, and his position became
most desperate.
During Gordon’s march to Shaka he released many slaves.
On his arrival he captured and imprisoned the slave dealers.
He intended to have pushed on to the relief of Gessi, but
now a message reached him telling of Gessi’s successes and
reinforcements, so he remained at Shaka.
Gessi had received supplies from Bahr-Gazelle, and during
the whole of April he harassed the enemy; in May he marched
against Suleiman, who had taken refuge in a town called
“ Dem Suleiman,” after himself. Suleiman was very nearly


captured. However, he escaped, and joined Rabi, one of the
most formidable slavers. Gessi lost not a moment in pur-
suing him; he fell upon a village where the slaver was sup-
posed to be hidden, but only found a sick woman in it.
He now marched on until he came to a dense forest, where
he sighted the enemy, who became alarmed and set fire to
a village they had occupied, and fled. An occurence now
took place that gave Gessi a great amount of information.
The next flight seven men mistook his camp for that of Rabi.
They begged him to wait for the army of Sultan Idris ,
which was coming up behind , so that they might join
their forces. He (as Rabi) told them that he would wait ,
and then had them made prisoners. Gessi determined to
attack Rabi before his ally could come up, and therefore
set forth with great speed. The next morning he came up
with Rabi’s camp, and completely routed him, capturing all
his stores and flag. He now moved away from the scene of
the battle, and, having set up Rabi’s standard in the centre
of his force, he awaited the arrival of Idris, who was not
long in coming. Just as his army came in sight, a sudden
storm arose, and he made post haste to get to the camp (as
he thought, Rabi’s). Gessi’s men now gave him a tremen-
dous shower of bullets, and what with this and the storm
Idris was completely defeated, he and one or two followers
alone escaped. Gessi now had put down the slave dealers
for a time, so he returned to Dem Suleiman. Gordon
meanwhile had been capturing the caravans of slave dealers
in a wholesale manner. He writes —“ I feel revived
when I make these captures. We must have caught five or
six hundred this week.” He had returned to Khartoum,
and on June 25th, Gessi arrived to. Gordon made him a
Pasha, and presented him with The new Pasha
now made his way back to his old quarters, and in July
heard that Suleiman was not far off. He set out, and put he
and his 900 men to fight. He then sent Rabi on the same
sort of errand ; and, what is more, did it with his handful of
290 soldiers. He was not satisfied with having caused them
to fly, for he pursued them, overtook them, and made them
capitulate. Suleiman was taken, and afterwards shot.
And thus fell the power of Sebehr in the person of his son.
Gordon had received news of Gessi’s final success, when
at Toashia. He now went to Fogia, where he heard of Ismail’s


deposition, and received orders to proclaim Tewfik Khedive
of the Soudan ; he returned to Khartoum, and from there
went to Cairo. He left the latter place on a mission to the
King of Abyssinia. He had heard that Walad had been
made a prisoner by Johannis’ orders. Now he was deter-
mined to get rid of Walad. He found Aloula (the captor
of Walad) encamped on a very steep hill, and his mule
was so tired that he had to climb to the great man’s tent.
The result of this interview was that Aloula promised not to
attack Egypt during Gordon’s absence. On the 27th of
October he arrived at Debra Tabor, the Abyssinian capital,
and was received at the court of Johannis, with a salute of
guns. The first night he was visited by some black soldiers
and Arabs who had been made prisoners by Johannis. They
begged of him to try and get them released. Next day he
had an interview with the king, who put forth numerous
absurd claims, viz: “ the retrocession of Metemna, Changal-
las, and Bogus, cession of Zeila and Amphilla (ports), and a
sum of money from one to two million pounds.” He went on
to say that he could claim Dongola, Berber, and Nubia, but
would'not. Gordon said he did not think the Khedive
would accept them. Nothing further happened until
November, when Johannis told Gordon that he would write
his claims to the Khedive. Gordon now asked him to
release his prisoners, the king became enraged at this and
told him to clear out. He went; and just before starting on
his return trip he received the letter from the Khedive. He
opened it, and found it to be most insulting, viz : “ 1 have
received the letters you sent me by that man; I will not
make a secret peace with you. If you want peace, ask the
Sultans of Europe.” He wrote to the Greek Consul for an
explanation, and got an answer to the effect that the King
had written as he saw fit, and if he judged right would write
others. Gordon, on his way back, was arrested by some of the
King’s men, and was taken back to the village of Johannis
uncle. However, he was released, and eventually reached
Massawa, where he found an English gunboat. An amusing
anecdote is told of Gordon, in reference to his interview
with the King:—
“When Gordon Pasha was lately taken prisoner by the
Abyssinians, he completely checkmated King John. The
King received his prisoner sitting on his throne, or whatever


piece of furniture did duty for that exalted seat, a chair being
placed for the prisoner considerably lower than the seat on
which the King sat. The first thing the Pasha did was to
seize this chair, place it alongside that of his Majesty, and
sit down on it; the next to inform him that he met him as
an equal, and would only treat him as such. This somewhat
disconcerted his sable Majesty, but on recovering himself he
said, ‘ Do you know, Gordon Pasha, that I could kill you on
the spot, if I liked ?’ ‘ 1 am perfectly well aware of it, your
Majesty,’ said the Pasha; “do so at once, if it is your
royal pleasure. I am ready.’ This disconcerted the
King still more, and he exclaimed, ‘ What! ready to
be killed ?’ ‘ Certainly,’ replied the Pasha ;‘I am always
ready to die, and so far from fearing your putting me
to death, you would confer a favour on me by so
doing, for you would be doing for me that which I am
precluded by my religious scruples from doing for myself
you would relieve me from all the troubles and misfortunes
which the fucuremay have in store for me.’ This completely
staggered King John, who gasped out in despair, ‘Then
my power has no terrors for you ?’ ‘ None whatever,’ said
the Pasha. His Majesty collapsed.”
He returned to Egypt at the end of the year, and sent in
his resignation to the Khedive ; he longed for rest; the
fatigue of his hard work was telling on him, and he could
not put up with the impertinence of the Pashas. His
departure was greatly regretted by the people, most of whom
adored him.
CHAPTER IX.
On his return to England, Gordon only enjoyed a few
weeks rest, when he accompanied Lord Ripon to India as
his private secretary, but he found the duties so distasteful
that he left in a month’s time. He then made a visit to
China, reaching Hong Kong on the second day of July.
He there saw Li-Hung-Chang, who was overjoyed to see
him again. While in China he successfully persuaded the
Authorities not to engage in a war with Russia.


Returning once more to England, he made a trip to
Ireland, from whence he went to Belgium on a visit to the
King, who was preparing to send an expedition out to the
Congo, which he wished Gordon to lead. Immediately
afterwards he started for Mauritius, having accepted the
position of Commanding Royal Engineer. On his way he
touched at Suez, where he received the tidings that hisfaithful
Lieutenant, Romulus Gessi, was dead. This was a very
severe blow to Gordon, for he knew that with Gessi’s death
would end all the good he had done in the Soudan.
After a stay of about ten months in Mauritius—during
which time he planned a scheme for the defence pf the
Indian Ocean —he was offered by the Government of the
Cape Colony the command of the colonial troops, with a
view to the settlement of the Basutoland difficulties. He —
now Major-General Gordon —accepted the position, and on
the 4th April, 1882, sailed from Mauritius, and arrived at
the Cape after a most trying voyage. On the Ist July he
took command of the forces, but owing to some misunder-
standings arising with the Cape Government, resigned and
returrfed to England.
Having long wished to visit the Holy Land, he now
succeeded, and made a visit to Jerusalem, at which place he
made surveys of the Holy Sepulchre and the walls of the
city, and so spent a happy and peaceful time. But this was
not to last long. “Chinese Gordon” was soon to be called
to the front again.
CHAPTER X.
We have come to the last epoch of Gordon’s life
—his second career in the Soudan. The Mussulmen
have always had a belief that at the end of twelve cen-
turies from the Hegira, the Mahdi, or new deliverer, would
appear This period would elapse on the 12th Novem-
ber 1882 But a man called Mahomet Achmet, the son
’ E


of a carpenter, appeared before that date, and declared
himself to be the IVEahdi. He was about thirty years of age
and is described as being tall and thin. In his early days he
was apprenticed to a relative, who treated him so badly that
he ran away. After this he professed to become religious, and
in 1870 announced that he was a disciple of Sheikh Nur-el-
Dami (Continuous Light), who ordained him a faki. Achmet
went to live in the island of Abba, on the White Nile, where,
in the course of time he gained many followers, who made
him extremely rich with presents. In' 1881 he wrote letters,
stating that he was the Mahdi, and was sent to reform
the Mahommedan world. A great many believed in him
gathering around him, and now that he had power, hesaid that
all who did not follow him should perish. Mahomet Saleb, of
Dongola, wiote to the British Government, giving an account
of what this false prophet was doing. His Excellency—Ranof
I asha sent an expedition out to meet the Mahdi, and on the
19th December, 1881, news reached England to the effect
that the False Prophet, at the head of 1500 men, had totally
destroyed an Egyptian force of three hundred and fifty men,
and that the Go.vernor of Fashada was amongst the killed’
In the month of July, 1882, the Mahdi surrounded the
E gyP tian soldiers, under Ysasif Pasha, and massacred the
entire force, and on the Bth September he attacked Obeid but
was repulsed. The Khedive was asked to send reinforce-
ments, but those sent by him were, on the 24th of October
entirely destroyed by the Mahdi, and, in January of the
following year, Obeid surrendered to him. By this time the
English Government was inclined to look upon affairs in the
Soudan in a more serious light than hitherto. Lord Dufferin
wrote the following, with reference to the Soudan “ Some
persons are inclined to advise Egypt to withdraw altogether
from the Soudan and her other acquisitions in that region ■
but she can hardly be expected to acquiesce in such a policy’
Possessing the lower ranges of the Nile, she is, naturally,
inclined to claim dominion along its entire course ■ and
when it is remembered that the territories in question if
properly developed, are capable of producing inexhaustible
supplies of sugar and cotton, we cannot be surprised at
her unwillingness to abandon them. Unhappily Egyptian
administration in the Soudan has been almost uniformly
unfortunate. The success of the present Mahdi in raising


the tribes and in extending his influence over great tracts of
country, is a sufficient proof of the Government’s inability
either to reconcile the inhabitants to its rule, or to maintain
T he , consec l uen ces have been most disastrous.
Within the last year and a half the Egyptians have lost
something like 9000 men, while it is estimated that 40 000
of their opponents have perished. Nor does this chronic
slaughter seem to be nearer its conclusion than when it first
commenced. Reinforcements, to the extent of another
10,000 men, have been despatched to Khartoum • but they
seem to be raw, undisciplined, and disheartened levies
In the meantime Egyptian garrisons at Obeid and Bara and
various scattered posts in Darfour and Kordofan, are cut off
from communication with their base; many of them are
surrounded, and some are pressed by famine. Obeid still
holds out, but Bara seems to be on the point of surrendering.
“ Colonel Hicks, a distinguished retired Indian officer, has
been engaged by the Egyptian Government to join the
Commander-in-Chief of the Soudan army, as chief of the
staff. A few retired European officers accompany him, who
perhaps will be able to inspire the troops with confidence.
Both Colonel Hicks and his companions have entered the
Egyptian service on their own responsibility. News arrived
in England of the first victory of Hicks Pasha on the 6th
June. Ihe rebels had fled in all directions, and it was
hoped the False Prophet would surrender himself. Hicks
got the name of “ Great Magician.” However, the Mahdi
did nothing of the sort, and so Hicks prepared to take Obeid
from him. It was reported that his followers were deserting
and so the Egyptians had great hopes of capturing him.
The maich from Khartoum to Obeid was very tedious.
Hicks had 10,000 men and 6000 camels; he dreaded the
climate and famine much more than he did the Mahdi. For
some time nothing was heard of Hicks, and the English
Government began to get uneasy, when, on the 23rd
November, the appalling announcement came that Hicks and
his army wera completely destroyed. The Mahdi had
200,000 men against Hicks’ 10,000. Mr. O’Donovan of the
Daily News , and Major Brody, of the Royal Horse
Artillery, were with Hicks’ army. Little is known of
this fearful disaster, and all were killed who could have
described it.
e 2


“ Only one man escaped. He stated that Hicks fought
most bravely, and was the last of the staff to die. This battle
was followed by another with almost as bad results. Captain
Moncrieff had gone with a force to put down the insurgents,
in the east at Takar; his men were surrounded and over-
come by the rebels, he himself being slain. It was now
very difficult to get men together. Telegrams arrived in
England of a very discouraging kind : —‘ Owing to the
small size of the steamers plying between Suez and Suakim,
the transport of the whole body of two thousand five hundred
men will require some time. Baker Pasha himself will
leave in about io days.’ ‘The Egyptian contingent was
reviewed by the Khedive this afternoon. The review was
followed by an unpleasant incident. The Turkish officers
came in a body to Baker Pasha, and plainly refused to go to
the Soudan, on the plea that their contract of service was
for Egypt alone.’ ”
And now people began to call out for General Gordon.
One of the English papers said—“ Why not send Gordon
with full powers to Khartoum to assume absolute control of
the territory, to treat with the Mahdi, to relieve the garrisons,
and do what can be done to save what can be saved from
the wreck of the Soudan ? There is no necessity to speak of
the pre-eminent qualifications which he possesses for the
work. They are notorious, and are as undisputed as they
are indisputable. Why not send him out with carte blanche
to do the best that can be done. He may not be able
single-handed to reduce that raging chaos to order, but the
attempt is worth making, and if it is to be made it will have
to be made at once, for before many days General Gordon
will be on his way to the Congo, and the supreme oppor-
tunity may have passed.” Her Majesty’s Government sent
the following to General Gordon, through Lord Granville: —
“Foreign Office, Jan. 18, 1884.
“ Sir, —Her Majesty’s Government are desirous that you
should proceed at once to Egypt, to report to them on the
military situation in the Soudan, and on the measures which
it may be advisable to take for the security of the Egyptian
garrisons still holding positions in that country, and for the
safety of the European population in Khartoum. You are
also desired to consider and report upon the best mode of
effecting the evacuation of the interior of the Soudan, and


upon the manner in which the safety and the good adminis-
tration by the Egyptian Government of the ports on the sea
coast can best be secured. In connection with this subject
you should pay especial consideration to the question of the
steps that may usefully be taken to counteract the stimulus
which it is feared may possibly be given to the slave trade
by the present insurrectionary movement, and by the with-
drawal of the Egyptian authority from the interior. You
will be under the instructions of Her Majesty’s Agent and
Consul General at Cairo, through whom your reports to
Her Majesty’s Government should be sent under flying seal.
You will consider yourself authorised and instructed to per-
form such other duties as the Egyptian Government may
desire to entrust to you, and as may be communicated to
you by Sir E. Baring. You will be accompanied by Colonel
Stewart, who will assist you in the duties thus confided to
you. On your arrival in Egypt you will at once communicate
with Sir E. Baring, who will arrange to meet you, and will
settle with you whether you should proceed direct to
Suakim, or should go yourself, or despatch Colonel Stewart
to Khartoum via the Nile.—l am, etc.,
“ (Signed) Granville.”
Gordon, within twenty-four hours of the time he ar-
rived, was on his way to Egypt, with Lieutenant-Colonel
Stewart. They reached Cairo on the 24th January, and on
the 26th started for Assiont. While at Cairo Gordon
received a letter from Sir E. Baring, to the effect that it
was believed that there were only a few Europeans in
Khartoum, but that there were from 10,000 to 15,000
Egyptians who wished to move north, and telling him to
bear in mind that the main point was to evacuate the
Soudan. “The Egyptian Government has full confidence in
your judgment, your knowledge of the country, and of your
comprehension of the general line of policy to be pursued.
You are therefore given full discretionary power to retain
the troops for such reasonable period as you may think
necessary, in order that the abandonment of the country
may be accomplished with the least possible risk of life and
property. A credit of has been opened for you
,at the Finance Department, and further funds will be
supplied to you on your requisition when this sum is
exhausted. In undertaking the difficult task which now lies


before you, you may feel sure that no effort will be wanting-
on the part of the Cairo authorities, whether English or
Egyptian, to afford you all the support in their power.”
General Gordon was received with great enthusiasm by
people m Egypt; they now believed that the Mahdi’s.
toliowers would disappear at once.
„ In the meantime the Soudan troubles were increasing.
1 ewhk ’ at Sinkat, was in terrible extremities : the Mahdi’s
forces had surrounded him, and his people were starving,
having already eaten all the dogs in the place. Baker Pasha
offered a reward of to the first man who would
convey supplies to Sinkat. Tewfik was in despair, and
made up his mind to fight his way to Suakim, as he would
rather die in fight than be starved to death. He with his
600 men rushed out of the town, but the rebels were
altogether too strong for them, and the poor fellows at last
ad to give in and were all massacred. On the 4th
ebruaiy Baker Pasha and his new Egyptian army were
completely routed. His soldiers proved to be fearful
cowards, who, in the face of the enemy, threw down their
arms, and a terrible massacre followed.
Gordon entered Khartoum on the 18th February, 1884
and was welcomed by the population with great enthusiasm!
On the 27th of that month he issued a proclamation to the
people of the Soudan :—“ As I have been appointed
Governor of all the Soudan, with the approval and by the
decree of the Exalted Khedive, and Britannia the all
powerful, the Soudan and its Government have become in-
dependent, and will look after their own affairs without the
interference of the Egyptian Government in anything
whatever. I also proclaim an amnesty, and grant you the
privileges given during the reign of Said Pasha ; and inform
you that his Majesty the Sultan, the Exalted, had made up
his nund to send 1 urkish soldiers, the well-known valiant
and courageous conquerors. But when his Majesty heard
of your wretched condition, and of my compassion for you,
he sent me, at great risk, putting my faith in the God of all
mankind, to prevent the declaration by his Majesty the
Sultan of war between Moslems. Your tranquillity is the
object of our hope. And as I know that you are sorrowful
on account of the slavery which existed among you, and the
stringent orders on the part of the Government for the abo


lition of it, and the punishment of those who deal in it (the.
slaves). And the assurances given by the Government for its
abolition, seizing upon, and punishing those concerned in
the trade; the punishment of those who trade in slaves,
according to Imperial decrees, and the firmans forwarded to
you—all this is known to you. But henceforward nobody
will interfere with you in the matter, but everyone for him-
self may take a man into his service henceforth. No one
will interfere with him, and he can do as he pleases in the
matter, without interference on the part of anybody, and we
have accordingly given this order. My compassion for
you.” (Signed.) “Gordon Pasha.” Thisproclamation dumb-
founded the English people altogether. An explanation of it
was demanded from the Government. The Earl of Derby
made a speech in the House of Lords to the effect that
Gordon had practically unlimited powers, and that it was
necessary before forming any judgment on Gordon’s action
to know the state of the case he (Gordon) had to deal with.”
Gladstone quoted Gordon’s words, “ Would to God by
laying down my life, I could put an end to the slave trade,”
and added that the slave system was so mixed up with
the general life in the Soudan that it would be im-
possible to put an end to it until 1889 ; for that until
then it was under the guarantee of the Egyptian
law. Most reasonable people put entire faith in Gordon
and waited for events to take their own course. On
the 26th February, Gordon issued another proclamation.
“ From the date of my arrival until now, I have given you
sound advice and have done everything to ensure tranquillity.”
He further stated that, as his advice had not been taken, he
was forced to call for British troops, who would arrive in a
few days. He threatened to severely punish all who would
not change their conduct, and finished by saying that he had
issued this proclamation that the rebels might know his
resolution. On the same day he wrote to Sir Evelyn Baring
to the effect that, if Egypt was to be quiet, the Mahdi
must be “ smashed uphe also repeated his request that
Tebehr should be sent to co-operate with him. Colonel
Stewart saw the force of his argument, as did also Sir Evelyn
Baring. Colonel Stewart mentioned in a memorandum to Sir E.
Baring, that none were more anxious to leave Khartoum
than Gordon and he; but that, unless Tebehr was sent there,


he saw very little likelihood of the policy being carried out,
viz., the evacuation of Khartoum. On the 27th, Gordon
wrote, “ Evacuation of the Soudan is impossible until the
Government asserts its authority. Should you wish to
intervene send 200 troops to Wady Haifa, and then open up
the Suakim-Berber road by Indian Moslem troops. This
will cause an immediate collapse of the revolt. If you
decide against this you may, probably, have to decide
between Tebehr and the Mahdi.”
Gordon now became aware of the fact that he would very
soon be cut off from Egypt. On March 3rd, he wrote, —
“ Even if I was mean enough to escape, I have no power to
do so.” On the Bth of April, although all communication
had been prevented between Khartoum and Egypt, he
managed to send a message to Sir Samuel Baker, appealing
to the British and Americans to subscribe ,£300,000 to
engage Turkish troops from the Sultan. He said “this will
settle the Mahdi for ever.” He added, “I do not see the fun
of being caught here to walk about the streets as a dervish
with sandalled feet; not that (D.V.) I will ever be taken alive.
I feel sure I have your support (whatever you may think
from a diplomatic point of view), and every man calling
himself a gentleman.” Again on the 16th of the same
month he sent a message : “As far as I can see, the situa-
tion is this—you state your intention of not sending any
relief up here, or to Berber and you refuse me Tebehr. I
consider myself free to act according to circumstances. I
shall hold on here as long as I can, and if I can suppress
the rebellion I shall do so. If I cannot, I shall retire to
the equator, and leave you the indelible disgrace of aban-
doning the garrisons of Lanaar, Kassala, Berber and
Dongola, with the certainty that you will eventually be
forced to smash up the Mahdi under greater difficulties if
you. retain peace in Egypt.” From this date until the latter
part of September no tidings arrived. Gordon now stated
that he had provisions for five months, and that he was
completely hemmed in. This intelligence relieved the
minds of the English—in fact, of all Christians on the face
of the earth. News arrived somewhere about this time that
Colonel Stewart had been wounded during the month of
March. General Gordon in October sent messages to the
effect that on the 17 th ult. he had despatched Colonel


Stewart with troops to take Berber. He said in
reference to himself—“ I will not leave Khartoum.”
It appears that Colonel Stewart, with Mr. Power and the
French Consul, attacked Berber, and drove the enemy out;
then, it seems, he sent the troops back to Khartoum, and
that he, with a small force, tried to make his way down
the river in a steamer. The boat was wrecked, and, on
their attempting to make their way overland, were all
murdered by a Sheikh and his followers, whom the poor
Colonel had put faith in. And now General Gordon was
alone, and expressed his indignation at the wretched way
in which the Government had treated him. It is stated
that when he heard of Lord Wolseley’s expedition he
had Khartoum brilliantly illuminated, and it is also stated
on the same authority that Gordon was very powerful, and
believed in by all in Khartoum. In a message received
on New Year’s Day he reported that Khartoum was all
right.
“ Khartoum all right.” This was the last message re-
ceived from General Gordon, and no more was heard of
him until, on the evening of the 4th of February, the
appalling new's of his death reached the British Government.
When the terrible announcement was made public on the
following morning, it cast gloom and anguish everywhere.
It is stated that since the days of the Crimea and Indian
Mutiny the people of England have not experienced such a
shock. Sir Charles Wilson, when he approached Khartoum,
found it in the hands of the Mahdi, who fired upon him.
The manner of poor General Gordon’s death is uncertain.
The Mahdi stated that Khartoum fell into his hands on
26th January, and that General Gordon was killed.
This news has since been confirmed. “At sunrise on the
26th of January (says one authority), the Soudanese troops
marched out of Khartoum and piled their arms, and then
fraternised with the rebels, showing them the way into the
town.” From another source we have the following
account: —“The latest news has been received from a
cavasse of Graham Bey Ruchdi, who accompanied Gordon
from Cairo. It appears that, early on the morning
of the 27th January, the gate in the southern wall was
treacherously opened by Feragh Pasha. Most of the
Mahdi’s men immediately rushed into the town. Gordon,


hearing the noise, went out armed with a sword and axe,,
and accompanied by twenty men, amongst whom was
Abraham Bey. They met a body of the Mahdi’s troops, who
fired and shot Gordon, nine others being also killed,
while the rest escaped. A general slaughter of the
European residents next followed.” The Mahdi himself
did not enter the town for three days after the capture.
He, at once, had the traitor Feragh hanged; he
seized all Gordon’s papers and a large number of bank-
notes issued by him—these he is preparing to nego-
tiate, with a view of turning them into cash, and it will
be hard to prevent him, as many were in circulation before
the fall of the town, and those that he has stolen cannot be
identified from the ones which had been circulated. Great
numbers of these latter have been bought by British
officers and men as mementos of the hero; the medals
which Gordon had struck are being sold at an enormous
price, in fact they are bringing more than their weight in
gold. Since affairs have taken such a serious change,
the British nation begins to look to the cause, and finds,
sadly but truly, that the fault lies in their midst, viz., their
Premier and his Government, who have shown from the
first how unfit they are for their office. What with their
dilatoriness and want of judgment, they have not only lost
one of the finest Englishmen who ever lived, but have
caused a slur to be thrown on the British nation, which it
will take some time to remove. But this state of affairs
cannot last long; surely the Gladstone Ministry is doomed.
It is to be hoped that better and abler men will come to the
front, and show the world that, although some bad mistakes
have been made, we can redeem our laurels and hold our
own against all comers. As a beginning, we had a good
example the other day, when England’s colonies, finding the
mother country embarrassed, were unanimous in their offers
of help. New South Wales, being fully prepared to im-
mediately despatch troops, had the honour of leading the way.
And what a glorious day, not only for the sister colony,
but for the whole of the Australian dependencies, that on
which a detachment of soldiers sailed from Sydney for
Egypt; what a day to be remembered by Australia’s sons, to
be looked back on in the future with a feeling of pleasure
mingled with pride, to be thought of as the first step of


these colonies towards relieving “Home,” as it is very
rightly called by most of us. News has been received of
the arrival (at Suakim) of these brave men, who left their
homes, wives, children, and all comforts, to go and fight, “for
the sake of liberty and freedom,” in a country beset by most
terrible hardships and perils, and inhabited by a savage
race of Mohammedans. May God protect them ; but if it
be His will that they fall in the fight, then let them be
looked upon as heroes who have fought for the sake of the
honour of their country and their homes, and who have
shown the world, that when “ Old England ” is in need, she
has only to look to her colonies, and she will find thousands
of willing hands to protect her interests abroad. Let Russia
come, or any other power, and see if they do not get
a reception they very little expect. They will find men,
ready for them, who have bravery, religion, and honour at
their backs, and who will unbuckle none of these for the
sake of any man.'
Throughout the life of the great man whose death we are
now lamenting, self-sacrifice was almost the uppermost
point. Let us all take him as an example, and by following
in his footsteps we cannot go wrong; let us be able to say
as he did, “ I have no fear of death, I trust in God
Almighty, and he will take care of me.”
GORDON.
Heart-sickness past, and hope-deferred draws nigh,
See Albion’s banners blazing in the sky !
And Nile dividing, as the iron prows
Impelled by fierce Titanic, fly to rouse
The long-hushed echoes from their ambush deep,
Where ’mid the lotus-buds and reeds they sleep.
There floats our flag, and yet Thou know’st it not,
Nor dream’st of friends in struggle tow’rds the spot
Thou still defend’st with brain, and heart, and soul,
Firm at thy station, where the two Niles roll,
And join with eddying swirl of “ Blue” and “ White,
In one huge current of their blended might.
But all too late ! Alas, o’er thee, Khartoum,
In mid air pois’d, behold th’ impending doom
Flaps her dark vans above thy sole minar,
In strain to pluck the crescent from the star.
And viewing thence (well pleased) with sidelong glance


The serried hosts without; each beaming lance,
Each courser’s arching neck and tossing mane,
And all the sinewy scourers of the plain—
Fly wide thy gates ! and inward rolls the foe;
Pell mell like roaring flood in overflow.
’Twas treason turned that key—the guard is bought ;
Vain now the leader’s sword, and all he taught,
In vain the past long toil of nights and days ;
Ah! see yon rank of matchlocks redly blaze,
As volleyed thunders sweep the sandy square,
And bullets leaping rend the ground and tear
The faithful few, as like new-sickled wheat
They reel and sink before the squadron’s feet!
’Twas there thy benefactor, false Khartoum !
Fell ’mid his “ children” in the sulphurous gloom
With harness on his back, and outstretched hand
And front to foe, in act to stern command.
He fell as fall the brave, with him there died
All that was best and noblest, justified
Righter of wrongs, avenger swift of crime,
His name survives, Ihe glory of all time.
We know not how ’tis with him, how it fared
With the charm’d body shot and shell had spared
In grim Crimean trench ; on Tartar heights
Through years of storm and siege, and “heady fights.”
Found he a soldier’s grave, or does he lie
Unburied, facing the eternal sky ?
That matters little. Yet we’d love to hear
Some Arab foeman brave, with trenchant spear
Had sunk a grave to shield that sainted frame,
Nor yet too late to save those bones from shame.
’Tis o’er. The bitterness of death is past,
And now no longer droop our flags—half-mast ;
But still we feel there’s naught can e’er abate
The shame and sadness of those words, Too Late !
February 2 8th.
G. G. M‘C.
William Inglis & Co., Printers, Melbourne.


IIvIFOKTA-ISrT HOTICE.
CRAIG, WILLIAMSON & THOMAS’
FURNITURE AND CARPET WAREHOUSE,
IflTO. © ELIZABETH STREET. ETO. Q.
Persons about Furnishing are invited to inspect the Stock now on view.
©PuwingPoom gufnthiPe.
Suites in Cretonne, Silk, and Tapestry,
with plush borders and panels.
Oval Occasional Chairs.
Walnut Cabinets.
Ebonised Cabinets.
Overmantels and Cabinets, ebonised and
gold, with painted panels.
Occasional Chairs in walnut, ebonised
and gold.
Brackets with silvered mirrors, various
woods and designs.
JuPttituPc.
Mahogany Sideboards.
Cedar Sideboards.
Walnut Sideboards.
Oak Sideboards.
Qittingpuunt ‘éu “cg.
Upholstered in roan and morocco, on
walnut, oak, or mahogany frames.
Dinner Waggons.
Carving Chairs.
Dining Tables.
Extending Dining Tables, with telescope
screws, in oak, walnut, mahogany,
cedar, and Tasmanian blackwood.
ggibPafy, ;mtl gull r»ruitufc.
Office Washstands.
Revolving Office Chairs.
Pedestal-Writing Tables.
Library Couches, Library Easy • Chairs
(in morocco).
Hall Stands, mahogany, walnut,
mirrored backs.
Hall Chairs.
pFtiPtttfuPc.
Bedroom Sifites, in “ Kauri, walnut, and
gold.” . .
Bedroom Suites, in walnut, artistically
decorated.
Bedroom Suites, “The Ash Beaconsfield.
Bedroom Suites, in Kauri pine, with mir-
rored doors.
Duchesse Tables and Washstands, in
early English and other fashionable
styles.
Washstands and Towel Rails, in various
woods.
Toilet Chests of Drawers, in numerous
designs.
Dressing Tables, Toilet Glasses, &c.
gJcrlgt«md§.
Iron, Brass, and Nickel-plated bedsteads. | Stump,French,Half-tester,and Four-post
Hair, Kapok, and Wire Mattresses. | Palliasses, Bolsters, and Pillows.
|iurnihifc.
Tables, Chairs, Safes, &c.
O.A.iR.iF’IEIT DEPARTMENT. _
C W & T. have one of the largest stocks in the city, consisting of Brussels,
* ’ ' Tapestry, Velvet-pile, Tournay, Kidderminster, &c.
Linoleums and Floorcloths in all widths, and newest patterns and designs.
Mats, Matting, Hearthrugs, &c.
FTTRNISHINGS.—Lace and Damask Curtains, Counterpanes, Eider Down and
Honycomb Quilts, Blankets, Sheetings, Bed and Table Linen, Towels, and all
° l
from First-class Materials, and put together in the best possible manner.
The advantage in purchasing direct from Craig, Williamson and Thomas,
who import and Manufacture their goods, is considerable, seeing that the retail
SAVED which, at a moderate calculation, equals 30 per cent.
Estimates will be given for whole or part furnishing of every class of residence
public institution, or hotel.
CRAIG, WILLIAMSON & THOMAS,
IMPORTERS and CARPET WAREHOUSEMEN,
614& 16 EUZABETH-ST., MELBOURNE, and COLEMAN-ST., LONDON.
FACTORY-A’BECKETT-ST., WEST.


'William Inglis k Co.,
Mercantile Stationers,
ARTISTS,
DESIGNERS,
ENGRAYERS,
LITHOGRAPHERS,
PUBLISHERS,
PRINTERS,
EMBOSSERS, &c., &c.,
37 & 38 FLINDERS ST. EAST,
■ in i
Dunedin. 6 Exchange Court, 96 Princes Street;
London : 28 Paternoster Row.
TELEFHIOTTE No. 44 7'.


AN AUSTRALIAN MAGAZINE: //
EDITED BY
PETER MERCER, D.D. / „
- /V
One Shilling, fjjj . f
SUBSCRIPTION
sitstgkl-E] coif^t
PER ANNUM
(INCLUDING POSTAGE), //
12s. 6d. !
/ INCREASED
/CIRCULATION,
ys/ 120,000
ANNUALLY.
PUBLISHED BY
/a /william Ingis & Co.,
:is37 & 38 FUNDERS-ST. EAST,
✓©/
// r
MELBOURNE.
/ALL BOOKSELLERS.


THE
*
m
A.T* SEARS.CHI
SEWING MACHINE.
“Matchless," “Rudge,” “Humber” and “Sanspariel" Bicycles.
“Matchless,” “Coventry-Rotary," “Humber," “Omnicycle," “Royal
Saluo," and “Caroche” Tricycles.
Patent Revolving Perambulators and Bassinettes, with Bicycle
Wheels and Rubber Tyres.
SOLE AGENTS :
HENRY BISHOP & CO.,
79 BOURSE STREET EAST, MELBOURNE,
H STREET, HOBART.


m
Li f/e
Assurance
&
Q
|2
ts-il
I
&
UNION IS STRENGTH.
*
• 1^»
ONE MILLIONS™
MELBOURNE , SYDNEY, ADELAIDE,
BRISBANE & LAUNCESTON.
JOHN DONALDSON, secretary.


1i II
SJJ
IS DIRECTED BY
Craig, Williamson & Thomas
TO THE FACT THAT AT THEIR WAREHOUSES,
6, 14, AND 16 ELIZABETH STREET,
MELBOUEHE,
The public can purchase any article or any quantity of material at
This is a direct saving to purchasers of
QO IP E R GENT.
@>jf urntt ureY®
Has just been added to C., W. & T.’s business, and they are now showing
DRAWING, DINING, BREAKFAST, & BEDROOM SUITES,
HALL, LIBRARY, and KITCHEN FURNITURE,
BEDSTEADS and BEDDING.
OOOOOOO^OOOOOO^OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOaOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
EXTENSIVE SHIPMENTS OF
fto poll’s Srapcru, ylaollctrii, and
Are received weekly by the several steamers trading from Europe to Melbourne, thereby
ensuring, at all times, the CHOICEST ARTICLES, with NEWESI
PATTERNS and DESIGNS.
Patterns Free oust Application.
CRAIG, WILLIAMSON & THOMAS
MELBOURNE AND LONDON.
