

EXTERIOR OF COURT HOUSE, AYLESBURY.
JOHN TAWELL, THE MURDERER OF SARAH HART.
INTERIOR OF COURT AT AYLESBURY, DURING THE TRIAL.
Iwm the PICTORIAL TIMES Weekly Newspaper 0/ March 15. 1340.


LIFE OF JOHN TAWELL.
(From “THE GLOBE.")
The convict JOHN TAWELL was born in 1784, and was the second son of
Thomas Tawell, who, for a considerable number of years, kept a general shop
in the parish of Aldeby, a village in Norfolk, about six miles from Beccles. In
this quiet and secluded village the subject of this memoir was born, and spent
much of his childhood and early youth. He received a plain and useful educa-
tion such as would serve the pursuits of trade for which he was intended at
the village school, over which a Mr. Shreeve, an unpretending but really well-
informed man, then presided. At this school John Tawell continued for about
seven years, and became a proficient in the humble sciences which constituted
the amount of his teacher’s professional stores. The intervals of school duties
were, as he advanced in years, occupied in assisting his father In the shop, with
a view to preparing him for taking his place behind the counter of some more
extensive trader, to whom his services might be desirable, and who would deem
them an equivalent for supplying him with food, and training him for the duties
of a grocer’s or draper’s shopman a post which his unambitious parent had
already determined he should fill.
In conformity with this purpose, John Tawell, about the year 1798, entered
the service of a widow (one of the Society of Friends) who kept a general shop
in the village of Pakefield, near Lowestoft, in Suffolk. In this situation he
remained about five years ; and by the activity and industry of his life, and the
strict deconun of his habits, he gained the confidence of his employer and the
respect of her customers, who were chiefly the inhabitants of that and the adjacent
villages. It was here that Tawell was induced to attach himself to the views,
and to adopt the garb, the phraseology, and the other general characteristics of
the Society of Friends, of which, as we have said, his mistress was a member.
It may here be mentioned, that while in tills situation Tawell formed a rather
close intimacy with Joseph Hunton, the Quaker linen-draper, who, in 1828, was
executed at Newgate for forgery. At that time, Hunton resided at Yarmouth ;
Tawell went occasionally there on business for his employer, and also on “ first
days” often went thither, for the purpose of attending worship in the Friends’
meeting-house in that town. The young men frequently met, and thus an inti-
macy sprang up between two persons, whose subsequent career in rice, though
somewhat varied as to the character of their respective crimes, afterwards
procured for both an undesirable notoriety, and an ignominious death on
the scaffold. Hunton was detected and executed after Tawell had been trans-
ported for an offence of the same class. As Hunton was known to have
been long engaged in the practice of forging and negotiating forged bills
of exchange, which, as they became due, he paid with the proceeds of other
forgeries, it is by no means improbable that Tawell’s intimacy with Hunton,
which he continued after his arrival in London, might have gradually under-
mined his moral principles, and suggested the idea of forgery as the means
of raising pecuniary supplies. Hunton had married a Quaker lady of Yar-
mouth, of highly respectable connexions there; and at the time of his appre-
hension for the forgery for which he was executed, and for some years previously,
had been in businesses a linen-draper. In Nortonfolgatej On Tawell’s return
from Sydney he inquired after his old acquaintance Hunton, and, on being
informed of his fate, expressed much sympathy.
To return to our narrative of Tawell whom we left at Pakefield, the indus-
trious and respected assistant in the widow’s shop. In the latter part of 1803,
or beginning of 1804, Tawell entered the great metropolis, bringing with him
letters of introduction to some of the Society of Friends from their Suffolk
connexions. These speedily procured for him a situation with a member of their
own community, a Mr. Janson, the proprietor of an extensive linen-drapery
establishment in Whitechapel. It was here that Tawell met with the young
woman whom he afterwards married; but under circumstances which tended to
diminish the respect he had acquired by his previously correct morals. In short,
it was discovered that this young woman, a housemaid in the family of his
employer, was enceinte, and by John Tawell. The scandal thus brought on the
cloth was hushed up by a marriage between the erring pair—a union which was
forced upon Tawell by the influence of his employer. The turpitude of this
offence against morals was considerably increased by the fact, that Tawell
was at the time carrying on a correspondence, with a view to marriage,
with a young person of a respectable Quaker family at Yarmouth, with
whom he had become Intimate when a resident in that county. An intimacy
which had commenced in imprudence, and an union which, on his part, was
rather the result of necessity than of choice, was not likely to produce much of
that felicity of which marriage was designed to be the source, and will be, when
affection is the basis, and virtuous confidence in each other the self-supplying
spring. Tawell and his wife were unhappy. By his unfortunate and guilty
intimacy with her he had lost caste among the Friends, and by his marriage had
been, of course, deprived of the advantages which an union with the Yarmouth
lady would have been likely to secure. These consequences though caused
by his own folly, by a process of reasoning but too general under similar cir-
cumstances — Tawell attributed to his wife, and visited them upon her by
neglect, and by yet more positive indications of unkindness and dislike. The
issue of this marriage was two sons, to whom reference has been made in accounts
which have been already published.
On leaving Mr. Janson’s establishment, which he did soon after his marriage,
Tawell obtained temporary employment in his own business. Being intelligent,
active, and enterprising, he naturally sought for some pursuit more profitable in
its remuneration, and better suited to his taste. At length he was recommended
to Mr. Marsden, the head of an extensive wholesale drug and patent-medicine
establishment In the neighbourhood of Queen Street, Cheapside. He was
engaged to travel for the house, and evinced so much activity and business tact,
combined with devoted zeal to the interests of his employers, that he was highly
prized by them as an efficient and trustworthy representative. During all this
time Tawell retained his preference for the peculiarities of the sect with which
he had been early associated, and was known on the road as “ the Quaker
traveller” an appellation by which he is still remembered by the few who
remain of those who were wont to meet him at the commercial inns on the
journeys he undertook. While in Mr. Marsden’s employ, Tawell is supposed to
have acquired that knowledge of drugs, their properties, and uses, and the mode
of preparing them for medicinal purposes, which he subsequently turned to good
account in Sydney; and which subsequently suggested the idea of using prussic
acid to destroy the life of the unfortunate woman whom he murdered. Tawell
continued in this situation about seven years; and was again rising into respect.
The recollection of his faux pas at Mr. Janson’s was fast passing away from
those who had the most reason to be annoyed by its occurrence; by others It
was regarded as a venial offence, for which his subsequent marriage with the
woman had compensated. As an intelligent and pushing man of business, the
confidential representative of a first-rate commercial house, Tawell was deserving
of the respect in which he was held by those with whom he was brought into
intercourse; and every thing seemed to be proceeding, month after month, in a
way at once satisfactory to his employers and advantageous to himself. At
length the forgery on the Uxbridge Bank the particulars of which were, to a
considerable extent, suppressed at the time of its detection, but which the Globe
recently supplied from a communication by a party who knew all the circum-
stances at the time —burst upon the connexions of Tawell, and produced asto-
nishment that one in whom so much confidence had been placed should have
been induced to embark in a scheme, the failure and detection of which involved
not merely the loss of character, but, at that time, the forfeiture of life. Having
a forged Bank of England note in his possession at the time of his apprehension
on the more serious charge—although there Is reason to believe he had no guilty
knowledge of its character—it was used as the means of procuring his escape
from the consequences of the capital offence he had actually committed. The
benevolent bankers (who were Quakers) were thus relieved from the necessity
of prosecuting; the Bank of England took up the case of the forged note on
their establishment; Tawell pleaded guilty by arrangement; and in 1814 was
sent, a convict, to Sydney.
In that colony Tawell arrived In 1815. Here his knowledge of drugs imme-
diately availed him. Instead of being assigned to a settler, and sent up the
country, he was retained in the sendee of Government, as one of the assistants
In the convict hospital at Sydney. In this situation he continued rather more
than three years. His intelligence, assiduity, and carefulness here also acquired
for him the favourable regards of his superiors, and by their recommendation,
the Governor, Major-General Macquarrie, first granted him a ticket of leave,
and shortly afterwards an emancipation ticket. Aided by some friends he had
made among the officials in the colony, Tawell first commenced business in a
small shop in Hunter Street, Sydney; and, meeting with encouragement, sub-
sequently removed to more commodious premises In Pitt Street. The shop, being
large, and having two spacious windows, one side was appropriated to drugs and
chemicals, and the other was fitted up as a grocery store. Here Tawell rapidly
grew rich. He embarked in the shipping trade; engaged in oil speculations;
and was successful In all. The report of his prosperity had reached England.
His wife, with her children, had received no aid from him. Notwithstanding
his changed circumstances, she had been living in obscurity and want; and at
length obtained a place of domestic servitude in the family of a gentleman,
residing in King’s Arms Yard, Coleman Street, London. A subscription was
raised to provide-, her and her sons with necessaries for the voyage, and a free passage
was obtained foil he.r and.them. nnd arrived at Sydney in
—no very welcome visitants to Tawell, who had formed one of those female con-
nexions which are more consistent with convenience than sanctioned by morality.
Tawell made the best of the matter. The house-keeper was provided for, and
Mrs. Tawell was installed mistress of the house; the sons were furnished with
employment; and, to do Tawell justice, he provided them with the necessary
instructors, and thus gave them the means of preparing for a respectable station
in society. During his early residence in the colony Tawell's father died; and
when his circumstances improved, and he was acquainted with the fact that his
mother required aid, he regularly remitted money to England for the relief of
her necessities until her death.
Having accumulated a large amount of wealth—at least between 30,000/.
and 40,000/. Tawell determined on returning to his native country, from
which he had been absent more than 16 years. Upon his arrival in London in
1831, he, with his family, first resided in a house in Great Prescott Street,
Whitechapel; thence he removed to Trinity Square, Southwark, where he
domiciled his wife and sons; but some affairs in Sydney requiring his personal
attention, and having an opportunity of embarking, with a prospect of profit,
a sum in the purchase of goods which he knew would meet with a ready
sale in the Sydney markets, he set sail thither with a valuable cargo. By this
speculation Tawell is said to have realised between 4000/. and 5000/. He re-
turned home, having settled the business for which he undertook the voyage.
Success in this undertaking induced Tawell to engage in another of a yet more
extensive kind, and to embark once more for the scene of his success. On this
occasion he took with him his wife and sons; the elder of whom, haring com-
pleted his medical studies, he established in business in Sydney as a surgeon and
apothecary, where, haring first married, and after three or four years’ residence,
he subsequently died. The death of this son deeply affected Tawell. He again
determined on returning to England; and on his arrival took the house in
Bridge Street, Southwark, so frequently alluded to on his trial, as that in which
Sarah Hart was engaged to nurse Mrs. Tawell in her last illness, and where that
guilty intercourse sprang up between the young nurse and her master, which
ultimately issued In her murder by her betrayer. Here Tawell assumed yet
more strictly his characteristic preference for Quaker society, and employed his
Increased wealth in works of benevolence. As though he sought to hide from
O O
himself the criminality of the Illicit Intercourse he was now indulging with Sarah
Hart, who had become pregnant by him, and remained with him in his house, until
her altered appearance betrayed the fact he would have fain concealed, Tawell was
constant in his attendance on public worship at the Friends’ meeting-house, and
subscribed liberally to schools and other benevolent objects. We have heard, from
a credible source, that to one school, connected with a Dissenting chapel in the
Borough-road, he subscribed not less than 30/. annually. He at length left the
the house in Bridge Street, and lived in retirement in the neighbourhood of
Croydon, visiting Sarah Hart at different places where he had placed her in
seclusion; at the same time paying his court most assiduously to the excellent
but ill-fated lady who, unfortunately for herself, at length consented to become
his wife.
[The trial of John Tawell for the murder of Sarah Hart took place at Ayles-
bury, before Mr. Baron Parke, on Wednesday, March 12. 1845, and continued
three days, when the Jury found him Guilty, and he received sentence of Death,
and was ordered for execution on Friday the 28th of the same month.]
