

LIFE AND LABOUR
IN
AUSTRALIA
E. WALTHAM




LIFE AND LABOUR IN AUSTRALIA.




LIFE AND LABOUR
IN
AUSTRLIA.
BEING
PERSONAL EXPERIENCES AND
OBSERVATIONS
BY
E. WALTHAM
LONDON;
HENRY J. DRANE, LIMITED,
Danegeld House, 82a, Farringdon Street, E.C,




CONTENTS.
CHAP.
PAGE
I. Experiences en route
11. Impressions of Melbourne and Sydney 18
111. In the Gold-Mining Districts ... ... 23
IV. Squatting and Sheep Shearing 38
V. The Life of the Cattle Drover 52
VI. The Australian Aborigines ... 64
VII. The Return Journey to Brisbane , 74
VIII. Sugar Plantation Work 81
IX. Journeyings by Boat and Steamer ... ... „. 92
X. On a Newly-formed Sugar Plantation 98
XI. Sugar Growing at “ Ingala, ’’ and certain Customs of
the Aborigines ... 107
XII. Rabbit Trapping 128
XIII. Anxious Times in the “Scrub” Districts 142
XIV. I Turn Cobbler
XV. Australian Droughts
XVI. The Return Journey Home 184




CHAPTER I.
EXPERIENCES EN ROUTE.
The good ship “ Somersetshire " is lying off
Gravesend, ready to depart on her voyage to
the Antipodes, via the Cape of Good Hope.
All is taut; the passengers are on board; all
are waiting for the signal to haul up the anchor
and to wave probably a last farewell to those
on shore. The order is given to heave up, and
at last we are under way, to face the perils of
the mighty deep. Slowly and stately the good
ship moves, quietly and majestically to the
vibrations of the screw; we steam down the
Channel on our way to Plymouth (the voyage
to that port is generally uneventful), with only
a small choppy sea, which did not seem to
have any prejudicial effect upon any of our
most sensitive passengers, who were quite
unduly anxious to begin those periodical
visitations to the side of the ship which are
the privileged indulgences monopolised by
the amateur sailor.


We arrived at Plymouth in the early hours
of a Friday morning; but as the captain was
moved to give due consideration to the super-
stitions of the sailors, we did not on that day
bid a last farewell to the white cliffs of old
England. One or two of the passengers,
during the time we were anchored off
Plymouth, availed themselves of the oppor-
tunity to go ashore, and having had enough
nautical, or marine, experience, they did not
return on board again, preferring, after this
brief experience, to remain on terra finna and
avoid, for the present at any rate, any further
risk of mal-de-tner.
Now, once again, the anchor’s weighed, and
we have had our last sight of land for many
weeks, for many thousand miles of ocean have
to be traversed. Now we dip and rise again,
varying these motions with an occasional roll,
and we are at last fairly on the sea—the open
sea. As the time passes, and the distance
from the shore increases, alas ! so does the
swell; and squeamishness begins to take hold,
vacant seats are conspicuous at the tables, and
we miss the joyous laughter of the erstwhile
merry passengers. It is generally assumed
that from seven to fourteen days outward
bound is an approximate estimate for the
average landsman to recover from the ill-effects
of maUde-mer and to resume his wonted
equilibrium. The woeful countenances, and


the pea-green complexions, are beginning to
assume their original and natural colours ;
once again is heard the merry laughter, which
joyously echoes through the deserted saloon,
from the convalescent and recuperated
travellers.
Now we settle down in real earnest to
anticipate and look forward to the usual
episodes which will occur on board, and which
are always, more or less, incidental to a long
sea voyage. To begin with, a squall suddenly
springs up, and by a peculiar coincidence, at
meal time, when the joint of a boiled leg of
mutton, with its concomitants, will gracefully
deposit themselves in the lap of some unfor-
tunate lady. And then there is the extra-
ordinary delight always exhibited when some
unwary steward, losing his balance, lands a
basin of greasy soup on the back of the neck
of an epicurean diner; or, to add a little
variety to the entertainment, two stewards,
with pugilistic intentions, on their way from
the “ cuddy ” with tantalising entrees , will
suddenly raise some difference of opinion with
each other, and stop midway on deck to argue,
in excited fashion, endeavouring at the same
time to keep the necessary perpendicular.
But, alas for human frailty, during the heat of
their argument a huge green sea will lap on
deck and quickly disperse both arguers and
argument. The next view of them ranges from
c


the interesting point of the dispute to the
ridiculous ; for the ship suddenly rolls and
lurches, and the two disputants, being swept
off their legs, are seen floundering in helpless
and briny confusion, the tasty joints carried
hither and thither by the backwash of the
water.
So these little details help to vary the
monotony of ship life. It is always so pleasing
to the average human mind to see a fellow
creature in trouble, and always so gratifying to
assist one when in distress. These little
incidents also give one the zest to look forward
to some fresh occurrences of a still more
humorous character.
Society on board is always more or less sure, as
time passes on, to become “ cliquey.” Scandal
and personalities would be the chief topic for
conversation with many ; but fortunately we
possess a few better-disposed people amongst
us, who are willing to go in for a more genial
kind of entertainment. To avoid, as far as
practicable, any unpleasantness, it is suggested
by some of the amiably inclined to start the
amusements by having a concert, varying the
proceedings with an occasional dance.
Although we did not possess any brilliant
talent in the shape of a Sims Reeves or a
Santley or a Patti, we could muster a good
few “ howlers ” after the “ Penny Pop ” style.
One youth, with a good deal of self-assurance,


favoured us with “ The brave old ‘ Teme-
raire,’ " the rendering of which must have made
poor old Santley's flesh creep. Another sang
a semi-comic ditty about a “ Case of lager beer
on every stair." The inhabitants of that
dwelling must have been of a somewhat thirsty
nature. And then came the maiden of uncer-
tain age, who, as it leaked out, was silently and
desperately sweet on the doctor, but whose
sweet smiles were languished all in vain—the
medico being possessed of an inconstant
nature —emphasising the old song, “One foot
on shore, and one on sea, to one thing constant
never," Therefore, he dangled his bait about
without any intention of reciprocating. How-
ever, to return to the maiden and her song ; the
burden—and it was worthy of all sympathy—
was, “ Oh, had I someone to love me,” etc.
This was duly rendered in high falsetto voice,
with many languishing glances thrown at the
pill distributor.
The concert having passed off with great
eclat, and the performers having been duly
encored and applauded, the next event on the
tapis was the inevitable charade, which might
have been appropriately termed a “tableau de
blunders." The principal characters, or perhaps
I should say “dramatis personae," were
a very self-conceited damsel, much taken up
with her own personal attractions, which she
no doubt thought would not fail to have their


due effect on the audience, and, in
proper contradistinction to the beauty, a
young man from the country. His very get-up
would not have failed to reveal this fact. Clad
in a brilliant check suit, like a red and white
draught-board, he advanced on to the stage to
fulfil his part with amorous enthusiasm. The
young lady awaited him with loving glances :
he reached her side, but whether his memory
failed him, or whether his heart was too full to
admit of expression being given to his pent-up
feelings, no one knew ; but there he stood,
chequered and speechless. The heroine
evidently construed in her own mind that he
was duly overawed and struck dumb by her
matchless beauty, and, wishing to give the
hero some satisfactory encouragement and to
remove the feeling of nervous prostration, said
unto him sweetly, “You may kiss me if you
like.” He immediately seized upon this happy
means as a relief from his bewildered condi-
tion, and osculating with great gusto, the
contact roused the audience to a state of
fervent delight; but the result, or effect of the
heroine's strategy, was very transient. The
hero's courage sank to zero, and the audience
were left, and perhaps some still are left,
cogitating as to what was the proper answer to
the heroine's sublime request. The youth
evanesced from the stage in great haste. The
suit, and the actor, with his want of histrionic


talent, disappeared from the gaze of a puzzled
and hilarious audience for evermore.
It was very evident, so far as practical
experience had developed it, that the talent on
board for engaging the popular attention was
of a very mediocre order. Other suggestions
as to entertainments were received with a cer-
tain amount of chilliness ; so the doctor and
his love-sick maiden, the quasi hero and his
belated heroine, were left in obscurity, or we
may even say oblivion, and it was with a
certain amount of relief that we were saved
from any further inflictions from our would-be
entertainers.
That night, in the midst of a rather heated
discussion, we were suddenly brought into
contact with a mighty breeze. It is the custom
with captains of auxiliary, or sailing ships, to
steer a southerly course, to bear down into a
southerly latitude in search of trade winds to
help the vessel on its way, and in the former
case to save coal, or at any rate to help to
economise their supply of fuel. We suc-
ceeded in finding a fair and friendly breeze,
all sail was set, and the ship was running
before the wind in elegant and rapid style.
The feeling caused by the beautiful undulat-
ing motion was intensely exhilarating; we
forgot and forgave our late inflictors in their
misguided attempts to please us—whose
ardour, for the time being, had engulfed


their want of training, technical or otherwise
—and we smiled upon our friends and foes
alike, with happy unconsciousness of what
was in store for us. In fact, our system was
so braced up by this change of progression,
that we might have gone through the opera-
tion of listening to the musical and the dramatic
struggles once again.
This happy state of things did not last long.
The fair breeze rapidly developed into a
terrific gale ; hourly the wind blew stronger
and stronger, and hourly the waves rose higher
and higher, the sea resembling a boiling caul-
dron. At one minute the stately ship seemed
to be riding above the sky so high, at another
it was down below in the trough, the waves
swirling and gurgling high above the masts,
giving one the impression that at any moment
they would at one fell swoop swamp the
vessel, and we should never rise again to the
level of the surface.
All on board now seemed to be in a state of
chaos and complete disorder ; the question
eagerly asked by the excited and bewildered
passengers was, “ Shall we weather the
storm ? ” Captain, officers and sailors were
one and all intently plied with anxious inter-
rogations, receiving replies more or less con-
solatory to their distressed feelings. The
screw was up and lying placidly on the deck,
a dead weight in the storm to the ship's


buoyant movements. Straining and creaking
in every plank, she ploughed her way through
the turbulent, mighty deep ; the gale kept on
increasing in fury, and amidst the roar of
wind and the lashing of waves, the sails,
which a short time before were ballooning
and bellying to a lovely breeze, were now
being rent from the masts and spars and
carried away into oblivion, the blasts tearing
and splitting them like so much brown paper.
For miles, as far as the eye could sec, was
one raging mass of white frothy foam. Now
the ship was riding on the summit of the
mighty roaring billows; again she was struggling
and striving down below, making frantic
efforts to reach the surface.
The chief interest of those who were not
unnerved by the pandemonium, and the truly
magnificent spectacle, was watching with
intense anxiety the remaining solitary sail,
which was hanging to the ring of a single
chain. Would it hold on and carry us
through ? or would it sever and split, to
be carried away to join its predecessors in
obscurity ? That was indeed the momentous
question—to be or not to be there ? It was
really interesting to note, during the critical
time, the profound and altered conduct of
some of our late valiant passengers; the
different views of excited and demoralised
humanity were fully exemplified during our


uncertain tenure on board, but I refrain, from
advisable and considerate reasons, from giving
any morbid details of personalities, but will
simply add that fortune smiled on us—the
solitary existing sail weathered the storm and
hurricane ; so, passing on into smoother and
less disturbed elements, the erstwhile despon-
dency of the company resumed its fair-
weather countenance, but we never seemed to
thoroughly recover our lost gaiety, or shake
off the rude effects of the past tempest.
Squally and broken weather following in our
wake, debarred us from fully enjoying any
more fun or humour at the expense of our
cabin’d associates ; therefore, sailing on with
the aid of the screw through stormy Cape
Leuwin, ail ideas of any further amusements
or entertainments were dispensed with, and
we settled down with calm resignation to wait
our arrival at King George's Sound and
Albany.
It is a strange fact, but nevertheless essen-
tially true, that few remarks are recorded
about Albany. I presume this is due to the
fact that most voyagers, like ourselves, fail to
perceive any sufficiently picturesque scenery,
or objects of interest, worthy of a passing
remark; or it may be, inter alia , that their
anxiety to reach Melbourne damps any ideas
of gushing about so insignificant a port of
call.


Proceeding on our limp and tepid way, we
eventually reach the entrance to Port Philip
Bay. Now we have to negotiate the “ Rip,” a
narrow deep channel of water running be-
tween two gigantic rocks. Safely passing
through this apparently dangerous passage, we
steam into the calm and placid waters of the
bay.
Now for a general exclamation, except from
old stagers. What a lovely panorama ! What
a cheerful transition from the tempestuous
ragings of the mighty deep to the tranquil
basin of the quiet bay ! All around us shows
practical and visible signs of the rapid advance
of civilisation in the sparsely settled suburbs
of the port, stretching from St. Kilda on the
one side, and advancing in a semi-circle to
Sandridgc, and on to the anchorage at Williams-
town.


CHAPTER II.
IMPRESSIONS OF MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY.
How rapid has been its transformation, can
only be realised by those” who settled here in
the earlier times . A few short years ago Mel-
bourne was but a huge sandhill, and the
country all around but a howling wilderness
of ti-trees, scrub and gum forest, a refuge on
land for the insignificant black, or aboriginal,
mosquitoes, and the bull-dog or soldier ant,
with sundry snakes and scorpions thrown in
for variety; and the waters of the bay a
moving mass of hateful sharks. Now how
changed! In place of sandy tracks, there rise
before your view majestic lofty buildings, with
paved rectangular streets, with all the latest
modern improvements. The domain on the
banks of the Yarra, with its imposing vice-
regal mansion, the botanic gardens, and other
picturesque additions too numerous to specify,
are not all these recorded daily ? So we will
aboard once more and proceed to Sydney.


It is said that comparisons are odious ; we
will not, therefore, endeavour to draw any be-
tween the towns of Melbourne and Sydney.
There are, indeed, none. The two ports are
perfectly antithetical to each other. The
former is simply a placid sheet of water, sur-
rounded mostly by artificial aids to picturesque-
ness ; thelatter port stands unique in its natural
beauty—no human device could enhance its
primitive architectural designs. Nature, the
supreme governor of the universe, alone could
have designed such a model of rugged perfec-
tion. In approaching the first bay at the
entrance to Sydney harbour, one is struck by
the extraordinarily powerful light that is thrown
from the lighthouse, which is not, as is
generally the case, set up on the highest point,
but on a much lower level. This light indi-
cates the entrance to the harbour. The vessel
now pursues a labyrinthine course through the
various bays, and the scenery is charmingly
picturesque, indeed enchanting. At one time
you seem to be entirely shut in and surrounded
by high cliffs, with no apparent outlet, when
suddenly the ship emerges into another and
separate bay, thus giving a varied and pleasant
effect to the illusion, and conjectures as to how
and when you left the other bay and entered
into this fresh one. These transformation
scenes render the passage from the sea to the
city wharf peculiarly attractive, interesting,


and delightful to the new arrival. The
residents of this noble city do not forget, or
fail to impress with imposing gravity upon the
new chum, the natural beauties of the harbour;
and invariably, without exception, if you are
fortunate enough to land and take a look round,
you will be accosted in this way ; “ Have you
seen our harbour ? ” It is quite immaterial to
the hospitable Cornstalks whether you have
just sailed through the different bays or
whether you have travelled over-land; the
interrogatory, like the hiccough, arises spas-
modically to one and all, and cannot be
restrained : “ Have you seen our harbour ? ”
On one particular occasion, it is related in a
paragraph of colonial history, a well-known
vessel was sailing to Sydney, but before enter-
ing the beautiful harbour, a boat was launched —
the captain of the ship had received the “tip ”
—the white sails were set, and as they expanded
to the breeze there was displayed in huge and
distinct lettering an answer to the proverbial
query : “Yes! We have seen your harbour ”
—thus saving themselves from the usual
interrogatories awaiting them.
Having duly effected a landing, some of us
proceeded to visit and admire a few of the
leading sights, such as The Domain ; Lady
McQuarrie's Chair ; the Paramatta River, with
its lovely orange groves and well-laid-out
gardens; and the Blue Mountains, which are


traversed by a zig-zag railway to the summit.
On reaching this, there is a long sweeping
descent right on to the extensive Bathurst
plains. The feeling one experiences in this
gentle gliding motion, running on the edge of
an apparently bottomless crevasse, recalls to
mind a well-worn quotation from our friend
of youthful days, when poor Virgil's classical
sayings were daily dinned into unwilling ears :
“ Facilis descensus averni .” How many of us,
since those days, have realised how lament-
ably true the poet's writings have proved !
What a magnificent spectacle is presented
to the traveller when passing down this moun-
tain on to the plains, when the sun is just
rising or when it is about to set! The mag-
nificent forests of trees, the gigantic iron bark,
the red, white and blue gum standing out,
clean barked, like marble pillars, from two to
three hundred feet from the ground before the
branches are reached; the huge and massive
granite rocks ; the small waterfalls seen in
the distance with snowy white spray, re-
sembling so many fountains ; all these inter-
spersed with the many varied tints and colours
of the rainbow, present a panorama which
once seen few ever forget. Through this
beautiful scenery leads the way to the cele-
brated Fish Caves,
Some of us may, perhaps, be permitted to
visit these places in this and the other colonies,


and probably under different, diverse, and
possibly adverse aspects.
Some of the party who then viewed with
astonishment, delight, and wonder these mar-
vellous works of nature, are now sitting on the
judicial bench, expounding and administering
the mystic subtleties of the law, equitably or
otherwise ; some have been acknowledged, by
a short-sighted community, to be thought
worthy of representing them in the Council,
where they air their limited knowledge, with
less experience, as to the white man’s rights
or wrongs ; others, again, having taken the tide
at the ebb, have wandered on the track—sun-
downing—and on the “wallaby” have
“ humped their drum ” to the doleful music
of the nocturnal mope-hawk and the dismal
howl of the übiquitous dingo; whilst others,
after a short cursory glance round, and a few
desultory visits in the immediate neighbour-
hood, have, on the first approaching sign of a
hot wind, evanesced, taken a berth on the first
ship homeward bound, and returned to give a
faithful and descriptive account of the Austra-
lian Colonies to their admiring friends and
relatives in the United Kingdom.


CHAPTER III.
IN THE GOLD-MINING DISTRICTS.
Leaving Melbourne, we booked our journey
by rail to Ballarat, via Geelong, a rather dis-
torted route, travelling, as it were, two sides of
a triangle, the distance by road being about 70
miles, but by rail just over 100 miles. It was
during this journey we first became initiated
in the technical terms that are applied to
mining rights. One of our fellow passengers,
who was evidently of an inquiring turn of
mind and deeply interested in the diggings,
was explaining to us how he had pegged out a
claim in Ballarat, and, having proceeded into
the township to register it, someone, during
his absence, had taken possession, or, as it is
termed in mining parlance, “ jumped" the
claim.
We, like many young men, having our
minds full of athletic subjects, fell into the
natural error that the aforesaid individual had
done some extraordinary feat in the shape of


a phenomenal long jump. So we innocently
asked how far the man had jumped. The
look of withering scorn the miner gave us only
added to our bewilderment.
Bristling up, with ill-concealed indignation,
“What do you mean?” said he. “Do you
want to take a rise out of me ? ”
As he was gradually working up his dander,
and a storm appeared imminent, we calmed
and pacified his injured feelings by stating that
we were only “new chums." Mutual explana-
tions followed, and peace was restored.
Arriving at Ballarat we entered the great
mining centre of the Victorian Colony. The
vast amount of wealth produced can only be
gauged by viewing the monument erected at
the Melbourne Exhibition, and representing,
in a solid mass, the enormous amount of gold
extracted from the auriferous fields by its
imposing dimensions in height, length, and
breadth.
Our stay in this city was of short duration,
only just long enough to hear recounted the
tales of fabulous wealth realised by the few
fortunate ones. But the history of the hun-
dreds who forfeited their lives in the arduous,
though exciting task of fossicking for the
golden ore is painfully silent. Of the scanty
few that we met who had duly blossomed forth
into millionaires it must be confessed that they
were poor specimens of humanity ; their whole


soul, and the only purpose of their existence,
seemed to be the accumulation of wealth.
The city, with its public buildings and
grand hotels, its magnificent rectangular
streets, showed substantial signs of golden
prosperity ; it seemed almost impossible that
anyone could actually realise what poverty
meant in a place like this, where gold was
handled and weighed by the ton. We could
easily imagine the feelings of the poor and
impecunious bank clerk. Gold, gold was
everywhere, but we could not touch a “meg.”
During the early hours, whilst waiting for
the celebrated Cobb’s coach to start, we were
entertained with an anecdote about the late
owner of the hotel and his racehorse. The
story, as related to us, runs thus : “ The pro-
prietor owned a horse which he was training
to run for the great colonial race, called the
Melbourne Cup, and he had a great belief in
its ability to upset all the favourites and that it
would win the Cup, although it was charac-
terised as a rank outsider. A gentleman,
happening to be a visitor at the hotel, was so
sceptical about the constant puffing up of this
horse and its prowess that he laid a wager
with the owner of £I,OOO to a box of cigars
that it would not win. The wager was ac-
cepted. During the intervening time the
landlord had a vivid dream, which he re-
counted to his friends in the morning, which
D


was to the effect that he saw his horse running
in the race. The jockey was riding with a
band of crape round his arm, and his horse
won the Cup ; and the layer of the odds paid
the money to his (the landlord’s) wife. The
dream was verified to the letter. The hotel
proprietor, and owner of the racehorse, died
before the race was run, the jockey rode
decorated with a crape band, the horse won
the Cup, and the money was paid to the
owner’s wife.”
The next story is attached to the track when
the coach was going to the diggings loaded
with many passengers of all sorts and condi-
tions, amongst the number being an American
and a very stout, em bong pongy lady, who
was too tightly laced up for her comfort. The
tracks were very rough, and the springless
coach jolted with inconvenient irregularity ;
being hot, dry weather, the roads also were
very dusty, and the little flea was particularly
prevalent.
For some distance the coach rattled along
and conversation flowed freely, but the lady
was evidently nervous and appeared to be
fidgety. There was an evident irritation about
the extremities, and she was making frantic
efforts to reach her nether limb in search of
relief. But nature and art had placed obsti-
nate impediments in her way, besides the
obstacles on either side. However, there is a


limit to human endurance, so, making one
mighty effort, she bent forward. There was a
grunt and a dynamitic explosion. The main
stay sail had gone by the board.
The amusement caused by this unexpected
interruption to the animated conversation was
very much increased by the American
drawling out in a quiet way, amid a hushed
silence, “ That’s right, ma’am; if you can’t
catch them, shoot them ! ” In many a wild
hunt after kangaroo, emu, or the wallaby, this
fact was re-echoed to the hunter, “If you can’t
catch ’em, shoot ’em,” and afforded many a
hearty laugh in the backwoods camp.
At one o’clock in the morning the bugle
sounded the approach of the famous Cobb’s
coach ready to start for Ararat. This gigantic
vehicle, capable of carrying probably sixty-
five rough and ready passengers, is drawn
by twelve or sixteen fiery and untamed steeds
and driven by one of the well-known charac-
ters yclept “ H-Il Fire Jack,” or “ Cabbage
Tree Ned ” —the former nick-named probably
from the reckless pace he drove, the latter on
account of the huge hat that adorned his head.
There were also other drivers connected with
this firm—to wit, “ Ginger,” a small turnipy-
waisted man with a fiery complexion and
beard to match; “ Nigger Bill,” a man of
colour; “One-eyed Sike,” or “Old Nick’s
Mate,” and so on ad lib .


We booked our passage and climbed up by
ladder or otherwise, and started en route for
Ararat. The drive proved a delightfully
pleasant one. We were fortunate enough, by
the aid of an extra consideration, to secure
the box-seat, which is always regarded as a
special favour. You must, beforehand, make
the acquaintance of the autocratic driver, and
also be prepared to plank down privately the
mighty dollar, or its equivalent, by engaging
this seat.
We were relieved, to a great extent, on our
journey from the monotony of jerky and
monosyllabic conversation, and its attendant
interrogatories for the passengers in the rear,
being otherwise entertained by listening to the
musical and trilling notes of our Jehu, who,
being of Swiss nationality, was able to favour
us with some lively Tyrolean ditties, which
sounded harmoniously, blending with agree-
able. concord in unison with the rattle of the
horses' hoofs on the hard high road. The clear
ringing notes of his “Ta ra, rai, rai, ra-a-a,"
echoed and re-echoed again as we went
spanking along through the weird and ghostly
forests.
On our way we passed the famous Lake Bal-
laroon, the property of an oldWilcanian pioneer,
noted for his persistent efforts in endeavouring
to induce the wily trout to make its habitation
in the waters of this extensive lake ; and who


again sought further notoriety by spending a
few thousand pounds on the public institutions
of a colonial metropolis, and received a
solatium to his aspirations and ambitions in
the shape of a knightly honour. In spite,
however, of the honour, he was always known
in the district as simply Tommy.
We had fully exhausted our stock of con-
versation and songs by the time Ararat was
reached. The first point of interest to which
our attention was drawn, and which ‘met our
gaze, was Mount Misery. This is generally
pointed out to new chums, and to those who
are unlearned in Scriptural history and in the
geography of the ancient localities, as the place
on the summit of which the Ark rested after
the subsidence of the flood, and it is moreover
asserted, on colonial authority, that when the
door of the Ark was opened the first remark
was made by the cat, who ejaculated, “ Is that
’ere a rat?”
This malicious attempt on the part of an
insignificant little animal, which would, under
ordinary circumstances, have only emitted
a self-satisfied purr, greatly upset the occu-
pants ; and so the Mount was named.
Since those days unhappy times have fallen
on that district. Perhaps this may have been
the real cause of the change of name in the
Mount from Ararat to Misery. Some years
ago, it is stated, when a report was spread


abroad that alluvial gold was found—especially
on Fiery Creek —no less than 30,000 tents
were pitched in the vicinity, and the country-
side was full of life and bustle. But the
animated scene and the excitement were very
transient, and poor Ararat was doomed to fall
back for its existence upon the precarious
conditions attached to “cockatooing” and jam-
making. The place appeared to be a sort of
Sleepy Hollow, the only excitement apparently
being the arrival and departure of the coach.
On the occasion of our visit we were fortu-
nate enough to witness the wedding of a
young squatter and a more juvenile squat-
teress. The whole population must have
assembled ; the affair had evidently aroused
widespread interest, and great excitement pre-
vailed in the township the previous night, the
festivities continuing for quite a week after
the affair was over. Two or three rather
amusing episodes occurred on the morning of
the wedding, but as they were of a personal
nature and referred to the dramatis personae,
we will pass them by as a small colonial up-
country effervescence.
Bidding adieu to our hospitable host, and
also to our historical friends, we proceed on
our journey to the next important diggings,
Pheasant Creek, now termed Skorwell.
Changing our style of coach for another of
less pretensions, we ambled along in a four


horse ramshackle or boneshaker through the
celebrated Great Western vineyards, and along
the flying doe track we reached, and passed
by, the far-famed Crown Cross Reef into the
township. Here we mingle once again with
prosperity and joviality. The reefs are paying
well and yielding gold galore, and, from the
prosperous and happy appearance of the
mining community, there seems to be a liberal
supply of the yellow ore. Judging from the
glare and resplendent glittering saloons and
the madding crowd that rushes hither and
thither, in and out of the well-filled bars, each
and all beam with self-satisfied contentment in
this wonderful “ Eldorado."
We enter one of the brilliantly-lighted
hotels. No sooner do we “ breast the bar"
than a huge rough-and-ready miner accosts
us thusly, “Well, mate, what's your poison ?"
or “What’s your lotion?" differing slightly
from the 'Murrican style of “Well, I guess
we'll irrigate. Give it a name, boys; I’m
doing the shouting"; and down on the bar
counter he planks the gold with an emphasised
remark, “Take it out of that, boss."
Although we expostulate with aristocratic
politeness, and decline with many thanks the
proffered, hospitality, explaining that circum-
stances, monetary and otherwise, will not per-
mit us to return the compliment intended, our
refusals are treated with contumely and disdain.


“ What! can’t afford it ? ” says one. “ What!
stony broke ? ” queries another. “ Bad luck
to it/’ quoth another. H Begorra ! No spon-
dulicks ! How much, bedad, does ye want ?”
and simultaneously, suiting the action to the
word, down on the bar he flops a handful of
the precious stuff.
“ Take what ye want, matey ; maybe some
day w T e may meet again, and then, p'r’aps,
we’ll be square again.”
Rough and ready, anxious and eager for the
fray, but always to the front to lend a helping
hand in a case of need, always ready to uphold
the cause of justice and equity, and to cham-
pion and defend the weaker sex from insult or
injury. Although it is difficult, so to speak, to
draw the line in their case, they honestly mean
their offers of assistance to be taken in a
literal sense, and without any offence, though,
perhaps, great exception may be taken to
their mode and ways of applying it; and
many are their acts of charity bestowed and
<£ born to blush unseen.” There are, of
course, exceptions to be met with occasionally,
and one was visible daily in the person of an
individual yclept “ Smelter Bill,” whose in-
come, derivable from the mines, was spoken
of by the ordinary individual with bated
breath, and feelings mingled with awe and
wonder at the almost fabulous wealth. In
fact, it was publicly stated that the bank


refused to pay him any interest on his
enormous and ever-increasing deposits. This
eccentric miner could be seen any evening in
certain bars associating and accepting favours
from the hard-working miners, or tribute men,
but never thinking of returning the compli-
ment, or spending a solitary copper except
upon his own miserable self.
Having indulged and spent a pleasant
evening at the expense of others he would be
seen trudging down the street with a piece of
raw meat in his hand, making his way to his
lonely habitation to cook and eat his solitary
steak, probably begrudging the expense it
entailed in the cooking. He eventually built
a magnificent house in the outskirts, and
furnished and furbished it with a lavish hand.
But whether he was seized with a pang of
regretful remorse at this apparent reckless
extravagance and expense gossip related not,
but, at any rate, he erected a small hut at the
end of this resplendent mansion, and there he
cooked his frugal meal and existed in solitary
Shylockian state, an object of silent contempt
to his fellow men, and probably a picture of
living discontent and misery to himself. .
It was decidedly interesting to watch at
various times the fluctuations of the mining
market, and to note the many extraordinary
flights the prices of scrip would take in the
course of a short time, I have a vivid recol


lection of a certain rough and generous-hearted
Hibernian tackling me one morning with an
urgent and emphatic request to join him in
buying up a few thousand pieces of paper, or
scrip.
“Begorra!” says he, “ye can’t do wrong.
Bedad ! yez can make your fortune forninst
the week, and sail back to the ould counthry
in royal style.”
But, in spite of his eulogistic pertinacity, I
was obdurate, and refused the enticing partner-
ship, preferring to watch the course of events
without the risk of a hazardous speculation.
However, he could not resist the dreams of
avarice and the desire to become a millionaire,
triumphantly telling me that he had invested
in a few thousand pieces of paper at the price
of 3d. per scrip. The day following his
purchase the excitement on his part began
speedily to germinate, for, bedad, the scrip
was already beginning to advance in value, and
was quoted at a bob, or the colonial Robert,
and gradually rose as the day progressed,
eventually closing at a pound. He even then,
in a fit of generosity, offered to go pards, or
shares, with me if I would buy in at ten bob;
but he still failed to induce me to take any
undue advantage of his fortune - making
scheme.
Down he came again the next morning full
of his “ Bedads ” and “ Begorras.” He was


literally running over with suppressed excite-
ment, because the investment he had made in
his favourite mine, called the “ Prince
Patriotic/’ had advanced most consistently
every hour in value ; and so the scrip con-
tinued increasing in price until they were
quoted at five pounds.
“ Now, Pat I ” said I, “be wise and sell.
Look what you can realise without any effort
or risk on your part.”
“ No! Bedad, I’ll wait a bit. Forninst
they'll riz for by/’ whatever that might mean,
and other ejaculations followed in hysterical
fashion.
I daresay the rise in stock affected his
Hibernian temperature ; the higher the price
the more incoherent he became, which was
only natural under existing circumstances.
The gambling spirit was fairly roused, and now
it seemed to me to be a case of “ neck or
nothing ” with him. However, the matter ended
in a complete collapse, for the shares, or scrip,
advancing, frantically, by leaps and bounds to
a value of eight pounds a-piece, the following
morning were not worth the paper they were
written on.
“ Oh, dear ! oh, dear ! ” exclaimed poor
dejected Pat, “ if they had only reached ten
pounds I was going to sell.”
“ If,” said I, “ you had been content with a
reasonable profit, and not been so grasping


and avaricious, you would to-day have been in
a good and prosperous position, and in affluent
circumstances, but now you must return to
your mutton and go 'cockatooing 1 again, and
revel once more on bush fare in the shape of
‘ damper/ 1 dough boys/ and ' beggars on
the coals ’ ; ” and thus I missed the chance of
taking fortune at the flood.
While staying in this mining town it may,
perhaps, not be out of place to record a small
municipal incident that occurred in a certain
township up country. A meeting of the
council had been convened, the mayor being
away on leave, and, having outstayed the time
allotted to him, during his absence a vote of
censure was passed at the meeting of coun-
cillors on the absentee official, and it was
decided to demand from him an explanation
of his truant conduct. This motion was duly
entered on the minutes. On the return of the
official head he desired, at the next meeting of
the council, that the minutes of the previous
meeting be read. This being done, the mayor
immediately asked who proposed this vote of
censure.
“I did,” said a pompous and full-blown
newly-elected councillor, stroking his chin
with complacent satisfaction,
“ Oh, you did, did you ? ” queried the
mayor, moving from his presidential chair to
the sleek offender, “ Then take that, and


that ” —suiting the word to his actions he
smote the offending member on the nose, and
spread him out.
Quietly resuming his seat he blandly
inquired, “Now who seconded this resolu-
tion ? ” N
There was a hushed and oppressive silence.
There was no answer. All present seemed
satisfied that the mover alone should be held
responsible for the offence, and no member
seemed at all eager or anxious to claim any
desire to engage in a physical contest.
“Who seconded this resolution ? ” he asked
once more, and still there was silence.
“ Then,” said the mayor, “ as there was no
seconder the motion is informal," and, taking
up his pen, he scratched it off the minutes.


CHAPTER IV.
SQUATTING AND SHEEP-SHEARING.
It was now time to be moving away from these
exciting scenes, and this festive company, to
seek for fields and pastures new; to make a
friendly acquaintance with the squatters and
selectors, and to observe how matters were
progressing in the agricultural and Mallee
districts, so we secured a couple of horses and a
buggy. The former can often be purchased at a
pound sale for the proverbial song, their price
ranging from a sovereign to a five-pound note,
the buyer taking all risk as to age and habits,
be they good, bad, or indifferent. If your luck
is in, a good bargain may often be secured.
The reason partly accounting for this nominal
value in horseflesh, is probably the fact that
there is a great deal of the borrowing element
amongst a certain section of bushmen,
principally amongst the men who are anxious to
travel up country on the cheap, or to reach the
sheep-stations in time for the shearing. So
they quietly collar a horse, and riding it as far


as is useful for their own convenience and
safety, and the animal having served their pur-
pose, the saddle and bridle are removed and the
horse is turned adrift to wander whither it
likes. The usual probability is, that it will be
“ run in ” into some township, and as a natural
consequence be lodged in the pound, where
it will be kept and fed for a time, then adver-
tised in the “ Police Gazette,” and if not
claimed, sold by public auction without
reserve to the highest bidder, the pound-
keeper’s receipt being sufficient acknowledg-
ment that the horse has been honestly
acquired, and there is no further risk of any
previous owner resisting the legality of your
purchase or otherwise compelling you to give
up possession. Some of these professional
horse stealers were so accomplished at this
nefarious business that they could artfully alter,
or, as it is termed in bush language, “fake ”
the brands, that they have been known to
steal a horse at night-time out of a selector’s
paddock, and dispose of it to the owner in the
morning not only once, but even on two or
three separate occasions. I remember an
occasion when this was practised most success-
fully on a butcher, who was located not far
from the Bracken Hills Silver Mines. This
butcher had bought a good useful nag and
turned it out into the paddock adjoining his
residence during the night. A young bush


man, who was quite an artist in the way of
“faking,” took this horse out of the pad-
dock at night, and deliberately sold it to
the butcher in the morning for and
received the money. The horse was turned
out that night and in the morning it again
disappeared, and was sold by the same young
bushman to the same owner again. The third
day it disappeared altogether. I happened to
be in a township when this young fellow rode
in on this very stolen horse, and was accosted
by the sergeant of the mounted police to know
whether he had seen anything at all of “ the
horse he was riding,” as there was a big reward
out for recovery and conviction. The young
man did not prolong his stay in the township ;
he got away, but unfortunately for himself,
emboldened by success, he was caught and
paid the penalty. This individual, although
only 19 years of age, defied the troopers and
everyone else for some time. He would cut
through the strands of a 5-wirc fence with the
palm of his bare hand. Catching the horse he
wanted, he would put on its hoofs boots of soft
material, made to order, and tying or pinning
to the horse a trailer composed of bushy limbs
of small scrub, he would quickly lead the
animal out of the paddock, “ fake ” the brands,
put on a large saddle cloth, and saddle and
ride away and dispose of it to some unfortunate
victim of misplaced confidence.


However, this is only one of the casual
incidents one meets with in bush life which we
have to put up with ; there are other cases on
record, in the good old days, when the removal or
“faking” of brands on cattle and sheep, in
some instances, have been the nucleus of many
fortunes. It was not at all an uncommon occur-
rence at one time for a small squatter, possess-
ing an elastic conscience, when mustering the
young stock or the lambs, to draft by an
occasional oversight, a few hundred head of his
neighbour’s property into his own flocks, and
by the exercise of a well-devised scheme, to
have them all correctly branded before early
dawn. But on the other hand, there live now
the descendants of men who have made their
fortunes by dint of sheer hard work, sedulously
avoiding all the traps laid by the wily
tarantulas, in the shape of shanties on the
different river banks and small isolated town-
ships, and who at one time would carefully
gather together every scrap of wool, either from
the backs of the defunct sheep or from the
branches and bushes of the prickly scrub, and
by carefully washing and cleaning the same,
would eventually collect and share a large
amount, and by a judicious sale would realise
a good profit, purchasing from the proceeds a
small flock of itinerant sheep. Thus in the
future these small items, by steady and per-
sistent care, would lead to such satisfactory
E


results, that the quondam shepherd by his
thrift and economy would blossom out, by
securing a large tract of crown lands at a
nominal rent, into a full-blown squatter;
and although illiterate, uncouth, and rough in
his style and manners, yet as a rule his genial
hospitality covered a multitude of blemishes ;
he seldom neglected to provide for the mutual
welfare of his family, by procuring for them all
the advantages of a good education, and in
many instances instilling into their minds the
precepts of courage, honesty, and a reverent
respect for religion.
Having, as I have remarked before, secured
the necessary means of locomotion, we made
a start from the hilarious diggings, and travel-
ling by a tortuous track through a barren and
deserted wilderness—on either side of us were
deep open pits—fossickers' claims abandoned by
the diggers as of no account —we leave the quartz
reef country behind and gradually enter the
Wimmeria plains. Steering a northerly course
we reach the Marma Lake, a pretty little sheet
of water located at the bottom of two or three
small hills with rising gound on all sides. The
only habitation that met our view consisted of
a small one-roomed mud hut, situated near a
belt of white gum timber on the side of the
hill, and occupied by a character of bad
repute, who gained a precarious living by
shady methods, and probably a member of the


“faking” gang. This lake, with its natural
architectural beauty, was destined, in a short
space of time, to become the centre of a large
and busy agricultural population. Passing on
we steer a more easterly course, and travel
over some lovely undulating and fertile plains,
and through pleasant forests of bull oak, until
we come in sight of the towering eucalyptus,
an indication that we are in the vicinity of
some watercourse or river. After journeying
a short distance we strike the banks of the
Maxwell River, and hail with delight a pictur-
esque and snugly built squatter’s bungalow, a
wooden building with plain and unadorned
exterior, devoid of any attempt at artificial em-
bellishment, and sheltered from the hot
northerly winds by a fringe of oak and mallee
scrub. Driving into the yard through a
rickety sort of gateway, we were fortunate
enough to meet the “ Boss ” on the threshold of
his domicile, who greeted us with cordial
effusion, expressing at the same time his un-
diluted pleasure in seeing us. Extending his
hospitality he urged, that w T e must put up,
and come in and have some dinner, and stay
the night or a w T eek if w T e liked, and he would
show us round the “cabboosh.” Our horses
were unharnessed and taken into what seemed
an apology for a stable, airy and roomy, well
adapted to comfort in this sultry climate. A
bundle of straw or dry reeds thrown to


them, and an unusual luxury, a drink of good
water, was provided. We were cordially
invited to step inside, as the mid-day meal was
just about to begin.
As we approached the front entrance, the
old squatteress was squatting on the doorstep,
enjoying a quiet draw from a short and well-
coloured clay pipe, which might once have
been a snowy white, but was now a black
“dhodeen." This individual was perfectly
undisturbed by our appearance, and merely
greeted us with a gentle movement of the
head, as an endorsement of her Benjamin's
request to step inside.
By a very peculiar coincidence, it turned
out that at this squatter's station, where we
were so hospitably received, the “ Boss "
happened to be one of those early pioneers
who had acquired an immense fortune and
extensive properties by means of the collection
of scraps of wool, and the scrupulous care and
energy which he had displayed in the early
part of his bush life. He recounted to us,
more or less in detail, the facts I have recorded
in the previous part of this narrative.
On our first entering the yard we were very
dubious as to whether he was the “ Boss" or
the knockabout Joey ; for our first view was
that of an elderly man, whose head was
covered by an old battered wideawake, like old
“ Britain's flag that’s braved a thousand years


the battle and the breeze." Underneath this
riddled old headgear a bronzed and weather-
beaten face, almost hidden from sight by years
of scraggy growth of hoary hair ; moleskin
overalls, baggy and mud-bespattered, and
dabs of sheepy-yoke ; jack boots, hobnailed,
from which the blacking and brush had been
conspicuously absent for many, many years.
This about completed the usual get-up of a
back country squatter.
The attire of the fair mistress on the door-
step would require the ready pen of the writer
of “ Charles O’Malley."
It is now the dinner hour, so we are ushered
into the dining-room ; a plain deal table stands
in the centre, and large old-fashioned wooden
chairs are arranged around it. There is no
attempt at comfort or luxury of any sort; no
display of the wealth he possesses or of the fat
balance held by his bankers ; no carpet covers
the floor, no tapestry hangs from the walls ;
neither is there a mirror or overmantel for the
inhabitants to steal covert glances, or the
mistress to note whether her back hair or hat
is straight, and none is needed for either sex
apparently in these isolated parts.
The conversation, during the frugal meal of
mutton and damper, washed down with a
pannikin of black tea, well boiled, and diluted
with evil-looking ration sugar, and milkless,
was inclined to be “ sheepy," and as our


knowledge and experience on this subject was
somewhat limited, we had to keep the ball
rolling by frequent ejaculations of “ Just so "
and “ Exactly."'
At intervals we were soothed by the
pungent odour from the doorstep, where the
old dame still sat placidly puffing—the curled
wreaths of smoke that were wafted inwards
satisfied us that the tobacco was not of a
fashionable brand, but was evidently one
known to bushmen as the good old “ Barratt’s
Twist," and, begorrah, it was pungent and no
mistake.
Nevertheless, in spite of a few minor draw-
backs, there was peace and plenty, and a
general air of homeliness about the place—a
genial reception, a good “ doss," plenty of
mutton and damper, and innumerable athletic
fleas—and thus we get our first introduction
to station life.
Taking a turn round after our repast, we
wend our way to the river, which runs through
the property. On the bank of this stream is a
sort of sheep-wash and wool-shed, both erected
in a very primitive style, reminding one of the
prehistoric pictures.
Now we are to witness some of the scenes
and incidents that occur in the shearing
season. The flocks have been mustered and
driven into the large yard adjoining the shed,
and are on the point of being dipped. The


poor sheep are first dumped into a tank or
pool of water, which is fenced off in the river,
head or tail first, whichever end the toss may
turn them. There is no ceremony in the pro-
cedure. Then they are prodded underneath
by means of a long pole, and after being well
soused, and half full of water, they are per-
mitted, before being asphyxiated, to scramble
out as best they can on the opposite side of
the pool, presenting a dripping, dejected and
forlorn appearance, casting piteous glances
and agonising sympathetic bleats to their help-
less comrades who were undergoing the same
lively ordeal which they had just safely passed
through. To any onlooker unused to this sort
of exhibition, the sheep seemed to have rather
a rough time of it ; but the washing of the
lambs that followed appealed more forcibly to
one's tender feelings, and, in a sentimental way,
the scene was more distressing, for the
younger ones, becoming separated from their
mothers, the plaintive, cries from both sides,
mingled with the yells of the men and the
barking of innumerable dogs, created an
indescribable and, to the unaccustomed ear,
hideous pandemonium.
This “lick and a promise,” in the shape of
ablutions, being duly accomplished, a very
transparent effort, as far as cleansing the dirty
greasy wool was concerned, which might be
justly termed an erratic labour of supereroga


tion, the shivering and benumbed animals
were driven into yards adjoining the wool-shed.
There they were allowed to drip and take a
short rest, which no doubt they thoroughly
appreciated, after their late turmoil of muster-
ing, drafting and washing.
Leaving the pool we were conducted to the
wool-shed, to witness the busiest times of a
squatter's station life, and at the same time the
most anxious and critical. The shed presents
a lively and animated scene. The shearing
boards are swept and garnished, the pens
erected, and marked off in regular and ready
order. The shears are sharpened with edges
like a barber’s razor, the blades glistening with
polished steel. Tar pots are placed in handy
spots, and all arrangements are finished and
ready for the shearers.
Before breakfast the clippers begin their
herculean task, and as they arc paid at the rate
of so much per hundred head, the greater the
number the more they receive. Great is the
rivalry and emulation exhibited amongst the
shearers as to who is going to head the list in
point of numbers shorn, and claim the
ambitious title as “ringer of the shed.” This
fortunate individual is singled out from his
comrades with as great an amount of admira-
tion and envy as the soldier who wins the
coveted V.C. To watch him sauntering from
the breakfast table to the shed, long after the


others have started work, conscious of his own
acknowledged superiority in this particular
line, gives one a feeling akin to humility, the
conscious pride he possesses, even in his little
way, of knowing how infinitely superior he is
to those two or three hundred fellow creatures
working and slaving in that shed. The poor
shearer, who works with perspirated frame
until he almost drops from exhaustion, and
rests content that he has, by dint of sheer
hard work, managed to clip 80 or 90 sheep, is
inclined to look with envy, mixed with wonder
and admiration, on this man, who works a
third less time and turns out the number of
150 before the sun goes down.
It is recorded as a positive fact that, on one
of the rivers, the “ ringer " of one of the large
sheds never went to work at the shed until
after breakfast, and knocked off at five o'clock
teatime, and could always total 250 shorn
sheep.
When, at the request of our host, I was, in
a weak moment, persuaded to try my hand, I
suffered an amount of physical struggling with
the wriggling sheep that will never be effaced
from my memory, or, as I thought for some
time, the marks it left behind.
Being fired with a natural desire to shear a
sheep, I walked into a pen, seized the animal
by one of its hind legs, and proceeded to
induce it to follow me to the boards. There


was a strong difference of opinion, the floor
was very greasy, and I had a sort of inkling
that the animal knew it was dealing with a new
chum, for, without any warning, I was on the
ground with the woolly occupant of the pen
passing over my body, as if it w T as a matter of
enjoyment. I stuck to my guns, and after
much loss of cloth and wind, I eventually
staggered with my prey to the shearing boards.
I had already caused much amusement to
the idle spectators, but I was determined to
clip this sheep or to skin him. Having
watched with observant eye the operations by
the practised hands, and thinking no small
beer of my own prowess, I scientifically placed
the obstinate sheep in a vertical position upon
his own tail, and proceeded in a similar man-
ner to remove the wool. As the first point of
attack in an artistic way is the throat, I opened
out at this part; my first impression was that I
had made a slight blunder and nearly severed
the jugular vein. The sheep objected most
strongly to the drastic treatment, becoming so
disorderly that I had to drop the shears to per-
suade him to be quiet. So far I had only been
three-quarters of an hour at the operation, the
spectators of this amateur feat were beginning
to get sarcastic, and sundry remarks were
made about a hospital and vivisection ; so
having a regard to the susceptibilities of the
sheep’s feelings, I pocketed my pride, and lay


mg down the shears, I candidly admitted that it
is a fortunate circumstance that there are other
means of getting a livelihood than by the
severe strain on muscle and temper of shear-
ing sheep.
Resuming now the more tranquil role of a
looker on, I noticed how each man worked as
if the sheep he was shearing would be his last,
and in spite of the severe strain on the back
and wrists they gamely continue to the bitter
end. There is a complete disregard of the fleshly
feelings of the poor sheep, for in their nervous
haste the men snip off wool and hide indis-
criminately, until the animal’s carcase pre-
sents a very marked and hieroglyphic appear-
ance. The boards resound with the call for
tar as the busy shearers ply with impetuous
haste their fleecing weapons. When finally the
sheep is done, or as it is misappropriately
termed shorn, he looks something after the
style of a red and black chequer board with a
white background, and is carried and uncere-
moniously dropped into the pen allotted for
the clipped sheep.


CHAPTER V.
THE LIFE OF THE CATTLE DROVER, OR
OVERLANDER.
When the pens are filled up, the sheep are
counted out into the main yard, and after a
few hours of unrest, misery, and bleating, they
are turned out, and allowed to roam about the
almost grassless and arid plains to await, in
blissful ignorance, the next treat that is in
store for them in the dim and misty future.
If the season should have been a favourable
one, and there is a fair amount of grass, the
greater portion of the flocks will eventually be
driven by easy stages to the nearest railway
township, en route to a metropolitan market,
and will be catalogued as fat sheep. On the
other hand, should the grass be scarce —a not
unusual state of things—the sheep will be
travelled in mobs about the country in search
of grass, and no doubt numbers will leave their
bones to bleach upon the heated sandy soil, as
many thousands have unfortunately done be


fore. This method of moving large mobs of
sheep from one colony to another, or any great
distance, is generally termed “ overlanding,”
and the man who undertakes the contract to
deliver, say, 30,000 sheep at so much per head,
very often finds it a most lucrative occupation,
although occasionally big losses are entailed
through having to travel across barren sandy
country. Having once started on a certain
route, the - driver is liable to be mulcted
in a heavy fine if he attempts to retrace
his steps, no matter what losses he may
sustain.
In the earlier days of the Colonies, apart
from the fascinations and attractions which the
gold diggings had for many thousands of all
nationalities —who, in the majority of cases,
found more of disappointments and misery
than of the precious metal; and in number-
less instances met with an unknown fate, or
an unmarked grave—there existed for those
who had implanted in them the desire for a
roving life, or as it is generally termed a “Bush
Life/' a splendid opening in the career of a
cattle drover, whose work is usually spoken of
as overlanding, an overlander being the
man who undertakes the contract to drive so
many head of cattle or sheep from one given
point, or station, to another ; or it may be from
a far outlying station in the back country to
the nearest railway station, or, as in some


instances, to the metropolis of the colony, be
it Melbourne or Sydney.
Speaking generally, it would be difficult to
name any other outdoor work, or occupation,
which requires greater natural courage, a
stronger nerve, or more perfect horsemanship
and presence of mind. Entirely indifferent to
any unfortunate circumstances that may arise,
as regards food, raiment, or accidents, there is
always in view a never-ending chance of dis-
playing those traits of character, in the varied
and different episodes, more or less exciting,
to a man possessed of the “real grit/’ or its
equivalent, nerve and courage. To one who
is anxious to realise what colonial life is, and
who, at the same time, is willing to rough it,
cattle droving is par excellence the gipsy's life.
Sheep droving, on the other hand, although
perhaps the life is somewhat similar, in so far
as travelling through the country is concerned,
yet is, generally speaking, devoid of the excit-
ing incidents and risks which have to be en-
countered in driving a mob of wild store cattle.
The slow and monotonous tramp behind a
flock of store sheep is bad enough, but to
meander behind a lot of fat sheep travelling to
the market, that ordeal is trying even to any
person possessing a Job-like patience. The
task is only suitable to those who have duly
qualified as successful loafers, or as the pro-
verbial “sundowner," who is never so happy


as when reclining behind a sleek mob of fat
sheep, attended by his faithful dog, always
willing and anxious to save his so-called
“Boss” any unnecessary exertion. To this
individual the life is a perfect Elysium as long
as the trip lasts. The average distance
travelled daily does not exceed six miles in the
twenty-four hours, the only drawback to the
loafer's perfect peace being the compulsory
duty on watch at certain stated hours of the
night; but even then he will often evade this
task by artfully working on the feelings and
good nature of a camp mate, to relieve him of
a simple duty.
Many years have now passed since, in many
instances, a certain number of squatters, who
had settled in N.S.W. and Victoria, finding
the area of land too limited for stock raising
or grazing purposes, decided on the policy of
migrating northwards, through S. Queensland,
and seeking for fields and pastures new in the
immense tract of the then unknown, or “No
Man’s ” land. The principal reason for this
decision was the increase of selection, or
the serious invasion of the selectors, or
“ Cockatoos,” on the pastoral tenants’ domains.
These squatters, by facing the dangers of
floods, wild blacks, and, occasionally, scarcity
of water, pioneered the new country, securing
large tracts of land from an impecunious
government at a nominal rental ; and there,


after years spent in enduring the many hard-
ships that are always incidental to the early
squatter’s existence, very probably some un-
foreseen calamity would occur, such as may
arise from an attack by blacks, an unexpected
flood, or perchance a terrible and devastating
bush fire, and such calamities may be the
causes either of ruin or of the destruction of
life. These pioneers, in many instances, after
spending their best years in these hazardous
undertakings, w T ere compelled by adverse cir-
cumstances to give up everything, thus leaving
a comparatively easy and prosperous under-
taking for the benefit of some future and
unknown successor.
It was the acquisition of these territories
that caused extensive movements of large
mobs of cattle; and these movements brought
into existence the necessary individual to carry
out the herculean task of transferring the
herds from one Colony to another.
Being camped on the river Wonbar, waiting,
after many weary months, for the disastrous
drought to break up; watching, and noting with
anxious and eager glance, every meteorological,
celestial, and terrestrial sign which might por-
tend rain, we received at last the long hoped for
season's downpour, and consequently the sum-
mons to put our camp in order preparatory to
making the first important move in a cattle
drover's life. Now we begin the exciting task


of mustering and cutting out the cattle in-
tended for the fields and pastures new. To
any person not well versed in station life, it
may seem an easy undertaking to separate
these animals, picking out the stores from their
more fleshy comrades, but this work is in itself
as arduous an undertaking for both horse and
rider as can possibly be imagined, requiring
long and practised use of an eviMooking stock-
whip, witla an eighteen-foot lash, and plaited
with kangaroo or bullock's hide. Charging,
bellowing, and snorting, the untamed
herd are driven, 'mid shouts of emphatic
language and the battery of a hundred thongs,
into the huge, strong-fenced stockyard pre-
pared for them. The cattle having been
properly drafted and delivered into the charge
of the contractor, the camp is now ready to
start on its long and probably eventful journey.
From this point the responsibilities of the
“ Overlander Boss " begin, and their name is
legion. The driving camp is composed of an
indiscriminate mixture of humanity. “ Prin-
cipia Factotum " is the “ Boss," who takes the
contract to deliver the cattle at the appointed
destination. He assumes the whole responsi-
bility, engages the number of effective hands
required, and supplies all the necessary
paraphernalia and the tucker required. Each
man has his own horse, if his purse is suffi-
ciently well lined to find the “ dibs" to
F


provide an animal at his own expense, in
which case a certain allowance is made in his
pay ; if he is unable to possess a horse, the
‘'Boss ” provides one.
Having equipped and made all the necessary
arrangements, and finally decided upon the
route, and fossicked all the useful information
that can be gathered from various sources, as
to the best track for feed and water, the
reporter goes ahead to fix the suitable camping
places, generally in company with the “ Boss/'
and to inform any squatter, who may be settled
on the proposed route, of the approach of so
many head of cattle. Having executed this
part of his duty, the reporter returns, meets
the cook and tucker wagon, and pilots him to
the place decided upon for camping.
After selection, this often entails a vast
amount of extra hard work in building up a
sort of miniature stockyard by means of brush-
wood and logs.
The cattle are now let loose. Away they
go, amid the usual pandemonium, as fast as
they can gallop, tearing through scrub and
forest. The only difficulty now is to steer
them in the proper direction, and let them
“ rip " until they blow themselves out.
Following, perhaps from the start, the
course of some well-known river, the first few
days may prove but little exciting ; camps are
probably easy of formation, the only danger to


look out for is, when on night watch, any
mysterious noise that may give the cattle the
sudden impulse to break away or stampede—
a cyclone, or vampero, is mild in comparison.
Having now got fairly on the way from
Brundawarra Station, all goes tolerably satis-
factorily ; all hands are fresh, and full of life
and spirits ; the horses are on their mettle and
the cattle are full of steam. So away they go,
perfectly indifferent as to the course they
pursue and the pace they travel, until
suddenly they are checked in their mad
career by the powerful administration of the
long and heavy lash. Turning swiftly, and
goaded by the punishment, they charge
frantically at the horse and rider, and a
simultaneous concussion would bring all con-
cerned sprawling on the dusty ground. But
the well-trained steed and rider are on the
alert, and by dodging and twisting like a
coursed hare hard pressed by the greyhounds,
they avoid any such catastrophe ; and letting
the infuriated beast rush past in his impetuous
course, they follow on his heels, and, applying
further physical persuasion, bring him back to
the mob again.
So this sort of procedure goes on by fits and
starts until the camp is reached. The cattle
are then rounded up, and, night watches being
appointed, it behoves them to sit, like military
sentries on duty, on their horses, keeping a


keen and watchful eye on the restless and
excitable animals. Those who are off duty
have finished their smoke and retired to
court the “ sweet restorer/' in rough bush
fashion, ready for any emergency.
All is hushed save the croak of the old
bull frog, and the ting-ting of his little mate ;
the rasping hoot of the fiendish-looking mope-
hawk, and the distant dismal howl of the
übiquitous dingo.
Suddenly the men on watch notice a strange
and fitful restlessness in the movements of the
herd, a suspicious and nervous tremor is
apparently making itself felt, and it is evident
that, like a convict with his patrol, the cattle
are waiting a chance for some excuse to make
a rush for liberty, or, in other words, to create
a general stampede. Suddenly the mysterious
chance occurs ; the falling of a leaf, the noise
of a breaking twig, but more especially the
suspected, or apparent, presence of the
scented black. Suspicious sniffings and quiet
snortings are the only outward and visible
signs of a great and general outbreak.
The opportunity has come ; with one bound
an excited bullock will make the dash, and in
the. twinkling of an eye away they go, like
Faugh-a-Ballagh they clear the way and are
lost to view.
All is chaos and confusion in the camp. The
herd had taken the bit between its teeth and


with uncontrollable fear and fury was stam-
peding through the scrub j the crashing of the
bullocks through the fallen timber and bracken
was the only indication of the direction they
had taken.
The shouting and hallooing of the watch
quickly arouses “ Boss/' camp, cook, and the
whole lock, stock and barrel in the camp.
Fortunately for all concerned, the affrighted
animals had steered in their mad career in an
opposite direction to the sleeping drivers.
Every man hastens to his horse, and then
follows a wild and perilous chase, through
tangled scrub and darkness, in the trail of the
departing stock. “ The lowing herd scamps
wildly o’er the lea, and leaves the camp to
darkness and to me.” How intensely different,
one might be inclined to soliloquise, is the
position here of the reckless stock-rider and
the elegiac poet! The latter quietly musing
on a tombstone about lowing herd, the former,
in all probability, vaguely wondering whether
he will smash his skull against the lowering
limb of some bull-oak tree, and find a tombless
grave in the wild and nameless forest.
So, tearing along haphazard at a break-neck
pace, over fallen logs and through entangled
brakewood, he does not pursue the even
tenor of his way, for the horse, getting his
hoofs mixed up in the wiry scrub, rider and
he fall together in a helpless heap. With a


quiet and casual remark at such a contretemps,
the practised cowboy will reinstate himself
into the good graces of his mount, and
regarding the incident with stolid indifference
as not having had a fatal result, he will resume
the chase, and by dint of hard riding and
better luck, again rejoin the fleeing band,
buoyed up by the hope that he will at any
rate be able to vary the monotony of an
evening’s life in camp with the details of his
catastrophe, and, by handling the truth a little
carelessly, will embellish his story to suit the
style of his audience.
After hard riding a distance of some miles,
the horsemen have succeeded, in heading the
panting and semi-subdued herd, and by the
forcible use of colonial phrases and stock
whips, have at last effected a stop in their
dashing career. Breathless, and perspiring
with heat and fear, seemingly ashamed of
their mistaken effort at escape, the terror-
stricken beasts are driven back again to the
camping ground, there to chew the cud till
daybreak and ponder over their mistimed
folly.
There is no further rest for the camp that
night, all hands having to be on guard to
prevent any further display of desertion on the
part of the restless truants. So, partaking of
an early meal, the mob is started once again
on the track. As the journey progresses the


cattle by degrees become calmer, and more
used to the methods of overlanding, and the
interest of the drover’s life now centres princi-
pally upon anticipating the sort of country he
will have to pass through. Will there be a
sufficient supply of water and feed ? How
will the blacks behave ? Will they be friendly
or hostile ? Will they revenge themselves
upon the baal white man, or spear the cattle,
in consequence of some malicious deeds or
practices by other white men, the memory of
which still rankles in their breasts ?


CHAPTER VI.
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
It has often been asserted, in speaking of the
inimical feeling that exists between the whites
and the blacks, that the former were invariably
the aggressors, and have practised the odious
habit of making presents of poisoned food-
stuffs, especially poisoned flour. This fact
may, except in isolated cases, be an exaggera-
tion ; at any rate, it was a cause of anxiety to the
camp as it moved further into the back
country.
We were now rapidly approaching the
“ Rangy," or hilly district, in which part are
to be seen the finest specimens of the
aboriginal tribes. The “ warriors," or fighting
men, are a fine, stalwart and athletic race, full
of sinew and muscle, and as active as the
native kangaroo. The women, or “ gins,"
stalk along the banks of the rivers or creeks,
tall and graceful in their movements. With
their diily bags and piccaninnies slung over


their shoulders, they glide along in single file
to the favourite fishing grounds, erect and
unabashed, in nature unadorned.
It is a pretty and interesting sight to watch
these uncivilised beings when engaged in their
piscatorial duties. The elder portion of the
dusky tribe will release the juveniles from
their hammocky perch, and, tossing them on
the bank or in the water, will then proceed to
wade into mid-stream until they reach the
depth suitable to the length of arm, and, lying
or floating on the surface, they will ransack
the bed of the stream for hours ; the picca-
ninnies in the meantime will be rollicking in
the water like so many frogs.
When a sufficient quantity of grub has been
secured for the mid-day meal, a fire will be
lighted by some talisraanic art —probably by
means of a flint-stone and the tough bark of
some wild cabbage tree. The whole party
will then squat round, and proceed to pitch
the contents of the bags by single items into
the smoky fire, and before the squirming
finnies have time to become lukewarm, they
are artfully withdrawn with finger and thumb,
and tossed into the receptacle awaiting them,
with epicurean relish. These gins have also
another way of securing their daily food,
without resorting to the river. They can be
seen meandering round and about the scrub,
tomahawk in hand, and, cutting and hacking at


the roots of the acacia and other trees, will
extract therefrom fat, white, gelatinous-looking
slugs. This is the chef d'oeuvre, and judging
from the self-satisfied grunts they emit when
enjoying this diet, it may be put down as a
tribal banquet, and of rare occurrence.
While these gins are occupied in searching
for their daily food, the “ Warriors ” and the
“ Benjamins ” are out hunting in the Bush for
kangaroo, emu, or wallaby, to provide them-
selves with material for a more substantial re-
past. This also is an interesting spectacle.
Armed with spears, boomerangs, nullah-nul-
lahs, and various other weapons, they will all
start, as from the centre of a circle, and radiat-
ing in all directions, but keeping each other in
view, career about until they sight their game;
then, having brought it into the circle, will pro-
ceed to close in, making the , circumference
smaller and smaller. Whenever the affrighted
prey makes a desperate effort to break through
this armed circle at any particular point, the
warrior lets out hideous yells and jabberings,
which turn the hunted animal back again,
and so these tactics go on until they get the
game within striking distance. These w r arriors
have also other ways of securing daintier diet,
such as the bustard turkey and the wild duck.
Catching the first-named requires a consider-
able amount of patience and cunning.
The hunter will break off several small leafy


branches, and proceeding to a conspicuous
position in the open plains, will then decorate
himself with this foliage until he resembles a
small bush, an oasis in the desert plains.
Then, armed with his favourite sporting
weapons, spear and boomerang, he will await
with sportsmanlike patience the approach of
the inquisitive grallic bird, which, filled with
pride and curiosity, will cautiously meander
round and round this pristine work of art,
gradually reducing the space until it comes
within striking distance ; the hunter jumps out,
discards in a moment his leafy garb, and the
bird, being too weighty to make a rapid flight,
falls an easy prey to the warrior's unerring
aim—there is a low hissing sound, a few scat-
tered feathers, and a triumphant return to the
Mi-Mi.
The catching of the wild duck is carried out
in an entirely different way. In this case the
darky proceeds to some lagoon or water hole,
which is well sheltered by thick scrub and
undergrowth, and a likely place for this water-
fowl. Another man will also assist him by
drawing the attention of the game. During
the time their attention is fixed upon the
opposite bank, the catcher will quietly crawl
into the water alligator-fashion, and pad-
dling quietly and gently underneath until he
gains a position immediately beneath, he will
in a silent and methodical manner calmly seize


the ducks by the legs, and drawing them one
by one underneath, soon annexes two or three
couple.
Expecting daily now to meet with hostile
and fighting braves, we make our journey with
more than ordinary caution. Night-time in
the camp requires extra vigilance on the part
of the watch, for it is far from pleasant musing
when on this duty to fancy every sound
may indicate the approach of a hostile
black. Fires are damped down, and no
matches are allowed to be struck, and no lights
of any kind permitted. All is dark, hushed,
and silent, save the stertorous breathing of the
cattle, and the usual crawk of the lonesome
more-pork, or mope-hawk, and the dismal howl
of the restless dingo.
Suddenly, one of the men, with a fixed ad-
herence to his own opinion, openly averred
that he did not care a tinker's jot for all the
blooming black-skins in the country, they were
not going to hinder him from having a draw
at his u dodeen," proceeded to strike a match,
and as he was applying the light to his pipe
the shadow of his form was reflected on the
side of the tent. This was. a sufficiently clear
object, or target, for the blacks who were lying
in ambush, and anxious for revenge. Before
the unfortunate man had time to draw a puff,
a spear, hurled by an unerring and unseen
hand, with great force and precision, penetra


ted the body of the boaster, adding another
victim to the lengthy list already catalogued in
the records of the aboriginals' iniquities.
Now is the time for vengeance, now there
is trouble in the camp. The Boss is appealed
to, a small council of war is held, arguments
pro and con are eagerly discussed; but the
calmer spirits prevailed, and it was finally
agreed to leave the matter in abeyance until a
more favourable opportunity. Too many diffi-
culties and obstacles stood in the way of any
immediate action for redress of personal
grievances.
This incident made it more manifest that,
unless the drovers exercised greater precau-
tions, and practised a larger amount of self-
denial, or acted according to the stringent
instructions issued for self-preservation, the
dangers to be met with ahead would only
bring about further serious catastrophes.
In spite, however, of the lesson administered
and other warnings, the spirit of adventure
lurked too strongly in some of our camp-mates’
breasts, so we had not long to wait before
another victim was added to the list. This
was due entirely to the want of any ordinary
discretion, or, it might be said, to a wilful
abandonment of all pretext to self-preserva-
tion. Some people would probably suggest a
want of self-respect.
At any rate, after driving the cattle into


camp, and during the silent hours of the night,
the self-indulgent youth must needs ride away
from the camp in search of an adventure on
his own account.
We were, at the time, encamped at no great
distance from the celebrated Mulligatawny
Ranges, and many were the fanciful tales re-
counted about the youth and beauty of the
dwellers in this wild and rugged country.
Stirred no doubt by an amorous impulse,
the would-be Don Juan sallied forth to woo,
in pidgeon lingo, the dusky maidens of the hills.
Probably during his palaver with one of
the ebony tribe, a jealous swain, susceptible
to any ifaithlessness on the part of the fair
sex, was on the watch ready and alert to
take revenge at a moment's notice ; or it may
be that the damsel merely acted under in-
structions, and was used as a decoy to lead the
unfortunate victim to his cruel fate.
Be that as it may, the morning broke and
with it no sign of the return of the youthful
wanderer. A search party was at once insti-
tuted, and there on the banks of a small ravine
lay the body, a spear driven clean through the
back. His horse stood tied to a bush some little
distance further on j an undischarged revolver
was in his right hand ; he had evidently been
making an effort to reach his steed, and,
slipping on the side of the bank, had failed,
and met his fate.


It has often been asserted, referring to the
relations between the whites and the blacks,
that the former have practised the odious habit
of making presents of poisoned food-stuffs to
the blacks, more especially poisoned flour.
These stories have, in many instances, been
much exaggerated, although there is no doubt
about the truth of them in isolated instances.
There have been cases on record where
water-holes have been poisoned, but not always
with the malicious intention imputed to the
squatter. In one instance it was done to de-
stroy the wild cattle, brumbies, and suchlike
animals. Unfortunately, a tribe of blacks at
the time migrated and pitched their Mi-Mis
on this water-hole ; the result was disastrous,
and was the cause of much active hostility
against the white men and their stock. On
this occasion several saddle horses and cattle
were indiscriminately speared.
These acts of so-called treachery on the part
of the blacks, usually meant retaliation by the
whites. This generally meant an elaborate
preliminary and extensive preparation for a
day's “ Blackbird ” shooting; but, in later
years, the distribution of Cadet camps about
the country, which were generally stationed
some fifty miles apart, put a different phase on
the matter. These were formed of twelve
picked aboriginals all selected from different
tribes, and officered by a white trooper. This


arrangement, as to the semi-military camps,
placed the affairs of any outrage, or difficulties,
in the hands of these authorities, to whom it
was duly reported, and to them was left the
task of administering a caution, which they
were not slow to take advantage of. The
black troopers gloried in the duties imposed
upon them.
There is but little doubt that the main diffi-
culty, and the origin of the majority of the
causes of the trouble between the two parties,
has invariably been traced to the kidnapping
of the young gins, with callous and unfeeling
contempt, and therein lies the pith of the whole
argument as to the secret of the spirit of re-
venge so embedded in the breast of the black,
which leads to these constant and unfortunate
frictions.
Apropos of the word “ native," in colonial
parlance the term “native” is applied to the
person who is born in the Colonies of white
parents; therefore a white being, be he either
a “ Gum-sucker," u Cornstalk," or u Crow-
eater," has naturally very strong objections
to this expression, as applied to the aboriginals;
they consider it derogatory, and offensive to
the feelings of the loyal colonials, to be called
natives under the same category as the blacks.
These unfortunate incidents being settled,
although the memory of the affair will probably
remain indelibly imprinted on the more sensi


tive minds, we resume once again our toil-
some journey, meeting with but little further
trouble or interruption. We finally reach our
destination, and delivering over the ranks of
skin and bone, reduced in weight and temper
by long and continuous driving, the cattle are
counted out and we let them go to roam the
plains and scrub at their own sweet will in
these fields and pastures new; and so will
they go on wandering and grazing until the
time arrives for mustering again, when the
next process will be a simple repetition of the
one related, with this difference, the lowing
herd in good condition will probably be driven
in slow and measured tread to the nearest
cattle market.


CHAPTER VII.
THE RETURN JOURNEY TO BRISBANE.
Now comes the important question : Shall we
stay and secure a billet in this “ never-never ”
country ? If we are unwilling to accept a job,
how about negotiating the return journey ?
This is an undertaking. that involves more
hardship and roughing than did travelling
with a camp which was duly supplied with
the usual necessaries of life. We declined the
offer of any hard graft in these wild and un-
civilised regions.
Thus, having made up our minds, we began
to make final preparations. Receiving our
cheques, or orders, each with two horses, pack
and saddle, ammunition and tucker, we made
a start at early dawn to face again the
inevitable, with its attendant dangers and
incidents.
We started with light-hearted gaiety and
joyous spirits, freed from the cares and
anxieties of untamed cattle and dreary night


watches in all sorts of weather; in the stormy
nights, when, the tropical rain fell down in
sheets of water, and made a mill-stream down
the back; in the soft and stilly night, when
the perspiration trickled gently down the
sentry’s manly form.
So we start on our return journey, full of
faith and hope. We decide upon traversing a
new track. Information about a new country,
and the route, is always most useful to over-
landers and others who may be engaged in
moving stock.
Striking out in a south-easterly direction, we
trust to our good luck to find a sufficient
amount of grass and water, or its equivalent,
pig's face, and cotton bush or salt bush, to
carry us into a more civilised and settled
district, and eventually to reach one of the
more important rivers.
Steering through the scrub in a haphazard
sort of way, we come upon a magnificent
undulating country, resembling the rolling
downs located in the southern part of this
colony.
Descrying a small water-hole, we decide to
doss for the night. Hobbling out the horses,
we make ourselves comfortable ; no fear of
blacks here, at any rate during the hours of
darkness, too far from river or lagoon. No
need of a watch, all is peace and quietness,
save that unmitigated, sepulchral hoot of the


inevitable mephistophelian-faced mope-hawk
and the usual accompaniment of the croak and
“tink-tink” of innumerable small amphibious
reptiles.
We pursue our journey at the first break of
day, and nothing occurs worthy of note or any
incident to cause us any excitement or anxiety.
Our journey was inclined to become
monotonous and devoid of all interest. Birds
of magnificent plumage, parrots, paroquets,
feathered with all colours of the rainbow, the
laughing jackass —a misnomer in these parts,
for it is too dry to manifest any mirth, being
satisfied with its personal adornment. How
entirely different from the southern genus!
One has the brilliant plumage without the
laughing music ; the other possesses the
melody minus the plumes.
The lagoons also swarmed with wild fowl of
all descriptions ; the pelican, the goose that
perches in the trees, ducks of all varieties, and
last, but not least, the stately swan, both black
and white. On the plains, millions of the
white-crested cockatoos, with red facings ; on
the ranges are seen the black cockatoos, with
slight white facings.
We had been on the track now for about a
week, and then once again the übiquitous
blacks —as Scotty quaintly remarked, “ I smell
thee noo.” Once more we were soon to
experience painful evidence of their presence,


as it became necessary for each to take his turn
at night watch, and again to damp down the
fires and exercise the usual precautions.
Of our party of three, one individual had
evidently failed to profit from the fate of his
late mate, when droving near the ranges, and
would often state that the man was trapped by
the want of exercising a proper amount of
caution, and they would never have him.
Later on, we were camped at no great
distance from a large tribe, commonly known
as the “ One Tooth," from the fact that they
all had one top front molar extracted in their
youth from the upper jaw, thus giving them a
distinct brand from other tribes, such as the
“ Slit Skins,” etc.
On our first meeting with them they
appeared to be of a friendly nature ; our mate
took it for granted that he could be more so.
It was a beautiful night, the moon shone so
brilliantly, shone as it never shone before.
Taking advantage of the apparent amiability of
the “ One Tooth " tribe, and the light of the
shining orb, our valiant associate sallied forth
on foot in quest of some foolish adventure.
Evidently he had acquired some vague
information of an intended “ Corraborree," as
the blacks seemed to be actively engaged in
some elaborate preparations for the holding of
some important ceremony—either a Totem
dance or their grand carnival.


Curiosity, no doubt, inspired him, in spite
of the danger attendant upon any visit of
a white man to these exclusive ceremonies ;
and so, without any words to his mates, he
suddenly and quietly disappeared from the
camp, and, as the sequel proved, it was to
meet his doom.
On our turning out in the morning and the
youth not having returned, we came to the
inevitable conclusion that he had either got
bushed, or, being discovered by the blacks,
had been speared.
We saddled our horses and proceeded in
different directions to make a search. Our
fears were only too truly realised. It was only
a repetition, in a great measure, of the former
tragedy; for not far from the banks of the
river he was lying on his face with the back of
the skull broken in by a piece of rock. There
were no signs of robbery, simply the same old
tale. Not far away were signs of a huge
gathering having been held, ashes, bits of wool
and skin, but nothing else ; the blacks had
migrated to other parts.
To add further insult to injury, during our
absence from the camp in search of our lost
mate, some of the thieving rascals had slipped
round the back of some thick scrub and
purloined our flour and sugar. We started off
again in pursuit, and in the distance, struggling
along, were two black fellows with our missing


rations on their backs. Kneeling down, and
taking a deliberate aim, we dropped the objects
of our search, and although we cantered up at
once to the spot where they fell, we saw no
further signs of the felonious “ One Tooths.”
So we picked up our rations, returned to
our camp, fixed up our kit and baggage, and
started again on our trip to get to the nearest
township, there to report the occurrence to the
authorities, and leave the matter to them to
decide upon the merits of the case, the cause
thereof, and whether it was deemed advisable
to administer the usual caution.
It was sufficient for us to secure a berth at
some outlandish part, and leaving all these
troubles and cares of bush life behind us for
the time being, to seek the hospitable shores
and comforts of Brisbane town; and to
sojourn there until we were “ stoney-broke ”
once more, or, as it is more familiarly termed,
“fly blown,” when it will behove us once
again to seek another job ; either in the rollick-
ing, though hazardous, task of mustering, happy
in the sound of cracking whips and bellowing
herds, or once more track through plain and
forest new, perchance, like our late misguided
comrade, to find a solitary bushman’s grave,
Brisbane, as some people are aware—it
would not be advisable to say more, because
there are individuals who still speak of New
Zealand as being situated in Australia —is the


metropolis of Queensland, and is located in
the extreme south-east point of the colony, or
nearly so, and some forty odd miles up the
tidal river from the entrance at Moreton Bay.
The town is divided by this stream into two
parts, termed North and South Brisbane, and
a more lopsided and inconvenient position for
the principal town can hardly be conceived,
especially by those unfortunate people who
have taken up their residence further north,
say, from Rockhampton upwards, and who
have to travel immense distances by small
steamers, the owners of which have a complete
monopoly of the coasting trade and to transact
any Government business.
We stayed at an hotel called “The
Sovereign,” kept by a party named Sovereign.
We had a sovereign time, spent our last
sovereign there, and borrowed a sovereign
from a Sovereign when we left the town. It
is hardly necessary to state that the people
still think of us, and miss us greatly.
Having thus reached the usual bushman's
state of complete impecuniosity, w T e packed up
our “swag,” and bidding our friends and host
a fond and tender adieu, we started on the
wallaby and “humped our drums” in happy
fashion, after the manner of well-seasoned
“sundowners,” and made tracks up north
again to find occupation, and gain some
experience in sugar plantation work.


CHAPTER VIII.
SUGAR PLANTATION WORK.
We were fortunate enough to overtake some
bullock teams travelling in our direction, and
as we both had had some little experience, we
were enabled to lend a hand, and so gain a
lift for our “swags" and plenty of mutton and
damper for ourselves. But, at times, it was a
cold cheerless job, being out before daybreak
to hunt for and find the wandering bullocks.
Although one always had a huge deep-toned
bell hung round his neck, he got so artful at
the first streak of dawn, that he would lie
down under some shady scrub, and the seeker
sought and listened in vain for that sounding
bell. At other times the whole team would
wander into the centre of some reedy, boggy
swamp, and there, pretending to feed, they
would await your arrival with the most com-
placent satisfaction, possessing, as no doubt
they did, the instinct, or knowledge, that you
could not reach them without divesting your


self of every garment you might have on.
This gave a delightful opportunity for the
blood-sucking worm to enjoy a pleasant repast.
Thus we mouch along by easy stages, with
an occasional variation in the day’s incidents
by the waggon getting bogged either in deep
sand, or when crossing some of the small
creeks with the soft treacherous surface, which
would let the wheels down, and bring the body
of the dray on a level with the surface of the
soil.
When the teamster finds himself in this pre-
dicament, it necessitates calling for additional
help from his comrade, and by yoking up a
greater number of bullocks to the embedded
waggon, this increase of strength enables the
drivers to get out of the difficulty. This is
termed “ double-banking.”
Now we duly arrive at our destination, and
putting up at a pleasant bungalow shanty, we
proceed to take a general survey of the town-
ship, and to ascertain the wants of the planta-
tion owners in the shape of useful assistance.
We were fortunate enough to secure the
sympathetic and valuable aid of a leading store-
dealer, and by his advice we made application
to one of the older planters, who offered us
billets, one as Kanaka overseer, the other to
watch the simple Mongolian, whose ways are
wily and mean.
The Chinee, as a workman, is, to say the


least, very slim, being very fond of opium, and
his game of Fantan ; he is apt to sit up into
the small wee hours, so that when the time for
turning out in the morning arrives, several
were not present at the roll-call, but were
quietly slumbering off the effects of the
evening’s dissipation, in dreamy poppy land.
Then would follow the usual interrogations
from the overseer.
“ Well, John ! what for you no go along a
work to-day ? ”
“Oh! me belly sick! Me eatem too muchec
licee ! Me no savvy work to-day ! ”
“You belly sick ! ” that is meant for very
sick. “You want em medicine.” So with the
aid of two assistants, the overseer would pro-
ceed to pour down the heathen’s throat a pint
or so of castor oil.
One good dose generally proved very effec-
tive, for if any of the renegades shammed ill-
ness, it was only necessary to call for the oil
bottle, and John would ejaculate : “ Oh, no, me
go work quick ! Me no like em oilee, it make
em me too muchee likee chow-chow.” This
was the only real difficulty that was experienced
with Chinese labour.
With the Kanaka, or South Sea Islander, the
treatment and manner of working them in-
volved a totally different method, or system.
On some plantations they were treated in a
kind and generous manner ; on others the re


verse was the case; bullying, plenty of hard
work, and indifferent food. There has been a
great deal said, and argued, on this question
of Kanaka labour, for and against.
Those people that have had but little experi-
ence in sugar planting, raised the cry against
black labour, and worked in the term
“ slavery ” ; but in the minds of those who have
had great and personal means of thoroughly
appreciating the utility of both classes of
labour, there is not the slightest doubt that
a planter cannot cultivate his sugar cane with-
out the aid of Kanaka labour, that is if he
wishes to keep out of the bankruptcy court or
to avoid liquidation.
In the first place, a white man will refuse to
undertake the ordinary field work, which is
usually allotted to the islanders ; and he also
objects to work, if he is worthy of his hire, at
less than twenty-five shillings per week. He will
be provided with all the necessities for a robust
constitution, and, in most cases, he will work
shorter hours. The Kanaka, on the other hand,
is paid at the rate of half a crown a week or
six pounds a year, and is bound to stay the
five years. All the luxuries he requires are
the chance of a good feed of the sweet potato,
or yams, a blanket, one or two articles of
clothing, and a reed humpy to shakedown in.
It therefore stands to reason that if the
argument is rendered thus, what would be the


difference to a planter's expenses, or profits, if
he employed, say, 100 white men at the usual
rate of pay, with all the other attendant neces-
saries, and ioo Kanakas with all their simple
wants, and minute amount of extras ?
In many of the large plantations, it is true
that the Kanakas usurped and absorbed the
white man’s position, for they held nearly all
the different departments in the residences,
in the mill, and in the field, and this was the
strongest point in favour of the arguments
against so great an influx of island labour, and
the manner in which they were employed.
On this particular sugar estate, which was
still working on the old and primitive style,
the overseer had to be out and ready to count
the boys by six in the morning. They were
all arranged in a row, many of them in scanty
attire. This unpleasant duty over, they were
marched down to the fields, there to hoe the
weeds, or strip the dry and crispy leaves from
off the sugar cane, and prepare it for the cut-
ting. My poor old chum was in charge of this
motley crew, numbering about thirty, and as
his experience amongst this particular kind of
coloured labour was extremely limited, he ex-
pressed his intention, when out in the field, as
he was the “ Boss,” to be the Boss, and make
them obey his commands.
Now a Kanaka, although acknowledging, to
a certain extent, the authority of an overseer,


has sufficient acuteness to know that he is not
“The Boss,” but simply an employee on a
higher level than himself.
At any rate, when the super began to assert
his small and newly-fledged authority, they
one and all turned on him, and charging with
their hoes amid yells and frantic howls, the
astonished youth, taking discretion as the
better part of valour, fled, and making tracks
down by the side of the river, was observed in
the distance careering over the cane fields
with the howling mob in full cry behind him.
Fortunately there was assistance at hand when
he reached the plantation yard in safety, and
was thus relieved of any further unpleasant-
ness. This little episode seemed to have up-
set my chum's equilibrium, and, added to this,
the temper and rather autocratic bearing of
the planter rendered our first impression and
experience on a sugar plantation not up to our
expectations.
Knowing that other and larger estates were
being opened out further north, and on a more
improved and modern principle, we decided
to offer our services somewhere else where they
might be better appreciated and secure a
better figure. We therefore interviewed the
object of our aversion, the autocratic planter,
and as he expressed as great a pleasure at our
wish to depart, as we had also done, he handed
us our little bit of paper, and once again we


were free agents, and on the war path once
more.
We had now some distance to travel if we
intended to devote our energies to sugar plant-
ing, for there were no estates nearer than the
Province River, so we decided on making for
the Fizzleroy, and see what chance there was
for occupation in that district. As the fares
charged by the steam company were so exorbi-
tant, we kept our dollars in our pockets and
trudged along the coast through the Glad-
stonian country until we reached the tropical
line of Capricorn, where stands in sultry clime
the rising town Rockyhampton.
We secured comfortable quarters in a roomy
bungalow with wide and elevated verandah ;
the breeze is conspicuously absent, and the
thermometer is just registering 112 deg., and
as that is the normal condition about here, we
are evidently in for a warm and dewy time.
There are several brilliantly lighted saloons,
and the inhabitants appeared happy and pros-
perous though rather moist. A great number
were occupied in assuaging the common thirst
with large tankards of iced drinks, and other
concoctions likely to destroy and ruin all the
gastric organs in the human frame.
Making another start in early morn, before
the dew is off, when there is any, we pass
below the hospital, a noble-looking edifice
situated on the top of a high hill; they may get


plenty of air at times, but what a task it must
be in the heat of the day for any outdoor
patient to reach it.
So we wander on over hill and dale ; the
white chalky soil with its glaring snowy colour
became during the day, especially trying and
painful to the eyes and sight—no wonder sandy
blight is prevalent. Reaching some tall and
shady box gum, we camped and awaited the
sun’s going down in all its red and fiery glory.
In the evening we started again, and reached
the banks of the Fizzleroy River, and lighting
some gum leaves and other rubbish to ward
off the innumerable mosquitoes, we doss for
the night.
The next morning we sauntered up to a small
shanty, kept by an old and hospitable couple,
who informed us there was a good chance of a
paying job near at hand, if we could only see
the “ Boss,” as he was anxious to have some
forty acres of land cleared and cleaned, ready
for the plough, intending to form a sugar
plantation.
During the time we were conversing at the
shanty, the owner drove up ; five minutes
settled the business, and we undertook the
contract. And a good paying one it proved
for us, by engaging a few aboriginals, to whom
we paid as wages small doses of opium, this
being the only means we could entice them to
work.


On receiving this opium—it had already
been smoked once by the Chinee, and had
therefore lost a great deal of its original
strength—the black would procure a small
empty stone ink bottle, and boring a hole
through its side, he would insert into this
aperture a reed, and after putting some of the
decoction into the neck, he would lie prone on
the ground, cover his head over with an old
’possum skin, draw and inhale the fumes,
Chinese fashion, until it was finished, when he
would return to his labours again.
It was during our sojourn on this river that
we had the satisfaction of taking a part in
killing the largest and finest specimen of an
alligator. It had been seen several times in
and on the banks of the river, and had earned
the sobriquet of “ Big Ben ” ; but why this
nick-name was not disclosed.
By dint of hard work, early and late, and a
liberal supply of secondhand opium, we
finished off our contract in three months, and
drew the spondulicks, a very satisfactory pro-
ceeding.
A casual acquaintance asked us if we would
have a few days’ fishing in the river, and join
in any other sport that might crop up ; and,
amongst other inducements, there was the
chance of coming across the huge saurian. As
our mutual friend was the fortunate possessor
of guns, ammunition, and other requisites, we
n


packed up the various necessaries for camping
out, and the anticipated sport. We managed
to hook and pull out some most extraordinary
looking fish, a mixture between an eel and a
serpent, horrid looking reptiles with trans-
parent warm and flabby flesh. To vary the
specimen, we would catch some flappers,
tepid and muddy in flavour. We had been
engaged in this so-called sport for some time,
and, leaving the boat, we went ashore to spend
a silent hour in a shady nook and watch for the
lengthy reptile. We took up our positions
some twenty yards apart at different angles, in
a zig-zag bend of the stream, with a long slop-
ing clayey bank. The weather was powerfully
hot, and all was hushed and silent, save the
beating of one’s own heart in unison with the
gentle rolling motion of the rippling water.
Gently and quietly we observed a huge,
massive, scaly object gradually emerge, and
slowly waddle out of the deep water on to the
sloping slimy bank. It was evidently intent
on seeking a quiet resting place.
Now was our only opportunity to catch him
before he camped.
There being only two weak or vulnerable
parts in the alligator’s hide, the eye and under
the forearm, excitement ran high—would he
turn in the right direction, and give us the
desired chance for an effective shot ? Sud-
denly there rang out the loud report of two


barrels, my chum in his haste could not
restrain himself any longer; the wounded
reptile lashed and bespattered the bank all
around with his iron-bound tail, and roared a
mighty roar, turning round broadside on in his
fury and rage. He received the contents of
the two remaining guns, and there he lay,
measuring exactly twenty-four feet from the
snout to the tip of his tail.
Another alligator of exactly the same dimen-
sions was shot by a planter in the Pioneer
river, near Port Mackay, and the skeleton is,
or was, fixed up in the Sydney Museum.


CHAPTER IX.
JOURNEYINGS BY BOAT AND STEAMER.
Having satisfactorily finished our lucrative
contract, and having a few surplus dollars in
our pockets, we decided to relinquish the
“sundowner’s” tramp to the impecunious,
and travel down the river to the coast and
thence by steamer going North.
The river now had risen to an unusual
height, and was running strong and turbulent;
the water, a dirty chocolate colour, was rising
higher and higher every hour, and no wonder,
for the rain had been descending at the rate of
an inch and a half in the hour.
Our sporting acquaintance suggested that
we should start at once, and cross the river
before the water overflowed the banks, so
tossing our swags into the small boat, we went
aboard and made for the other side ; but alas !
the well-laid schemes gang aft agley, for when
we got fairly into mid-stream, the boat sud-
denly turned broadside on to the raging cur


rent, but whether this was due to the oarsman
losing his presence of mind, or whether the
stream was running stronger than it appeared
to do, we know not, we were being carried at
a rapid rate down stream, in company with an
indiscriminate collection of floating debris.
The water was now bank high, and the boat
was gliding on a level with many of the
branches of the trees growing on the bank
side.
A sudden impulse stirred my chum to a
happy idea. Standing up on the seat of the
boat, he made a frantic grab at one of the
outstanding limbs, and seizing it with both
hands made a desperate effort to stop the craft
in its mad career, but the result was unfortu-
nate, for the branch snapped in his grasp, and
he plupged headlong into the turbulent muddy
current.
We could not restrain the shouts of laughter
at the ludicrous sight, but our mirth was cut
very short, for our gaze being centred upon
the individual struggling in the water, we
failed to notice the branching top of a tree
rising and surging ahead of us. In a few
moments our frail bark struck the obstacle,
and two more of us joined our comrade in the
muddy deep ; blankets, oars, and other articles
were carried away with astonishing speed.
Fortunately, a short distance further on, the
river took a sharp and sudden bend, so seizing


our blankets and striking out we reached the
shore on the proper side, only lower down than
we had anticipated. The boat turned wrong
way up, and was carried some little distance
from where we effected a landing, and then
charging on to a big snag, stuck fast, and was
left until the water resumed its normal con-
dition.
As the population in this neighbourhood
was scattered and scanty, and the sun was
pouring down upon our drenched figures a
burning heat, we divested ourselves of our gar-
ments, and with the blankets and other articles,
spread the clothes out to dry. This did not
take long ; so strapping up our impedimenta
once more, we bid our semi-nautical acquaint-
ance a fond adieu, wishing him better luck
with his boat when next he rows a chum
across the ferry.
Being now secure on terra firma , we pad
the humble hoof, and in a short time we reach
the township, staying a couple of nights to
wait the steamer’s arrival and to make the
necessary alterations and improvements in our
toilet to enable us to face the usual ceremonies
and formalities of civilisation.
Having been properly shorn, and made
generally presentable, we stroll to the little
wooden box termed an office, and book our
passage for the port where the centre of the
northern sugar industry is situated.


On our voyage we make one call at a small
place, and almost the only port that has a
sufficient depth of water to enable steamers to
approach the landing stage. Here the pas-
sengers are entertained by blacks, of all ages
and sizes, diving from all points of observation
into the clear deep water, for any miscel-
laneous coin that may be thrown to them by
travellers on board the ship.
Only a stop of short duration, and we are
under way again for the next port, and our
present destination, where we intend to land,
and hope to find some occupation, and gain a
further experience and knowledge in the cul-
ture of sugar cane.
Port Macrae is a flourishing settlement of
planters and plantations on the Pioneer River,
or rather, it is situated as near the mouth of
the river as the low-lying swampy nature of
the soil will permit, being covered with the
ti-tree dumosa scrub down to the inlet from the
Pacific Ocean.
Taking a bird’s-eye view from the balcony
of the principal hotel, there are to be seen
numerous chimney-stacks of the different sugar
mills, standing high and imposing above all
the surrounding bungalows and various plan-
ters’ residences, and the plantation outbuild-
ings, emitting every now and again thick
heavy smoke, proving to our mutual satisfac-
tion that, at any rate, the mills were busily


occupied in crushing the cane, hence there
would be a favourable chance of getting em-
ployment.
In the morning we strolled through and
around the township, which consisted of a few
hotels, shanties, and stores, all of which seemed
to be doing a rattling business, especially in
the evening, when the Kanakas rolled into the
place by hundreds, and a rare profit the store-
keepers made out of this island custom.
Happening to go into a store to procure
some necessary article, we were rather inter-
ested in the shopkeeper's style, or method, of
doing business with the coloured race ; and
we were not long in discovering how a good
percentage was made out of these purchasers.
One of the Kanakas had bought some of the
usual gaudy Turkey red, to please no doubt
his better half, and the assistant was charging
two shillings and sevenpence-halfpenny either
for the piece or the yard, it doesn’t matter
which, probably the latter, when the proprie-
tor overhearing, called the seller on one side
and remonstrated with him at his stupidity
and want of business tact.
“ Never," quoth he, “never charge a Kanaka
any odd pence. If the price is two shillings
and sevenpence-halfpenny call it three shillings,
and so on pro rata at other prices ; they do
not know anything about fractions of shillings.”
There was probably a good deal of truth in


this shopkeeper’s statement, for, on one occa-
sion, an overseer had engaged a Kanaka to do
some particular service for him, and after the
job was finished, he offered the darky one
sovereign. It was declined as not enough. On
being presented with three bright shillings
there was a smile and a cheerful acceptance.
At luncheon time several planters turn up,
and after indulging in the proverbial “ swizzle,”
they sit down at a long well-decorated table,
generally attired in an immaculate white
shirt, minus coat land vest, and a neat belt or
kummerbund in place of the usual inartistic
supports.
It was our good fortune to meet, on this
occasion, with two well-to-do planters, who
were on the look-out for useful assistance.
The spin of a coin decided our fate. My mate
took his choice, and picked a plantation that
was in full working order ; as mine was a case
of Hobson’s choice, I went some distance up
the river to a plantation where they hadn’t yet
begun to plant, and so we parted for the time
being to gain a more satisfactory experience
of how things ought and should be done on a
sugar plantation.


CHAPTER X.
ON A NEWLY-FORMED SUGAR PLANTATION.
The following day after the interview, I pro-
cured a horse—on the strength of the appoint-
ment I had made a “ sub ” from the planter—
and made my way across the river coastwise
towards Repulsive Bay. About two miles from
this well and truly named inlet, I observed,
situated on rising ground, two small humpies
and a few Kanaka huts. These, I was soon to
learn, formed the “ Banyanni" Plantation.
However, there is nothing like beginning at
the bottom, or lowest rung of the ladder, if
you wish to thoroughly understand the busi-
ness ; and gradual promotion and hard-earned
experience will lead to a better appreciation of
this humble start in after years.
The individual who lived in the larger
humpy of the two was styled “The Manager ” ;
he was a cross between a leek and a thistle,
short of stature and thick set. On the top of
this rather diminutive figure, and attached to it


by a thick bull neck, was a thick matted mass
of hair of a glorious red tinted hue, with facial
tints to match. His temper matched his fiery
coloured mane. This was to be my companion
and associate, with a few Kanakas, for some
little time to come.
The Boss rode out the day following my
arrival, and after a few words as a sort of
apologetic encouragement, asked if I could do
a bit of surveying, as he wished to have a plan
of this estate, and to lay it out in certain sized
areas. I consented to undertake the work if
he would allow me two Kanakas to assist me.
So I started forth at early morn with the two
islanders, who were unable to speak or under-
stand a single word of English—not even a
bad expression, a most unusual thing. With
them, and a chain and sextant I meandered
along the banks of a small creek, through long
dry grass, infested with snakes of all sizes and
descriptions, and beneath a blazing sun
toiled backwards and forwards to instruct these
ebony youths, who had never seen a chain or a
white man before, what I wished them to do.
And thus for six weary weeks this traversing
on the banks of a diminutive creek and round
a rugged rocky hill was persevered with, and
finished to my intense relief and satisfaction.
This work being completed, it was now my
turn to take a hand at the long desired experi-
ence in starting sugar planting. __


Matters were now very much improving ;
horses, implements and building materials
were being landed daily, and planting was a
daily occupation. During the leisure hours it
was an easy matter to procure some good
sport, either in wild fowl shooting, or, to vary
this, with some excellent rifle shooting at the
alligators, the numerous kangaroos and
wallabies, or the fleety emu and the cassowary.
On one occasion, when out hunting, taking
with me two favourite dogs—one a magnificent
specimen of a kangaroo dog, a cross between
a Scotch deerhound and an English bulldog ;
the other a good style of the Norfolk spaniel—
these animals, which were some distance ahead
of me, were barking in a most excited manner
and dodging frantically round and about, what
appeared to me, the fallen limb of a tree.
As I approached, I came to the natural con-
clusion that the prey was located either in this
piece of timber or in a hole underneath ; but
as I came closer, I noticed a gentle undulating
motion along the whole length of it, and
presently a huge open cavity appeared to my
astonished gaze. It turned out to be one of
the lazy carpet snakes. After it was dispatched
it measured exactly thirteen feet eleven inches.
Unfortunately, the reptile was too badly
damaged to permit of the skin being removed.
Proceeding further in the direction of the
--coast, the dogs put up a fine and speedy


wallaby, which, being hard pressed, made
rapidly for one of the numerous small lagoons,
into which it careered without hesitation, and
closely followed by its pursuers. After swim-
ming half-way across, one of the dogs, the
spaniel, disappeared from view; but the wallaby
and the kangaroo dog reached the other side
without mishap, and although I watched and
waited, the quadruped was never seen again.
For several weeks, and on every opportunity,
I watched, with weary patience, the different
lagoons and water-holes to catch sight of that
rascally alligator, hoping that after he had
finished his canine feast he would indulge in a
soothing nap on one of the warm and shiny
banks, when I should be able to plant into his
carnivorous and scaly hide a satisfactory return
—in the shape of a Martini bullet—for my
lost favourite.
The dog, be it remarked in parenthesis, is
the most attractive bait for the saurian reptile j
in some parts, when fording creeks, or rivers,
infested with these hideous objects, it is a
common practice to swim two or three of these
quadrupeds across at the same time, as a
matter of precaution to the horseman's safety.
The cane being now planted, and having
gained a sufficient amount of experience to
justify an application for employment on any
other plantation, and, moreover, the boss
having decided not to erect any mill for some


time to come, confirmed me in my determina-
tion to move to other parts, and still continue
tracking further north. So I dropped a casual
line to my chum to meet me in the township,
as my contract had expired, and asked him to
join me once again in the search for graft in
plantations fresh and new. He was only too
glad to coincide with my views, expressing his
opinion that it was much too civilised a place
for such as we.
During the few days that we were spending
in the township, enjoying the generous hospi-
tality of some of the planters, picnics to
different places in the day time, dancing and
music in the evening, every planter seemed
disposed to rival and emulate his neighbour
in the liberal display of entertainment to
strangers —and so we pirouette around to the
same old tunes, and warble in the chorus to
the old familiar songs, reminding us of the
years gone by and the Christian poet's lines—
u As for some dear familiar strain
Untired we ask, and ask again,
Ever, in its melodious store,
Finding a spell unheard before.”
As these pleasant scenes and the jovial com-
pany were proving much too attractive it was
time we removed to rougher quarters. More-
over, there were visible signs of grave entangle-
ments, rings were being exchanged, small and
tender erotic epistles were passed between the


lovers, Adonis was rapidly and surely being
drawn into the meshes of “ Affrodity,” and as
desperate cases require drastic measures we
took the bull by the horns, and one morn at
early dawn, before the nymphs arose, we bid
our hospitable host a cordial adieu with many
heartfelt regrets. The luxury and delights of
the tender feeling were not for such as we.
Once more we reached the township, deter-
mined to board the first steamer going north
and face the inevitable again, satisfied that we
had had enough of recruiting and resting after
our late spell of hard work.
As before remarked, during our stay in the
township we received a message from a
planter’s agent that our services were required
on a sugar plantation which was then being
opened up in the northern territory.
Visions now flitted through the brain of our
becoming full-blown sugarites, when we should
be able to superintend the cutting, the
carrying, and the crushing of the cane ; and
by observing how the carrier conveyed the
bamboo between the rollers ; how the juice was
expressed and run into a tub; how a pump
elevated it into the batteries, where it was
struck ; how it was clarified ; how it was
boiled in huge vacuum pans, with sighting
glasses to see how the sugar was getting on
inside ; and, finally, to see how it was passed
into the centrifugals and thence into measured


bags. Having observed all these intricate
methods in making sugar, we should be in a
position to secure a leading part on any of the
best plantations.
Having discoursed on our future prospects,
and satisfied ourselves we were in for a good
old time, we departed from Port Macrae in
good spirits and sailed northward. Calling in at
Port Bow-wow, a place totally devoid of
interest, and passing Cape Tribulation, we
reach the township of Chefs.
We are now sailing inside the Great Barrier
Reef. It is a wonder we don't stick fast on
one of the numerous projecting coral reefs,
which poke up their perforated spikes here and
everywhere, or on one of those which are not
visible—a truly dangerous coast to any navi-
gators.
This town of cooks had nothing to recom-
mend it; a few wooden bungalows, consisting
of the Q.N. Bank, the usual saloons, and any
quantity of Chinamen. This was a sort of
depot for the Palmure river diggings, situated
some distance away in a north-westerly direc-
tion ; a difficult place to get to, and a track
totally unfit for the generality of white men to
travel; many being suddenly seized with a
kind of falling sickness, followed by dizziness,
which in a great majority of cases proves
fatal.
The Chinese were used as packers, two men


carrying a two-hundredweight load, slung on
a bamboo pole, and supported on the shoulders.
Thus these hired Mongolians would oscillate
along in a sort of “go-as-you-please " fashion,
mile after mile, in single file. Sometimes one
of the heathens would lose the number of his
mess, by being abstracted from the rear end
of the line by some hungry cannibalistic black,
who, being accosted why he preferred the
pigtail to the white, answered in a way that,
being translated into pigeon English, meant:
“Me no like ’em white fellow ; he too much
smoke ’em strong fellow tobacco, no good ;
yellow fellow monkey tail, he smoke opium ;
my word, me eat him, budge rry.”
As this place had no attraction for us, we
moved along, anxious to reach our destination.
After a pleasant passage, we were landed at
the mouth of the Endurance River. On our
arrival here, we chartered a small rowing boat,
with two men, to row us up the stream to
our destined point, “ Ingala.”
On our journey we passed through the man-
grove swamps, with their clayey, slimy mud
banks, on which the alligator loves to bask ;
every now and again one would be seen glid-
ing into the water, without causing an apparent
ripple, seeming almost too lazy to make the
effort. Further on we passed beneath the wel-
come shade of the stately palm trees ; a mag-
nificent jungle of tropical foliage, intermingled
H


with wonderful specimens of ferns of all
varieties, ranging from the tiny maidenhair to
lofty forest trees, and hanging from the
branches of the latter, wafted to and fro by the
wind, was the treacherous lawyer scrub, so
called from its clinging tenaciously to anything
it may happen to touch. In unison and har-
mony with this gentle motion of the eel-hooked
scrub, a variety would be added in watching
the swaying motion of the evil-looking water
snake, hanging by its tail, ready, in case of
emergency or danger, to drop into the stream,
and swimming at a rapid rate seek safety in
the bank.
Now, as the sun goes down, the sky be-
comes darkened with clouds of flying foxes.
The aroma arising from their flight is sugges-
tive of the odour of the skunk or the polecat,
and the air is alive with millions of mosquitoes.
Glad and thankful are we to catch sight of the
temporary landing stage of our destination.


CHAPTER XI.
SUGAR-GROWING AT INGALA AND CERTAIN
CUSTOMS OF THE ABORIGINES.
This plantation is still in an embryo state,
but the site chosen for the planter's residence
and other necessary buildings, has been care-
fully marked out on rising ground on the high
banks of the river, surrounded by tall palm
trees. Belts of acacia, scrub, capsicum,
passion, and other wild creepers, thickly cover
the ground.
On our arrival we are met by the “ Boss,"
Mr. Beverley, who conducts us to a small
corrugated iron building, which constituted
the accommodation, or barracks, for the three
of us. The whole assembly consisted only of
one white man, one Kanaka, or South Sea
Islander, one fat Chinaman, and ourselves.
The interior of this solitary iron building
contained three small iron bedsteads, with
Indian matting to sleep on, there being no


necessity for blankets or linen in this climate,
beneath an iron roof. Mosquito nets hung
from guards run horizontally from poles above,
and draped all round, entirely protecting the
sleeper against any attacks from these stinging
winged pests. Besides these requisites there
were also stocked inside the barracks several
tons of flour, sugar, and divers other neces-
saries of life.
As we were given permission to amuse our-
selves for the first week in any manner we
liked, the importation of labour and material
not having yet arrived, we meandered about at
our own sweet will, taking a general survey of
the surrounding country; using a certain
amount of precaution when in the vicinity of
the blacks’ encampments, instilled into us from
previous experience.
Our week’s furlough having expired, we
settled down to work. Large numbers of
white men, Kanakas, Chinese, and other
nationalities began to land daily, and we were
soon busy in superintending their labours ;
building wooden houses, which were elevated,
some on four-foot piles, some on ten-foot piles,
with a twelve-foot verandah all round, thus in
some cases leaving a comfortable space under-
neath for a cool dining-room, pantry and bath-
room.
Then there was the putting up huts for the
foreign element. These huts were erected by


means of poles, bark from the trees, and rushes
or reeds gathered from the lagoons.
The place soon became like a veritable bee-
hive ; black fellows running to and fro
carrying bundles of reeds, cutting uprights,
etc.; Chinese clearing away the wire grass,
tussocks and any useless debris, sweeping out
their “ humpies,” putting up their bunks,
making their settlement look spick and span,
and arranging their paraphernalia for the
inevitable smoke of opium and a quiet game
of Fan-tan. Carpenters were sawing and
hammering, blacksmiths were busy fixing up
chains and bolts, and putting to rights the
various implements required for cultivating
the soil. The whole place resounded with
noise and laughter, reverberating through
forest and scrub, causing much awe and
wonder amongst our wild and dusky neigh-
bours.
In due course the plantation work began,
Chinamen were engaged in the arduous task
of felling and clearing the ground of all trees
and stumps and in digging any drains that
were necessary. The Kanakas were employed
to clear the land of any smaller obstacles and
make it ready for the plough, or in doing any
other light work that was needed.
And so the work went on from week to
week, enlivened occasionally by a free fight
between the Chinese and Kanakas, which


ended sometimes with fatal results. Neither
the Kanaka nor the aboriginal can bear a
Chinaman. “He ! no white fellow ; he !no
black fellow. Me no like him ; all the same,
monkey ! "
When there was a disturbance—and it was
generally about some dusky maiden—the
blacks would go for the “ heathen” and seize
him by the pigtail, then there would be
ructions. Sometimes there would be trouble
amongst the Kanakas themselves, for the same
reason, especially if they had come from
different islands.
In the course of time civilisation improved
in everything all round ; the owner’s residence,
overseers’ quarters, outbuildings and huts
were completed ; and last, but far from least,
the sugar mill was rearing its gigantic stack on
the banks of the river—an imposing edifice.
Now all was busy and gay ; the young cane
was sprouting up, and visions of crushing
loomed in the future.
As everything appeared to denote a pros-
perous season, the “ Boss ” made all necessary
arrangements and departed to the “ Land of
the Cornstalks” to take unto himself a wife.
Our heartiest wishes of good luck accompanied
him thereto.
We duly received notice of the return of
the bridal party, and great was the rejoicing
on the plantation. Our one bell was rung till


it jolted out of its socket on to the ground,
nearly annihilating two or three of our white
men ; bonfires were lighted, and there was a
general Dutch concert, white men's songs
intermingling with the dusky lullabys. Abor-
iginals jabbering amongst themselves, “We
think him white feller, got f un big feller
debbil-debbil,”
On the arrival of the “ Boss ” and his wife
our “ morale ” generally became more refined.
Mrs. B. was a pleasant, lively young woman ;
and, although Colonial born, had seen very
little of bush life. Like most of her sex, she
was of an inquiring turn of mind.
“ Mr. 5.,” she said to me one morning, “ I
should so much like to see some of the blacks,
and have a talk with them ; they look so shy
and interesting.”
“ Certainly,” I remarked, “ you can see any
of them whenever you wish to do so ; but I am
afraid that you will find conversation difficult.
I must also tell you that they are rather
scantily attired and their manners somewhat
rough.”
“ Never mind, send them along ; my sister
and I are so curious to see them.”
So going down to the huts, I singled out two
girls and a boy or two for inspection, and told
them to follow me up to the “ Big House.” I
went ahead of them, and, stepping on to the
verandah, told Mrs. B. they were coming, but


she must not be surprised if they appeared in
full dress, according to their own ideas.
To give them their English names, Haidee
marched up first, as proud as a queen, a tall
well-developed damsel, with Grecian features;
the other, Daisy, had a small, plump figure,
with a saucy, smiling face. Almost needless to
say, their attire was scanty ; a small beaded
necklace, light girdle of pampas grass, and one
or two bone ornaments completed the black
maidens’ idea of necessary toilet.
“I think,” said the new mistress, “I will
take them round to the kitchen and clothe
them a little.”
After a time they reappeared in English cos-
tume.
“Now both come up to-morrow morning
and see me again ; and don’t forget to
put on your new garments,” was the lady’s
order.
This being explained to them, they bolted
for the camp.
Next morning the dusky sirens were seen
approaching, and from the sounds of laughter
it was evident we might expect something
original and ludricrous. The lady of the
domain and her sister fled at the sight of
Haidee, rigged out in a pair of white knickers,
with steel apparatus, intended as a dress
improver, on the outside. Daisy was in white
chemisette and nightcap.


The order from the distance was called out,
“ Tell them to go back at once 1 "
Eventually, however, Haidee became maid
of all work in the “ Big House,” and Daisy
was installed as an assistant at the wash-tub.
At this time there were several hundred
wild blacks encamped a few miles from the
plantation, and I had, during an occasional
tramp down the river, visited one or two of the
aborigines’ camps, those at least who were
inclined to be at all friendly.
It was when out on one of these expeditions
I made the acquaintance of a black fellow who
had once been in the employ of a squatter in
the lagoon valley, but had now returned to his
native lair. He was an agreeable youth, and
friendly, so far as it is in the power of a black
fellow to be with a white man. They always
seem to be possessed with a latent desire to
kill, even when civilised and, in a sense,
friendly. This innate desire I have heard
them express on many occasions, and this is
the principal reason why a white always keeps
a black in front of him. I was also, in an
indirect way, the means of being of some
service to one of the tribe.
Every morning would be seen, walking down
the banks of the river or creeks, a long string
of black gins, in single file, varying in ages
from the youngest piccaninny upwards, the
latest arrival being deposited in a dilly-bag,


suspended by a grass cord round the neck and
hanging down the back.
These dusky bipeds make the river their
fishing grounds, where not too deep for their
purpose. The practice adopted by them is
more of the scavenger style, for they float on
the surface of the water, and, scraping the
bottom with their hands, bring up anything they
can find. They drop their game into the dilly-
bag, which hangs handy behind.
The youngsters and piccaninnies in the
meanwhile sport and amuse themselves on the
bank or in the water.
About sundown the procession is re-formed
and they return to the camp, where small fires
are lighted ; then, sitting round these in small
circles, they toss the dainty grub, or mussel,
on to the hot cinders, picking them off again
with their fingers, and enjoying the primitive
feast with evident satisfaction.
The male portion, when not otherwise en-
gaged, or too lazy to turn out of his Mi-Mi,
will sometimes go hunting, and, if fortunate
enough to bring back any game, there are high
jinks and feasting for many days.
It was part of my duty to ride across the
river, and, much as I disliked the job, it had
to be done. The stream at this point was
crossed by a ford of a very zig-zaggy nature,
and it was not an easy matter to trace the track
through; missing it meant deep water and


swimming for the bank, an unpleasant alterna-
tive, as the river was infested by numbers of
alligators, their small tips often showing just
above the surface like a piece of black wood.
So would they silently float, an apparently
harmless object, unperceived and unnoticed,
except by a practised eye, watching for their
prey. When crossing on the dark and silent
nights their bark would send a creepy feeling
through the frame, and, shuddering, the travel-
ler would cast a wistful eye on the opposite bank.
On one of my daily rounds I was startled by
the sounds of shrill screams and much yelling.
There was evidently something radically wrong
at the “ fishing grounds,” Hurrying on in that
direction I was horrified to see a poor gin in
the claws of an alligator ; the brute was ap-
parently intimidated by the shouts or he would
have easily disappeared with his prey. The
noise the tribe were making was enough to
terrify all the fish and reptiles in the neigh-
bourhood. However, I had already unslung
my rifle, and, firing, I had the satisfaction of
causing the ’gator to disappear beneath the
surface. The gin was brought to shore. She
presented a lacerated spectacle ; the saurian's
claws had left a corrugated impression across
the breast, a deep and ugly wound. I took
the trouble to sew up the gash and dress it, as
far as my limited pharmaceutical knowledge
permitted, and sent her to the camp.


No sooner did she arrive there, having in
the meantime recovered from the shock and
alarm of the attack, than she tore off the
bandages, and, pulling out the stitches, pro-
ceeded to doctor herself in her own fashion—
a sort of herbal treatment in the shape of
leaves and some oily juice expressed from the
palm.
At any rate, she was about again in a short
space of time, and apparently none the worse
for her mishap, but the deep scarred furrows
remained like knotted rope cords, testifying to
the severity of the wound and how lightly
these people treat pain and suffering.
After this incident I stayed about the camp
for a time, having a chat with my coloured
friend “ Jacky.” Presently a happy thought
struck him, as he said : “Me want yabber
along you byemby, you savvy ? You no let
’em black feller see me talk along a you, one
feller moon he get up, you come along big
feller scrub.”
Accordingly, after sun-down, I strolled down
to the Scrub indicated and found Jacky there
waiting.
“ Well ! ” he said, “ me no time talk along
you to-night ; me want tell you, byemby, big
feller ‘ Roborree’ my word by one 1 Roborree,’
shake um ground all about, you want see ’im ?
You budgaree white man, me tell you. Baal
you yabber along a white man, baal you tell


’um black fellow, budgaree. Me savvy you
byemby.”
In the meantime Jacky had to ascertain by
various codes and signals when the great
festive gathering was to take place, and where.
It was no use his endeavouring to explain to
me the arrangements too far ahead, for the
blacks’ ideas of time and dates are crude and
rather confusing. The moon appears to be
their only authority on matters chronological
and horological.
Some two or three days after, when skirt-
ing round some thick scrub, I was just in
time to observe, unseen, a fine specimen of a
black warrior push a piece of pointed wood
into the trunk of a warringal cabbage tree,
which is of a soft and spongy substance ; and
then he darted off in another direction. I
proceeded to the spot, and, drawing out the
object, I noticed it was carved and artistically
marked with small hieroglyphics cut in the
wood, which was evidently a piece of the heart
of a myall, smooth as polished marble and
hard as iron. Not understanding the meaning
of these mysterious-looking characters cut in
such peculiar fashion, still I felt pretty sure it
was intended to convey a message or notice to
the tribes of some event that was to take
place.
However, I inserted the “letter”where I
found it, and sought for Jacky to explain the


hidden mystery. When I met him and told
him about the missive, and its position, he
said : “ Oh 1 me savvy that feller, he run all
about, he stick 'um letter here, one feller letter
there, long way," pointing in an opposite
direction. “He put 'um mark on letter.
Byemby another feller he come along, he see
letter, he look, he savvy what it say, he run
along and tell another feller tribe, byemby one
feller fire, two feller fire, all along country, you
savvy! All black feller savvy big one
‘ Roborree ’ ! So long ! ”
This emblem of the tribal caligraphy was,
after the meeting of the blacks, put in posses-
sion of the planter’s brother —the only one I
ever saw.
On another occasion, when pursuing my
daily task, I suddenly heard mysterious sounds
as of some unearthly wailing down below the
banks of the creek. Tying up my horse, and
proceeding cautiously, I espied what turned
out to be, I believe, a black fellow’s funeral,
or wake. The dusky mourners had rigged up
over the running stream, where the water was
as clear as crystal, a kind of reedy hammock,
on which was laid the body of a young
warrior. They assumed his spirit had gone to
the happy hunting grounds, and were now, I
suppose, holding a sort of musical wake to
encourage the spirit in its happy flight. I
retired from the scene as quickly as I had


come. It was a grotesque picture ; the chief
garb of mourning seemed to be mud and clay.
The principal mourner was a big powerful
buck, with a mass of thick curly hair, which,
in its natural state, ought to have been raven
black ; but it resembled a petrified clay pot.
Evidently the head, having been previously
well greased, was then well rubbed over with
soft, slimy clay, and then, being allowed to
dry, presented a gruesome sight. The whole
of the body was also treated to a liberal
allowance of grease, thus completing the
funereal toilet.
Later on I went back to the resting place ;
but I had probably been observed, for there
was no sign of the deceased warrior, only the
bare hammock was visible, wafted gently to
and fro by the wind.
A pleasant change had now taken place in
our plantation life; we were gradually be-
coming properly civilised beings. Society in-
creased ; the brother of the “ Boss ” had
arrived with a few friends, and all was gay;
music and small impromptu dances on the
verandah and an epidemic of love scenes, a
repetition in a small way of Port Macrae.
These pleasantries made a welcome change to
our otherwise quiet and monotonous existence,
probably saving us from lapsing into a semi-
barbaric state.
One evening, when leaving the Big House


on my way back to my bachelor’s quarters, I
heard a muffled and whispered “Cavee,”
which I knew to be the signal from Jacky. I
listened, and again the “ Cavee ” was repeated.
I walked over to the belt of timber and found
him there waiting to tell me about the
“ gathering of the tribes.” This was his mes-
sage : “ To-morrow night, the sun he go down,
you come along close big feller scrub, you
keep along the bottom, creep up bank, you
look out no black feller savvy you, you see
plenty light, you no forget. So long ! ”
It was now time for me to inform my friend
Williams and prepare for the excursion. So,
proceeding to the barracks, I saw him and
explained that I was going over to the big
scrub on ’gator creek after sun-down ; would
he accompany me and be ready for any
emergency ? Mum’s the word and don't
forget.
It was, at the time I am relating, a difficult
as well as a dangerous matter to obtain a view
of a real and thorough representative gathering
of the wild tribes of blacks, commonly known
as a “ Corroborrce,” but sometimes termed a
“Totem Dance” or “Grand Carnivale” in
civilisation.
This festive occasion is the chief and ab-
sorbing interest in the aboriginal’s existence,
the principal items being composed of mimetic
dances in imitation of the different habits of


the various wild animals, which arc totems of
the particular groups in the tribes.
Of course it was an easy matter to “ rig up ”
an entertainment for the edification of any
particular visitor ; but the acting was unnatural
and the make-up artificial, “ got-up-for-the-
occasion style.”
The wild blacks are most resolute, and very
determined to debar any white man from
watching their “ tableaux vivants."
W. and I now made our necessary arrange-
ments, informing those whom it might concern
that we w T ere going to ride round the boundary
as a precautionary measure, so just after sun-
down we made a start. It was soon dark,
there being no twilight in this latitude.
Travelling some distance on the top of the
bank of the creek, until we heard distant
sounds of mirth and revelry, we now
descended the banks, and leading our
horses for a short distance, we tied them up,
secretly hoping they would not give vent to
any neighing, although they were well secreted
out of sight in this scrub.
Leaving our “ brumbies ” securely fastened,
we proceeded cautiously on foot towards the
rendezvous, devoutly trusting at the same time
we should not plant any portion of our
extremities on one of the numerous and
venomous reptiles that infest the latitudes.
As we came in sight of the Mi-Mis the scene
i


that met our gaze was weird and picturesque
in the extreme.
In front, squatted on their haunches, were
two or three old patriarchs, white and hoary
with age, viewing the animated mob with
stolid and stony gaze ; another ancient heela-
man stalked about with the gait of a warrior,
his shiny ebony face lit up with the fire of
potent passion. He was wildly gesticulating
and shaking off (pro fem .) the fetters of age.
He strode round the encampment with fiery
energy, uttering evidently some passionate
review of his warlike past, and reminding us of
an old pictorial daub representing “ Ajax
defying the lightning.”
Several old and weak-kneed gins, very, very
lightly attired, were parading to and fro in
front of a fire. One of them was evidently
holding forth, either in company or in opposi-
tion, to the vehement old patriarch, for she
was wildly waving her hands about, in one of
which she held a “yam stick,” or “ waddy,”
her long and shrivelled arms whirling about in
dangerous fashion, every now and again
bringing the stick down on the ground with
hysteric violence, being inspired, no doubt,
with some mysterious prophecy, not an unusual
circumstance amongst certain uncivilised
tribes. Others sat silent and unmoved by this
excited oratorical display.
A short distance from the Mi-Mis was a


huge circular enclosure, round which were
gathered a numerous and heterogeneous com-
pany of the pure and unadulterated aboriginals.
“ By Jove I ” whispered W., “this is a weird
and inspiriting introduction to the darkies’
festival; it is a good job there is none of the
‘ fire-water ’ introduced, or there would soon
be a grand old melee, in which spears, nullah-
nullahs and boomerangs would be brought
into play, with disastrous effect upon some of
their excited skulls.”
Presently the undressed circle was brilliantly
lighted up by a number of torchlight bearers,
who took their seat inside the cordon. These
lights are made by stripping the bark off the
resinous pines, and they reflected a splendid
light over the animated scene.
Creeping as near as safety from observation
would permit, we were fortunate enough to
witness, quite distinctly, this extraordinary
primitive spectacle.
First of all, the spectators were composed of
blacks of all ages, sizes, and both sexes. I may
as well state at once that one and all were as
“ Nature adorned them ” —“ Honi soil qui mal
y pense”—in its natural simplicity. The
smaller and younger squatted in the first and
second rows, the taller ones standing behind.
All was perfectly still and silent. At one
end was stationed the “ orchestra,” or the
“ ebony band,” consisting of three hideous


looking individuals, who held in their hands
long dry bones, which they clicked together,
forming a sort of accompaniment to a dull
monotonous dirge-like wail, which beggars
description.
The order being given, the band struck up,
torchlights were waved in fantastic style, and
the performance began by the entrance into
the circle of five stalwart black fellows, in full
warpaint. Their ears and noses were pierced
with large chunks of wood or bone, heads well
greased and odoriferous, the limbs decorated
down to the knees with fur and feathers, while
round the ankles clicked and rattled other
ornaments. In their hands they poised the
spear and shield, and tomahawks, with blades
of flintstone, were run through the girdle at
the waist. They acted a scene of mimic war-
fare ; the faster clicked the bones, the more
excited became their antics, whilst they
grunted and shambled about to the delight of
the assembled tribes, going through all the
mysterious tactics as when attacking or
defending themselves in battle.
Now the scene becomes more realistic,
Caesar flattening Brutus with a nasty blow and
Achilles receiving a stab from a spear. The
wounded are carried out, the audience signify-
ing their approval by yells and shrieks. Thus
ends the first act.
Now another set of performers appear in the


circle, this time composed of young and
bashful maidens only. Perfectly unadorned,
not even did they wear an ornament of any
kind ; perfect symmetry and features—a pic-
ture for an artist. Joining hands they gam-
bolled round and round the ring, after the
maypole fashion ; faster and faster they
twirled, totally indifferent and oblivious to the
stentorian shrieks and yells of the hilarious
spectators ; emitting at the same time peculiar
noises, which might have been mistaken for
the chorus of a sty of little squeakers crying
for their food, accompanied now and again by
snorts and grunts from the elders.
Panting and puffing, after this display of a
skirtless dance, they were led from the arena
by a muscular gladiator, who was evidently
acting as “ stage manager.”
After one or two smaller efforts of some
youths, anxious to display their histrionic
ability, the general pantomime began, in which
all the actors appear together in the circle.
There was, I believe, a love scene. It was
short and to the point, for lago picks up
Desdemona and carries her off bodily —nolens
volens —pursued by some, supposed to be irate
lovers, round and round the arena. Finally
taking refuge in a distant corner, he drops his
burden, and standing over her, is prepared to
fight them all. The scene recalled to one's
mind very vividly an old print representing, in


prehistoric times, an ancient barbarian Briton
defending his love under similar circumstances,
with the same absence of toilette.
The pantomime finale is beyond my powers
to describe. The yelling, the shrieking, the
torchlight flitting here, there and everywhere,
the weird light thrown on the palm trees and
acacia scrub in the background, the moving,
gesticulating antics of the dusky and excited
beings, the fantastic attire of the performers,
the dismal doleful wail of bony notes, with
solemn irritating click, the hideous caricatures
of human beings, rendered the whole scene so
ghastly, and yet so realistic and picturesque,
that it would be an easy task for the imagina-
tion to realise a living picture of Dante’s
Inferno,
As we heard the whispered and significant
words of “ White fellow ! white fellow !”
they had smelt us—we knew we were on the
verge of being discovered, so leaving, though
somewhat loath, a scene which will ever be
indelibly impressed on our memory, we
scrambled in haste down the banks of the
creek, and making rapid tracks for our steeds,
we were soon in the saddle and away, without
waiting to express our thanks for having spent
so pleasant an hour.
We were none too soon, for the lights were
“ dowsed,” and immediately there arose a
demoniacal outburst of wrath. We did not


stop to inquire the cause, guessing only too
well the reason for this display of rage and
disappointment. We reached our barracks
quietly and unharnessed,
“ My word,” said Jacky, the next morning,
“you feller see 'um last night; me savvy you,
you go quick ! That big feller, * One Tooth/
he see you ; he plenty make em row ; you get
away lucky ; no more big feller Roborree
along here now, he no like it; go away long
way now ; plenty small feller Roborree, no
good byemby me show 'em white feller.”
The season was now advanced and the cane
was being crushed, and the sugar satisfactorily
turned out into different qualities—brewers’
crystals and so forth. All seemed happy, con-
tented and prosperous ; but alas ! the sword
of Damocles was hanging over the heads of the
poor planters. There was a small dark cloud
in the southern horizon which omened ill for
the sugar industry, and that was the ominous
word Slavery.
Our time of service having expired,' we took
our paper and our plantation experience, and
departed for “ fields and pastures new,” little
thinking how short a space of time would
elapse ere this prosperity was to be damped by
the cry against black labour, and the tremen-
dous fall in the price of Colonial sugar.


CHAPTER XII.
RABBIT TRAPPING.
The important question with us now was, to
which point of the compass should we steer ?
North of us lay the barren gulf country; west
of us was situated the fine table-land of the
Cloncurry, with its beautiful air and lovely
scenery, which would make a splendid resort
for consumptive or delicate chested people,
but is, unfortunately, so difficult of access.
South of us we knew meant civilisation, com-
fort, and a good prospect of occupation.
This decided us ; so booking our passage,
we steered our bark for the Sunny South, cal-
ling at the old familiar ports, taking on and
leaving passengers as we proceeded on our
voyage. All went smoothly and well until we
reached Cape Tribulation, when the vessel ran
on to a snag, or small coral reef. The sudden
stop upset things a bit on board. There was
a crash, a pandemonium of broken glass and
crockery, and a slight panic j but as there


were no ladies on board, there was no scream-
ing. The damage was small, and after a delay
of short duration, we backed off and resumed
our way.
It was rumoured that we had a “Jonah ” on
board, in the shape of a bush lawyer, w T ho had
already been wrecked on the coast three times
previously. Two ships' captains had refused
to sail with him. Many expressed the opinion
that had they seen his name on the passenger
list they would certainly have waited for
another boat. However, as “All’s well that
ends well," we sailed safely into Sydney Har-
bour. Being all old hands, we were not
accosted with the proverbial query, “ Have you
seen our harbour ?"
We passed a pleasant week in Sydney, en-
joying once more the delights of viewing the
beautiful and picturesque scenery in the
vicinity ; crossing over the bay, or one of them,
occasionally by a small ferry boat to the north
shore, and then up the Lane Cove River, then
up the Parramatta with its lovely orange groves
and elegant suburban residences on either
side, then up the Nepean, and finally we did
Sandringham, and once more had a run over
the magnificent Blue Mountains, going over
the summit at sunrise, and returning again at
sunset. Thus our sojourn in this marvellous
metropolis came to an end, and as our re-
sources were also arriving at a similar conclu


sion, it became necessary to move off some-
where in search of food and raiment, or
its equivalent. And as the “ wind bloweth
where it listeth,” so must the übiquitous bush-
man waft himself whichever way chance may
take him, in the hope, like Micawber of old,
that something may “ turn up,” and enable
him once again to find some occupation
wherewith to raise the wind.
At this time there were many rumours
abroad about the money that could be earned
by trapping rabbits and the dingo, especially
the former. Millions of the little rodents were
running wild about the sandy districts, particu-
larly so on the Darling river.
The Government and squatters were offer-
ing a good remuneration for every skin pro-
duced, besides providing all the necessary
paraphernalia in the way of tents, traps, and
other utensils. The tucker, or rations, was
also provided, but was-put on the slate, to be
rubbed off when the trapper had a balance to
his account.
This was good news for the impecunious
Bushites. So packing up our duds, once again
we face the track; once more we travel over
the mountain, but this time we pad the hoof,
and do a quiet tramp, going at the rate of
thirty miles a day, and travelling in a south-
west by west direction until we reach the
friendly Murrumbinder, Now we have plenty


of water, and any quantity of fish, and move
gaily along the banks of the river until we
reach its confluence with the majestic stream
Hurra-Murra —the Missouri of Australia. The
water was running at about half flood, and
some twenty feet from the top of the banks.
What an enormous waste of water passing
through unutilised in such a dry and barren
country !
We decide to camp the whole day and have
some sport, and angle for the celebrated cod,
whose weight varies from two pounds to two
hundred pounds, or less. So catching two
fine looking frogs, we insert them judiciously
on the hook, and with a good stout cord and a
short stick, as an apology for better tackle, and
throwing the amphibious reptile into the water,
we sit down to await events. In a very short
time we have simultaneous bites, and jerking
the line suddenly over our heads we land two
beautiful fish weighing about six pounds each.
Now we proceed to cook them; having already
made a large log fire we have plenty of nice
hot ashes for our purpose, so wrapping the
fish carefully in some broad leaves gathered
from the water’s edge, we insert them head
foremost in the ashes ; in a few minutes they
are taken out, the skin is drawn off, and the
feast is ready.
In. the morning we renew our march.
Lower down the river we come across a bul


lock driver's camp; outside was placed on two
forked sticks the skeleton of a cod they had
caught the previous day, which they informed
us weighed one hundred pounds. Cod
this size are too coarse for eating, but
the flesh stewed makes splendid soup, which
is more refreshing after a long and weary
march with a fifty-pound swag upon your
back.
So we pursue the even tenor of our way
until we eventually reach the junction with the
Dear River at Mentmore, where the Murra-
Murra suddenly takes a bend, almost at right
angles, and taking its course between the two
Colonies N.S.W. and S.A., runs down by Port
Adelaide to the sea.
Now we shape our track along the banks of
the Dear River until we sight the trappers'
tent, pausing here to partake of the usual bush
hospitality of tea and damper, varied some-
times by an occasional “dough-boy,” or “beg-
gars on the coals.” We shake down here for
the night, and acquire much useful informa-
tion. Many wonderful tales are told us of the
big cheques that are being earned by the trap-
pists. Our minds are so fired and excited by
the stories related, that we hurry off in rather
indecent haste from our host, and pursuing
our way, we leave the river and make a hap-
hazard shot for some outlandish sheep station,
where the rabbits are numerous, trappers


scarce, and the squatters anxious and willing
to engage anyone.
We reach the place about sundown. This
is a diplomatic policy, and generally a point of
etiquette with bush travellers. We make
known our wants, and being accommodated
with the usual rations, we camp for the night,
and wait for the morrow.
In the morning, after a short interview with
the “ Boss,” we are supplied with a hundred
traps each, tent, tucker, with camp oven, billy
can, pannikins, and so forth ; this parapher-
nalia is put into a cart, and following on foot,
we are duly conducted some twenty-five miles
into the bush, and pitch our tent on the side
of a small lagoon, nicely sheltered by a belt of
small she-oak.
There was abundant evidence of the multi-
tude of rabbits; the sand hills all around were
literally perforated, or honeycombed, by hun-
dreds and hundreds of burrows, and at sun-
down we could see them dodging about with
playful antics; the sand appeared to be an
animated mass of moving objects. Visions of
big fat cheques flitted through our brain. If
we could only trap one quarter of those we sec,
this vision would soon become a stern reality.
At daylight next morning we strolled out in
separate directions, with the hundred steel
snares slung over our shoulders. It is one
thing to set a trap, but it is a mighty different


matter to lug them about the sand hills. How-
ever, we managed to set all the traps. This is
done by making an indentation in the sand
at the mouth of the hole, laying the trap open
and on a level with the surface of the soil, and
smoothing the sand gently over with a piece
of stick. The rabbit is a sensitive and artful
creature, and its sense of smell pre-eminently
strong.
Arriving at the camp again by nine o’clock,
there is nothing more to be done but to wait
until sun-down, when away we had to go again
on another long jaunt to ascertain the result of
our early morning’s labours. But the chickens
were unfortunately counted too soon. During
my walk to the sand hill, I w r as casting up in
my mind, how many bunnies should I bag ?
Would there be ninety, eighty, or perhaps only
ten ? Arriving at what I presumed was the
locality wdiere I had planted the traps in the
morning, I could see no signs of anything,
and thought I must have drawn a blank.
Although I hunted high, low and everywhere,
I could not find a single trap, and it suddenly
struck me, as there was such a sameness about
these barren hillocks, that I had got bushed,
and must find my way back to the camp.
The country is very puzzling at times, the
same oak scrub for miles, the same kind of
bare sand hills duplicating each other by the
dozen ; “no gleam to watch on tree or tower,”


nor any kind of particular landmark to guide
the trappist on his way.
After a long and weary search I returned
much discomfited and dejected, and as miser-
able as a bandicoot at my misfortune. To
add insult to injury, what made it still more
mortifying to my feelings was, when I reached
the tent, to observe my partner, with a very
self-satisfied smile, busily engaged in skinning
about ninety rabbits. I made some very lame
excuse, and waited with eager impatience for
the sun to go down. At last the evening came,
and I started off with renewed vigour to search
for my hidden traps. In the distance I ob-
served the bunnies running and skipping about
in playful style, and disappearing from view,
the nearer I approached ; but I also noticed,
with complacent satisfaction, others that did
not seem disposed to run. The cause I soon
discovered ; some of them were detained by
my missing snares, and my delight was in-
creased when, turning round the corner of the
hill, I found three nice little rodents in the
embrace of one trap.
I carefully collected all that were waiting for
me, and carrying them to a quiet spot in an
adjacent scrub, I proceeded to divest them of
their pelts; these I carried back with me, after
setting the snares again some distance away
around a fresh sand hill.
The next morning, starting out as usual be


fore the break of day, on arriving at the trap-
ping ground the first thing I noticed was a
huge diamond snake caught fairly by the
middle. It was in a towering rage, its eyes
glistened like electric sparks, the forked tongue
poked out as it hissed and abused the snare ;
however, I quieted him with my waddy, and
then skinned him for thus trespassing
on my preserves. Proceeding farther on, I
was next accosted by a large species of iguana,
a genus of our old associate the saurian reptile;
he pranced about and around the hole, and
defied me to mortal combat. Never having
had any previous encounter with these ugly
looking reptiles, and armed only with my
knotty persuader, I paused to meditate whether
I should accept the challenge. I decided to do
so, and charged j he declined my assumed
heroic attack and disappeared down the bur-
row, frightening and sending up a couple of
rabbits which I secured.
Pursuing my labours in an extended direc-
tion, I am stuck up by another of these scaly
pests, this time securely held by a trap. Shall
I despatch him, or not ? that is the question.
I may say that the Government took these
reptiles under their confiding care, and a
penalty of five pounds was imposed on anyone
caught killing them. But lam afraid a great
number were demolished, owing to the
nuisance and trouble they were to the trapper.


On arriving at another hill, a trap was
missing; the trail was clear, distinct and zig-
zaggy. Now what, queried I, can this animal
be ? Something that can jump and travel too.
Following up the trail for at least two miles, I
lose sight of it in some thick undergrowth;
retracing my steps, and traversing round the
bushes, I pick up the scent again, and following
it up, discover the object of my search, fast
and secure, in the fork of a limb of a thick oak
tree in which the trap had become firmly
wedged. If the snake seemed a bit put out,
it was as nothing to the fierce, spiteful wrath
of this huge canary-coloured cat. Although
I felt grieved at its misfortune, I had to
pocket sentiment, and operate. It is said
“ pussy ” has nine lives; I really think this
one must have had nineteen.
Thus, with these pleasing variations, the time
passes on, and the Inspector is due at the station
to count out the number of skins that have been
secured by the different trappers during the
past month. So we wend our way to the station,
taking our spoil with us in a cart that has been
sent out to bring us in. We leave our tent and
paraphernalia behind, knowing there will be no
chance of any interference with them.
On our arrival we meet several other pro-
fessors in the art of catching gathered together,
waiting, with looks of general satisfaction at
the result of their labours.
K


Before the actual work of counting begins,
several large logs of wood are piled together
and then lighted, making a huge blazing fire.
Into this the Inspector causes the skins to be
tossed as he tallies them off, the trapper at
the same time checking his own catch by
notches on a stick as the enumeration pro-
ceeds. All the pelts having now been counted
and destroyed, and the number certified as
correct, each man receives his cheque for the
amount. The provident trapper will lay in a
fresh stock of stores and return to his work
again ; the improvident will proceed to the
nearest shanty, and there remain to be lamb’d
down with fire-water, and return to his work
in a state bordering on imbecility. We decided
on an immediate return to our camp, and
having realised a substantial sum, we agree to
purchase a couple of mokes and a cart, as our
trapping ground was getting farther afield.
We drove back in proper bush style.
The next morning, catching our newly
bought steeds, we proceed to saddle them
up to carry our traps. Mine was a fiery
flea-bitten grey, with good showy action,
although he had passed out of his teens. Like
an old war horse, he possessed a good deal of
temper and mettle, and strongly objected to
the indignity of carrying a trap. I felt very
doubtful about its submitting to the indignity
I was about to impose. However, I made a


start, and all went well until we reached the
trapping ground. I had taken off one trap,
and was in the act of setting it, when
Bucephalus, pretending to be nervous, started
off at full gallop, bucking and snorting in the
distance. I viewed with disgust and anger all
my paraphernalia spun sky-high and scattered
in all directions. Controlling my feelings as
best I could, I gathered up my dispersed
snares and proceeded on foot to set them all,
and then returned to the camp to search for
my rampant steed. The brute had not re-
turned ; the next day he sauntered down to
the lagoon for a drink without his bridle.
The horse that my chum had bought was of
a totally different style; the only beauty about
it was its price, it was a regular “ outlaw,” as
the sequel proved.
One day when W. had finished setting his
traps and had arrived back at the tent again,
he remarked, “What do you say if we take
our guns, ride out towards the river, and have
a bit of sport ? ”
I assented, so we saddled up our noble
chargers, and sallied forth with spirits blithe
and gay.
We had not proceeded many miles before
W., spotting a “paddy mellon” going along
quietly on three legs, levelled his gun, and firing,
succeeded in hitting it; but he had no time to
dismount and secure his game, for at the re


port of the gun, his moke claimed his most
earnest attention. Down went his head, and
poking his nose fair between his fore legs,
arching his back like a well-bent bow, he set
to work; jumping high into the air, he brought
his four feet together, and came down on the
ground with a regular jarring thud, in a style
very similar to that of the deer when it is going
through the performance of killing a snake.
But this movement did not unship my chum.
Now the steed, squealing with rage, bucked
straight ahead in a succession of flying leaps,
varying this with an occasional side wipe, but
he could not unseat the rider; overlanding
through scrub and forest had given him that
firm seat in the saddle for which Australian
bushmen are noted. Balancing himself and
yielding to every motion of the horse, swaying
his body loosely to meet and accompany each
varied bound, keeping his legs pressed firm
against the knee pads, he withstood every
variety of buck with placid impunity.
At length the “brumby," losing all patience
with its attempts to displace the rider, took
the bit between its teeth and bolted; head in
the air and tail sticking straight out, away he
went, like John Gilpin of old.
W. had now lost all control over his newly
bought steed, and could do [nothing but sit
tight and trust to good luck. For miles
around the sand hills and other places were


literally honeycombed with rabbit burrows,
and now the horse was running blind, should
he get his fore foot into one of these
treacherous holes, the chances were the rider
would break his neck.
I followed in the rear, as fast as my ancient
charger would consent to take me, and watched
for the final scene with considerable anxiety.
In a short space of time the inevitable occurred,
for suddenly the horse turned a complete
somersault, stirring up an immense cloud of
dust, hiding both from view. On reaching the
spot, there w'as my chum a bit dazed and
bruised, but otherwise he had escaped any
serious injury. Pegasus had broken his neck.
This unfortunate mishap put an end to our
day’s sport ; we removed the saddle and bridle
off the defunct steed, and slowly wended our
sorrowful way back to the camp.
For the rest of the month we worked along
Chinee fashion, W. taking the remaining horse
one day, and I using it on alternate days ; so
we managed to finish our task. Picking up
our tent and utensils we managed to persuade
the old warrior to drag us to the station, when
receiving our cheques we bid farewell to the
Dear River and a trapper’s life.


CHAPTER XIII.
ANXIOUS TIMES IN THE SCRUB DISTRICTS.
Having turned our faces southward, we de-
cide to still continue pushing further south ;
so following the course of the Darling River
due south, we reach Wentworth, the junction
of this stream with the Murray. Still keeping
our course on the N.S.W. side of the river, we
arrive opposite Mildura, the place that has
earned a good deal of notoriety by the specula-
tive attempts of a large American firm to form
large irrigation works, and to cultivate various
sized areas of mallee scrub, which they
eventually hope will turn out fruit and vege-
table gardens. If they can find the supply of
water, well and good, but as the old iScotty
remarked, “ I hac ma doots.”
We cross the river at this point over to the
Victorian side, and have a look over the irriga-
tion plant and the drainage works going on in
the scrub.
One huge drain was excavated right through


the proposed area to be irrigated, and from
this main supply were cut smaller tunnels to
provide the different allotments with the
necessary amount of water. Several large
engines were placed on the bank of the river
to pump the water into the main drain supply,
that is when there was any ; but unfortunately
previous and reliable experience has proved
that the supply of water in this river when
most required is, to say the least, very pre-
carious. The contract that these engineers
have undertaken wall turn out eventually a
white elephant.
I have seen this majestic stream at certain
times of the year wiien a person could walk
dry shod down the bed of it, and could cross
it in many places without getting wet; at other
times it will be a raging torrent, and overflow-
ing its banks will inundate the country for
hundreds of miles. In many instances cap-
tains of the steamers have lost their reckoning,
and have been seen steaming about over the
tops of submerged trees and completely aw T ay
from the proper channel.
Finishing our cursory view of Mildura, we
pursue our course through deep fine sand
hills and the usual miserable barren wilder-
ness termed the Mallee country. Any sane
person driving, riding, or walking through this
desert, and taking note of the immense sand
drifts, could not possibly help having a feeling


akin to pity for men possessing such a specula-
tive ambition as to attempt to irrigate such
country as this. Nothing to be seen in the shape
of vegetation, not a weed, or a blade of grass,
no tree with foliage, not a sign of any decent
living thing, nothing but the bastard eucalyptus,
which would not grow anywhere else ; a haunt
for snakes and iguanas, an abiding place for
the centipede and the scorpion.
Through this desolate land of Gomorrah we
move, as fast as circumstances will permit,
and by travelling all the night we sight the
river again. We were unable to follow it
altogether, owing to the immense bends it
took in its course.
We dump down our swags at a water hole,
and pulling out our tackle, search for the in-
evitable frog, and in a few minutes breakfast is
prepared ; but on this occasion we had neither
tea, sugar, flour, or salt, in fact the fish had to
be eaten cum non grano salts. The meal
being satisfactorily despatched, over a quiet
rest and a whiff of twist we discuss our future
plans, and decide to continue our present
course, and stick to the water, which we knew
would lead us to Euston Station.
However,'before we reached that place, we
came across a small river shanty; inquiring
here as to the want of employes, we were in-
formed there was trapping to be had across
the river, at a station called “Kill on Mundie.”


So crossing over to the Victorian side, we seek
an interview with the “ Boss,” who tells us
that there are thousands of rabbits in a sand
hill. “Can we trap?”
“ Can a duck swim ? ” said W.
“ All right,” said the squatter, “go up to the
store and get what you require.”
We did, and instead of two hundred traps
we got four hundred. The hill was only about
a mile away, and near the river.
We pitched our tent and sallied forth to the
trapping ground ; there was only one solitary
sand-hill, so we set the whole four hundred
traps round it, went back to the tent, and
waited for the result. In about an hour's time
there was such a howling and yelping in the
distance, intermingled with a lot of monkey-
like gibberish.
“What on earth,” said W., “can we have
caught this time ? ”
Proceeding to the spot from whence the
sounds were echoing, we saw a rather ludicrous
sight.
It appears that an old fat station lubra was
doing a little bit of hunting on her own
account, and had taken her two mangy mon-
grels with her. Both these dogs had got their
fore feet in different traps ; when the old gin
attempted to release them, they had expressed
their anger by biting her on the hand ; and
hence arose the demoniacal chorus that had


aroused our curiosity. The animals were re-
leased, and Jemima, muttering many barbaric
maledictions on our heads, departed in wrath-
ful and savage indignation.
Later in the day, at about sundown, the
tuneful melody began. Its first intimation was
a plaintive solo, and then another, then a duet,
and so on until the final chord was struck in a
most inharmonious chorus. The bunnies were
evidently having a rough time of it. Our
curiosity led us to move out of the tent, and
walking round some thick bushes' unseen and
unobserved, we watched their playful antics
and the animated scene. The hill was a moving
mass of rodents ; every now and again there
would be a sudden squeal, and then a small
cloud of dust ; every rabbit that was not de-
tained disappeared each and all into their
several burrows. Presently the bolder ones
would pop out again, then the others w T ould
follow, until they swarmed again.
Now the fun began ; it resembled a small
battery practising iwith blank cartridge—
squeak, click, and dust nearly every second.
Towards dark we ventured out to clear the
traps; we had made a very successful catch,
very few of the snares being left vacant.
Although w r e set the traps again, the remain-
ing rodents were too artful, dodging out of
their burrow T s in all sorts of fantastic ways ; so
we pulled up our camp and returned to the


station, and handed in our paraphernalia to
the storekeeper, who informed the “ Boss ”
that we had finished our contract,
“What!" said he, “done already? How
many have you caught ? ”
“ Three hundred and ninety-nine, and a bit
of fur/’ said W.
“ Then you had better go back and catch
the balance of the missing one/' quoth the
“ Boss/’
“No thanks,” said W., “it wouldn't pay,
it has gained too much experience last night!”
“Well,” said the squatter, “do you want a
job ? If so, go along into the stockyard and
see if you can find anything, but first of all,
trot into the kitchen and get some tucker.”
Suiting the word to the action, we sailed for
the kitchen, and found there a fine buxom
damsel, such a specimen as we had not seen
for many a long day ; unfortunately for us, we
were forestalled by one of our own crew, in
the shape of a dingo trapper, who was making
a fierce attack upon mutton and damper, and
crowding in at the same time, between each
mouthful of grub, a desperate amount of bush
courtship.
However, as we were decidedly “ peckish,”
though we did not like disturbing this victualis-
tic and tender scene, we had to put sentiment
on one side, and request boldly and politely if
the fair maid would oblige us with some dinner.


What a relief to be able to leave out the word
“ black," and what a joy to observe once again
the merry smiling face of a pretty fair girl
smitten with the absorbing passion !
The damsel was most gracious and obliging.
We enjoyed our meal so heartily, that we both
declined any further occupation that day, not
having been accustomed to luxuries.
This maiden’s lover, it appears, had been
engaged in trapping dingos in the mallee
scrub, and having brought his skins to the
station, from the sale of these and the pay he
received per head, he had netted a nice
amount of cash. As the result of this, and
from the proceeds, he had come to the con-
clusion he was in a position to enter the bene-
dictine state, hence the position of affairs in
the kitchen when we put in an appearance on
the scene ; but the sequel proved very un-
fortunate for Zoe.
The feast was prepared, the guests were
invited, and all was in readiness for the wed-
ding to take place, and we were eagerly looking
forward to having a good old time ; damper
with currants in, a solid, stolid sea-pie with a
good six-inch crust and the best part of a
sheep inside it, and other bush luxuries too
delicate to mention. But alas ! for the incon-
stancy of man, the pride of creation, the sub-
jugator of the universe and women's hearts.
On the morning when the knot was to have


been tied, when the parson and the parents
and friends were waiting to witness the joyful
ceremony of placing on the ring, the bride-
groom dallied. “He cometh not.'’ A few
anxious inquiries are made and - the reason is
soon discovered. He had made a midnight
slope. Late in the night, when all was hushed
and still, he had harnessed up two horses to
the squatter’s buggy and departed secretly and
quietly. He succeeded in getting as far as the
first creek, about eight miles away, and in
crossing had missed the proper ford ; in trying
to mount the opposite bank the pole had
broken, so taking out the horses and leaving
the taclde behind, he departed on them bare
back and was lost for ever to the damsel fair.
As it was as useless to look for a trapper in the
dense Mallee country, as for a needle in a
pottle of hay, the visitors departed to the
places from whence they came, sadder perhaps,
but probably wiser.
It is said that pity is akin to love, and more
so perhaps where the recipient is young and
buxom.
As W. began to manifest a desire to impart
this sort of trinket to Zoe, I began to be
alarmed as to the result. I suggested to him
we had better move ; he consented, so we
informed the “Boss” of our intended
departure.
“Will you,” said he, “lend us a hand to


cross a carriage and four horses over the
river ? ” We agreed to do so on the next day.
The Murray, just at this time, was running
bank high, and was at least a hundred yards
or more from one side to the other; and more-
over, we were quite well aware that none of
the other station hands could swim a stroke.
However, in the morning we rigged up a sort
of raft, by binding together with stout cord
several heavy logs ; launching it, we placed on
it the buggy, and set sail across the swollen
stream, the “ Boss ” sitting in state on the seat
of the trap, and four of us, one at each corner,
guiding a swimming horse through the turbu-
lent water. We had arrived nearly in mid-
stream, when the raft began to wobble in a
decidedly ominous manner, and to sink deeper
than was necessary ; the two non-swimmers
began to show signs of nervousness, and trans-
ferring this feeling of timidity to the struggling
steeds, matters assumed an uncomfortable
look. Just as we reached a little more than
the middle, the ship canted down on one side
and slowly and surely began to descend ; the
water was rolling gently over. It was a case
of each for himself; our blankets were floating
gently down stream.
I said to W., “ I am going, you stay here;
the raft can’t possibly go to the bottom, it’s
only a case of log sinking. Let the horses go,
they will reach the other bank all right. I shall


pick up our swags at the bend, take them ashore
and get assistance from the shanty near."
So quickly divesting myself of my boots and
other attire, I slid into the water, and rapidly
overtaking the floating bundles, I managed
without any extraordinary exertion to land
them at the first bend —then came an awkward
pause. I only had the garments I had left on
board ; how could I face civilisation like this ?
It was not a corroborree. However, by various
manoeuvres, I attracted the attention of the
proprietor ; he brought out his boat and a
rope, and we got the skipper, crew, and buggy
ashore.
Bidding good-bye to “ Kill on Mundie,"
we resume our march down the river to
Euston, and here we decide to camp and rest
for a few days.
We had not been in this place long, before
I began to notice a visible change in W.'s
manner. Although I plied him with carefully
guarded queries, the answers were always
evasive and unsatisfactory; and I could feel
that our partnership was approaching its end.
So one morning I tackled my chum with the
brief question : “ W., are you fixed here ; and
do we part now and for ever ? ”
“ You have hit the mark," said he.
We parted the following morning, he staying
in the township, I proceeding in solitary state
down the Victorian side of the river to Swan


Hill, I heard after that W. had fallen in the
toils of the only daughter of a fairly well-to-do
publican, and he eventually married her. As
a member of a noble family, and a man of
first-rate education, I felt sorry to hear of the
mesalliance, and wrote him quite a paternal
letter on the subject. I received a reply from
him, ft Physician, heal thyself " —and that was
all.
I now wander along the banks of the river
until sundown. Noticing a snug little island
a short distance from the bank, I paddle out
to it, and making a fire I sat down to muse on
the mutability of human friendship and watch
with varied interest a fierce battle that is raging
between two ants; one is a huge bull-headed
black object, the other a small red species,
fierce and determined ; the former is evidently
a bully, and is trusting to its superior weight
and size, but his confidence is misplaced, for
with a sudden dart the smaller fry administers
the fatal blow, and bull-head is a corpse. I
put out my hand to pick him up, when the
fiery little insect fastens on to my finger and
quickly inserts his sting into my hand; my
musing comes to a sudden end, and so does
red head.
I start off in the morning at daybreak,
being roused up by the long unfamiliar joyful
notes of the laughing jackass, who seems to
wonder how long the sluggard is going to


sleep* Further on a tall and leafless looking
gum tree is covered with the screeching white
cockatoo ; and on one limb are to be seen two
little paroquets making sweet love to each
other; reminding me of poor W.’s unhappy
state. This is no place for me !
Roused up, as I have remarked, by the
feathered disturbers of the early morn, I roll
up my drum, and view with any feelings but
pleasure the long jaunt in front of me, through
miles of thick mallee scrub, having to negotiate
a belt of this barren wilderness of over twenty-
five miles before reaching the plains and oak
forests beyond. However, there is some satis-
faction in the thought that there is nothing on
the track likely to interfere with the progress
of the traveller. The only living things to be
met with may be a few dingos, perhaps a few
head of wild cattle and brumbies. So I make a
start for Lake Wunga. A more dismal, solitary,
gloomy, lonely walk, I have never experienced.
Mile after mile I traverse, no shade from the
rays of the burning sun, not a drop of drinking
water to be found through the entire length, not
a sound to be heard except the beating of one’s
own heart; not the sign of a living thing ; all
is hushed, desolate, and silent, nothing but a
huge belt of sand, and the eucalyptus dumosa,
varied here and there by an occasional tree of
bastard mallee.
It is in such country as this where the


lowan, or malice hen, makes its haunts, one of
the shiest birds in creation. Retiring as
civilisation advances, it is very rarely seen. I
was fortunate enough to come across one of
their nests, which consists of a high mound of
sand. It seems they first of all pick out a spot
where the sand is of a moist nature, and ex-
posed as much as is possible to the rays of the
sun ; there the bird will lay an egg, and cover
it over with sand ; another bird will do the
same, and other birds will follow" suit. Laying
their eggs side by side, and covering the eggs
all over with sand, they will form the base of a
kind of pyramid, raising it layer by layer until
it will reach the height probably of about four
feet; then, the laying being over, they leave
the matter of incubation to nature, or the heat
of the sun, which, raising the temperature of
the moisture beneath, will cause the eggs to
hatch, and in due course the little mallee hen
will be seen to protrude from the sandy nest,
and like the infant English partridge, will run
off with the shell still sticking to its back.
The eggs of these sensitive and unsociable
birds are of a lovely pink colour, and the shell
is of a most delicate nature ; but they make a
very excellent and tasty dish.
The sun is beginning to decline ; the weary
traveller on his way must press. Passing by
large salt lakes, which resemble the newly
driven snow, glistening in pure and dazzling


whiteness in the distance ; passing again lakes
with water as clear as crystal, but as salt as
brine—“ Water, water everywhere, but not a
drop to drink.” How tantalising this is to a
thirsty traveller, only those who have had the
experience can realise.
There are means of procuring a drink of
water even in this apparently waterless country.
By selecting a likely looking tree, and cutting off
a length of the root beneath the ground and
hanging it perpendicularly, enough water will
drip out by drops to enable a thirsty man, in
some measure, to quench his thirst.
At last the roofs of an out station appear in
the distance, and I shall be there by the ap-
pointed hour of sundown, and receive the
usual rations and a shake-down beneath the
friendly shelter of the travellers' quarters.
To this resort I proceeded, and gathering a
few sticks there is soon a good fire, the “billy”
boils, tea is made, and this with a piece
of damper constitutes the supper, then to bunk;
no fear of indigestion, no fear of a restless night.
Let anyone suffering from dyspepsia, or want
of digestive powers, try a thirty-mile walk in
the summer through this sandy malice scrub ;
no water to drink, nothing to eat until the
journey is done, and continue this routine for
at least a week; there would be no further
cause of complaint as to absence of appetite,
or weakness in the digestive organs.


CHAPTER XIV.
I TURN COBBLER.
Being called at the usual hour by the early
“jackass,” I rouse myself, breakfast, and make
an early start for Lake Choorogany.
I am now fairly in the heart of the great
mallee country, and shall be glad and thankful
to get through it. A bush fire in these regions
would bring serious results. I plod along in
the same old style, and without any further
incident reach the lake at night-fall. Here I
am gratified to see, on the edge of the water,
a vegetable garden, with luscious looking
tomatoes, and in charge of the heathen Chinee.
I stroll up to the hut, and politely accost him
thus—•
“ John! You give 'em ’marto ? Me hungry,
me tired, me come a long way scrub.”
“No ! me no gibb you anytink. Me no
sabby you. You go along 1 Bossy,' him up at
station two milee all along same trackce ! Go’-
day.”


I walk away, and picking a nice sheltered
spot near the water’s edge, I make a leafy doss,
and fixing up a little brush break-wind, deter-
mine to camp for the night, and have tomato
and fish for supper. The head station is two
miles away, so all is well. John is armed with
an old flint gun, which he daren’t fire, but
which he brings out for show. I have met
with them before. I get out my tackle, and
while it is yet light enough, I have a turn at
fishing, and am fortunate in catching two or
three flappers. Putting them on one side, so
that the ants shall not eat them, I meander
down to the garden in company of a friendly
waddy in case of accidents. I step over the
fence, and proceed in leisurely fashion to re-
plenish the inner man first. Having thoroughly
enjoyed a hearty feed, I was busy stowing some
away in an old flour bag, when my pleasant
occupation was interrupted in rather an abrupt
manner.
There was John with his old flint. I thought
his old pigtail would stand on end ; he was a
good deal more excited and angry than I was.
“ What for you come along a garden, you
’teely my ’marto ? You no good ! My word,
me shoot ’em you quick.”
I was lying prone on the ground when first
addressed, but by degrees I had worked myself
into a sort of kangaroo position, ready for
emergencies. When John, in his excitement,


forgot how near he was approaching the poor
bush man, and reiterated his intentions, I
made a frog-like spring and rammed him fair
in the “rice basket 1 '; the flint dropped out of
his hand, and John was “welly, welly sick."
I felt sorry for taking a mean advan-
tage, but under the existing circumstances
the regret was short-lived. I returned to my
“ doss,” cooked my supper by putting some of
the tomatoes inside the fish, tying them up in
leaves, and sticking them in the ashes. After
the meal I dowsed the fire, and moved my
quarters to a distant point on the other side.
The next morning I was up very early, and
was at the head station before breakfast, got
some rations and a bit of mutton off the cook,
and made tracks through the scrub by a back
route. I knew, if I did not get bushed, I
ought to reach the Yarry-Yarry Creek within
thirty miles.
I had not proceeded far before the uppers
of my boots parted company with the soles ;
here was a dilemma that I was not prepared
for. I tried walking without them, but this
caused so much delay—as I had to keep sitting
down every hundred yards, to pick out thorns
and other small annoyances—that the question
now arose, can I catch a rabbit, or a 'possum ?
If I could secure one or the other, and also
find a small water hole, I should be all right for
the night, and also manage a bit of cobbling.


So casting an eager glance around, as I
amble painfully along, I observe a fine speci-
men for my purpose, an old dry bastard mallee,
the very place for an old buck mammalian.
Cutting a long, small twig, and making a slit
at the thicker end, I proceed to insert it in a
likely looking abode, where I hope to “draw
the badger.”
Pushing the stick in at full length, and stir-
ring gently round, I feel some soft substance.
Drawing it out for examination, I notice with
satisfaction a little piece of grey fur; I have
struck oil at the first attempt. Inserting the
stick again, I press it gently and firmly against
the coat of the prey, and twisting the stick
round two or three times and drawing it
steadily towards me, I bring to light a fine fat
'possum. He was very wroth and snappish at
the way in which he was persuaded to come
out of his nest. However, I soon quieted him,
removed his skin, which I carefully pegged
and stretched out on the trunk of a tree to dry,
and discovering a small water hole a short dis-
tance away I made this my camping ground
for the night. Later on I removed the skin
from the tree, and stirring up a big ants’ nest,
I peg the skin on the ground for them to clean
for me. In the meantime the fire was burning
well, so rolling my game up in a broad leaf or
two, the menu for the evening was “La
Grille Posum a la Tomatee.”


Not being in so great a hurry this morning
as on the previous one, I did not disturb my-
self too soon; there were none of the feathered
tribe either to rouse the sleeper. A lovely and
charming country for an anchorite 1
Having broken my fast—“ dejeuner ala sans
fourchette ?”—I set to work at the cobbling
task, to rig up a pair of fur boots; made while
you wait, and all one piece. Not having been
instructed in my early youth in the cutting out
of leather, or any other material, to my dismay
I discover that I have been too liberal in the
supply of skin for the uppers. I must there-
fore hunt up another ’possum. As I know
their habits are nocturnal, I am sure to find
one at home ; so procuring another twig, I
search for the mammalian abode once more,
and being successful, I go through the same
performance with more haste, and stir up the
ants to renewed vigour. These little pismires
being put on their mettle soon make short
work of all the fatty substance, so I am en-
abled to finish off my other boot, and begin
my final journey through this apparently end-
less wilderness.
My foot guards are not so protective as I
had hoped, for I had not proceeded any great
distance before a sharp splint projecting from
a malice root, entered my best toe. However,
it might have been worse, so drawing the bit
of timber out, I pursued my uneven way, and


arrived at Yarry-Yarry Creek soon after the
shades of night had fallen.
I have now reached the borders of civilisa-
tion ; I must resign the role of the vagrant
swagman, or “ sundowner/ 1 and, in common
parlance, “ put on a bit of side.” So I stroll
into the one-horse shanty, kept by a man of
Hebraic features, who evidently smelt the
dollars, for he was painfully civil. “ Veil ! ”
said he, going through the usual imaginary
ablutions with his hands, although in reality
soap and he had been strangers for the last
decade, “Veil, mine frent, vot for may I have
ze pleasair ! ”
“ First of all I want a shake-down for a few
days. Can you accommodate me ?”
“ Much delighted I am sure ! ” quoth Abra-
ham.
This matter being settled, I proceed next to
the slop department to get a rig out in the
latest bush fashion. When I had finished my
purchases, and came forth in broad daylight,
I felt a good deal like a trussed turkey. Had
I been built in greater length, I daresay I
should have resembled a well-trussed native
companion. However, as the ancient said
I looked like a “ blooming squatter,” I let the
matter rest there and strolled in to breakfast.
Oh, what a change from my long abstinence
from luxuries ! Here on the table bacon and
ham floated about disjointed in pints of grease,


and on the top of these pieces of pig, and side
by side with them were several hens 1 eggs.
“Now,” thought I, “anyone having a good
feed of this for a week, ought to start off for a
hundred-mile tramp through the mallee
scrub.”
The family assembled at the table consisted
of two daughters (there was no Mrs. Abraham),
the old ancient, and one son, short and thin,
with a nose like the proboscis of a jack mos-
quito. There was one other guest, the new
doctor. This was his first effort at distinction
since getting his diploma; as the number of
patients was limited, he and the youth played
single-wicket matches at cricket on the banks
of the creek until they got thirsty, when they
would retire to the store and imbibe.
The morning's meal being over, I take a seat
in the corner to look at a paper, this luxury
being quite a novelty. Whilst thus engaged,
I was much amused to observe the elder
daughter stroll in, and walking round the
breakfast table, which was now deserted, take
up the different dishes containing the liquid
bacon fat and pour the whole of the con-
tents down her throat, smacking her lips with
emphatic satisfaction. Her father had men-
tioned that she was inclined to be consump-
tive.


CHAPTER XV.
AUSTRALIAN DROUGHTS.
Considering now that I had once more joined
the ranks of bush society, and that my store
garments were fairly passable, I determine to
hunt up a little society on my own account.
So I stroll up to the sheep station and make a
formal call on the squatter, who I find at home,
and of a different type to the sort one meets
further north ; there is more formality in the
manner, less of the esprit de corps you meet
with when further from civilisation and the
trammels of society. However, lam received
with genial cordiality, and as all squatters,
more or less, are invariably interested in the
description of new countries, I am invited to
join them at dinner in the evening.
In due time I wander over to the house.
The residence is a long low building, built
bungalow style with a verandah all round,
fenced in with trellis woodwork, which is
covered with a passion-fruit creeper. The


roof is double barked, with a vacant space of
about a foot between each roof. The walls
are made of solid mud or clay, and splashed
over with small variegated pebbles. The
interior shows no sign of the rugged nature of
the material of which it is composed. There
was a fine large dining-room, with four French
windows all opening out on to the verandah,
comfortably and elegantly furnished. It was
quite an arcadian resort. I was introduced to
Mrs. Phearson, her daughter and son, and I
could see from the style that I was in for
ceremony and a trying ordeal.
At the table Mrs. P.—after a few introduc-
tory remarks from the host, and a casual obser-
vation about the weather —turned round to me
and said: “ Have you seen the newspaper
lately ? ”
“ Well, yes, I have looked at one this morn-
ing.” (It was the first I had seen for about
two years.)
“Well, Mr. , what is your opinion about
Count Shoveltap’s latest movements ? ”
I learnt later that she meant Count Shouva-
loff, or some such similar individual. Had I
been knocked down unexpectedly by a
boomerang, I could not have been more
flabbergasted.
“ H'm, I beg your pardon, madam, but I did
not catch the name.”
Mrs. P. repeated the staggering question,


My only chance now to wriggle out of this
dilemma with any credit, was to assume that
the lady must refer to “overlanding,” and
Shoveltap must have taken charge of a large
stock of cattle or sheep from these parts up
north ; and no doubt the idea prevailed in her
mind that I had probably run across him in
my travels.
“No, madam! I do not know anything
either of him or his movements ; he probably
took a route bearing in a more westerly direc-
tion ; that would be the cause of my missing
him.”
There was a painful pause, a look of sarcastic
sympathy at my ignorance.
“ I refer, sir, to political movements.”
I humbly explained that, as I had been ab-
sent from the haunts of civilisation for a period
of about two years, I could not profess to be
well versed in the ambassadorial duties and
diplomatic movements of a Russian Count.
I am happy to say the Blue Book shut up,
and we spent a pleasant evening, musical and
otherwise ; and over a pipe later on, I enter-
tained in bush fashion with a few little over-
landing anecdotes, sprinkled with a little
plantation sugar.
Returning to the shanty, I find the doctor
with one or two others indulging in a game of
dominoes. As this amusement has no attraction
for me, I retire to my bunk. The whole


structure of the dormitory was of a very flimsy
and airy style of architecture. I could observe
from the transparent nature of the canvas, that
I was in for another, and totally different kind
of shock to the system. I had not retired long
before a light appeared on my left; the trans-
parency now was very evident, the medico and
son appeared on the scene and retired. I
wonder now who inhabits the partition on the
right, I was only kept in suspense a short
time, when the old Eupatroid appeared in
person, but as he did not take much trouble to
divest himself of any extra clothing, I was
much relieved.
But later in the night I honestly wished
myself away on the banks of the Murray, very
much preferring the cry of the “more pork,”
and the tuneful notes of the early rising
laughing jackass, to the loud stertorous snor-
ing of old Abraham in the next partition ; and
heartily wished, for that night at any rate, he
was with his forefathers.
I decided to move in the morning, as this
was no place for me; so securing the services
of the young Hebrew to assist me in the pur-
chase of a mount, I am enabled to travel
through the gum forests along the banks of
the creek in tolerable comfort, and to reach
once more the oak country and the open
Wimmeria Plains.
What a vast change has come over this dis


trict! A short time ago it was the Eldorado of
a squatter's ambition, where fortunes had been
made, but now what a forlorn spectacle it
presented ! All along the track for miles, with
few exceptions, there was no sign of dwellers
in the homesteads ; no sign of sheep or cattle
grazing on the plains ; fences were broken
down; everything was in a dilapidated
condition. This part of the Victorian Colony
was evidently experiencing another of the
casual droughts. I must push on to the town-
ship, and “fossick” out some information on
the subject of an Australian drought.
Dwellers in the cities and urban districts of
the old country have but little conception of
the enormous and widespread distress and
anxiety caused to squatters and selectors in cer-
tain districts of Australia, especially in the
North-Western part of Victoria, and more par-
ticularly in that part that is commonly known
as the Mallee, or Northern districts of that
colony, where there is in a normal season an
enormous area of wheat under cultivation,
sufficient, if the harvest be favourable, to
supply probably all the demands of their own
population and a considerable surplus for ex-
port.
Many years ago, the '69 Land Act came
into existence, permitting any person, parents
of families, and even the children them-
selves, to select any portion of land, up to a


limited area of 320 acres, or half a block—the
square block, or whole selection being equal
to 640 acres, that is a mile square; this
amount of land was also allowed to squatters
wishing to protect their homesteads from selec-
tion.
There was a tremendous exodus at this time
from the Western Districts, and especially
from the S.A. Colony ; all classes went to the
Wimmeria country, and all sorts of means were
devised to transport goods, chattels, and pro-
visions, more particularly water, to enable the
would-be selectors to negotiate the ninety-mile
desert which lay between S.A. and Victoria.
Some of the camping grounds around the
water holes reminded one of a village feast;
all sorts and conditions of human beings
thoroughly enjoying themselves, concertinas
playing, bugles sounding, and the sonorous
trombone, as if they had already discovered
the Promised Land. They had yet to experi-
ence the value of water. The poor squatters
were nearly demented by the rapid and inces-
sant influx of these selectors, many of whom
had evidently never tasted the delights of a
bush life, and were seeking for a truly rural
existence far from the madding crow T d.
The general idea prevailing amongst them
was that this part was to be the “ cockatoos’ ”
newly found paradise; and in spite of the
Squatters’ ominous predictions—generally male


dictions —and the notes of warning uttered by
old hands about the recurring disastrous
droughts, they still continued to flock across the
border, facing the discomforts of the barren,
waterless, and sandy tract of country with a
total disregard of the horrors that were preached
to them.
They were like diggers struck with the gold
fever, they had got the land delirium on the
brain ; all attempts to frighten them from
pegging out were futile, and so week after
week the rush continued, and thousands of
acres of pastoral land were transferred from the
squatter to the selector.
The amount of litigation that ensued proved
a little gold mine to the lawyers ; and the
licensed surveyors profited to such an extent,
that eventually some of the more careful
amongst them blossomed out into full-blown
sheep farmers, or squatters in other districts.
A few of the more ambitious married money,
and actually had the honour of repre-
senting the “ cockatoos ” in the House of
Assembly.
As a sort of solatium, the squatters were
allowed to peg out, or retain certain areas, as
pre-emptive rights, round their respective
homesteads, woolsheds, and water holes ; but
the acreage was so restricted that the land was
of but little value or use to them; there was no
chance of the sheep wandering to the fenced-
M


off water holes, or dams, to quench their thirst,
when probably a dozen or so of “ cockatoos ”
were camped round, or in the vicinity.
Although one squatter alone spent some-
thing like £30,000 in litigation, and many
violent scenes were enacted at different times,
all his expense and efforts to dislodge the
selector were but in vain ; and the cry was
“ still they come.”
On one occasion, when a few would-be
selectors inquired of this litigating squatter at
his homestead, if he would supply them with
a pannikin of water, he blandly informed them,
with an “Ananiacal” smile, that there was
“ na watter ” in the country, and there had not
been any rain fall for years past, but he could
“ gie them a sma' wee drappit 0’ whuskey, but
ye ken nae watter.” At the same time he
possessed a well of beautiful clear water in his
backyard.
However, this information did not damp
their ardour, or deter them from still continu-
ing to peg out the land. Houses and shanties
were built, brush and log-wood fences were
erected, in many cases to be pulled down
again by the irate squatter; tanks were sunk,
to be filled up again by the same irascible in-
dividual. Improvements were pushed along
at a rapid rate, so that between the general im-
provements, and a malicious squatter, and
numerous law-suits, the selector at the begin


ning of his career, at any rate, had his time
fully occupied.
It therefore came to pass that, in the course
of a few years, the country that a short time
ago consisted of bull-oak and gum forests,
acacia scrub, and open plains, became trans-
formed, or metamorphosed into apparently a
successful and profitable farming area. And
so the settlers pushed on until the borders of
the great mallee scrub were reached, an im-
mense tract of sandy, waterless couhtry, densely
and closely timbered for miles upon miles by
the smooth and clean barked scrub, termed
eucalyptus dumosa, a smaller species of the
gigantic gum tree. Salty lakes are scattered
here and there, resembling on their surface
sheets of driven snow, iridescent in their
natural beauty, and sparkling in the sunlight
with a dazzling brilliancy. At this point, for
the time being, was the terminus of the
selector who faced the desert with its arid
plains. The tales of droughts deterred him
not, but this barren basaltic wilderness turned
him, so he, turning his face eastward, followed
the fringe of the mallee scrub, and crossing
the river Murray, turned his selecting pro-
pensities to the fond care of N.S.W.
Further south, townships sprang up in all
directions, wide well-marked roads were laid
out to all the main settlements, and narrower
roads were left for access to the different selec


tions and water holes. Every selector, accord-
ing to his means, erected substantial fences,
and the usual outbuildings necessary for farm-
ing purposes. Every shilling spent on improve-
ments, and in the cultivation of the soil, was
deducted from the total amount due by pur-
chase from the selector to the Government.
A Crown lands bailiff would estimate the
value of the improvements, and if this amount
reached the sum of the purchase of the selec-
tion, a Crown grant was issued to the selector
and the land became his freehold property.
All was bustle and glitter, there was a smile
on the face, but alas ! the tear was to follow.
The knowing ones looked askance, and
shaking their silvery locks, would wag
their heads and quietly remark, “ Bide a wee,”
and proceed to recount what were looked upon
by the listeners as fairy tales —the devastations
that had taken place in those parts in such
and such a year ; how, after long and con-
tinuous spells of hot winds and sand storms,
every river and water hole was dry ; how you
could walk along the beds of the famous Wim-
meria and Murray rivers ; when the sheep lay
rotting in thousands, and the kangaroos,
wallabys, and even the birds, died as they
attempted to move about in search of water.
No doubt there was a great element of truth
in their statements, which were taken as
exaggerated for the occasion.


I have very vivid recollections of an experi-
ence of similar occurrences in the shape of a
drought which transformed the hitherto ver-
dant plains, in a short space of time, into a
howling wilderness ; and the rivers, creeks,
and lagoons became as dry as the sand. Equal
almost to the celebrated “Black Thursday/' a
time unparalleled in colonial history as regards
the destruction of bush property. This disaster
was due to the firing of the immense quantity
of undergrowth that had been accumulating
for years past, and at that time there was a
want of experience in dealing with these
destructive bush fires.
During an engagement on a sheep station
situated in the mallee country, I gained my
first experience and taste of what a real drought
was like.
When arriving at the homestead, the country
was well and liberally supplied with water ;
the lake, some fifty miles in circumference,
was full and overflowing, creating, by means of
a small creek, a further supply into another
lake some few miles further north. All the
tanks were full, and there was an air of pros-
perity and contentment about the place,
employer, employes, and stock looking fit and
well. In our daily rides there was no difficulty
in finding small green patches of herbage on
the scattered plains, though somewhat limited
in area.


At the time I refer to there had been copious
falls of rain, and every prospect of good sea-
sons. The “ Boss ” therefore had naturally
concluded that an increase of stock would be
an advantage in many ways; more fat sheep,
more wool, more improvements and other
luxuries generally incidental to prosperity.
We were all therefore much occupied in re-
ceiving, counting, and culling out the new
arrivals, which invariably got mixed up with
other mobs of sheep on the route from one
station to another. This increase was duly
turned adrift to fatten, and wait events in the
future.
The counting of sheep as they rush wildly
through an open gateway requires consider-
able practice; as a rule the counter will station
himself at one of the side posts, and will count
in threes or fives. As soon as the hundred is
reached, he calls out “Tally," and a man standing
near with a stick in his hand will notch it as
the counter calls, and so the process goes on
until probably twenty or thirty thousand sheep
are passed through the gates, and it is marvel-
lous the correctness displayed in the enumera-
tion by a practised hand.
Soon after the genial rains had ceased, and
the grass had sprung up, as if in haste to
screen the baldness of the earth, an immense
change set in; the sun shone as if to make up
for an apparent reluctant holiday, and so it


continued to pour down its relentless heat day
after day, week after week, month after month,
and finding a genial companion in the strong
hot winds, the two elements concentrated their
united powers, and continuing to pile on the
agony with unabated vigour, the hitherto ver-
dant pastures were soon reduced to the appear-
ance of a bleached hide. The wind tore up
and wafted the dried-up grass far and wide,
the sun daily poured its rays upon the sand,
causing the winds to increase their heat, and
raising the temperature to a degree which
threatened annihilation or extinction to all
things breathing.
The thermometer having reached a happy
maximum settled there, and refused to budge
either in one direction or the other. The lakes
dried up, the tanks ran low. In the few re-
maining water holes in the bed of the river
were daily scenes of struggling sheep, who, in
endeavouring to quench their thirst, had be-
come embedded in the mud ; the more they
struggled and wriggled, the deeper they sank,
and there they lay exhausted, in the soft slimy
puddle, a helpless mass. Thus day after day
the irksome task of extrication went on from
early morn until the sun went down, to save
the pelt, if the carcass had to be sacrificed.
At the first glimpse of the daylight, all hands
were striving might and main to skin as many
sheep as possible, before the sun arose in


strength to render the task an impossibility.
The flocks were mustered during the hours of
the night, and driven or carried, as circum-
stances permitted, into the yards, but as a rule
few reached the enclosure alive, and in many
instances they had to be shorn where they
dropped.
To tackle the work of drafting a feeble lot
of sheep in a yard with clouds of blinding
dust, and the thermometer registering well
over the hundred in the shade, to carry them
out and skin them, and but little water of a
very inferior quality to quench the thirst, is a
task compared to which the fabled Herculean
job sinks into insignificance as a cheerful and
pleasant occupation.
Then follows the overwhelming catas-
trophe, a bush fire. A small wreath of smoke,
curling and rising gently up towards the sky,
is the first indication of an approaching con-
flagration. Immediately the horses are saddled,
and away helter skelter we ride to the scene.
Perhaps it is a brush boundary fence on fire,
or it may be the decayed undergrowth and
dead leaves that have been set alight by the
carelessness of a “ sundowner's ” not having
damped his fire properly down ; or it may
have had its origin in the reflection of the
sun's rays on a piece of broken glass. At any
rate, whatever the cause, the fire has worked
its way into an old log and brush fence, and


to save as much as possible is our main object.
The only remedy we have is to tear away the
fence in different sections, and having cleared
a sufficiently large space, to then start another
fire to meet the one already burning, and so let
the two meet and destroy each other.
This is well and good if the fire has not
reached any great dimensions ; but unfortu-
nately, in spite of the perspiring toil, and the
united energy of all engaged, a casual spark
will be wafted into the dead underwood in the
forests, and setting fire to the collection of
leaves and rubbish which has probably
lain there for years, all our labour is in vain ;
we have only one alternative now, and that is
to ride for bare life back to the homestead and
there exert all our powers and energies in the
protection of the station residence and build-
ings, which are placed in the greatest jeopardy
and danger.
We now start a fire in the long dry grass
from the boundary of the woolshed and stock-
yards, and having cleared a good-sized space,
we proceed to similar operations until we are
well clear of any danger arising from the
approaching raging element.
What a fearful, terrible sight! Only those
who have witnessed it can possibly imagine
the truly deplorable though magnificent spec-
tacle. As the fire gathers strength, so the
current of air increases, and travelling along


at a rapid pace, deals death, havoc, misery,
and annihilation in its track. All manner of
beasts, kangaroos, wallabys, paddymelons,
snakes, birds, come fleeing before the devas-
tating storm, many to be caught and over-
whelmed by heat and smoke, and perish in
the flames.
Unfortunately there are worse disasters to
be recorded amongst the many painful scenes
of demolition and destruction of vast areas of
country and station property in different parts.
One of these was the sad fate of three men
who were engaged in putting up a new brush
and log fence in the mallee. The difficulty of
discerning a bush fire in this densely timbered
country is extremely great ; it is only when
the conflagration has reached immense pro-
portions that the volume of smoke can be
observed, and often, as in this case, when it is
too late to effect a retreat, or escape from the
rapidly travelling and destructive conflagra-
tion. Thus these men, becoming no doubt
terrified and bewildered at the sudden ap-
proach of the raging element, lost all presence
of mind, and running hither and thither,
finally, blinded by the intense heat and smoke,
fell victims to this merciless enemy.
It is a difficult matter to convey a proper
description of the truly magnificent spectacle
which the forests present at night time after
the fire has passed over. For miles and miles,


especially on the sides of the ranges, will be
seen gigantic gum trees and the iron bark,
towering high up in the air, lighted up and
burning in every limb, like so many huge and
powerful torch-lights. Every now and again
one of these mighty denizens of the forest
will fall down with a tremendous crash, and in
its descent will throw out a variety of fire-
works ; when reaching the earth an enormous
shower of red-hot cinders will be shot up into
the sky, like a grand finale at a Crystal Palace
illumination and pyrotechnic display.
How true the presage of the “old hands"
was, has been proved of late years, and since
the land has been settled. What is known as
the great wheat centre, or area, has been
stricken in a greater or lesser degree by
droughts at different times, which have in
some instances paralysed production, and have
transformed these immense areas, which have
temporarily sustained a large population, into
a barren waste. It will devolve both upon the
Government and on the selectors themselves
to solve a problem of the greatest magnitude,
to provide the residents of the mallee-stricken
districts with a safer and surer means of reaping
a more productive harvest, and put on a firmer
basis the necessary forces of wealth-pro-
duction which they possibly no doubt con-
tain ; and to be the more effective, the
residential community must make every per


sonal effort to tackle this apparently impos-
sible task.
It is a case of history repeating itself.
Years ago it was Faith and Hope; it is still
the same old plea, hoping against hope.
Hope still remains at the bottom of the
Pandorian box. Hoping against hope that
surely the seasons would change, and bring
about the timely rains, and save their flocks
and crops from a dreadful disaster ; but it is,
judging from past reports, apparently only a
repetition of past experiences. Belated signs
appear, the moon with her halo, the frogs are
chirping, the] seaweed is damp, and so forth ;
but the signs are false, the rain comes not,
and so hundreds of miles of country are, as
in the past, abandoned to their fate. No
pasture to feed the stock ; no seed obtainable
to sow for another year’s crop ; not a drop of
water ; all is waste and utter desolation.
What the expectant “cockatoo” anticipated
in his enthusiasm has not been realised ; his
ideas of peace and plenty have not been
fulfilled ; the warning note is amply and fully
illustrated. Instead of waving paddocks of
ripening corn, in place of luxuriant fattening
herbage and sleek-coated stock in prime con-
dition, instead of all this, the land is as bare
and brown as a well-baked damper; all the
labour and toil exerted in the fields with so
much care and patience, has simply produced


some lanky erratic straws, which will never
require the labour of a mower or need
the blade of a scythe, and will, in all proba-
bility, be wafted into oblivion by the first hot
wind that blows.
There is only one alternative left to the
unfortunate selector, and that is to move into
fairer and more favoured regions, repeating in
a lesser degree, as regards stock, the anxious
movements of the squatters in the earlier
years. To move away, this is the last hope
and chance of saving the lives of the gaunt
and rough-coated stock, and so they travel in
a semi-transparent condition, their strength
permitting them, in the death-dodging task of
struggling from the drought-stricken area.
In spite of all this desolation, in spite of
the too oft-recurring droughts, it is to be
hoped there is still a brighter future in store
for these unfortunate cultivators of the soil,
which will yet obliterate the scenes of a sad
and gloomy picture.
On some of the more important river fron-
tages, irrigated areas are to be seen, and where
the contrast is painfully visible, in these parts
the cultivation is bright and green, and the
stock strong and vigorous. There is no doubt
that the mallee country has a rich soil, and is
easily cultivated, and even with a moderate
rainfall will grow a fair crop of corn, and sus-
tain a limited population ; but there is to be


taken into serious consideration the average
rainfall, and this, as a general experience, is
very small, so that there is but a poor and
remote chance of securing a sufficient supply
of water for irrigation purposes ; but it might
be possible, and practicable, to conserve a
sufficient quantity to bring to maturity a
moderate crop ; but in the majority of in-
stances, where there is good pasture, there is,
almost without exception, a total absence of
water.
The same may be said of the herbage.
Where there is good grazing, the water is
situated probably some miles distant; and no
selector has yet taken up land who has found
it a profitable and genial occupation to cart
water many miles from lake, lagoon or river,
under a scorching sun, and over deep sand-
hills, and through a barren and deserted land.
There is not the slightest doubt that for a
number of years the selectors have been con-
cealing, as far as circumstances permitted, the
extent of their distress, and in the same ratio
as the squatters publicly published their
troubles from the same causes, viz., disas-
trous droughts. So they have hoped on,
and bravely met their disasters; but their
fate, like the pioneers of earlier years, is prac-
tically inevitable, and must come sooner or
later; the mallee settlers will find that the
“ fairy tales,” uttered and recounted as already


mentioned, will be only too fully verified;
and the magnitude of the disasters, as recorded
by the “ old hands” in the earlier years, will
be thoroughly exemplified in their time, if
they have not been so already. And, more-
over, it is sincerely to be hoped that those
who still remain on the land, with a firm and
stubborn intention to see it through, and face
the worst, will keep up a stout heart in their
arduous task. It is to be hoped they will
receive every practical and sympathetic
assistance from the powers that be, but they
must bear in mind that as the early pioneer
had to face and meet these difficulties,
dangers and disasters single-handed, so they,
on the other hand, can be comforted with
the thought that assistance will surely be
rendered to them in their troubles by a
paternal and benevolent Government.


CHAPTER XVI.
THE RETURN JOURNEY HOME.
Having now passed through the varied experi-
ences and vicissitudes of a colonial life, in the
way of jackarooing, overlanding, sugar planting
and crushing, trapping, etc. ; having wan-
dered through the immense tracts of the great
mallee scrub, on foot and otherwise, and
having viewed the terrific and disastrous bush
fires, and had some practical experience of an
Australian drought, I wander once more
across to the Murray river, at Swan Hill, to
take a last long, lingering look at the famous
stream, in which I have had a few mishaps,
many a pleasant swim, and in which I have
caught many a cod. Bidding an adieu and a
last farewell to these scenes with a pang of
regret, I take my seat in the train, and in the
evening am landed once again in the Port
Philip Station and Melbourne.
With a stay here of brief duration, I am on


the move again, ocean bound, en route for
New Zealand.
Steaming along the coast from the bluff we
pass the various ports of interest. Although we
anchor for the night, we have but little time
to view Dunedin and Christchurch; just
enough to say that we have been there.
Reaching the windy town of Wellington, we
tranship to another steamer, and start on our long
return journey via the historical Cape Horn
and the “roaring forties.” There is not much to
be seen, except huge icicles hanging from the
rigging, snow storms, mighty waves, and a
distant sight of the gigantic and phantom look-
ing icebergs, a well illustrated case of “ dis-
tance lending enchantment to the view.”
These enormous blocks of ice and snow re-
semble the frosty scenes depicted on some of
the Christmas cards—a majestic snowy white
castle, standing on the side of the snow-clad
mountains, the different points and peaks
rising perpendicularly from the summit and
rendering the illusion more picturesque and
perfect.
The climate is too bitterly cold to admit of
perambulating the decks, so, as a general rule,
the heated atmosphere of the smoking-room is
the favourite resort. The voyage is quiet,
and most uneventful, the cold and stormy
weather precluding any desire for amusements
on board.
N


So we pursue our course past the Falkland
Islands, leaving the Magellan on one side, our
captain evidently preferring the open sea to
the tortuous and somewhat hazardous route
through the straits. Now we come in sight
of the South American coast; whilst steaming
along we encounter one of the mighty whirl-
winds which take their rise in the river La
Plata, and coursing down between the banks
of the stream, as it travels gaining strength
and impetus, as if in a funnel. This is termed
the “ Vampire/' When reaching the mouth,
where the waters enter the sea—the river at
this point being about three hundred miles
wide—the fishermen, hearing the sound of
this blast echoing down from the river’s source,
are warned that it is time to clear out; so
rapidly hoisting the mainsail, they speedily
make tracks for the open sea. The puff of
wind comes on us like a sudden squall, helping
us on our way. So we reach the bay of Santa
Cruz, and passing through a narrow entrance,
fortified by sundry guns, we enter the first bay.
Steaming onward, we pass into a large open
sheet of water with a beautiful transparent
dark blue tint. This bay, which is pro-
tected by guns placed in the fortress, is
spoken of as a fac-simile of the celebrated
Bay of Naples, as regards the lovely tints of
the water, its picturesque position, and general
climatic influences.


We now reach the harbour of Rio de
Janeiro, commonly termed “ Rio.” Here we
go ashore. What a wretched, dirty, miser-
able looking town, and what an evil-looking
lot of characters engaged in the manual
labour on the wharves ! Passing through
this heterogeneous mixture of Spanish and
Portuguese, we proceed into the town. It is
no cause of surprise, from the sights we see,
that the “ Yellow Jack ” is a constant visitor, and
flourishes and finds a congenial abode in this
spot. The sanitary state and condition through-
out the place would encourage the visitation
and permanent retention of any contagious
epidemic. There is, however, one redeeming
feature—the Botanic Gardens, which are
situated about four miles out of this pestilen-
tial resort. What a beautiful, verdant picture
is here presented to the gaze in tropical plants
and foliage! It would indeed be difficult to
find more lovely scenery than is represented
in these beautiful gardens.
Having visited the apparently principal and
only sight, we return on board, and fondly
hope we carry no germs with us. So the
anchor is weighed, and once again we sail,
and in due course we sight the noted and con-
spicuous peaks of Teneriffe, rising elongated
and spire-like towards the sky, to a height of
something like 14,000 feet. This can be seen
a distance of 100 miles from on board ship.


We drop anchor at this point, and, landing,
come into contact with “ Espanola,” this being
essentially a Spanish settlement. Here you
can experience, or enjoy, a distinct variety of
climates, beginning at a hot temperature, and
lowering it by degrees to a more moderate
degree of heat as you ascend the peak.
Our stay here is of short duration, so we
sail once again, and with a fairly decent
passage across the well-known Bay of Biscay,
we find ourselves at early morn comfortably
installed and riding at anchor in Plymouth
Sound, viewing once more, after many years
of heat, hardships, and toil, the delightful,
homely shores of Old England. Though the
climate is liberally abused, and the generality
of the inhabitants are not always in accord, or
in mutual sympathy with the colonial habits
and manners, yet there are few who have
travelled far and wide who are not delighted,
and relieved, to return from the distant lands;
and settle once again in comfortable and hos-
pitable Old England.
FINIS.
The iVawBH passa, Printers, High Street, Lewes,,


“ The Suffrage movement ha* now arrived at its literature.’'
The first popular novel dealing with the Women’s
Suffrage Question.
Outlawed. Is Nct
By Mrs. DESPARD & MABEL COLLINS
(Mrs. Kenlngals Cook).
Apart from an excellent and original plot the hook contains
a vivid description of Mrs. Despard’s prison experiences
and observations.
“ The pages of this book thrill with intrigue, romance, in-
justice, and murder. It is this same murder that has given Mrs.
Despard her great opportunity. ... In her story of prison
life she is particularly interesting.'’—Daffy Express.
“ It will, no doubt, be widely read,"— Scotsman.
“ The authors can be congratulated on having turned out a
readable story with plenty of dramatic effect and a lot of surface
sentiment." —Dundee Advertiser.
“ A story round the prison experiences of Mrs, Despard.”—
Glasgow News.
"Exceedingly well written, with keen and yet restrained
phrasing and refined and yet brilliant thinking.”— Light.
You should Order a Copy of this Book
at once.
Henry J. Drane, ltd., Danegeld House, 82a, Parting don St.


TWO BOOKS WORTH READING,
The Trail
of the Jesuit.
By CLUNIE MAXTON.
Cr. Bvo, Cloth Extra. 6s.
“ Miss Maxton’s first novel showed distinct promise, and there
is an improvement both in manner and matter in the present
romance. . . . The dialogue is bright and crisp."— Dundee
Advertiser,
“ The tale is exciting enough, and the author can write very
well."— Dundee Courier.
“ Miss Maxton can depict character and tell a tale effectively."
—Birmingham Daily Post.
"An extremely good story." —Sheffield Daily Telegraph.
BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Heir to a Million.
Cr. Bvo , Cloth Extra. 6s.
"An interesting Irish story, well though simply written.”—
Literary World.
" A story which interests us."— Gentlewoman,
“ Readers who like a good, straightforward story will find this
book interesting." —Liverpool Courier,
"The story is well written, and of interest throughout."—
Manchester Courier.
Henry J, Drane, ltd., Danegeld House, 82a, Farringdon St.
———E.O.——


A Fait 1 Suffragette.
6S. By ADRIENNE MOLLWO.
In addition to an excellent plot the author makes a most
sensible proposition by which the Women’s Suffrage Question
may be settled.
Great Suffragists and Why.
2s. 6c/. net . By ETHEL HILL and
Mrs. OLGA FENTON SHAFER.
With photographs of all the leading Suffragists.
Gems of Thoughts. is.
Being a selection of Quotations from the Sermons of
Father Stanton.
A thought for every day in the Christian year, forming an
ideal Birthday Book for Church people and others,
A Dog’s Life in Burma.
3s, 6d. By “THE DOG.”
An amusing story, introducing Burmese manners and
customs.
Through the Malay Archipelago.
6s. By EMILY RICHINGS.
An interesting story of a journey through a little-known
locality.
The Moralists’ Birthday Book.
7s, By MARK MEREDITH.
Containing a selection for each day of the year from the works
of well-known philosophers.


New Books just published by HENRY J. DRANE, Ltd,
As They Are. 3s. 6d. net.
By "BARTHOLOMEW.”
With a Preface by Madame Sarah Grand.
The Glasgow Herald says: “ Realistic and sincere, yet
humorously light and artistically telling.”
Helen Polska’s Lover.
By ADOLPHE DANZIGER.
Cr. Bi'Oj Cloth , 6s> Paper , Is. net.
The British Times and Mirror says : “ Not only a most enter-
taining picture of manners and life in Poland, but a story of real
interest.”
Hearthrug Comedies.
Is.
By D,
The Sheffield Daily Telegraph says : " A volume of capital
little plays.”
“ Bright little pieces, on which 1 amateurs ’ would do well to
expend a shilling.”— Oxford Magazine.
The Red King’s Dream. Is.
By E. M. RUTHERFORD.
The Dundee Courier says: “We have rarely seen such mental
talent, coupled with such true poetic fervour and fancy."
JUST ISSUED.
A Wild Rose. Is. net.
By MAY LITCHFIELD.
Illustrated by W. M. Shilungford.
An attractive booklet printed and illustrated in colours.
tome and Germany.
2S. 6d, net. By “WATCHMAN.
‘The Plot for the Downfall of Britain.
In this book the author’s amazing statements are amply borne
t by quotations from leading men of all ages.
