

J'ht
A 7 '^,
IGESS, “/f*
LIFE
OF
RICHARD BURGESS,
THE NOTORIOUS
HIGHWAYMAN AND MURDERER,
1+ ■ m, .
% \j~ k iL*-
(j i
PRICE—ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.
WARD AND REEVES, PRINTERS, GLOUCESTER STREET, CHRISTCHURCH.
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF, WHILE IN PRISON, SHORTLY
BEFORE HIS EXECUTION, WHICH TOOK PLACE
AT NELSON,- N.Z., ON THE FIFTH DAY
OF OCTOBER, 1866.




AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF
RICHARD BURGESS.
[Burgess, the notorious Highwayman and Murderer, who was hanged at Nelson on the s ih of
October, 1866, left behind him the following account of his life, written by himself just
before his execution.']
Bear Reader, — A good beginning in this
life redounds to one’s advantage, if rightly
applied. In reading these my memoirs, you
will see, by not using the talent entrusted to
my care aright, what misery and crime is the
consequence; but I will not anticipate. Your
humble servant was born in the year of Grace
eighteen hundred and twenty-nine, on the
fourteenth of February, so that at the present
time I am in my thirty-eighth year. I was
born at a place called Hatton Gardens, at the
west end of London, of honest and well-
meaning parents, as far as I know, for that
knowledge is limited to my maternal parent.
My father I never knew; that is to say, I
was not brought up under his care and nurture.
My ideas are very confused, even to the pre-
sent, respecting him; all I know is from my
mother. She was a lady’s maid to the family
of Lord Grosvenor. While there, I take it,
she fell a victim to the blandishments of some
one connected with the Horse Guards. I
believe I was the fruit of her betrayal, by a
wretch worse than myself in that he neglected
her in after life. My earliest recollections are
very vivid, so that my whole life lies before
me like a map of the Globe. I grew till I
attained the age of eight or nine. All these
years I knew but a mother’s care. I was now
of an age sufficient to know right from wrong,
and was very observant of all that passed. I
used to notice my poor old mother give vent
to her tears, in the presence of a male friend.
One day, while in her tears, I ventured to ask
her who he was that made her cry, when I
was subjected to a fondling, and told he was
my father. His visits wore very distant, so
that when I used to see him I had nearly
forgotten who he was, I remember on one
occasion he took me to his arms and kissed
me, and told me to be a good boy to my
mother ; that was the only paternal embrace,
to my knowledge, I ever received from the
author of my birth. So you may say that I
never knew a father’s care or love. At this
time my maternal parent was very much re-
spected by all who knew her. I trust she was to
the end of her days, God bless her. Her educa-
tion was very superior to that of her neighbours.
She brought me up in the love and fear of
God in her simple way, as far as causing me
to attend a place of worship —that being the
acme of her ideas of religion. Her worldly
means were not affluent. She had an income
in her own right, she received from an aged
aunt, prior to my birth. With this she
maintained herself, and among her frienda
passed as a widow; for such she was, to all
intents and purposes, for a more abstemious
woman never lived. About this time I was
twelve years old, when'we removed to the
east end of London, to a place called Milk
street, Commercial road. There I attended
school, until my unruly conduct caused my
expulsion therefrom. This incident nearly
broke my old parent’s heart; her over-indul-
gence was beginning to bear fruit already, and
that she could see. This event caused us to
remove again, this time to a place called
Hoxton New-town. There I was sent to an
academy kept by a Mr. Fry. I also attended
a Sunday school, at a place called Ivy lane.
Things continued at this for some time, with-
out anything remarkable happening that is
worthy of notice here, with the exception of
mother giving me repeated injunctions to keep
from the water —the Regent’s canal being nofe
far distant. In defiance of her commands, I


was a constant visitor thereto. One day I
remember testing my abilities to swim across
the said canal, accompanied by a youth older
than myself. While doing so, I got so fright-
ened, that I ceased swimming, and clang to
my companion. We went to the bottom
together, when he managed to free himself
from my embrace. There I was left flounder-
ing by myself and drowning. My mother’s
words were echoing in my disobedient cars 5
and the thought of her distress was all that
troubled me—as for my own death, that gave
me no concern whatever. I was sinking for a
third time, when I was rescued by a bargeman
from this impending death. I was carried
home in a blanket. This upset the old lady’s
equilibrium for some time. She was naturally
delicate. To gain her confidence, I went on
very steady for some time. While we had
been here, mother became acquainted with a
Mr. W s. He was a widower, and had
some four children —three boys and one girl.
The hoys, two of them, were my seniors ; the
girl, Emma by name, was about my own age.
Mr. W s was a master cabinet-maker.
This acquaintance grew till they became very
intimate. It ended in our taking up our
abode at bis residence 5 and I was bid be very
civil towards him and his children ; that he
would he to me a father, &c. Whether this
union was sanctioned by a celebration of the
marriage rites I know not j but I trust it was.
Whether or not, it docs not become me to
pass any strictures on my poor old mother.
This I know for certain, it was the beginning
of my woe and trouble, for there was an ill-
feeling between us boys; but in all our
bickerings I was ever thrown to the wall, no
matter how trifling the event. This treatment
engendered hatred in my heart, young though
I was, to all the W s, except to the girl
Emma, who was my only friend among them,
for she herself was neglected by the rest; but
in me she found a brother, and Ia sister —
for a sister she was to me, and a good one,
God bless her, and may she never hear of my
exit from this world. At this time an event
happened which caused my dismissal from
this school also. It was this —the boys had a
fashion of sharpening their pencils to an
extreme point. One of the lads put the
pointed end up his right nostril, and there
kept it balanced, when I gave it a blow with
my hand and drove it up his nose, so that he
bled my profusely. A doctor had to be sent
for to extricate it. This caused me to be
severely punished, and forbid the school,
which was the last school I went to. Mr.
W s then took me in hand to learn me
his trade ; his eldest son George was an excel-
lent tradesman, so I was put principally under
him, my arch-enemy of the whole W s. I
made very little progress under him, you may
depend, for his very words were gall to me.
The only improvement I made in the cabinet-
making business was to clean the workmen’s
rubbish from them ; and occasionally sleep in
the shop for punishment. My poor old mother
had to look on and see her poor neglected boy,
as she used to call me, castigated for the least
thing ; and the only friend and soother I had
was my little Emma, who was held in the
same estimation nearly as myself by the
remainder of the W-——s.
At this time I had attained the age of four-
teen, so I came to the resolve of leaving my
no longer peaceful home. With this I re-
moved myself to the Surrey side of the
Thames; there I became acquainted with
youths more advanced in years than myself,
and with whom I found a ready welcome. It
is needless for me to say that they were all, so
to speak, City Arabs, as it were. Their pre-
datory acts were principally confined to picking
women’s pockets. I was but a neophyte at
the trade; so much so, that my first essay at
the business was very clumsily executed, in
that I had to run for my bare life. I after-
wards became proficient, as you will see. The
manner of perfecting ourselves therein was
this : —The girls of our acquaintance used to
put anything in their pockets, and parade to
and fro ; the young beginner was then deputed
to rob them of what they had, without being
detected, till he made himself quite perfect.
This was the testing ordeal of our abilities. I
soon acquired such proficiency that I was pro-
nounced perfect. I remember being in atten-
dance at the Olympic Theatre when my first
mishap befcl me. It was this : —I was in the
lobby when an old lady passed to go to her
carriage, when I followed her out. When I
gained the pathway I approached the lady,
but in so doing I was observed (unknown to
me) by a detective, so that I was taken in the
very act of robbing her. Only she begged
very hard for me I should have been trans-
ported for it, instead of which I received six
months’ imprisonment, to be flogged in and
out by the birch. While doing this sentence,
I received the first letter in my life from my
distracted parent. Oh! the bitter anguish
this epistle caused me; it brought me to
acknowledge to myself that I was a bad boy.
I made all sorts of resolutions, to the effect
that I would return to her on my enlargement.
The time came for me to put my resolution to
the test. On the morning of my discharge,
after receiving thirty-six stripes with the birch
on my nether person, I was lectured by the
clergyman of the prison against pursuing such
a course of sin. When I gained the outside
there were the two best friends I had in the
world waiting my coming—my mother and
Emma. On the opposite side there were some
of my companions, who came to claim me as
their own, for the dissolute life I led prior to
my incarceration suited my pampered and
vicious ideas of life ; so, after all my rash pro-
mises to return to my neglected parent, I left her
weeping for her erring son, and responded to
the invitation of my companions. In looking
back at this incident, I blush for very shame
Here was a kind mother and foster-sister;


entreating my return to the paths of rectitude j
on the other side, was vice and crime awaiting
their victim, so that I chose the latter of
these courses, because my very nature was
bad. Oh, Cfod! impute not unto me, when
thou comest into judgment with Thy servant.
I bid my parent good bye, and joined my com-
rades. 1 told them how I bore my sentence,
when they one and all remarked it was nothing,
although I was writhing with pain from my
recent flogging. At the renewal of our
acquaintance, I was introduced to all scenes of
vice and dissipation—for I was considered
very clever among them, for I was very daring
and fearless, which caused me to boa favourite.
I continued leading this sinful life for some
time, in consequence of being fortunate in my
nefarious pursuits. I lived, comparatively
speaking, a gentleman’s life ; I bad everything
you could wish for at my stage of life. Some-
times I would throw myself in my parent’s
way, just to see her as it were, on which
occasions they were ever accompanied with
entreaties to return to my home, and all would
be forgotten. But to no purpose were her per-
suasions ; the thought of the W s was
quite enough for me. I frequented all the
places of amusement —races, theatres, free-and-
easies; in fact, all places where crime was
likely to be effected, there were to be found
its votaries. I was that perfect in my pursuits,
that I became the associate of men who were
old enough to be my father; so that, besides
following the profession of a pickpocket, I
added that of a housebreaker. This was prin-
cipally carried on in the suburbs of London
and other isolated gentlemen’s villas ; in such
places as Claphara, Balston, and Kingston.
At this time I had attained the age of
sixteen, and was as smart a youth as was to
be found among my connection. I remember
having my last interview with my beloved
sister; it happened on a Sabbath day. She
was on her way to church when I met her.
On our first meeting I perceived her counte-
nance suffused, whether it was at my shame
in being a transgressor, or at her own maiden
coyness, I know not. O how she did beg of
me to cease from doing evil, and to return
home with her; but all to no use. I was
leading too gay a life —Oh, bitter gayness!
We waited till we reached the house of God,
where I left this angelic creature. I pro-
ceeded to crime and death; she to peace and
happiness.
At this time we were contemplating robbing
a place at Clapham, being a gentleman’s villa.
We went, and succeeded. We returned,
laden with spoil, being, for the most part, the
plate of the family. This, as all ill-gotten
property, was disposed of at a great sacrifice
ofits intrinsic value. After this my last act
of sin in robbing my fellow, I was coming out
too gay, which caused a jealous feeling among
m y former confreres, so that it got noised
abroad, when it reached the ears of one of our
first-class detectives (he ia now an Inspector
of Police). The upshot of this was that
we were suspected, and eventually arrested.
They traced the stolen property, which led to
our conviction. We were tried at the Old
Bailey, and received fifteen years’ transporta-
tion across the seas. This put a stop to my
career as a London pickpocket and house-
breaker. I was sent to the New Model Prison,
Chalk Farm, in the suburbs of London j my
companions went to Van Dieman’s Land by
the ship Egyptian. At the time I went to
this Model Prison, which was in the year ’45,
the prisoners were dying like rotten sheep,
through starvation and an insufficiency of fresh
air, the cells being very badly ventilated. Be-
hold me now, the inmate of a dungeon drear!
0 that I had been prevailed on with the kind
entreaties of a loving mother, and returned
to her, like a prodigal son that I was. No,
1 was now about to receive the fruits of my
labours. This event brought my heart-broken
parent to me at the first convenience. In the
meantime I began to look about mo, and to
understand the awfulness of my position.
Here I was the sole inhabitant of a cell, fitted
up with the necessary conveniences for the
confined. I had received a sentence of fifteen
yeai’s. I had not the faintest conception
about how long I was to be thus confined.
Thus immured from home and friends, even
from those in a similar state, for this was one
of complete isolation, no corresponding with
your fellows; in fact, had I been conveyed
there in the dark, I should not have been
sensible that others were confined under the
same roof. This I thought was horrible
treatment to subject a fellow-creature to, not
looking at the heinous offences of which I had
been guilty. I thought that I did not merit
such treatment as this; my ideas were very
crude with respect to my deserts. I thus
remained for six months before I saw that
ever-kind parent. Our meeting was an awful
one ; she being so delicate of constitution, could
not bring herself to battle with my misfortune,
but made it her own, at the cost of her entire
prostration of mind and body. When she
recovered herself sufficient, then it was not
bitter words of reproach she upbraided me with
to make my position worse; no, but words of
gentle import, as she was ever wont to use
towards her reprobate of a son, for she was
the best of mothers. G-od, hear my prayer,
that she may find Thee a merciful God, who
will acquit her from all her many sins and
infirmities! On her leaving me, I then felt my
position; she went to her liberty, I prevented
from following her. In words I cannot de-
scribe my true state of mind; but from my feeble
description, a son will, if he has been guilty of
causing unhappiness to his maternal parent,
go, I say, instantly, and make reparation to her
by a filial embrace, and ask her forgiveness.
While bidding you to do so in these few words,
they wring my heart with poignant grief. I
remained thus confined without receiving any
consoling visitors, with the exception of the


chaplain of the gaol; but I received conso-
lation from another source. As regular as the
time went round, came my letters from those
who were suffering equally with myself. How
oft used I to peruse them, till each word w r as
engraved on my heart. I had now been con-
fined nearly twenty months, all of which were
spent in the strictest seclusion. I was made
acquainted that I was shortly to leave my
dismal abode for the Australian Colonies.
This news of joy to mo nearly drove me
distracted; was it possible, I thought; I could
not bring myself to believe it. My parent was
notified of the expected departure of her sou.
This brought her and my dear girl of a sister
as I ever considered her. The interview was
the last we had on earth; for her prophetic
words have been realized These were her
parting salutations, with our hands clasped in
each other— c< Good bye, son, you have been
hitherto a bad boy; and now I am about
to lose you for ever, for we shall never meet
again; God protect you!” She told me my
sister could not overcome her grief to warrant
her to come and see me; so she remained
outside the prison doors. AVe parted ; she
left with me the little presents she brought,
to be kept by me as souvenirs . Hers consisted
of a beautiful Bible, and a portion of her and
Emma’s hair, with braces, gloves, and mittens.
Thus I took my last farewell of one of the
best of mothers : and was about to leave my
native land, never to see it more.
From the dread I entertained, after my
incarceration, at the punishment inflicted
on evildoers for their offences, I am con-
vinced that had I been left at my liberty in
England, after I had fulfilled the stipulated
period of confinement, I should have become
a reformed member of society, instead of the
scourge I have proved. In after years, when I
was again immured for an indefinite period of
time, how different then were my views. I
looked upon it in a far different light. I
considered the Government were doing me a
kindness ; for I was away from all labour,
and other incidents attendant on a prison life.
Besides all this, it gave me an opportunity for
thought; and since I had adopted myself to
an evil course as a profession, I was thus
enabled to put myself through a course of
study, being principally how I could effect my
illicit purposes without detection. So that I
look upon your models and close confinement
as # schools for studying how to perpetrate
crime, for old offenders in crime. They may
be very well for youths who have just com-
menced their career, for I proved that in my
Own case. It is not so with men with whom
I have been thrown amongst; no, I have
known men commit themselves on purpose, if
they thought it would lead to their being
confined where they would be away from
all labour and other annoyances. This is the
view they take of it; that it is the very thing
they would prefer as a relaxation from work,
Which latter they abhor. No, instead of these,
as I have said at the beginning, if the religion
of Christ was made the medium of convincing
them of the viciousness of the course they are
following, it would be the means of winning
poor lost souls to Him. I mean, that they
should be simply shown Him as He is, an
all-forgiving God, This may seem strange to
the ears of many, in hearing one thus descant
who all his life has been such an heinous
sinner. In fact, I can hardly realise the import
of my own advice; but I feel a something
within me that tells me I have been a wicked
wretch. But with all these selfeconvictions
and upbraiding, I am bid come and rid myself
of my sinful burden. By whom thus invited ?
By Jesus Christ, who Himself suffered death
once, that I should not suffer and die eternally.
Think not these ideas are produced through
cowardice from the impending fate that awaits
me. No ! God forbid ! for when living I
possessed a superabundance of physical cou-
rage—as is well known, I was courageous to
a fault, so that I saw no danger. No! they
are engendered from a conviction of my need
of the interposition of the Mediator Christ,
the Lord of Heaven and Earth.
The time arrived that I was to leave for the
colonies. I went on board the ship Joseph
Somes, which was to convey mo to my desti-
nation. On board with myself were some three
hundred prisoners; all young men. There
was nothing of consequence occurred on
shipboard worthy of notice, only the invari-
able accompaniment of the sea sickness, which
I was exempt from; for I never, experienced
any disagreeable sensation in my life from sea
travelling. We reached Melbourne, I believe,
in the month of September, in the year forty-
seven, at which time I had nearly attained my
eighteenth year. We all took up conditional
pardons, which specified that we were free,
but not to return to the United Kingdom of
Great Britain till the expiration of our sen-
tences. Thus once more I was free; true it
was on a banished shore; that gave me very
little concern whatever. On the passage out
I cultivated the acquaintance of a young man
who was by trade a stonecutter, and if was
arranged that when we reached the colonies
we were to become mates, and he would teach
me his trade. At Melbourne he soon obtained
work, and by my assistance we earned good
money; hut through being thrown back among
the same as myself, the germs of good I pur-
posed were completely eradicated, so that I
was ready to begin again my old practice. At
the time I speak of, some nineteen years gone
past, there were very few police in the colony,
so that we had the country, so to speak, to
ourselves. I remained at the stonecutting
business for a while, and made great profici-
ency therein, so that in after life I attained
such skill in the said, that very few in the
colonies could surpass me. I perfected myself
at the hulk and at Pentridge, At my then
time of life labour of any description was bur-
densome, so X gave up the honest calling I was


following for one of dissolution and profligacy.
Asa blind as to what I was, I entered the
services of a gentleman holding an official ap-
pointment, being no less a personage than Capt.
Grey, the District Magistrate of Geelong.
During the time I was thus employed I was
robbing at every opportunity. While in his
service I robbed a Mr. M‘Clarty, a publican, on
his way from the steamer to his own house.
With me was a shipmate. We had been in-
formed he had been to Melbourne to get some
money, for at the time I speak of there was no
bank at Geelong. Directly he reached a place
that was then called the beach, we caught him,
and to prevent him from calling out my com-
panion put his hand over his mouth, in doing
which Mr. Mac. bit him by the finger; buthewas
a true Spartan, he bore it without complaining.
We got a good bit of money from him. The
next day my employer asked me if I had seen
a man with his left hand tied up, as he (Mr.
Mac.) had been violently robbed last night,
but that he had bitten one of the robbers.
Little did he then know that he was speaking
to one of the robbers. I left his honest em-
ploy to go to Adelaide, with a young man who
was a very clever pensman. We were disap-
pointed when we got there as to the place; we
bad been informed it was a more flourishing
place than Melbourne. While here we effected
several clever forgeries ; but in my absence he
tendered a cheque and got detected, which also
led to my arrest for one X had previously got
honoured. The result of this was that I got
eighteen months, and my companion four
years.
I had now become a hardened wretch, and
thought nothing of being incarcerated for an
offence. On leaving England I left behind all
those ideas of rectitude. Here it was thought
nothing of to get a few years of trouble and
misery, so that I did the above sentence with-
out any repining at my position. On obtain-
ing my liberty, X returned back to Melbourne,
prior to leaving which, I seduced a native girl,
and on my return I found she was one of the
Magdalens of the street. God! in Thy judg-
ments of me, cast this foul sin with the re-
mainder behind Thy back, and charge me not
therewith ! I then took her with me to share
my home, wretch that I was; thus we lived
in sin and shame till the diggings opened.
Prior to the Ballarat diggings breaking out,
1 became acquainted with a butcher. He did
■not follow his business as such, but dealt in
cattle and sheep. I joined him in the whole-
sale stealing of the said. The manner of it
was this : —We used to go to the different sta-
tions for the purpose of purchasing a few head
of cattle—say fifty or sixty. (Meat at this
time was sold for a penny the pound.) On
our way to town we took all the less frequented
tracks, and on the road we used to pick up
some as we went along—say twenty from this
place, fifty from that, till we reached town ;
then they were sold by him to the butchers,
“y modicum being, a share of those we stole
on the way. Sheep were acquired in the same
way. While we were together I think we
must have stolen upwards of five hundred
head of cattle, beside sheep to a great number.
This was not all. At this time horse-stealing
was very rife, so that in our journeys we
brought many horses to town and sold them.
This latter was the great difficulty, but that
was got over by my friend, for there was a
secret understanding between him and the
auctioneer. We were the first that brought
cattle to Ballarat, and had I have stopped
with this butcher (I mention no name, because
I don’t wish to compromise him; I trust he
has ceased from such ways, because his status
in society is one of dignity at the present
time) for six months after their opening, I
should have been an independent man. From
meat being at a very low price (prior to this
you could buy a prime beast in the market for
about three or four pounds), it rose from a
penny a pound to fourpence. After the disso-
lution of our nefarious partnership I became
acquainted with a great many such as myself,
who had flocked to the diggings from all parts.
At the time of which I am speaking the pre-
vailing element of the inhabitants was com-
posed of expiree convicts from Van Dieman’s
Land, and the new importation of conditional
pardoned men. What with my shipmates and
others of the same stamp, there was no avoid-
ing them. The gold was easily obtained, no
labour to speak of being required, the sink-
ing not exceeding then from six to eight
feet. Had I, like the majority, gone
digging, I should probably have avoided suf-
fering the fate that awaits me. No, this was
not the first opportunity I had to raise myself
from my position; —no, it suited me to follow
it in preference to an honest one. The life the
body of diggers were leading was something
new to me, for everything was carried on to an
extravagance. Gambling was the chief thing
thought of, and I ever, from a hoy, was fond of
winning from my fellows, were it but a few
marbles ; but the scenes of every day’s profit
and loss were to my ideas the very quint-
essence of a gambler’s life. Being the votary
to this worst of passions, I was its tool and
shuttlecock. I had not been long here before
I required funds, and to obtain which I had
recourse to open violence.
My awful life is now about to commence.
I shall not be able to particularise each rob-
bery I perpetrated. No; such is not my
wish ; but I must state that I was doing nothing
else. I must mention here the inducements
there were for men to rob and plunder. There
was no Commissioner here at the time I
arrived, so that the diggers had no protection;
consequently, they had all to mind their own
gold, which, in unnumbered cases, was taken
from them in the open day, in presence of the
body of diggers. When the Commission®
and suite came, things were very nearly the
same as before; certainly, the diggers made
him the depository of their gold, for which


they received a receipt on the Treasury in
Melbourne. Now, mark the fiirasiness of
such a guarantee for their depositing their
gold with the Government. This said receipt
purported to deliver the amount of gold
specified thereon to the person answering to
the name inscribed on it; so that there was
hardly a digger robbed but what he possessed
one or more of these said receipts, which, on
losing, he lost his gold, if he did not reach
town before the robbers ; which, if it was for
a large amount, he was prevented either
by detention or murdered. Shortly after I
arrived at these diggings, I became acquainted
with a young man by the name of Keefe ;he
had not long been from Norfolk Island; he is
since dead. Him I made my mate, because
his tastes and habits were congenial with my
own. X remember we were going to stick up
a place on the Sunday night, to effect which
He began cleaning the fire-arms ; in doing so,
he took hold of a piece that was loaded, and
of which he was not aware. In handling it
thus as an empty piece, he shot himself through
the left hand. This was the first accident
that happened, I believe, on the diggings;
consequently there were no doctors practising
then. What was to be done under the cir-
cumstances ? We were at our wit’s end, more
especially me, for in taking him for my mate,
I took him to share even his pain. Such has
been my disposition through life ; I have ever
proved myself true to my misguided com-
panions as to feel for them as a brother should
for his own flesh and blood. Luckily there
happened to be a medical man following the
calling of a digger (which was no isolated case,
for this was the time of the gold mania, so
that there were doctors, merchants, settlers,
aye, even parsons) ; at all events, he came
forward and rendered us his valuable services,
which were duly appreciated by us. After
his manipulations Keefe was considerably
eased; but the great desideratum was the
want of medicines, potions, &c. In the mean-
time he went on with the little medical treat-
ment that could be shown him; he got on
very well, being a young and hearty man.
While he was in this state, one evening there
came a man to our tent, and to whom I was
a stranger, and he to us. He wanted his mates
robbed. (This was no unfrequent thing, for
men were digging together who had not seen
each other previous to their meeting at that
place.) He told ua they had a good bit of
gold, besides money, and they were all drink-
ing, so he would go and join them, and get
drunk with them. “You will find the main
of the gold in a bucket of water under the
bed; but mind how you do it, for most of
them are Yankees, armed at night.” In con-
sequence of my mate being shot, I had only
another man with me, so I proposed delaying
our visit till the night got advanced. We did
so. When we went they were all in bed
asleep, and by each man’s side there was a
gun or pistol. Before proceeding to rob
them we removed these weapons; on accom*-
plishing which, we searched every man’s per-
son, and took therefrom what gold and money
they had, not forgetting the bucket, where the -
main part of their gold was to be found. We
then left. On looking over their money on
our return, I found one of those said receipts ;
it was for thirty-eight ounces. Now the
weather had been extremely sultry for some
time, and my mate’s wound was thus rendered
offensive; so much so, that he himself could
not abide the noxious effluvia that emanated
from it. For this purpose it was settled that
I should go to Melbourne, in order to procure
some medicines and chloride of lime; so that
as I was going to town for the above, I might
as well take this said receipt, and get the gold.
With this I procured a horse, taking the first
I came to, and started at once. The distance
was sixty miles, which I accomplished in about
nine hours, without baiting the horse. I
reached Melbourne at nine o’clock in the
morning, the Treasury opening at ten. About
half-past I tendered my receipt for the gold,
when they handed me the bag containing the
thirty-eight ounces, and for which I had to
pay a mere trifle. I have mentioned this in-
cident at length, to show how the poor digger
was robbed, aye, and murdered, through these
said receipts. This was not the first I had*
had of them, but the first and only one which.
I tendered at the Treasury. Look at the
advertisement, till lately, that has appeared in
the Argus newspaper, calling upon all claim-
ants for gold lying at the Treasury unclaimed
to come forward. Gold, to the amount of one
million pounds, if not claimed after a certain
date, would be appropriated to the improve-
ments of the colony. This speaks of foul
play to a great extent in Victoria; and a great
deal of it was caused, no question, by those
trumpery receipts. I returned to Ballarat the
same night, for I was a capital horseman, for
which purpose I purchased a horse, having
let the one I rode loose on coming to town.
We experienced the benefit of my journey, in
that it assuaged my comrade’s pain, and nullr
fled the swelling.
Things continued at this for some time, I
devoting my time to that hellish practice of
mine, and which was my ruin in the main#
When one evening going home, I heard some
one screaming. I went towards the spot,
thinking someone had fallen in one of the
holes and hurt himself. God, Thou knoweafc
my visit was truly “ Samaritan ” in its nature,
for I was by myself. On reaching the spot, I
was paid for my trouble, by receiving a bail
in the calf of the leg. I was shot in mistake
for another. This caused me to be confined
within the tent for a while; the ball had not
penetrated far, in consequence, I take it, of a
small charge of powder, so that I was soon up
and knocking about as usual. My companion
was now convalescent, and I was progressing
therein. When I had recovered, we were
meditating robbing a Mr. Hewett, a store


keeper, who went regularly to Melbourne once
a month, and who took with him a good deal
of gold; he used to buy the most gold of any
storekeeper. The morning he started he had
a man with him, which was unusual with him
to take any one. We let him pass, for he had
a distance of sixty miles to go. After he had
been gone about an hour, we mounted our
horses, which were two good ones ; we soon
overtook him; he was driving a chaise cart.
We allowed him to precede us through Bacchus
Marsh. When wc came up with him again,
it was just the other side of Pike’s station.
We were astonished on coming up with him
at the Marsh. Wc then adjusted our falls of
black crape, and stopped him. We drove the
horse and cart about half-a-mile, for this was
at a place called Keilor Plains, and you could
see miles ahead of you. There we took the
horse out, and tied him ; Mr Hewctt we also
tied to the wheel. On searching him we found
some money, but not much. We asked him
what he had in his cart, when he replied, with
tears in his eyes, “My all.” On looking, w T e
found a bag containing, he told us, forty-three
pounds weight of gold, and he hoped we would
not take all this ; at this we mounted our
horses and left him. On leaving him he re-
marked—“ I know you, and when I get loose,
lil raise the country but what I will have you
arrested.” Fatal words for him were these.
We rode about a hundred yards from him,
when my companion observed —“ He has recog-
nised us.” We reasoned, if our surmise was
correct, he would be as good as his word, and
probably succeed therein, so we came to the
decision of, preventing him from doing us any
harm God !I am now about to tell my fel-
iow-creaturea that I destroyed Thy blessed
image in the person of Mr Hewett, and for
which Thou has promised to forgive me,
through the blood of Thy dear Son, shed on
the Cross at Calvary for me and the rest of
mankind. We returned and put the horse
to, and drove him over to a place called Deep
Creek. There I shot him, and threw him into
a hole, that at the time of a freshet was filled
with water; but, at the time I speak of, it was
dry. I then covered him up with the debris
around the spot. We drove the horse some
two or three miles ; on attaining which, we
ran the cart into a water-hole, and let the
horse loose. After this deed was effected, we
rode on to Melbourne, which was reached in
about two hours. It is useless for me to go
further into details as to the locale where this
deed was done, as some fourteen years have
elapsed since then, so that his remains could
not be found, having mouldered away, if they
have not been discovered. There was no great
outcry about him. He came from California
at the first of Ballarat; in fact, he must have
been in the country prior to that opening, for
he was there when I went. At these, I may
Bay the dark days for Yietoria, there was very
nttle inquiry made for anybody, should they
*iave disappeared suddenly.
At Melbourne I went to live with a young
girl I took from the Port Phillip Club Hotel,
We took a house opposite the Post-office, in
furnishing which it cost me nearly two hundred
pounds ; but what was money to me, and how
acquired ? I remained in town over a month,
during which time I had run through some
seventeen hundred pounds. O, these were
hellish times, and its inhabitants let loose for
a while, to create as much mischief as they
could, and ruin as many poor souls as came in
their way. If you wanted a ride into the
suburbs, and hired any sort of a turn-out at
all, you were not to be surprised if you were
asked twenty pounds for giving your friend an
airing. As an instance to what extravagance
men went to, I may mention- two cases that
came under my own notice. The first -was a
friend of mine. It was this : There were some
men (banking at the Rojal Oak Hotel —all
expirees from Van Pieman’s Land. When
this individual came in, the table was covered
with wine decanters (for the shout, as it was
termed, was ten pounds worth). He was
asked to drink, when he observed, in his mud-
dled state, “ I don’t see any here, landlord;
bring us something to drink.” He, ever ready
to do business, asked what it was to be, when
Brummy —for such was the name he went by
—said, “ Let me see if I have any money j 1 *
when he deposited on the table one hun-
dred and eighty pounds, and said, “ Bring
the value of that in.” Mr. Boniface
stood aghast; he was bid comply with the
order. So he picked up the money, and went
to execute his mission. During his absence
they tried to reason him out of his absurd
request, all to no use. A few cases of cham-
pagne were brought in, when Brummy told
him to throw his house open till all was spent.
This incident was the talk of the town, and
ever after w'ent by the appellation of Brummy’s
shout, which was a shout indeed. This money
would have supported a family of six persona
in England for two years; here it was spent
in a few minutes. The other is not like its
precursor; but it is an extravagant one, never-
theless. It is the following : —A young man
who had previously followed the sea as hia
calling, but since the diggings had opened he
had been very successful. On his arrival m
Melbourne he became acquainted with a young
girl, whom he intended to make his wife. In
purchasing the trousseau for the occasion, he
went with her shopping. They went into Mr.
Marks’; and among other things required waa
an orange crape shawl. He was shown one >
for which he was asked twenty pounds. He
said, “ That’s very good ; but have you no more
costly ones ? ” The shopman was astonished
at his request. At all events, he showed him.
an inferior article to the other; and asked for
it twenty-five pounds. John, the digger, re-
plied, “Ah! that is something like.” He
tendered a fifty pound note, when the man o£
business —who was a Jew—observed, “ I will
go and get change;” when he was stopped*


the man saying, “ Never mind, give ns another
of them ’ere shawls such was his manner of
speaking. Two nights after this I saw one of
the said shawls ribanded off her back.
About this time the Bendigo diggings
opened ; crime was very rife. It was settled
that we should pay a visit to those diggings,
and see what they were like. We started —
four of us. On reaching which, things were
very flourishing, and no mistake. Gold was
to be had in any gully by simply turning the
Bod, when you were rewarded for your trouble.
Notwithstanding all this, I chose the life I was
leading in preference to acquiring a competency
by honest means. We left there, and began
sticking-up all who passed for two days. I
daresay we had at one time upwards of thirty
men tied to the trees. lam now about to re-
cord another black deed, being no less than a
cousin-german to the one I inflicted on poor
Mr. Hewett. God, I judge myself before my
fellow-man, and in Thy sight, and let this, my
acknowledgment be received by Thee to my
eternal profit; in that I abhor myself for
having been so heinously guilty of destroying
Thy ever-blessed image. Oh, that I could
make reparation for what I have done. But
no, it is not possible ; for in the taking of my
life it cannot cover what I have been guilty of.
Alas ! but that I had a hundred lives ; I would
freely give them all for what I have done. In
intercepting four men coming to Melbourne,
at a place (where many a poor fellow has met
with foul play) called the Black Forest—black,
indeed, as its name indicates—one of them (a
German he proved to be) refused compliance,
when he received a ball that laid him low.
The thought of those days and those doings is
horrible to think of. On his person we found
fourteen pounds of gold, confined round his
waist in a body belt. He was drawn off the
road, and there left.
After doing this deed we returned to Mel-
bourne, which was the centre of attraction to
me. I was a young man in the prime of life,
having reached my twenty-first birthday. Be-
sides which, I was accounted a smart dapper
little fellow, traces of which I yet bear ; and
it’s no egotism on my part—for now I hate
myself—to say I was the Lothario among my
{acquaintances. I was in attendance at the
Queen’s Theatre, which was then in Queen
street, in the boxes upstairs, contiguous to
which was a large room for drinking purposes.
During the interlude I went into the said
room, when, shortly after, such a scene of
indescribable confusion ensued that description
of it fails me. It was caused through the
detectives of the police arresting a man on sus-
picion of a violent robbery, perpetrated outside
the door of the theatre, just before my enter-
ing, Now, at the time lam speaking of, there
was a distinguishing trait observable between
men of the world (as they were termed) and
® member of society. It was to be seen in the
dress, which was one of black clothes and a
Panama hat, with the invariable accompani-
ment of a large hammer-headed whip. In the
scene that met my view they were being freely
used. The upshot of it was, that the detectives
were worsted, and had to retreat. At the con-
clusion of the theatre (for I returned to get
out of the way) the police, in great number,
were waiting to intercept certain men as they
came out. In passing through the phalanx of
police, some observation was made respecting
me, but I was allowed to pass on my way;
they arrested several, but had told them to go
again. I have mentioned this to show the
universal lawlessness of the times, and the in-
sufficiency of the police to effect their purpose
in the arrest of the suspected. On getting up
in the morning, it was nothing new if you
were told a man had been found strangled in
the gutter. Many a time and often did I
witness men violently choked in the streets of
a night. I have seen man and wife proceeding
on their way meet with treatment I am
speaking of; in fact, it was dangerous for an
honest man to be found out after dark. He
was very nearly as unsafe in his own house.
I remember going home late one night, when
my attention was drawn to a man being
violently robbed by two men. I witnessed the
whole of it, because I knew the assailants. I
left the locality of the robbery, and had not
gone far when I was confronted by the detec-
tives. While having a confab with them, the
man I saw being robbed came by, when he took
us for the same as those who had mal-treated
him just before. He said, “ They might have
robbed him with less violence.” When they
said to him, “ When did that happen ?” He
replied, “ Not long ago.” At this I turned
to proceed on my way, when I was prevented
from going. This led to an altercation. They
said they would stick to me as one of them.
I had no arms but a whip, which I drew, and
struck one of them a blow over the head;
in doing which I received a similar one, that
laid me prostrate. In consequence of my
offering this resistance, it led to my being
suspected as the real party implicated in the
robbery. I was taken to the lock-up, and the
next day the detectives had so prevailed on
the man, that he came forward, and without
any hesitancy on his part, said I was one of
them, which, God knows, I was innocent of,
I was committed for trial, and eventually re-
ceived a sentence of ten years for this offence 5
the first three to wear irons.
Now my career was stopped, in that I could
not rob and shed men’s blood at will; but
that gave me very little concern; my sole and
engrossing thoughts were how to recover, if
possible, my liberty. At the time of my
arrest I was living very comfortably, the only
worldly comfort I experienced prior to or
since. I was placed in a separate cell, in which
I remained for nearly eleven months. When
I received my sentence I was as unstable as
the wind. I can compare myself to nothing
else but to a young unbroken colt, for no man
could tame me, as you will see as I proceed in


my revealings. Shortly after I had been an
inmate of the gaol —some six weeks after I
was tried —X received fifty lashes for using
threatening language to one of the officers of
the prison. The state of Melbourne Graol, at
the time I am speaking of, was very unsettled,
in that it was not suited for such men as me.
There I occupied a single cell: that is not
what I mean. I could see a weakness on the
part of the authorities, and so could others.
There were about twenty men there the same
as myself, the remainder being vagrants, &c.
We were not allowed among the rest, but
kept by ourselves, so that, after I got flogged,
we thought the authorities were going to play
np with us; so that we made it up between
us that, the first, opportunity that offered
itself, we would embrace it. Not only that;
but the first who interfered unnecessarily with
any of us, we were to take to him and
chastise him. An occurrence shortly after
afforded us an opportunity of carrying the
above resolve into practice. It was as fol-
lows : —One morning we were let out for
the purpose of exercising, when one of our
men had done something, I don’t remember
what, when he was bid go inside, which
he refused to do. The officer persisted
in his demand for his compliance, when
the prisoner struck him a blow which" felled
him to the ground; while there he
kicked him unmercifully, and had not his
hoots been impaired, he would have killed
him outright. After I thought he had given
him sufficient I took him away, and walked up
and down the yard. One of the prisoners, a
man who had received fifteen years the same
session as myself (his name was Owen Tully),
stepped forward just as the gate was being
opened, and picked up the officer, and carried
him inside; had he done so before the gate
had been opened, he would have been killed,
for of all things that hurt a prisoner’s feelings
is one of themselves assisting the Government
in any manner whatever, so that I say he
would have been killed, and that he knew in a
ease like that. The result of this was, they
had to send for the military, who were doing
duty at the gaol, to put us in our several
cells. A file of soldiers walked in, with their
bayonets fixed, and thus marched us in.
What caused us to resist going in was, we
knew, did we do so, that after we were in they
would pay the principals a visit, and nearly
kill them in their cells ; not so if the military
came, they then took charge of us, without
any maltreatment. The magistrates were
sent for, and the same afternoon the man who
struck the officer was tried, and sentenced to
cue hundred and fifty lashes, there and then.
The rest of the prisoners, with myself, were
not tried till the next day; we were brought
out, and I was sentenced to one hundred
lashes by the common hangman, and threat-
ened, should the like ever occur again, I should
receive three hundred. With me was flogged
another young man, receiving the same as
myself. The prisoner who stepped forward as
I have described had his sentence mitigated
to seven years ; and what was it remitted for ?
because he swore untruths; and the same
afterwards was made a constable over the
men, and did the whole of his fifteen years in
two years and eight months; he was a great
scoundrel. At the present time I look back,
and not with animus towards him, because his
character is in the record of Yictoria as an
infamous villain. This was a good beginning,
you must allow, for at the time I received the
hundred lashes my back was not healed from
the effects of the other. I had done three
months of my time when this latter occurred.
Besides being thus flogged, I was subject to
the punishment of solitary confinement often
(which punishment, be it understood, con-
sisted of being rigidly confined, with one pound
of bread per diem, water ad libitum , that is
the meaning of solitary confinement). After
this we were most strictly immurred, one
hour being all we were allowed for exercise,
and separate from the rest ; there were six
of us.
Crime was being perpetrated to an enormous
extent, so that the gaol was getting over-
crowded with prisoners. The sessions were
held every month in Melbourne, besides else-
where ; and I have known as many as sixty
waiting trial, and, out of that number, thirty
convictions, some with ten, twelve, fifteen,
twenty, and thirty years’ men ; we only had
two men in the government that had received
thirty-two years each—one of them was my
companion and messmate, Captain Melville ;
but more of him anon. We were sentenced to
the roads of the colony.
Now the gaol was full of long-sentenced
men ; they would not trust us at the Pentridge
Stockade, which was a very temporary place,
when the hulks were suggested and procured
for the worst characters. The President was
the first that was opened as an introduction to
others. It was declared fit for the reception
of prisoners on the 15th of December, 1852.
I was one of the first that went on board of
her; there were some twenty of us removed on
the above date, by as many soldiers and
police. On arriving there it put me in mind
for all the world like WombwelTs Menagerie.
The ship was eight or nine hundred tons ; she
was about one hundred feet over all. It con-
sisted of three decks; the upper or topmost
deck was used for the purpose of exercising,
which was occupied by ten men at the time,
all handcuffed by twos. There was but one
way of going down to the different decks,
namely, the main hatchway ; on going down
which you reached what was called the middle
deck ; going down further, you arrived _at
what was called the lower deck. On walking
from stem to stern there was on either side of
you a row of cells —in number twenty, on each
side of you—so that each deck had forty cells
on it. These cells did not average three feet
by seven j they were boarded up in front,


with the exception of the space over the door
of each, which were iron bars. There was a
small aperture to admit the light to each cell
from the ship’s side, some eight inches by six.
On the lower deck these portholes were within
three feet of the water. On being first made
an inhabitant of these floating hells of misery
and crime, I wondered what they would do
with us next. The ship in the course of a
few days was freighted with her living sinful
cargo—for sinful it was, and no mistake. The
ship now contained eighty poor lost souls,
many of whom have departed this life, some
the way I am going, others nearly as bad, ay,
worse, for they have been snatched away
suddenly without looking to Christ the Lord
to forgive them their many and purple sins ;
SO that my position, though a fearful one to
contemplate, is far preferable to a great many
I could mention. I trust others who were
confined in these hellish places will profit by
my life and end, and flee from the snares of
Satan and of death. In a few days we began
clamouring against being so confined, and not
being permitted to see the light of heaven,
when we were told we should not be allowed
out of the cells while we were there. Such, I
believe was the original intention of the
Government. There was a sentry to each
deck, who promenaded up and down, pistol in
belt, and sword in hand, night and day. The
oaths and blasphemy given utterance to by the
men who were confined here was awful, for
One not contaminated, to hear. There was no
discipline at this time in force; it was like hell
Out of doors, the men being very restive,
pacing up and down their cells like so many
wild beasts, every man being in irons, the
clank from which was dreadful. We had now
been confined for nearly three months, without
being allowed outside, only on purpose to
wash ourselves once a day. This treatment
was beginning to tell on the men, the most
robust among us, when we came to the deci-
sion that if it was not altered, each man was
to endeavour fo get out of his cell. This
caused the Government to permit us the
exercise I have mentioned above. On first
enjoying this boon, I had attained the upper
deck, when a sudden change came over
me, caused by the fresh air on the system,
after breathing the fetid and polluted atmos-
phere exhaled from one another. On looking
round at my comrades, they presented such
an awful spectacle to my belief, that the like
was never witnessed by any person before.
Besides the close confinement we had been
compelled to endure, we had another enemy
equally as hurtful: it was the gnawing pang of
hunger, so that no wonder the men presented
such a cadaverous appearance, which, with
their white duck clothes, caused them to loot
like walking spectres of some other world. We
continued thus for the next three months,
without anything occurring to myself. Dur-
ing the time I was confined how often did I
wish the ship would go to the bottom, for I
was thus cut off from all prospect of
so I prayed that it might end at once. Oh,
impious wish ! had my prayer been realised,
where should I hide myself from the presence
of God at the Judgment Day P I was not the
only one; it was the universal prayer of the
ship’s unhappy inmates, for we thought there
was no leaving here, for a few years at least.
We had one man get out into the water; he
is since hanged ; he was one of the seven vic-
tims the Government caused to suffer for the
tyrant John Price ; his name was Williams.
The way he got out was this ; he feigned sick ;
having previously procured a table knife, out
of a paint pot that was contiguous to the
trough where we washed of a morning. He
thus took to his bed (what a sin to call it a
bed, it was two blankets and a rug thrown on
the dock), and while there, which was four
days, he cut through the deck, which let him
down the ship’s hold, among the coals and
ballast. At the stem and stern of the ship
was a slight partition, on gaining which there
were two large apertures to admit light and
air. He watched his opportunity, when the
sentry turned his back, to go to the other end
of the deck, when ho got out on to the cable,
for he went out at the stern. Previously to
his leaving his cell, he stripped himself naked,
even removing the padding he had to protect
his legs from the abrasions of the irons ; thia
latter prevented him from escaping, as you
will see. After getting into the water, and
beginning to swim, he found, in so doing his
irons run round his leg, I mean the basil part
of them, that which is rivetted round the
ankle. The distance he had to swim was not
above four hundred yards in one direction.
He said himself, he never could have reached
it without the tackling of his irons. So he
returned back to the cable, in doing which he
was heard by the sentry on the uppermost
deck—for there was always two on duty thera
night and day ; they were called number one
and two posts. He was challenged by the
said, when a boat was lowered, and the cry
raised, “A man overboard.” This occurred
about nine o’clock at night. We heard the
cry. When I asked the sentry on duty what
was up, he replied, “Someone capsized, I sup-
pose, out of his boat; ” for none of the prisoners
were privy to his going, only the one next him.
Shortly after X heard the dismal clank of
irons, and got up to see who it was coming
down the ladder, for I was midships on th»
lower deck. I saw who it was—Williams—
who was doing a sentence of thirty years.
There was never anybody else who attempted
to get out that way after this. We had a
cranky kind of a sergeant; on opening his cell
he exclaimed “ There’s a hole in the bottom
of the ship.”
During the time we had been confined here,
the Government approved of the hulks, and
caused the Success to be fitted up on a similar
principle, with respect to her lower decks
dividing the middle one into cells, to hold four


snen each. The gaol was full of long-sentenced
men, waiting removal to the hulks. The
Success was notified to the public fit for the
reception of prisoners. It was intended that
the men on board of her should go to work.
Now, before they could receive any of those
•with large sentences, it was necessary to
remove some of the prisoners from her. This
led to a culling of the shortest sentenced men
out from the others. I came under that, for
my time was considered short, though it was
ten years, compared with some of those con-
fined there. We were removed on the 21st
day of June to the Success hulk, some thirty
of us • the remainder of her living cargo was
brought from the gaol. Wc had been on
board of her some six weeks, when it was
decided we were to go ashore for the purpose
of working. After we had been out some time,
wc thought wc might, by a desperate effort,
be able to regain our liberty. We were badly
situated, it is true, the sea facing us on two
sides, at the back of us the town, besides
being environed by sentries. So tbat I say
the attempt was a very desperate one. The
men whom wc thought woidd try were con-
sulted, and they, one and all, acquiesced in
the plan to be adopted, which was this :
The men were to have their irons
broken on heaving the ship’s bell strike
seven bells. During the interval, one man
was observed breaking his irons by a prisoner
who was treated with distrust by the re-
mainder. He gave information of what bo
bad seen. This put the authorities on the
alert. Now when wc were to start, each man
knew what he had to do. Pour men were to
man a gocart, and go in the direction of the
sentries, three of whom were not far distant
from one another. On getting within speaking
distance, we wore to attract their attention to
some passing object, and directly they turned
to look at it, wc were to pounce upon them
and secure their arms, which obtained, we
were then to march in a body through Wil-
liamstown. But now the sentries were on the
qid vive. Nevertheless, there was no retreat-
ing, our irons were broke, so that we could
shake them off at any moment . The hulk
President loomed in the distance, which wc
knew was our destination; so, rather than he
sent there for an indefinite time, wc came to
the decision to carry our plan out, or die in
the attempt. Out of some thirty that were
going at first, we could only muster eight men
that would face the Forlorn Hope. We
Started, and met the open volley of muskets
discharged at us. Four out of the eight were
knocked over (one man being shot at his work
besides) ; three out of them losing a leg each,
which was amputated a short time after. I
bad a miraculous escape, the ball carrying
away a portion of my jacket collar. It was
impossible to effect either the one or the other
of our wicked schemes. “ We could not escape
or meet with death, and had my impious wish
been consummated, where should I be now
had I been shot to death ? No ; it was not to
be as I willed, but as Thou, O Lord, willeth.
We were conveyed on board under the sur-
veillance of the Water Police, for the signal
of our intended rush had alarmed them pre-
vious to our starting. Tlie next day I was
brought out, and a pair of thirty-six pound
irons rivetted on the top of the basils on my
legs, for I only broke the chain. The Inspec-
tor-General of the Penal Department was
notified, which brought liim instanter. It was
Mr. Barrow, since drowned. lie told me I
should be removed to the hulk President, and
never leave her till my sentence had expired,
when I told him lie would not see the day I
left her. Which was true ;he never did, for
his boat capsized in Hobson’s Bay, where
lie was drowned.
On board of the President I was placed in
the smallest cell, in the low'er deck, out of
which I was never allowed for three months,
only to wash of a morning. During all this
time I was not allowed anything to protect
my legs from the double set of irons on them.
I was accounted the chief ringleader (which I
was, it is true) ; consequently there was no
sympathy shown towards me, but I was treated
worse than a mrngrcl cur of a dog. What
was the result of all this treatment ? Why, I
bitterly swore enmity against mankind in
general. T was not alone in these wicked and
hellish ideas. No ! they -were entertained by
most of the wretched and sinful creatures
around and on every side of me. It was
nothing out of the way to hear your fellow
confinec exclaim that if ho over enjoyed free-
dom once more, no matter how short the
time might be, he would leave no one to come
forward and prosecute him —-meaning that he
would murder them. Such has been done in
my course ; and in tellingyon mine, I am also
telling you that decision has been arrived at
by others equally as wicked as myself. God
grant they have not been so heinous in Thy
sight as 1 have, and that their wicked resolves
have not been carried into practice. Things
went on much as usual, till we received in-
formation that wc were about to have a fresh
Inspector-General, in the person of Mr. John
Price. His appointment will ever be a stain
on the Government of Victoria. But I must
be guilty of a digression from my own con-
cerns, and devote a few lines to the antece-
dents of the said, for they are known to me ;
in fact, his very infamous life is, or ought to
be, known by every member of society. He
arrived in Van Dieman’s Land some five-and-
twenty years ago. Shortly after his advent
there, he was made the magistrate for the
Hobart Town district, which office he held for
years, when he was appointed to succeed
Major Child in the commandancy of Norfolk
Island. While there, reaching over some
years, he enacted the most unheard-of cruel-
ties towards the prisoners under his charge
jintil his conduct met with a true exposition
from a reverend gentleman, by the name of


Mr. Bachelor, of ever-blessed memory, for he
proved himself the true Samaritan to the
unfortunate. The line of procedure he adopted
was this —There had been many reports reach
them about his mercilessness, when he mad©
it his business to go and see for himself.
While there he cultivated the acquaintance of
John, and thus had an entree to all the dun-
geons there were on the island. He thus
saw and heard for himself of the daily scenes
that took place under his own supervision.
He returned to Hobart Town. There he
convened a meeting to be held in the Govern-
ment paddock, in which was erected a plat-
form, on which thereverend gentleman mounted
and told them the cruel scenes he had seen,
till the meeting was one of tears. Among his
revealings, he described the place where the
men were flogged as a slaughter-yard, for
blood was there spilt like water every morn-
ing. No wonder men became such great
criminals, if it was their lot to be placed under
such men as John Price. His punishing the
men in this style was not showing them their
sinful course, biitit was causing them to throw
off their relationship to humanity, and to take
that of demons. Besides what I have men-
tioned, they were shown a specimen of the
irons worn by the men, similar to those I have
mentioned put on me after the rush, which
were strong enough to hold the largest ship
afloat. As an instance of his excessive cruelty,
the following will suffice : —There was a young
man by the name of Sparks who had incurred
the displeasure of Price (which was easily
done), and for which he was repeatedly Hogged,
till the inhuman monster was tired of wit-
nessing the laceration of the poor fellow’s
flesh. He then subjected him to a course of
solitary, till he gave the unhappy man three
months, on half-a-pound of bread per day.
Not only this, but he compelled him to carry
a weight of iron fit for a wild beast. In his
cell there was a ringbolt, to which he was
fastened round the waist, so that be could not
sit down only when his tormentor thought fit.
He was thus being tormented when it pleased
the Lord to ease him from his misery, by
taking to Himself the unfortunate man; so
that, on entering his cell for the purpose, no
doubt, of viewing his victim in misery, there
he was hanging by the waist, dead. My fel-
low-men may hereafter say I was a notorious
criminal; what can they say of this tyrant,
who was one of the greatest murderers ever
God allowed to pollute this earth. He super-
seded Mr. Barrow in the month of February,
1854.
He was accompanied on his first visit by
the above. On that occasion I was pointed out
to him, when he told me he ought to have
had me on the Island, he would soon have
tamed me ; but as it is, you’ve got a nice
little house, where the flies won’t annoy you.
Such was the introductory visit paid me by
Mr. John Price. The reign of terror was
about to begin with the prisoners.
Some time prior to his taking charge, there
was a gentleman appointed from home to
preside over the prisoners a Captain
Kelshore ; but on his arrival, he was simply
made the Superintendent of the Stockade,
Shortly after Price took charge, he was ousted
out of that, because he was too humane*
Most of the warders were removed, to make
way for those Price had with him at Norfolk
Island, so that they carried life protectors in
their packets, and on the least provocation
being given, they were freely used. Occasion-
ally you would be startled by the cries of
someone of the prisoners being maltreated
with these weapons, and should it take place
out of their cells, when they were knocked
senseless they were thrown into their cells
like so much lumber. This was the daily
routine, with solitary. I have seen three parts
of the ship’s inmates in solitary at once. All
this time, nearly three years now, we had no
clergyman to visit us, with the exception of a
Presbyterian, who came when he liked, and
then it was simply confined to the distribution
of tracts. We never had a prayer offered up
for any of ns, except the prayer of wickedness,
which was often given utterance to. John
Price paid us a monthly visit, on which occa-
sion he did but display only his wantonness,
not redressing grievances, which he never
would entertain, but tell you it served you
right. I went out to wash one morning, and
on speaking to one of my fellows, I was spread
on the deck and kicked, till they threw me
into the cell, and closed the door, not caring
if I was killed or not, I mentioned this to
Price, when he told me I was too soft for this
country, and passed on. This was the first
and last complaint I made to him or any of
them, satisfying myself, if attacked with mal-
treatment, by having a blow or something
similar for my temporary revenge. I had
now worn those irons two years, which, with
the basils of the others, weighed over forty
pounds. On one of his visits, the Chief
Warder, a Mr. Wilkins, asked him to remove
my irons. He said he would if I liked to ask
him myself. I told him that I never would,
for he gave me no encouragement the first
time I asked him to redress a grievance of
mine. “ Come, now,” he said, I will not only
remove your irons, but I will let you have a
run ashore ; but mind how you abuse this
favour, which you owe to Mr. Wilkins.’*
With that I was transferred back to the hulk
Success. There I followed the stone-cutting,
for which I displayed a natural aptitude. I
remained here for six months, till 1 was think-
ing of having another trial for my liberty, for
I knew I should get no indulgence from Price;
in fact, hardly any one received any, so how
could I expect it ? Melville came ashore, and
other long-sentenced men, when we agreed to
take the ship’s pinnace lying contiguous to
the sails and everything in her. It was
so arranged, that on passing her to go oa
board, we were to seize her and put to sea,


the wind being favourable at the lime. We
waited our time, and got everything ready for
the occasion, in the form of knives (cut off the
bottoms of shovels, and ground), to cut away
any impediment in the way of ropes. The
all-important evening arrived, the wind very
boisterous. In consequence of our all being in
irons, I took a little smalling hammer to break
them when we gained the shore. Owing to
the wind being high, there was a warp from
the shore to the ship to steady the launch
that conveyed the men to and from the ship.
This was pulled by a boat’s crew, consisting of
refractory seamen, with a free man called the
cockswain ; so, in consequence of this warp
being outstretched in the manner described,
we were on the wrong side of (he jetty ; but
as we came with the intention of going, nothing
would stop us. We allowed the launch to get
about a hundred yards from the shore, when we
pulled the little boat (which was fastened to
the launch by a line), up to us, and jumped
into her to pull to the pinnace. On gaining
possession of the boat, we threw all her crew
of six men overboard. The coxwain, by
name Owen Owens, could not swim, so he sat
and clung to the scat in the stern of the
boat. In jumping in, someone of us alighted
on tire hand of the tiller, and broke it. My
post was to steer the boat. Independent of
the coxswain of the boat, there was in the
launch the man who had charge of the ship,
and styled the shipkeeper. Ho came forward
in the launch, when he saw what was up, and
jumped into the little boat'; in doing so, I
threw him overboard. The men, some ton in
the whole, were seated, and began pulling in
the direction of the pinnace, when we found
it was fouled, with the warp fast at the stern-
post and (ho rudder. In endeavouring to free
it wo were losing time, so we cut it. We
essayed to puli, when we found wc could not,
against such a soa ; so X turned her head to
seaward ; in doing so, I was necessitated to
kneel on the scat in the stern sheets of the
boat, and take the head of the rudder between
my hands. Our object now was a brig, with
sails spread, and anchor nearly apeak, for she
was going out. But in order to get at her,
we had to pass between our own ship, on the
poop of which the sentries were drawn up
ready to fire when we came within distance of
their range, and the battery, at the end of
which the warders were in readiness for our
passing. On running through, the boat we
were in got riddled, and I was shot, the ball
entering my back, at the end of the left
shoulder blade, which, owing to the position
I was in, came out at the left side of the left
jugular vein. Had I been in an upright
position, it would have put an end to my sin-
ful life. After I was shot, it made me insen-
sible for a time. > When I came to myself, I
heard the man Stevens commanding the
coxswain to stand up ; for on the authorities
seeing him thus exposed to danger, they would
hare ceased firing. Ee refused to Comply with
the request, when Stevens asked for the
hammer, saying, “ I will make you obey.” At
this, though my own life’s blood was oozing
from me so that I was nearly dead, —notwith-
standing that, when I heard him enquiring
for the weapon of death, I reached it to him,
for in falling I fell on it. After he got the
hammer in his hand, he said “ Stand up ; ” he
received no answer, when he struck him a
blow on the head, which scattered his brains
all over me. He was then thrown into the
sea. The man Stevens, after killing Owen
Owens, remarked, “ We are all hanged to a
man, so rather than that I prefer this ; ” with
this beWbrew himself into the sea. He thus.
Almighty God, rushed into Thy dread pre-
sence with his hands wet with the blood of his
fellow-man ! At this stage of our guilt, we
were surrounded by boats; the first that came
to our arrest was the police boat. Prior to
its arrival, Melville, who all this time had
been in the bows of the boat, came aft, and
took me in his arms when he found I was shot,
and dipped his Government cap in the water
and bathed my temples ; neither he nor those
in the bow with him saw mo fall. On the
coming up of the police boat, he said, “ When
she comes within reach, let’s jump in and
take possession of her.” Only they were
cautious ou approaching us, they would have
lost her. Poor Frank, I trust you were
reconciled with God before you left this life,
though the manner of thy death is a mystery
with many. I admire thy bravery now as I
ever did. We were secured. I was conveyed
on board and laid on the deck ; ultimately I
was removed to the lower deck. The next
morning my irons were knocked off, and I
was given over by the doctor. I lay thus for
seven days in one position till a diagnosis
showed there was a possibility of my recovery.
Let us review' this tragedy. Owen Owens, a
young man, of six and twenty summers, was
murdered—and by whom ? I have said
Stevens scattered his brains oyer me. True.
But who gave him the weapon to do it, and
himself dying ? I consider myself the murderer
of him as much as Stevens ; ay, more, for had
I not been shot, I certainly should have killed
him myself. 0 degenerate and fallen nature,
when thou riscst against thy human brother-
hood to ensanguine thy soul with their blood !
Oh the many times I have met death in the
face; and had he conquered me, (hen my
portion hereafter would have been one of
eternal damnation! Jesus, Thou immaculate
Lamb ! let Thy precious blood shed for the
sins of the world, save me from the dreaded
wrath of an offended God, and pardon me for
this as well as other deeds I have done ! In
throwing the men out of the boat, one poor
fellow could not swim, and caught hold of the
blade of one of the oars when he received a
blow that sent him to the bottom. His name
was William Turner. In after days, Mr.
Champ told me I was the cause of Mr.
Jackson’s death (the shipkeeper), who died


shortly after, from the effects of the usage
he met at our hands. We were all fully
committed for trial for the wilful mur-
der of Owen Owens and William Turner.
At the trial Melville was tried and sworn to
as killing Owen Owens, when, by my G-od, it is
as I have stated ! At first the inhabitants were
for hanging us without a trial ; but when the
public feeling cooled down a bit, they could
see from what they heard that men were
goaded on through such tyrants as Price.
Melville and two more of our comrades were
sentenced to death ; they were the three first
that were tried. The inhabitants could see
that the nine of us would suffer, when, through
some technical point in the law with respect
to our warrants, it appeared we were not in
legal custody ; so, in consequence of this infor-
mation we were acquitted, and the sentence
against the others rescinded.
At our trial there was a general exposition
of the treatment carried on at the whole of the
establishments of the penal department since
John Price had been in office. The conse-
quence was, that a committee of inquiry was
inaugurated by the leading men of Melbourne.
At this Price began to redress every grievance
prior to their visits. He was letting men to
their liberty whom he had been keeping un-
justly in bondage. In so acting ho was but
heaping coals of fire on his own head, for as
fast as went away they went to the Com-
mittee, and made their complaints.
Prior to our coming to Melbourne to he
tried, Price paid us a visit, and told us we
would all bo hanged by the neck as sure as a
robin. Melville said, “ John, you will soon
follow.”
We had now been confined in gaol, after our
miraculous escape from being hung, some five
months, when one morning the intelligence
reached us that John Price had been stoned to
death by the prisoners the evening previously.
On hearing this news I gave three cheers
(which God forgive me for). In the course
of the day we heard how he came to meet with
his death. It appears after our trial, when he
heard his conduct was about to be scrutinised,
he tendered his resignation, which would not
be entertained. The Committee were about
to investigate the murder of a man (for mur-
der it was) of the name of Henson. The
manner of his death was this :—While under-
going a sentence of five years at Colliagwood
Stockade, his reason left him, and he was sub-
jected to all sorts of treatment in consequence.
The authorities would not believe the Lord
had, lor some divine purpose, deprived him of
his reasoning powers, hut attributed his con-
duct to scheming. This brought upon him
unheard-of misery. He was blistered from
the crown of the head to the soles of his feet;
he was immured and starved to death, so
much so, that he was observed repeatedly
eating his own excrement. Every morning he
■was brought out of his cell, and made to stand
under a certain place, when the chief warder,
Mr. Tumham, mounted on an elevated posi-
tion, from whence he let fall water, to a great
amount, on to his naked person, at which the
poor fellow used to laugh. He was treated
thus every day, till the poor fellow gave up
the ghost. I say this inquiry was pending at
the time of his death. Just previous to his
death Price was heard to say repeatedly, that
when this committee work had blown over, he
would make it a warning to some of them. On
the day of his death, the men at the Success
hulk were very refractory, in consequence of
the chief warder throwing a man’s bread over-
board, and confining the man. This brought
Price down to see what was up. The men
made their complaint, and the only satisfac-
tion they received was, that he would pay
some of them out yer, if they did not mind.
This threat was given to men who were exas-
perated to desperation. At this they set upon
him, and barbarously murdered him. His
death, as well as his appointment, is a disgrace
on the Yictorian Government. Eor this man
seven lives were sacrificed, which, I believe,
from what I heard afterwards, three out of
the seven were innocent, never laying a baud
on him. Lucky for me, I use to think, that I
was not there at the time, for I certainly
would have helped to kill him.
After his death we were turned over to the
penal department, which, while living, I be-
lieve, we were not to be till everything was
settled ; so, to make room for the men charged
with his death, some thirteen in number, wo
were removed to the President Hulk, on the
Easter Sunday, in the year fifty-seven —John
Price being killed on the 27th March, in the
said. On arriving on hoard for the third and
last time, all was indescribable confusion in
consequence of his death. Men who had
hitherto been compliant to all manner of
tyranny, became obstreperous in their over-
joy to think they were free from his
tyrannous yoke. The magistrates could not
restore order among them, for the ship’s com-
pany were in a mutinous state prior to pur
transference. Shortly after the whole of the
prisoners received a month’s solitary confine-
ment, which caused them to become more
refractory still, which, gave those in charge an
opportunity for revenging their faithful
tyrant’s death. Forgive me for expressing
myself thus, O Lord, towards one of Thy fallen
and degenerate race! Thou, ‘God of the uni-
verse, knowest he was an impious wretch, and
abused Thy ever-hlessed name. It is Burgess
speaking, Lord ; not that he dare presume to
judge the degrees of wickedness in others,
when his own sins are so heinous and offensive
to Thee that cannot look upon iniquity;. so
forgive me, I say, these expressions,— I cannot
let this pass untold: —A poor fellow at Pent-
ridge was stooping down at his work, when
Price came behind him and struck him with
his fist; the poor fellow exclaimed, “ Oh, my
God, what’s that for!” “Go along, you
wretch! lam Jesus Christ of Pentridge! ”


This is the man -whom the all-liberal Govern-
ment of Victoria were giving fifteen hundred
a-year to reclaim men from sin.
At the expiration of this solitary we received
another Inspector-General, in the person of a
Mr. Champ, now in charge of the penal de-
partment. Shortly after his coming, the
military were removed, which had been there
from the time of Price’s death. Things then
went on a little for the better. He had been
in charge a twelvemonth turned, when he
broke up the hulks, which, while they were in
vogue, was the occasion of more sin and
wickedness than any other place under the
canopy of heaven. Look at the fruit pro-
duced by the cruelties inflicted on board of
them —I mean the President and Success.
Go to any penal establishment, and ask to sec
the worst characters they have at the present
time in durance rile, and they will show yon
men that have been at Pentridge and the
hulks. Let it be understood that I have not
undertaken to unfold to you all the injustices
and misery that were inflicted on the pri-
soners at these hulks ; no, it would take me
six months to do so, and I have not a few
weeks at my disposal before 1 have to meet
my offended God. Ho; they are not a tithe
of them, and which I am unavoidably com-
pelled to mention, as they, more or less, are
connected with my own history.
The hulks were now broken up, and I was
sent to the Collingwood Stockade to finish the
remainder of my time. At this time I had
done nearly six years and a-half'out of my
ten. If I may be allowed such an impious
expression, it was like going out of hell into
heaven. When Mr. Champ took charge,
every man then knew how long he had to do
before taking up his indulgence. Vive years
was the stipulated time for a ten years’ man
with good conduct. How I did not come
under this regulation through my misbe-
haviour. My form went before the Govern-
ment, and they awarded me two years extra
to the specified time ; so that, on my removal
to the stockade, I had not long to do before
I took up my indulgence in the form of a
ticket-of-leave for the remainder of my time
that remained incompleted. The time came
round when I was thinking about going to
my liberty. It came in the year fifty-nine.
With me left a young man who was not so far
advanced in crime as myself, but still a willing
follower therein ; so, previous to my leaving, it
was arranged that I was to take him with me.
I was quite satisfied of the Victorian treatment
from what I had experienced ; so I thought of
trying another field for it, for should I be
overtaken by misfortune (as we term it), to
fall into the hands of the Government, I
could not do better than go where I was not
known. So with that Sydney was the field
chosen. I learnt just after I came out that
there was a bank at a place called Deniiiquin,
some forty miles from the river Murray, in
the Edwards district. On leaving Melbourne,
I took what is called the Plenty road, till I
came out at Seymour, a small inland town.
At the time Of my arrival the races were on,
at which place I saw one of the men who lost
his leg with mo at the time we rushed the
sentries. Ho told me his worldly position,
which was very indifferent. While there, I
noticed one particular booth doing most of the
business, and I made inquiry which -way the
owner went to the town, for the course was dis-
tant therefrom two miles. On gaining informa-
tion which road he took to go thither, for
there were several, I started about a half-a-
mile thereon, intending to slop him on his
way. His name was Mr. Brooks, the hotel-
keeper at Seymour. I waited till the evening
got advanced, when I found he took one of
the other tracks. I made it my business to
remain the next day and follow him. I say
him—but there were four of them in a chaise
cart. I was again disappointed, in that- he
was accompanied by the troopers after the
races were over. Had I succeeded in my
intentions, from the illicit booty I should
have assisted that unfortunate. I returned to
the town, and was thinking of going ; and for
that purpose I took two horses from Mr.
Brooke, one of them being a racehorse, which
I rode myself. We crossed the Groulbourn
river and went to Rushworth, thirty miles
from Seymour. It was a goldfield. There
was nothing there to suit me, so I went in the
direction of the Murray river. At Mrs.
Fox’s station I procured two fresh horses,
leaving the other. We reached the Murray,
having effected a few robberies from several I
put up, but got nothing to speak of. The
day had gone by that men carried their wealth,
so that it was useless sticking up on the road.
Now I wished to get across the Murray, if
possible, without being seen ; so that on reach-
ing its banks two miles above Moama, or
Maiden’s Punt, we essayed to cross on horse-
back. My companion, whom I shall call
Dave (his name was David C n he is
still living, and the father of a small family of
children) gained the centre of the river, when
his horse turned over with him, owing to his
keeping the beast’s side on to the stream,
instead of allowing him to go a little with it.
In being thus capsized he had to swim back,
in consequence of the swag being fast on the
saddle. I permitted my horse to turn back
a*fter its mate. In gaining the land, I pro-
posed that we should let the horses go and
cross at the punt. By taking the boat this
was done, Ou the opposite side wc were then
in the Sydney country. I took two fresh
horses from Mr. Walton, the publican, which
he afterwards recovered. I rode then till I
reached the town of Deniliquin, on the banks
of the Edwards river. I there ascertained
that the information respecting the bank was
correct. I went into the said, and found, in
order to do it effectually, we required another
man. I felt vexed to think that we were not
strong enough; but if I had known what I
B


afterwards learnt, there was a man stopping
at Taylor’s public-house, an old friend of
mine, and whom X left at Hokitika. We
camped on the banks of the river. My com-
panion went to get something from the store
for our use, when he told me the woman went
to a box to give him change, he having ten-
dered a large note, when he saw the contents,
which he described as containing a large
amount, and he thought he could get it
without making any noise. He proposed
going to get the above at dusk, for which
purpose I accompanied him, taking our two
horses, one being a fresh one belonging to
Mr. Tyson. They were tied in a clump of
she-oak trees, on the lower side of the punt.
On reaching the store, the door was closed,
when I proposed going in and sticking them
up; it was done. We were admitted, when
some neighbours came in to purchase some
goods, and to distract his attention I priced a
lot of things, which I pretended I was pur-
chasing. After I had looked about me at the
place and its owners, I thought we might be
able to get therefrom a few hundred pounds.
When I asked him how much my bill came
to, he replied, “ Sixteen pounds odd.” I said
>c You will have to change a £SO note.” He
said, “ Oh that I can do, sir.” At this I pulled
out my revolver, and leaped the counter, to
his surprise and trepidation. I ordered my
companion to go into the adjoining room and
fetch those people out. I made them all
secure, and took what money they had, and
the contents of the box. At this I bid Dave
go and see to the horses. He started for that
purpose. I remained doing duty over these
people till I thought he had been gone time
sufficient, when I told them to bide quiet for a
quarfcer-of-an-hour, and then they might raise
the neighbourhood. The police station was
not forty yards away. Mr Warren (for such
it was whom I robbed, as described, on a
memorable evening, being on St. Patrick’s
night, 1859) —I say, Mr. Warren, you did not
receive any maltreatment from me ; I there-
fore humbly beg your pardon, and trust you
will forgive me, for I am shortly to pay for
my sinful and wicked conduct to you and
others of my fellow-creatures, by the punish-
ment of an ignominious death. So when you
hear of my having suffered, tell the Lord our
Saviour that thou forgayest me my trans-
gression. On gaining where we left the.
horses, the first thing I heard was their
galloping through the town, occasioned by my
mate coming on them in the dark suddenly,
which caused them to snatch their heads back,
and break the reins and get loose. This was
a sad loss. We proceeded on to Mr. Tyson’s
station, thinking they would make there.
We could see no tidings of them ; it was a
beautiful moonlight night. I gave up all
thoughts of seeing the horses any more,
when I said, “ Let’s get out on the road, 1
and the first horsemen that come along 1
we will stop, and thus get horsed,” We
journeyed about seven miles that night, and,
being summer, we wanted no bedding- At
daylight we proceeded on our w r ay, all the
while looking out for some horsemen to pass ;
we were disappointed that day till the evening,
when we drew near the Murray river, and sat
down. "While here, who should come upon
us unawares but a trooper. He had no uni-
form, but I could tell who he was 5 besides,
the pistols in the holsters told me. He asked
for a drink of water, at the same time interro-
gating us as to the road we came ; he also
inquired if we had seen two men in our journey
answering a certain description. I was too
well-dressed; I think, for him to have any sus-
picion of us, though he eyed us very closely.
He observed he should only go as far as the
accommodation house, which was in sight (for
Dave had been there and got some provisions).
After he left I remarked, “ I shall put him up
in the morning, for he is riding a nice beast.”
I passed the hack of the accommodation house,
in order to precede him. X sighted him, and
told my comrade to stay where he was —I
would put him up. The trooper came up. I
asked him where he was going. He resented
my questioning, when I bid him alight from
his horse. He flew to his pistols, but too
late; I had him covered, and that he saw.*
When my comrade came to the scene he took
hold of the horse by the head. The trooper
still refused to come off his horse ; I told him
the result of his non-compliance. “ Well,” he
replied, “if you shoot me I will die in my
saddle, for I have been eighteen years in the
service, and was never unhorsed yet; I could
never survive the disgrace attached to it I”
Here was a state of things! What was to be
done P It was no good taking his life ; the
one horse was as had as none for two men.
Another thing : I admired the courage of the
man, so I let him pass ; with his salutation
that “ I was a Briton, and no mistake,” I bid
him proceed about his business. On viewing
this man’s conduct, I believe there would be
very little bushranging if the service had such
men as him, because bushrangers would then
have men opposed to them as courageous as
themselves.
After this event had taken place, we crossed
the river Murray, by swimming it with our
clothes on. I was now once again on the
Victorian side, where I never intended being
any more; but I was absolutely compelled to
cross, for the trooper preceded me, no doubt
raising the way as he went. Behind us there
was the town of Deniliquio, all in arms, in
consequence of the late robbery. After I
gained the Victorian side, I went in the direc-
tion of the River G-oulbourn, at the junction of
the Murray. The first place I reached was
the station of a Mr. Marshall; there I stopped
all night. The next day I went to a Mr.
Burgess’s station, on the G-oulbourn. There I
could see we would be able to get horsed. I
sent my comrade down the river a bit. X
remained, under the pretence of stopping all


night. There were a good many men scattered
about, so I waited till it became dark, and then
went to-consult my companion. When we
camd up the workmen were all in their huts,
i went to the stable for the purpose of getting
the horses ready before I put the station up ;
in doing which we had to strike a match, to
see where the saddles were. This was ob-
served from the house; X was missed, after
telling them I should stop all night. Their
suspicion was aroused; so they came to the
stable to see what was up —being the raffiter,
accompanied by three male friends. I was at
the door, when I was challenged to stand.- I
said, “Stand you!” At this they discharged
two barrels at once at us. With this we made
for the fence, for there was no telling how
many of them there really was ; so we escaped.
In doing so we got separated; I made for the
rendezvous where I had ordered my comrade
to wait prior' to its getting dark. There I
waited, I dare say, upwards of an hour and
more j no Dave. I then ventured to cooey ;
no response. With this I took one of the
roads, thinking to overtake him, on which I
journeybd some four miles by the light of the
moon,, which had burst through the opaque
clouds. No Dave. I was very uneasy; I
knew nothing had befallen him in the
way of being arrested, for he had led the
van by vaulting over the fence. I proceeded
on my way till I heard the barking of dogs.
I listened, and could tell it was an out-station,
where sheep were folded. I made in that
direction. On reaching it, it turned out to be
as I bad surmised. On knocking at the door
I was admitted. There were three men inside,
two shepherds and their hutkeeper. I told them
I had been chucked from my filly. This they
believed, because my appearance helped to
bear out what I asserted ; for, previous to going
to the stable, I put my spurs on, —there they
were when I reached the shepherds’ hut. It
was about two or three o’clock in the morning,
when one of them said if I liked to stop till
daylight, he would lend me his mare to find
my own. At this acceptable offer I was in-
clined to wait, you may depend; and as an
•encouragement. for his lending me her, I
offered to leave with him £2O, which he de-
clined taking. The morning dawned, at which
he arose, and went in search of her; he re-
turned, and said the horses were shifted, and
there was no knowing in which direction to
look for them ; he was absent about two hours.
So, since I was not to be so fortunate as to
secure a horse under such circumstances, I had
breakfast with them, and threw a pound note
■on the table to treat themselves at my expense.
TVom them I learned, in an indirect manner,
whereabouts I was ; I knew the country well
enough, but of late years it had altered its
general appearance, from there being such
alterations in the settlers’ runs. I started on
my way, telling them I was going to a certain
.place, and took the opposite to it.
I had not gone far—about half-a-mile—when
I came out on the beaten road, proceeding
on which I sighted a trooper coming in my
direction ; he observed me also. On reaching
the spot where I was, we saluted each other.
I started on my road, when he stopped his
horse right close to me. He told me two men
had disturbed Mr. Burgess’s station last night,
tlieiv intention, from their conduct, being to
stick up. the said, and from the descriptions
given you answer to the description of one of
them; so will yon have any objection to
accompanying me thither? At this a stock-
rider came up, when the trooper said, “ Have
you any arms about you ? ” I remarked,
“ I’ll let you see see ! ” At that 1 pulled
out my revolver, and in so doing lie leapt on
the top of me. ,We had a struggle for life and
death. In jumping off his horse he caught
my pistol with his right hand. We were thus
struggling when the stockrider came to his
rescue. Luckily for the trooper lie did, for I
certainly should have mastered him. I was
captured by them, and taken on to Mr.
Burgess’s station. The stock-rider went in
another direction, for it appears, after we got
disturbed in the manner described, the owner
of the station rode into Eehuca, and gave in-
formation to the police of what had occurred.
That caused them to start out there and then.
At the place where I met the trooper, it was
distant sixteen miles from Echuea. On
reaching Mr. Burgess’s station I was recog-
nised, and my Wellington hoot taken off, to
see if it answered the footprints round his
own verandah, for I had been round the bouse,
to see which was the best way to enter. Not
long after they brought my mate in; they
chained us to the monger of the stable, that
being the first time ever I was made a horse
of. Wc were forwarded to Echuea, on the
banks of the river Murray. The two troopers who
arrested us had a present made to them by the
station-holders round neighbourhood. It
appears my comrade had made an outstation
likewise, and was there stopping, anticipating
my coming, when who should walk in but a
trooper and a stockman. He was then secured.
On arriving at the station, the sergeant in
charge put me in handcuffs, notwithstanding
I was shut up in an iron lock-up. In the
evening I asked him to release me while I
took off my coat. In doing so, he left the
key in them, which I secreted. The next day
I was tried before Mr. Sturt and Mr. Kelly,
the latter being the resident magistrate of
Deniliquin. I was acquitted for attempting
to stick up the station, because the evidence
was defective, in that it took place at night in
the dark, and they could not swear it was us.
But I received twelve mouths for carrying
firearms, and was fully committed for trial for
attempting the life of the trooper. And Mr.
Kelly preferred a charge against me for stick-
ing up Mr. Warren and the trooper, and to
be forwarded to the Sydney Government at the
expiration of my time. They brought my
companion out, and gave him twelve months,


on the supposition that he was my mate. On
the same night he was taken away, and I
thought within myself that the magistrates had
thought better of it and recalled his sentence.
On the following morning he came in, when I
asked him where he had been to. He said,
“In the sergeant’s place all night.” He further
told me there was a stranger there who wanted
to know very badly who I was, and if he
would tell them, lie might get out of his
sentence. I felt vexed at what he told me.
The day arrived we were to lie forwarded on
to Sandhurst, to be tried at the forthcoming
trials. Having possession still of the handcuff
key, I was determined to escape, or lose my
life. The first station we stopped at was
the one on the Campaspe, called the Runny-
medc station, at which a Yankee had charge.
Now wc were conveyed in a chaise cart,
for which the man was to receive ten
pounds; so when wc arrived here it was
dusk. The Yankee took us under his control,
while the troopers took the saddles off their
horses ; wc wore then taken into the guard-
house, for they had no lock-up. After the
troopers and civilian had had tea they relieved
the Yankee from his charge ; we were still
handcuffed together. "While wc were silting
in the room the troopers began talking about
the new uniform jacket, which caused one of
them to lay his revolver on a bed, in the oppo-
site angle to where we were sitting. It there
remained till the Yankee came back, and re-
sumed his duty over us. lie pulled out his
revolver, and laid it by his side on the table in
front of him, and side on to us. Not long after
lie began writing in a book, when the troopers
proposed giving their horses a clean down.
They rose to go the stables for that purpose,
which were some sixty yards from the guard-
house ; they went, leaving the pistol still in
the same position. When they left, the civi-
lian stretched himself #n the bench opposite
to us, with liis feet not far from the loaded
pistol. At this I gave my companion the
handcuff key to loose himself, as I was fast by
the right hand, and he had his at liberty. I
motioned to him ns well as I was able (for the
man that drove us down was dozing) for him
to open the door, and I would secure the
pistol. With this, I made a bound and got it.
In the meantime, Dave had got the door open,
on attaining which, he left me with these two
men confronting mo. After I had gained pos-
session of the pistol I turned round, when the
Yankee was picking up his revolver to fire at
me, when I made him put it down again,
though he had told me a little of his life in
California ; he was nothing but abraggadocia of
a fellow, not having the mettle of his confrere
on the Sydney side of the Murray. "What
was I to do, in consequence of my companion
leaving me the way he had done ? Now, had
he only have stopped as he ought, we should
have been able to have gone to the stables and
stuck the troopers up, for they had no arms,
and we were in the place where they were
kept. Another thing, we should have taken'
their horses, and the money and valuables
taken from us, and escape we must, beyond a
doubt. No, he thought only of himself. What
else could I do besides what I did, which was
this : —When the Yankee put his pistol
down, I pulled to the door, and went to
the hack of the guard-house, and began to
put distance between us. In so doing the-
wife of the Yankee saw me, and screamed
out; this alarmed the station. I still Avas
proceeding at good speed, when I was pre-
cipitated into the bed of the Campaspe,
which at the time was only a chain of watcr-
holes. The height from whence I fell was about
thirty feet, but my fall was broken by the
descent. I was stunned by the fall, and quite
unconscious for a fe\v minutes. When I
recovered myself the Yankee was firing at me
from the height—the Avoraan telling him
whereabouts I fell. I Avas rendered hors de
combat by this fall, so that I was an easy cap-
ture. They carried me up, and handcuffed me
hand and foot to the stanchions of the benches.
While in that position Mr. Yankee showed his
cowardice, by inflicting a scries of blows on a
prostrate wretch, that could not avenge him-
self ; lie beat me fearfully about the head with
his carbine, till I AA’as knocked senseless. Dave
escaped, their attention being occupied in my
recapture. The trooper stationed witli the
Yankee rode to where the Inspector of the
district was stopping, for my escapade with
the trooper on the Goulbourne had brought
him up. In the morning he took me in his
own gig, with handcuffs round my ankles, and
tied to the back of the gig. Thus I made my
advent at Madvor. On arriving there I Avas-
chained to the logs. On the Monday morning
I avqs taken and tried for attempting to escape,
for which I received twelve months. I was
then fully committed for trial for endangering
the trooper’s (Mr. Yankee’s) life. At the end
of this examination, Mr. Reed, the inspector
mentioned, Avas kind enough to receive my
statement relative to the manner in which I
was disabled from the treatment I received at
the Yankee’s hands. I was a perfect fright to
look at, and Avith all their blandishments I
could not be prevailed upon to wash the blood
from my person till I was tried. The result
of my complaint was, that Mr. Stanley (for
such was his name), got discharged from the'
service. I was sent to Bendigo, where I bad
to be tried for these offences. I lay there for
nearly four months, during all which time the
authorities did not identify me, because I was
very much'altered in appearance, and under
the name of Charles Harris; so when these
country officials telegraphed my description as
I appeared, they did not know it was Dick
Hill, my name in the Victorian records. I
was anxiously waiting to hear from Dave all
this time, but still no news. This ingratitude
hurt me very much : my friendship towards
him, he knew, resembled a modern Damon
but as for him, the ingratc as he proved


himself, he did not-reciprocate the feelings I felt
for him, I bitterly swore that if ever I caught
him I would shoot him like a dog. David, I
am now asking the forgiveness of God for all
the many and heinous sins I have committed ;
how can I expect my prayer to be heard if I
forgive thee not? No; I freely absolve you
from the ingratitude you were guilty of to-
wards me. God grant you have, as I heard,
reformed your manner of life, I hope through
a conviction of its sinfulness. Remember in
His sight were all the robberies we did to-
gether !
At the sessions held at Sandhurst, in the
month of July, I was tried. At my arraign-
ment an incident occurred that was very bene-
ficial for me, insomuch that it left an impres-
sion behind that I was well connected. It
was this : —On the jury being empanelled, lire
Crown Prosecutor objected to one of the jury-
men, asserting he was cither a relation or a
relative of mine. He was dismissed the jury.
For the first oflonco the .judge advocated my
case, in that the jury were led to believe that
he arrested mo without sufficient warranty, so
that they made a common assault case of it,
and for which I only received one mouth’s
imprisonment. Being in legal custody when
the other took place, I was field responsible
for what I did. For this I received six
months. After the trials were over, I was
identified, which, had it been known some few
days previous, I should have got fifteen years
at the very least. The newspapers gave it me,
but they were a day behind the time. I was
sent to Melbourne directly. On arriving,
there was an ovation on the occasion, which
shewed itself when I reached the gaol. While
there, an old acquaintance of mine received
the sentence of death for throwing the over-
seer over the quarry, not hurting him much,
for the which he was about to suffer. At the
reading of his death warrant, lie requested
permission to sec me. I saw him three days
.prior to his execution. I pitied him in his
then awful position, not thinking that I should
some day be in a similar one ; but it is so.
Rowley, I shall shortly go the way you left
this world ; but it is my just due —not so
with you ; you doubtless deserved punishment
for what you did, but not that of death. I
left the poor fellow to be hanged the next
day, and went to Collingwood stockade. There
I was put in the separate cells, then forwarded
to Peutridgc. The model prison had just
opened, so that I was one of the first placed
in it. While here, I thought I should do the
whole of my time thus, for the authorities had
a great spite against me. The discipline was
very strict, The prison held some hundred
and sixty prisoners. It .was fourteen years
since I went inside the walls of a model prison.
On looking back at my first model life, and
contrasting it with the one I was then endur-
ing, how different were my feelings. Then I
was reclaimable. Now I was a hardened
wretch and murderer, in whom there was no
reclamation. What did Ido while immured
here ? Why, review my deficiencies, in not
being more fortunate in my predacious life.
I remained an inmate of this establishment
nearly twelve months, all which time I saw no
one but those connected with the model. In
my secret communings I had resolved to have
nothing to do with anything in future but
what would reward me for my trouble. I
have before mentioned that these establish-
ments were not fit places for men who are well
versed in all sorts of crimes, because hero they
are nice and clean, and away from all kinds of
hard work, so that they consider themselves
the gentlemen prisoners. During all the time
I was here I never saw any clergyman. It’s
true, the regulation board specified that any
prisoner wishing to see the chaplain, has only
to make his request known to the warder on
duty, and it would be attended to. Now, I
consider, and do still, there is too much for-
mality in this—no Christianity. The religion
of Jesus Christ, from what I have learned, is far
different to that. Christ, while on earth, bid
His disciples go into all the world and preach
the Gospel. What more fitting place to go to
than where crime and sin abide. It is the
clergyman’s business, if he is a disciple of
Christ, to go, and not wait till sent for,
which, in unnumbered cases, would never be.
Who knows but on one of bis visits the Lord
might reward him for his labour, by convinc-
ing even a wretch like me of the need of the
Saviour. Such was the system in vogue at
the time I speak of. I remember the question
being asked by one of the members of the
Committee of Inquiry, whether there was any
reformation taking place in any of the pri-
soners confined on board the hulks. The
answer was no. So, likewise of your models,
for on the hulks crime was engendered to an
enormous extent. There were men there who
entered the Government not having been
prisoners before, who left the Government con-
firmed criminals. I left after being there the
time I have mentioned, and was removed to
the lower Stockade, where there are some
five hundred prisoners always kepi. There
was nothing of consequence happened to me
while I was doing the remainder of my time.
The murdering days, as we used to call them,
were past.
I was now about to leave the Victorian
Government, anticipating, of course, being
turned over to the Sydney authorities for the
offences standing against me there. On the
morning of my discharge I was surprised at not
being sent away in handcuffs ; I heard nothing
about the transference, so I was discharged a
free man once more.
Let us look back a bit at my career while
doing that ten years. I was flogged twice,
and would have been a good many twiecs if
John Price could have carried his advocacy
into practice; but they would not sanction it.
I was the last man flogged in Victoria, on the
occasion when I received the hundred lashes.


The public would not have any more of it.
I believe the prisoners are indebted for its
discontinuance to a Mr. E. n, who was a
prisoner at the time (not a convicted one, but
under detention only). He told me lie would
represent it to the public, which he did; lie
was on the balustrade, and thus saw my back
when I came in. I w r as sentenced to wear
irons three years ; I wore them six years and
a half -without their being struck, with the
exception of their being removed when I was
shot, or to put heavier ones on me, which at
one time I was carrying forty pounds, for
upwards of eighteen months. Solitary con-
finement—l cannot tell you how much. The
Act specifies a man shall not do more than
three months in the one year; yet I knew a
prisoner on board the President Hulk (Morton
by name) who did six in the year fifty-five. I
opened the floating hells, and was. one of
the last to leave them. I was on them five
years and a half, during which time I was
nearly five years in a separate cell, confined
day and night, with about four hours’ exercise
a week. I was for two years confined on the
lower deck of the President Hulk, some four
feet below the surface of the water. While
there I never saw the sun rise or set. I was
subject to all manner of cruelties. We -were
imraurred here without seeing or hearing a
clergyman for years. I was shot at twice—
once nearly mortally wounded, in that it was
in a vulnerable region ; and ’ was the occasion
of two men being murdered. In this recapi-
tulation of my sufferings, it is not done to
elicit sympathy, because I am not entitled to
that, my life being so heinous and wicked.
No ; it is done to draw the youths’ attention
to the hitter wages of transgressing against
the .laws of G-od and man—to cause him to
see the amount of misery that is entailed on
the evil-doer for preying on his fellow-man.
Out of that ten years what enjoyment did I
ever experience from following the paths of
crime and vice ? None; but the contrary, as
I have endeavoured to show you in my feeble
attempt at delineation for your eternal profit.
Those ten years were years of bitter sorrow • I
had but one month’s liberty out of it, from
the time I left Collingwood till I was arrested
again.
I attained my liberty as I have mentioned,
though that was not my due, having a prior
charge preferred against me in the Sydney
country, which, through the dereliction of the
authorities, I swung clear of —I cannot attri-
bute it to anything else but an oversight. At
the lime I left the penal department for good,
I loft it a marked man. I had not been away
from there three weeks before I was taken up
on suspicion of robbing Messrs. Hill and Evans’
warehouse of a great amount of property,
being principally silks and satins. The people
who were doing the above got disturbed, and
left their horse and cart. On my arrest I was
sworn tc as belonging to the horse and cart.
Luckily for me I could disprove all the false
evidence. Independent of that they arrested
the real perpetrators on their way to Adelaide,
and with them a waggon load of valuable pro-
perty. I was acquitted, but not without an,
exposition of my antecedents.
While there I lived with a Magdalene of
the better sort of unfortunates, Anne A 1 n.
I hope, when she hears of my unheard-of
crimes, she will cease from her wicked life;
and occasionally, when she thinks of me and my
fate, she will pray to the Lord of Mercy fer-
tile forgiveness of my many sins. All con-
nection with us has terminated, though I
intended rewarding her when I came to Mel-
bourne. While in Otago, and prior to my con-
viction, I transmitted money to her, from the
Weatherstone diggings, which I hope she re-
ceived.
Before leaving Melbourne for New .Zealand,
I paid a visit to the cricket ground on the occa-
sion of the first team coming to the colonies.
I was seated viewing the contest between
them and the Melbourne Club,, when my
attention was drawn to a man not far from
me. He was in the act of consulting his
portmonnaie; after doing which, he returned
it to his pocket. ■ I shifted my position, and
robbed him of the same. I then decamped,
and found that it contained sixty odd pounds.
I was now determined to leave Melbourne, the
scene -of my sin and misery, and see what I
could do at the Otage diggings. So, with that
X left, and shipped by the Asa Elridge, for
Dunedin, in the year sixty-two. I had been
then some fourteen years in the colonies, out
of which X had been an inmate of a prison
and companion to woe and misery for over
eleven years. People of Victoria, I was sinned
against, as well as sinning, whilst among you,
in that I was a murderer from the first, a true
i disciple of my cruel master, Satan. lam now
seeking for the mercy of God for what I have
done, so that all whom I may have done any
injury to forgive me, if you hope to be for-
given. You who are matured in crime, take
warning by me, and flee from it as from a
poisonous serpent; if not, it will sting you
when there is no retreating. You of Victoria,
don’t be led by the fascinations of crime which
urge its votaries on, persuading them it is a
jovial life. Avoid, I say, its allurements,
because the end of it is misery here, and
eternal condemnation hereafter. Don’t make
light of my advice because it is given from
one who is about to leave the world, and say,
O, the canting parsons got hold of him,' and
he was induced, through the fearful punish-
ment they conjured up to frighten him, to
confess his sins. Throw such thoughts, if
entertained, as unworthy of you and unjust
to me. I am well known among the sinful
class as one, who, while living, never injured
his fellow in crime, in thought, word,or deed;
no, but has ever been the foremost among you
—that is acknowledged—and who will make
his exit from this world not as a craveij coward,
but as a man, and, I trust a Christian one. I


look upon my past life as one unworthy of
me. Hitherto I have prided myself on my
life being one that called forth the admiration
of my fellows for my manliness and indomit-
able courage. I tell you it is a false and
mistaken notion. Tho life of a thief and a
robber is one of umnanliness and false pride.
Look at the times I faced death among you,
and had I only have consummated my wish—
either death or liberty—what would it have
profited me P I will tell you. Eternal death
and condemnation, or further sinking my soul
in iniquity and sin. You may take credit to
yourselves, as I have often done, and say, I
shall never go tho way he is going. Another
thing, you may bo one of the first to throw
the stone at me and denounce me as a mur-
derer. Hold thy auger against me awhile, for
in the sight of God the whole of mankind are
murderers, if they believe not on the Son of
Righteousness slain for the redemption of
fallen and sinful man. And if you persist in
following still in the paths of sin and crime,
you don’t know when you may have to imbue
your hands in your fellow’s blood, and thus be,
as I am—a murderer. Let: me hope my warn-
ing will meet with your acquiescence, and that
you will become better members of society for
the future. Rut don’t neglect the thing need-
ful for your happiness here and eternal bliss
hereafter. People of Victoria pray for and
forgive me !
1 an-ived at Xhmcdin by the ship Asa
Eldridgc, at which place I did not stop above
a few days. On leaving there I went to the
Weatherstone Diggings, at which place I saw
two or three men whom I knew—one in par-
ticular, who was keeping the Diggers’ Amuse-
ment Room ; I mention his name, for I wish
him to blush for the manner in which lie
betrayed me—it is James Montgomery. The
reason that induces me to mention him in full
is, that he is a dangerous man, besides being
a bad member of society ; another thing, by
remaining quiescent with respect to him, he
may dupe someone else. On my arrival, lie
sent for me, and told me one of the lads con-
nected with the hank of New Zealand was in
the habit of going across the ranges to Gabriel’s
Gully, a distance of half a mile, every Friday,
with a large amount of money. How I came
to know that (so my pretended friend con-
tinued), he came into the bar two or three
weeks ago, and asked me to lend him my
revolver, as he was going over to Gabriel’s
Gully, with money for the bank there, which I
lent him. Two days after I went with him to
be shown this lad, for he was nothing else.
The first Friday I was there I went on the
range to intercept the youth on his mission. I
was disappointed in catching my unwary youth,
for he took some other track, and thus escaped
me. I returned and told my informant of tho
result of my expedition ; he said he could not
account for it. Now I promised him, if suc-
cessful, I would give him a good start in the
world ; this made him anxious for my success,
for he ran no risk, being still a member of tho
community, though he had just done five
years in Victoria. He kept a public house, so
that I made his place my principal resort.
While here I became acquainted with the
banker’s movements ; also, Mr. Thompson’s, of
No. 2 store —the latter accidentally. The
manner of it was this ; —I was going home one
night late, when my attention was drawn to a
man lying near the creek. I woke him up,
for he was sleeping. He asked me his direc-
tion home, which was in my own way. On
reaching there his companions were all drink-
ing. I heard them say, “ Have you got your
money all right ? ” He answered in the
affirmative. I was close at home, so I waited
to see the end of their night’s carousal. I then
paid them a visit, and took from them about
£6O in money, and about seventeen ounces of
gold. On the Monday morning I went to sell
the same, and chose No. 2 store for it. There
I learnt that they were in the habit of going to
Munroe’s Gully, a distance of four miles. The
next day I had been gambling, when a certain
man, a stranger to us, pulled out some money
to bet; I noticed he had a good sum; I kept
him in tow till it came dusk, when I invited
him out, and there I choked him, taking from
him a good sum of money. At this I removed
from Wcatherstone’s for about a week, causing
my would-be friend to say I had gone to
Victoria. About this time I was going to rob
the banker, Mr. Kissling, on his return from
the Waitahuna diggings, after receiving the
money brought up from town by the escort, for
the use of the banks. Thursday was the day
generally chosen to fetch this money, a dis-
tance of ten miles over the ranges. I received
intelligence that he had gone, when I went
about two miles on the back track he used to
come, to intercept him on his return. With
me was my companion, Kelly. He did not
come it was getting late, when wo thought he
must have taken the other track. We re-
turned, and I sent my Judas to see if he had
returned. No : so we started at daylight in
the morning; but it afterwards appeared he
had come through in the night. At this we got
two horses, and went and pitched a tent not far
off the track, but out of sight, about halfway be-
tween the two places, intending, whenhepassed,
to follow him. We were expecting him all the
Thursday, but he never came. We went to
see what was the reason of his not going ; that
we could not learn. Now, had wo been for-
tunate enough to have caught him, we should
have been very well paid, for he brought some
£14,000 on the pommel of his saddle. While
we were at the township, one of our acquain-
tances came to me, and told me there was a
man in a disreputable shanty, who had plenty
of money, and would I come and put him up.
Now the Weatherstone diggings were very
quiet, so that I objected to men being put up
and let go to alarm, the place, for I anticipated
robbing this banker, sooner or later, and that
would do me; another thing, were men robbed


and let go, this would cause these people to be
on the alert. With a little persuasion I went
—Kelly was at his tent not far from the camp.
The man came out for the purpose of getting
water from the creek ; we approached him,
when my companion caught him by the
throat, and choked him. I took what he had,
which was very trifling, the woman belonging
to the shanty having robbed him, and left a
few pounds on his person. His name was
John Leversy. In doing the above my
■confrere did not catch him to rights,
in that he emitted a stifled noise.
This brought the people out from all the
surrounding tents, and only I fired a pistol
off to cause them to keep back, we stood but a
bad chance of escaping. This incident alarmed
the place as I thought. That night I slept in
the tent with Kelly and three more men. I
did not get up in the morning early, owing to
its being Sunday. During the morning a man
by the name of Bill Smith came to the tent,
under pretence to see an acquaintance of ours
who stopped at his tent. How the police
were at the scene of the robbery, making
enquiries from the neighbours. It appears
they bad suspicion on some people there,
when this Smith, after leaving that tent, where
Kelly and I were in bed, walked over in their
direction, and told them there were some
likely men there, pointing to the tent, who
would do the like. This brought them over
to the tent, before reaching which they were
seen coming. This caused a man by the name
of John Eussell to start in the direction of the
town. At this time we began dressing. They
came to the tent 5 we were but half-dressed at
the time. They intercepted Eussell, and
made him a prisoner. When they reached
the tent I was outside of the said. I asked
them what they wanted. They replied, “To
arrest you for a highway robbery.” There
were three of them, two sergeants and a
detective. There was some parleying between
us, when I told them I should not go with
them, when Sergeant Trimble, who proved to
be one of them, said he would make me go.
With that ho presented his pistol, when I
pulled out mine, and told him to come no
closer. I then turned my back towards him
to proceed up the range, when he fired most
deliberately, resting his pistol on his left arm
to ensure steadiness of aim. I turned and
threatened him that I would fire at him if he
did not desist; and as sure as 1 had, he would
not be alive to-day. Many and often times
did I censure myself for not shooting him,
because he did me grievous harm afterwards.
X was still going up the range. At this time
the diggers were running in all directions.
He fired again. This time the bullet whizzed
past my head. This was followed by a
third shot, all which time we were increasing
the distance between us, when I heard a fourth
shot, and felt the ground scattered about me.
Kell y that was a close shot,
when he told me it came from his pistol, the
bullet going in the ground between our feet.
On attaining the summit of the range, he
refused to come any further. With that we
escaped, notwithstanding there were upwards
of two hundred diggers after us. They gave
over the chase at dark, when we ventured to
come back. The police had taken possession
of the tent, so that we went to the tent at the
junction of Gabriel’s and Weatherstoue’s. Kelly
went in and woke a man that came over with
me from Melbourne. While inside doing the
above, from a tent close by I saw some police
secreted, so we went about a hundred yards
and spoke to this man, when he told us the
police were all round the place. I sent him
to the store to get some things for us, when I
shifted my position. Luckily I did so ; for,
shortly after doing so, there was a perfect blaze
of light directed at the very spot we had
just vacated. This determined us how to act.
We then left without waiting for our stores,
and proceeded in the direction of our own
tent between the ranges. When we reached
there, it was about two o’clock in the morning.
Wo were very much fatigued after what we
went through that day, so that we needed
rest. It was arranged wc should lie down
till daylight, then get up and shift the tent, in
case of treachery. I threw myself on the bed
without removing my clothes. How we thought
we were safe till the morning, otherwise one of
us would have watched while the other had
an hour’s rest. Being very tired, wc slept on
until awoke by the police, who had entered
the tent noiseless and woke us, with the
understanding that if we moved they would
scatter our brains. Wo were secured. How,
getting away the way we did, X thought there
was nothing against us, or else they would
never have taken us, for by my side I had a
double-barrelled gun and also a single one,
besides three Colt’s revolvers, all loaded with
ball cartridge. We were brought by the two
sergeants into the diggings, where I thought
the diggers would lynch us, such was the cry.
On arriving at the camp, they preferred a
charge against us for firing at the said ser-
geant Trimble. Hover was there a more
perjured case. The next day there was a
mock identification. The man whom I robbed
in the manner described came in, when we
were all ranged round the lock-up. Kelly
and I being in irons, he picked out one man
who had been in the lock-up some four days
prior to the robbery. He picked out another
by the name of Davis. This did not satisfy
the police. They caused us to come out of
our cells the second time, when he walked
direct to the man Eussell, and said this is the
other, after picking out two men before as
the ones who robbed him on the Saturday
night. We were committed for the shooting,
and also for the gun I borrowed, which turned
out to be a stolen one. When within two
miles of Dunedin, the escort got capsized
down a precipitous descent. We were all
handcuffed by twos. It was just going over


broadside down the descent, when Kelly and I
jumped, and then rolled uphill to let the
wagon pass us, which went over and over, till
it gained a level place, the gold going in all
directions. We wore conveyed into town,
where there were crowds of people waiting
our arrival. This accident happening, caused
a version to get afloat that we attempted the
escort, but got disappointed. I heard them
say as I passed them iu a cart, there’s one
of them shot, because I was bleeding. The
injury I sustained caused me t) be confined
to my bed, on and off, for six months. We
were tried, and received a sentence of three
y ears for the perjured charge preferred against
us, and six months for the gun. The man
Bussell received three years for the robbery, of
which he was innocent. How, after I was
tried, Kelly suspected this Montgomery of
informing the police as to our whereabouts.
He did not know the actual spot. We were
betrayed by someone, that was evident, for
when the charge was being preferred, they
asked me my name. The Sergeant-Major
said alias so and so, which was a proof of foul
play somewhereOn the West Coast his
conduct was made known to me how treacher-
ously he behaved, so that put all supposition on
one side. James Montgomery, it is well for
you I am about leaving the world, or I should
hold you accountable for your unmanly con-
duct. I will not leave the world without even
forgiving you, my worst enemy. I trust, if
you ever see this, it will make a better man
of you. I was again a confined inmate of a
prison, having been but a short lime at my
liberty. I was compelled to keep to my bed
hi consequence of the hurt I sustained, on
and off, for six mouths, at which time I was
thinking of trying to escape if possible. Dur-
ing the time I had been in the gaol I was
making provision against I got well, in pro-
curing what implements I could. I carried
the handle of a strong frying-pan wherever
1 went for four months. The manner of
effecting my purpose was this; —l and three
others were confined in one cell, in a pas-
sage where there were four cells : we occu-
pied the last but one from the outer wall.
How, iu the one next- to the outer wall, there
were four men waiting trial; I knew one of
them, so that before I could venture to try, it
was necessary to have these men’s consent.
That was soon obtained through the interces-
sion of my friend. Kelly was in the first cell
of the four, so that it was impossible for him
to go ; but though I could not take him, there
were others willing to go, among them Garrett.
How he was doing a sentence of eight years,
and confined in a cell by himself, that cell
being contiguous to a day-room that communi-
cated with the front yard, which gained, there
were but the gales to vault over, and then you
Were iu the streets. So it was arranged to
give him the first opportunity for getting out
in case I should alarm the sentry on duty
outside an the platform, directly over where I
had to work. Ho was to be out by eleven
o’clock ; he woidd go to the corner of the
Supreme Court, and cooey. We parted on
the Sunday evening with that understanding.
After being mastered at six o’clock, I told the
men in my cell that I was going to try to get my
liberty, and would they strain an effort. One
I knew would go, but the other two objected.
I removed the sleeping berth, and went to
work on the partition wall of the next cell, for
which I had permission from those who were
in it to enter. It was composed of brick,
which took about a half-an-hour before I had
an opening large enough for me to go through,
which I did. How there was another mus-
tering and inspection at nine o’clock. I re-
mained in this cell talking to its inmates till
after eight, when, on leaving them, I bid
them not to be talking to each other while the
officer was inspecting our cell, because their
voices sounded quite plain through the aper-
ture under my bed when the bunk was in its
place. The night inspection went off’ very
well ; at the conclusion of which, I told the
two men in the cell with me that I must tie
them in their beds, which I did. The hole
was made into the other cell early iu the
evening ; so, had either one of them have
told the officer in his rounds, I should
have been frustrated in my designs ; but
fear prevented them, for had they
done so, X believe I should have jumped
out of bed and killed them, for I had a
large knife that would have killed an ox.
Before going out of my own cell I blinded the
window with my bedding. I then went into
the other, and did the same. Having done
which I struck a light, and ignited a candle.
I then remained inactive from nine o’clock till
nearly twelve before I hoard a noise, which I
took for a cooey. I have been greatly censured
for waiting all this time ; even the men iu the
cell persuaded me to begin. But no, I was
ever true to ray word, let it be given for any-
thing whatever —I may say my word was my
bond. On hearing this noise, I took it for-
granted that Garrett was out. I then com-
menced working at the outer wall, which was
a two-foot rubble stone one, very securely
built, the inside of which was coated with
cement, and the removing of which tore the
skin off my hands. How, had it been, as the
evening prognosticated, a boisterous night,
instead of a calm one, the sentry would have
been in one of the towers for protection and
shelter; instead of which, he was daw'dling
along on his post, or leaning over the hand-
rail (though I could not see him, yet I could
tell his whereabouts by his steps or cough).
So that, iu consequence of this, I could only
work when he was walking any way brisk, for
the least noise ran up the wall, and he must
have heard the least sound had we not worked
with circumspection. I continued working at
intervals through the night, till my strength
began to fail me ; and had I got out, it’s more
than a hundred to one against my getting


away. I took down the side of the cell very
nearly, and had but one stone to remove, when
I would be out. Now this stone had to be
brought inside, or otherwise, in its fall, it would
have alarmed the sentry. The opening I was
making was some five feet off the floor of the
cell, and about eight from the outside. The
reason I could not make the aperture on the
lower part of the wall was in consequence of a
large stack of firewood heaped up on the out-
side. I continued my working till daylight
began to appear, which caused me to cease,
and give it up for a had job. Now had I that
lost time at my disposal, I should have
succeeded, no question. No, I allowed another
to benefit himself at a sacrifice of my own
liberty. I returned to my cell, and threw
myself on the bed, and never in all my life did
I experience such exquisite relief. Oh! it
was bliss to my fatigued and weary body. We
were let out for the purpose, of washing. On
gaining the yard, the first one I saw
was Garrett. I was astonished to see him.
He showed no symptoms of uneasiness what-
ever; hetookit quite cool. I said to him u How
is this ? ” when lie told me he was prevented
from working by the night sentries sitting
most of the night in the day-room. I was
like a miller in appearance with the dried
mortar and Either debris I had been handling.
At breakfast time he showed me the aperture
he had made to come out of his cell. I de-
clare if an old hen would not pick a larger one
in the same lime. This served mo right for.
having anything to do with him, after know-
ing what sort of a man he was, for he did a
sentence of ten years in Victoria, during all
which time I never exchanged words with
him because he was held in bad odour by the
prisoners at the hulk for his getting his
fellow-prisoners into trouble. I should have
kept him at arms’ length here, only I thought
lie might try for his liberty. The man is one
of the greatest cowards that ever lived. He
is a big man ; ho isjustasbad in proportion
to his size. His tenets of manhood belong to
the Jonathan Wild school, for he is a con-
glomeration of deceit; not one manly act did
I ever sec him do. Garrett, I trust the
authorities will prevent you disseminating
your unprincipled conduct to the ill of any of
the prisoners. I am not writing this in an
antagonistic spirit, for you know what you
would have received at my hands if I had
been spared to run my vicious course. No ;
it’s not with any animus I thus speak, for I
have known yon some years now, and I never
knew you do a manly act towards your fellows
yet, but many had ones. You have no respect
for any living being, and you glory in your
atheistical belief, when at heart you’re craven.
I have not mentioned you as you deserve, but
I hope through what I have said the guiltless
will avoid you as a poisonous reptile. Those
godless principles entertained by you will show
your hollowness of principle, even to your
fellows. I write this that you may not do
any further harm than what you have. It r 3
not against your person I am speaking, but
against your unhallowed principles. The
frame of mind I am in bids me forgive you
with a righteous forgiveness, because I am
looking to Him whom you pretend to despise
and mock. How your latter end will be in this
world I will not prognosticate. This I say,
repent while there is time, and injure not
your fellow. In the afternoon the magistrates
came, and we were charged with breaking gaol.
Now the two men arraigned with me were
innocent, because they were compelled to wit-
ness it, without taking part therein; so that
I was not going to stand by and see them
punished ; —no, but I told the visiting justices
that I compelled them, at the expense of their
lives, to remain quiescent. I was placed in
irons, and sentenced a short time to solitary
confinement. This was getting off very
leniently; for, should I fail in my attempt, I
anticipated two years’ extension to my time.
After this I was considered the ringleader in
every refractory outbreak, for we were con-
tinually doing something in the spirit of
rebellion against the authorities, and God
knows it was not through any tyrannous treat-
ment, for we did veiy nearly what we liked.
This behaviour led to our being isolated by
ourselves. We continued like this for nearly
two years, without any alteration. In the
mean time they were bringing into force a
more severe discipline. I wore those irons for
over twelve months. I was then placed in the
stockade amongst the other prisoners. I had
not been there long before an open rebellion
took place ; it was caused through the pri-
soners’ indulgence. One man, who was doing
a sentence of three years for shooting a man,
petitioned the Government for the remission
of one-third of his time. It was not enter-
tained. This caused the remainder of the
men to believe there was no indulgence for
any of them. So they thought, by being
refractory and obstreperous, their requests
would he acceded to. This was to be ac-
counted for because none of them had been
trained in the school of infamy. I was con-
sulted, being considered among them as aufait
with respect to their decision. They naturally
looked to me to guide them through this their
refractoriness. I told them what would be
the consequence, and were they prepared to
do a month’s solitary, when they one and all
replied—“ Aye, three of them, if required.”
There were about forty orfiftyprisoners confined
in the stockade, some of them very bad ones,
inasmuch that they were causing their fellow-
prisoners to be punished. Having become
insubordinate, a round robin was drawn up,
for the purpose of knowing who had given
their word not to yield to the authorities, I
leading the van. I knew my indulgence was
forfeited long since—in fact, from the moment!
I entered the gaol. But from the estimation
I was held in by the prisoners, I could not:
retreat, hut knew only entail misery


on myself. 0 false evanescent gaol pride, as
baneful to thy fellows as to thee by whom
entertained. The routine I should adopt, were
I entering on my unfortunate career again,
would be quite different to the one I pursued.
I should do my time with patience; for having
broken the laws of man, it is necessary that
I satisfy the same by enduring punishment, to
show the rest of mankind they are not to be
violated at will. I would be upright in all
my dealings with my confmees, injuring no
man, submitting myself to those placed over
me ; and not, as I have ever done, kick against
the pricks, that goad and wound ; not glorying
in being considered an irreclaimable. I should
advise those who are or have been treading in
my steps, as regards their behaviour in prison,
to beat a retreat, and not think by doing so
they arc dishonouring themselves ; for, when
properly understood, our lives of evil arc
nothing else than a compound of dishonour
and unmanliness. The result of this outbreak
caused them the next day to keep mo in my
cell —for I was separate from the rest. I feel
certain had they not have done so, blood would
have flowed, for I was greatly incensed against
one of the warders—McMahon byname; and
he was doing duty in the stockade the day I
was secluded. The whole of the men were
placed under solitary treatment. This was
followed by the prisoners making a most hellish
noise, I helping to swell the chorus, night
and day. This continued for a week, when
the authorities called the most of them out,
and forgave them. Tin's caused a damper on
the spirits of the others that were left—the
black sheep of the fold, some twelve in num-
ber. Tlie magistrates came and tried the rest
for insubordination. As for mo, being consi-
dered the prime mover of the outbreak, I was
sentenced to receive thirty-six lashes; with
me tw r o others, one twenty-four, and the other
twelve lashes each. This quelled the mutiny,
for such they designated it. I was then for
some considerable time confined by myself,
being allowed one hour’s exercise a day. My
time was getting short now, when the authori-
ties asked me to be compliant for the rest of
my time, and they would let me out with the
remainder of the prisoners. I requested to be
permitted to finish my sentence in my then
position ; it was not acceded to, so I did the
remainder among the prisoners. On being
released among them I was astonished at their
unprinciplcdncss with one another, so I kept
aloof from them. This hurt me very much,
for I had been through my whole prison life a
strenuous stickler for upright dealings among
ourselves. But here the tables were turned—
the most unprincipled led the van. God, I
have to ask Thee for Thy forgiveness, in that
in my heart I was killing them every day for
their unmanliness.
The eleventh of September, sixty-five, came,
the day when my sentence of three years and
a-half had expired, and I was about to be
once more set at liberty. It -was a memorable
morning, being the one Toovey was to stand
his trial, and now lam in a like position. I
did not remain in Dunedin long, some four
days, during all which time my every step,
day and night, was dodged by the police.
Prior to my leaving the prison, I gave it out
that I should go to the West Coast, though,
when asked by any of the authorities, I always
evaded their questions as to where I was
going. Now we knew (that is Kelly and I)
that we would be closely watched, so we
thought we might be able to out-do their
vigilance by taking an inside track over the
ranges to the West Coast. After we had
made provision for this route, wc found it
was not practicable; so we came to the deci-
sion to walk it by the main road. Wc had
reached as far as a place called "Waikonaite,
when we became aware that our exodus from.
Dunedin had been attended by the surveillance
of the police, for on reaching the above wo
were requested to go to the lock-up by a man
who proved to be one of themselves.
Wc were subjected to an interrogation from
those in charge as to where wc were going.
This was only an excuse to allow them to
search our swags, to see if we had any' firearms.
We were then told that the Canterbury
authorities had been notified of our coming
into their province ; not only that, but that
we should have the attendance of a trooper
until wc arrived at the boundary of the two
provinces, ■which was carried out to the very
letter. We were thus escorted, not openly,
the delegated one either preceding us or not
far away. On reaching the Waitaki river, which
divides the Canterbury country from Otago,
wc managed to evade any further surveillance
of the police by taking the upper ferry, and
taking the ranges for our future track. We
thus travelled till wo came to a station kept
by a Mr. Tutcs, not far from the Ashburton
river. There we received information that
by going through the llakaia Gorge wc should
cut off about a hundred miles of our journey.
The next wc went in the direction speci-
fied, till wc pulled up at the north branch of
the Ashburton river, on essaying to cross
which Kelly got frightened, notwithstanding
he saw me get over safely enough. He con-
tinued trying different places with the same
hesitancy, when I was beginning to lose my
patience, when, unknown to him, I ventured
to cross back again. In doing so, I got swept
off my feet, and carried down the stream some
distance. After extricating myself of my swag,
I succeeded in reaching the other side, with
the loss of the swag, which I tried hard to
recover, by running down the stream and
rushing in to intercept it going down, but all
to no avail. On coming up with Kelly, who
was silting down, not aware that I had com©
across, I told him (he narrow escape Iliad
had, besides losing the principal of our tilings.
We gained a woodman’s hut, and related the
disaster that had befallen us, when ue kindly
offered to take his horse and go in search of


it. Not long after lie returned with it, having
gone a distance of ten miles, when he found it
washed up on a snag, for the which I gave
him a pound. We came on till we arrived at
the Aralmra river. There I was instrumental
in saving Kelly’s life, who attained the middle
of the stream, when he was being swept away
with it, when I caught him by the hand. On-
coming to the West Coast had preceded us, so
that we arrived at Hokitika under very inau-
spicious circumstances. Nothing daunted by
the intelligence which heralded our coming, I
was determined to push my way among them,
and see what I could do in the way of making
up for my late misfortune in New Zealand, I
arrived there on the 7th of October, when I
was told there were great enquiries about my
coming, and the authorities had been to people
to whom I was known, asking them to point
me out. I was standing looking about me
the night after my arrival, when an individual
came to me and said I was getting very proud.
I allowed myself to bo prevailed on to take a
glass of wine. While having the same, who
should walk in but Sergeant-Major Bracken.
He had previously been told who I was. Now
he was oue of the sergeants who arrested mo
in Otago. I was greatly embittered against
him in consequence, it’s true, but on reviewing
my charge for which I suffered three years, I
found he did me no material injury. We
passed the time together, and had something
to drink. In a few days I went to the Kauieri
diggings, situate some five miles from Hoki-
tika. » There I made it my business to get
into 'a claim. Besides benefiting myself in a
worldly point of view, it would get noised
abroad that I had become industrious, and
was pursuing the calling of a digger. All
finesse aside, I did work at the said very hard
untff the Christmas. My worldly position
was'improved thereby. Prior to the Christmas
I robbed Mrs. McCoy of her cash box, which
contained thirty poimds odd. The manner
of it was this: She kept a dancing saloon
attached to her house, in the which she used
to dance occasionally. On the night I robbed
her, I asked a young man to take Mrs. McCoy
for a partner in a varsovianna, a particular
dance of hers. While going through the
figures of the above, I was cutting another
figure, in that I went to the back of the
premises, and entered a small window that
communicated with her bedroom, the door of
which led from the bar, her son being behind
the said at the time. After getting possession,
I was disappointed in the amount. I expected
at the least a hundred pounds. Her house
was the only one bn the Kanieri where the
diggers could have amusement, accompanied
with convenience, so that she monopolised the
most of the trade, and her takings could not
be less than a hundred pounds a week. She
was heard to say, “A good job I went to Hoki-
tiki yesterday,” which was unusual with her,
her day being every Monday morning, and
this happened on the Saturday night, after, as
I thought, having the week’s takings. I came
to Hokitika to spend the Christmas, that being
the first time I had been there since my
arrival. While enjoying myself there, which
I did without any disguise, in first-rate style ;
it put me in mind of Victoria on the breaking
out of the diggings there, inasmuch that
money was spent like dirt. While the holi-
days continued, I must have robbed no less
than twenty different persons, so that at then-
close, I dare say, after all my expenses, which
were extravagant, I had nearly five hundred
pounds. I was becoming very gay again,
when I became acquainted with a girl I took
from hotel. I persuaded her to come
and live with mo, which she did, poor crea-
ture ! I purchased a cottage, and procured
some furniture. In this wo lived for about
six weeks. During the time of my thus
deceiving her as to who and what I was, she
became pregnant, after which she continually
asked me to make her my wife, that her shame
might not cause her to blush hereafter. Poor
Carry, but few know of your existence at
Hokitika as the paramour of Burgess. Your
letter I received since I have been here hurt
mo very much, when you appealed in it to
my comprehension of your real slate, and are
you to tel! the fruit of our shame its father
was hanged for being a murderer ? 0, Carry,
there’s that three hundred and seventy poimds;
I will not forget thee, girl, and dare I say our
child. But do as I bid you; go home to your
friends, and plead the weakness of human
nature, and not wait to see the last of me, as
you stated ; leave me to God and my wretched
state. May my fate be the cause of bringing
to God even you. God bless yon and yours.
Carry, ever blessed, 1113- intentions towards
thee were purely honourable, that is, I in-
tended for you to share my bread for the re-
mainder of my days. I can imagine your
feelings towards me ; they are those of pity,
mingled with detestation. I have no more to
say to thee, but make amends for thy sins
towards God, and ask Him of His merciful
kindness to show it to me, who am a wretched
trangressor of His divine law; let your
woman’s heart plead for me at the Throne of
the Omnipotent and Omniscient God. Bless
you. Good bye !
I kept possession of the claim by paying
another to work in my stead. I went to loot
after Mr. Walmsley, who was stationed at
Rosstown, because I was informed that he
came to Hokitika in company with a packer
every month, with a large amount of gold. I
saw him knocking about till I got familiar
with his person. I received intelligence that
Mr. Kerr, the banker, was saddling his horse,
and was going to Hokitika. At this I hurried
down the avenue to get my gun ; while ship-
ping the said lie rode by. Now there was a
great drawback in connection with us ; here we
were marked men, and if a man like Kerr was
stuck up, no matter by whom, we should, as a
matter of course, be taxed with it. I returned


to Hokitika after gaining this news. I was in
no hurry to carry my plans into execution,
because I had so many irons in the fire at once,
that I was undecided which to draw first.
Lord, I must needs confess it that my plans
were bloody. I remember reading, some time
prior to my selecting the West Coast as a field
to carry on my nefarious pursuits, about a
female in Italy who became like an enraged
beast at the sight of blood. She was a bandit
captain’s wife, who got shot, when she lifted
his carbine and stood over him, and defended
his lifeless corpse till she was captured, and
received a sentence for life. While doing the
which she seduced her gaoler to let her join
her band once again, and she would put him
in possession* of a large treasure. He complied
with her wish. On going to obtain the pro-
mised reward he was stabbed to the heart.
This, I thought at the time, was a companion
fit for me. On coming from Okariti I noticed
the weakness of the ship that brought the
gold in it, and could I have met with men
whom I could trust Mr. Kerley would not
have reached Hokitika. My brother sharc-
clamouring among themselves
that if I did not return and work my own
claim, or leave a more industrious man than
the one I was paving they would call a
meeting and sell me out. This was a mere
subterfuge on their part; they evidently knew
who I was, and wanted me out of the claim ;
so rather than an exposition should take place
respecting my antecedents among a body of
diggers, I came to the resolve of sacrificing
my interest in the claim for a mere moiety of
its intrinsic value.
I went one Sunday to rob Mr. Kerr, on his
return from Honoughue’s gully, which I should
have done but for an accident; I was in posi-
tion on the Bonoughoue track, which extends
through the bush for about a half-a-mile ; it
was on a Sunday afternoon, the rain having
continued from mid-day, when a man came by
from Donoughuc’s in the which he passed and
saw my gun ; his suspicion was aroused, and
he returned back again. My attention was
drawn to it, when we thought it would be as
well to let him pass. Now the reason the man
suspected after having seen me was, some few
weeks previous, the postman of Rosstown and
the Bailiff of Hononghue’s had been stuck up
by two men, and there were two of us. I be-
lieve the authorities suspected Kelly and me for
sticking these people up from what I heard
when I returned to Hokitika, having been
absent at the time, which, by my God, we did
not; there was better game in the preserve we
were waiting for. On looking at this incident I
clearly see it was the interposition of God who
saved Mr. Kerr, not any fortuitous circum-
stances, but the Omniscient God’s interference;
to Him be the praise. I was contemplating
having a good venture shortly, and then make
my exit from the Australian countries alto-
gether j it was the banks of Okarita, which were
to be done stragetically, in that I was endea-
vouring to procure some trooper’s clothes;
which obtained, the two or three police sta-
tioned there would have availed them nothing.
While at Hokitika I managed to find my way
to the camp for a charge of inebriation, which
happened after I left the ball held at the
Union Hotel. It was not that I was incapa-
ble, which I never was in my life, but for
interfering with the police in the discharge of
their duty. I was fined as an inebriate. At
this I went to the Grey, and there I was shown
Mr. Pox; he belonged to Maori gully, to which
place I went to look at him and the said; it
suited me, and caused me to wait a fortnight
for bis coming, when I lost patience, and re-
turned to Hokitika. I had now been to all
the diggings on the West Coast. My poor
bird saw me occasionally, when she ever
pleaded for me to set her free from her shame.
At this time, which was the latter end of
April, I became acquainted with the man
Sullivan. Mark under what peculiar circum-
stances we became acquainted! I was pro-
menading Eevell street with Kelly one day,
when an individual passed; he observed, “ I
think I know him ; if so, he is an old
schoolmate of mine, and such a character!
The last place X saw him was in Launceston,
in ’52.” Now I was looking out for a couple
of men to assist in doing the banks at Okarita.
In a few days Kelly came to me, and said,
“ I was right respecting that party ; he is up
at Solomon’s. I have been with him all the
afternoon ; come up and spend an hour when
you have had your tea.” I went according to
promise, and there, sure enough, he was.
Mark under what auspices this ill-omened
acquaintance began! After a while we played
at cribbage for refreshments for the company,
during which I was formally introduced by
Kelly as his brother, with a wink, which he
took, for we passed as such at several places,
this being one of them. Some time after,
Sullivan and I played two strangers for some
two hours or more, when he played one of
them himself for half a sovereign a game. He
was being beaten, when he began cheating.
This led to words, and the man picked up his
money, and said he was willing to lose it fair, but
would not be cheated out of it. Now Sullivan
considered himself entitled to the stakes, and
it riled him ,to be foiled by this stranger, when
he drew his fist, and struck him a severe blow
in the face. This caused a scene, when the
landlady persisted in their leaving the house.
They went outside for the purpose of fighting ;
when there, Sullivan gave the man in charge
for robbing him of half a sovereign. Kelly
and I left shortly after, by going out the back
way. On gaining Eevell street there was
Sullivan, and the man in charge of the police,
clamouring at the door of the Eose, Thistle,
and Shamrock for admittance, which was not
responded to. The constable took the man to
the camp, Sullivan following. It was two
o’clock on Sunday morning. We waited out-
side the fence, when I thought they were a


long time ; so I went and listened. There I
heard Sullivan telling the night officer the
whole of his culpable behaviour. lie came
away, when I asked him what he had done
(for his conduct was rather strange to mo, to
have a man connected with me to charge
another with a misdeed). He replied,
“Did you think I was going to let
a b y wretch like that best me?
Ho fear, the b r shall sweat there till
Monday, at all events ; for having seen the
inside of a lock-up, he won’t perhaps commit
himself in the like manner again.” At this wc
parted. I promised to see him the next day
at the Hope and Anchor public-house. After
leaving him that night, I thought ho was a
bad man, for I had proof even then that he
would scruple at nothing. How, had I fol-
lowed the bent of my inclinations, I should
have had no dealings with him at all. I hope
this wickedness that has been unfolded at
Nelson will be a warning to the world of evil-
doers, and cause them to place no wicked
reliance on their fellow, or they will repent it
hereafter. Take Sullivan as the type of warn-
ing for your confidence, who is not only
heinous enough to do bloody deeds, but after
its commission, to save himself from the just
punishment he merited, he is trying by
inculpating innocent men to save his own
worthless life. I believe I should not have
presented my infamy to the world at large
only for his conduct, which induced me to
confess concerning the whole of the bloody
tragedy as it occurred, in order that Sulli-
van’s guilt might appear manifest to all
men. D uriug all my past experience, ranging
over some years now, I never saw or heard of
the equal of Sullivan. It has been my mis-
fortune, in my chequered life, to be thrown
among the dross and scum of society, where
I have seen all sorts of wickedness enacted—
man rising against his fellow, and taxing him
with things he never did, in order to curry
favour from those placed over him, or to
further himself in some scheme of villainy.
But as for Sullivan, he has outdone them all;
he has nearly out-judased Judas, who betrayed
his innocent and loving Master. Jonathan
Wild is a fool to him, and he played and
dabbled in human blood to further his guilty
aims. But Sullivan has exhausted the whole
vocabulary of villains for a paradigm. He
ranks at the head of the list as the arch-villain.
These are harsh epithets, but they are never-
theless true. He has not injured me that
causes me to speak thus; no, I have done
that myself. Did his iniquitous conduct injure
no one else, I should never have pursued the
course I have to enlighten the world; I should
have treated it as one guilty wretch betraying
his confrere in crime. But he has not done
that; his own guilt is so apparent, that it’s to
evade justice and immolate the guiltless. God,
in Thy wonderful dealings with man, cause
this wicked mystery to be unfolded to the
enlightenment of Thy erring creatures, that
the sinful wickedness of one of the real mur-
derers may appear to their understanding as
it does to Thee, whose blessed sight was wit-
ness of the whole. My earnest wish and
prayer is that others may profit by this un-
heard of wickedness. May it be the means of
causing distrust among the class I have moved
in, and enable them to see that crimes such as
these arc not to be perpetrated at will; that
Thy all-searching eye will, when it pleaseth
Thee, prevent its commission. Take warning,
youths, by me, and cease to do evil and learn
to do well while there is time, and put it not
off till you are ushered like myself into tho
presence of God, with all your sins uncan-
celled. According to promise, I had an inter-
view with him the next day, and of all the
men to talk (to gain the confidence of any
man) he surpassed all that ever I heard of.
The horrible revelations of deeds of darkness
he gave utterance to would coagulate your
blood to mention. Another thing, Kelly was
surety to me for his fidelity, having known him
some twenty-four years and more, and told me
lie was true and staunch to his comrades.
This was sufficient warranty for me, so that
he gained my confidence. I then confided to
him my ulterior intentions, which met his
entire approval, so that he was or pretended
to bo quite elated to think he had been so
fortunate as to fall in with us. I asked him
the strength of his finances, which were very
low. I gave him a trifle, when he hesitated
about taking it, remarking that he would have
some that b night, or there should not be
any at Hokitika. I then told him and Kelly
if they went to Parr’s, at the Arahura, and
put those places up, they might get a few
“centuries” for their trouble. ‘I told them, to
distract the suspicion of the police lighting on
us afterwards, I would be seen by the autho-
rities all the evening ; for where either I or
Kelly was, they thought the other was not far
distant, because at this time we never took
any one into our confidence. We parted,
Sullivan taking me by Die hand, saying, “We
have never worked together yet, but when the
time comes for that, you will find me a per-
fect tradesman.” I made it my business to
be seen till a late hour till I thought they had
been gone time sufficient to have effected their
illicit journey, the distance being nine miles
there and back. They returned unsuccessful,
owing, I believe, to the evening being a fine
one, which caused the residents to be scat-
tered about, and they had no largo arms.
I told him I was not prepared to go to Okarita
yet, having to procure the trooper’s clothes if
possible, otherwise I should go to Melbourne
to get them; whether or no I should have had
to go or send to Melbourne, to furnish ourselves
with wigs and false whiskers. But if he liked I
would take him with me to rob Mr. Kerr, which,
would not interfere witli our other work. He
acquiesced in all I suggested, so that it was
arranged that we should start on the Friday
night, at seven o’clock, and traverse this


journey, fourteen miles, unseen by any person.
We reached our destination about four o’clock
on the Saturday morning. Prior to our leav-
ing Hokitika on the Friday, I purchased a
small tent to take with us, which wo erected
on the Saturday morning, in the scrvib, out of
sight of all passers by. This was on the
Totara river, distant half a mile from the
Swede’s accommodation house. We remained
secreted in the tent, which afforded us shel-
ter and espionage of the road all that day. In
the meantime everything was put in order
by myself, ready for our bloody work. Now
Kelly was left at Hokitika, to elude any sus-
picion of us. On the Sunday, which was the
day to go and fetch the gold from Douoghue’s,
we were waiting very anxiously for him to pass,
when not long after our wish was gratified.
With him was another horseman, who! thought
would leave him at the sea beach. After
passing wc vent on the first cutting, and pre-
pared our coverts, one on each side ot the road.
This gave him a sight of the river bed for
some distance, along which Kerr had to come
before lie entered the cutting mentioned. On
Ills sighting them, if the other horseman
should come, we were to let fall our crape ; but
if Kerr came by himself, as I believed ho
would, we were to put on no disguise, but stop
him as we were. He was to inform me when
they were coming, so that X should bo pre-
pared to step out and stop them—that being
m v privilege. He had not been long secluded
when he gave the signal; there were three
of them, the last being a trooper. Mr. Ken-
led the van—but so warily, that on entering
the avenue he preceded the others some hun-
dred yards, and then stopped till the others
liove in sight. They then pulled up, wdieu lie
again went a-hcad, and stopped right opposite
my covert, tlio others following as before. At
this stage four packers, on horseback, came
the other way, so that it was impossible to stop
them. When Mr. Kerr was opposite, had I
bare stepped out, those behind w r ould have
fled and given the alarm, which would have
cut off our retreat. In the meantime, I should
have been missed from Hokitika, which would
have been confirmation of my guilt. So they-
were allowed to pass.
Mr. Kerr, I ask you for your forgive-
ness, in that I did you no bodily harm ;
but before the ail-merciful God I am your
murderer, for so sure as you came along by
yourself, such would have been your fate.
In your prayers remember me; for take Christ
for your example; He prayed for His murderers
with fervency, “Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do.” Though sensible
what I was going to do to you, yet I need
your prayers to the Fountain of Mercies. If
you pray, let it be with ardour, for God
regardeth the prayers of His children. On
gaining the tent I felt vexed with myself to
think I should be disappointed after coming
that distance. It was not to be; God pro-
tected Mr. Kerr; and when he hears what a
narrow escape he had, I trust he will for the
remainder of his days dedicate himself to the
Lord, who, through His inscrutable ways,
prevented him from being murdered. We
returned towards Hokitika, on the way taking
a boat at the Totara, which we left on the
mud flat, owing to an insufficiency of water.
On reaching the south spit we took another
boat to put us across the Hokitika river,
which we made fast on the other side. This
misadventure caused me to he more assiduous
in doing what I meditated; for this disap-
pointment was the occasion of putting me to a
deal of inconvenience, besides wasting time,
and I intended being clear of the West Coast
when the winter set in. Sullivan was short
of money, and ready, by his conversation, for
anything; so l watched my opportunity to
procure those clothes and accoutrements from
the camp—for of all places I think a police
camp, no matter where situate, is the easiest
place robbed after dark. I went into the
barrack room, and while there I heard some
one coming, so I had to decamp, taking with
me a revolver only. The next night I was
walking down Beach street to an old lady’s
place I used at times to stop at, when on
passing Mr. Prince’s store I saw his partner
counting the contents of the cash-box. I
went and found Sullivan, and proposed getting
it, as he was short of money. I told him to
go to the back door, and ask for Mr. Prince,
for being in the dark he could recognise no
one. Ho went; I entered the front of the
premises, and lifted the cash-box ; it contained
but twenty pounds exactly, with a draft
for three hundred pounds ; I think that
was the amount. The same week I
succeeded in effecting my purpose on
the camp. I took therefrom some four
revolvers, cartouche sashes, sword belts,
pants, Ac. These X had taken care of by
a friend. To provide against contingencies I
suggested it would be as well, in case any of
these revolvers were found on me, to he able
to give an account of them. Kelly was at the
Grey, so I pressed getting a man whom we
could rely on ; for the one 1 selected was a very
respectable tradesman at Hokitika, a master
painter and glazier, and who had the principal
work of any in the trade. I went and secreted
two revolver cases in the sand ; after doing
which I went to the Golden Fleece Hotel, and
began drinking, when I threw myself into the
company of Mr. Chamberlaine, who was there.
In course of conversation the ship Maria,
which was stranded on the beach, was men-
tioned, when I proposed going to see her.
This was done. Mr. Chamberlaine and Sulli-
van were with me. In sauntering along I
kicked the sand, and thus laid bare what I had
previously hidden. Mr Chamberlaine picked
them up, and gave them to me. I asked them
to look about, there might be something else. I
carried them in my hand. I took them to the
old lady’s placo before mentioned, and put
them under a sofa, on which I sometimes slept.


I was then waiting till Kelly came from the
Grey, when I thought of running oyer to
Melboairno myself, and getting what I required.
On the Saturday night Sullivan told me ho
must be doing something, otherwise Mr.
Walker would be asking him for money, as his
expenses wove rather heavy, in consequence of
keeping that woman. This was a most dis-
reputable creature, that came in the ship
Albion witli him. Well, I told him to meet
me at the wreck of the Montezuma, at nine
o’clock the next day, and I would go to the
Tercmakau and rob Mr. Brown, the store-
keeper on the beach, who bought all the gold
got in the ncighoiuhood. 1 was knocking
about that night till very late, in order to be
seen by the authorities, for Kelly was away.
I was at a ralllc that night for a piece of
needlework I wanted to present to my unfor-
tunate. The subject of the said was a nun
taking the veil. After leaving there, which
was near two o’clock, I went to the old lady’s
place, where I had always an entree. I had
not been long in bed, before I heard a knock,
saying, “ Open the door.” I knew from the
gruffness of the voice whom it proceeded from.
After putting on my drawers, I opened the
door, when who should walk in but seven
police. Now, owing to some champagne I
drank that night, I was a little the worse for
drink, and forgot all about the revolver cases
which I had with me all the night, having lent
the pistols to an individual the same evening.
In undressing, I took them out of my poncho
pocket and threw them under my pillow. I
was rushed directly they opened the door, and
in searching my bed they found the said. In
consequence of knowing any previous history,
they made mo fast before they began to search
the house. I told them they were in an
honest man’s house, and that all they found
there I would be responsible for. This would
not satisfy him who conducted my apprehen-
sion, but he must take the poor old man
belonging to the house, who is sixty odd
yeai*s of ago. During my incarceration, which
extended to eleven days, beforo*the investiga-
tion began, all which time they led the old
lady a fearful life, my legal adviser came to
me, when I instructed him to subpeena Mr.
Chamberlaine and Sullivan. Now mark the
atrocious conduct of the latter. - He comes
unblushingly forward into that court, ascends
the witness-box, then gives me a masonic
sign that it’s all right, then takes the Word
of God in his hand, and swears he was with
me by accident when those things were found
and given to me by the painter, pretending he
did not know the man’s name, and on his oath
I came by them honestly. This corroborated
evidence caused my acquittal. Since the
villain has been confined, to propitiate the
authorities, he has had the atrocious audacity
to charge the said Chamberlaine in complicity
with Mr. Carr, the constable, for stealing the
said. Sullivan, do you believe that the all-
seeing God can ever forgive you, without you
undo the mischief you have caused at Hoki-
tika and elsewhere through your evil machi-
nations. God will cause you to wither like a
potsherd. Mr. Chamberlaine, foi’give me for
duping you, in that you were led to believe
that you found the subject of your own incar-
ceration. Mr. Carr,.l am guiltless of the
misfortune that has befallen you. Both of you
pray for me.
While I was in durance vile I afforded
the newspapers pabulum for the week,
during which time they raked up every-
thing against mo to my detriment 5 even my
visits to the dress circle of the Prince of Wales
Opera House, on which occasions I generally
took the old lady and other friends. Owing
to my being thus caricatured as a great pc-~
to society, it bi’ought a certain amoun- jf
discredit on all who were in any way ,011-
nected with me, more especially the poor
old lady. Mrs. Morgan, how dare you pre-
sume to throw the stone at the old lady, when
you ought to blush for your conduct with
me! Go and ask her to forgive you, that you
did it in your ignorance. Mrs. Aldridge and
your husband, I have been the evil genii to
your present happiness. lam exceedingly
sorry to think that I should be tlic cause of
bringing sorrow to your cup of misery; do mo
the justice to believe that I am sorry even to
death, that you should be made to suffer for
what I have done. True, I deceived you in
that yon knew me for nothing else but an
honest man, which the world at lai’gc took mo
for, so that yon are blameless for my acts. I
am indebted to you for a great deal of kind-
ness shown to me, which I cannot now dis-
charge towards you, but I trust all who
hitherto have held me in esteem will liquidate
my obligations to thee the best of women, I
know in what estimation I stand with thee, as
lam a murderer. I ask you not to sympa-
thise with me ; I am not worthy your doing
that. I ask you to forgive me for ever be-
coming acquainted with you, and thereby
entailing disgrace on yon, Pity the criminal,
but loathe my crimes. God ever bless and
guard you and yours; pray for me. Mr.
Dycir tlie detective, you ought to fall on your,
knees, and praise God that you have escaped
my threat, which would have been carried
into effect on my return to Hokitika. You
know what that was, and the occasion of it.
On my release, I knew I should be suspectecl
now for anything of consequence, since they
found a portion of the things stolen from* their
midst; the remainder, I learnt after I came
out, were made away with irrecoverably. The
day of my discharge Kelly came from the
Grey to see after me, when they arrested him
on the same charge, for owing to his being
absent, I take it, the authorities thought he
had the arms with him. On the night of
his arrest, I was asked by a poor devil of an
evil-doer if I would stand at the door while he
went in and stole the cash-box. I did so-
There "was next to nothing in it. This was on


the 23rd of May. ' The place from whence the
said box was taken was the Rising Sun Hotel.
The next day, which was our Queen’s Birth-
day—God bless her—though I have been a
bad subject, I knew how to appreciate such a
good creature as she is. Would to the Almighty
I was like her in His sight, though if I am
accepted of Christ, I am greater than an
earthly monarch. Kelly was discharged, the
charge preferred against him being withdrawn.
Now I knew it would be prudent to absent our-
selves from Hokitika, otherwise I should be get-
ting into some serious trouble; so with that I
proposed starling the next morning at daylight.
We left according to my wish. Prior to my
leaying, the money I had, some three hundred
and seventy pounds, I got a draft on the bank
in Sidney, and told my unfortunate when she
received a letter from me, to make away with
the bit of a home, and follow me, bringing
nothing with her but a few of my clothes,
amongst them my big coat; this was my part-
ing instructions to her whom I injured, both
in this world and in the next, without she
repents. Carry, ease me of my burdensome
load of guilt, by letting me not be taxed with
your ruin. We reached the Grey on the
Saturday morning, that being the 26th of May.
Now there was one drawback with respect to
me at the Grey,—l was known by the Inspec-
tor of Police, and to keep out of his way I
crossed on to the Nelson side till dark, when I
came back again to the Greymouth township.
Now, after we arrived in the morning, Kelly
began drinking, so that when he came over
for me in the evening, he was tipsy,
which caused words between us, and
while getting into the boat, he fell and cut his
eye. We passed the evening away very jovial,
Sullivan getting very drunk. At daylight
Kelly awoke, and said he was ashamed of
himself for his behaviour and disfigured face;
bo he said he would not stop in town, but
camp outside of it, over the other side of the
bridge, Sullivan going with him. Nowhere is
another specimen of Sullivan’s hellish conduct.
When we came to the Grey, they (that is
Sullivan and Kelly) went to the Provincial
Hotel, kept by a Mr. Barnard, to which place
I went on my coming over in the evening.
Since we have been lying here, Sullivan has
caused this man to be fined, through some
false evidence he has given the authorities
concerning him, when the man never saw him
or Kelly before seeing them at the Grey, and
then he saw nothing to lead him to think we
were other than we appeared to be, —diggers.
Mr. Barnard, the injury you suffered at the
hands of Sullivan will return on his own head,
I sincerely hope, for he is a most consummate
scoundrel. While sitting in the above hotel in
the morning, who should come in, among
other visitors, but the man Wilson, now
charged with the murder of Mr. Dobson.
Poor fellow! you are as innocent as the
unborn babe; and I trust, before I leave
this world, I shall hear that you are acquitted
for the same. Never since the world began
was there greater infamy enacted by one man
towards another than to charge him with any
knowledge whatever with this young man’s
murder. But be of good cheer; the veil will be
lifted from one monster’s dark deeds ; then the
world will see Sullivan as he is—a very fiend.
"We had something to drink then, and subse-
quently thriough the day, for he was in and
out all the day. In the afternoon I received
information that young Mr. Wilkie was going
down the beach to fetch some gold from the
various stores. I sent my informant out to the
place where Kelly was to tell him to come in
directly. Instead of his coming, Sullivan came
and told me that Kelly was very bad after his
debauch. While waiting to cross where he
should*come, who should pass by hut the very
man I wanted to swing clear of—Mr. James.
He saw me, and crossed to speak a eons table ;
while doing so, I shifted my position, and lost
him. I went on the road to wait the coming
of Sullivan; I sighted him running, for he
had to come the distance of three miles. We
crossed at Cobden, through which town we
went to the sea beach, on gaining which we
awaited the approach of Mr. Wilkie. Now
we must have been too late, for my informant
said he was generally hack by four, and it was
past that when we crossed; so that Mr.
Wilkie you escaped, fortune favouring you ;
for I verily believe you would have been mur-
dered. Here was another proof that God was
displeased at my wickedness, which he showed
by frustrating my designs. We returned- to
the Greymouth, when Sullivan went out to his
camp the same evening. After I had my tea,
the man Wilson came in again, and remained
in my company till a very late hour. A few
words, I feel, is necessary from me respecting
the said. I first saw him on the West Coast
just after Christmas; I had previously known
him ; so that on meeting the poor fellow as
stated, he told me he had just left Nelson, after
doing a sentence of six mouths. He was at a
loss what to do now he was in Hokitika. I
could see the inoffensive sinner had no energy.
The next time I saw him he was vending
newspapers, carrying the Hokitika Times to
the Greymouth for sale, a distance of five and
twenty miles—anything to earn a crust; to
get it otherwise he had not the stamina. At
the time I saw him at the Grey he
told me he had been very bad, and rendered
unable to pursue his calling; not only so, but
to procure a few necessaries, while in that
unhealthy state, he had exhausted his news-
paper funds. Now I was anticipating robbing
Mr. Pox, the banker, and told him, in the
course of a few days I should be able to give
him a start again. Now I fold Sullivan, on
parting with him the same evening, that he
would have'to go up to Maori Gully, and see
when Mr. Pox left, and return directly;
but before he started I told him I should send
for my gun, as it was no use his taking that.
So the same night I asked the man Wilson to
C


take charge of mj gun and pistol till I wanted
them, as it was dangerous for me to have any
firearms in an hotel. Ho was very willing to do
anything for me ; besides, he had an expectation
of getting some money from me in a few days, so
that ho was ready to oblige me by going out
there and then, that lie might not be seen carry-
ing any suspicious looking bundle through the
town in the daylight. The next time X saw him
he told me he started out for the purpose of get-
ting my gun, but that on the way the soles of his
light boots came oft'by walking through the stiff
clay on the road, which caused him to turn back.
This was about ten in the morning. We had
something to drink, and I asked him to come out
with me and carry them in for me. On arriving
at the place where they were camping, Kelly was
lying in bed. I took my gun and pistol, and, to
hide them effectually, I took and rolled them in a
blanket, and put oilcloth on the outside. I then
gave them to the man Wilson, and told him to
take them on to town. I stopped and had a con-
versation with Kelly and Sullivan, the former
complaining of his inability to move. I left them
with the understanding that Sullivan was to go
up to Maori Gully. On coming to the Grey-
mouth Mr. De Lacy came along on horseback,
being in search of a mare be had lost. Wo walked
together till we nearly overtook the man Wilson.
He Lacy observed, “ Is that fellow with you P ”
X told him the service he was doing for me, when
he observed, “ Mind you don’t be seen with him
by the police, for X think they know something
about him, and you will bo getting into trouble.”
We journeyed on till wo reached the bridge, dis-
tant about a mile and a half from the town.
There he alighted from his horse, and wo had two
glasses of brandy. He then engaged the youth
who attended on us in conversation about the
mare he was in search of, when ho was told the
Maoris in the neighbourhood had reported one
dead in the bush. We then left. We kept com-
pany till we reached the Grevmouth, the man
Wil son preceding us all the way in sight. There
I parted wifh Mr. Ho Lacy. Wilson took my
swag to some place, and came back to me in about
an hour. At this time it must have been three
o’clock. He then remarked he would go and have
a lie down ; he wont away for that purpose. The
next time I saw him was about six o’clock. He
then remained in my company till nearly ten,
when we parted for the night. The next morning
he came into the hotel—it may have been near
ten o’clock. He did not slop long, when he wont
away, and came to me in the space of an hour,
and told me that tall man (meaning Sullivan)
told him to tell me to go to the bridge. Wilson
remarked he was all wet and muddy. I wont to
the bridge indicated, and there was Sullivan in
the slate described. He informed me the reason
he did not go to Maori Gully, which was on the
road thither. On nearing the coal pits, some
eight miles from the Greymoutb, lie met a young
man whom he took for a banker. It was about
five o’clock when this happened. He continued,
“After stopping him, I could not let him pass,
because he saw me without any disguise; so after
finding out my mistake, I took him in the bush
about a hundred yards from the road. I inter-
rogated him as to who ho was, when he replied,
( Hid you take me for a banker P here is all the
money I have—six pounds odd.’ ” Sullivan said
“it was a pity, he was such a nice young fallow.
I then made him sit down, and there we strangled
him. I raked a hole and put him in it, compass
and all, for lie turned out to be Mr. Dobson, the
Provincial Surveyor.”
This was the bloody version-of Sullivan relative
to the murder of the above, as near as I can re-
member, word for word. Sullivan continued:
“ After I burked him, I knew be would shortly be
missed, so I thought it advisable to return.” He
then asked where Kelly was. I told him ho had
gone over to Cobden. Now, whether Sullivan
murdered Mr. Dobson by himself, or had someone
else with him, I know not. I saw Kelly earlier
than Sullivan; lie told me nothing about the
affair, further than he should soon leave the Grey,
Sullivan, in his revelation of the tragedy, said
(: Wo” burked him. Whom ho meant by the
“ we ” T am ignorant of, but I have my surmises.
This thing I can vouch for, on my impciishable
soul, that the man Wilson, now charged with
complicity in the deed, knows no more about it
than a person a thousand miles away. No; the
man Isa victim of Sullivan's; for, at the time the
murder was done, he was in my company in a
very little time after, and this dark deed was per-
petrated some eight miles from town. Now, since
Sullivan has charged him as a confederate in the
deed, to invalidate the evidence of witnesses that
could prove his own guilt, he has laid some false
charge against them. One is Mr. DeLacy, the
livery stable keeper, who met him on the road (for
after I left him ho started directly), about a mile
from where he was camped, and about three or a
little more from the scone of the murder. There
is Mr. Barnard, the hotel-keeper, where Sullivan
hung his bedding and clothes out to dry the same
day, as he returned on the Tuesday. The man
Wilson can prove beyond all doubt of his being at
Greyraouth, and never having left it except with
me, for the purpose mentioned. He can prove he
slept at the European hotel on the night the
murder was done, which he could not have done
had he been a principal in the tragedy, for the
locality where it occurred is impassable after dark,
inconsequence of an extended swamp; in fact,
the road was immersed under water most of tho
way. Had it been passable, Sullivan would have
come to town the same night, that he might not
leave any trace of his having been seen on tho
road after his bloody work. There is proof posi-
tive of Sullivan being seen going up the road, and
not Wilson. The monster! On bearing of this
deed, I thought it would be the means of causing
me to leave the West Coast. I was noways afraid
of being implicated in it, because there was un-
doubted evidence of my whereabouts. Sullivan
thenremarked, “What’s to bedone; it’sdangerous
for us to he here long, and I want something to
do. I thought when I stopped that wretch I was
doing right.” Ifc remarked, “'I don’t know
any of these big fellows.” I told him in his
absence I had heard there was a bank at the
Duller, and I thought of sending for a man who
would come, to put tho bulk of tho notes
away after we had clone the same. He coin-
cided with my judgment; so I sent a letter
direct to tell Levy to come and do for us what I
have said. The same afternoon I quite accident-
ally saw Mr. Eox, who had come down in the boat,
I knew he would not remain long in the town, so
I proposed going out in the morning and robbing
him. On parting on the Tuesday night, it was
arranged that Kelly and Sullivan should seek
some other place to lodge that night, so that on
leaving in the morning early, Mr. Barnard would
have no suspicion after it was done. Kelly slept
at a barber’s, who took in boarders; Sullivan at


the British hotel —I think that’s the sign. I
know the house. Now we wore all to be across
the bridge before daylight, because there were not
many who passed during the day, so that they
took notice of all travellers. On getting up in
the morning, 1 left tho Provincial hotel quite
noiseless, having told the landlord on the previous
night I should get up early in the morning, and
not be present at breakfast. Sullivan was wait-
ing on the road. "We waited Kelly till it was
nearly daylight. The man "Wilson, I asked to
carry out my things to the place where he got
them, which he promised to do by the break of
day. So I left Sullivan waiting Kelly, and pro-
ceeded to the locality where I intended stopping
Mr. Fox. On my way thither, Wilson overtook
me. I was then about taking my swag, when he
still persisted in carrying it to the place desig-
nated. We passed the bridge together. At the
door of the shanty there stood a man. We pur-
sued our way without any salutation. On reach-
ifc, Sullivan and Kelly came up, Sullivan carrying
a shovel. I left the man Wilson and went about
a half-a-mile ; we took up our positions. Now I
told Sullivan, if Fox came by himself, which there
was a possibility of his doing, it would be for the
safety of all to murder him, for which purpose
Sullivan brought the shovel. That shovel calls to
my mind another link in the chain of Sullivan’s
guilt. On coming to town on the Tuesday morn-
ing, he went into Jack’s Nonpariel Piehouse, and
had breakfast, dirty as he was, prior to his seeing
me, and he left his swag and the shovel he buried
Mr. Dobson with. So the morning we went to
rob Mr. Fox, he stole a shovel on the road, which
caused the owner to follow him, in consequence of
being told at the bridge that a man with a shovel
had passed. He overtook Sullivan at his old
camping ground, and claimed his own. While in
position, Sullivan replied, “ Should Fox show any
resistance, he should let drive at him, for Mr.
Fox always carried his revolver ready for a shot,
should he be called upon to stand.” I knew
another party in Hokitika who told me he had
spent upwards of three weeks expecting Mr. Fox
down, and was disapointed in his coming, and
had he attempted to stick him up, Mr. Fox would
have shot him dead. I told him there was no
necessity for that; I would make him pull up.
We remained thus till his time of passing had ex-
pired, when we returned to town, at three o’clock
in the afternoon. The same night I learned that
Mr. Muiloy was going to accompany Mr. Fox up,
carrying a good round sum. I left my arms
out at the place of intended murder. That night
it was decided that, in consequence of our sleeping
at different places, one was waiting for the other,
which might be obviated if wc Sept under the
same roof; so we all abode at the Provincial
Hotel. We arose for our demoniacal work at
five in the morning by the watch. Tho same
manoeuvres were gone through as before. On
this occasion I delegated Kelly to remain on the
edge of the flat; he could thereby see a distance
of two miles, but could not identify any one that
distance. While waiting for their coming, Kelly
came in haste, and said he could just see them;
they were in sight; but there were eight in
number, which he advised me to let pass. While
they were passing I saw the Inspector of Police,
.dressed like a digger, with two more of the corps;
they kept looking to the right and left as they
were walking; there proved to be tho number
mentioned, all armed to a man. From this 1 felt
convinced that they had, by some means unknown
to us, come to know our intentions. We remained
secreted about half-an-hour, when we returned to
tho Greymouth, on reaching which we heard by
the rumour afloat, that a great number of the
police had gone to escort Messrs. Fox and Muiloy
on their way, because they had received informa-
tion that they were going to be stuck up. This,
then, accounted for such a number accompanying
them. The next morning we were sitting in one
of the bedrooms of the hotel before mentioned,
when in walked Mr. James and tho sergeant.
They walked without any prelude into the room.
This called forth some angry words. They shortly
left, when Sullivan took all the arms, done up like
a swag, out of the back door, and went across the
river, and left them with a friend of his, whom no
doubt he has informed against for doing the same.
Now, had the inspector attempted to search the
room, he would have found all our arms. After
Sullivan left, the landlord felt himself in a very
difficult position; he anticipated being taxed with
a knowledge of us and our doings. So, to reassure
him, I said I would go to the camp, and ask him
by what authority he came and exposed me, and
some more such remarks. But go I did. On
reaching the camp, Mr. James asked us (for Kelly
was with me) would we step inside, or otherwise
he should turn out his men to look at us. So in
we went. While inside he told those who were
there to take charge of us till he came back. I knew
his mission, but the bird had flown. He returned
in the space of a quarter of an hour, and told us
we were at liberty to go; which we embraced,
saying, as left, we should make our report to the
head officials for his uncalled-for interference. It
would not do; he knew what he was about. On
returning to the hotel we were told the police had
been and searched the house, asking the owners
thereof if they saw us with any firearms. Mr.
Barnard was not allowed to see anything belonging
to us, and that Mr. Inspector ought to have known.
This visit, though it did us no material harm, yet
we felt our position untenable at the Grey any
longer. The Wallaby came from Hokitika that
morning, bound for the Buller, via Nelson. That
night Mr. James came to tho hotel again, and bid
me leave his district, or otherwise he would cause
me to leave by compulsion, by caricaturing my
visit there in the newspapers, and putting every
business man on the alert. I promised to leave at
the first convenience, but not telling him for where.
By the Wallaby Levy came, when it was arranged
that we should go on to the Buller. The same
evening we purchased five shillings worth of balls
to take with us, and which Sullivan says were
stolen from the Grey. The next morning we were
up at daylight, and crossed to the North Spit.
There we erected our tent in the scrub, while
waiting the sailing of the Wallaby. While here
I told Sullivan I thought we had not sufficient
money, when he said, “Oh yes you have ; ” but I
told him, in ease of delay or any other unforeseen
accident, I should go and get some more. Harry
Jones! you are astonished, no doubt at my atro-
city ; but I feel certain you will forgive me. I
thought to be able to keep your company home to
Europe, when I should have felt a pleasure in
being able to make amends to you for your past
behaviour. Your words have been most prophetic;
though you have no such power as prescience,
yet they have proved most true. We shall not
meet again in this world, but I trust we shall in
the next, for you are the essence of goodness.
We remained here till tho Saturday morning,
when I sent Sullivan on hoard the Wallaby with


the arms, having heard she was to sail at noon; 1
intended taking a boat and meeting her. He re-
mained all day on board, learning in the meanwhile
that she would not sail till the next day at noon.
He came to us at dark with this intelligence,
leaving the swag containing the arms in charge of
a fellow passenger. On the Sunday we got on
board, unobserved by any of the authorities. My
intended conduct at the Grey, had not the Lord
prevented it, would have been the taking of ano-
ther fellow-creature’s life—ay, two of them. When
I heard of Mr. Mulloy, I was still determined to
leave no trace of my deeds of darkness. I found
a most willing follower in my footsteps in the
monster Sullivan; he was ready to shed any
amount of blood if but the opportunity offered
itself. I am guiltless of Mr. Dobson’s murder-
thank God for that; but I stand before Him as the
murderer of Mr. Fox; also Mr. Mulloy, which
God in His divine mercy absolve me from. On
board the Wallaby Sullivan observed to me how
easy it was to take the ship if she had any gold
on hoard, which we ascertained she had not,
otherwise it is more than probable she would
never have reached her destination. We reached
the Buller on the Monday, at noon; there we
went ashore, and found the information incorrect
relative to a bank. A more deserted looking place
I never saw. We took up our quarters at a
shanty, for public house there was none. I felt
while here as if I was out of the world. It was
soon arranged that we should go on by the Wal-
laby to Nelson, and from thence to Picton—
because some time ago I had learnt that the banks
on the East Coast of the Middle Island were
entirely at the mercy of any marauders who liked
to enter them. At the Buller Sullivan thought
to exercise a little of his cunning, by writing a
letter to the captain, to prevail on him to give us
a passage. He came to me and told me what he'
had done; so I went on board and bad our tickets
renewed for Nelson, by paying the balance to the
captain. On leaving the Buller we had to en-
counter a heavy sea, which swept the decks from
stem to stern, the ship sustaining a slight damage.
I was on the deck the whole time, witnessing the
way the ship laboured; and while she was
engulphed in the waves, the thought came across
my mind of Jonah being thrown overboard, the
sailors thinking he was a murderer. On reaching
Nelson we went ashore. I, Sullivan, and Levy
took a walk through the town, to see if we could
find a place where we might pitch our tent, for I
did not wish to go to any house of accommodation,
knowing thereby I should be leaving a trace of
my having been in Nelson, for I was sensible the
authorities at the Grey were totally ignorant
of which way I had gone. We returned to
the jetty, where we left Kelly minding the
swags, and who r ported not having seen any
place where we could camp; so it was decided
that we should go to some boarding-house in
preference to a public-house. During our walk
through the town, I saw several places purporting
to afford lodgment for travellers, amongst them
the poor old lady’s place mentioned by Sullivan
in his guilty evidence. There we received the «
best of accommodation for the night. In the
morning we left while breakfast was being pre-
pared, and learnt our way to Picton. We re-
turned and partook of breakfast, after having
which we discharged the obligation, and left.
After leaving the above, I took a circuitous route,
to elude any surmise as to the road we were
going, for I told the old lady on the overnight I
was going to Melbourne by the Gothenburg. On
gaining the road, we proceeded on until we were
passed by the three horsemen, Mr. Birrel proving
to be one of them.' Farther on we overtook the
man Thompson, carrying a bolt of canvas. He
belonged to the Wakamariua diggings. From
him we learnt what a miserable place it was ; we
had no illicit views in respect to it. We journeyed
on, passing Mrs. Smith on the way, whom I
wish to be undeceived about my carrying a shovel.
We had but the one, and that Sullivan always
carried; it was the one he buried Mr. Dobson
with. On attaining a portion of the ascent of
this side the Maungatapu range, we stopped and
made some tea. While having the same, the
man Thompson passed. I asked him to rest, and
have a pot of tea, which he did. He then went
on, saying he intended going as far as the Pelorus
bridge. In proceeding up the range, and not far
• from the summit, Mr. Peillet (X think that’s his
name), passed on horseback, going to Nelson,
He spoke to Kelly, and asked our intended gaol;
he received some evasive answer. After he passed,
there was some conjecture as to who he was, for,
from the manner in which he scrutinized us, we
put him down as some official of the Government.
On the other side the range, some two miles and
better, we camped at the back of a large rock
that crops out alongside the road. The next day
we went as far as the Pelorus bridge; it was four
o’clock in the evening of Friday when we camped,
about, one hundred yards, I dare say, from the
accommodation-house kept by Couper. There we
purchased two pigeons from the woman, because
she had no meat; likewise some soft bread,
owing to Sullivan’s teeth being loose, for we
had any amount of biscuits. On the Saturday
morning it rained very heavy, so that we did not
attempt to move. On the same morning Sullivan
picked up a stick and toppled a turkey over, which
we roasted at the fire; we also killed a young cock
fowl, which was stewed in the billy. It cleared up
at mid-day, so we up tent and away towards Can-
vas-town, which place we reached at dusk on the
Saturday evening. It was an unseasonable hour
to erect the tent, so we went by permission from
Mr. Terves to stop in an empty store. There was
nothing purchased from him that night but a
candle; we wanted nothing else, though he said I
purchased some mutton; it’s untrue, a mistake on
his part, for we had plenty of meat in the remains
of the fowl and turkey for the night. The next
morning (Sunday) Levy went and got some mut-
ton chops for breakfast—another error on the part
of Mr. Terves. Being Sunday we proposed re-
maining where we were, not from any compunc-
tious motives, but to rest. After breakfast I
asked Levy to go and have a look at this Deep
Creek, not that I thought anything good would
accrue from it, but merely to let us know whether
the man Thompson had told us true. No doubt
had he returned and told us there was something
there that would have paid us we shoujd have
gone and done it. He started; I went and had a
conversation with Mr. Terves, principally about
the locality and Havelock. From him I learnt
the distance to Picton was farther than the
journey we had come from Nelson. After Levy
had gone, I remarked to Kelly and Sullivan that
I did not approve of the way we were travelling;
we were leaving a track behind us all the way,
for the residents took great notice of all wayfarers;
so it was arranged when Levy returned we should
fo back to Nelson, and proceed by boat to Picton.
had -another conversation with Mr. Terves, rela


tive to the cure of dysentery, as Sullivan was taken
very bad with the same, and Mr. Terves had pre-
scribed for him burnt brandy and cayenne pepper.
I then purchased what mutton he could spare,
that being the first time I was in his store; that
was in the afternoon of Sunday. We waited
the coming’ of Levy before supper till we
turned to and had ours. That night I cleaned
and oiled the arms, large md small, for I
understood the handling of those things better
than either of my companions. I did not load
them as the false and guilty perjurer Sullivan
stated. In the morning we did up the swags
ready to start, when I was getting fidgetty re-
specting Levy’s long absence, till the day got
advanced, and it was settled we should not leave
there that day. In the meantime, Sullivan and I
•went and ground the knives ; there were two of
them, the one a common digger’s sheath knife,
the other a large butcher’s knife. The latter
Sullivan brought away from the Wallaby on leav-
ing, and when he told me at the time I wanted to
know what he brought that for, because if we ever
required the like of that, we could easily procure
them. He observed, “Not the like of that;
armed with that and a revolver, I would face any-
thing.” The knives were ground, not for any
special purpose, but as there was a grindstone
staring us in the face, and one of them, the little
one, very dull, we ground the both of them. Not
..long after Levy returned; if must have been
three o’clock. He told us the same as the'digger
Thompson said it was, a poor place; he dare say
there were from fifty to sixty people. With him
he brought a newspaper, 'I cannot vouch for its
name; this I know, it bore out what I had pre-
viously said respecting the Bank of New Zealand
being next to a public-house. He said he knew a
great many there. He stopped at Matthieu’s all
night, and who was going with some more people
to the West Coast. They asked him during the
evening the general prosperity of the said, when
he told them how things were progressing. He
remarked, “ They would have started with me,
only they had to adjust the fly of the roof; but
they will start to-morrow without fail.” Themght
was approaching. I told him we should start
back to Nelson, in consequence of the distance we
had to go, and I did not like tho way we were
travelling. He said, “ All right.” He went and
lay down. I went outside and had a confab with
Sullivan and Kelly, relative to those people he
said were going to the West Coast. I said, “I
shall intercept these people. Levy said Matthieu
was a storekeeper as well as a publican, and from
what he says the whole of them that are going are
business men.” Kelly observed, “ Take my advice,
and do nothing of the sort; if you wanted to do
the likes of that, you had a better field for it
where you came from, and paid for your trouble ;
besides, we did not come here for that. When we
started it was with the understanding that we
should * not interfere with any other fry, so be
persuaded and have nothing to do with them.”
I remarked, “It would not disarrange our inten-
tions, for this is all in our way, and who knows
what gold they may bring with them. You know
we have none too much money. I don’t know how
much Levy has, for w© have no claim on him;
he is going all out at the present time, and when
we get toPicton, we may have to wait some time
before it is practicable to do what we want.” Kelly
observed, “ I have sixteen pounds, besides wbat
you have, and that will see over some two or three
weeks nicely.” Sullivan was all this time standing
by, but saying nothing. I persisted in carrying
out my proposition, even though I did it myselß
Kelly replied, “ You will not be persuaded for the
best, but there’s one thing, I should like to be at
Nelson before it occurs.” I said, “ That you can
do, for I shall go as near Nelson as possible, and
after I have done it, I shall keep secluded until
ready to sail for Pieton.” Kelly left and went
inside the house quite hurt, if I am to judge
from the irascibility he displayed on leaving. ■ Sul-
livan observed, “lean see no reasonable objec-
tion to these people not being interfered with, so
that I acquiesce in your decision, Dick; you and
I can do it; we don’t want any more, surely; I
could do it myself for the matter of that.” So it
was decided that they were to be robbed on their
way to Nelson. I came into the house after every-
thing was thus settled. That night we were
without meat; so I went to the Maoris’ place, and
took therefrom two fine hens. In the meantime
Sullivan got some cabbages out of Mr. Terves*
garden; so, what with these and the fowls, we did
very well. Now Levy was not made a confidant
of with respect to these men, because he told ua
there were a great many at the Deep Creek whom
he knew, and I thought within myself he might
attempt to reason me out of my purpose, in that,
after it was done, they might suspect him; so that
he was not allowed to know. We started in
the morning, but before doing so Sullivan went
and purchased some sugar and butter. Now we
thought of starting at the break of day, to delude
Mr. Terves as to which way we went, but found
we were deficient of the above. On leaving we
made a start as if we were going to Havelock, by
keeping the banks of the river. After as we thought
having evaded any surveillance on the part of the
said, we crossed the river; on doing so Mr. Terves
observed us from the bank. I saw him standing
' watching us gain the other side, when I spoke to
him, and told him we were going back to Nelson.
In his evidence he has made this parting saluta-
tion a very distorted one, accompanied by an
epithet that is beneath me to make use of, for I
ever endeavoured to pass among mankind as st
good member of society, which I have no doubt
he himself thought after I had conversed with him.
I was the spokesman-on the occasion, and w'hat I
said was this: “So-long; we are going back, ag
there is nothing doing here ; ” which he took for
what he persuaded himself he heard, being some
eighty yards distan*.
Sullivan said, to save the expenses of the boat
hire, we waded the river. At the time I spoke
Mr. Terves we were crossing : and I declare to my
Almighty God, that in no part where we crossed
did the water reach higher than the ankle of the
boot. Besides, the then state of the river was
such, that the Maori’s canoe (for there was no
boat) could barely carry one over at the time.
No, it was not to save the hire, but for expedi-
tiousness that we chose to wade, for we all had
long boots on; for the authenticity of what I
have said can be fully borne out by the testimony
. v of the person who saw us cross. Now this simple
incident ought to be self-convincing to any man
endowed with reason, that men like us, who had
in anticipation the recruiting of our finances,
should hesitate about the expense of the boat, which
in itself was but the price of a glass of brandy;
whereas men of our stamp run through twenty
and sometimes thirty pounds for the night 3
expenses; such is the way the ill-gotten money
is spent. Look at the money I spent, for
for the short time I was at Hokitika. Why, had


it been, honestly acquired, it was enough to keep
me in most comfortable circumstances for ten or
twelve years, whereas it was thrown away by
gambling and other sinful excesses in as many
months. _ We journeyed on till we arrived at the
Nelson side of the Pelorue bridge,'distant there-
from three miles. There Sullivan prepared tea
by kindling a fire on the road. While being
prepared, Sullivan related a conversation he had
with Mrs. Couper, who. stopped and spoke to him
at the head of the bridge, relative to the turkey
she missed; when he told her, “You are mistaken
if you suspect us, for one young man with us is
so sensitive, that he cannot witness the death of
anything, and you may rest assured, did either
of us attempt to do the like, he would have pre-
vented it. If you have lost a turkey, I condole
with you for your loss/’ I was this sensitive
young man he meant, as he remarked to me,
chuckling at the same time, “ Don’t say I never
did you a good turn, when I have represented
you as a perfect innocent.” While partaking
dinner, an old man passed on his way to Nelson;
lie passed the time of day, and journeyed on.
Now, Sullivan, the guilty wretch as he is with
myself, stated that Kelly observed, after he had
passed, “ did you take notice what a ‘pogue ’ he
had,” meaning thereby, did you see the bulk of
his pocket. Sullivan, Sullivan Ido you, as I have
before said, believe in the Omniscient God, who
is cognisant of your wilful and corrupt wickedness,
in saying what you have? Undo while there is
time, or else you will be damned for ever. There
were uo remarks passed respecting the poor old
man. After dinner we up swags and away,
Sullivan, as usual, leading the van. In walking
along I kept principally with Kelly, and the con-
versation turned on my intended depredation.
He observed, “ Now I could rob these people wiuT
you willingly, only I don’t fancy it; I think it
will be the occasion of setting the road on fire,” —
meaning there will he a great outcry afterwards
in this quiet place. All to no purpose; I was
resolved to do it, for I persuaded myself no harm
woiild come of it. I then preceded .them, and
overtook Sullivan sitting down at the bridge, in
company with the old man who passed us
while having dinner. On reaching them I
also eat down, throwing my swag on the
ground. I had been here some ten minutes,
when Kelly and Levy came up. They stood
for some minutes, when Kelly observed, “ Are
you nob going ? ” I said, “ Not .yet; ” when he
replied, “ I shall lose no time, for I want to get in
to-night; so I shall bid you good day.” Levy
remarked, " Are you going no farther P ” (Kelly
having told him I was going to rob those people),
I said, “ After I have had my spell; ” he said,
“Then good day, master, ” a term he always ad-
dressed me with. On my arrival at the bridge,
Sullivan was conversing with the old man, relative
to the antecedents of the said. I heari, in answer
to questions put, “ I have been working for
"Wilson at the Pelorus, cutting flax, so much the
acre.” The old man replied, “ I shall be jogging,”
when he took up his bit of a swag (which con-
sisted of one blanket, an old shirt, and some other
equally poor wearing apparel), and left. After he
had gone, Sullivan remarked, He’s a b 1 -
artful old cove ; I think he holds it, for I noticed
something bulky in his trousers pocket.” I
pooh-poohed the notion ; he said, “Allow me to
know.” I replied, “ How can he have much,
when he said he had been working for "Wilson
seven months, cutting flax for three pounds
the acre ?” Sullivan answered, “ That’s his
version ; he’s a wary old chap ; he has not been
in these countries thirty years for nothing.”
After awhile we started, intending to go as far as
Franklin’s flat that night, and camp in the old
remains of a hut. Sullivan, in advance, had over-
taken the old man, who did not walk very fast.
They were in conversation when I came up. We
passed on. After going a little distance, Sullivan
said he didn’t like the old fellow. “I noticed
when I overtook him tho second time, he shifted
his knife round to the other side, and since we are
going to do these people over (his very words) I
think we had better prevent him from doing us
any harm hereafter.” I said, “As you like.” ■
With that we went a little farther, till we got a
view of the road both ways, and put our swags in
bush. God have mercy on me, for I am now
about to tell my fellows the greatest stain
and sin that lies unanealed before Thee.
Wc turned and faced the old man ascending the
range. Sullivan preceded me, in consequence of
my having to stop to pub pieces of paper in the
chambers of the cylinder belonging to the pistol I
had in my hand. On coming up with him, he had
engaged the old man in conversation, asking him
had he seen a knife on the road, for he had lost
his out of his sash. The old man answered in the
negative, looking very wild, as if he possessed
the knowledge of prescience, and thereby knew
his fate. I pulled out the pistol I had kept
secreted, and told him I thought he had some
gold, which he assured me he had not. • Sullivan,
at this, said, “Let’s see,” catching hold of his
arm. At this the old man put his other hand to
his knife, when I caught him by the wrist, and
took it from him, observing as I did so, “ Is that
what you mean ? ” The old fellow said, “ I have
only three pounds odd; take it, and let me pro-
ceed about my business.” At this stage of the
tragedy, I verily believe I could have let him pass,
for I felt sympathy for him, accompanied with
vexation, to think that I should have allowed
myself to stop a man like him, that was the very
picture of distress. I said, “ Come down here.”
He replied, “ I won’t; do you want to murder
me?” I replied, “What an idea to enter your
head; come on down! ” Again another such
answer, when I caught him by the throat (for he
had thrown himself oh the ground) and prevented
respiration, when, on loosing - my hand, he an-
swered, “ I’ll go; I’ll go.” We took him on the
lower side of the road, down the gully. We had
not gone far, when he sat down, and said, “ That
was far enough; he would go no further.” X
again caught him by the neck, when he rose at
the bidding, and we went some hundred yards off
the road. There we made him sit down. He
remarked, “If you murder me, it will be a very
foul murder.” At this I took him by the throat,
and held him till ho was dead, his livid eyes and
blackened face staring me in the countenance, as
much as to say “ Look at your handiwork! ”
After removing my hand, the confined breath
came bubbling through his discoloured and
swollen lips, when. Sullivan drew his fist and
struck him a severe blow on the abdomen. We
then searched the person of our victim, and
found, as the old man had said, three pounds odd.
Sullivan took the old man’s shovel and raked a
hole, when we turned him over and over till he
remained with his face downwards in the hole.
We covered him up with earth and other debris
lying round, then put some dead limbs of trees on
ghe top of all, with a few fern roots in the inter


stices. This bloody and foul act was now com-
pleted. But rest quiet, soul, where thy fellows
hare put thee, having had shown to thy murdered
corse all honour and respect paid to it by the
inhabitants of Nelson! You now rest beside other
and wealthier victims of your murderer, and he
himself will shortly be ushered into the presence
of that God to whom thou art gone. Uise not up
and accuse him; but if thou hast obtained mercy
for thy sins, plead for thy murderer! We took
the old man’s swag and hid it behind a large
feilen tree, putting some boughs in front of it;
it’s close to the road, directly opposite where the
old man, James Battle, was buried. They ought,
if not already, to be found, and treasured as sou-
venirs of the departed; for, though old, they will
speak in years hence to the honour of the Nel-
sonites. On gaining the road, Sullivan remarked,
“That’s a nasty bit of work; but it was not for
what he had, but for our own safety it was done.”
He said, “ That’s not the way, either, that I burke
a man; the next we do I’ll show you my way.”
I said, “ I never did such a thing before in my
life; I would much rather shoot them as I have
done.” We went along the road till we gained
the spot where the swags were. We reached
franklin’s flat, and there camped for the night.
While Sullivan made the fire and adjusted the fly
of the tent (for Kelly had the tent with him), I
loaded the arms for the morrow’s work. We had but
sorry fare that night; true, we had plenty of bread
and butter, with the remains of the fowls, but we
were deficient of tea and sugar, and had we some,
we had not wherewithal to make it, because Kelly
had the billy; so a drink of the pellucid stream
sufficed. We rose by the break of day, and went
our way till we came to the place we camped at
on our way to Canvas-town. There we put our
swags in the bush, taking the straps off them. We
then took our arms—mine (the double barrel
gun and pistol) I caused to be found, Sullivan’s
those produced in court, the pistol being mine,
the gun his; he also had the knife he brought
from the Wallaby. There wc took up our positions,
mine commanding the road from Nelson, his the
way the men were coming, giving him a view of
some six hundred yards down a descent. While
thus secluded* a horseman, from Nelson, was the
first to pass. His advent was soon followed by
some men driving cattle before them from Nelson.
Then three Maoris on horseback passed, while
the cattle were yet in sight. Not longer after,
we changed pur stations, in consequence of his
being in the sun and mine in the shade, which
caused me, through the dankness of the atmos-
phere that, surrounded me, to feel very cold and
chilly. The day was now advancing when he
left his covert, and came to me and told me there
was a young woman and a fellow carrying a
swag, and he should put them up. I said, “ No;
let them pass.” He observed, “ I shall.” And
had he carried out his intention, I should have
shot him like a dog; for when he persisted, I
raised my gun, when Anne Fulton (for such it
was) came in sight, and he let them pass. After
doing so, he made answer and said, “You are a
character! what odds would it make?” I said,
“ We all have had mothers and sisters of our
own.” No more was then said. Anne Fulton, I
have before asked you for your prayers to the
Throne of Mercy on my behalf, for though I have
been what I am, I never in all my life injured or
allowed others to injure any of thy sex. As an
instance, for I left it to repeat here as a parallel
to your own case. The day I mentioned when
we shot the German in the Black Forest, we
stopped, among others, an old gentleman and his
daughter, both on horseback. They were taken
off the road, and caused to alight, when one of
our party (since hanged) stepped forward and
took the girl (who had attained the age of
puberty), on one side. I heard the girl’s voice,
when I and a comrade went to see what was up,
when she rushed over to me, and fell on her
knees, and said, “Save me, save me!” This was
rather strange. My companion who took her on
one side said nothing was up, only she refused
being searched. I took her on one side, and told
her to give me the money she had belonging to
her father. She assured me on her word they
had none besides what her father had. I satisfied
myself, but in such a manner that noways un-
manned myself or outraged her feelings. On
restoring her to her father, the old man’s tears
were flowing, for he thought his daughter had
been ravished, but she, anticipating his surmise,
reassured him. It was no unfrequent thing
for the like of that to be done, for there
was a man hanged ia Melbourne, whom
we used to call Old Ned, for a like offence.
His mate we called Black Joe. In robbing a.
restaurant, kept by a woman—a Mrs. Brown,
this Black Joe went in to search the place; in so
doing he unmanned himself, by adding rapine to
his robbery, and from some remark alleged to
have come from this old Ned, he was executed for
the same, the real aggressor being at largo and
still is; so that an act of that description is not
allowed to bedone by any one that has a spark of
what we term manhood; so that, Anne Fulton,
your case was worse than its predecessor, in that
after your rape you would have been murdered.
When you hear my fellow-men execrate my name,
keep you silent and retire to your closet, and pray
for my darkened soul. Shortly after they passed,
Mr. Birrel came in the direction of Nelson on
horseback. After he passed, we sighted the men,
I knew it was them from the description Levy
gave of Matthieu; also the horse being a chest-
nut one in colour. On perceiving them, we threw
off our coats and took up our positions. I left
Sullivan behind the rock, and went myself down
the descent towards the creek. I told Sullivan to
let them come down the descent before he left his
covert; they would then be between us, and I
would step out and stop them, after doing which
he was to give me his gun, and tie them. They
came within fifteen yards of me, when I stepped
out and called on them to stand (bail up, such
being the phraseology in vogue, which means get
together.) The men fell back in great trepidation.
I bid them face the range, for the pathway was
very narrow, and facing the range, it enabled
Sullivan to bring me his gun, which he did. He
then commenced tying them one at a time, which
was done by causing each man to put his hands
behind his back. After they were tied, he led the
horse, which was very docile, to the place we had
cleared for it. There he made it fast, and cut the
rope, unbuckled the straps of the pack-saddle, and
let the things fall on the ground. We then toot,
the men down to the creek, up which they walked,
the water barely running, Sullivan in front, lead-
ing the way, the men walking in file, I at their
rear. We proceeded up this creek for about six
hundred yards ; then we turned to the right
up the range, and stopped one hundred
and fifty yards from the creek. There they
sat down, when I told Sullivan to put bis £un
down and search the men. He took about sixty


pounds in money, when I said, “ Is this all you
have f ” when Sullivan said, “ Here’s a bag of
gold.” I asked them their several names, which
they told me. I said, “ Is there any one behind
belonging to your party ? ” They answered,
“ No.” Had there been their lives would not
have been taken. “ What have you on that pack
horse ? You had better tell me, for you have more
gold than this somewhere; and should I find it,
it won’t be good for you, so you had better tell
the truth.” Mr. Kempthorne said, “My gold is
in the portmanteau,-which I hope you will not
take the whole of; there is some forty-six ounces.”
Now the over-night we said, was it convenient,
we would burke the whole of them. There was no
one behind belonging to them, and we reasoned,
that when missed they would have been thought
to have gone on to the West Coast. Almighty
and just God, this deed that I am about to record
cannot be parallelled in atrocity. It was then ar-
ranged that wo should take the unfortunate Dudley
from the rest. We tied the others securely, hand
and foot. I told them, in consequence of the range
just thereabouts being rugged, it was necessary to
take them away one at the time. This they ac-
quiesced in. We took Dudley about sixty yards
up the range, at the back of the place where
Kemptborne was sitting. There we caused him
to sit on the ground, when Sullivan took off his
sash, and put it round his neck ; then, the hand-
kerchief being over his eyes, we strangled him.
I pray the God of mercy to forgive him his many
sins, in consequence of hot being allowed time to
seek Thy mercy. On returning to the remainder,
Mr. Lerapthornc asked what noise was that he
heard. I told him it was caused through break-
ing the bush as we passed. The way wo mur-
dered Dudley was taking too long, when it was
agreed on our return to shoot the rest. This
would have been done at first, only wc
thought the report of the arms would have been
heard from the road. I then told them I should
take them no further, but merely separate them,
and free one of them, but that they were not to
leave the spot for the space of an hour. I took
Mr. Matthieu to the right of ICempthornc, about
as far, I should think, as fifty or sixty yards,
Sullivan taking De Pontius to the left of Kemp-
thorne. On reaching the place mentioned, I shot
poor Matthieu with the pistol I had in the waist of
my trousers, because I was too close to shoot him
with my gun. He received the charge in his left
breast. He screeched when he was shot. I left
him with his feet tied, for I pretended to fasten
them, to divert his attention, when, on raising my
head, I shot him as he stood. After doing so, I
ran and sighted poor Kempthorne, who had
risen to his feet, and was looking around him in
all directions. I presented my weapon of de-
struction, and shot him behind the right ear.
His life’s blood oozed from him, and ho died
instantaneously. Sullivan, in the meantime,
had shot Do Pontius. On his return, I bid him
look to Mr. Mathieu, whom I left quite hurriedly;
I indicated where I knew his life was leaving him,
when lie shortly returned, and said, “ I had to
c shiv’ that ‘sjilor,’ ” —meaning thereby that ho
stabbed Mathieu. I saw the bloody knife wet
with the blood of our victim. Me then left the
scene of our fiendish work. On passing the spot
where De Pontius lay, I saw that ho was dead.
Sullivan said, “ This is a digger” (for the others
were storekeepers), “ let’s cover him up, and
H IO Y fi nd the others, they’ll think he did
it, and sloped,” meaning that he had gone. So
with that we threw the stones on him ; in doing
so, one piece caught him in the corner of the eye,
which caused the blood, not having had time to
coagulate, to spirt out; Sullivan, I believe,
thereby getting some on his face, for on gaining
the creek, down which we retured to the road, he
washed his hands and face in the said.
I have now arrived at the end of our bloody
work, which while recording I suffered un-
mitigated sorrow; for, by the blessing of
God Almighty, I have been enabled to see
and feel the enormity of my crimes. Here I
have told you of leaving four of my fellow-
beings murdered in the bush, and murdered in
cold blood. Mrs. Matthieu, I have been the
means of bereaving thee of thy earthly mate ;
but, Oh, forgive me, for what I have done.
Let me trust that God will pardon him his
sins, for the sake of His Son Jesus Christ*
Mourn you his fate in all submission to the
Almighty; but let not your sorrow for him
who has gone to Gfod, hinder you from seeking
your own salvation, and thus by your turning
to God for the remainder of your life, God
may be propitiated thereby, as to forgive
Matthieu his sins. In your orisons to God night
and morning pray for me, who have been the
means of thy loneliness, thereby you will prove
your worthiness to be accepted of God. Mr*
Kempthorneyouliaveleft amost worthy brother
to mourn your irreparable loss, in that he has
shown his brotherly love to thee, by causing
the search for thy remains to be prosecuted
with vigour. No doubt thou hast others equally
distressed at thy loss, for thou wast a most
promising young man. Let me hope thy life
was one of piety and prayer, that in thy sudden
and unexpected death thou wast ready to
meet thy God. I have asked the Almighty
God to have mercy on thee, as I sent thee
before the Judgment Seat of God unexpectedly
by thee. DePontius, whether you have
friends to mourn your loss (by that I mean
any relatives), I know not j but rest peacefully
in thy unexpected tomb, for thy loss has been
mourned by thy brethren. I have prayed
to God that He pardon thy sins, for the sake of
His Dear Son, Jesus Christ.
On gaining the road we went directly to the
horse. I broke open the portmanteau, and
took therefrom Kempthorne’s gold. "VVe then
began to repack the horse, while doing so a
horseman passed. I left the horse, and went
behind the rock to see if he took any notice,
for I thought there was a possibility of his
hearing the shots, and that may have caused
him to have lingered about the locality; but
no, he passed on. He had not gone far when
he was met by a footman, who spoke him. I
could tell from the gesticulations of the latter,
that he was seeking information, and I can
vouch I heard the word “ No.” I saw the
footman pass, and then went to Sullivan, and
told him what was up. We took' no heed of
it, because the men whom we had slain had
distinctly told us there was no one else con-
nected with them. After repacking the horse,
we threw* a few articles necessary for the


packing of food away, in the form of two or
three plates and a fryingpan. I then led the
horse, Sulliyan in front, carrying the two
shovels —one belonging to James Battle, and
the other the one that buried Mr. Dobson.
He did not go far before he threw them down
the gully. We went on the road nearly a
mile, when I stopped, Sullivan having gone
down the gully to secrete a shirt, the one he
had on while doing the tragedy, and which he
removed on its completion. I have said this
shirt was fouled by the blood of Matthieu,
which I still maintain ; but there is a possi-
bility of my being mistaken, for in the covering
up of DePontius, the blood from the same
spirted on Sullivan, and he may thus have
got the blood on his shirt, because he washed
his hands and face in the creek on leaving.
The reason I said it was Matthieu’s blood was
that when he returned after stabbing the
latter, which he must have done in e stooping
posture (for I saw the prostrate form of Matthieu
before I left him), so that in stooping down to
stab him, I concluded that the blood was
the said’s. This I know for certain, that the
shirt was removed after the deed, in conse-
quence of the blood being on it. While hiding
the shirt, he threw away the gun he brought
with him from the Grey. We then took the
horse down the gully, and there shot him.
This is the whole and true account of the
Maungatapu tragedy as it occurred, given by
the repentant perpetrator, Eichard Burgess.
Now we will take another glance at these
tragedies before leaving the locality. The
guilty and misleading Sullivan stated that
Levy and I murdered James Battle, he and
Kelly being sent different ways to intercept
any who passed, so that they should not hear
the cries of the said. That is false, as that
God is true and holy. There wanted no such
espial of the road, because at the spot where
Battle was murdered you could see both ways
before he was taken off the road. As for his
cries—to whom was he to cry for help but to
the God of Heaven, for he was beyond the
hearing of man? No, Sullivan, your guilt is
too apparent, I trust, for you to escape your
just reward. In the ease of the tragedy of
the four acts, each act ending in the life of a
fellow-creature being taken, he there again
has made himself a neutral party, only per-
forming the part of a supernumerary, instead of
the part of a principal. Now this is six
murders he has figured in, and in each one
taken the part of a subordinate ! He is the
undoubted murderer of Mr. Dobson, and he
is my confederate, and the only one, in the
Maungatapu murders. I must have had a
most exalted opinion of his stability when I
allowed him to take the part of a neutral.
No, the man was, in the absence of Kelly, an
entire stranger to me, and it behoved him to
show he merited my confidence by wading in
the thickest of our deeds ; so that, with respect
to his statement, it’s one tissue of lies from
beginning to end. In it he says he hid the
shirt to indicate the spot where he threw the
gun. Now he wanted no such indication, for
there was the carcase of the horse we shot,
which would have soon revealed itself by the
foul odour emanating from it. It was not hidden
to show the locality where the deed was done,
because there was no mistaking that—nature
revealed it by a large rock tbat cropped out at
the spot where the men were stopped. No, it
was hidden, as he thought, to evade evidence of
his guilt, and not to benefit society by his in-
formation. He says he received orders from
me to stop any one who passed. How well he
discharged his trust! Was he actuated by
motives of love towards his fellows that he did
not stop Muller from passing; no, far other-
wise, as his subsequent conduct showed. He
had no opportunity for doing so. Now, in the
case of the horse, he wishes to figure as a Mar-
tin in his feelings towards the same. His ac-
count (which is most false) is that Levy was
afraid to lead it down; no, but it was Sullivan
who displayed the timidity attributed to Levy.
He says we intended letting the horse go in the
bottom of the flat —no such thing. His version
respecting the death of the said is true ; it was
our original intention to shoot him.. I hope I
am not displaying any unchristian animus
towards him ; if so, I am sorry for it, for such is
not my intention ; I am merely, for the edi-
fication of my fallen brothers, giving this his-
tory that they may take warning by it, and
see from it to what an extent of wicked-
ness a guilty wretch will go to save his despi-
cable and worthless life. Now the reason the
gun was made away with was, that in the rob-
bing of the Picton bank the one gun wis suf-
ficient, and that was not required at the scene
of the robbery, but for defence afterwards, if
we had to take to the ranges. After shooting
the horse we went on our way, not rejoicing, it
is true, but still enacting the tragedy over
again, till we reached the Nelson side of the
Maungatapu. There we stopped, and Sullivan,
kindled a fire at an old chimney, for at this
time it was getting dark. By the glare of this
we read the letters and other papers taken
from the men, which kept the fire kindled,
until we had satisfied ourselves there was no
money in them ; the principal of them belonged
to Mr. Kempthorne. Here we secured our
swags, which were but clumsily done up before
starting j iu them we put the gold. In the
meantime Sullivan took the satchel and hid it
behind a big tree. Sullivan says we stopped
here to make tea. Dntrue ; we had no billy,that
he knows; and I live in hopes that ere long he
will disabuse the public of his false and per-
jured statement. In giving his evidence he
said he was going to burn the satchel when we
laughed at him for not knowing better, for by
so doing he would be leaving the brasswork
behind. Had I been in the body of the court
listening to the case, instead of being a princi-
pal, I would certainly have said “ Don’t you
wish you may get it.” You don’t catch
old birds generally with chaff; for the idea


■of Ms presuming to think that the people of
Kelson are that gullable, not to be able to see
through such sophistry as that! Here was an
old Van Diemonian, of tliirty years standing in
the colonies, who had the affrontery to stand in
that box, and to ape the Simonpurism to such
an extent, that his fellows laughed at him,
because he was leaving traces of his guilt
behind him. When he murdered poor Mr.
Dobson, did he attempt to burn the compass
he foot off him ? No, he tnew better than
that. So he did with respect to the satchel, as
innocent as he tried to make himself. At this
-chimney we ate the remains of our victuals ;
there I threw the pepper and powder pro-
duced away—having a pound canister of the
latter. We then had a distance of nine miles
to go. In waiting along it was settled that as
soon as possible we should take the boat to
Pieton, and do the hank, and make onr exit
from the Australian Colonies. But Gtod, in
Eis wonderful dealings, willed it otherwise. I
am not sorry, but rather rejoice, though I
have a felon’s doom to meet; what is that hut
nay just deserts, for I have come to know Him,
whom hitherto I have crucified afresh, in that I
was an alien in belief? We passed the first
accommodation house, at which place they
came to the door, but we kept in the dark as
much as possible. Sullivan says, “Levy and I
slipped and got wet.” Untrue with respect to
the place. On the road Sullivan said, “We
must mislead that Jew ; do you know, Dick, I
doh’tlike him, though I can adduce no reasonfor
it, only they are a deceitful race, and you never
know when you’ve got them.” I said, “ I
have known him some time ; I don’t think
there’s any harm in him ; if I had thought so
I should not have brought him, I can assure
you. As for the race, I think, taken as a class,
they are better than we are to one another.
At all events, it’s not necessary that he should
know anything of us, further than is absolutely
necessary for our purpose. We can tell him we.
put a fellow up and got some gold oif him.”
Sullivan observed, “ That’s sufficient; we can
tell Tommy (meaning Kelly), there’s no fear of
him.” On nearing the town, about a mile the
other side the accommodation house from
Kelson, I heard someone say, “ Is that you
Dick.” We stopped, when Kelly audLevy came
out of the bush, having heard my voice when
passing. I was surprised to see them. I said,
“ How is it you did not reach Nelson?” Kelly
replied, “I got so tired, and Phil’s feet so sore,
that we drew in off the road, and covered our-
selves with the bedding till daylight. We then
thought it would not be prudent to be seen on
the road, (for I anticipated your robbing those
■people,) until dart. I waited till it got
thoroughly dark, when I was thinking of
starting, just as you hove in sight.”
With this they got their swags, and journeyed
•on with us. On the road Kelly asked me if
the work came off as we expected, I said,
“ Well, yes.” Kelly ashed, “ How much did
you get from them.” I replied, “About three
hundred pounds.” He said, “ That all! I
would not have had it happen for as many thou*
sands. You mark my word, if this don’t
cause our expulsion from the Island. I re-
plied, “No fear.” We reached the accommo-
dation house, when a man came out
with a candle in his hand (for the dogs had
given warning of our coming). On seeing no one
pass he came out on the road, candle still in
hand. We fell back and avoided his seeing
us; he then went back and closed the door.
On passing the house, the woman came to the
door, and called her little dog, who was
barking at us. She looked in our direction,
but she was not able to distinguish how many
passed, whether two or four ; but there were
the latter. In crossing the Maitai, about half
a mile from this house, was the place whereboth
Levy and I slipped, and not where the false
Sullivan said. On the road I told Levy, when
he asked, “ What news, master,” “ We robbed
a man and got some gold from him.” We
approached the town of Nelson when it may
have been about nine o’clock. It was under-
stood that Levy was to go with me in case of
any news reaching town about these people,
then I should be able to take care of him, as
the wicked and evil disposed Sullivan was
dubious of him, in case he should hear any-
thing. So, on arriving at the bridge at the
north end of Hardy street, it was proposed to
separate till the morning. We were to meet
at ten in the morning, at the port. Now
Sullivan had the forty odd ounces of gold in
his swag, besides some large gold we got off
the persons of our victims. I had the one
bag taken from the person of Matthieu, contain-
ing 14ozs. (so he himself told us). After part-
ing, I asked Levy to take me to some quiet
place, because I wished to avoid being seen if
possible by any one that knew me. He said
he was at a loss where to take me, when he
bethought himself of the Italian’s place, on
entering which Levy engaged the proprietor
in conversation relative to the Collingwood
diggings, how far distant, &o. He then asked
respecting some acquaintance, and finally
asked him to accommodate us with lodgings
for a few days at the farthest. He agreed to
do so. We then left the swags and crossed
the road to Phillips’s boarding-house. There
we had supper. While having it, we con-
versed with the landlord. I told him, in
answer to a question, that I was stopping at
the port. He could see we were strangers at
Nelson. We then went to the Trafalgar
hotel, and had a glass of brandy each; then
returned to the oyster saloon and went to bed.
In the morning I went, after having breakfast,
and purchased a suit of clothes, not that I
wanted the like, but merely to appear clean,
my others being wet. When I left the Grey,
I put on some clothes to appear like a digger,
having by me any amount which I left with my
unfortunate. I then went to the port without
cleaning myself. Sullivan and Kelly were
already there when I .arrived. I had some


conversation with Kelly as to where he
stopped, when-he told me at the Lord Nelson.
I told him I hoped he would not get drinking.
We then went beyond the place of traffic
(I and Sullivan) and emptied out the gold
on a handkerchief spread on the ground.
After doing so, we put some in each bag, but
different in amount to what they were at first.
After doing which, Sullivan took the handker-
chief and threw it into the sea, saying, “That
belongs to Phil, but there is blood on it that
came from that splor we strangled, but I’ll
give him a few pounds, and he can treat him-
self to anew one.” Now Sullivan pretends in
his evidence to be ignorant of how these men
were disposed of till he learns it from Levy
while mixing the gold. O lame testimony !
Now it is well known among men that any
incident occurring, after it is passed, it is
generally brought on the tapis again. Here’s
Sullivan admitting that he took the part he
says he did for argument sake, just to show
the hollowness of his guilty conduct. After
these deeds are done, we walk together into
Nelson, a distance of fourteen miles from the
scene of the murders, and during all that
journey he pretends he was not made a
confidant of. Sullivan ! it won’t do. More
especially is this practised amongst evil-doers
who, as it were, take a pride in their nefarious
dealings, and re-enact any crime, no matter
what, over again and again after its commis-
sion; so that Sullivan’s pretence amongst
thinking and rational men, when carried to
such a length, is confirmatory to them of its
untruthfulness. I told Kelly to meet me at
twelve o’clock at the lower end of Bridge
street. Sullivan and I went to sell the gold.
I went to the Bank of New South Wales and
tendered mine for sale. I was bid come this
way —that meant into a room at my back
when facing the counter. There another
gentleman came and looked at the gold over
the other one’s shoulder, then left. I was
now in the room with the banker only, of
whom and his doings I took no note; he
might, had he thought proper, have taken
half of it, my attention being absorbed in the
weakness of the place. 0 that I had seen it
before I left Nelson for the Deep creek—
those men would not have been murdered,
and I should have been about starting at the
time I am about to receive the sentence of
death for Europe. As I have before said, it
was not to be; God willed it otherwise, to my
eternal profit, I trust. After the gold was .
weighed, I was bid come this way back to
the first counter, where I was paid seventy-six
pounds odds. I met Sullivan below the
Mitre Hotel; there he produced a receipt for
gold sold to the Union Bank to the amount of'
one hundred pounds odd. He remarked, “I
gave the name of Clarence Everett; they
believe it’s the West Coast gold. I told them
so when asked. He said, “ I kept back some
to sell with those nuggets ; it don’t do to sell
too large a quantity at one place.” I replied,
“ All right.” I then told him of the unpro-
tecteduess of the bank where I sold mine,
expressing a wish that I had known it sooner j
‘‘but I’ll tell you more wheulsee Kelly.” We
then sat down on the green grass, in a by-
street parallel with Collingwood street. There
we regulated the money, which was ninety
pounds odd each. The money we took from
the persons of our victims was shared at the
chimney, which was thirty pounds odd each.
Now Sullivan has made this latter into a
subdivision of four, allotting to me and Levy
sixteen pounds odd, himself and Kelly fifteen
odd, which he said was done at the old
chimney.- Never did man yet invent sneh
lies, and wilful and corrupt perjury, since
the world began. I then rose to leave,
Sullivan remarking, “ I will sell that gold
bye-aud-bye; we will meet here at twelve.”
I then went and had a bath, also a
shave, getting my whiskers split at the
chin, to alter my appearance, for I was more
afraid of meeting Trimble than I was any one
else, for I knew he would not stop till he
reached the camp, for he knew I had a debt to
settle with him for the injury he did me in
Otago, by swearing false against me. I then
cleaned myself; prior to doing so I went and
got measured for a pair of light watertights at
the shoemaker’s, opposite the oyster saloon.
At twelve o’clock we all met at the place
specified. We there sat down, and I related
how the bank of New South Wales was to be
done. This caused an elation among the
whole of them, for there was no question as
to the feasibility of my suggestion ; it was
always taken as Q-ospel truths. I made
enquiry at the shipping office while at the
port, as to the first departure, and where
bound, when I was informed that the ship
Airedale was expected on Wednesday, and
would leave the next day for Taranaki. I
saw the Kennedy and the Thane lyitig at the
jetty, bound for Hokitika, but they were going
in the wrong direction ; so, since learning the
weakness of the said bank, I settled it as soon
as the Airedale came in, we would take a
passage to Taranaki and stop there for the
space of a month, as we anticipated,
that if this tragedy was brought to light,
it would* have blown over in that time. I
gave Kelly twenty pounds, not as his portion
of the ill-gotten booty —no ; because we had,
while together, hut the one purse —hut to
spend in what he liked. He remarked he did
not want any yet. We then left with the
understanding to meet at seven o’clock at Mr.
Edwards’ store. Sullivan said, “ I’ll go and
sell the remainder of the gold,” and I was to
wait his coming opposite the English church
in Trafalgar street. I remained there for
upwards of an hour, till I was getting fidgctty.
He came after being absent an hour-aud-a-half.
I received twenty pounds as my portion. He
told me he had to sell the gold wo got off 1
their persons by itself, owing to its being of an
inferior quality, and for which purpose he had


to wait the coming of the assayer, who was
absent at the time, which caused his delay, and
he Talued it at three pounds thirteen an
ounce. He remarked to me, “ I have now
too many sovereigns ; I want two or three
large notes, for I want to send that woman of
mine something,” meaning an abandoned
woman he brought witli him in the ship
Albion, from Melbourne, and with whom he
was living while at Hokitika. I said,
u Give them to me, I will take them into
that bank that is such a gift, and see if they
recognise me.” I entered the bank, and asked
for an exchange for the forty sovereigns I laid
on the counter, and to be obliged with two
twenty pound notes. The stout gentleman
remarked, “ There’s not forty there.” I said,
{c What do you go by—the superficies they
cover ? ” When the man to whom I sold the
gold stepped forward and counted them all
correct, and gave two twenty pound notes in
exchange. I returned to Sullivan and told
him no recognition had taken place ; they
don’t know me. “ Know you,” he said, “ Your
mother wouldn’t know you.” We parted to
meet at seven. Sullivan, to inculpate Kelly
and Levy, has said, “ They and himself sold
the gold —Kelly at the place where I sold
mine; Levy at the Bank of New Zealand.”
Which is totally untrue. Now Levy is a most
remarkable man, whom the bankers could not
forget if they once transacted business with
him, for he is dressed now as when he left
Hokitika and the Grey; so that they could not
but identify him if Sullivan’s version was true.
I trust that the forthcoming trial will convince
every rational man of his atrocious conduct. I
returned to my lodging, and gave Levy ten
pounds. We met at seven, when Sullivan
said, “ We’re all right, Owens said he saw me
drinking at the port on Wednesday morning,
and I am A 1 with him. I don’t like his
daughter; she would make a good detective,
she is so inquisitive as fo who any one is, &c.”
He further remarked, “It’s a good place to
stop at; there’s the best of everything on the
table, and I have a room to myself. They
take me for a regular flat of a fellow.” I told
him I did not care how I fared for the time
being ; things were not the best, but I d$ not
complain. These meetings took place and the
same topics over again, we wishing the Airedale
to arrive, that we might be away before any
news reached town respecting those men. I
spent the day generally in wandering out on
the outskirts of the peaceful little town of
Nelson. Things continued at this till the
Saturday night, when Sullivan drew me on
one side, and told me “ they were missed ; the
cove that spoke the horseman being delegated
to come after them and fetch the horse back ;
it was to be left for him at the livery stables.
Owens will quash it though, for he suspects
some Italians who are said to have gone to the
West Coast. I and Tommy are going to
spend the day with old Potter, to keep out of
the way ” I said, “ Very well.” They were
missed the next day, but the police gave no
credit to the report. Sullivan said, “ I was in
old Potter’s to-day, when the subject of their
non-arrival was mentioned, and Potter made
answer and said, “ Here’s the man who mur-
dered them,” pointing to me in a joke. If
such was the case, never was a joke more
true, for he pointed out the real murderer of
the subject of their conversation. “ I must
endeavour to keep out of Terves’s sight, for he
will know me in a second.” Kelly asked me
how I whiled away the time ; “as usual, I sup-
pose, moping over the newspapers P” He said,
“Is there anything about them people you
put up ?” I said, “ No; they are keeping it
quiet.” We then separated for the night.
On the Sunday I went to see the principle on
which the flagstaff was conducted, just to kill the
morning; afterwards to see the University. Levy
also asked me on one occasion respecting the
report of the man we robbed. I silenced him
with a similar reply. Sunday night no meeting,
in consequence of Kelly and Sullivan being out of
town all day. On the Monday morning, while
washing, Sullivan walked into the Oyster Saloon
and beckoned me out; Kelly was on the opposite
side of the road. I responded to the beck, and
followed him out. We went as far as Mr,
Edwards’ store, and there Kelly told me he was
in the barber Dupuis’s place, getting shampooneef,
when he overheard the sergeant telling him that
these men were supposed to have met with foul
play, as four suspicious men left Canvas-town the
day previous. Ho said, “ What did you do with
them, Dick?” Sullivan said, “What oddsj
who’s to know it was us; was there no one else
on the road besides us ? Besides, it will take them
a clay or two to find them; before then we shall
be away.” Sullivan said, “ Owens is making
more noise about it than anyone else; ho has
sent a telegram to the West Coast to intercept
them Italians that went by the Kennedy.” This
intelligence upset me for a bit. We parted,
Sullivan getting very drunk on the occasion. I
returned and breakfasted, after which I kept
Levy in the house till after dinner. I then pro-
posed going for a walk, and took him past tbs
place where I hid my gun, partly to see if it had
been disturbed or not. No, it was all right. I
remained down the lane till it was getting dusk.
I then returned and had tea; after which I pro-
cured an Evening Mail, and went and read it in
the closet. There, sure enough, suspicion fell on
us, from, it stated, an accredited source. This I knew
to be Terves, the storekeeper. I went directly to
the Mitre Hotel, and lingered about the spot
till I saw Sullivan, who was in a muddled state of
half cunning. To him I told the news in circu-
lation. He made little of it. I suggested it
would be prudent for him and me to go and camp
on the ranges. “No,” he said, “he admired my
generalship, but in the present case there was no
necessity for it; everything was as right as an
eight-day clock. There’s one thing, we’re safe
enough as long as that Jew is taken care of.”
This half-flyness on his part disgusted me, so I
left him to his orgies. I then took a walk as far
as the port, and roamed about till nine or ten
o’clock ; then returned. I had some oysters opened
for me, and proposed bed. Before going, Levy
asked me if I would take a glass of porter. I
said, “ I did not care.” He replied, “ All right.
Master.” He then left to go and get it. He wa«
gone a long time, when I got into bed, and I fell*
asleep, and never missed him till next morning*-


I got up and breakfasted at once. I then cleaned
myself and went as far as the Mitre Hotel. There
I saw Sullivan crossing the road. I followed him
into Hardy street. There ho told me that Levy
was taken on the over-night at the Wakatip
Hotel, by two diggers, who had left the Deep
Creek with him. He said Owens went to have a
look at him, and described him as a “ black-looking
ruffian.” I asked him had ho seen Kelly that
morning. He said, “He has gone with Potter
for a ride; I am going too; there’s a horse left
for me ready saddled.” We walked over the bridge
at the end of Hardy street,and went along the beach
for upwards of a mile or so, during which he told me
it was a good job I was out on Sunday, as Terves
dined at Owens’, and had I been at home, he
must Lave seen me. “ I got the remainder of my
money from him this morning; he evidently
suspects me, for he asked me to ride out with
him to the Maungatapu to look for these men.
That was only a ruse on his part; he wants to
keep mo in tow. 1 made an excuse about my
head being bad from last night’s drinking. I
went and planted the pistol and strychnine when
I heard that Phil (meaning Levy) was arrested,”
The guilty sinner! he has said I told him I
secreted my gun the night Levy was taken. No
such thing, I was too wary for that, as to leave
my gun and pistol at the place I was lodging at,
for the owners thereof to see them in my absence,
and thereby conjecture who I was. We returned
to town with the understanding that we were to
take to the ranges at dark. He said he should go
and have a ride, would I come P which I declined.
I was walking up the Waimea road, when he
came by on horseback. We had a confab on the
road, when he told me the sailorman whom he
was going to throw overboard coming to Nelson
was in Owens’, and saw me, and said, “ You
know who it is that is taken for this affair; he
came with you from the Grey.” I told him he
was mistaken, no one came with me from the
Grey. Ho said, ‘ I saw you drinking with him
on board.’ ‘ That’s very likely, I drank with so
many there that I cannot make out who you
mean.’ Miss Owens was listening to the whole
of this with her ears cocked, I asked him to
have something to drink. On leaving, the
daughter said, ‘ Your head is not too bad for you
to go about drinking, but it is for you to accom-
pany father in search of these men.’ The b y
young b h! she is worse than her father for
the recovery of these men.” He said, “You
might as well come for a ride till the day wears
apace.” To this I consented I took the horse
he was riding, which was a cream-coloured pony.
He went and hired a horse at Newton’s livery-
stable, Hardy-street, at which place Mr. Owens
was when he w r ent for the horse. We rode till
we came to the turnpike. There I threw down a
shilling to pay the toll for both horses, when a
young man, whom I took for the son of the old
lady who picked up the shilling, asked was there
any intelligence further about those unfortunate
men. Sullivan said, “ They have arrested one
ruffian,” ■which they were aware of. We rode till we
pulled up to wind the horses at the Turf Inn, at
which place I called for two glasses of ale. The
landlady came to the door, and asked if there was
any more news relative to the men who were
missing. Sullivan replied, “ I tell you, missus, I
.think it’s all moonshine; the men have taken some
other road and gone to the Duller, perhaps, or
elsewhere.” Mrs. Candy made anssjer, “ If such
is the case, when they are overtaken—as they will
be, "for a detective and three police are gone by on
this road to-day—they ought to be severely
punished for upsetting the public mind in this
way. Do you know I have scarcely slept since I
heard it.” Wo then rode on to the Plough Inn,
kept by a Mr. Ryan, prior to reaching which we
changed horses, because I was riding Potter’s
pony, and Sullivan did not want him to see me
riding it, for it was left for him expressly. I ar-
rived at the Plough, and baited the horse, the
males belonging to the place being absent, so that
Mrs. Ryan showed me where the oats were. I
left Sullivan coming behind, though not far dis-
tant. The Sergeant of the Volunteers passed,
galloping on horseback. This caused Sullivan to
linger behind. I went to the turn of the road, and
there he was standing with his horse in the middle
of it. I beckoned him, and he came. I asked
him the reason of his stay. He replied, “He
thought that sergeant was delegated to come after
us.” I said, “ Well, what good were you doing
where you stopped ?” He answered, “ I was
waiting to rescue you, if my surmise was correct.”
I did not doubt him for a moment then ; but now
I do. No, Sullivan, coward that you are, you
were playing the deceiver’s part. Had I been
arrested, Sullivan was off. I might have sung
out till I was tired “ ala recuse We luncheoned
here while the horses wore baiting, after which I
walked round the parsonage of Richmond, Sulli-
van with me. While promenading here Mr. Owens
and some of the police rode past, unseen by us,
Owens suspecting evidently that his bird, Sullivan,
was about to fly. Wo returned and discharged
the bill, ■when we mounted our horses, and rode
in the direction of Nelson. We had not gone far
before Mr. Potter drove by in his gig, driving his
wife and child behind, Kelly in front. They sung
out to Sullivan, “ You’re a pretty fellow.” With
this I rode past them, and kept in front of them
all the way into town. They stopped at the Turf
Inn, and had something to drink. I pulled up at
the Rising Sun, when Potter passed, Sullivan
behind. He pulled up and had a glass of ale. I
returned the hired horse at Newton’s, for the
■which I was asked twelve shillings and sixpence,
for the hire of the horse for four hours. I de-
murred about the charge, when I was asked half-
a-guinea. Mr, Newton observed, “ You are not
the gentleman who hired it.” I said, “No, it
was Mr. Simons. We shall want two to-morrow.”
He answered, “ I will provide you with two fresh
ones.” I told Sullivnn that after I returned the
horse I should go to the Collingwood bridge, and
wait his and Kelly’s coming. I waited at the
bridge about half-an-hour, when they came. I
told Kelly that I was going to leave the place that
night, and to get under arms as quick as possible,
for suspicion has fallen on us, and they will leave
no stone unturned till they find these people.
Kelly said, “ Well, I shall remain where I am.” I
replied, “I could wish that you came with me;
should anything happen to you through me I
should never forgive myself.” He made answer,
“Pm all right; I shall not move an inch.”
“Well, I must be off, so good bye,’ c and we shook
hands. He said, “Don’t say good bye, I shall
see you in a month from this date at Picton.” I
said, “I must go and get my arms, for should I
be molested before I get under weigh, I shall never
leave off upbraiding myself for such neglect. Come,
Sullivan, and let’s see if lam suspected; I want
to get those watertight boots that I have, and
my own clothes, and to doff these, and face the
ranges.” Dullivaa answered, “ I’ll follow you ;


go on.” I went up Bridge street, till I came to
tlic Italian’s. Not far distant I saw a man pro-
tending to light his pipe. It would not do with
a man like me, who, so to speak, could smell a
constable, for such he was. I waited the coming
of Sullivan, who came very laggardly along, so
that I felt piqued to think he did not show more
alacrity. He came ; I permitted him pass ; ho
crossed the road ; I then wont in the same direc-
tion, when, as I moved, the people who were
dogging me moved also. I saw Sullivan stopped.
I waited on the opposite side of the road to sec
the result, when he turned and wont down the
street. I was surprised at his conduct, that he
did not come to me. I turned likewi e and crossed
the road, and went in the direction that Sullivan
went. In so doing there wore men running past
on all sides : I saw two in the middle of the road
along with one of the Italians belonging to the
Oyster Saloon. I could see I had no chance of
escape, and no firearms; had I but had my revol-
ver on mo, as I ought after doing what I had, all
the police in Nelson would never have taken me
alive while I had a charge in the pistol. No, as I
have said before, it was not to be ; my course was
run, and a swifter one run in the race—Vengeance !
How could I expect to have things my own way
so long ? No, God had caused the sand of my
horologe to run out, after proving such a disobe-
dient and rebellious son. Opposite the Mitre Hotel
they came and put their hands onmo, which I shook
off, telling them not to handle me. I was bid come
to the station, which was close at hand, There
they preferred a charge of murder against me.
I gave in the name of Richard Henry Miller.
Shortly after, Kelly and Sullivan were arrested
and brought in, the same charge being preferred.
Until that day, I was wondering in my mind
where the lock-up could be, as I saw no outward
semblance of such a building anywhere, till
Sullivan told me that was the station, pointing
with his finger. The gaol, likewise, I could not
find, without asking, which was out of the ques-
tion. I know where both arc now to my sorrow.
The next day we were arraigned and charged as
being the other men who were at Canvas-town,
and remanded till the following Monday. Sulli-
van, in the lock-up, said, thatfellow who waslighting
his pipe told him to go and tell the Italian to
come and see if you were the man who resided at
his place. I turned to go, but forgot to call. I
said nothing to him then, but 1 thought the more.
I was convinced that he was a coward, and my
conviction has proved correct; because who but a
poltroon could have been guilty of such malignant
malevolence as he has displayed towards Kelly
and Levy. At the first of the investigation con-
cerning these men, having previously asked to
have the services of a legal adviser, he asked to be
furnished with a pencil and paper; having which,
ho wrote a few questions for the instruction of
Mr. Pitt, who appeared on our behalf to watch
the case. Before giving them to him, he sub-
mitted them for my approval. Bid ho consult
the poor Jew alongside of him? No! but me,
his confrere in the subject of the investigation,
which is another small link in the chain to prove
his guilt. In the interval between the remand
and the investigation, the bill was put up pur-
porting the suspected murder of Mr. Dobson, the
Provincial Surveyor of the "West Coast. I read it,
and in reading it, I saw it offered a free pardon to
an accomplice; not to the real murderer. Now I
came within the pale of that; I was a true accom-
plice, because I was privy to the murder before I
loft the Grey. Bid I clutch at the boon tendered?
No; if I was wicked enough to do the like myself,
or to keep the secret of another, I was not that
wicked to peach on my follow. Through my
chequered and awful life I have ever been a
faithful comrade in sin, never having injured one
of my fellows in thought, word, or deed, but the
reverse. That has caused me to be respected by
the fallen race; in consequence of that I shall again
take the liberty to show you the hollowness of
our principles. Sullivan listened to the reading,
for I read it aloud to its finish. He did not say
he wanted to write to his wife; there was the
bill proclaiming his handiwork to the world, in
the murder of that young man, beloved by all
who knew him. The man Stone arrived, and told
us it was reported we were the suspected mur-
derers of the above, when Sullivan answered, “ That
h y Jemmy Murray I thank for that.” StonuV
testimony was borne out by our being told by an
official that a warrant had been issued for our
apprehension. The same night Levy was removed
to the gaol. This event caused Sullivan great
uneasiness, in that the next day he never moved
from the square aperture in his door for venti-
lating purposes. This vexed mo very much, to
think that a man like him should be uneasy at
any ruse on the part of the police, for it was nothing
else, as I told him. He was motioning every time
I went to the opening. He said, “ 0 that b y
Jew! ” I told him I was surprised at his conduct.
He replied, “ I was not far wrong in the wretch. 5 '
I said, sc You would make a nice fellow were
there facilities for it, to be taken away to one
end of the building, out of sight or hearing of me,
and some of the detectives to come to you and
say, “ Now, Sullivan, with all your cunning and
reliance on Bick, he has peached on you.” He
said, “No b y fear; I should know it was a
lot of mullock they were telling, for you are not
like this Jew.” I said, “ What can he tell them?
Nothing; if he does he’ll put his foot in it; for
remember ho was on that road the day the men
were murdered.” He still persisted in his opinion;
it was not what Levy could tell them, but being
forestalled by him, as he thought. Because it’s as
plain to me at the present time, that such was his
intention from the first of our acquaintance, did
an opportunity offer itself. The reason he ex-
claimed against the man Wilson, was, he thought
his suspicions had been aroused after knowing he
was on that road, and the dirty and wet state ho
was in next day when ho came to the Greymouth.
The nest morning, on coming to the opening
mentioned, there was another bill placarded up—
they having removed the other. I said, “ What
have we here,” seeing at a glance what it was;
but I said the above to make little of it. I read
it, because from my cell I could see it best. It
also purported to award a free pardon to an
accomplice, not to the actual murderer or mur-
derers. After reading it I said, “What do you
think of the bloody Jew now ? ” At that a
change came over his cadaverous countenance; I
shall never forget it to the last moment of my
wretched life. Oh, that I had the pen of an able
man, that I might thereby be able to depict the
demoniacal expression that flashed from his eyes.
I believe it would be the means of saving many a
poor fellow that merely follows in the wake of a
wretch like Sullivan, who was ever ready to wade
in seas of blood, and then in he steps, his hands
not dry from the blood of his victims, and
abuses society with his guilty version. He
sent for the Inspector for permission to write to-
