

Life of the
Hon. Wm. Brookes
BY REV. W. OSBORNE LILLEY


The Hon. William Brookes.


Life of the
Hon. William Brookes
(A Distinguished ueensfand Citizen)
BY THE
REV. W. OSBORNE LILLEY
F.R.H.S,,
AUTHOR OF
‘THE BROTHERS TURVILLE,” “BOUND FOR AUSTRALIA,"
“SHEEN FROM MY THOUGHT-WAVES,"
ETC., ETC.
BRISBANE :
City Printing Works, General Printers,
iit, Queen Street.
I c> O 2 .




PREFACE.
The Hon. W. Brookes, at his decease, left in the hands
of his son, Mr. Mottram E. Brookes, a considerable
number of diaries, letters, and other memoranda,
recording the incidents of his life, and his observations
upon many of the events that occurred in the early
history of Queensland, and in which he took a part.
These documents were placed in my hands, with the
request, that I should write a biography of him. I
acceded to the request with pleasure; not only, because,
I held the opinion, that it was important that some
permanent record of the distinguished men, who have
been prominent in shaping the affairs of the colony,
should be written, and that such works would be of
much service to the community, but also because of
my personal respect and esteem for Mr. Brookes. I
was much with him in his closing years, and I was
deeply impressed with his sincerity, keen intelligence,
and unabated interest in the true welfare of the people.
His was no ordinary personality. Those who did not
sympathize with his views, and were sometimes
disposed to regard him as an “ inhabitant of Utopia ”
were compelled to admit that he was a man of no
common build, and that he had a remarkable power
to perceive the meaning of the actualities of life. In
this work I have allowed him largely to speak for
himself. It has been a labour of love. And I trust
that it may be of some service in showing, especially
to the rising generation, wherein true loyalty to the
State consists, and upon what principles the future
greatness of the nation must be based.
W. OSBORNE LILLEY
“EVERSLEY,” BOWEN HILLS. BRISBANE.




CHAPTERS.
PiUE.
i.—Ancestral Influences ... ... ... 7
ii. —Boyish Days ... ••• 15
111. —Early Manhood ... ... ... ••• 25
iv. —Bound for Australia ... ... ... 35
v. —Courtship and Marriage... ... ... 42
vi. —Storm and Stress ... ••• ••• 53
vii. —Beginnings in Brisbane ... ... 84
viii. —Business Life ... ... ••• ••• 7 1
ix. —Entrance upon Political Work ... 87
x. —His Main Public Labours 105
xi. —Religious Life ... ... ... I+s
xii.—-Declining Days ... ... ... 167




LIFE OF THE
HON. WILLIAM BROOKES
CHAPTER I.
ANCESTRAL INFLUENCES.
“ My boast is not that I deduce my birth
From loins enthroned, and rulers of the earth ;
But higher far my proud pretentions rise—•
The son of parents passed into the skies.”— Cowper.
THE birth of a child into this world is not merely the
beginning of a new existence, independent of the
past generations of men and women who have preceded
it; it comes endowed with influences from its ancestors
which may in many subtle ways affect its individuality,
mould its character, inspire its career, and almost deter-
mine its destiny. A child may be a fresh link in an
unwinding chain of human lives, with a strange tendency
to be shaped into the same pattern as its predecessors.
Hereditary qualities are one of life’s significant posses-
sions. They tend very much to make or mar us. Bishop
Heber suggests that in genius there may be “ The soul
of ages in a single mind,” and probably there may be the
accumulation of peculiar gifts in certain families for
generations which culminate in one striking in-
dividuality. But none can claim to be free from the
influence of his progenitors. “ They rule us from their
urns.” While our wills may be consciously free, and we
indulge the thought that we are “ Masters of our fate,”
yet there are often inherited forces behind the will which
control us, leading us to cherish distinctive dispositions,
to affect certain mannerisms, and to* choose peculiar pur


suits. Sometimes these potent elements of character seem
almost latent, and only strikingly reveal themselves in
special circumstances, or times, or moods. But they are
always there, and must be reckoned with when a due
estimate of our personality is formed. Oliver Wendell
Holmes has likened the manifestation of these innate
qualities to the succession of fruits that may appear on a
tree with a number of varying grafts in it. He says: “ The
various inherited instincts ripen in succession. You may
be nine-tenths paternal at one period of your life, and
nine-tenths maternal at another. All at once the traits of
some immediate ancestor may come to maturity un-
expectedly on one of the branches of your character, just
as your features at different periods of your life betray
different resemblances to your nearer or more remote
relatives.” It is evident that to have had a good ancestry
is no mean advantage. The stock from which we have
come is important. The mysterious red fluid that flows
in our veins may teem with germinal energies. Blood
tells in the struggles of life. Better than being born with
the proverbial golden spoon in our mouths, or of an
effete national aristocracy, or even in the perfumed cham-
bers of the palace, is to have descended from pure and
virtuous parents, whose pious and cleanly lives kept their
bodies from the taint of vice, and their souls white in
the sight of God. This is the best heritage. Those who
can claim such a “house and lineage,” may well be
grateful, and may make their boast that their ancestry,
though not among the great of the earth, yet were of
the nobler line of the sons and daughters of the royal
household of God.
The Hon. William Brookes, who was born at Hanging
Ditch, in Manchester, on October 14, 1825, was fortunate
in his ancestors. He left behind him at his death a
descriptive record of them in a manuscript book, which he
named “ Family Archives.” Not that he thought that
anything more than an antiquarian interest would be taken
in it, but it might be readable as a glimpse of olden days.
“ When,” he naively says, “it is fifty years old and
these leaves are yellow, it may possess some little value as
■a curiosity, calling back past times, just as I looked at
my grandmother’s high-heeled shoes and brocaded gown.”


But the few vivid touches that he gives in the portrayal
of his grandparents make the archives extremely interest-
ing. The human element in old chronicles has always a
distinctive charm. Even, if there is little interest 'felt in
old vanished customs and fashions, there is generally some
curiosity to see how human life in its struggles and diffi-
culties was shaped in by-gone days; how men and
women beat out their heart-music, amid the common
possibilities of time and circumstance. He relates, “Of
my paternal grandparents, I only knew my grandmother.
Her husband, I understood, died in middle or early life,
leaving her a widow to struggle to keep herself and her
two sons by a shoe-shop in Old Mill Gate, Manchester.
She was a fine old lady—for a lady she certainly was —
with the high spirit once distinguishing both English men
•and women. A staunch adherent of the Church of Eng-
land, and unfailine in her attendance at the old church,
even almost past the time when her failing strength
notified that her church-going days were nearly run out.”
With respect to his grandparents on the maternal side,
lie remembered his grandfather, Mr. George Oakden, as
“ a stout littlish man, with a fresh face ”; and his grand-
mother as a lady that he fancies had an “acid temper
•and a will of her own.” But though they were “ plain
people, and had little culture,” yet in his childish eyes
•they seemed to possess some degree of social importance.
The old gentleman had been “ a cotton manufacturer of
some sort,” but had retired from business. He kept a
horse and gig, “a fact,” he says, “ regarded by me as indica-
tive of opulence” an opinion which, as Carlyle in one of his
cynical reflections upon wealth and respectability suggests
was' the common idea then of the British people. He
remembered the horse and gig well, for his grandfather,
though he never won his affections, yet endeavoured to
be kind to him by taking him for rides, which he much ap-
preciated ; and the horse and gig also was in his memory
associated with the old gentleman’s death, as they were
left as a legacy to his father, who did not highly appre-
ciate this showy addition to his modest establishment,
and did not long retain jt. The old people evidently
possessed some wealth and social standing, and were
regarded as a grade above the shopkeepers of Old Mill


Gate. “ For," he says, “ rumours came to my boyish ears
that my father was considered to have made a good
match, and to have married a lady in a higher social
position than his own. I heard also that my mother's
parents did not approve of my father as their daughter's
husband. This is probable, from my also hearing from
my eldest brother George, some six or seven years older
than me, that my mother scaled the wall of the backyard
of her parents’ house in Chorlton Terrace, my father
being in waiting according to previous arrangements, and
they went away together and got married.” Whatever
opposition to this somewhat romantic and clandestine
marriage existed in the bride’s parents at the time, it
seems to have been overcome and forgotten as the years
went by, as he goes on to say: “ I remember how we
children went often to see my mother's parents and their
kindness to us always,” and when a sad period of com-
mercial distress came, and his father felt the pressure
severely, he remembers hearing him say “that but for
grandfather’s money we should scarcely be able to live.”
His mother’s only sister he recollects did not marry
very happily. Her husband affected the life of the fine
gentleman, and he noticed that the house where they
lived was more “ stylish ” than his own, but this gay
Lothario, a commercial traveller, was often in money diffi-
culties, which tested the patience of his wfife’s father
severely, as he on several occasions had to rescue him
from the consequences of his extravagances. But aunts
and uncles and cousins do not seem to have made a
lasting impression upon William Brookes’s mind; as he
says. “ They all seemed to fade away into shapeless
memories, like moving shadows in a dream.” Life’s back-
ward vistas have few abiding personages. Love alone
immortalises.
His mother he remembered with the fondest affection,
though she died when he was about five years old, and no
portrait of her, except a silhouette, remained after her
death to fix her features on his memory. She was evi-
dently a woman—
i • Nobly planned
To warn, to comfort,'and command.”
A true, pure, motherly woman, doing her duty simply in


her daily sphere, and seeking to make her home the
dwelling-place of sweet contentment, quiet refinement, and
cheerful piety. William Brookes never failed to recognise
how much he had lost by her early death. He often refers
to it and laments over it. Xo event in his childhood made
such a deep impression upon him as her death-bed scene.
He says, “ Some of the surrounding circumstances of my
mother’s death fixed themselves ineffaceably upon my
mind. I was at school in Half Street, near to Hanging
Ditch, in Manchester, where we lived. The school was
kept by an old lady named Miss Sidebotham. It was
afternoon when a servant girl came to fetch me away at
once and quickly. We ran home, and I was taken straight-
way into my mothers room. She was in bed. My sister
and three brothers were kneeling at the bedside, and I
knelt with them. She spoke to my eldest brother, and
entreated him never to be either a soldier or a sailor. To
my child’s mind these words seemed remarkable, and I
never forgot them. On the other side of the bed, in a
comer close to the bed-head, sat my father, weeping
audibly, as if his heart was breaking. That sight and the
impression it made upon me never faded from my memory.
I remember nothing of the funeral. My father used to
take me to look at her grave in Rushholme Road Ceme-
tery, and the place was, in a dim sort of way, to be re-
garded with quiet reverence.” It appears she had been
tngrried to his father about thirteen years, and died when
her youngest boy, Benjamin, was only three weeks old, for
he recollects seeing in the room among the sad group that
were witnessing her last hours, “ a nurse holding a baby
in her arms, and leaning over the fire and stirring some-
thing in a pan.” Her death was a noticeable event in the
religious circle in which she moved. It was regarded as a
triumph of Christian grace. A funeral sermon was preach-
ed in memory of her at the church she had attended, and
a sketch of her life appeared in the connexional Methodist
magazine. The world was all the poorer for her early
exit from its motley stage. A gloomy cloud had fallen
upon the home which was hard to lift. The young lives
there must suffer. Who can estimate the loss of a good
mother? It is indeed irreparable. Like Cowper, William
Brookes ever cherished fond memories of this saintly


mother, ant! often brought back to his mind reminis-
cences of her gentle ways. He could say—
“ All this still legible in memory's page
And still to be so to my latest age."
He remembered that she was fond of music. She had
brought her piano to the home on her marriage, and
many an hour was brightened by her playing. He could
remember standing by her side as she played and sang
some of the well-known hymns. One tune and hymn
remained in his memory all through his life—the tune
“ Helmsly,” to the words “ Lo, He comes with clouds
descending." “ Besides being able to play the piano,” he
states “ she painted in water colours." And it must be
recollected that at the time she lived these were not
■common accomplishments, and among religionists of the
sect to which she belonged, “ such accomplishments were
rather shunned than coveted." Life was narrower then
than now. This he notices. “First of all," he observes,
“ they cost money to acquire, and when acquired the
question was asked, ‘ Did they promote the progress of
true religion in the soul?’ This question was seldom
answered by a cordial affirmative. More generally by an
ominous shake of the head implying anything but safety
and certainty. I have a notion that my mother was over-
cultivated for the station of life occupied by my father."
But surely it was better this way than the opposite. The
house and the children are much in the mother’s hands,
anti the more cultured she is, the more elevating is her
influence there, and upon the future of the young ones that
go forth from that centre of life. “ She used," he con-
tinues, “to help us to commit to memory Dr. Watts’
hymns and songs for children. The words —
•• How beautiful along the gay mead.
The daisy and cowslip appear.
The flocks as they carelessly feed
Rejoice in the Spring of the year.”
I first heard from her. She gave the first impulse to the
faculty of remembering, and of being attracted by lines of
poetry and phrases met with in poetry. As far back as
memory takes me, I have been able to quote “ Tis the
voice of the sluggard ”; “ Then, I’ll not be proud of my
youth or my beauty,” and other lines written for children.


House in Manchester, England, where the boyhood
of the Hon. W. Brookes was spent.


1 am sure that all her children inherited from her
character, example, and teaching, a love of nature, and of
the beautiful in nature; an impressionableness to musical
sounds, whether in music or in musical arrangements of
words in language, to form and colour in painting and
sculpture and architecture. In these respects our in-
heritance was an invaluable one. And when blended
with what our father instilled into us by his life and
conduct, an almost innate love of truth, a content with
simplicity, an unconscious revolting from trickiness, sor-
didness, and meanness —I say, that taking into view what
we physically and mentally and morally received from
our parents, few children, very few, have had an equally
noble heritage.” This was indeed so, and he very happily
recognised it.
His father had succeeded the grandmother in the
business in Old Mill Gate, and lived there to d good old
age. And all through his life he maintained an un-
blemished reputation. He was a useful member of the
Methodist New Connexion Church in Oldham Street for
more than fifty years. He filled many important offices
in that religious community. Honest and affable in
business, sedulous in caring for the comfort of his
widowed mother while she lived, calm and temperate in
manners and speech, kind and charitable to the afflicted
and poor, keeping an open house for ministers of the
Gospel, and always ready with his purse and practical
service in aid of any worthy cause, he proved himself to
have possessed many sterling qualities which must have
deeply influenced his children. One of them, Mr. J. H.
Brookes, writing of him after his decease in 1868, says:
“The kindness and affection of mv father to his
children was very great, and I remember with sincere
pleasure the home of my youth, when with brothers and
an only sister, we revelled in the gladness and joy of a
happy Christian home; our father joining in our pleasures
and always pleased to see his children happy.
“ Our home was a Christian home, our earliest recol-
lections bring vividly to mind, family worship, cheerful
singing and music, the company of God’s people, and
especially the society of our dear ministers. Our house
was ever the resort of the pious among our own people ;
whether rich or poor, they were always welcome at my


father’s house, and as God had abundantly prospered
and blessed him in his worldly concerns, so he freely
gave as he had freely received.
“My father was for many years engaged in promot-
ing the interests of our cause by labouring in the Sabbath
school, by occupying various responsible positions in our
church. He was a class-leader, steward, trustee, and a
representative at our annual Conference. 1 have always
heard from those who laboured with him that his duties
were fulfilled with the greatest earnestness, promptitude,
and satisfaction.
“ One very remarkable trait in his character which
rivetted itself on my mind is this, and we could wish that
his example were imitated by many more, his attention
to the old, the sick, the poor, and the distressed. The
cottage, the cellar, and the garret were often visited, and
their poor inmates relieved and comforted. The blessing
of the poor has often rested upon him. He helped those
who had no other earthly helper.”
And this son also describes his declining years and
death-bed as very peaceful and happy. Honoured and
revered by all who knew- him' he calmly passed away in
his seventy-sixth year. He was one of the excellent of the
earth.
How often the quiet walks of life are travelled by
these saintly folk. Such characters as these have done
much to make England great. True as steel in all their re-
lationships with theirfellow men, helpful and self-forgetting
in their service to others, they are the salt of the earth,
the leaven of humanity, the strength of a nation's life.
Their progress through the world is not blazoned abroad
with flaunting banners or trumpet-peals, neither do im-
posing tombs and eloquent epitaphs mark where they lie,
and keep their memory' green, but they live in the hearts
that felt their goodness; their children hold their reputa-
tion in high honour and rise up to call them blessed, and
they will surely stand in their “ lot at the end of the days.”
So the young life of William Brookes, who was destined
to play an important part in the affairs of one of the
Australian colonies, was started on its wav' in the old
fatherland, w’ell equipped with hereditary qualities for
the coming conflicts with the changing fronts of circum-
stance in a distant clime.


CHAPTER II.
BOYISH DAYS.
“ The spirit culls
Unladed amaranth, when wild it strays,
Through the old garden-ground of boyish days."
— Keats.
THERE are very few who are gifted with sufficient
powers of observation and reflection in childhood,
to realise the value of their swiftly passing years. To
most children, the time flows smoothly on, bringing its
ripples of pleasure or vexation without apparently making
any special imprints on their minds, or awakening any
meditations upon the effects likely to be produced upon
their characters, or after lives. Though they are at the
most impressionable period of their earthly existence, yet
they seem almost entirely unconscious of the impressions
they are receiving. Joys and sorrows are lightly felt and
seem to be quickly forgotten. As James Montgomery
says:
■' Like butterflies in spring,
Like bees among the flowers,
Like swallows on the wing.
How swift, how soon ye passed away.
Joys of my early hours !
And —
15ut Oh ! what light and little things
Are childhood’s woes ! —they break no rest,
Like dewdrops on the skylark’s wings
While slumbering in his grassy nest,
Cone in a moment, when he springs
To meet the morn with open breast. "
But transitory as the emotions felt may be. yet they
do leave lasting effects. The memories created, tend to
develope traits of character, and blend with visions of days
to come. But the child perceives little of this, or the
significance of the circumstances that affect him. His


eyes are holden. He is busy with the present, and the
bright anticipations with which his imaginations gild his
lot. He is fed, as Eliza Cook says, on “ rich ambrosial
gingerbread,” and 1 engaged in building “fairy castles,” he
can leave others to philosophise over him. Perceptions
of the meaning of childhood’s days come afterwards,
when they are looked back upon with older eyes. The
backward gaze is illuminated with experience. But all
is not seen, even then. Only here and there an event
stands out like a bold and craggy promontory along an
indented shore. Much ever remains obscure. Mists
even sometimes gather over well-remembered scenes. But
with all that, enough can generally be traced to show
that life has not been without some unfolding lines of con-
tinuity. That the present has been largely the outcome
of the past; and that in youth’s earliest days there was a
purpose in the divine providence which environed them
round to prepare them for their life-work, though they
then knew it not.
William Brookes wrote an interesting record of his
boyish days, after he had reached a period of life when
his judgment had matured, and he had leisure for retro-
spection. He tells us that as a boy he missed most of all
his mother’s tender care and watchful sympathy. ‘‘Her
loss,” he says, “ was never repaired to me or to any of
her children, and I am conscious that in my most impres-
sionable years, I was without a godly mother’s example
and precepts with results not favourable or helpful to the
moral development of my character.” Again and again
he speaks of the absence of a loving influence around his
childhood which only a mother could bestow. It had led,
he perceives, to the cultivation, as he grew up. of an
objectionable stoicism of demeanour which was often
misunderstood. He had never had “ the blessedness
of a true maternal home-bond ” in his childhood, and
having no mother to awaken tender sentiments and
ardent affections, he had formed the habit of repressing
his feelings which made some “ regard him as selfish
and cold when he was simply aiming to steel himself
against manifesting the emotions that rose within him."
That he had not a mother’s love in his boyish days cer-
tainlv affected his manners, conduct, and character.


\ . >
His father evidently did his best to mot&erjess
family well, and it was not until after tbit be..'
married again. There were live children, one atmgbter;
four sons. The daughter and one son were oldtJT"
William, and two were younger than he was. He says,
“The manner of life in our home was simple and un-
affected. My father was kept busy in the shop and in
managing the business. My eldest brother assisted him
in the shop, and it was understood that the business
would devolve upon him in course of time. We saw
little company. My only sister kept house for some
years, until my father married a second time. My father
was not companionable to us his children. Kind, loving,
good, he was. But he paid little attention to us. We
seemed to get into the way of not expecting him to be
different from what he was, and to be able to find our own
amusements, and pass our leisure time without much
supervision.” The children were not allowed to run the
streets, and they had not much inclination that way,
but there was an old churchyard close to the house
which made a good playground.-- With the absence of
superstitious dread, commonly characteristic of children,
they used to have many a light-hearted gambol there.
“Railed in by iron bars six feet high, inside we were
in no danger of being run over by vehicles or horses,"
he says, “ while nothing could have improved upon the
large fiat tombstones for the spinning of tops. Our only
terror was an unpleasant man known to us as ‘ The
Apparitor.’ At times he would chase us out of the church-
yard, when we had to escape as best we could, often by
squeezing between the rails, a feat at which I attained
some skill.” His childhood was however neither dull
nor unhappy. He was fond of reading, and when he was
very young he seems to have been quite an adept at this
pleasant and useful pastime. He never could remember
how he learned, or that he had any difficulty in gaining
a knowledge of the alphabet, or mastering the simple
rudiments of language. The store of books in the house
was not large. There were Miss Edgeworth’s Tales, and
Dr. Doddridge’s Family Expositor, and Bunyan's Pilgrim’s
Progress, and other religious books of the same kind,
and every month there arrived the Methodist New Con


nexiun Magazine. His father was not a reading man.
He only read if he wished to obtain information or as
it help to devotion. He liad a strong aversion to novels ;
to read them was a waste of time, and often led, as he
thought, to the neglect of duty or religion. But this
little library was a treasure house to the thoughtful boy
growing up in that quiet home. Even the sober Con-
nexional Magazines, the appearance of which then “was
not inviting,” he explored and found as he says, “a
good deal that was interesting about foreign travels,
wonderful escapes, and special providences: these last
I thought peculiarly curious,” and when there was, among
many thrilling stories of divine interposition in human
affairs, one of some hardened sinner being struck dead for
some act of w'ickednness, it awakened the reflection that, it
was strange the fear of such a terrible doom did not “act as
a strong deterrent from vice.” His love of books doubtless
brightened many an hour in the dull sitting-room behind
the shop, which he describes as dimly lighted from the
backyard and odorous with the pungent smells of leather
and others more offensive, from the insanitary conditions
which then generally existed.
Books w'ere indeed his “ talismans and spells " to while
away the long hours of the winter’s evenings; they opened
up to him worlds of fancy and adventure; they interested
and instructed him, and kept him from associations that
might otherwise have harmed him. Meagre as the supply
of literature then was for youthful readers—for the days
had not come when piles of illustrated periodicals, charm-
ing stories, and romantic tales, in which science and
religion are “ made easy,’’ are found even in the homes
of the poor—yet there was sufficient in the few religious
classics and periodicals that came into his boyish hands
to foster his intellectual growth and keep the desire for
knowledge burning within him. When he had exhausted
the home bookcase, he requested his father to allow him
to belong to a private circulating library, which consisted
almost entirely of novels; and afterwards to another that
had a choicer variety of books. Though his father ex-
pressed surprise that he was not satisfied with the books
in the house, lie willingly paid the library subscriptions for
him. to gratify his longings for other kinds of book-lore. At


tfirst he seems to have literally devoured all the novels he
•could get. The pages of Benimore Cooper, Captain
Marryat, Ainsworth, James, Dickens, Bulwer Lytton, and
•other popular writers of fiction of that day filled him
-with delight, and contrary to his father's opinion they do
not seem to have injured him in any way. "Of fiction for
a year or two, I was voracious, he says. “ 1 never found
•my father’s fears verified. My indiscriminate reading of
novels did me no harm that I could afterwards discover.
I was too young to dwell with intelligence on the love
.scenes. The plot was all I cared about. ... I had
no one to guide my reading. This was probably a loss.
My father used to look at the books I brought home, and
sometimes he would signify his opinion of my taste, by a
■disapproving grunt, but he never interfered.” Afterwards
his desire for more solid reading asserted itself, and mak-
ing friends with an old Scotchman, who was the librarian
-at a more important library which had been opened in
Market Street, he could obtain the best books published.
The librarian used to allow him to go *■ inside the counter"
•and select for himself, a privilege which he esteemed as
“an inestimable advantage,' and which led him never to
•care for a library afterwards unless he had the ‘‘same
•freedom of access. ' Books and music were his chief
recreations, for his father had a Puritanic aversion to-
wards many of the pastimes which are so common now
■even in many pious homes. Draughts, chess, and cards
•were regarded as very questionable amusements, and the
children were not allowed to play them. Dancing, too,
was rigidly forbidden ; but music was not at all disap-
proved of. Mis father was “rather soft upon music,” he
says, “ perhaps because our mother brought a piano to his
house and played it, and perhaps because it could be
used in the service of religion.” In the Oldham Street
‘Chapel, where his hither regularly attended, he could re-
member how his father’s voice could be heard joining in
the singing as he stood at the head of the pew. and some-
times he would practice on the flute at home, and taking
ms little son on his knee while he played, would encourage
him to sing. So William Brookes became acquainted with
many hymns and tunes, and wasquite proficient in singing
them; so much so. that he was always called upon when


visitors were present to show his talents. He was per-
mitted to learn to play the violin, and an organ was pur-
chased for his elder brother, and placed in the “ front
best room,’’ and upon this he was allowed to play. He
gained sufficient mastery over these instruments and the
piano to enable him to take part in concerts at the chapels
around and to play the tunes at the services, and doing
this was a source of much enjoyment to him.
His school experiences were a mixture of sunshine and
shadow. A good education was not very easily obtained
in Manchester by the families of middle-class people in
his early days. There were a few private seminaries, and
there was the Manchester Grammar School, which he
describes as “an old foundation school, the management
of which was completely rotten, where the boys were taught
nothing, except the mechanical habit of sitting on a bench,
making no noise, and submitting to discipline, and a little
Latin. His father had been taught there, and he wanted
his children to have a better education than he had re-
ceived, so they were sent to private schools. After leaving
a dame’s school he was sent to one held in a large room
over a shop, ami approached,” he relates, “by a side
passage, the closeness and smell of which remain in my
nostrils.” Evidently the days of sanitary science in Eng-
land had scarcely dawned. The school was managed by
two brothers, one of whom had a wooden leg, and who
seems to have been a terrible martinet, and to have been
most unsparing in the use of the cane Mr. Brookes’ re-
marks upon his school days are worth quoting, and they
give a striking v iew of school life then.
“ I am afraid to say how many times he caned me be-
cause I got flustered and could not spell the word ‘ hos-
pitality.’ I was about eight years old at the time, and I
was taken to and from school. Had mv schooling always
gone on in this place and in this man's charge, it would
have, I am sure, caused me to loathe all schools and all
instruction. But shortly one of the brothers, evidently
not the martinet, went to live at Broughton, where he built
a private residence, and a school-room at some distance
behind it, a garden intervening. To this new school I was
sent. My schoolmaster was a local preacher in the
Methodist New Connexion. He could be severe. For


some years I was afraid ol him. and no doubi had cause
■lo be. I learned, however, and gradually came to like my
master and what we were taught, and to be happy in
school hours. The school was quite a mile from Hang-
ing Ditch, and going to it was going into the country.
'The walk there was a delight. I never went to any other
school. From about eight to fourteen I was under one
man's charge. To this cause, the absence of interruption
.and frequent changes of school books and various
methods. I attribute the fact that what 1 learned was
learned well and thoroughly. The range might be limited,
but that was not a loss: it was a valuable gain. Lindley
Murray’s small and large grammar 1 went through and
through. There have been since other grammars ; pos-
sibly they are improvements, but I do not regard them as
such. The liible was read in class, as was Lindley Mur-
ray's ' Reader and Sequel.’ We were taught to read aloud,
a department of instruction which is, to my wonder and
regret, little thought of now-a-days. Our pronunciation
of words was attended to. and the meaning of words was
made clear. Writing had much time given to it, and to
be a good writer, holding the pen properly, was an ambi-
tion with the boys. 1 was taught Latin, but never went
further than Cornelius Xepos. With the Eton Latin
■Grammar I was tolerably conversant. In arithmetic, I
went through Wallinghame’s book. Algebra I did not
learn, nor French, nor Greek. 1 had lessons in drawing
for perhaps two years, but left school before the art ever
glimmered in its meaning on me. My education would
now be smiled at. Nevertheless, I consider it to have
iieen a good one. 1 was imbued with a wish to know,
with a love of books, with an acquaintance with English
authors and the English language, with the Bible narra-
tives, with as much arithmetic as I ever afterwards have
needed, with a measure of facility in original composition,
and with a desire to keep on learning when my school
days were passed. Does any system of modern education
do more than this? Do they accomplish in the majority
of instances half this?”
These closing questions are pertinent ones, and cannot,
perhaps, be easily answered, so much depends upon the
■quality of the scholar under any system. The old methods


were doubtless slower, and probably the knowledge-
learned was more deeply grounded in the learners' minds.
The boys not only knew- their lessons; but, to use an
American phrase, they knew that they knew. In good
private schools more attention was doubtless given to the in-
dividual scholar than under State or School Board systems
now. Children are now often taught "in bundles,” and while
the general average result may be higher, yet there is not
the careful watchful interest taken in the mental develop-
ment of each pupil under the teachers charge. Boys now
have to distinguish themselves to be noticed. At all
events, Mr. Brookes, as he looked back in after years upon
his “ schools and schoolmasters,” was very grateful that he
had been so well taught. Writing of this period of his
life, he says, “ 1 never can recall my school days without
feelings of gratitude to God. They were happy days, in
which a good religious, moral, and intellectual foundation
was laid, on which since I have only had to build. I
have had nothing to pull down or reconstruct.”
There were other influences at work which left in-
dents upon his memory. His father’s connection with the
church brought him into contact with many of the
Methodist preachers of that day, and also with the saintly
poor of the flock, who were often special objects of his
father’s care. The house was a kind of rendezvous for
the preachers : they would always find a welcome, either
at dinner, or for a talk on church business, or for a night's
rest, as there was a spare room set apart as the “ prophets’
chamber." He had lively memories of many of these
visitors. Especially at the annual Conferences, when the
house seemed filled with a hilarious bustle, and for a few
days the dining table was lengthened and crowded, and
the children had to sit where they could, but listening
with both ears to the bright and cheerful conversation
which his father encouraged in his guests. Religion then
showed its shining side, that it could appear in “silver
slippers." These solemn ambassadors of the cross, whom
the children regarded as veritable apostles of Christ, could
there unbend, and in the presence of good cheer and a
genial host, seek to outvie one another in relating humour-
ous ancedotes and uttering pungent repartees. But it wa*
all tempered with pietv. To quote his words;-- “The


preachers' witticisms were many, but they all bore a
Scriptural endorsement which sharpened their points. But
never any irreverence. 1 never heard anything said, either
by my father, or by any one at his table, which was ques-
tionable or open to blame. Indeed, it was from my father
that I first heard the lines, and I never forgot them :
•• Immodest words admit of no defence.
For want of decency is want of sense.’
Such sociality was educational. Pure, simple, and
stimulating, it would bring out the best qualities of the
children, and leave many pleasant memories. They were
entertainments after the pattern of Bunyan’s regalement of
the pilgrims in the house of Gaius in his Allegory. " Then
were they very merry, and sat at the table a long time
talking of many things.''
There were other guests there sometimes beside
preachers. His father often fulfilled the Saviour’s injunc-
tion to welcome not the well-to-do, but the poor to his
hospitable board. The poor old people of the church
always knew where they could meet with a kind word and
find a substantial meal. Some of them seemed in Elysium
when they sat behind a plate of meat and potatoes. Some-
times he would take his son with him to places of squalid
penury, carrying with them a supply of homely viands for
some hungry pensioner of the church, and often sanctifying
the gift with prayer. William Brookes had a vivid
memory of one poor old lady, who was often a visitor at
his father’s table, partly because of her beaming grateful
face, and partly from the cap she wore, which surmounted
her curls as a " wonderful elaborate work of art.” The
gloomy old church in Oldham Street lived in his memory
too. There was the choir, led by a pawnbroker with a
fine voice, but suspected of a “ leaning towards drink, 1 ' and
the organist, his son. who knew not a note of music, but
who could play the tunes bv ear : and a little man who
played the \ iolincello. who mysteriously disappeared,
either because -I he could not stand the organ, or the
Organ could not stand him.” The warm and earnest ser-
vices verv much impressed him. He did not remember
much of the doctrines taught, but the fervent appeals
maih nftrn touched his conscience and awakened deep


emotions. When about twelve years of age he was con-
scious of an inflowing of spiritual influences which deeply
affected him. “These influences," he says, "could not
be the result of reading, thinking, or reasoning. They
came greatly unsought, but they made an epoch in my
life. I got a glimpse of a higher, happier world of feeling
than I had any conception of before. They faded away
among the distractions of youth, but they never entirely
left me. I always involuntarily had them as a sweet
memory in possession.” So his boyhood passed affected
by many varying circumstances. He was evidently a
thoughtful, receptive boy, gaining impressions from all
sources, and retaining them within him, too, as germs of
dispositions and characteristics, which in the after strain of
life would manifest themselves.
But, for those first affections.
Those shadowy recollections.
Which, be they what they may.
Are yet the fountain light of all our day.
Are yet a master light of all our seeing
Uphold us. cherish, and have power to make
Our noisy years seem moments in the being
Of the eternal silence truths that wake
To perish never.
Which neither listlessness nor mad endeavour
Nor man. nor boy.
Nor all that is at enmity with joy.
<"an utterlv abolish or destroy '


CHAPTER III.
EAKLY MANHOOD.
Youth's path is gay with pinks and roses
The weeds grow thick about his feet :
He blunders, as he makes his posies,
Kor weeds, as well as flowers, smell sweet
IT has been said thai the years between boyhood and
manhood are ' bridged with vanishing arches of ex-
perimental endeavours. And it is quite natural that it
should be so. Much at this period of life must be merely
tentative. A youth can only find out his capabilities and
his right place in the world, as he tries his powers amid
tlie many and varied objects of interest that thrust them-
selves upon him. He has to make discoveries in himself
and in the moving cinematograph of circumstance which
unrolls itself before him. Often he is bewildered and
takes the true for false, and the false for true. He has to
learn bv his mistakes, and to find the straight and narrow
wav after not a few painful wanderings in “ by-path mea-
dow." Theexperiences of others seldom teach him much.
He will exploit for himself. He has confidence in his own
judgment, and is strangely subject to periods of inflexible
determination: v His wilfulness is one secret of his
strength. Those who watch over him, and often pity him,
know that they can do little to guide him. They can only
hope that his blunders will bring wisdom. They know
that mainly he must find the clue to life's labyrinth for
himself.
William Brookes probably made a mistake when, in
opposition to his father's wish and his schoolmaster s ad-
vice. at the age of thirteen or fourteen, he was unwilling to
remain any longer at school, and left to learn some kind of
business He had become uneasv at school, anti wanted to
see w hat lie could do for himself in the world. He after-
wards regretted this step, observing, “ T evidently did not


know what I wasdoing." A few more years at school would
doubtless have been a great advantage to him. But to
the young change is sweet, and they long to try their
sinews in the race. A friend of his father’s, a solicitor,
was wishful at this time that he should enter his office,
and offered to take him and instruct him in all the “ nice
sharp quiblets of the law, but his father had a very-
strong prejudice against the legal profession, thinking that
a lawyer could hardly be an honest man and secure eternal
blessedness ; and he somewhat quaintly refused his consent
to the proposed arrangement by saying:—“ No, I will, at
least, give him a chance of going to heaven." This pre-
judice against lawyers was very common then in the Eng-
lish mind. An honest lawyer was supposed to be a great
rarity. Such well-known epitaphs in the old church yards
as-
(i<hl works a \von<l<*r. now ami then.
He. though a lawyer, was an honest man
And —
Here lies one, believe it. if von can,
Who. though an attorney, was an honest man
The gates of heaven for him will open wide,
But will be shut gainst all the tribe beside
show this; and in mail} of the writings of that period
lawyers are described as ‘ sharks," “ sharp and wounding
brambles," "scratching briers," “greedly cormorants.”
'' A poor client among them.” Adams writes, l is as a
blind sheep in a thicket of thorns : there is no hope of
his fleece: it is well if he carry away his flesh whole on his
back." The law was regarded as '' a sort of hocus pocus
science," that “ smiled in your face while it picked your
pocket." and the delays and '' glorious uncertainty of it ’’
lined the purses of its professors with ungodly gains.
Legal procedures have been reformed since that day, and
lawyers have a better name, but the prejudice then was
loud and deep. So his father persuaded him to turn his
mind to trade, and he was apprenticed to the wholesale
drapery firm of Messrs. S. and J. Watts and Company, a
well-known firm in Manchester. A premium of was
paid, and he was bound for five years, with the under-
standing that he was to learn all the departments of the
bu siness from haberdasherv ami hosierv to silks and


lace.'’ But this agreement he thinks was not carried out.
He was put at first to the meuial work of sweeping floors
and cleaning windows and arranging the goods in order,
and was principally kept in the shawls and ribbons’ de-
partment. He was inclined to complain of this. He did
not find this employment congenial to him. The mere
mechanical round of labour did not suit his active mental
temperament. His day dreams and ambitions found no
ground-work in his daily employment. He was out of his
true sphere. He says, that he did his work with regularity
and obedience, and was quite willing to begin at the base-
ment floor, but he had no love for the business. He
worked like one “ bound by fate,” like a young spirited
horse fastened to the revolving bar of a machine; he had
no desire to excel, no hope of advancement. The days
were merely struggled through. He had the idea that he
would have found fuller play for his faculties in “ the life
of a musician, or a painter, or journalist, or perhaps a
lawyer,” but he was fixed there and had to serve his time.
But during these years of apprenticeship he was endeav-
ouring to cultivate himself by reading and study. His
leisure time was largely spent in self-improvement. He
felt inclined to resent any encroachments upon the hours
which he thought he might rightly call his own. It an-
noyed him to find that “ his leisure was not his own pro-
perty,” that it might be “ invaded ” by his superiors, who
could “ order him back after tea and keep him at work
till ten or eleven o'clock.” This was a constant grievance.
He often fretted over it. and he used all his ingenuity to
esc ape from it. as he deemed it an injustice.
lie was at this time stirred with ambitions.
He was determined to cultivate his mental powers
and lit himself for some useful place among his
fellows. He took lessons in French and German :
furnished himself with Spanish. Italian, and Portuguese
grammars and lesson books : started writing a diary, in
which he wrote digests of the lectures and sermons he
heard, comments on current events and questions, and
criticisms upon the books and articles in the reviews he
read. He was resolved to gain the mastery over his mind,
which he frequently found was very unmanageable. "I
wish.” he wrote. ” that I had more command over mv


thoughts, to arrange all on one subject together, with a
facility of expression. As it is, my mind is but a sort
of lobby through which passes a motley procession of ideas
in a disorderly and unprofitable way; few ideas stop, still
fewer are original; they all form—to change the figures—
a sort of rug work, and my mind performs the humble
office of being the canvas on which it is worked. Is it
always to be so? It is an evil hard to remedy, and only
by perseverance and application. Truly, much remains to
be done. Yet I do not despair.” He joined the Athe-
naeum, a popular literary society in those days, attending
the classes, listening to such eloquent lecturers as George
Dawson, Henry Vincent, and Ralph Emerson, and be-
coming a member of a philharmonic society, he cultivated
his musical talents, and so spent his leisure in a most
useful manner. He took part in the debates in the
Athenaenum, and was extremely eager to attain the art of
public speaking, and to distinguish hiinself as a debater.
Sometimes he was discouraged with his failures, but his
desire to win success led him, in spite of discouragements,
to persevere. On one occasion he made very careful pre-
paration. It was to be, as he describes it, his “ debut as a
speaker,”' and he is very anxious to acquit himself well.
He kindled his ambition with the motto, “ AutCa?saraut
nullus," and he tried to screw his courage up for the oc-
casion. He hoped it would not be “a.ut nullus.” But as
he pointedly says, “We shall see.” And so alternating
between the hope of distinguishing himself and the fear of
failure he made the attempt. But like most young aspiring
orators, he found that to deliver a speech was a very differ-
ent thing from preparing one. When he rose to his feet
all the shapely sentences and elegant periods slipped away
from his memory, and he had to struggle with a con-
fusion of mind and disjointed thoughts until he sat down
again. " How I bungled through and got to the end I
do not know,” he says. He was terribly nervous. His
vanity had received a shock. But he would not give up.
He would try again. He consoles himself with the thought
that it was, at least, “a commencement,” and he may do
better next time. He resolves that he will speak on every
debating night, and 1 upon every subject before the society,
.and so gain practice. He is very much helped at this


time by reading the memoirs of Sir James Mackintosh,
the renowned philosopher and eloquent advocate. In
one of Sir James’ letters to a friend, who evidently had
written to him about the difficulties he found in acquiring
the orator’s art, he found the following encouraging words:
“ You have no enemies, but your modesty and taste, and
you have the means of vanquishing them by an inflexible
resolution to speak coolly and often. If you suffer your
modesty to fasten you long to the bench it will become
unconquerable; if you require too much excellence from
your early, or from your daily exertions you will be more
unjust to yourself than you are capable of being to another
man. Great excellence cannot appear at first, and it can
only be occasional. Eloquence differs in one remarkable
respect from the other fine arts. The poet may execute
a thousand rude sketches in the solitude of his study; he
may commit them to the flames; and he need not appear
before the public till he has attained the perfection ot
his art. But it is otherwise with the orator. He must
expose his first rude exercises to the malignant curiosity'
of the public. It is only by practice before them that he
can leam his art. Whatever his genuis may be, it has a
mechanical part which every man but Pitt has acquired
by use, and this is the very part nine-tenths of his hearers
can best judge. He is like that general that learns to
fight by fighting, and whose only school is real war. This
is a reason for indulgence towards the first attempt of the
speaker which applies neither to those of the poet or the
painter. As far as I have observed, a man must be an
every day speaker to be popular. It has an air of business.
The eloquent speaker or passages of such a speaker, seem
to rise naturally on great occasions from his usual level.
On the contrary, occasional speakers are very apt to be
thought rhetoricians and haranguers when it is otherwise :
they have more weight than popularity, and they generally
require the aid of age, or station, or previous fame, or a
very peculiar character which will sometimes supply the
place of all the others.”
Mr. Brookes speaks of this epistolary dissertation on
public speaking as “very refreshing" to him in his am-
bition to be a speaker, and he sums up the impressions
he had received from it, with “Well then, here goes


Never shall an occasion for speaking pass me. Prepared
or unprepared. I’ll have a try. By the way ‘ the
malignant curiosity of the public ’ will have much enter-
tainment. However, it is no importance what people
think. Once more Aut Caesar aut nullus!' ” He was
evidently at this period too ambitious to be content with
packing shawls and ribbons. His mind was tilled with
visions of greater things.
Doubtless this ambition to culture himself exercised
a good moral influence upon' his character. It kept him
from debasing habits and associations. It preserved him
amid many evil influences that necessarily surrounded
him. It created an atmosphere around him that warded
off many a defiling breath of depravity. A Manchester
warehouse and sales-room were not places w’here the odour
of sanctity existed. The common air of the place was
terribly impure. Conversation and the sentiments that pre-
vailed were horribly obscene. At first he was “ sickened ”
and almost ‘affrighted' with the immoral talk and
sensuality that prevailed. It broke upon him he said “ like
a hideous vision.’’ The standard of conduct was below
anything that he had ever heard or read of. Coming from
a pure home he recoiled from the moral rottenness that
everywhere assailed him. Licentiousness was regarded as
a necessary indulgence, a common recreation, a venial
offence. Most of tne young men affected a life of sensual
gaiety up to the limits of their meagre salaries, and their
conversation was generally of their coarse pleasures and
their carnal indulgences. They had no desire to raise
themselves above their low level of routine work and
sensuous gratifications. The older men were not much
better. The good were few. One or two religious men
held themselves aloof, but they did not affect the general
character of the place which was fearfully debasing and
corrupting. It was very difficult for a youth like William
Brookes to escape the pollution of his daily surroundings
and to live a clean life. But he seems almost wholly to
have been preserved from falling into the gross vices of
those around him. He speaks of this period as “a fiery
ordeal,” and as being grateful and surprised as he looked
back, that he kept his moral sense unscathed, and his
aspirations unperverted. His sensitive temperament and
pious training had probably much to do with this. He


shrank from contact with these lewd and vulgar de-
pravities. He felt conscious that he would be rebelling
against the nobility and design of his existence if he
yielded to the temptations that surrounded him. He had
the conviction that his life was given him for higher
purposes than debasing pleasures. He would not drink
ofCirce’scupand “roll with pleasure in a sensual sty.” He
was of a higher calibre.
There was another circumstance which tended in
the same direction. One of the principals of the
firm, Mr. James Watts, afterwards Sir James Watts,
hearing that he could play the organ, and being interested
in the services held in a small Congregational Church
at Heaton Norriss, near Didsbury, where he lived, asked
him to go with him to his residence on Saturday after-
noons, and to stay over Sunday and play the organ at the
church. He was at first reluctant to comply with this
arrangement. He feared that, as an apprentice of the firm, he
would find such an association with one of the heads of
it, irksome and disagreeable. He dreaded being patron-
ised, and that he would be uncomfortable in his employer’s
home, which he knew was very different from his own.
And he found it so. The elegance and refinement that he
found there made him feel shy and awkward. And
though the kindness he received enabled him to derive
considerable pleasure from his visits, yet he never entirely
lost the feeling that he was socially “ out of his latitude.”
A n apprentice in the house of a Manchester magnate would
hardly feel at home. Mr. and Mrs. Watts however en-
couraged him to talk about his studies, and the books he
read. Mr. Watts often sitting with him in the library,
both smoking, and conversing in the most familiar way,
and sometimes he played the piano for Mrs. Watts, while
she and the children sang; and it is evident they en-
deavoured to make him appear at ease in these unaccus-
tomed surroundings. Mrs. Watts, he says, was a kind
and motherly woman, and won a large measure of his con-
fidence, and awakened some of those feelings of affection
which he might have had towards his own mother if she
had lived. And the society that he met with at Mr. Watts’s
was also helpful and stimulating. Ministers and students
from the Lancashire Independent College, who came to
Heaton Norriss to supply the pulpit at the church were


always entertained by Mr. Watts, and their conversation
at the dinner and tea table was always of interest to him.
He was brought into contact with minds that quickened
his own, and frequently made him cognisant of his de-
ficiencies. Sometimes as he took part in the conversation
he found that his views of the subject discussed were very
crude and imperfect, like, he says, “ goods in a disorderly
pawnbroker’s shop, some secondhand, some damaged, and
some of little use to anybody ”; but during the week that
followed he would search his books for information and
store his mind and become better equipped for the next
occasion. All this was serviceable. In knowledge and
manners he would be improved. These Sundays would
be red-letter days, and though not altogether comfortable to
himself, yet their influence would be good. They con-
tinued for three or four years. But they came very sud-
denly and abruptly to an end.
Around this sudden break in his life, so fraught with
subsequent issues, there may still be some remnants of
mystery. His relation of it leaves room for some con-
jectures. He scarcely understood it himself. He always
felt that his frequent visits to his employer’s home, and
the friendly footing upon which he stood there, was
unsatisfactory, and might be construed to his disadvantage
by envious tongues in the salesrooms, and that it might
be terminated at any time, but he was not prepared for the
summary end that came. As this event was certainly one
of the important episodes of his early life, perhaps it will
be best for him to describe it in his own way.
“ A rumour,” he says, “ had been circulated in the
warehouse that I was more intimate with Mr. and Mrs.
Watts than my humble position justified, but I never
knew who set the rumour afloat. I never tried to find out.
It was enough for me that there was such a rumour. I
heard it first from Mr. Watts himself. He came to me
in the warehouse and said that he regretted to have to
tell me that he had heard what would make it unpleasant
for him for me to come any more to his house! What it
actually was he had heard he did not say, but he intimated
that it was something affecting his family relations. I
understood him to mean that I was laying siege to the
affections of his eldest daughter. Had I been doing so
i* would have been a protracted siege, almost like the


siege of Troy, as she was only about thirteen years old. It
is, of course, possible that she had expressed to her mamma
some opinions of me which might have caused to spring
up in Mrs. Watt’s mind the gravest apprehensions as to
my deep-laid and nefarious designs. I honestly believe that
that mother would have as soon have selected me for the
honour as any one else. But it had not occurred to me in
my wildest schemes for worldly promotion to carry off
Mr. Watts’s daughter. The revelation made to me by
himself came upon me as a most tremendous blow. Had
he confined himself to telling me that my services as
organist were no longer required, I should have received
that intelligence as a matter of course, and with a degree
of pleasure, for the engagement was not very palatable to
me. But in the form I received it, it cut my self-respect to
the quick, and my whole nature rose in angry rebellion.
I left the warehouse at once before business hours had
closed, and went to the only person in the world I could
go to —my father. As I told him of my dishonour, I cried
like a girl, and he comforted me as well as he could. His
words still are audible, ‘ Live it down! Live it down.’
That was very well, but it was advice I felt not the least
inclination to act upon. I told him I would throw up my
situation and leave England.”
This narration of the event undoubtedly shows that as
a young man, William Brookes was very quick and
sensitive when his honour was touched, but it is not clear
how far he or the Watts’ were to blame in the matter.
He may have not been altogether discreet. He may have
even awakened an affection in the susceptible heart of
Miss Watts. Young as she was, she may have become
attached to him; and this being discovered by her
mother she at once decided that it would be better for her
.daughter’s happiness and future prospects in life, for the
acquaintance to be broken off, and so Mr. Watts was
deputed to speak to him. This probably was the cause
of this abrupt finish to the visits made to Mr. Watts’s
residence,and the Sunday organ-playing; but there also may
have been something in the chatter of the salesroom that
reached the ear of Mr. Watts and affected his action.
“Hewas much agitated,” Mr. Brookes says, “as he spoke
to me,” and more so when he was told that I intended to
leave his employ. Mr. Watts asked him to think no more
c


of it and resume his place in the warehouse and at the
organ. But this he would not do. He was wounded too
deeply. He would not return to his work. He could not
feel happy in Manchester any longer. He would emigrate
to Australia. And out of this incident, trivial as it new
may seem, the purpose to leave England for the colonies
arose in his mind. He would not listen to his father’s
persuasions, and live down the babble of jealous tongues
or the suspicions of Mrs. Watts that he had been aiming
to gain the affections of her daughter. He would leave
it all and seek his fortunes in a new land. Years after-
wards he saw there might be in the event the working of a
divine providence. The act of that
“ Divinity that shapes our ends.
Rough hew them how we will."
Nothing but such an incident, he said, “ could have shaken
him out of his nest.” But how apparently trivial this
incident really was! But so it is with the changing trend of
many lives. Some almost insignificant circumstance has
awakened a new and strange purpose, which has be-
come a fixed and dominant determination, a determination
which nothing could change! In the biographies of
notable men how often this is seen. They were influenced
by seeming trifles to make the greatest decisions. Life
has these strange pivot points, which swing us round in
quite unexpected directions. We may be blind to the
fact that long stretches of years may be affected by our
decisions at such times, and onlookers may be surprised
and filled with wonder at our actions, but the impulse is
strong and irresistible, and we without due reason press on-
ward through our chosen path with firm steps and stubborn
wills. Little events have grave issues. Wisely as one said—
Despise not thou a small thing, either for evil or for good:
For a look may work thy ruin, or a word create thy wealth;
The walking this way or that, the casual stopping or hastening,
Hath saved life, and destroyed it, hath cast down and built
up fortunes.
Commit thy trifles unto God. for to Him is nothing trivial.
And it is but the littleness of man that seeth no greatness in a
trifle.
In this disagreeable termination of his visits to the home
of his employer, William Brookes found “the parting of
the ways,” the turning point of destiny.


CHAPTER IV.
BOUND FOR AUSTRALIA.
*' The sails were set, and fair the light wind blew.
As glad to waft him from his native shore ;
And fast the white rocks faded from his view.
And soon were lost in circumambient foam ;
And then it may be, of his wish to roam
Repented he." —Byron
TO leave England for Australia fifty years ago was a
far more venturesome undertaking than it is to-day.
Then, k generally meant a final separation from all old
and familiar associations, and to embark on an altogether
new and almost unknown enterprise. Now through
wider knowledge and l fast ocean liners it is often regarded
as only a holiday trip. Very little was generally known
then of this marvellous land of sunshine, wealth, and weird
beauty. Stories of its nuggets of gold, its extensive plains
and sheep walks, its rich scrub lands and dusky races, its
peculiar fauma and flora, its brilliant skSes and dry
odorous air, and its free and rugged methods of living were
being freely circulated and arresting attention; and a
considerable amount of curiosity was excited, and many of
an adventurous turn of mind were led to cherish the desire
to emigrate. But still much was left to the imagination;
there was little real information generally possessed;
much was based upon floating rumours and travellers’ tales.
Australia had been, regarded, mainly, too, as the spot
where English criminals had been transported. It had
been made the dumping ground of convicts, and this
had not enhanced its reputation as a desirable home for
the sons and daughters of English people. Startling
narrations of barbarous and cruel deeds occurring at the
convict stations, and of the escape of the convicts to settle
in the bush, also added to the gruesomeness of the views
generally held. But some of the evils connected with the
convict system were passing away. Efforts were being


made to abolish it altogether. Free and industrious emi-
grants were encouraged to offer themselves. Some, like-
Dr. Lang, whose monument stands in Sydney to-day, as
a memorial of his labours,were bringingtothecoloniesemi-
grants of the better sort to people the land; aided by
the spread of information and the chartering of ships,
the outflow of emigration to Australia was be-
ginning to assume considerable proportions at that
time. Emigrants of an enterprising and hard-working class
were coming forward, desirous of seeking their fortunes
in this distant clime. Some doubtless were ne’er-do-wells,
who had worn out their chances of gaining a living in the
old land : but many were of the brave, stalwart, industrious
sort, who were inspired by the purpose of bettering their
condition for themselves and their families, and to find
in a new sphere of activity, ampler scope for their energies,
greater freedom, and larger possibilities ot wealth and
distinction.
It was a time also, of social upheaval in England.
The cramp of poverty was severely felt. There
was an outcry for a new exodus. The eagle was stirring
up her nest. More room was wanted. An outlet for her
teeming multitudes must be found. The singers also
sang of more golden climes. The songs of Charles
Mackay and others, put heart and hope in many a weary
toiler, and turned his eyes longingly towards promised
lands shining with gold and flowing with milk and honey.
The way there might be long, the voyage full of peril and
discomfort, the unknown country bulked with dangers and
difficulties, but what did it matter ? The present was dark
and the future gilded with hope. So singing, “Cheer, boys,
cheer,” there is “ a bright to-morrow,” they faced all that
was before them with undaunted courage. They set their
faces as a flint in the front of unknown perils. They
girded their hearts with steel. With resolute wills and
fearless mien they crossed the treacherous deep, and be-
came the pioneers of a vigorous race in this Southern
hemisphere: founders of a new Britain beyond the seas,
the builders of a new nation in a new world. They were
doing more than they dreamed. Though even then Sir
Edward Bulwer Lytton put into the lips of one of his
heroes, who had ventured to retrieve the fortunes of his


iiouse in the Australian bush, the noble words, " There-
is more glory in laying these rough foundations of a mighty
State, though no trumpets resound with your victory—
though no laurels shall shadow your tomb—than in forcing
the onward progress of your race over burning cities and
hecatombs of men.'" This was true. And in no part of
the world can the glorious truimphs of peaceful labour
be more seen than in Australia, where the horrors of war
have never been. Its stones have been laid in the fair
colours of peace.
William Brookes was one of these peaceful pioneers.
Though the reason of his going to Australia was the
trifling incident of falling into disfavour with his employer,
and the desire to escape from a position which had be-
come intolerable, yet it did not affect the significance of
the step as an epoch in his life, and the results that accrued
from it. His determination to emigrate was unalterable.
So he spent two or three months in making the necessary
preparations, and in bidding farewell to friends and
acquaintances. He seems to have parted with Mr. and
Mrs. Watts and their family with some degree of friendli-
ness. Mr. Watts gave him high testimonials, and he visited
the house and bade “ good-bye ” to Mrs. Watts and the
children. So the unpleasant situation was gilded over.
And there were a few others upon whom he made fare-
well calls. In one case a rather romantic incident
occurred which shows that as a young man he was not
without susceptibility to female influence, nor without
impulsiveness. On hils return from bidding farewell to
Mrs. Watts, at Heaton Norriss, he called at a farm house
where there lived two respectable and comely young
women, whom he had seen at the church on Sundays
where he played the organ, and once or twice he had
accompanied them home after the service. So he would
call upon them. His knock brought them to the door;
they asked him in: but this he declined, and he stood in
the porch uttering his farewells. When he turned to go,
they came to the garden gate with him; and then he
says some wild amorous feeling was aroused within him;
he was going away ; why should he not ‘‘ Gather ye rose-
buds while ye may,” and acting upon a sudden impulse he
threw his arms round the younger and prettier of the


two, and imprinted a kiss on her lips! It was done in
a moment and before the young lady could recover from
the shock, he was hurrying away blushing at his owa
temerity. It was, to quote Xenophon on kissing, “ the
act of a most headstrong and venturesome person, as one
would even throw himself upon swords, or leap into the
Haines.'’ We do not know whether the young lady was
more startled than amused, or annoyed than pleased by
this sudden embrace. Her account of the incident would
have been interesting. If her affections had been at all
inclined towards him, she might have felt the impress of
that kiss for many a day! It might have been something
to dream over.
Acting under the advilce of a friend he took a cabin
passage in the " Bengal,'’ a small ship of about 480 tons
register. He had been warned against taking an inter-
mediate or steerage passage, as he would then have had
to associate with people who might not only have been
disagreeable and offensive during the voyage, but would
have been disadvantageous to know after landing
in the colonies. He wished to escape evil
associations. He paid for his passage, and
though the berths were small and the space
at the saloon table very narrow at meal times, yet there
was little to complain of in the appointments of the ship.
If he had any qualms of repentance during the stormy
hours of the voyage he does not record them. He had not
been on board a ship before. It was altogether a new
experience. He apparently sailed with a cheerful mind.
He wanted to get away from his surroundings which had
become irksome to him. His father was the only one he
felt deeply in leaving. His brothers and sister and his
round of acquaintances had not a very strong hold upon his
affections. But his father was truly loved. He says,
“My father often told me I was making a mistake, but
he did not seriously oppose my going. There was one
thing on which he lovingly insisted—it was, that I should
take the total abstinence pledge. I diid take it, and it was
an invaluable safeguard to me on the voyage and after-
wards. I parted from him with loving sorrow. I told him
I intended to return in three years. And so I did intend.
He came to the gate of his house to see me off. and her


Mr. William Brookes, senr.


stood looking after me so long as 1 was in sight. We
never saw each other again. I wrote to him from Sydney
every month and from Brisbane, in all, about twenty years.
My brother James told me by letter that my letters to father
were a great comfort and consolation in his last years,
and that he awaited the monthly mail with continued
interest as long as helived.” Thus with his falher’sanxious
solicitude for his welfare —for who can misread the picture
of the father standing at the gate and watching his
distancing form—and reluctance to give him up —he left
England never to return. The voyage seems to have been
mainly uneventful. There was a great deal of drunken-
ness on board and some gambling. The captain and the
doctor were both often under the influence of drink, and
the ship was principally navigated by the chief mate. The
passenger that shared his sleeping cabin was a drunken,
dissipated Scotchman, who fortunately for himself had
been put down for the lower bunk, as he generally was so
intoxicated that he could not have climbed into the upper
one. Like all habitually drunken men his habits were
miserably filthy and offensive, and William Brookes found
it very difficult to endure them. But the conduct of his
cabin companion and that of others made him extremely
thankful that he had taken his father’s advice, and had
become a total abstainer. The value of good habits is
always enhanced amid the prevalance of evil ones. He
made very few' intimate acquaintances. There was a great
deal of caution a.-d reserve among the passengers. There
were few nauual confidences. Private histories were
seldom rehearsed, and reasons for leaving the old country
were hardly ever narrated. For three or four months
these voyagers were thrown into close contact with each
other, and yet few abiding friendships were formed.
He speaks of making the acquaintance of Mr. Stephens,
whose name for many years afterwards was honoured in
■Brisbane, and also of Mr. Lang, who also won a lasting
reputation for true piety and probity in business in the
same city, and of a gentleman and bis wife and sister too,
from Manchester, the latter lady afterwards becoming
his wife; but most were disinclined for much familiar
intercourse. Each one had his own history behind him.
and his own vision of the future: and he manifested no


meddling interest in others. The character of emigrants
in those days was not always above suspicion. It was
difficult to know who was your fellow voyager. Reticence
tvas wise.
William Brookes very happily busied himself with
continuing his efforts at self-culture. He had with
him two volumes of “Chambers’s Information for the
People,” and a manuscript book, and every morning he
copied out some portion of the articles from these volumes.
This he did mainly to improve himself in writing, and to
keep himself in readiness for any situation that might
present itself on landing. He copied principally the
articles on geology, a science which he never found of
much sendee to him, but the exercise in penmanship was
v ery useful, and helped him to give him that rapidity
and skill as a ready writer which he aftenvards possessed.
He also quaintly says, that he adopted a peculiar and
“ shabby ” way of doing his own washing, which would
certainly prevent any of his fellow passengers regarding
him as “ a capitalist going to invest his wealth in Aus-
tralia.” He used to wash his own coloured shirts and
socks in the wash-hand basin after his morning ablutions,
and hang them out on the rigging to dry. This was not
only economical, but it kept him from having an accumu-
lation of dirty clothes, and when he reached Sydney he
had no trunks full of that unpleasant impedimenta to
trouble him. He would conserve his resources. The
future prospects were uncertain. He would keep enough
money by him to take him back agaiin if fortune failed
him in Australia. Some of his fellow-voyagers were not
as prudent. They gambled and wasted what little wealth
they had, and landed penniless. But he was more careful
and thrifty, and would start life in this new' land without
the dread of pressing poverty resting upon him. Money
is a good servant in such circumstances. It gives confi-
dence and hope. But with what mingled feelings he would
look upon the gradually appearing shores of New South
Wales!, How full of light and shadow the opening vistas
of this new' world must have seemed! How the beauties
of Sydney harbour must have impressed him! How
strange the busy scenes upon the wharves, and the appear-
ance of the newdy-built city ! And the future, who could


penetrate its hidden possibilites ? Who could lift the
veil? Curiosity, hope, and perhaps qualms of fear would
mingle in his mind as he set foot on this untried and un-
familiar soil. But we can imagine that he would rally up
his courage to meet the “unknown with a cheer,” that he
would step ashore with a resolute air, determined to
grapple with circumstance with a strong and sinewy hand.
He might have murmured to himself the words of Goethe —
“ The Future hides in it
Gladness and sorrow,
We press still thorow
Nought that abides in it
Daunting us—onward !' ’


CHAPTER V.
COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE.
The door is open. Look! before thee stands
Not only Gods of wealth but maiden neat!
She waits to bless thee with her heart and hands.
Fear not to woo her, she is good and sweet.
Life richer grow with love to give it worth,
And loving hearts make highest heaven on earth
ON landing in Sydney, William Brookes found very
little difficulty in finding employment. It was at thie
latter end of 1848 that he arived there. He had been
advised to take whatever situation offered, and not to
make a point of obtaining high wages, but to keep his
eyes open while at work for any better employment that
might present itself. On the first day after arrival, on
using letters of introduction he had brought from England,
he had the offer of two situations. He chose one as an
assistant to a small merchant in the city at a salary of
seventy-five pounds a year. The wages were not ligh,
but the work was congenial, and he soon won the con-
fidence of his employer, and was trusted by him to take
a considerable part in the management of the business.
The only other employee was an old Caledonian who ■v.te.i
as book-keeper, but whose irregular habits were a constant
source of comment and trouble. He had seen better
days, and every now and then he would sit and brood over
the past, till his thoughts became intolerable, and when
he had reached this miserable condition, he would rush
out, and get drunk! But after a few days he would return
in a most penitent and dilapidated condition, and take
his place again upon his office stool, as if nothing had
happened. He was borne with mainly because he was pitied,
and his wages were very low. But this threw' more work
and responsibilities on Mr. Brookes. He had to do much
of the book-keeping as well as serving in the storeroom.
But this did not trouble him. He was acquiring know


ledge as well as capacity for business. His first experi-
ences of colonial life were pleasant and gratifying. The
sunny climate, so different from the smoky air of Man-
chester, the shorter hours of employment, the easy inter-
course between his employer and himself, and a sense of
freedom and independence made him enjoy his existence,
as he had never done before. He was endeavouring to
guide his life by the highest principles. At this period,
when he has been meditating upon the change in circum-
stances, and comparing the present with the past, and
asking himself whether he was fulfilling his duties to his
employer and himself under the new conditions, he writes :
“ First I will seek with humility and sincerity the assist-
ance and protection of my God, and endeavour to live a
circumspect, sober, rational, thoughtful, and religious life,
and who ever found the proper means to do that fail?
Another duty, second only to the other, and very similar
in many respects, lies before me; I will not relinquish my
habits of reading, thinking, writing, and study, come what
will; and thirdly I will live within my salary. I will
pursue amusements which shall be instructive, draw upon
myself for society rather than lead the butterfly life of
many around me, scorn all meanness, defy all
peril, act upon the solid unbiased conviction
of the truth, cherish a veneration for principle,
and endeavour to embody principle in practice. I am
well aware these are high resolves, but they are formed
dispassionately and in seriousness. Will they be fulfilled ?
Ah ! there’s the rub! ” Perhaps few young men submit
themselves to such an analytical introspection. But it is
well when such principles and aspirations are possessed
and cherished, and when they are blended with the
consciousness of self-distrust and the necessity of Divine
help. George Herbert says “who aimeth at the sky, shoots
higher much than he that means a tree ”; and he suggests
that this “ grain of glory ” should be “ mixed with humble-
ness.” Tdeals are valuable even if they are not easy to
maintain amid the bewildering whirl of curcumstance, and
the hard tussle of existence. To keep an unstained
escutcheon in the midst of the besmirching traffic of the
world needs much watchfulness and care. A measure of
self-distrust is better than too much self-confidence. To


lean on self is weakness, safety is in God. But he sought
help in the Unseen. He knew the value of prayer. His
first act when he found himself alone in his bedroom at
his lodgings after landing was to kneel and pray for Divine
guidance and blessing.
He found that what he had to pay for board was
likely to be too great a strain upon his income. Decent
lodgings were expensive, and his wages small, but his re-
solve to live within his means was rigidly kept. However
inconvenient his circumstances were, he did not ask his
employer for an increase of wages, for the business was
a small one, and he had a memory of doing this once
which influenced him. In, Manchester, he remembered
having asked Mr. Watts for an increase of salary, assigning
as a reason that he could not live on what he was giving
him. And his employer’s answer had not been forgotten,
which was, “ Yes, that may be, but you see we don't look
at salaries in that way. We pay people for what we
can get them for! ” It was not then the day of strong
labour organisations and popular agitations for a living
wage. The old economic law of “ supply and demand ”
was much in force, and men had to work for what they
could get, unregulated by trade unionism, altruistic axioms,
or by the State. So, with frugality, he incurred no debts,
and did his daily work with a cheerful spirit.
He went to board, after a few weeks, with his fellow-
passengers from Manchester, whose acquaintance he had
made on the ship. These were Mr. and Mrs. Evans, a
married couple, with an unmarried sister living with them.
Here he found a comfortable home, and afterwards a wife.
The unmarried sister, Miss Evans, soon began to attract
his attention. He had frequently spoken to her during
the voyage, and had paid her, he says, " some small civili-
ties, ’ but not more than he had paid to others. But now.
living in the same house with her, he began to find her
society very pleasant and agreeable. She was graceful and
attractive in her movements in the house. Her manners
were gentle, quiet, and homely. She was seriously in-
clined, too, thoughtful, and fond of reading. She could
converse upon many subjects that interested him, with, in
h's opinion, much sound sense and solid judgment. There
was nothing of the “ tittering red-cheeked damsel fresh


from school” about her, nor of the
girl. He found there was much in commombmyperf’ihsm.
He caught himself watching her as she busifc
15-
household duties, missing her presence in the ro&tjCMdigW
(he left it, and 1 listening for her opinions in the conWi'SP*
tions that arose at the table. He could give up his studies
in the evening to converse with her, which he was not will-
ing to do for anyone else. He saw she was exercising a
powerful influence over him, and as no thought of matri-
mony had yet entered his mind—for he had his way to
make and his future position to secure—he began to feel
some alarm at the new and strange emotions which had
been awakened in him. He thought at first it would be
only discreet to escape from the fascination of her pre-
sence that was beginning so powerfully to affect him. So
he made some plausible excuses to give up his lodgings,
and went to sleep at the store and did his best to cater for
himself. But he was very restless and unsatisfied. In a
week or two he found himself in a most bewildering con-
dition of mind. He lost command of himself. A strange
mastery of feeling controlled him, and he began to adopt
those mysterious ways of lovers which have ever been the
wonderment of those who have not yet been under love’s
tyrannical sway—for lovers’ ways “are deep.” He says:
“I found myself rising uncommonly early and walking in
the direction of my former lodgings. I did not go past
the house. Somebody might see me. A sight of the
chimney pots did me good, and was to a certain extent
appreciable and satisfying. I became more and more un-
settled. Then I began to go to my former lodgings, just
to see how they were getting on, being interested in them
as shipmates! This became a nightly practice. When I
had spent an evening with them, and went back to sleep
at the store, my arrangements for living alone seemed
dreary, and the attic seemed an awful size and most
gloomy, while my solitary candle made the darkness visible
and tangible.”
He was passing through what has been called the “ de-
lirious vertigo” of love. The sister-in-law, with the instinct
of a married woman who had 1 probably memories of her
courting days to help her, began to suspect that his visits
were not altogether a manifestation of kindly interest in


them as old shipmates. She perceived there was some-
thing in the visits of another kind. But she kept her own
counsel as far as he knew and waited for further develop-
ments. Neither the brother nor herself, however, dis-
countenanced his coming. He was welcomed by them,
and the young woman' made no objections to his advances.
But there was an obstacle in the way. The course of true
love never runs smoothly. She had given, it appears, a
promise of engagement to another! And though the young
man to whom the promise had been given was by some
means or other utterly destitute and never likely to pro-
vide means, even for himself, apart from supporting a
wife, yet she regarded her promise as binding, and needed
a great deal of persuasion to give him up. And William
Brookes wished her to act honourably and just to him, but
he wanted Miss Evans himself very badly. It was a case
where a great deal of casuistry might be indulged. When
an opportunity arose for him to plead his own cause he
tried not to be unfair to his unfortunate rival; but whether
he was so or not it is bard to determine. He admits that
he was a biased advocate, and argued with no slight
subtlety that the promise she had made, being without
prospect of fulfilment it was equivalent to the vow of a
nun, and this being so, in all honour and honesty she stood
absolved from the promise. The force of this would not
probably be admitted by any Catholiic Father Confessor,
but they were both Protestants, and logic is not very
closely scrutinised when affairs of the heart are concerned.
Her affections were doubtless more deeply stirred towards
the present lover than, the absent one. The promise, per-
haps too, had been rashly made, and now the recipient of
it had become unworthy, it might not bind her strongly.
She was deeply moved by his appeals. " She cried bit-
terly,” he says, but did not yield at once to his per-
suasions. She clung to the idea that, if she never married
she must remain true to her first engagement. Her depth
<>f feeling only increased his admiration and respect, and
very philosophically he turns it into a ground of hope. He
does not despair, but will argue the case again. He did so,
and at the next interview when he pleaded his cause he
was more successful, and he left the brother’s house an
accepted suitor.


As an illustration of the open and candid nature he
then possessed, and how desirous he was that he should
not win Miss Evans under false pretences, we give some
extracts from his diary, and a letter he sent to her just
previous to their marriage. His diary, written mainly
before leaving England, contains many revelations of his
inner life at that period, and of his views of the union
which ought to exist between those who seek to enter the
bonds of matrimony. And the letter was sent with the
diary that she might know somewhat of his real character
before she married him. Very few would have done this.
It was not an ordinary act. T\> quote the diary :
“ There is most certainly nothing inherent in my charac-
ter that would have led me voluntarily to the considera-
tion of my duty to the Almighty, and the probability is
that my mind would have been led away by frivolity and
sin, and that I should have been utterly careless about re-
ligion. This reflection ought to cause something more
than mere thankfulness; it should make me endeavour,
not only to exemplify by my life and conversation that so
important a blessing has not been undervalued, but should
make me anxious to communicate the good effects to all
within the sphere of my influence.—March 16th, 1847.
“ To-day has been revealed to me that a large amount of
vanity exists in my character; of all defects this is the
most ridiculous, and the least to be excused. Conscience
also makes known to me a hideous corruption of thought,
a most lamentably low spiritual life, and a deathly im-
purity of soul. This conviction, when viewed with refer-
ence to the requirements of God, with the holiness en-
joined in the Gospel, should create sincere and deep
humiliation of soul, should conduct to Calvary
From having been brought up with the Methodists, I have
had many opportunities of witnessing the action of feeling
under religious excitement, and from observation of its
effects dread being subject to any such influence. A
change wrought in my soul, I would wish to be, the result
of a comprehensive, clear, face to face, sight of God’s
truth.—April nth, T 847.
“ The last month has been witness to a struggle in which
the law of sin has been victorious: but. I trust, it is, at
last, through Jesus Christ, defeated. May He finish the


work He has graciously begun and make me the mean
instrument of advancing His most blessed will and glorious
cause. While writing, I have misgivings that when op-
posed to the brunt of the world, when mingling with my
fellows in daily Ike, these impressions will fade away. I
detest cant; there must be no hypocrisy, no seeming vir-
tue. The path is narrow and difficult to pursue, but grace,
assistance, and every needful blessing has been promised;
why falter?—July 18th, 1847.
“ Society needs many reforms. Error stalks about
shamelessly. The truth often lies concealed, or is unad-
vocated, and a field presents itself where the harvest is
plenteous but the labourers are few. The perception of
all this involves many important issues. Can I not labour
and do something, however little, here? But, in order to
do this as an indispensable preliminary, many faults in
myself must be corrected; much that is evil must be eradi-
cated. I am prouder than I should like to acknowledge.
lam pitifully vain; much too earnest a seeker of the ap-
plause and good opinions of man, impure in thought;
quick and energetic to do evil, slow and reluctant to act
conscientiously. What work is here! May the Holy
Spirit assist me to a thorough cleansing and regulation of
my mind.—August 28th, 1847.
"Sometimes lately I have contemplated marriage. But
so serious a step I almost recoil from. This lam well as-
sured of, and have been for one or two years, that the mar-
ried state is the only one in which I should feel myself to
be in a true, God-appointed position. I have warm feel-
ings, quick moving affections, and these have been
at various times, almost always, I might say, a source
of uneasiness and discomfort. Many and many a time
have I envied the stoical implacability of others. When
guilty of what Byron calls ‘ moral inebriety,' I would have
purchased at any cost the stolidity of a log of wood. Now
my judgment exclaims against this. It is not necessary, as
it is not morally right to wish for what would be an in-
justice to some of the noblest constituent parts of human
nature. What then? How can this unnatural and false
position be destroyed ? A rash inadvertent act is followed
by consequences which I should deplore as long as I lived.
The only peace that presents itself to my mind is to strive


continually to be natural and chaste in thought and con-
duct. —May 9th, 1849.
“ The sentiment I entertain for —I trust my future wife
is not the one I always considered the sentiment of love
to be. It is not an overwhelming Romeo and Juliet feel-
ing, hot and uncontrollable. It is rather a calm admiration
of mental qualities. When I think of her, it is the expres-
sion of her face; the smile, the eyes present themselves to
my memory. The tikne was when thinking of such a posi-
tion every idea would have been sensual and little beside.
But the spiritual education of the last two years has
wrought in this respect an entire change. I have become
by Divine assistance more disenthralled from sensual
thoughts. With reference to Miss Evans, they have had, I
may say, no existence. Nor shall they have. Our attach-
ment shall be formed on a basis more permanent and more
worthy of that vocation to which all men are called—
Diary, June 12th, 1849/'
In the letter, he says, with respect to sending her the
diary for her perusal, that he is showing her the tnstde of
his soul, and that she is the only person he could entrust
to read it; but he admits that there were recesses within
him “still more hidden,” as in every human being, and
that she is not to be deceived by his apparent candour in
allowing her to see this record of his life. “ You will
find me possibly not much worse, but most emphatically
not much better than the average of humanity. No one
is more alive, more miserably alive to his or her failings
and infirmities of the judgment, heart and life than I am.
I am more frequently vanquished than victorious in the
life and death struggle with evil.”
He is anxious that she should not have an erroneous
estimate of his character, and to show that whatever
peculiarities she had noticed in his conversation and
manners were capable of explanation. He describes his
lonely feelings as a motherless boy, and how he had had
to repress his affections, which might affect his manners.
The want of any outward object to love, caused the
sentiments seeking that object to turn inwards. It was
my constant aim to repress feelings, which oftener than
otherwise, w r ere misconstrued and exposed me to ridicule.
This conduct to others might very often, did no doubt
D


appear, to be selfishness. It became habitual, in time, to
assume an indifference which was actually false. And
my dear Mary Ann, allow me to suggest that this is one
of the points where I fancy you misunderstand me. You
think me cold. Do you not love? My levity of speech
and demeanour have been successfully employed as a
disguise, even towards you. A jest and a smile may often
cloak an aching heart; I candidly tell you, that very
frequently I have deceived myself.”
And he further says:
“ Let us not love with a summer affection, but as
rational, responsible beings should love. Xo advantage
can accrue from mutual self-deception here. Rather let
us frankly acknowledge our mutual deficiencies. Rather
let the sharpness of our insight teach us forbearance,” etc.,
etc.
We should hardly think that many young women have
been wooed in such an honest, straightforward way as
Miss Evans was. She had the good sense to see and
appreciate the remarkable candour and open-hearted in-
tentions that animated him; and not many weeks elapsed
after receiving these communications before she was
married to him. It might seem as though they had
married hastily, and would repent afterwards. His wages
were small, and his prospects of future wealth not very
bright and encouraging. But it turned out to be a wise
and prudent action. She made him a most exemplary
wife. All through the struggles and toils of his eventful
career, she was his true comrade and helper—
A guardian angel, o’er his life presiding,
Doubling his pleasures, and his cares dividing.
When he speaks of her, at the close of her earthly career,
after a union of over forty years, it is with a warmth of
loving appreciation and unwearied affection, the most re-
markable. The crown and ornament” of all my life
was my wife, he says. “ Without her, life would probably
have been only temptations and snares. She made my
life. She was my life. In my plans and doings she
was my central figure. In everything she was consulted.
Everything foul, mean, and morally suspicious fled from
her. She lived in an atmosphere of godliness. Her tender


•ways were irresistible to me, to her children, her servants,
her friends. So to the last. Her body dropped like a
cloak from her shoulders. She was absorbed in im-
mortality. My prayer is that those who carry her blood in
their veins may be prevented by God’s grace from ever
tarnishing her sweet, holy, and blessed memory. She
is my wife as much as ever. My uppermost desire is that
I may be at my last accounted w r orthy to pass the heavenly
gate, at which she received an abundant entrance, and
cordial welcome, and to be both of us together with the
Lord.” This is a rare eulogy, and it was the sincere out-
pouring of his heart’s esteem and affection. He had
chosen well. His married life was supremely happy. Such
unions seem to give force to the saying, that “ some mar-
riages are made in heaven.” He had sought guidance
from God, and who can doubt that he was directed in this
step. He always recognised the Divine hand in it. Where
marriage is such a perfect blending of mind and heart, it
shows what God intended it to be, and the blessedness
that may be found within its sacred enclosures. Sanctified
by religion and mutual reverence and affection, it becomes
life's holy of holies, an abiding fountain of pure pleasure
and consolation, an oasis of Eden’s peace and refreshment
in this weary earth To contemplate such a marriage, ought
to silence the cynic’s tongue; to reprove all wedlock with-
out love; to hush the strident-voiced sisterhood, who, be-
cause they lack the tender spirit of self-sacrifice that
dwells in apure woman’s heart,loudly demand questionable
rights ; and also to make the shady apostles of a free
and lawless love, hide their heads in shame. It was a
marriage almost idyllic in its simplicity. On an October
morning they went quietly to St. James’ Church, Sydney,
accompanied by the brother and his wife, and there went
through the usual ceremony. The brother giving his
sister away to be married to him, and his wife witnessing
to it. They then had dinner together at an hotel in
Botany, and afterwards he and his bride went to a little
cottage they had prepared as their home. She at once,
he says, “ set to and boiled the kettle, and we had tea.
Then I read the 37th Psalm, and we knelt side by side
and asked God's blessing on our union, and His guidance
during our united lives. We both knew it was a solemn


event to us, either a blighting curse or something we
should thank God for in time and in eternity. We had
entered into the most solemn of earthly covenants, not
merely with our eyes open, but also with serious fore-
thought and calm deliberation. From the beginning we
were like an old married couple." With such a com-
mencement, it is not surprising that their union was
happy. In the words of an old English writer, they were
“ like two candles burning together, which made the house
more lightsome : or like two fragrant flowers bound up
in one nosegay that augments its sweetness; or like two
well-tuned instruments, which sounding together, make the
more melodious music." So did these two young venture
some souls join their lives together.
From that day forth in peace and joyous bliss.
They lived together long without debate,
Ne private jarre, ne spite of enemies,
Could shake the safe assurance of their state.


CHAPTBR VI.
STORM AND STRESS.
Life is dinted on its shielding,
Swords are blunted in the wielding.
Brave the hearts that are not yielding
To the hosts of hell.
When the fight is lone and weary.
And the hours are long and dreary.
Strong the hearts that whisper cheery,
" All is going well.”
THE marriage of Mr. Brookes increased his respon-
sibilities, and made him realise that he must arouse
himself to fight life’s battle strenuously', in the land in which
he had come to dwell, with a steady courage and endur-
ance He had, to a certain extent, “ burnt his boats,” and
cut off his chances of retreat. He had given one hostage
to fortune, and he must, strive to make that fickle goddess
bend to his will. His means were very limited, and it
was only with the greatest economy that he could keep
from debt. But he had found a true help-meet, who, with
quiet contentment and frugal ways, brightened his lowly
dwelling, and strove with him to keep away that gruesome
misery. They both had a healthy horror of it; that chain
which many young people thoughtlessly fasten around
their lives; putting in pawn years of their existence tor
the sake of momentary comforts or passing shows. Debt,
which as Dr. Stanford truly says, is “ the thing of mystery
and fear, that for ever haunts the life, even of many a
man who keeps up the appearances of wealth. The
spectre that walks by his side with soundless footfall,
sometimes seems to put a freezing hand upon his shoul-
ders, sometimes quickens his steps, sometimes comes round
and looks him in the face, sometimes turning it white and
wet. sometimes when he is at home makes each knock
at his door like a sting in his heart; sometimes as he sits
at table, shoots out shadowy fingers to ‘write on the wall


over against him,’ letters that make him tremble. Debt is
agony. Debt stuns the intellect. Debt suffocates. Debt, like
a nightmare, benumbs that which it clutches, makes ‘ the
right hand forget its cunning, and the tongue cleave to the
roof of the mouth.’ Debt creates many an evil habit, the
habit of staving off by temporary expedients a coming
crash; the habit of trusting to chance; the habit of keep-
ing up a desperate composure when on the edge of the
worst; habits that gradually harden a man, fill his heart,
and blunt the fine chastity of conscience, so that he is
still able to run up debts with frightful facility, and to
let them grow with soft, noiseless, unsuspected accumula-
tion ; debts leading to debts, troubles to troubles, and
lies to lies.”
Small as the income of Mr. and Mrs. Brookes was,
they strove to live within it. They happily were
devoted to each other, and had no desire for amusements
or society outside of their own home. They seem to have
been utterly careless of the reflections which their neigh-
bours might pass upon them. The opinions of others
had no weight with them. They were sufficient for
themselves. That which is sometimes the bane of young
married people, the effort to keep up appearances to the
level which fashionable conventionalism or their acquaint-
ances demand, and to stand well with what they regard as
“ Society” did not influence them at all. He wondered
afterwards “ what people must have thought ” of them,
especially as he recalled to his remembrance one scene.
He had purchased a bedstead at a sale. It was a massive
mahogany four-poster, and he had it carted to his attic
in the store to free it from unpleasant pests, which had
made their abode in it, and it was openly brought along
the streets and down the narrow gateway of the pre-
mises “with the mosquito curtains flying like banners’'
before the breeze, which must have excited the curiosity
and amusement of the passers-by, and evoked many a
comment. But he appears to have been perfectly in-
different to the smiling onlookers. He was making a
home, a cosy nest for himself and his bride, where within
its warm and pleasant precincts he could find contentment
and rest; and what did it matter what the outside
world thought? He and his wife found in helping one


another in making the most of their limited means, in
books, in shopping together, in quiet enjoyments sufficient
to interest them, and the noisy “ bow wow ” of the world
was nothing to them. They visited little, and their visitors
were few. One friend alone he mentions, besides his
wife’s relatives, as coming sometimes to see them. Mr.
Stephens, one of his fellow-passengers already mentioned,
whom he thought envied him his domestic felicity. “He
had bachelor’s quarters,'’ he says, “ among sheepskins
and fleeces at Botany Swamp at a fellmonger’s, and often
came, and was always welcome. When he came we fussed
about and had cakes fried and served hot. The quantity
he and I could put away used to make us both smile as
we talked of former times, long after We both smoked
colonial tobacco at half-a-crown a pound. Years after,
when our finances had expanded, we found out that this
was as hot as fire, and went on to American tobacco.
It was good enough for us both then.” We can imagine
the pleasant hours spent in this homely fashion. There
were no appearances to keep up. They had the glorious
privilege of being independent. But with all their
economy, they found it difficult to live within their in-
come, and he began to look around for some means of
increasing it.
After they had been married about two years, and one
child was born, and he was desirous of increasing their
income, he thought he would seek his fortune
on the goldfields. It was in 1851 that gold was first
discovered in New South Wales. Up till then the vast
plains in the colony had principally been stocked with
sheep, and the production of wool and hides and tallow
to export was almost the sole industry. This had become
a large source of wealth to the squatters. It was esti-
mated that even at that early period of colonial develop-
ment, there were more than five millions of sheep on the
runs; and over fifteen millions and a-quarter pounds of
wool, and nearly ninety thousand hundredweight of tallow
were exported. The value of these exports exceeded one
million sterling. The main trouble of the squatters was
to obtain labour cheaply. They endeavoured to block
the sale of land by keeping up its price beyond the
purchasing power of any but wealthy men, for they knew


that farmers and small settlers on the soil would hardly
<lo the work of station hands. They were not unwilling
that the system of sending convicts to Australia should
be continued as the assignment of bands of convicts to
become shepherds and shearers on the runs furnished them
with cheap labour. They had agents at home that re-
cruited and assisted men of the poorer class from the
peasantry and slums of cities to emigrate. The wealth of
the country was largely in their hands. They formed
a squatocracy, and exercised almost supreme control over
all other commercial enterprises. But the discovery of
gold suddenly changed this aspect of things. It opened
new sources of riches. It drew thousands from the cities
and stations. It created another wealthy class. The
lucky miner became one of the new plutocracy.
Rumours of the existence of gold in New South Wales
had often been circulated. In a despatch addressed by
the Governor, Sir George Gipps, in 1840, to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, there is a statement that “ an
auriferous sulphuret of iron, partly decomposed, yielding
a very small quantity of gold, although not enough to
repay extraction, had been found by Count Strzlechi, the
explorer, in the Vale of Clwdd; and there was an old
shepherd of the name of Macgregor, who frequently sold
small parcels of gold to jewellers, and who was keenly
watched to find out where he obtained them, and whether
he obtained them honestly; but though nothing was dis-
covered by those who watched him, he afterwards con-
fessed that he had found the gold at a place called
Mitchell's Creek, about two hundred miles west of Sydney.
Small quantities of gold were occasionally found by travel-
lers near Bathurst, and some who had seen the goldfields
in California, declared that from the nature and contour
of the soil, gold would be found there in abundance.
Appeals were made to the Governor of the Colony, and to
Earl Grey, the Colonial Secretary of that time, to have
a scientific investigation of the district, but the Governor
was afraid of disturbing the public mind by ordering
geological investigations, and the Colonial Secretary
thought it would be better for the Australian people to
“ stick to their wool-growing.” All overtures of willing
prospectors were therefore coldly received. But a Mr.


Edward Hargreaves, who had. while in California, been
struck with the similarity between “ the richest diggings
of that country, and a district in the Bathurst country,
which he had travelled over fifteen years previously,* on
his return to Sydney, made an exploring expedition there
being willing to leave it with the generosity of the Govern-
ment if his discovery answered his expectations. He,
with a company of men, began to explore the banks of ike
creeks in the neighbourhood of Bathurst, and reports of
their rich finds of gold soon began to cause great excite-
ment in the towns around, and in Sydney. Nuggets worth
large sums were found, and grain gold in sufficient
quantities to awaken eager expectations of great wealth
were extracted by the crude methods of crushing and
washing then used, and soon there was a rush of miners
to the field. Men of all classes caught the feverish
mania for gold. Tradesmen left their stores, clerks their
desks, and artisans their benches, to rush to the dig-
gings. Professional men threw aside their chosen careers,
men of education who had not succeeded in ordinary
pursuits, and also escaped convicts, and the residuum of
city life all congregated there. Some were alarmed at the
disorganisation of society which this gold rush caused,
and in the neighbourhood of the diggings great fears were
felt that riots and all kinds of outbreaks of vice would
occur. Life was fearfully rough in the miner’s camp, and
it was likely that terrible scenes of dissipation and' strife
would be seen among this motley crowd of eager men.
Fortunately, the Government selected at once a Com-
missioner, who proved himself to be a man of cool cour-
age, firm temper, and sound judgment, and something like
good order was established in the miners’ camps. Mr.
Hardy, the first Gold Commissioner in New South Wales,
was well qualified for the position. His rule was firm, yet
not arbitrary. Claims were marked out, and licenses
granted with fairness, and any attempt at nefarious schem-
ing T>r infringing upon the rights of ethers was dealt with
promptly and with a quiet strength that deeply impressed
the whole camp.
»“ The Three Colonies oi Australia," by Samuel Sydney


This discovery of gold certainly marks an epoch
in the history of Australia. It, in some respects,
altered the character of the population. The love of
gold is latent in every one, and when aroused it becomes
an intense, all-asorbing passion. This wild gold rush
gave a new aspect to the whole social fabric. Visions of
nuggets of fabulous value rose before men’s minds, and
made them mad to possess them. It filled them with
dreams of sudden wealth which intoxicated them, and
made them unwilling to labour in the ordinary occupa-
tions of life. What will not men do for gold? Is it not
to most the quintessence of all earthly good, and in their
quest for it, character, years of wearisome toil, and even
life itself have been sacrificed. Like a magical magnet it
often has drawn them on blindly to their ruin. To quote
Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy, “ Gold of all others is a
most delicious object; a sweet light, a goodly lustre it
hath; gratii/s aurum quam solem intuemur, saith Austin,
and we had rather see it than the sun. Sweet and
pleasant in getting, in keeping; it seasons all our labours;
intolerable pains we take for it, base employments, endure
bitter flouts and taunts; long journeys, heavy burdens, all
are made light and easy by this hope of gain: At mihi
plaudo ipse domi, simul ac nummos contemplor in area.
The sight of gold refresheth our spirits and ravisheth our
hearts, as that Babylonian garment and golden wedge did
Achan in the camp; the very sight and hearing sets on
fire his soul with desire of it. It will make a man run to
the antipodes, or tarry at home and tum parasite, lie,
flatter, prostitute himself, swear and bear false witness;
he will venture his body, kill a king, murder his father,
and damn his soul to come to it.” Strong as these words
are, they could be verified. This passion for gold is a
most powerful one, and sometimes seems to throw all
others into the shade; and now it was aroused in the Aus-
tralians, and thousands wildly crowded to the diggings at
Summerhill Creek, at Ophir, and on the Turon River, and
at Braidwood, and all over those extensive auriferous re-
gions for many miles; and some less eager started dairy
and other fanning operations, and some opened hotels and
stores, and so townships spmng up, and the whole district
became populous with new life.


Mr. William Brookes was excited by this new aspect of
things, he caught the gold fever, and 1 he determined to
trv his hand on fortune’s wheel in gold-mining. This was
not to be wondered at. His income was small, and his ex-
penses increasing, and might he not be one of the lucky
diggers, and return after a few months with his pockets
filled with nuggets or their value in scrip, and in that way
escape the pinch of economy and the long years of toil for
wealth. The prospect fascinated him, visions of quickly
made fortunes stirred his pulses, and he resolved to go.
He left his situation, going with perfect goodwill between
his employer and himself, and making one of a party of
six he decided to try his hand at the Turon diggings, which
were then reported to be abounding in the precious metal.
He obtained a horse and rode there, a lonely ride of over
a hundred and fifty miles, his comrades in fortune-hunting
having apparently taken the coach a few days before. He
found all the public-houses on the way thronged with
travellers, bent on the same errand as himself, and every-
thing charged for at exorbitant rates. His journey was not
altogether a pleasant one. On his arrival he sold his horse,
and at once began with pick and shovel to search for gold.
But he soon found that it was not a romantic pursuit. It
was decidedly hard work for which he was unfitted, and
the coarse life of the goldfield was not at all to his liking.
His party, too, found little gold ; their claim was not a
rich one; it required much labour for small gains. He soon
became disheartened, and decided to give it up. He says
his share of the gold did not pay for his tobacco. He had
evidently made a mistake, though his unpleasant experi-
ences might be afterwards turned into use. He w 7 as not of
the right build for a miner, and all the glamour of the gold-
field soon dimmed. He returned to Sydney a sadder and
a wiser man. He estimated that he had lost nearly a
hundred pounds by the adventure. As he had sold his
horse he had to start upon his journey back on foot. It
was a long, weary tramp. The road led over a wide range
°f rugged mountains, and upon them he lost his way, and
for a day and a night he was rambling about without food
or shelter. Probably his reflections upon this attempt to
make haste to be rich were not very complimentary to-
himself nor to the brave visions that had allured him..


But he pushed on his toilsome way over the lonely ridges
and ravines, until in the afternoon of the second day he
was gladdened to see a public-house in the distance before
him. There he obtained food and rest, and having bad
enough of his wanderings, and having sufficient money left
to pay the coach fare, he took it for the remainder of the
journey, and at last reached Sydney in safety. Probably
his speedy home-coming was a surprise to his wife and her
relatives, and with such poor results from his expedition
in search of wealth. But his wife would be heartily glad
to see him back safely, for his absence must have been a
source of anxiety to her in those exciting days; and, per-
haps, she knew better than he did his unfitness for a
miner’s life, and did not expect great results from the
venture.
He did not return to his situation at the store, but
obtained a clerkship in connection with the Union Bank.
Cold had been discovered in Victoria as well as New South
Wales, and the branch of the banking business in Mel-
bourne had much increased, and clerks were much needed
there. As he was willing to go to Melbourne, he had
little difficulty in obtaining the situation. He agreed to
go at a salary of a hundred a year, and ten pounds were to
be allowed for the expenses of removal. But when he
reached Melbourne he found that the salary was alto-
gether insufficient. Rents were very high and living dear.
He had to pay thirty shillings a week for house rent, and
as much as that for a load of firewood. It used to irritate
him fearfully he says, to see a man with “ a scarlet waist-
coat and heavy gold chain ” delivering a load of wood in
the back yard, “for which I had to pay him about as much
as I earned in a week.” He found, with all their efforts to
prevent it and their dread of it, they were getting into
debt. They had no friends or acquaintances there. The
hours at the bank were long and the work onerous, but
this did not trouble him so much as the knowledge that,
with all their care and frugality, they were sinking help-
lessly into financial difficulties. He tried to save the
expense of rent by purchasing an old brick house. It only
cost fifty pounds, but it was a poor tumble-down structure
of two rooms on an unfenced allotment, situated in a
steamy brick-making suburb of the city, about two miles’


walk from the bank. But they tried to make a real home in
this poverty-stricken place. He whitewashed it inside and
out, and sought to impart some air of comfort to it; but it was
a vain attempt. His wife soon became seriously ill through
the unhealthiness of the neighbourhood. She was unable
at last to leave her bed. The doctor had to be called in,
and he pronounced it typhus fever. Mr. Brookes was in
sore straits. He did not know which way to turn. He was
at his wit's end. His wife suffering in bed, his little
daughter, just able to crawl about the floor, needing care,
among strangers, his means scanty, compelled to
attend to his duties at the bank or lose his
situation; it was, indeed, a time of pressing
anxiety and trouble. He was able to obtain in his diffi-
culties the services of an old person who lived near, and
there was a doctor, a new arrival in the colony and just
struggling to gain a practice, who proved sympathetic and
helpful. But he felt that he was passing through the
furnace, that it was a bitter hour of trial. He relates, that
one night when the doctor had ordered a bran bath, “I had
to go to Melbourne for a bushel of bran after tea, and
carry it back. This was a long walk for there were no
’busses. The nurse and the doctor had the bran boiled
and the water drained away. Mamma was packed in the
hot bran, and sewed up in it, and covered over with
blankets. I shall never forget that night. When the nurse
and the doctor had gone, I was alone with our little baby
girl. Mamma was in the next room talking delirously in
the dead of night. The comfortless bedroom, bare floored,
unpictured, all the furniture shabby and mean, nothing but
spake of poverty, my funds running low, myself doubt-
ful of my wife’s recovery. I really did think all was go-
ing against me. Yet somehow I did not despair. I knelt
and asked for Divine help to meet our case, and for power
on my own part to leave my wife to His care and merciful
will. When I rose, I felt a strange calmness of soul and
an ability to look at our untoward circumstances straight
in the face. I felt certain that I should not lose my wife.
The next morning when the doctor came she was taken
out of the bran. It was thrown out into the yard, but I
observed that the straying pigs would not eat it.” So
passed this crucial hour. The power of religion was surely


manifested. Faith in God does give calmness and
strength. Such hours leave their impress on the soul.
They impart life’s holiest lessons. With respect to -the
doctor’s treatment of the disease, it might seem a rough
and ready method, but it was certainly sensible, and in the
best sense scientific. The fever was drawn from the blood,
and the patient at once relieved. Often such methods are
more effective than more pretentious ones, and which
sometimes seem almost like medical empiricism or passing
fashions in the treatment of disease. From that night
Mrs. Brookes began to recover.
The doctor advised that she should be removed from
Melbourne as soon as she was able. But to do this was
to face another difficulty. Unless he could get a transfer
to Sydney from the bank inspector there, he could not leave
Melbourne without the risk of losing his situation. He
applied to be transferred, but no reply came. The means
of communication between the colonies were slow and
uncertain, and perhaps it would have been difficult to
supply his place while the gold rush was attracting so
many. But it was necessary for his wife’s recovery that
he should leave as soon as possible, and so, without re
ceiving permission, he resolved to go to Sydney. He saw
the manager and explained his position. He paid the
doctor his modest bill of three pounds, which did not, he
says, cover all his kindness by a long way. He fortunately
sold his house, for which he obtained twenty-five pounds
more than he had given for it, and this helped a little in
this emergency. He gave the furniture to the old person
who had nursed his wife through her illness, and so with
shattered circumstances and poor prospects he left Mel-
bourne. The husband of the poor old nurse carried Mrs.
Brookes and their boxes in a donkey cart to the wharf,
Mrs. Brookes and the baby sitting on the top of the lug-
gage, and he walking by the side. This was, as he says,
beyond comparison the darkest and most hopeless period
in all my life. He had only been in Melbourne about six
months; but weary seasons of trial are not measured by
counting the months or days. Much can be suffered and
many lessons learnt in a few hours. There are dark
periods in most lives that stand out in bold relief through
the vista of the years. Life’s-testing furnace may be intense,


but brief. The Divine refiner of souls knows when best to
kindle the cleansing flames and how long they need to
burn. Mr. Brookes and his wife were both severely
tried, but love and faith brought them out of the fiery
trial really unscathed. They never upbraided each other.
They did not embitter their poverty with envying and re-
pining. Though sometimes it seemed hard, he says, while
many whose accounts passed through his hands in the
bank were making large fortunes at the gold fields, at
racing speed, that he should drudge on at a wage quite
inadequate to his requirements, yet there was no mur-
muring at home. Poverty and pain might come in at the
door, but love did not fly out at the window. Though no
minister of the gospel found them out and sought to
strengthen their faith in God, yet they maintained their
trust in Him through all this time of trouble. They pos-
sessed the only enduring philosophy of existence, which is
human love linked with God. They enjoyed the priceless
sustaining consolations of religion, and believed through
all their anxiety and distress that God would never leave
nor forsake them.


CHAPTER VII.
BEGINNINGS IN BRISBANE.
l'roni place to place we roam.
Our tent is raised and falls,
At last, we find a home.
And dwell in solid walls
And then life's work is wrought
Oft far beyond our thought
THEY were welcomed back in Sydney by his wife's re
latives, and Mrs. Brookes stayed with them till she
regained her strength. He presented himself at the Union
Bank, and explained his circumstances to the inspector and
how he was compelled to leave Melbourne without consent,
and the action was overlooked, and he was employed again.
He w ? as made bill-clerk, at a salary of one hundred and
twenty-five pounds a year, and soon life began to assume
some degree ol comfort again. He secured a house at a
reasonable rent, made the acquaintance of the librarian of
the Australian Subscription Library, and was well supplied
with books ; also, he became friendly with a minister's
family, that of the Rev. Nathaniel Turner’s, a well-known
Methodist clergyman, who, both in Sydney and afterwards
in Brisbane, did some very substantial work in laying the
foundations of that church in the colonies, and whose son,
the Hon. J. S. Turner, M.L.C., of Queensland, became a
distinguished citizen in Brisbane and a generous and de-
voted supporter of his father’s church. These associations
were very helpful. He attended the services at the Metho-
dist Church, though neither he nor his wife became mem
bers at that time, yet they found pleasure and satisfaction
in the ordinances of religion. They were creating a home
for themselves again. A twelvemonth of peaceful life
glided by. He began to think he was to remain in Sydney
for the rest of his days. He tried to buy a cottage, but
the owner would not sell. He entered into negooiations
for the purchase of a piece of land, and prepared plans


Hon. W. Brookes
When he first arrived in Bristane.
Mrs. W. Brookes.


for the erection of a house; but just then he heard that
the Union Bank Directors intended to open a branch in
Brisbane, and that the Rev. N. Turner’s eldest son was to
be appointed manager; and though he had no reason to be
dissatisfied with his position in Sydney, yet the idea took
possession of him that he might find better opportunities
of advancement in a new and smaller settlement than he
could where he was, and so he offered to accompany Mr.
Turner’s son to Brisbane. This offer met with the ap-
proval of the bank directors and all parties concerned, and
once more he and his wife and the baby, which had grown
into a bright little girl, started forth on strange untrodden
paths and new ventures. They sailed from Sydney in a
small vessel, called “ The Brothers,” and were three weeks
making the voyage, a distance now travelled in about thirty
hours. After what appeared to them very wearisome de-
lays in entering the river and in reaching the landing stage,
they gained good comfortable quarters in Grenier’s Hotel,
which was a noted hostelry for squatters and travellers, on
the south side of the river, in these early days.
Brisbane, which is now growing into one of the chief
cities of the Commonwealth of Australia, was then re-
garded only as a small township belonging to the colony
of New South Wales. It had only about two thousand
inhabitants. Its stores were generally rude shanties. Its
splendid winding river was without a bridge to connect the
somewhat scattered populations which began to accumu-
late on the banks on both sides. There were then, how-
ever, a hospital and a gaol, several hotels and stores, a
convict barracks, a court-house and' police station, one
or two small churches in the process of building, a sub-
stantial windmill on one of the hills, a newspaper office, a
bank, and a school of arts. These signs of British energy
and civilization were there, and showing themselves as
they generally do in colonial settlements, as a kind of
foundation for future developments. Where a large por-
tion of the city now stands was thick scrub, where the
native blacks congregated and sometimes startled the
settlers with their wild and sudden appearances and noisy
corrobborees. Stories of outrages by them checked any
but the adventurous from wandering far into the bush,
t-and, where fine roads now curve in many directions, was
E


only threaded with narrow tracks. Other towns were sup-
posed by many as more likely to become the capital city
of the colony. One of them, Ipswich, twenty miles inland,
was a larger and more important trading settlement, and
Cleveland, a cultivated and convenient spot on the shores
of the bay, was often regarded as the best site for the chief
city of Queensland. A few foresaw the future importance
and dimensions of the little scattered township on the
Brisbane River in the early days. Doubtless its growth
was a surprise to most, and the very old residents who have
survived the toils and struggles of the past fifty years must
often be almost bewildered as they see the city to-day,
knowing that where magnificent buildings now stand and
■crowded thoroughfares are seen, there were only bush
lands thick with tangled undergrowths and gum-trees,
peopled with dusky blacks, or only dotted here and there
wfith the rude humpies of some venturesome settlers. Bris-
bane has been a marvellous manifestation of British energy
and enterprise. It is a city which must often fill the hearts
of the old residents with elation and pride. Its splendid
edifices, and populous streets, flashing with electric cars;
its substantial and handsome bridge uniting the North
and South sections of the city; its Parliament Houses and
Governor’s residence; its railway stations and lines spread-
ing out among its thriving suburbs ; its parks, theatres,
recreation grounds, and seaside resorts : its schools, col-
leges, and museums; its factories, marts, and trading
houses; its courts of justice, Government offices, and
public halls: its hospitals, churches, and benovolent insti-
tutions, all make it a marvellous creation of human labour,
w'ealth, and well-directed energy, well worth admiration
even in this age of wonderful achievements by the race.
Brisbane, too, can lay claim to a large share of beauty. It
is built on the shores of the meandering river that bears
its name and around its houses grow lovely masses
of tropical vegetation ; and the sides of the hills, grey and
red and brown, upon which the buildings cluster, give it a
charming appearance as the golden light from its clear
skies rests upon it. It is called the sunny city of the Com-
monwealth. and situated as it is in a zone w'here for months
of the vear the air is clear and bright, and so warm and
genial that outdoor life can be nearly always enjoyed, it


fully merits that name. The city and suburbs now con-
tains over one hundred thousand inhabitants. Its river
has been dredged and wharves constructed so that ocean
liners from all parts of the world visit its ports. It is the
industrial and commercial centre of one of the largest and
wealthiest of the Australian States. It is a city teeming
with life and vigour, and destined to play an important
part in the new nation recently created in the Southern
Hemisphere.
But who could have foreseen this in eighteen hundred
and fifty-three, when Mr. Brookes landed there. He
found everything small and in the initiatory stage. The
opening of the branch of the Union Bank, which had
brought him to Brisbane, was, he says, “ a great event ” in
this little township. The manager was at once regarded as
a " leading personage ” in society, and he, as the ac-
countant, teller, and ledger-keeper; for at first Mr. Brookes
seems to have filled all these offices, was also a noticeable
addition to the small circle of social gentility that strove to
make the place more after the pattern of larger towns,
He became a member of the Committee of the School of
Arts, and made many congenial acquaintances.
The Wesleyan Church, to which Mr. Turner, the man-
ager, belonged, was then not a very vigorous institution.
The building in which worship was celebrated was a small,
broken-down brick one, on a piece of ground given by the
Government, and a new church was much needed. Mr.
Turner very liberally gave one hundred pounds towards
building one, and collected a good sum besides, drew up a
plan for a new building, and stimulated those who be-
longed to the denomination to enter zealously into the pro-
ject, and it was accomplished. Mr. Brookes contributed
thirty pounds, and when the church was built, and an
organ purchased, he became the organist. He and Mrs.
Brookes also joined the membership of the church, and
entered heartily into all its operations. He was asked to
preach, but he did not think his mental equipment then
was of the sermon-making kind. At the social gatherings
of the church, however, he could always be relied on for a
speech; or, as he modestly says, “ some remarks.” His
circumstances improved, too. He bought a house, specu-
lated profitably in land, another daughter and a son were


bom to him, and he was rapidly settling down as one of
the well-known residents of the place.
But a circumstance arose which tended to awaken an
ambition to render some service in the public affairs of
the colony where he had apparently permanently located
himself. He had not thought much of what might be
done in shaping the political aspects of the colonies before
this. In Melbourne and Sydney he had not even used the
franchise, neither had be taken much interest in public
questions, and perhaps he would not have interested him-
self in political matters in Brisbane as soon as he did, had
there not at the first election which took place after he had
settled there, a candidate presented himself to represent
the County of Stanley, in which Brisbane was
situated, in the New South Wales Parliament,
with whose principles and conduct he could not agree.
A new Constitution Act had been passed in New South
Wales, in 1855, which gave to the colony constitutional
government, and the nominee system by which the Upper
House was formed. This reduced the franchise anil led
to a keener interest being taken in political affairs. An
agitation had commenced for the separation of the More-
ton Bay colony, as Queensland was then called, from New
South Wales, and there were points in the new Constitu-
tion Act and in further legislative proposals which led to
much division of opinion and party spirit. The nominee
Upper House, the proposed two-thirds majority neces-
sary to alter the Constitution, and a clause which voted
fifty thousand pounds for religious endowments gave scope
for much political rancour and strife.
A Dr. D’Orsay, of Ipswich, contested the election
for the County of Stanley, and Mr. Brookes did not be-
lieve in this candidate, who had, as he thought, insulted
the people by using the term, once so common, “ the great
unwashed,” and whose views were too conservative for
him, and so he took a prominent part with those that
opposed him. A meeting of the opposition was called, at
the School of Arts, and he was asked to move a resolution.
Amid much party feeling, he did this. A scene of great
confusion arose. Dr. D’Orsay was present, and was at-
tacked, and some affirm, in his anger and excitement, he
drew a knife to defend himself. Amid much uproar the


meeting ended. Dr. D’Orsay was defeated at the poll, and
he took his defeat badly, and he did not forget the part Mr.
Brookes had played, and he made inquiries about him,
and wrote to the inspector of the Union Bank, in Sydney,
complaining of Mr. Brookes’ conduct, and asking if bank
clerks were permitted to take a prominent part in politics.
This was likely to cause trouble. A letter was sent from
the directors to Mr. Turner, the manager in Brisbane, who
apparently smoothed the matter over without letting him
know what instructions he had received from Sydney, but
expressed to him a strong wish on his own part, that Mr.
Brookes would not do anything in future that would affect
the popularity of the bank. But this episode set Mr.
Brookes thinking. He had tasted the exhilarating cup of
political excitement. He had probably won an amount of
popularity by his first appearance on a political platform.
The party that had chosen him for their spokesman had
gained the victory, and he began to have dreams that one
day in this young community he might exercise an in-
fluence in public affairs that would tell for what he con-
ceived to be the true advancement of the colony, and in
that way serve his generation according to the will of God.
His diaries are full of prayerful wrestlings with himself over
the new ambitions that stirred him. His position as a
bank clerk, he saw, would hamper him. He admitted the
wisdom of the manager’s advice. But he chafed under
such restrictions. He saw there would be openings before
him of entering into civil and political life, and the limita-
tions of his present occupation would always hinder him.
He became restless and dissatisfied. He made an unsuc-
cessful attempt to obtain the management of a branch of
the Australian Joint Stock Bank, which shortly afterwards
opened in Brisbane. He asked for an increase of salary,
which was not granted. And in the midst of this uneasi-
ness and dissatisfaction his mind turned towards a busi-
ness career. He resolved to start on his own responsibility.
He would be free to follow the impulses that animated
him. Great events for the colony were looming. Its in-
dependence was coming. Separation from New South
Wales was sure to be granted. Land would greatly in-
crease in value. A large inrush of population would occur.


Trade would be greatly extended. Municipal and State-
interests would assume much greater importance. A
Governor’s residence in the city, and a Parliament meeting
there, would give wider room for all aspects of citizenship,
and why should he not be free to play his part in the stir-
ring events which were casting their shadows before his
eyes and arousing his ambition? Like the war horse, he
was “ pawing in the valley and “ smelling the battle afar
off.” Soon the way opened. Impulses are often prophetic
of coming changes.


CHAPTER VIII.
BUSINESS LIFE.
Life is sacred everywhere .
Room there is to do and dare
l>esk or counter, home or mart.
There a man can play his part.
Hut tis best to find his sphere,
Or his life grows bald and sere,
A T the time when William Brookes was looking for a
position, in which he might have larger freedom of
speech and action, an opportunity offered itself for him to
engage in business on his own account. There was an
ironmongery store kept by an elderly gentleman, Mr.
Southerden, who was willing to dispose of it on reasonable
terms, and who, though very rigid in his religious beliefs,
and somewhat brusque in manners, was a man of sterling
integrity and keen business capabilities. It was not diffi-
cult to arrange matters with him. He evidently saw that
William Brookes had the right mettle in him, and could
be trusted. But the new enterprise was not entered upon
alone. His brother, Benjamin, had followed him to
Queensland, and had taken up land a few miles from Bris-
bane. and was farming it, and Mr. Brookes asked his
brother to join him in the business, and this he was willing
to do. And so they purchased the stock and goodwill, pay-
ing about four or five hundred pounds in cash, and leaving
bills to the amount of a little over two thousand pounds.
It was certainly a plucky and hazardous undertaking, for
neither of them knew anything of the ironmongery busi-
ness ; but it was successful. The firm of W. and B.
Brookes soon became one of the best-known and most
widely patronised establishments of the growing township.
The trade mark, “ W.iVli.H.," may be found on iron
ware in the city till this day. They had started just as
Brisbane was beginning to assume some importance as


the capital of a new colony. About a year after they had
commenced business, on December ist, 1859, the separa-
tion of the colony from New South Wales took place. On
that day, what had been known as the Moreton Bay Dis-
trict was proclaimed in Sydney to be an independent
colony under the name of “ Queensland.” This event was
anticipated with much interest, and when it occurred, it
gave a great impetus to all social and commercial activities.
A Governor’s house had to be prepared ; one owned by a
well-known citizen, Dr. Hobbs, was chosen, and a thousand
pounds spent in suitably fitting it up, the rent being paid
by the New South Wales Government for three years.
Civic and Parliamentary procedures had to be initiated, a
bishop appointed by the Anglican and Catholic churches;
some little show of military " pomp and circumstance ”
originated, and all that distinguishes a metropolitan city
begun. The change was great. Mr. Brookes describes the
eagerness with which the coming of the first Governor, Sir
George Bowen, was watched and waited for. Visitors from
far and near crowded into Brisbane and impatiently asked
for news of his arrival. Some delay was occasioned by
contrary winds in his passage from Sydney to Brisbane, and
once or twice the steamboats that had gone to the bay to
welcome him had returned with the disappointing news
that the ship " Cordelia,” in which he was coming, was no-
where to be seen. But at last she was sighted, and in-
stantly, he says, “ every eye was brightened," and once
more the steamers started for the bay. One of them, the
“ Breadalbane,” went down to meet the “ Cordelia ” with a
company of representative citizens on board to welcome
the Governor, and to bring him up to the city. Mr.
Brookes thus describes the event: —“ Mamma and myself
were on board. A respectable band of music added much
to the exhilaration of the scene. We neared the “Cordelia.”
drew up alongside, and were invited to an introduction to
the Governor. Most of us accepted the kindness, Mr.
Buckley introducing us. After a brief stay on board, the
Governor and his lady embarked, accompanied by the
captain of the “Cordelia,” and escorted by twelve marines.
His Excellency and his lady won upon us all by their affa-
bility and personal appearance. On arrival at the Botani


cal Gardens, we landed at a stage prepared for the oc-
casion, amid a large concourse of the inhabitants, who
were enthusiastic, yet at the same time, remarkably decor-
ous. All passed off without any occurrence to mar the
hilarity or pleasure. A procession was formed, and the
representatives of Regal power went to Government House,
where His Excellency took the oaths and proclaimed
Queensland as one of Her Majesty’s colonies.”
Of course, this event gave an immense stimu-
lus to the growth of Brisbane. The population
increased, land was purchased all round the
city, wages were good, houses were rapidly
put up, and everything prospered. For a few years all
things boomed. In such a business as Mr. Brookes and his
brother were engaged in, trade was sure to be brisk. It
proved a very successful enterprise. They were able to
pay off their liabilities, and in five years purchase land and
build business premises for themselves. And strange to
say, they had only removed into their new place a few
months before a fire broke out at their old business pre-
mises, which were burnt to the ground. This was a happy
escape for them, and allowed the tide of prosperity to
flow on unchecked. But, of course, changes came. “Black
and white,” as Rutherford said, “ is the unco course of
God’s providence.” “Shadow and Shine is life”; “Flower
and thorn.” His brother suffered much from ill-health,
and after seeking to obtain recovery from his sickness in
the colonies, went to reside in England, and there became
the home buyer of the firm. This, of course, occasioned
much more business pressure and anxiety to rest on Mr.
Brookes: and as the years went on it became evident that
a period of commercial depression was likely to follow the
good times that had been experienced. In new colonies
commercial life is not as steady and solidly progressive as
in older lands. It has its “ booms,” when fortunes are
rapidly made, when speculations pour golden scrip into
the fireproof safes with almost magic hands, when money
flows like a river, and a fevered mania of exhilaration ani-
mates all classes ; and also when little thought of the
future checks the wild rush and noisy hubbub that pre-
vail. For, at such times most are blind, and think that


to-morrow will be as to-day, and perhaps much more
abundant. But these “ booms ’’ break, and then wide-
spread disaster comes. Land suddenly loses its value,
syndicates dissolve amid bitter losses and angry recrimina-
tions, banks demand overdrafts and stop payment, trade is
paralysed, and the whole framework of society suffers dis-
location and collapse. Men who thought they were rich
suddenly find themselves stranded in poverty, and some
who have affected showy ease and glittering affluence,
have had to commence life again at the bottommost round.
Such periods of financial disaster and ruin often bring
premature age and death. Men have looked ten years
older after a few months of bitter anxiety and their loss
of fortune, and some have never recovered from the shock.
Such times test the most virile and religious. They are
a severe strain upon a man’s principles ; character is then
in the crucible: a man is then revealed as to what sort
he is.
A monetary crisis arose in Queensland in the sixties,
which the old inhabitants still remember, and speak
of in those emphatic tones which men use respecting past
troubles which have made a deep impression on their
minds. It chiefly arose from a panic in the English money
market through over-speculation in limited liability
companies. It was not, as in later years, when such
commercial disasters have arisen through rash speculation
in land, and strange inflations of value here; but there
had been some recklessness on the part of the Government
in borrowing and spending lavishly in public works. Much
of this, of course, was necessary, but there had been much
extravagance. Government buildings had been put up.
bridges built, roads and railways constructed, and this, be-
ing done with borrowed money, and the works not very
productive, the prosperity created was not based on very
stable foundations. A large number of the immigrants
which were brought into the colony at this time, too, were
without capital, and did not create much. The money
used by the Government had been chiefly borrowed from
colonial banks, and business had been done largely with
accommodation bills, and so when the banks affected by
the condition of the money market in England refused to


make further advances or to honour drafts made on
them, there was general commercial disaster. All Gov-
ernment works were at once stopped. A large number of
men were thrown out of employment. The men working
on the railways marched to Brisbane, bearing their shovels
and frying-pans, on which were written the pitiable words :
“We want work! We want bread!’’ Business was at a
standstill. Riots were threatened, and the whole state of
society was decidedly out of joint. The Governor, Sir
George Bowen, appears to have been much blamed then
for his resistance to measures which some members of the
Administration wished to adopt to relieve the monetary
pressure, and which were afterwards adopted. It was
suggested that Treasury notes should be issued, and a
system formulated by which the credit of the colony should
be placed more fully on its own basis, and not be so de-
pendent on the local banks. Sir George Bowen was op-
posed to this, because it was alleged, whether true or not,
that he had become a large shareholder of one of the
banks. However, Treasury Notes were ultimately issued,
and were very serviceable in helping the finances of
the State at this crisis. Mr. Brookes had not a very high
opinion of the administration of Sir George Bowen; he
says, he manifested much “ imbecility and gross incom-
petency” ; and he accuses him of cowardice at this time of
riot and disorder. “ During,” he says, “ the whole of what
has taken place lately, he has been most awfully frightened
for his personal safety. The volunteers and soldiers have
been on guard at Government House armed to the teeth,
and not permitted to stir away in defence of the lives and
property of the citizens. lam not the only person dis-
gusted with him.” Of course, others probably held differ-
ent opinions of him. His position was a difficult one, and
it required a remarkably strong man to keep a clear head
and a heroic spirit amid such a crash of financial institu-
tions, and so much social turbulence. Life and property
were certainly in danger. The unemployed were numer-
ous, and though, as a temporary' relief, work was started
again on the railways at twenty shillings a week and rations,
yet this did not allay the discontent and distress which
prevailed. Mass meetings were held, and the mob was


excited by the usual inflammatory agitators that come to the
surface at such hours, and urged to make attacks upon the
banks and the stores. A plan was arranged to create a
disturbance simultaneously in four parts of the city. The
police got to know' of this, and about three o’clock on one
afternoon the citizens w r ere alarmed by the firing of a can-
non from what was then called Windmill Hill; and at
this signal the police, fire brigade men, and special con-
stables marched along the streets towards the Government
stores.
There was great excitement; all the shops and
public houses w r ere immediately closed, and crowds
gathered in the streets. The assailants of public order,
however, did not appear until night fell, and then they
assembled in large numbers, and, excited by the addresses
of their leaders, they made a rush for one of the banks.
The clerks stood ready with loaded revolvers and these the
mob would not face. They then rushed to the Colonial
stores, and burst the doors open, but very' little was pil-
laged, for the armed police were ready with their batons
and bayonets to disperse the crowd. Stones were freely
thrown, and several of the police severely injured; and
many of the rioters suffered from broken heads, and not
very gentle prods from the bayonetted carbines. The
Riot Act was read several times, and a proclamation was
made that all persons not officially engaged in the main-
tenance of peace were to keep within their houses whe e er
the signal gun was fired. These measures seem to have re-
stored order, and the next day a number of the unem-
ployed were sent off to country towns in the north and
west, and it w'as not long before the city began to assume
its normal condition. But there was much discontent and
anxiety, and business continued in a very unsatisfactory
state. Bills were dishonoured, securities became valueless,
banks stopped payment, and insolvencies W'ere frequent.
It was a time of great financial worry and trouble. For
some time the firm of W. and B. Brookes was able to wea-
ther the storm. It was perfectly sound, though trade was
dull and full of risks. His brother was away in England,
and he had to bear the responsibilities of the business
without him. Happily, he had a most capable and re


liable manager. Mr. C. M. Foster, who afterwards became
his partner, and has been known in Brisbane for many
years as a worthy and respected citizen, was then of im-
mense service to him. Mr. Foster's business aptitude, his
clear foresight, and unwearied industry, considerably eased
the burdens which then rested upon Mr. Brookes, and
freed him from much of the pressure that otherwise would
have prevented him from taking part, as he did, in many
public affairs. Mr. Brookes frequently refers to this
gentleman in t»*e most eulogistic terms.
But the strain upon him was very severe. And besides
this and the care of a growing family, he had interested
himself in many public movements and had become a
recognised figure in the public life of the city. He
was known as a writer of pungent articles in the Bris-
bane journals. He was a member of the Committee of
the School of Arts and other important societies. He was
made an alderman of the city. He contested several elec-
tions for a seat in Parliament, and sat for three years as
member for North Brisbane. He occasionally preached,
and was an influential member of his church. He also lec-
tured sometimes, and addressed public meetings. He was
certainly one of the busiest of men. His vigour and ver-
satility seemed almost inexhaustible. His only recreation
was music, of which he was passionately fond, and in which
he attained a high degree of skill and excellence of per-
formance. But it was no wonder that his health should
give way.
He had formed the habit of excessive smoking,
too, and he was not so abstemious as he might have been.
He had given up his teetotal principles, and often used to
indulge himself too freely with stimulating liquors. All
this told upon his nervous system, already strained with
over-work, and a complete break-down ensued. He was
obliged to take absolute rest for a time. He went away
from home, and he and Mrs. Brookes visited New Zealand,
travelling over a good portion of that colony, seeing the
wonderful Terraces in all their beauty, which in 1886 were
destroyed by a volcanic eruption, and viewing many of the
townships, and coming back much recruited in general
health, but suffering from a form of rheumatism in his right


leg, which gave him much trouble for a long time after-
wards.
But when he returned he found that business was
still in a very unsatisfactory condition, and that it would
only be by the most strenuous efforts that he could be
saved from bankruptcy. Messrs. Rabone Bros, and Co.,
of Birmingham, with whom most of the English trade of
the firm was done, and who were their largest creditors,
began to entertain suspicions of their solvency, and to
adopt measures which gave them much annoyance. This
Mr. Brookes felt acutely, for the English firm was well
secured, and he believed that if that firm would have exer-
cised ordinary patience, the difficulties could have been
overcome, and all threatened disaster averted. He was
very sensitive in. relation to commercial honour, and his
reputation as a business man. He often had the fear at this
time that he might bring dishonour upon his name, and his
profession of religion by becoming insolvent. Writing on
this subject he said : “ These failures make me fearful. If
we should give way, and have to convene a meeting of our
creditors, I should feel it severely. My dread is lest
Christ’s church should be damaged by me. Circuit stew-
ard, local preacher, committeeman of the School of Arts,
and before the public in various ways, if I were to make
commercial shipwreck, many would rejoice at the receipt
of so much additional evidence that religion embarrasses
a man in business. God grant that this devil’s idea gets no
warrant from my history.” He speaks of wading through
“ a sea of angry, curling waves," of finding his way through
a dense scrub of pe'rils ; of business cares following him
wherever he was, ' like a long funeral procession." lie
had hours of despondency when the “ horrible thought”
would present itself, that he would be amenable to the
charge that he had proved himself deficient in prudence
and competency in the conduct of his business. This rises
before him like a spectre. It seemed to him as if he
could not get “ either over, under, or through” his finan-
cial embarrassments. His mind was sometimes completely
absorbed in the wearisome contemplation of bills and
money. The terrible burden was “ dull, heavy, and unin-
termitting.” He finds nothing to wonder at that people


in similar circumstances “ succumb to the temptation of
drink,” or prefer the “ detailed exposure of a court of
insolvency.” His interviews with his bankers fill him with
apprehension, making his knees tremble, and leading him
to pour forth his soul in prayer. He is like a ship amid
stormy breakers, with no harbourage near. He is alarmed
lest those who prophesied his failure when he commenced
in trade, will rejoice in the fulfilment of their prophecies.
But amid all these harassing cares he was steadily doing
his best to prevent the threatened disaster. His letters to
his brother Benjamin, who had been entrusted to supervise
the orders for the English firm, and to present the con-
ditions of business to them during these trying times, are
full of the keenest business acumen and promptness.
Some of the letters are very drastic. He thought his
brother was not acting with sufficient energy and firmness
in preventing large quantities of unsaleable goods being
sent to them; and he writes with some sharpness, and ul-
timately decides to dissolve partnership with him.
He gives up much of his public work that he may devote
his whole attention to his affairs. He lessens his stock-in-
trade, curtails expenses, refusing to receive any shipments
of goods for months ; he opened a store at Toowoomba, a
town about a hundred miles away, that the surplus stock
may be disposed of. He works like a Titan to save the
firm from wreckage. But the English creditors were mer-
ciless ; they swooped down upon him like an avalanche,
and he lrad at last to succumb. Everything was given up
into their hands, with tne understanding that all liabilities
were to be met. He placed in their hands all the “ little
properties he had.” He says, “ I surrendered everything.
But we had the consolation of knowing that our creditors
were satisfied, that we had paid our debts in full, and had
not gone through the Insolvent Court.” In this testing
time he came through his difficulties with clean hands.
He was not like many who live in dishonest extravagance
and reckless indifference to the claims of others, and
seem utterly careless of the suffering they bring upon
their creditors; and when the self-brought crash comes,
meanly secure themselves, and by some cunning artifices
tnake afterwards further displays of wealth and affluent


living ; people whose proper place would be the felon’s
dock or prison cell. Xo one could accuse him of any
attempts to rob his'creditors. He had never lived extra-
vagantly. He did not believe in lavish display or luxuri-
ous living. His home was never furnished with expensive
elegance; nor his family provided for with wasteful indul-
gences. Beyond what was necessary for comfort and
health he regarded as useless expense. He passed through
this crisis as an honest man. and when it was over he felt
a sense of relief, and had the gratification of knowing that
no one had lost money by the firm of W. and B. Brookes.
Though the English creditors had treated them with the
most rigid severity, exacting every farthing, even to the
extent of ten per cent, rate of interest ” calculated on the
compound principle of interest on interest, making their
claim fifteen thousand pounds," yet every one was paid his
due, and he came out of the trouble with an unstained
reputation. True, he had lost all his wealth. After ten
years of business toil, and twenty years of Australian ex-
periences, he had to begin life again.
But he very promptly made another venture. On
looking round to see where to find his next step, he re-
membered that another ironmonger in the city, a Mr.
Markwell, conducting a business in the main street, had
been heard to say that he was inclined to sell out. At
once he went to him, and the following interview took
place: ‘‘ I enquired if what I heard was true. He was
well aware of what had happened to me. He said he did
wish to sell the business. I asked, ‘ Would he sell it
to me ? ’ He said he would. I said I would buy it if
his terms were possible to accept. He promised to hold
the offer closed to everybody until I saw him again.
I saw Mr. Foster" (his much-esteemed manager) “about
joining me in the purchase. He agreed to do so, and
we two saw Mr. Markwell. We told him that we had
no money, but would buy on bills, some of them en-
dorsed. We bought on those terms. It was a living busi-
ness, and the sale did not stop it for one day. So we
began again under the name of Brookes and Foster.”
This transaction must be regarded as a striking example
of energy and promptness, and also of the worth of high


character in commercial transactions. It was an instance
of indomitable pluck and enterprise, and he could surely
have inscribed upon his sign-board the motto of the notable
Chicago tradesman who, when the Great Fire there had
swept away all his wealth, at once fixed up a board upon
the ash-covered site, upon which he chalked, “ All is gone
save wife and children and energy.” But it was also an
illustration of the value of that integrity which awakens
confidence between man and man. And this is the best
basis of commerce throughout the world. Fair dealing
and the confidence it creates, are the strongest founda-
tions of the temples of Exchange everywhere. Amid all
the chicanery and deceit which unfortunately do prevail
in business circles, they could not be kept going without a
certain amount of honest dealing. A trading community,
absolutely without honesty could not continue to exist.
It would break in pieces through its own rottenness.
“ Man,” as Dr. Chalmers used to assert, “ has a natural
principle of integrity,” often over-ruled by selfishness, and
hidden beneath the common struggle for existence and the
individual ambition to succeed; yet it is w'ithin him, ar.d
must assert itself. It makes some men “ worthy of all ad-
miration.” “It is very noble,” hesays, “when the simple
utterance of his word carries as much security along with
it as if he had accompanied that utterance by the signa-
tures, and the securities, and the legal obligations which
are required of other men.” And he dilates with glowing
eloquence upon the homage which one human being can
render to another, when he consigns to a trader, it may be,
separated from him by an ocean or a continent, the wealth
of a whole flotilla, and yet sleeps in full confidence that it
is safe. This surely shows there is some innate grandeur
m the nature of man; and where integrity is manifested,
even in the smallest business transactions, it is worthy of
all honour. Such manifestations tend to foster true bro-
therhood and purify the tone of city life.
William Brookes was once more (after this episode,
which occurred in 1869) in the full swing of business, and
the new firm prospered. His partner and he bought land
® the centre of the city, and erected handsome and com-
modious premises. His son and his daughter’s husband
F


engaged in the business, and it became one of the chief
establishments in Brisbane; and in 1882, when he had
reached 57 years of age, he was able to retire with sufficient
means to live in comfort and independence. It had been
thirteen years of unchequered business prosperity. His
remarks on his success as a man of business and his re-
tirement from it are worth noting. He does not wish it
to be thought that his somewhat rapid accumulation of
wealth arose from his possession of more than ordinary
“talent, push, and courage.” He does not regard himself
as having had altogether the highest qualifications for a
successful business man. He frequently thought business
to be drudgery, and longed to withdraw from it. He often
felt that he could spend his years better than in casting
up accounts or “ weighing nails,” but there were certain
circumstances that tended to make his career successful
which he carefully states. “In the first place,” he says, “I
attribute the measure of success I had in business to my
having Mr. Foster for my partner. To his knowledge of the
business, combined with his plodding industry, the success
we had is mainly attributable. Any faculty I had for
directing or controlling would be lost for something to
work upon. Another was my unfailing health making it
possible for me to be unremitting in my attention. For
twelve years I made out the monthly bills alone, except
for the last twelve or eighteen months when my eldest son
was with me to learn counting-house duties. The sugges-
tion that we should buy land and build in Queen Street
was Mr. Foster’s solely, and it was the most profitable
step we ever took. I am the more cheerfully willing to
write all this because I wish it to be distinctly understood
that the dissolution of the partnership was in all respects
made in a mutually friendly manner; and had Ito begin
again I could desire no better partner than Mr. Foster.
But my power to retire arose quite as much from the rise
in value of real property as from any other cause. I had
bought property for ,£1,500, and spent £SOO upon it
which produced first £2OO per year, and then £365 a
year. The shop and land cost both together £ro,ooo.
In the valuation finally accepted on my withdrawal from
the business was £20,000. So, that while it is true that
the business was the nest egg, the rise in the value of real


property was the chief reason why I was able to withdraw
when 1 did at the age of 57 years. - ’ He notices several of
the mistakes he made which may be useful to record. He
tried to divide his time at first between keeping the books
and serving customers; this often led to the accounts being
kept in a slovenly manner. He desired to do more busi-
ness than his capital warranted, or the nature of his busi-
ness made legitimate. The firm also became surety for
contractors of all sorts in order to increase trade, and this
often brought bad debts and occasionally law suits. He
thought he knew a risk when he saw it, but he failed
sometimes to measure it correctly, and so frequently only
got clear of the consequences with difficulty. He admits
that he gave too much time to public questions; “this was
a rock on which I had,” he says, “ many severe bumps.
I was pushing, had plenty to say, was full of opinions and
wishful to help public matters forward, and do my share
as a tradesman to the common cause, and so allowed my-
self to be drawn away from my business to a further ex-
tent than was in keeping with my own pecuniary interest.”
He found great difficulty in deciding where to draw the
line between his business interests and his obligation to
serve the country. “It is not easy,” he reflects, “to lay
down a rule which can be invariably adhered to in relation
to this, and which will be always right. There are shop-
keepers who see nothing, care for nothing, except what
takes place across their own counters; who take no in-
terest in public affairs, either close to them or anywhere
in the world; who go to no public meetings; w’ho at an
election give their votes at hazard on the first recommenda-
tion, and who often do not care to vote for any one; who
find in their newspapers and their ledgers all the mental
exercise they desire; who are content to allow public
affairs to be in the hands of those silly enough (this is
how they speak) to waste their time upon them. These
people cannot be right, whoever else is wrong. They
surely stand condemned of selfishness. It is tolerably clear
also that they do not intelligently study that which they
profess alone to study—their own interests. ‘ Keep thy
shop and thy shop will keep thee,’ is a proverb with much
truth in it, yet it does not comprehend all the truth. How
far can a shopkeeper leave his shop? There are times


when it will demand his undivided attention, and it should
always employ the greater part of his attention. But if it
so absorbs him that nothing else in the world interests
him, there is something wrong. It may be said there
are not many people like this; they would be misers, and
misers are scarce. A shopkeeper may attend to his shop
with all his heart and soul all the hours his shop is open,
and then pass his small leisure in frivolous and useless
and money-spending amusements. This is a common
type, and cannot be regarded as of a high quality. There
must be some middle, moderate course, hard though it
may be to find it. lam convinced that there is nothing
in the occupation of any shopkeeper debarring him from
continually striving after mental and moral improvement,
if he choose to aim at it. I am equally convinced that
the more a shopkeeper knows of what is going on in the
world the better shopkeeper he will be in every way, and
the wiser will his criticisms be on bis own business. In
the colonies the inter-communication between sound
politics and flourishing trade is close. Bad times and bad
government are almost always related. A well and broadly-
informed shopkeeper can often see bad times coming on
and prepare to meet them. He can shrewdly guess at their
causes and at the remedies for them. Although he may
not consider n his duty to put himself prominently for-
ward, he can judge of fitness in other men, and will be
desirous that public men shall be honest and competent,
and not merely personally and vainly ambitious; but per-
haps the main thing is for a storekeeper to quietly and
silently qualify himself for public trusts and responsi-
bilities ; not anxious to accept them; reluctant rather to
seek them, and not in any event to undertake to bear them
until his business has enabled him to carry both burdens
or to put aside the burden of his business so as to weight
him with one only. I know what it is to have keen busi-
ness anxieties and fears, and at the same time to have
public demands on my energies, both of body and mind,
and I would not wish my worst enemy to be so situated.”
These are very wise and sober reflections. They are worth
pondering. They are the teachings of experience. Few
men understood the difficulties of the situation better than
he did. Often he longed for leisure that he might devote


“Oakden,” the Brisbane Residence of the Hon. W. Brookes


himself more fully to public service. But he felt that
there was a danger of injuring his business by too much
absorption in it. He sometimes was impressed with the
idea that it would be better for him to wait until he had
made a competence before he engaged in public work, but
he was constantly drawn into its coils. It had a great
fascination for him. He saw too that some who devoted
themselves to business solely, until their wealth was as-
sured. were then incapable of public duties, and were often
laughed at for their audacity in offering themselves for
influential positions in the city or State. He wished to
escape that. His aim was to be a useful citizen. He was
often.
Hackneyed in business, wearied at that oar
Which thousands, once fast chained to. <]uit no more.
And desired to break away from its chains. And now he
was free. Not that he might find—
-1 The refuse of some rural shade.
Where all his long anxieties forgot,
Amid the charms of a sequestered spot."
enjoy a refined idleness, or, as lie says, “ retire into the
suburbs of the town to make the cultivation of a
garden the main occupation of life ”; but he
wanted to find a sphere of enlarged usefulness.
He had never been eager to make a large amount
of money. Mere money-making for the sake of vain
display or for the gratification of ostentatious opu-
lence he regarded with abhorrence. Life was too sacred
to be spent in accumulating unnecessary riches. All
through this period of successful business life, when his
wealth was accumulating, he was often in the thick of
many popular movements, and ever ready to aid the found-
ing of useful institutions: speaking at meetings and
contributing many articles on all kinds of subjects to the
Press, also vigilantly watching the progress of the colony
with tireless eyes.
And during those thirteen years of devotion to busi-
ness enterprise, great advancements were made in all
directions. The discovery of gold in Gympie in 1867. and
the Land Act of 1868. which threw open so much valu-
able land for settlement gave an impetus to trade and


greatly increased the population. The colony steadily
recovered from its time of depression, and once more was
on the up-grade of prosperity. Railways were made and
opened. Large areas of land were selected and put under
cultivation. Townships sprung up in many places. Land
in Brisbane rose to high value, and imposing buildings
took the place of wooden shanties. Well-made streets were
extended into suburban districts, and groups of houses
were rapidly erected around the city. Governor after
Governor succeeded each other. Governor Blackall, a
feeble old gentleman who died in Brisbane, was appointed
after Sir George Bowen ; then the Marquis of Normanby,
whom Mr. Brookes, though he disagreed with his opinions
on black labour says, “ behaved himself like an English
nobleman," and “ the marchioness did much good in a
private, unostentatious way." And Normanby was suc-
ceeded by Mr. Cairns, who, in Mr. Brookes’ esteem, was
‘‘ a very nice private gentleman, and that was all ” ; in
public matters, " he was as nearly as possible a nonentity,
and when public speaking was unavoidable, he said nothing
ore rotundo, like a perfunctory Governor would be expected
to do.” And Ministry after Ministry sat in the Houses of
Parliament. The Lilley Ministry followed the Mackenzie
Ministry, to be succeeded by the Palmer, Macalister,
Thorn, and Douglas Ministeries, and the political life of
the colony was vigorously developed. Electoral Acts were
passed and new constituencies were created. The Educa-
tion Act, which excited much contention and strife be-
tween those who aimed to make education “ free, secular,
and compulsory," and those who strove to associate it with
religious denominationalism, was passed, after a long
and heated struggle, in 1875. The foundations of
a great State were being laid and broadened, not
altogether with agates and precious stones, but
with hard and durable metal. They were days
when much was done for the future growth of the coun-
try. Mr. Brookes, though fettered with business, in-
terested himself in every passing event, and yet yearning
continually for greater freedom to enter the surging com-
motions of public life. And now it had come. He could
leave his counting-house and counter, and with a free hand
take larger part in the affairs of the nation.


CHAPTER IX.
ENTRANCE UPON POLITICAL WORK.
Man can wrestle with the wrong.
Man can sing the victor’s song,
He can turn the wrong to right.
He can conquer in the fight
Courage man ! though often hit,
Wielcl thy sword, and wield thy wit,
Never yield to wary foe,
Hold thy ground, and onward go.
Press through all things till the right
Passes calmly into light
THERE are many kinds of public men, and very varied
are the motives which lead them to attempt to fill
positions of influence in the community. Some are, doubt-
less, filled with an enthusiasm for humanity and a desire
to benefit their kind; but many are simply prompted by
an inordinate ambition to distinguish themselves from the
common crowd. They cannot live in quietness and ob-
scurity. They must attract the eyes and ears of the public
in some way, and bulk large amid their fellows. Mainly
self-worshippers, they hope the multitude will be won to
th - ! same idolatry and build their altars to the same God.
They care really nothing for the people’s welfare; they
gull them, and use them as the climber uses the rungs of a
ladder to ascend. All their pretensions of public service
centre in themselves. They ever work for their own ends.
Others have a desire for power. They love to rule, to
subdue those around them to their will,and toimpress their
ideas and projects upon the mind of the people are the
objects of their ambition. They want the populace to
be as clay in their hands, to have the “ skill that moulds
another’s weakness to its will ”; and often they, in their
unscrupulous lust of power, stain their reputations and
bring dishonour upon their country. Milton describes
such in his day : ” This,” he says, “is the masterpiece of


the modem politician—how to qualify and mould the suf-
ferance and subjection of the people to the length of that
foot that is to tread on their necks ; how rapine may serve
itself with the fair and honourable pretence of the public
good; how the puny law may be brought under the ward-
ship and control of lust and will; in which attempt, if
they fall short, then must a superficial colour of reputation
by all means, direct or indirect, be gotten to wash over the
unsightly bruise of honour.” But generally the ambition
of such men “ o'er leaps itself,” and they fall into con-
tempt to rise no more. There are others, whose only aim
is to gain the emoluments of office. Since in Australia
politicians have been paid by the State, and a salary is
attached to a seat in Parliament, a large number of men
who have not been able to succeed in gaining an honest
livelihood in an ordinary way have come forward to win
the suffrages of the people, and many have succeeded in
doing so. The Legislative Assemblies are now dotted with
such men. Men with little statesmanlike ability, but with
fluent tongues, who can rail against any Government in
power, and profess to be champions of the working classes,
and with great plausibility of speech voice the discontent
of the hour, and gain the ears of the masses; these are a
numerous class of candidates for Parliamentary honours
in Australia.
And sometimes it has seemed as if the working men have
been fearful of entrusting their interests to any one, however
able or well instructed in political economy or honourable
in conduct, that did not belong to their own class. They
have sometimes preferred the penniless adventurer to the
substantia! citizen, the noisy babbler to the thoughtful
student, the loose liver to the upright man. This is a
danger in all democracies. Queensland has not been worse
than other lands, but a wider franchise and freedom have
brought this evil more fully to the front. Bom leaders, and
men of sterling worth, aiming with unselfish purpose to
build up the nation in righteousness and advance its best
interests, will always be rare. Mrs. Craigie describes or-
dinary politicians as being now of “three kinds” : she says,
they are “the sugary, the soapy, and the feathery. The first
cover their vile opinions with sweetness : the second affect


to keep other people's opinions clean ; the third make their
opinions so light of wing that they can fly away at a
moment's warning. It would not be difficult to find
specimens of all three in Queensland. But Mr. Brookes, as
a politician, was like none of them. It must be allowed
that his purpose was mainly to promote the interests of the
colony, and to advance the welfare of the people up to his
light. He was ambitious, as he admitted, and sometimes
conscious of being a little vain of his versatile endow-
ments, which he was using for the public good—a con-
sciousness which he frequently confesses and severely re-
presses—but his ambition was not self-centred, nor was it
a desire to gain honours for himself or social aggrandise-
ment for his family; it was simply to serve his generation
according to tne will of God, and to do his “ quota,” as
he said, “in the growth and progress of the colony.’’ He
felt his responsibility to the Supreme Ruler of nations for
the talents he possessed, and he did not want to hide them
in the earth. He saw how chicanery and corruption were
mixing their virus with the political life of this new-born de-
pendency of the British Crown; how there were cliques
and conspiracies formed to hinder the legitimate settle-
ment of the immigrants on the land, and to make the Go-
vernment a squatocracy, eager only for cheap labour, to
the ignoring of the rights of the mercantile and toiling
classes; how the people were being misled by specious
arguments and empty promises, and he was stirred with an
afflatus of righteous passion to rectify some of the abuses,
and to bring in a more just and equitable administration of
public affairs.
He was not guided by prudential considerations.
As a business man, it was to risk loss of trade and
social standing to speak out upon many of the burning
questions of the early days. It was to put himself in op-
position to the upper social circle, which in the township
was being rapidly created. It could hardly be said that
he would gain by entering the arena of political strife,
where there was already much heated feeling and deter-
mined blackballing of one another. But he ventured to
enter. He thought that political life might be purified;
•hat righteousness might prevail in political assemblies;


that Queensland could be established and built up upon
honourable foundations. Why could it not be made a
veritable little kingdom of God ? Why should all kinds of
injustice and evil prevail? Could not one section of the
community act squarely with another ? And could not wise
laws be made that would give to all classes freedom for
right-doing and honest living, and check the evil-doer in
his nefarious practices, and form a basis for a social struc-
ture worthy of permanence in the earth. He wanted
" To feel the earth mot e sunward."
And join the great march onward
It was lor this he sacrificed his lime and energy that
might have been spent in self-indulgence or in a more
rapid accumulation of wealth. By pen and tongue, by
seeking to influence men around him, by taking part in
the making of the laws, his aim was the advancement of
the people in all that makes life worth living, and the
creation of just and sane legislation for the general good.
He seems to have had John Bright, the noble-hearted
Quaker statesman of England, at one time as his model.
On reading some of his speeches, he remarks: “ His elo-
quent sympathy with the vast mass of workers, and his per-
fect identification with the cause he advocates, united with
so broad and deep an intelligence, warms my heart and
quickens my pulse. To emulate him may seem to dupli-
cate the fable of the frog and the bull, still he comes
before my judgment in preference to all other living men
as my criterion of a public man.” We reveal ourselves by
our sympathies, and this reference to the effect which the
utterances and personality of John Bright had upon him
certainly shows that there were chords in his nature that
could vibrate to the noblest aspects of a public career. His
ideals were high. He was often ridiculed by the thought-
less for what they considered his Utopian views, sometimes
evoking sneers for what was deemed his Puritanic pulpitry-
He w : as, indeed, made the butt of many a jest. His name
William w’as turned into " Billy,” by some adept in allitera-
tive sounds, and he was often designated “ Billv Brookes”
in the comic columns of newspapers and in the parlance of
the streets. Cartoons of him and his violin were often ex


hibited. But such burlesque is cheap and easy. The
latent buffoonery of humanity is sure to amuse itself in
that way; and the more vigorous a man’s personality, and
the more strenuous his battle for righteousness, the more
likely he is to be the sport of the groundlings. But ridi-
cule affected him but little. He held on his way. Utter-
ing his thoughts on all current questions and influencing
the growing, throbbing life around him in many ways. He
was the outflowing centre erf mental and moral forces that
often touched the popular sentiments and actions to finer
issues.
And though his name does not stand identified with
any notable act of legislation, neither is it emblazoned
on the front of any prominent institution, yet there are
few great enactments on the Statute Book upon which
he did not in some way or another exert an influence, or an
institution that he did not have some hand in either found-
ing or shaping. Subtle forces are the strongest. Often
the life of the man whose name is not affixed to popular
movements and achievements has done a great deal to-
wards their progress and fulfilment. There are two kinds
of nation builders—those who build that which is palpable
to ordinary eyes: city walls and marts and temples, com-
mercial and social customs and civic laws; and those who
build up the conscience, opinions, and character of the
people. Some are known for their outward achievements,
and their names are household words, while others are re-
membered only as psychic forces, charges of moral dyna-
mite, winds of God moving society around them towards
the spiritual order of the universe, and the highest and best
conditions of life possible to humanity. Mr. Brookes was
one of this latter kind of nation-builders.
The first Queensland Parliament was opened on May
22nd. iB6O. The members were returned from sixteen
electorates, and were twenty-six in number. Brisbane re-
turned three members, and in the excitement that prevailed
Mr. Brookes was not only an interested spectator, but one
of the busy moving actors. His descriptions of the elec-
tion of the candidates and the opening of Parliament are
written with a sympathetic hand, and with the*idea that in
the future he may be called upon to take a more pro


niinent part in similar events. A few jottings from his
diary may be interesting as a peep at the personnel of
those early days :
“ 28th April, iB6O. —On Saturday, at the nomination of
Roberts and Lilley (afterwards Sir Charles Lilley) for the
Valley. Nothing very remarkable said or done. Then to
the German Station to hear Mr. Prior, and to assist him.
Met at Mr. Zillman’s house, the room full. Mr. Prior
spoke for an hour with the attention of his listeners. Mr.
Zillman and Mr. Gericke both feel disposed to support
him. Mr. Rode wavering between him and Gibbon. I
fancy Gibbon will be dropped. This week fourteen of the
twenty-six members will be returned.
“ May 2nd.—Roberts lost his election. Lilley in by
three votes. My vote lost by another person using it;
and what makes it more disagreeable, using it in favour of
Lilley. Still the contest was close, and lam satisfied with
Lilley, believing him equal in all important respects to
Roberts. News from Stephens to say he is not sanguine
of success at Drayton. Hockings at South Brisbane only
polled eighteen votes. A short time since he was the
most popular man, so fickle is popularity. Bah! Jordan
working like a nigger to get in. Roberts the first of the
defeated candidates to try again for North Brisbane. This
is, in every case, to be discountenanced, and I will be no
approving party to any person doing it, not excepting Ste-
phens. Pring for Warwick without opposition. Moffat
and Taylor for Western Downs, leaving Bartley on one
side without even nominating him. He will not fancy this,
but really he had no claim upon the electors. This is a
fine time for the observation of human character. Our
first Parliament promises to be a strong one for the squat-
ters. This will not be for the universal good of the col-
ony. So far, the voters seem to think and act in a far
less thoughtless manner than the blustering of our novitiate
candidates assumed would be the case. The ballot in its
working gives satisfaction, and is a great advance in quiet-
ness and order during the exciting periods of elections.
Warrv making efforts to be returned. Blakenev coming out
coarsely to fngratiate himself with his Irish fellow-country-
men. He is, however, generally looked upon as a very


successful adventurer. Cribh keeping very
look of things is not encouraging to him. He takes it for
granted that his " long political life” (his favourite ex-
pression) will carry before it, as a qualification, all oppo-
sition. But lam mistaken if he is not to learn ere long
the lesson that others do not estimate him at his own
rate.
'' May 3rd. —In the city we shall have a sharp struggle.
The defeated candidates will come forward here as a last
hope, and I trust they will be shown that it is verily a for-
lorn hope. Our young colony needs the Divine blessing,
and I often mingle my prayer with those I find consolation
in thinking ascend from pious people generally on behalf
of our political condition. My own personal part is as
nothing. I try to curb all the movements of personal am-
bition in this direction. To the “ natural man ” a seat in
Parliament is an attractive object of pursuit. Pi the
spiritual man” it is a solemn responsibility. 1 am per
suaded that in after times, when looking back upon the
beginning of our colonial history, 1 shall find abundant
cause for thankfulness that I was held back, that violence,
gentle violence, was offered to my anticipations of immedi-
ate participation in politics. My heavenly Father knows
what is in me, and perhaps I might approve, did circum-
stances favour, another Haman.
May 13th. —I am glad the elections are over. For
Ipswich the electors have sent in Forbes and Macalister,
and O'Sullivan. This last-named gentleman has a
history, according to Captain Geary He
is an illiterate man, and the tool of the Roman
Catholic party. He is said to have great impudence,
and from the little I know of him, the general opinion
that he is not altogether fit to occupy the posi-
tion of a member of Parliament, is well founded. The
selection of such a man will not advance or make more
respectable the claim Ipswich has put forth to be the
future capital of Queensland. Not that the claim would
bear impartial examination before, but it is weakened by
this election. With reference to the next elections, I must
try to think calmly. It is not easy to be calm. There is
a grand future to be worked out. Questions of noble pro


portions are coming forward for solution. To the mere
politician they invest the coming time with a keenly in-
teresting character, and if they do so to him, with what
a solemn and prayer-requesting attitude they come to the
contemplation of an intelligent Christian! I would re-
gard them from this point of view. Young has it that
"an undevout astronomer is mad”; quite as applicable is
the remark to a statesman.
21st May, rß6o.—This evening Jordan called with the
“ Herald'' newspaper of 4th June, 1856, and others of
about the same date. They contain much information of
precisely the kind our legislature need. I am sure they
need it just now. Jordan laudably anxious to do what he
can to establish the custom that our Parliamentary pro-
ceedings be opened with prayer. Every Christian must
wish success to this endeavour. I hope we shall not pur-
sue the same course as they adopted in Sydney. I can-
not but think that they have fallen into the evils Franklin
foresaw and predicted as the natural result of a prayer-
less deliberative Assembly.
“ May 22nd. —This day memorable in Queensland
annals. The Parliament opened by commission, mem-
bers sworn in, and a Speaker elected. Conversed
with Taylor, Thorn, and Macalister last night; they
were excited with their situation. I am sure that
all the members will take their seats feeling that
what they have to do is no child’s play. The prayers
of God s people go with them. lam not alone in regard-
ing this as a solemn time. Queensland is the dwelling-
place of us and of our children. Wise laws, suitable to
the times, and cautiously progressive in their character,
will cause the colony to advance quickly, and make sure
the ground taken. Should, however, which God avert, our
members keep the interests of the colony as a whole in
subordination to the promotion of their several particular
purposes, we shall soon present a scene of confusion and
complaint. The squatters are in great strength, and they
are in temptation to do all they can to entrench their posi-
tion, which is already preponderating unjustly to the agri-
cultural progress of the colony.


‘‘ 23rd May.—Yesterday witnessed the opening of both
Houses by Commission. It was a very interesting sight,
rather formal, but not unnecessarily so. They elected (the
Lower House, of course) Gilbert Elliott as Speaker, on
the motion of Mr. Gore, seconded by Mr. Macalister.
Herbert congratulated the House on its choice, assuring it
that the Governor would also have pleasure in confirming
the appointment. As he is Colonial Secretary, Mr. Her-
bert’s style of speaking drew attention. He does not come
up to my standard, speaking in a formal manner, not re-
lieved by any grace of action. Gore hesitates and
stumbles. Macalister is vulgarly loud and voluble; I be-
lieve him to be a man of little reading and thought. The
House adjourned for a week, when they will really begin
business. The prevailing idea in the public mind is that
little of a liberal character is to be expected from the pre-
sent Ministry. A dissolution before any work had been
done is to be looked upon as unfortunate. But lam in
hopes that the people will not tolerate a slow procedure in
the paths of the present land system. The squatters out-
number considerably any other party. Indeed, there are
but two parties, the land question making this the only
division at present.
“ 30th May. —Yesterday our Government began its work.
Many ladies were present, and mamma was a lively ob-
server. In the afternoon I went to the Assembly, where
they were discussing the Governor’s speech. The Op-
position were in force, and my impression was that they
will be formidable to the Government. Most of the mem-
bers were on the cross-benches, as though they had not
made their minds up on which side of the House to finally
settle. Buckley appeared to be Opposition leader, though
Ido not know w’hether this is by consent of the party. I
heard him, Raff, Jordan, Lilley, and Macalister speak in
disparaging terms of the Ministerial policy as sketched in
the speech from the vice-regal chair. It cannot be reason-
ably denied that the speech was unsatisfactory, evincing an
indisposition to pursue or to initiate any really comprehen-
sible measure.”
These records of his impressions of the opening of the
first Parliament shew' how strongly his mind was drawn


towards the political arena, and that it was his intention to
enter it when fitting circumstances arose. He watched the
proceedings in the House with the closest attention,
studied its methods of procedure, and endeavoured to
grasp the questions which were debated and their relation
to the well-being of the colony.
The Parliament met in a two-storied building which had
been the military barracks, the Assembly meeting upstairs
and the Council below. There was much preliminary work
to be done. Parties soon formed. Questions affecting
the occupation of Crown lands, and grants of money and
land to religious bodies, and also whether education should
be national or denominational gave rise to many a heated
debate, and showed what principles were likely to be adop-
ted in the administration of the affairs of the new-born
colony. Mr. Brookes naturally affiliated himself with
those who were contending for the rights of what might be
called the “ commonality”—the traders and toilers in op-
position to the influence of the squatters, who predomi-
nated in the Government and in the Legislative Assembly.
They were doubtless the men in possession. They had
been the pioneers in opening up the country. Before the
separation of Queensland from New South Wales, vast
areas of land were taken up and stocked with cattle and
sheep. There was a small population, and some regarded
the climate as too tropical, and too far away from Europe
for any large number of immigrants to find their way to
its shores. Its immense grassy plains seemed only adapted
for feeding sheep and the production of wool; and so
they were divided into enormous blocks, and leased by the
Government to the pastoralists, with the understanding
that the leases were not to be continued for the whole of
their land if it was required for public purposes, or for
the closer settlement of population. By this stipulation
portions of the land might be resumed by the Govern-
ment, and let or sold in areas suitable for agricultural or
farming settlements. It was, of course, the aim of the
squatters to keep the land as much as possible
in their hands. They were the wealthiest and most influ-
ential section of the community. They were stronger than
any other class, because, as Mr. Brookes says, they had a


common bond of self-preservation. They could work com-
pactly together. They tried to entrench themselves be-
hind “ cumbrous, intricate legislation.” Banks and mort-
gages backed up their interests, and it was very difficult to
wrench any measure of power from them. This industry
did not employ a large number of hands in proportion to
the wealth invested in it, and only at shearing time was
there a pressing demand for labour, and generally the
escaped and freed convicts had furnished almost a suffici-
ent supply. But when the convict system was abolished,
the voluntary immigrants obtained from Europe were not
of the class of workers to take their place, and so efforts
were made to introduce into the colony a number of Chi-
nese and coolies. This the “ people’s ” party strenuously
opposed
Beside the cheap, reliable labour for the stations
that was wanted just then, as the Civil War in America im-
perilled the supply of cotton for the Lancashire weavers,
Queensland was looked upon as one of the countries from
which a supply could be obtained, and cheap labour was
wanted by those who started cultivating large plantations
for that purpose. Though many thought it could be best
cultivated by owners of small selections. This was the
opinion of Dr. Lang, the ardent advocate of colonial emigra-
tion. He spoke of “ cotton as the future staple product of
the colony,” and describes most enthusiastically the suit-
ability of the soil and climate for successful cotton grow-
ing, and urged his immigrants to obtain selections for
plantations, believing that they could be worked success-
fully by themselves and their families, and bring in suffi-
cient wealth for them to live in content and comfort. A
widespread interest was taken in the question. Mr.
Brookes contributed a paper to the discussion, which he
read before the Queensland Philosophical Society, and
which was afterwards published and widely circulated,
arguing that cotton-growing might attract to the colony
from England those who would become proprietors of
small farms of about one hundred acres each, worked by
themselves and families, which would lead to a natural in-
crease of a desirable population. This was the hope of
many who had the interests of the colony at heart; and
c


though the Government was prepared to grant land for the
purpose and offered bonuses, and some fine cotton was
grown, yet it did not attract many immigrants to enter upon
the industry. It could not be grown cheaply enough for the
markets of England. But those who invested their money
in it and strove to make it pay, joined with the pastoralists
in attempting to bring into the colony a large amount of
alien labour. And this became the burning question of
the day—whether Queensland should be peopled with an
independent farming and trading population, or whether
there should be employed, under wealthy owners of large
tracts of land, a great number of coloured toilers, working
for a low wage, and living in conditions far below the
labouring classes of Europe. It was this question which
aroused Mr. Brookes and others, and led them to resolve
to oppose with all their strength the Government of that
day, which, by legislation and other means, were furthering
the introduction of coolies and South Sea Islanders into
the colony.
The efforts made to grow cotton were really the means
of first bringing the Polynesians into Queensland. A Syd-
ney merchant and shipper, named Robert Towns, who had
been engaged in trading in the South Seas, decided to es-
tablish a cotton plantation on the Logan River, not many
miles from Brisbane; and often having employed the is-
landers on his vessels and in other ways, determined to
employ them on his plantation, and he brought a shipload
of these dusky kanakas, and quietly landed them near
his place, and set them to work on his fields. And one
day the attention of the people of Brisbane was arrested by
seeing these blacks driving the bullock teams which drew
the cotton crop into the city. There was naturally a great
deal of excitement over this introduction of coloured
labour, and many a protest was made. Very soon after
sugar-growing was commenced. Captain Hope started a
sugar plantation at Cleveland in 1864, and a number of
other plantations were established in the neighbourhood
of Caboolture and the Logan and Nerang Rivers; and
the planters were eager for a supply of coloured' labour to
work their fields. The demand for it became great. A
considerable number of ships were employed in bringing


the islanders to Queensland. Vessels went from Mel-
bourne and Sydney, as well as Brisbane, to furnish a sup-
ply sufficient to meet the demand, and to provide for the
planters’ “ cheap, organised, obedient” labour. It became
a recognised traffic in coloured humanity. Scandalous in-
cidents occurred, for it gave occasion for infamous deeds
of brutality and crime, mnay of which were hushed up, for
was not cheap labour necessary for the production of the
riches of the colony, and the development of its resources?
The squatters joined with the planters to uphold thisnew
and questionable traffic, and it was vigorously defended
by the dominant party in the House, and the Governor,
Sir George Bowen, declared “ that in the employment of
coloured labour, Queensland had the potentiality of be-
coming rich beyond all the dreams of avarice.” Was not
that enough ? Could justice and respect for the rights of
blackfellows stand in the way of clutching such a golden
bait ? But Mr. Brookes and the party that he joined
saw that this policy would check the immigration of an in-
dustrial white population, foster a tyrannical spirit, which
would ignore the rightsand privileges of inferior races, pre-
vent the best development of the wealth of the colony,
lower the wages, and bring a stain upon the reputation of
a British dependency. The Ministers, too, were creating,
he thought, all kinds of offices and billets for their friends,
and squandering the public money, as he said, “ in in-
creasing salaries and other foolish ways,” ignoring the
true purposes of Government, neglecting to provide any
system of education for the young, and proper means of
employment for the immigrants, or opportunities for their
establishing homesteads on the soil; and he was moved
to come forward and attack these abuses. He would enter
the political battlefield, and contend for what he believed
to be the rights of the people, and for the righteous ad-
ministration of the law. So, in 1863, at the formation of
the second Parliament, he offered himself to represent East
Moreton in the House, an agricultural district lying be-
tween Brisbane and Moreton Bay, and what was regarded
then as a very important constituency. He issued two ad-
dresses simultaneously, one in each of the rival papers
•which then voiced the opinions of the State, the “ Courier”


and the “ Guardian,” both of which bore the stamp of a
quaint originality, and are strikingly terse and vigorous.
The following two quotations are from them. He says :
“ My first and foremost wish is that as we propose to
have responsible government, that we really go further than
our empty profession, and that we do enter upon the en-
joyment of the privileges and advantages of responsible
government. Hitherto we have had responsible govern-
ment only in name. The recent House of Assembly bore
too great a resemblance to a merchant’s counting-house,
where certain things were bought and sold. Such a House
of Assembly I hope we shall never see again.”
“ I hope to see the day when national education shall
take and hold its legitimate rank and claim to be largely
and munificently assisted by our colonial revenue. I have
infinitely more faith in good and efficient schoolmasters
than in policemen, however numerous, or however well-
dressed It may be all right to let a member
of Parliament buy up in the name of his children, wife,
cousins, and grandmother all the good land in an agricul-
tural reserve. I cannot bring myself to think that this is
a correct procedure, even if tlie honourable, the Attorney-
General, does endorse it. Nor can I approve of immi-
grants being knocked about from pillar to post, unable to
procure good land on which to settle down
When separation took place, I supposed, like many others,
that the benefits resulting therefrom would be great, im-
mediate, and universal. With the first session of our Par-
liament Ido not wish to find much fault; but ever since
it has been more and more apparent to even the meanest
capacity that as a colony we were less and less likely to
realise those noble ends and advantages which we sup-
posed must follow from being under a responsible govern-
ment. Our revenue has increased beyond our expecta-
tions, but it has been of no corresponding advantage to
the public. The announcement of Queensland as a sepa-
rate and distinct colony seems to have operated exactly
like the east wind did in a certain country. The authority
from which I venture to quote as affording a parallel in-
stance, says: ‘ The east wind brought the locusts. And
the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested


In all the coasts of Egypt; very grievous were they; be-
fore them there were no such locusts as they, neither after
■them shall be such. For they covered the face of the
whole earth so that the land was darkened, and they did
eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees
which the hail had left; and there remained not any green
thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all
the land of Egypt.’ To such a state of things it was not
in human nature to submit. All change was hopeful. I
•do not mean to say that the next Government will not be
exposed to similar temptations, but their ability to resist
will much depend upon the various constituencies sending
men into Parliament on whose probity some degree of re-
liance may be justly placed," etc., etc.
This kind of public appeal was doubtless unique, and
•doubtless evoked much comment. But it was not the sort
of political address to win immediate success at the polling
booth. In fact, the elections at East Moreton involved him
in much political rancour, and though he gained the seat at
the second election, he ultimately lost it. At the first
voting he was out-numbered by the two successful candi-
dates, and was the lowest on the poll. But an informality
in the notice of the election given by the Returning Officer
had occurred, and some irregularities indulged in by the
successful candidates; also there was a suspicion that
briber)’ had been committed, and these facts led Mr.
Brookes to petition against the decision of the electors,
and the first election was declared null and void. There
was consequently another election. In this one he and
one of the previous successful candidates were returned.
But this election was also petitioned against, and was de-
clared null and void, too. And at the third time he was
unsuccessful by one vote! It must have been a hard fight,
and fought out to the end with vigour. But all through
he seems to have kept a cool head and a well-governed
tongue. In his defeat his words are not wanting in dig-
nity or grace: “My not obtaining a seat in the Legis-
lative Assembly will not entail ruin or disaster on the
colony, and is of no consequence at all compared with the
gross infraction of the law by which elections are sup-
posed to be conducted and regulated. If this election for


East Moreton is to be a precedent, then we may all bid-
good-bye to responsible government. A seat in the Legis-
lative Assembly may be a position of usefulness and bene-
ficial influence, but this can hardly be the case when it is
purchased by the loss of self-respect. I have no desire to
sneak into the Legislative Assembly. If I ever get there, it
shall not be by votes only, but by votes that represent the
virtue, the intelligence, the sobriety, and the industry of
the electorate. This is high ground to take, but it is the
precise ground I have taken in the present election.”
This was no empty boast. And this defeat by one vote at the
third contest did not greatly dishearten him. His action
as a candidate won respect from a large number of the
better sort, and so, when shortly after an opportunity oc-
curred again to obtain a seat, he was able to secure it.
There was a vacancy caused by one of the members for
North Brisbane, Mr. George Raff, going to England, and
he was nominated for it. He was opposed by Mr. Warry,
a chemist, and Mr. John Petrie, who only secured two
votes. Mr. Brookes was returned at the head of the poll,
but his return was petitioned against by Mr. Warry, on the
ground that he was interested in divers contracts with the
Government, and the election was declared null and void.
They both went to the poll again, and the decision of the
electors was even more emphatic this tim° than before;
Mr. Warry only polled 45 votes and Mr. Brookes 408.
Mr. Warry took his defeat so much to heart that he died
not long afterwards. There was a great deal of noise and
turbulence when the decision was declared. A disturbance
took place. Mr. Brookes was carried along the street by
his supporters, and a number of his opponents made a rush
for him and bonnetted him ; a free fight ensued, ending in
some of his assailants being locked up for a night in gaol.
He took his seat for North Brisbane in 1864, and he sat
in the House for three sessions, until 1866. Those ses-
sions were not very prolific in notable acts of legislation,
and there was a change of Ministry in 1866, the Herbert
Ministry resigning through having adopted a proposed
amendment to the land laws, and Macalister succeeded-
him ; but an appeal was made to the country in 1867, and
Mr. Brookes again contested the seat, but he was defeated,


and did not offer himself as a candidate again until after
he had retired from business in 1883. It was well that he
was not returned at this election, and that he was not a
member of the Assembly during thi trying years of the
financial crisis in his affairs, which occurred, as has been
stated, in 1869. He had seen that Parliamentary duties
necessarily absorbed much time and energy which ought to
be legitimately used in the conduct of his own affairs, and
though it was a disappointment at the time, he saw after-
wards that it had happened “ for the best.”
His defeat arose from several causes. He was not a
member to be easily put down or to be gagged. He spoke
frequently. He would claim his right to criticise any ques-
tionable procedures on the part of the Government or the
Speaker, or any member of the House. He was frequently
in collision with the dominant party in the House and the
Colonial Secretary, who tried to put him down by calling
him a “ shopkeeper,” a “ retail dealer in pots and pans,”
and to bring him into derision when he felt the strength of
his arguments or the pungency of his piercing attacks.
And although he won respect in the House for his single*
mindedness and adherence to his convictions, some
looked upon him as eccentric and crotchety, and his ec-
centricity made a good election squib for Ids opponents.
A conscientious man amid a crowd of politicians whose
role is opportunism or expediency generally is regarded as
an “ eccentricity,” and the public can easily be made to
shun the influence of such a man; one who will not be-
come a mere cipher in a party struggle, and who has the
courage to assert his own opinions. This probably affected
the voting. There was another reason. He had obtained
from the Government a large amount of business for his
firm. They had supplied much of the material for the
new Parliamentary Buildings and other Government works.
This business had not been transacted in any underhand
manner. It was well-known and openly done. But it was
easily turned against him in an election contest, and made
to lessen his chances at the polling booth. So, in this
election, he was the fourth on the list of eight candidates,
polling 439 votes, while the three above him polled over
600. He felt this defeat severely. It was a blow at “ his


pride and ambition,” he says; but when he calmly re-
viewed the situation, he admitted that it was a legitimate
exercise of the verdict of public opinion, and of great
service to him in the troublous commercial times that then
awaited him.
But though he was no longer a member of the Legisla-
tive Assembly, and did not enter Parliament again until
1882, he was ever on the alert to use his influence for the
promotion of purity in political life, and the adoption of
such measures as would increase the well-being of the
colony.
There was one question which aroused his energies and
absorbed most of his labour for the public good, and that
was the employment of coloured labour. His name will
ever stand associated with the efforts made to free Queens-
land from the stigma that once rested upon her reputa-
tion incurred by the importation of coolies and kanakas
for the cattle stations and sugar plantations.


CHAPTER X.
HIS MAIN PUBLIC LABOURS.
Is he not man, though knowledge never shed,
Her quickening beam on his neglected head ?
Is he not man, though sweet religion’s voice
Ne'er bade the mourner in his God rejoice ?
Is he not man by sin and suffering tried ?
Is he not man for whom the Saviour died ?
—Montgomery
MR. BROOKES, though keeping himself in touch
with all public questions, and ready to take his
part as a citizen in their discussion and solution, yet bent
his energies most fully to oppose the systematic importa-
tion of alien races to work upon the sugar plantations of
Queensland. He took this up as a man takes up a mission,
to which he feels especially called, and he became very
widely known as the irrepressible and irreconcilable op-
ponent of coloured labour. He regarded it as a horrible
infringement of human rights and contrary to all the best
traditions of the British people. Tb those who have only
seen the condition of the kanakas since careful legislation
and stringent regulations have been adopted in obtaining
them and employing them on the plantations, many of the
drastic denunciations of Mr. Brookes, and his persistent
attacks upon their employment upon the canefields, must
seem extravagant. But at the commencement of this
labour traffic, and for many years, it was stained with fear-
ful atrocities and crimes.
To judge his opposition to it fairly, the traffic must be
viewed from its inception, and not from the standpoint of
after years. For nearly half a century it has been a trouble-
some and irritating question in the colony, and may not be
absolutely settled yet. Before the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment decided that “ the kanakas must go," their condition
bad been much improved in Queensland, and most of the


evils that had been associated with their importation and
employment had ceased. Not only had the Queensland
Government surrounded the traffic with salutary restric-
tions, but a humane and Christian spirit had largely pre-
vailed, and much was done to make their presence in the
colony pleasant and satisfactory. But the history of this
attempt to obtain cheap labour in the early days is a black
record of kidnapping and murder, and it doubtless is a
stain upon our fair fame, and was a peril to our civilisa-
tion and progress. It was a bad beginning of the develop-
ment of our natural wealth. Mr. Brookes saw with clear
prevision that it would lead to evils almost as villainous
as the atrocities committed in the worst forms of slavery,
that it would tend to interfere with the settlement upon the
soil of a white farming population, which might and ought
to become the strength and backbone of the State, that it
would degrade the employer of such labour and lower the
national character by the creation of half-castes, and spread
a general deteriorating influence over the country, and he
determined to do all that one man’s energy and wisdom
could do to prevent it. For many years he persisted in
opposing this attempt to base the prosperity of the colony
upon principles that placed the mere accumulation of
riches before the highest moral and social conditions ; that
regarded the growth of the material wealth of the few as of
more value than the well-being of the many; that set a
higher estimate upon money than manhood; principles, as
he believed, that would be subversive of the true advance-
ments of the colony, and lead to the growth of a tinselled
plutocracy inflated with pride and over-bearingness with-
out due regard for the welfare and rights of the toiling
multitude.
He bent all his strength against this evil, which he
regarded as a fearful manifestation of greed and oppres-
sion, and though somewhat disguised, a. shameful traffic
in human flesh and blood. With passionate warmth he
denounced it, taking every opportunity of exposing its
incidental tyrannies and cruelties in the Press and on the
platform, stirring up the philanthropic, both in England
and in the colonies, to combat it; never resting in his
zealous attacks upon it; often speaking on public occasions


like a man inspired with a divine afflatus until his audiences,
catching the fire of his enthusiasm, would glow with a white
heat and under the spell of his vigorous utterances bum
with a strong intent to sweep away this evil from the land.
He was the herald of the “ White Australia ’’ movement.
And if he did not live to see the “ kanakas ” no longer em-
ployed upon the plantations, he certainly did much to
bring in many alleviations of their condition, and to create
the sentiment which has at last demanded that the impor-
tation of black labour shall end. On looking back upon
this long and strenuous campaign, he wrote, in 1886 : —“ I
took my stand as a prominent denouncer of South Sea
Island labour, Coolie labour, and Chinese labour in
Queensland. I may say that all the books I read —and I
bought all the books that threw light upon the subject—
all the information derivable from newspapers; all I saw
going on in the colony, everything from every source, con-
firmed me in the opinions I formed at the first, and
strengthened my resolutions to give no rest to my eyes nor
slumber to my eyelids; to work perseveringly with tongue
and pen, and any influence I had, until Queensland was
out of danger from what was, to my best thinking, a
crowning, an overwhelming, an irreparable calamity."
Very soon after Captain Towns had introduced South
Sea Island labour upon his cotton plantation on the Logan
River, and the demand for such labour was increased by
others who had started cotton and sugar growing, all kinds
of abuses of the rights and liberties of these islanders oc-
curred. They were unscrupulously kidnapped from their
native isles; they were crowded into the labour vessels:
they were ill-fed and ill-clothed; they were landed without
proper shelter or protection, and often driven to their
work in gangs under brutal overseers. They suffered from
many diseases, and died by scores and hundreds. The
whole business became a scandal and a shame, and yet the
seeming wealth that was thought to accrue from the em-
ployment of these islanders muffled the lips of many, and
led them to wink at the atrocities committed. Even re-
ligious men closed their eyes to the evils that existed. To
quote Mr. Brookes’ statement, made before a Select Com-
mittee appointed by the Legislative Assembly, in 1876,


“ Every vile feature of the traffic in Polynesians came
early into view. Not an inhabitant of Queensland but had
a long stare at them. We became so familiar with them
that we seemed to lose our first sense of their horribleness.
The idea of obtaining servants over whom we could have
unlimited control; who would be obedient, docile, handy,
industrious, cheerful, fat, smiling, contented, always laugh-
ing, for wages so small that they seemed next to no wages
at all—this idea apparently drove out all consideration as
to how these people were procured. If we were told
that husbands were separated from wives, thousands of
children left without their natural protectors, homes deso-
lated, villages ransacked and burned, drunkenness, fraud,
.and every dishonest artifice employed in order to procure
these men who were to add so immensely to our comfort—
we heard all this as if it were an idle romancing tale told
by sentimental philanthropists. So it came to pass that
citizens who were religious men, officers of churches; nay,
even ministers of religion, saw no shame in availing them-
selves of the labour of poor helpless savages who had been
inveigled from their native homes, or in many, perhaps in
most instances, who had been sold at the islands by their
chiefs and bought by white men, and bought and sold a
second time at our wharves in Brisbane, Maryborough,
Rockhampton, and Mackay. Our newspapers contained
advertisements that these injured, helpless creatures could
be bought on application to agents. They were carried by
our steamers, not as passengers, but as freight, like horses,
cattle, and sheep. They had a market price; were quoted
at so much per head. Promissory notes were given for
them, discountable by the banks. They were, in fact,
merchandise.” This is a strong indictment, but it was
doubtless true.
All this went on, and the Government soon made several
efforts to check or supervise this human “merchandise.”
In 1868, an Act to regulate the securing and employ-
ment of the islanders was passed. Some of the outrages
committed were beginning to make the colonv notorious,
and rumours of them had reached England. It was im-
perative that something should be done. Special and
favourable reports of the condition of the kanakas were


sent by Government officials to the authorities at home to-
allay the uneasiness with respect to them, which had
arisen, and an Act, called “ The Polynesian Labour Act,"
was passed to restrain the unscrupulous men who had en-
gaged in the traffic and to prevent the recurrence of the
alleged infamies. It showed that the Government admitted
that gross evils existed. The Act provided that the cap-
tains of the labour vessels should, if required to do so,
have a Government agent on board; that in securing the
islanders written agreements were to be made with them,
which were to be endorsed by a missionary, consul, or
some other responsible person, and who also should sign
a document purporting to state that the natives had will-
ingly agreed to leave their islands, and had understood the
nature of the engagement. The agreement was to be made
for a term of three years, and the islanders were to receive a
certain sum per year as wages, besides ample food and cloth-
ing. Each vessel had to undergo careful inspection, and to
be licensed to carry a proper number of labourers. The
captain and owner of the vessels were each reguired to
give a bond of to the Government that the pro-
visions of the Act would be duly fulfilled. On the arrival
of the kanakas in Queensland, an immigration agent had to
board the vessel and examine the agreements, and question
the new arrivals whether they understood them, and
whether they had been rightly treated during their passage,
and not till this was done were they to be allowed to land
or to be handed over to their employers. These also were
placed under restrictions. They had to properly feed and
house their labourers, and to pay their wages agreed upon
into the Savings Bank, if required, and also pay the cost of
their passage, and of their return to their islands when the
three years’ term had expired. Their plantations were
also open to the visits of an inspector, who was supposed
to see that these imported labourers were well treated.
These legislative enactments to regulate and control a
very questionable business were probably honestly formu-
lated and accepted by many of the politicians of that time,
who supposed that they 'were conserving the general
interests of the colony by seeking to surround this traffic,
which, in itself, was so essentially liable to abuse, with


saving clauses and regulations. But very little good was
accomplished by this Act. It was passed in a half-hearted
way. It was not strongly opposed by any party in the
House. Tomanyitseemsonlyanecessarypieceof legisla-
tion. Mr. Brookes had no faith in it. At best, to him, it
was only a compromise with the evil. He would have
stopped the traffic altogether. If there had been sufficient
“ moral courage and political intelligence ” in the House
at the time, he believed that it never would have passed,
but a preventive measure would have been carried. It
certainly did little to prevent the repetition of the outrages
which had already made the employment of the islanders
so infamous. As he says: “ The labour trade went on
with its vile characteristics little lessened. It became evi-
dent to the most unbelieving that robbery, pillage, rapine,
drunkenness, lust, murder, kidnapping, were exceedingly
difficult to ‘ regulate,' and that there was something dis-
honourable in even trying to ‘ regulate ’ such abomina-
tions; but the efforts to do so were continued as for ap-
pearance sake.” There were still signs of dissatisfaction
both in England and in Queensland with the methods
adopted, and the next year a Select Committee was ap-
pointed by the Legislative Assembly to examine into the
working of the Act. This seems to have been principally
done to present another favourable report to the Home
Government, and to silence those who continued to agitate
for the ending of the traffic in the colony. The committee,
Mr. Brookes alleges, was a packed one. Six out of the
seven members of which it was composed were known to
be favourable to the employment of black labour,
and the witnesses examined were chiefly those
from whom opinions on that side of the question
could be readily gained. Mr. Brookes and another were
mainly the only witnesses that sought to expose the failure
of the Act to “ regulate ” Polynesian labour, and they re-
ceived, he says, scant courtesy. One of the newspapers,
commenting on this committee, had the following:—“ The
flagrant partiality and one-sidedness of the whole affair,
the simplicity of the questions, and the effrontery of some
of the witnesses are all sufficiently ridiculous. . • •
No impartial person can attach the slightest weight to a


report adopted by prejudiced persons, supported by the
evidence of witnesses who, in almost every case, had a
direct personal interest in bearing testimony to the benefits
of coloured labour, and the satisfactory working of the
Act.”
The proceedings of this Select Committee, how-
ever, may have lulled the storm for a time, but every now
and then shameful incidents occurred on the canefields,
and reports were brought by sailors of the most awful
cruelties and outrages perpetrated by the captains of labour
vessels securing the islanders in the South Seas, which
stirred up the popular indignation, and led to renewed
agitations. Sometimes some Legree would put his kanakas
in irons or beat them to death. Sometimes the canoes with
islanders on board would be surrounded with armed
sailors and fired upon, and in forcing the captured ones
into the ship terrible scenes of brutality would be enacted.
One or two events especially made a deep impression on
the public mind, and they certainly show how terrible were
the villainies that were associated with this painful chapter
in Queensland’s history. One was in connection with the
captain of the labour schooner “ Jason.” This vessel be-
longed to a firm in Maryborough, a town that was then ris-
ing into importance as the centre of a sugar-growing dis-
trict. Members of the firm were connected with persons
in Government positions, and several doubtful transactions
had been hushed up, when the following incident occurred.
The schooner started on her voyage one April day in 1871,
and she had on board a Government agent, a gentleman
•who had offered himself for the position, and had been ac-
cepted. He was a respectable townsman named Meikle-
john, who was known as a well-to-do and reliable per-
son. He had been a squatter and a planter, and also a
magistrate of the town. He had also employed coloured
labour, but having sold his plantation, and still taking an
interest in the islanders, he wished to see how they were
obtained. So he secured this appointment as Government
agent for this voyage. It was to him a sorry result of his
curiosity. His experiences were terrible and tragic. Noth-
ing had been heard from him by his friends during the
voyage; but, at last, news reached them that the vessel


had arrived at Maryborough Heads, and was anchored
there. His son-in-law, a Presbyterian clergyman, and a
doctor, hearing of the arrival, went down the Mary River
and boarded the vessel. And to their intense surprise and
horror they found Mr. Meiklejohn in the most strange and
pitiable condition. He seemed insane, and was unable to
recognise them, and had become emaciated from ill-treat-
ment and want of food, and was incapable of giving any
intelligible account of what had happened to him. He
was conveyed ashore in this weak condition, and for some
time he remained in a dazed and exhausted state; but
he gradually recovered, and at length was able to tell his
story of the fearful scenes he had witnessed, and of the
treatment he had received. The following is his written
statement, which was presented to the Colonial Secretary,
then Mr. A. H. Palmer:—
“ Maryborough.
“ To the Honourable the Colonial Secretary,
“ Queensland.
“ Sir, — I desire very respectfully to explain the delay in
sending in the report I have now the honour to present as
Government agent on board the ‘Jason,’ on her voyage
from Maryborough to the South Sea Islands and back, in
April, May, June, and July last.
“ When the ‘ Jason ' returned to Maryborough, on the
13th July, I was in an extremely feeble state and totally
unable to attend to business, having been confined in the
ship’s hold amongst the islanders, handcuffed and chained
to a ring-bolt for more than three weeks, without bedding.
This treatment I received by the orders of the captain, who
said I was insane and dangerous. I was delirious for some
time, but I attribute my being so to the captain having
drugged me in a glass of wine on the 12th June.
“ I was carried ashore to the residence of my son-in-law,
on the 13th July. The day after, Mr. Cran, one of the
owners of the ‘ Jason,’ called on me, and I told him I was
not at all satisfied with the way the islanders had been
procured. On the 18th July, I saw Mr. Faircloth, the
Police Magistrate of Maryborough, and told him that I
had been intimidated in the performance of my duties on
board the ‘Jason,’ the captain having held a loaded re


volver to my head and threatened to shoot me. After-
wards, on the same day, the Honourable, the Minister lor
Works, Mr. W. H. Walsh, saw me, and said that the
Police Magistrate had told him that I had a complaint
against the 1 Jason,’ and he (Mr. Walsh) wished me for
my own sake not to press it, as I should be sworn down.
I said that I must press it. He replied, at all events, do
nothing for a week, as the public mind was too much ex-
cited in consequence of the election. The election allud-
ed to was the election for Maryborough, and Mr. Walsh
was one of the two candidates. To my great surprise, on
the 20th July, two days after, Mr. Walsh, at the request of
the owners of the ‘ Jason,’ issued instructions in the name
of the Queensland Government to Messrs. Bligh, Cribb,
and Powell to hold an inquiry into the voyage of the
‘Jason.’ It was entered into on the following Monday,
the 24th July, when it must have been well known I was
too ill to attend.
“ I may be permitted here to state my belief that this
inquiry was obtained and hurried on by the owners of the
‘ Jason’ in order to bring into discredit any statement I
might afterwards make. At the first sitting of the Board,
my solicitor asked for an adjournment in order to enable
me to be present, and handed in a medical certificate to
show my then inability. The Board declined to adjourn,
and proceeded to receive statements tending mainly to in-
jure me and touching in only a general and cursor)' manner
the reasons why I was on board at all. Amongst others,
the statements of two islanders, who had been useful on
board and been on better rations than the other islanders
on board, were interpreted to the Board by the mate, and
were received as evidence that everything done during the
voyage was lawful.
“ Although scarcely able to walk without assistance, I
was present in the Magistrates’ room, and met the Board
on the 25th July, and requested an adjournment for a
week, undertaking to hand in then a written statement with
dates and particulars. I stated that I was much too weak
to give evidence that day, and that I thought it unfair to
receive evidence not on oath, and that I had serious
charges to prefer against the captain of the ‘Jason,’ or
H


words to that effect. The Board told me there was no case
before them. I then asked what was the object of the
inquiry ? The Board on this consulted together, and after-
wards Mr. Bligh told me that the Board would excuse my
attendance, and that I might go home. The inquiry pro-
ceeded, and on the 26th July was adjourned until the 9th
August. On the 9th August, I received a notice to attend
on the 9th August. At that date, the ‘ Jason ’ had sailed
from Maryborough to Sydney with the captain, mate, and
all the crew who had given evidence to the Board. Under
these circumstances, 1 thought I paid the Board the
respect it was entitled to, when I replied to my notice to
attend on the 9th August, that I would attend neither on
that day nor at any other time.
“ My official instructions as Government agent did not
reach me until the middle of the day on which the ‘Jason ’
sailed, and I was, therefore, unable to provide myself with
the means of carrying them out, or even of sufficiently
learning their contents, as the vessel was hurried off with-
out reference to me. My papers were handed to me in
the street by Mr. Faircloth, the immigration agent; and,
in handing them to me, he said I should be required to
inspect the stores in the ship, but that, he believed, that
Mr. Travis, being the agent, I should find everything all
right.
‘‘ Under Instruction No. 3, I found when I joined the
ship that she was licensed to earn- one hundred islanders ;
a number, in my opinion, much too large; no part of the
space which ought to have been allotted to them w r as ob-
liged to be used for storage of sails and stores. In this
respect I found that the vessel had been previously passed
by Mr. Faircloth and her license granted. No papers
other than a letter from the Under Colonial Secretary in
Brisbane, and a copy of the Polynesian Labourers Act, ac-
companied my instnictions.
" Under Instruction No. 4, I have to report that no tea
or sugar was supplied to the islanders returning to the
islands, nor to the islanders brought to Maryborough. I
saw none supplied up to the time of mv confinement in the
ship’s hold, and if any had been supplied while I was there,
I must have known it, as I was chained near to the door of


ihe place where the provisions were kept, l'here was only
one boiler on board, and this was required for the cooking
of yams, rice, and meat. The shirts provided were of
cotton, and not of flannel or wool, as required by the Act.
The blankets supplied were of thin, poor quality. The
islanders were kept naked until within two or three days’
sail of Fairway Buoy, Hervey’s Bay, and they suffered
much from cold as it was winter. I believe that nearly
every one of them had a cold or a cough when they landed,
and that this want of suitable warm clothing was to some
degree connected with the great mortality amongst the
islanders since their arrival. Out of twenty-four taken by
tht Maryborough Sugar Company, seven died in less than
seven weeks.
“ With reference to the duties devolving upon me as Gov-
ernment agent, I found, a few days after sailing, that I was
regarded and treated as a spy, and that any remarks I
made about the way islanders were obtained or treated
afterwards, were met with sneers. As to explaining the
terms of the agreements to the islanders, the Government
agent is in the hands of so-called interpreters, who are
almost always South Sea Islanders, and always entirely
under the influence of the officers of the ship. In talking
on this subject with the mate at an early part of the
voyage, he asked me how I could know whether the is-
landers were properly engaged, and understood their agree-
ments. I said that I must depend upon their interpreter.
He told me that the ship was not going to find an in-
terpreter for the Government, and that if I depended for
information upon their interpreter, I should be mistaken,
for he would manage him. I said that then all I could do
was to report to the Government, and that there might
be a difficulty in getting another license. He replied that
a Government agent could easily be got rid of by giving
him a dose or a lift overboard when nobody was looking.
Conversations like this took place several times at the
cabin table, when I believe both the captain and Mr. Haw-
thorne were present.
“ On the 7th June, when off Amboym, the captain came
into the cabin and said we were in luck, as two canoes were
coming off with men for us. One of the canoes took fright


and made off. The two ship’s boats went after the other
canoe. The mate went in one of the boats. The mast
of the canoe was struck down, and 1 saw a shot fired at
the canoe from the boat the mate was in. The ‘ Jason’
also bore down upon the canoe. The canoe was hauled
alongside the vessel, and a ship’s boat was on each quar-
ter of the canoe. Nine islanders and a boy six or seven
years old were forced on board the ‘Jason,’ the last is-
lander being hoisted up by a rope being passed under his
arms. On seeing this plain kidnapping, I told the cap-
tain that these men did not wish to come with us. He
was at this time in the canoe, stealing the pigs in her, and
handing up arrow's. He shouted out to me from the canoe
in an insolent manner, ‘When you open your mouth,
speak so as to be understood.’ He came on deck very
soon afterwards, and approaching where Mr. Hawthorne
and I were standing, said to me, ‘How do you like it?’
1 replied, ‘ Not at all.’ And I went into the cabin. He
immediately followed with a loaded revolver in his hand,
called me a scoundrel, and threatened to shoot me through
the head. I cautioned him, and he ordered me on deck,
saying that the cabin was no place for me. He followed
me with the loaded revolver still in his hand, and I called
Mr. Hawthorne to witness that I was chased from the
cabin with a loaded pistol. The captain then threw the
pistol violently down, and wanted to fight me. He said
he did not know me as Government agent; taunted me
with not drinking; said that I was only Mr. Travis’s boy,
and that Mr. Travis would make a poor little man of me
when I got to Maryborough if I reported anything un-
favourable of the ship. While this was going on, I be-
lieve the canoe escaped with some ten or twelve islanders
in her. After this I w»as shading myself from the sun
under the sails forward, when the captain ordered me to
come aft, saying that I had no right to be among the
islanders, and he kept me in the sun for five or six hours,
which gave me a violent headache for the whole of next
day. Then the islanders who had been stolen were
brought aft by the captain’s orders, and he said to me,
‘lf you think these men have been stolen, you can ask
them ; and if they say they have, I will put them ashore.’


The mate went forward for the interpreter, and after
having a short conversation with him. brought him aft.
The captain tnen told the interpreter. Tommy Tassoa,
to ask the islanders whether they wanted to go ashore, for
if they did, he would land them in the ship’s boat. The
interpreter seemed to ask them something, and he told us
that they did not want to go ashore, that they were all
right. 1 was convinced in my own mind that all this was
a deception ; and the more so as the next day some of
them were crying, one of them bitterly, and pointing to
the shore. T heard Tommy Tassoa tell the mate not to
sail too near the coast, as the islanders from the canoe
might jump overboard and swim ashore. When we were
near Mallicolo, the whole of the islanders stolen from the
canoe went forward, and began to sing loudly enough to
be heard from the shore. I asked an islander who had
been taken from Apii to interpret for us at Amboym, under
our premise to be landed again at Apii' (which promise
was broken, as he was brought to Maryborough, and is
now in the employ of Mr. John Eaton), what these is-
landers were singing. He said they were telling them on
shore that a bad wind came, and they could not get to
Amboym, and ship come and catch them.
“ These occurrences showed me most clearly that f was
quite powerless to prevent any ill-doings, and that even my
own personal safety depended upon my being extremely
cautious in what I said or did.
“On the 12th June, the captain asked me in the after-
noon to take some wine with him to show that I bore him
no animosity. T told him I would do so. but that I would
still do my duty, and that he must not be deceived. He
said, ‘ Tf T thought you would report me. you would never
see Maryborough, as it would be very easy to put you out
of the way; and that I surely could not be so cruel, as
it would completely ruin him and his family. I took
about a wine-glassful of wine out of a tumbler, standing
at the time in the cabin in front of the captain’s berth.
I do not recolle -t leaving the place where I was standing.
I seem to recollect being seized and dragged on deck.
The next thing I remember was finding myself in the ship’s
hold amongst the islanders, handcuffed and chained. T


suffered greatly front want of water. Two or three times
afterwards the captain wanted me to take more wine, and
tried to force me to drink it. On these occasions the
captain was generally accompanied by a sailor named
George Parsfield. I was confined in the ship's hold, hand-
cuffed and chained until the day before the ’ Jason’ ar-
rived at Woody Tsland, Hervey’s Bay. Then the chain
only was removed, and not until the following morning
were the handcuffs taken off. When the ‘Jason’ was
visited by Mr. Sheridan, the Water Police Magistrate at
Maryborough, 1 was still in the ship’s hold amongst the
islanders, unable to stand or go on deck. From the 12th
June, when I was drugged, I was totally unable to note
carefully what took place on board, and was often quite
unconscious of what I said or did.
“I may be permitted to say that my undertaking the
office of Government agent on board the ‘Jason’ was owing
to my being wishful to see the South Sea Islands, and to
my hat ing always felt an interest in the islanders. What
I have witnessed of the Queensland Polynesian trade has
convinced me that it is abominably and incurably im-
moral.
When I saw, as it was so plain to see in the mock
enquiry into the proceedings of the ‘ Jason’ at Mary-
borough. that the persons engaged in this wicked trade
can take shelter under the influence of a Minister of the
Crown, it was clear to me that there was no sincerity in
the loudly-professed desire that the whole of the truth
and facts connected with the ‘ Jason’ should be brought
to light, and the offenders, if any, punished. I had no
course open to me but to send in to the Government my
resignation as Government agent. I have done so, and
my resignation has been received and accepted.
" Having had not merely my character foully assailed,
but my life attempted, while an officer under the Queens-
land Government, and while in discharge of my duties as
such officer, and finding that no redress was obtainable
from those to whom I was responsible, and from whom
I had a first claim to be protected, it was impossible for
me to preserve my self-respect and not tender my resig-
nation as a magistrate of a territory so governed. I have


therefore tendered my resignation as a magistrate of the
territory, and my resignation has been accepted and
gazetted.
“ It appears necessary to add that though I have not
been requested by the Government to furnish a report
as their Government agent, it has seemed to me that to
do so would be only to close appropriately and formally
such official relation."
This remarkable statement was revised by Mr. Brookes,
and he accompanied Mr. Meiklejohn when he presented it
to the Colonial Secretary, and the interview was not a
pleasant one. Mr. A. H. Palmer, who afterwards was
generally known as Sir Arthur Palmer, endeavoured to
brow-beat them, and to treat the statement as altogether
unworthy of credence, and some sharp verbal passages-at-
arms passed between him and Mr. Brookes. “ What right
had Mr. Brookes there ?’’ he asked. “ Why was he med-
dling in the matter ?" The whole report to him was con-
cocted testimony which he regarded with the “utmost
contempt." “ Yes," said Mr. Brookes, “ that was pre-
cisely the way in which we regarded the sham inquiry at
Maryborough. So they might still strike a balance be-
tween them.” He was there as Mr. Meiklejohn’s friend,
and he intended to remain. As Mr. Brookes would not
leave, the Colonial Secretary sent for the Crown Solici-
tor to be present, and at length became more reasonable,
and said that the Government had seen nothing “ to make
them think that the ‘Jason’ had done anything
wrong, and that if any further evidence was forthcoming
they would see that justice was done.” This was all that
could be obtained at the interview. Mr. Brookes was not
satisfied. Mr. Meiklejohn’s statement was evidently true,
and he was determined that the matter should not be
hushed up. He continued the agitation, and at consider-
able expense of time and money, aided by the subscrip-
tions of sympathisers, counsel was employed, and witnesses
secured, and the captain was arrested, and ultimately
brought to justice. There was much public excitement
over this event, and the trial lasted six days, ending in the
captain being sentenced to five years’ imprisonment and a
fine of fifty pounds. This captain was one of the most


notorious kidnappers of the natives of the Polynesian
Islands. He was generally supposed, whether true or
not, to he the man who personated the saintly
Bishop Patterson, and by deceiving the natives,
led to the bishop being murdered. Dressed in full
canonicals, it is said, this captain welcomed a large
number of natives on board his vessel, and while
pretending to talk to them in a religious way, he
ordered his crew to break holes in their canoes, and
surrounding them while they were on board, sailed away
with them. The bishop, arriving some little time after-
wards at the same islan 1 was murdered by the natives who
had seen their fellow-islanders thus kidnapped.
This captain, after he was set at liberty—and he was
before the full time of his imprisonment had expired, by
the clemency of the Government, who evidently, it is to be
feared, favoured the traffic—went into the business again,
and was ultimately killed by a poisoned arrow from the
bow of a South Sea Islander : a fate he certainly richly
deserved.
But the agitation caused by these events, and
other grim incidents, which every now and then were made
public, did much to bring the employment of coloured
labour into discredit, though those in power, and those
who were deriving wealth from it strove hard to shield it,
and to hide the infamies connected with it. Another
Select Committee was appointed by the Legislative As-
sembly in 1876, but little came of that. It was not con-
ducted in a much better way, Mr. Brookes says, than the
previous one. Much of the evidence taken was made to
countenance the questionable transactions of the labour
vessels, and toned down tosuit the dominant members of the
Committee. Mr. Brookes gave evidence, but knowing
how difficult it was from his former experience to state
clearly before the Committee the facts lie had accumu-
lated, without being led into verbal entanglements by ad-
verse questions, he prepared a careful statement to pre-
sent. This was accepted after much demur, and was
ultimately printed in the records of the Committee’s pro-
cedures. It was a very lucid narrative, and contained
some telling incidents and strong arguments, and must


have made a. deep impression. Hut still the trade con-
tinued, though there were stricter regulations adopted,
and more careful means taken to secure the islanders.
And Mr. lirookescontinued on the alert to use every oppor-
tunity to expose this forced immigration of blacks. Every
shameful incident was brought as far as possible before
the public in the pages of the journals, or at public meet-
ings ; and sometimes he was threatened with actions for
libel for his trenchant exposures. One amusing incident
took place. The captain of one of the vessels and some
of his crew were reported to have been massacred on one
of the islands, and Mr. Brookes, obtaining the captain’s
portrait, put it in his shop window, and in bold type in-
scribed under it, “ Killed and eaten." The crowd gathered
around the window, and no small amount of horror was
expressed at the fate of the captain. But not long after
he arrived in Brisbane safe and sound, and he was incited
by his friends to sue Mr. Brookes for libel. A letter was
sent to him from a lawyer of the usual kind demanding an
apology. Though Mr. Brookes thought that it would be
a curious thing to prove in a court of justice that to sug-
gest that the captain of a kidnapping ship among cannibal
islands had been killed and eaten, when he was alive, was
to " hold him up to public ridicule, hatred, and con-
tempt'’ ; yet for peace sake he decided that it would be
better to make the amende honorable in the pages of the
“Courier.’’ He did so in the following terms:—
“ To Captain Kilgour, ‘ May Queen.' —During the day
I have made two unsuccessful efforts to see you personally,
and have written you wishing for a personal interview. In
order, however, that no time may be lost in bringing about
an explanation, 1 adopt this public method of reaching
you, as the matter in hand seems to me to be more of
a public than a private character, and because, if I have
injured you or anybody else publicly, it- is only reasonable
that the reparation should be as public as the injury.
“ I never saw you, nor do I know anything whatever
about you as a private gentleman. T only know you by name
as the eaptam of the ‘ May Queen,’ a vessel employed in
bringing Polynesians from their native homes to Queens-
land. That vessels so employed are engaged in an un


hallowed calling, I have always thought, and have ex-
pressed my opinions to this effect frequently both pub-
licly and privately. I regard the trade as one which we
ought not, as a colony, to be engaged in or mixed up
with. 1 believe it cannot be carried on except at the
cost of moral and political principles which should not be
tampered with, but, on the contrary, held in honour and
kept sacred.
“ When the news came of the massacre of yourself, your
crew, and of all the islanders on board the ‘ May Queen’ —
although shocking in the extreme —yet there was nothing
in it which surprised those who had an acquaintance with
the South Sea Island ' labour - traffic. Such events had
been heard of before, and in the light of the narrative of
the Government agent of the ‘ Lucy and Adelaide - —
another ‘ labour’ vessel—published in to-day's ‘ Courier,’
we can only go on expecting such events to happen again,
and to be always happening. The traffic is carried on at
continued risk of such things, and the best authorities
agree that it is impossible to have it otherwise.
“ I am not willing to think that you seriously believe me
capable of holding you or anybody else up to public ridi-
cule, scorn, or contempt. I have never hesitated to hold
up the system of obtaining Polynesians for Queensland
uses to scorn and contempt, deeming it a personal disgrace
to every inhabitant of the colony, and the more insuffer-
able because he seemed so powerless to abolish it by our
duly constituted legislative authorities. I feel nothing but
sentiments of regret that, as far as captains, sailors, and
ships are concerned, the trade should be possible. I hope
to see the time when it will die out from universal refusal
to engage in it.
“ So far from rejoicing in your death, I am exceedingly
glad that the whole account was untrue, and ask you to
believe in my sincerity in writing this. I also trust that
you will accept this in the friendly spirit in which it is
written, and allow me to remain, dear Sir,
Yours truly.
WILLIAM BROOKES.”


Nothing more was heard from the captain, and this
ripple on the troubled waters blew over without much ad-
vantage from the mistake to the labour side. The cause
for which he was fighting was gaining ground. There was
still the disposition to uphold it by the successive Gover-
nors of the colony and the Ministers of the Crown, and
Mr. Brookes complains that even the working classes, who
ought to have been keenly interested in the question, were
very apathetic. His enthusiasm to preserve the colony
from this black stain upon her fame demanded from others
an eager, whole-hearted response, and unless he met with
this, he was dissatisfied. Some Quakers visited Brisbane,
and knowing the reputation which this body of religionists
had for philanthropy, he thought they would listen to him
with sympathy, and go back to England strongly moved
to help him in the battle, and would stir up the Society
there to agitate the public against the evils that existed.
But in this he was disappointed. “ They had the Quaker
acuteness, he says, “in seeing how money was to be
made, and the Quaker aptitude in turning corners and
walking in bye-paths, so that objectionable ways of making
money might be made more presentable, and less likely to
run counter to tender consciences. To my pre-eminent
reasons why coloured labour should not be allowed to
obtain a footing in Queensland, these Quakers were as
blind as bats. I was amazed and grieved to find them so,
but that they were so, and contentedly so, was indisput-
able.” They could understand the horrors of slavery in
its old-fashioned guise, but in this milder form, with so
many legal safeguards and regulations it seemed altogether
different and almost innocuous. So he washed his hands
of the Quakers. He could not move the editors of Eng-
lish magazines to discuss the question. He wrote articles
for the “ Leisure Hour,” and “ Sunday at Home,” and
“ Fraser’s Journal,' and other publications, but they sel-
dom appeared. Vested interests and monied influence
were on the side of his opponents, and it was continually
represented that the laws regulating the traffic were suffi-
cient to prevent the infliction of gross wrongs, and that
what outrages were said to be committed were exceptional,
or had been much exaggerated: and so his appeals were


often unheeded. But some of his work told, and he was
pleased to see as time went on the evil diminish and the
trade fall into disrepute. He says, “ The difficulty of
obtaining Polynesians in any way, whether by purchase
from the chiefs by fraud, or by barefaced kidnapping, was
gradually growing. The sugar-planters were having the
conviction forced upon them that this labour system was
working violently against the grain of the opinion of the
colony, and this part did not increase the confidence of
bankers, who had all the sugar-planters under the thumb.
Bankers began to look over their advances on sugar pro-
perty with a view to curtail them and call them in. The
prospects for all who had invested in them, or gone into
debt on account of them, were cloudy. The Legislature
had a majority, and it was disposed to contend with public
opinion, and to assist the sugar-planters ; but all the Legis-
lature could do was not enough to prevent the downward
tending of sugar-planting as a vested interest.”
This probably weighed more with many than the moral
aspects of the question. The kanakas might be entrapped
and wrongfully brought to work on the cane fields : there
might be occasional murders and massacres ; overseers
might be orutal, and utterly demoralised by the arbitrary
power they possessed over the gangs of blacks employed ;
these poor creatures might die at the rate of eighty in the
thousand ; but all this was little in comparison with the
fact that it was beginning not to pay! It is certain that in
the early eighties it was the general impression that this
kind of coloured labour was doomed. Efforts were to
be made to obtain coolies to work on the sugar fields in-
stead. for it was not easy to keep up a profitable supply
of Polynesians.
But in 1881 a vacancy in the North Brisbane
electorate occurred by the removal of Mr. A. H. Palmer,
who had been knighted, to the Legislative Council. He
was a strong supporter of the Government, which was
then led by Sir Thomas McTlwraith, one of Queensland’s
most noted statesmen. Sir Samuel \Y. Griffith was also a
member for North Brisbane, and was the leader of the
Opposiiion. The two members had sat on opposite sides
of the House, and now on the retirement of Sir A. H. Pal


mer, Sir Samuel Griffith hoped to win the seat for his
party. He was looking round for a suitable candidate, and
in conversation with Mr. Brookes, the idea presented itself
that he might successfully contest the seat. Since 1868
Mr. Brookes had remained in business, but he was retiring
from it, and he was willing to avail himself of the oppor-
tunity of entering Parliament again, as he was strongly
opposed to the party in power, not only on general
political principles, but because it was largely the
coloured labour party. In the address Mr. Brookes issued
he makes this question prominent. He says, “ A pet idea
of the present Government is the introduction of coolie
labour. 1 have always regarded coloured labour as the
deadly and implacable enemy of everything which makes
the colony worth living in. It possibly may make a
few rich, but it unquestionably makes the many
poor and miserable. It breeds a mushroom aris-
tocracy. It makes the ballot box an anomaly.
It upsets all social conditions under which we live,
and if it becomes general, will eventually sink
Queensland to the degraded level of a Crown colony in
which freedom of speech and personal action are unknown.
I would have no parley with it, make no compromise with,
it, but remove it from the list of our irritating public ques-
tions by bringing in a copious and sufficient supply of
European immigration.” The contest for the seat was
fought mainly on this issue. His opponent, Mr. John Sin-
clair, was the avowed Government candidate, and was
strongly backed by that party. He was an ironfounder in
the city, an employer of some importance, and had been
the Mayor, and was, as most thought, sure of the seat.
But Mr. Brookes was returned by a substantial majority of
three hundred and fifteen. The tide of public opinion was
rising against coloured labour and the party that upheld
it.
At the declaration of the poll Mr. Brookes asserted
that his election was a direct answer to the question
whether the city of Brisbane was satisfied with the policy
of the Government. “ You have.” he said to the electors,
“administered a very powerful vermifuge to the army of
adventurers, carpet-baggers, and parasites of every descrip


tion who have, during the past few years, made the colony
a favourite financial resort"; and their decision, he hoped,
would tend to a revival of political honesty and common-
sense throughout the colony. He was doubtless a little
elated by his success, and it was pardonable. He could
not help drawing comparisons between his position then
and when he was defeated in 1867. He was at that time
entangled in business cares, and had temporarily lost his
hold upon the public; but now he was able to retire from
his business with a comfortable competence, and to enter
the political arena unembarrassed with financial worries,
and with the satisfaction of knowing that a large amount
of public opinion was on his side in the battle he intended
to wage against the strongly-entrenched principles of his
opponents. Reflecting on this change, he recognises the
Divine goodness that has led and sustained him, and
makes this observation:—“Placed again in a position of
public trust I was aware that this was not owing to the
strength of my right hand. It was not for me to say ‘my
power and the power of my hand hath gotten me
this wealth,’ and replaced me in this post of honour.
Rather was it for me to remember the Lord my God, and
acknowledge that these deliverances, guidances, and pro-
motions were from Him, and to ponder well, more than
ever, the path of my feet. Not to forget Him, and get
bewildered and lost a second time, but to go softly and
gently, looking to Him for the wisdom, prudence, and dis-
cretion so much needed, and willing with all the strength
of a cheerful will to be in His hands as a happy and a re-
joicing instrumentality.” It was in this spirit he entered
the House, and his opponents were often puzzled with his
calm audacity in attacking those in power, and his ap-
parent insensibility to their cynical and acrid efforts to
silence him. He had a mission to fulfil, and every oppor-
tunity was taken to further it. He was a frequent speaker
at this time, and his attacks were- most frequently made
upon the head of the Government, Sir Thomas Mcll-
wraith, one of the most astute and strong-minded Premiers
that has as yet appeared in the history of Queensland.
Just then he had initiated a most bold and venturesome
project which might possibly have advantaged the colony


in the future, but which was a scheme too large and costly
for the colony then to undertake. It would probably have
ended in making some capitalists rich, but burdened the
country heavily with debt. He proposed what was called
the Transcontinental Railway scheme. This was to grant
power to an English syndicate to construct a railway
through the interior of the State, from a place in the south,
near Charleville, to extend for about one thousand miles,
to some point in the Gulf of Carpentaria; and it was pro-
posed, Mr. Brookes says, that the syndicate should receive
between eleven and twelve millions of acres of land in
sections of fifteen miles by five on each side of the line
for constructing it; and when completed the railway was
to be their property, and if sold to the Government after-
wards they were to receive all that the railway had cost in
its construction, and if the sale was forced by the Govern-
ment fifteen per cent, over the cost was to be added. This
was the pretentious, daring scheme which this energetic
statesman propounded, and a syndicate was actually
formed of bankers and others in London and Queensland
to carry it out: contracts for steel rails, it was said, were
promised, and the whole business was arranged, waiting
only the consent of Parliament.
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith and his friends—whether true
or not —were strongly suspected too of not being unin-
terested promoters of this projected syndicate of land-
grant railway, which, of course, laid him and other
members of the Government open to legitimate attack;
though many were fascinated by the very audacity of
the proposal. It seemed such a magnificent concep-
tion. and likely to ensure the aggrandisement of the
colony. Would it not open up the interior for many
agricultural and commercial enterprises? Would it not
bring capital into the colony, and create a vast amount
of work. Would not populous townships spring up
all along the line? And would it not shorten postal
communications with Europe by some days, and give the
colony a name and a place among the foremost peoples of
the earth ? So this bold dream of causing the colony to
leap at once into wealth and notoriety was dilated upon by
its promoters, and many listened, wondered, and admired.


But the more prudent statesmen saw that with the sparse
population and undeveloped resources then existent it
would only lead to serious financial difficulties and dis-
asters. Would it not lock up much of the land in the
hands of absentee proprietors and fortune-hunting specula-
tors? Would it not burden the people with taxation to
purchase the railways, and to run them, while much of the
land assets to relieve the burden would have gone into the
pockets of the syndicate ? And the coastal towns, already-
growing in importance, would lose much of their trade and
be ruined.
It was doubtless too vast a scheme for a sparsely popu-
lated colony. The risk would be too great. This
project and the attempt to bring large numbers of
coolies into the colonies for the stations and plantations
produced much political agitation, and prepared the way
for the Opposition, led by Sir Samuel W. Griffith, "to over-
throw the Government. Sir Samuel Griffith had travelled
through the colony, exposing the weak places in this re-
markable proposal, and also advocating the abolition of
coloured labour. Mr. Brookes and others visited the
northern towns for the same purpose, and when the next
general election, of 1883, took place, a large majority of
members were returned in opposition to the Government.
Mr. Brookes was returned again as the colleague of Sir
Samuel Griffith for North Brisbane, having successfully
contested the seat with Mr. John Douglas, who afterwards
was knighted and appointed Governor of Thursday Island.
Mr. Brookes was regarded as the stalwart henchman of
the leader of the Opposition, and rendered yeoman's ser-
vice to him and his party in the House. He was prepared
to loyally follow Sir Samuel Griffith, especially as he had
pledged himself then to lessen and ultimately abolish
coloured labour. When the House met, Sir Thomas Mc-
Ilwraith and his followers made a desperate stand for their
policy, but they were defeated and resigned. Sir Samuel
Griffith was called to the Premiership, and formed a strong
Government. Mr. Brookes did not take office, but in the
legislation effected, such as shaping a new Land Bill to
foster settlement; the extension of coastal railways; the
discussion that arose over the proposed division of the


colony into two or three provinces; the Land Tax Bill;
and the promoting of legitimate immigration; and especi-
ally in endeavouring to settle the troublesome black labour
question, his voice was frequently heard, and his trenchant
speeches generally arrested attention.
He was sanguine at this time that the work of freeing
the colony from the black labour stain was to be crowned
with success. Some terrible outrages were committed
by the captain and crew of a ship called the “ Hope-
ful," which caused great excitement at this period, and
led to the demand again for a commission to investi-
gate the conduct of the shippers engaged in the labour
trade. The captain and boatswain of the "Hopeful"
and some of the crew had forcibly dragged the islanders
on board who had come to trade; men and women
had been fired upon and murdered, while others had
swam wounded and bleeding to the shore; canoes had
been upset and broken to pieces, while the islanders
struggling in the water had been seized and brutally put
under the thwarts of the ship’s boats to prevent their
escape. The crew-, led by these men, had landed on the
islands, shot down the natives, fired their houses, and pur-
sued them into the bush, and in the most outrageous way-
secured their ship load of kanakas. By some means the
record of this voyage became kn jwn, and the boat was
seized, and the captain, boatswain, Government agent, and
a number of the crew were brought to trial. The dis-
closures made were sufficient to sentence the captain and
boatswain to death, and the agent to penal servitude for
life, five years to be spent in irons; and seven of the crew
were sentenced to various terms of imprisonment. There
was much public excitement over these trials, and strange
to say, some attempted to have the sentences set aside.
An agitation was got up by the sympathizers with the
traffic, and a petition signed by twenty-eight thousand
names to get them reprieved, and a deputation actually
waited upon the Prime Minister to beg for mercy for these
murderers and kidnappers! But the plea urged was the
most damaging to the whole South Sea labour trade that
could have been devised. They asked for mercy for these
criminals on the ground that “ these atrocities were so
i


common in the traffic that it was hard to make these men
the first victims of a stricter application of the laws!”
Surely this admission was sufficient to condemn the busi-
ness in the eyes of every thoughtful citizen. The sentences
of the two chief offenders were ultimately commuted to
penal servitude for life, and the Government agent died
while undergoing his punishment in irons, ft was more
and more evident that the kidnapping of the islanders was
attended by shameful deeds and outrages, despite Acts of
Parliament and stricter supervision. So a Royal Commis-
sion was appointed in 1885, and the evidence given before
it was very condemnatory. All available witnesses respect-
ing the operations of six labour vessels during one year
were examined. The inquiry was to be made:—“ x. As
to the circumstances under which the islanders were en-
gaged. 2. The manner in which the nature of the en-
gagements was explained to them. 3. The understanding
by the recruits of the nature of the engagements, and the
period for which they had agreed to serve.” The vessels
selected for examination were the “ Ceara,” “ Lizzie,”
‘Hopeful,' “Forest King,” “ Heath,” and “Sybil.” all of
which had sailed under the strictest bonds and regulations
of the Polynesian Labour Act.
A few paragraphs from the report of this Commission
may be quoted. With respect to the “Ceara”:—“ Our
opinion is that all the recruits brought by the ‘ Ceara ’ on
this voyage were seduced on board by false pretences;
that the nature of their engagements was never fully ex-
plained to them ; that they had little or no comprehension
of the nature of the work they had to perform ; that the
period for which they agreed to come was in no single
instance for three years.”
Also that: —“ On reviewing the whole evidence as to re-
cruiting on this voyage of the ‘ Lizzie ’ we are of opinion
that while some of the natives were forcibly kidnapped, all
of them were allured on board by false statements : that
the nature of the engagement to which they subsequently
attached their marks was deliberately misrepresented to
them; and that they had no clear understanding that ihey
were coming to work on a Queensland sugar plantation for
three years.”


With regard to the “ Hopeful " it declares that:—“ The
history of the cruise of the ‘ Hopeful,' . . . from the
evidence submitted to us, is one long record of deceit, cruel
treachery, deliberate kidnapping, and cold-blooded mur-
ders. The number of human beings whose lives were sac-
rificed during the recruiting can never be accurately known.
In addition to the two men killed at Samaroa for which
Williams and M'Neil were tried and condemned by the
Supreme Court, the stories narrated to us more than
confirmed the facts brought out at the public trial.'’
About the “Forest King,” the report states: —“We
are of opinion that all the recruits brought by the ‘ Forest
King ’ were decoyed on board under false pretences; that
the nature of their engagement was never explained to
them: and that none of them understood they were to
work on a sugar plantation for any period, much less for
three years.
Similar declarations were made respecting the other
ships. In the most innocent methods used, a great deal of
deception had to be practised, for the captains had to
display “ a tempting array of tomahawks, knives, tobacco,
and calico—in fact, those articles most coveted by the
inhabitants of the islands of the Southern Seas,” and it
was stated, “ Presents of trade more or less liberal, and
promises of other supplies, generally secured a ready ac-
quiescence to the proposal to go in the boat or ships.”
Also that:—“The love of home of these islanders
amounts to a passion, and the recruiting agents had to
overcome dislike to practical exile by assurance that they
would not be absent for any length of time. Wherever
there was pronounced unwillingness on the part of natives
to go in the boats or remain in the ships they were too
often impressed by threats, though cases of overt kidnap-
ping were confined almost wholly to one voyage—namely,
to that of the ‘ Hopeful ’ —as was also the dastardly act of
wrecking canoes and driving the occupants into the water
that they might be rescued by the ship’s boats.”
Also that:—“ Even under the most favourable circum-
stances the natives had very little conception of the real
purpose for which they were invited on board or engaged
to go in the ship to Queensland.”


The evidence against the traffic was complete, and Sir
Samuel W. Griffitn's Government decided to wipe it out.
It arranged to send all those islanders who had been brought
under the notice of the Commissioners, as unjustly ob-
tained, back to their native homes, and this was done at
a cost of some thousands of pounds, and a Polynesian
Labourers’ Amendment Act was passed, which declared
that after the 31st of December, 1890, no more licenses to
obtain Polynesians should be granted. Well might Mr.
Brookes rejoice and think that his labours had not been
in vain; that the goal of all his efforts had been reached.
In this way he commented upon this action of the Go-
vernment: —“My only regret was that such a declaration
had not been made long before, as was possible, and as
would have been made, but for the apathy of the colony
which was reflected by the successive Governments. The
fixing of a date was, however, to give the employers of
Polynesians to clearly know that on this kind of labour
they must not depend, and that they must make other ar-
rangements. Amongst whatever arrangements they might
make, neither Chinese nor Indian coolies could be in-
cluded. The Griffith Government had passed an Act en-
suring that no Indian coolie should be brought into
Queensland unless the Queensland and Indian Govern-
ments had agreed upon terms, and such agreement had re-
ceived the sanction of the Queensland Parliament. So
that taking all these things into consideration, the danger
to Queensland from coloured labour of any description was
reduced to dimensions so small that as a public question it
ceased to have no appreciable importance. This being so,
I felt that the part of my public work, which had always
ranked first in my estimation, was accomplished, and
though I am aware that dying embers do sometimes break
into flame, still the necessity was gone for any constant
and laborious attention.”
This was his view when his career in the Legislative
Assembly was drawing to a close. Little, perhaps, did he
think then that the question would flame up again with
such virulence that it would become a fiercely burning
question before five years had passed away, and that it
would be still unsettled when the Commonwealth was


established at the commencement of the twentieth century.
Little, too, did he imagine then that Sir Samuel W.
Griffith, would be the leading politician to devise
means for the further continuance of this objectionable
labour. But so it was. Politics are said to be the
science of convenience and compromise, and so they were
in this case, But much may be said for Sir Samuel W.
Griffith’s change of front.
Towards the end of the eighties a financial depression
came. For a few years there had been a period of great
but fictitious prosperity. A ten million loan had been
effected, and this had been spent freely in public enter-
prises, and the effect of this was to stimulate afl kinds of
trades and industries. Population rapidly increased; com-
merce was extended in fresh directions; land rose to
fabulous prices ; allotments that might be purchased in
soberer times for a few pounds were sold for thousands:
speculation became the main source of wealth; fortunes
were made in a few hours at commission agents’ offices;
legitimate trading was too slow, and often much more
money was risked outside a business than in it. A mania for
buying and selling land seized all classes. All values were
inflated, and everything hummed and buzzed withan excit-
ing exuberant activity. But this boom broke, and every-
thing seemed to suddenly collapse and shrink into worth-
lessness. Men who believed they were rich found them-
selves penniless and entangled with inextricable embar-
rassments. Banks closed their doors, and refused to
honour the drafts made upon them. Insolvencies were of
daily occurrence. Trade was stationary, and work was
scarce. All institutions and industries suffered, and in the
midst of this financial distress, Nature, in the shape of
disastrous floods, spread desolation over many districts,
and Brisbane, the capital of the colony, was nearly ruined
by an unparalleled inundation. As these times of distress
approached, and the sugar industry did not flourish in the
face of the impending loss of black labour, an agitation
was commenced to set aside the decision of the Govern-
ment, and to provide again for the obtaining of the
kanakas to work on the sugar fields. And this agitation
-was successful. But before the effects of this agitation


were consummated, Mr. Brookes had left the Legislative
Assembly and had been installed as a member of the
Upper House.
In 1888, a general election took place. Mr. Brookes was
conscious of failing strength and many physical infirmities,
and he very reluctantly came forward to contest his seat
for North Brisbane again. This he did, but he was then
frequently subject to attacks of giddiness, sometimes ob-
liged to hold on to the railings of a fence, or to a chair
to prevent a fall, and once on alighting from an omnibus
he fell heavily to the ground. He was conscious, too, that
his public work was drawing to a close. Yet he yielded to
the request of an important committee of citizens, and was
again a candidate. His appeal to the voters is not without
the old ring of quaintness and vigour. He speaks of his
strenuous efforts to keep out of the colony and all Aus-
tralia " the intolerable pollution of coloured labour,” and
how in “ rather solitary fashion ” he had laboured and
wearily waited until the light had dawned on the minds of
the majority of his fellow colonists. And that with in-
tense thankfulness he saw that there was an “ irresistibly,
strong, universal opinion ” to preserve the colony from
“ Chinese, Indian coolies, Javanese, Cingalese, and South
Sea Islanders”.
“ There are people,” he said, “ who would cart the relics
of their ancestors, if they have any, to the nearest bone-
mill. The god of their idolatry is ‘ Spot Cash.’ They are
the concession hunters, always prowling about to see how
much of the public domain they can pillage from the
people. What cannot be weighed in scales, or be quoted
in a stock exchange, or be bought and sold for money, is
to them not worth a moment’s consideration. In contrast
with this bargaining, huckstering, peddling, sordid policy I
place the high, broad, statesmanlike utterances of Sir S.
W. Griffith, and I think I know which of the two vou pre-
fer.”
He also addressed several meetings dealing with the then
current questions of protection and free-trade, the estab-
lishment of factories, naval defence, loans, and land taxes,
and answering a number of questions in his usual good-
tempered way. though once he had to stop speaking


SPECIMEN OF THE CARTOONS
AT ELECTION TIMES.
The North Brisbane Foot Race: Age tells some but Record more.
A Remim'sence of the North Brisbane Election, 1888.
From the “ Boomerang,”


through an attack of sharp-cutting pains in his chest and a
sense of feebleness. His candidature was strongly sup-
ported by a section of the Press, and especially by the
“ Boomerang,” a journal then run by Mr. J. G. Drake, who
is now the Hon. Postmaster-General of the Commonwealth
and Queensland representative in the Federal Ministry.
This journal, in a series of articles, reminded the electors
of the consistent career of Mr. Brookes, and the brave
work he had done; and declared in vigorous tones that
“ Queensland, cannot spare him yet.” Working men eagerly
strove to return him at the top of the poll. One of them, a
well known poulterer named Rose, was stirred to poetry,
and the following popular ditty gave expression to their
views:
" Electors, on the fifth of May,
In Freedom's cause arise and say,
' Queensland for men. not birds of prey.
And vote for Brookes!
, Who fought your battles in the past ?
Who naiied his colours to the mast.
Till slavery was crushed at last ?
Ye answer, Brookes !
Shall we return to Parliament,
Those on our swift destruction bent.
And when 100 late the deed repent ?
No, vote for Brookes
Up in your might, ye working men.
Who wield the pick, the axe, the pen.
And prove that reason guides you when
You vote for Brookes !
Heed not King Humbug's party cries,
Be bravely true, and calmly wise;
Ships without ballast soon capsize,
And vote for Brookes.
Electors to all Queensland, show
Your arm is strong, you fear no foe,
That Right is might, this being so.
Then vote for Brookes ! "
Signed — A Working Man
But notwithstanding all his efforts and the efforts of his
friends, he was not elected. The political tide was turning.


Bad times made the people dissatisfied and desirous for a
change of Government. Or perhaps it was partly a mani-
festation of the natural law of love of change which
characterises national life everywhere in progressive com-
munities. Progress is seldom made on slow, sure, and
steady lines. It moves forward with strange diversions,
short, backward movements, and fierce on-leaping dashes.
Humanity is made that way. Many doubtless expected
that a more bold and vigorous policy would be initiated
by Sir Thomas Mcllwraith than had been in vogue dur-
ing Sir Samuel Griffith’s Premiership, and they were pre-
pared to take the risk that might ensue from any startling
legislative novelties; and he was contesting with Mr.
Brookes for North Brisbane. Excitement reached a high
pitch. Party spirit bubbled like heated quicksilver. The
feeling was intense. The streets were filled with noisy,
tumultuous crowds. The publicans had dispensed their
drinks very freely, and drunkenness prevailed. The
Chinese shops were broken into and looted, and some of
the owners barely escaped with their lives. All through
the day exciting rumours were circulated, and unseemly
brawls were frequent, and at the close of the poll a scene
resembling pandemonium arose. Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
headed the poll, obtaining i,76r votes; Sir Samuel, 1,127,
and Mr. Brookes, 1,009. Considering the political condi-
tion, and that Mr. Brookes was not a Cabinet Minister,
but had merely been a private member of the House, the
number of votes secured showed that he still retained a
large measure of respect and influence in the constituency.
His state of health, too, hindered him in attempting to ad-
dress many public meetings, and in other ways it lessened
his power to contest the election, and it was not surprising
that he failed. But he was not very much aggrieved that
he had lost his seat in the House. He felt that the in-
creasing infirmities of age made a quieter sphere more con-
genial to him, and it was with much satisfaction that he re-
ceived an appointment, in 1891, to the Legislative Council.
His seat in the Upper House, and the use of the Parlia-
mentary Library, were a source of much pleasure to him.
It kept him in touch with current politics and literature,
and helped to fill the leisure of his closing years with


ever-varying interests. He never ceased to watch the
political fluctuations of opinion which once more rose
around the coloured labour question. For it was not al-
lowed to rest; and he had the bitterness of seeing his work
mainly undone, and the battle which he hoped had been
crowned with victory, commence again ; and Sir Samuel
Griffith, whom he had regarded as the trusty champion in
the fight, apparently turn over to the enemies’ camp
and become their leader.
Political changes had again taken place. Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith, who, in 1888, when Mr. Brookes was
defeated, had become Premier, had quarrelled with his
colleagues over a proposal to spend forty thousand pounds
in building a Central Station in Brisbane, and resigned.
This weakened the Government, and in their attempt to
provide for a serious financial deficit by imposing a heavy
beer and land tax, they were thrown out by a “want of
confidence ” motion being carried, and Sir Samuel Griffith
was sent for to form an administration, and a coalition
Government was created. The two rivals for power
coalesced, and what was called “ the Griffith-Mcllwraith
coalition ” was formed. And in 1892, Sir Samuel issued a
remarkable manifesto on the black labour question, in
which he prepared the way for fresh legislation upon it,
and the continuation of the employment of the Polynesians
on the sugar fields. He says:
“ You are aware that I have been for many years one of
the most determined opponents of the introduction of
servile or coloured labour into Queensland. My objection
has not been on account of the colour of men’s skins, but
I have' maintained that the employment of such labour
under the conditions to which we had become accustomed
was injurious to the best interests of the colony regarded
as a home for the British race, and principally for the fol-
lowing reasons:—
" 1. It tended to encourage the creation of large landed
estates, owned for the most part by absentees, and
worked by gang labour, and so discouraged actual
settlement by small farmers working for themselves.
“ 2. It led to field labour in tropical agriculture being
looked down upon as degrading and unworthy of the
white races.


’• 3. The permanent existence of a large servile popula-
tion amongst us, not admitted to the franchise, is not
compatible with the continuance of our free political
institutions.
To these reasons was added, so far as Polynesian
labour was concerned, the discredit that had been brought
upon Queensland by the abuses that for some years pre-
vailed in me South Sea Island trade.
“I recognise," he said, '• the force of those reasons as
fully as ever.”
Hut he argued circumstances were changed. '• The sys-
tem of large estates worked by gang labour has fallen into
disfavour.” It has been proved that sugar as a profitable
crop can be “ grown by small farmers,” and generally ad-
mitted that it “can be grown by white labour." But
“there are not at present in Queensland a sufficient num-
ber of Europeans able and willing to do the necessary-
work, and to take the place of the Polynesians who are
gradually leaving the colony, and of whom no more can be
introduced under the existing laws.” And the planters do
not •' know.” he said, where to turn for the necessary
labour,” and unless such labour is found “ mills will be
closed and some removed,” and the productiveness of the
lands of the colony seriously diminished. And as the
danger of the aggregation of large estates was past,
and other perils connected with the traffic
had ceased, he proposed to make further provis-
ions *• for preventing abuses in the introduction
ot the labourers, and for preventing them from
entering into competition with white labourers in other oc-
cupations," and also “ that the immigration shall continue
(unless, of course, otherwise determined by the Legisla-
ture) for a definite but limited period of, say, ten years.
P>y that time," lie said, •- 1 have no doubt that such further
developments will have taken place as will enable the
sugar industry to be carried on without fear of our revert-
ing to the former system, with its dangerous incidents and
consequences, and in the meantime I believe that a. valu-
able impetus will be given to the producing industries of
the colony.


" I have not arrived at this conclusion hurriedly, nor, I
confess, without reluctance, and I am not unaware that I
may be charged with inconsistency. ’
But he is not to be deterred by such a charge from pro-
posing what he conceives to be the best practicable means
of furthering the interests of the colony. To many this
manifesto was a painful retrograde step. Others, of course,
welcomed it with acclamation. Sir Samuel Griffith, while
doubtless his motives were patriotic and honourable, seem-
ed to many to have turned a political sumersault. Mr.
Brookes was grieved and wounded to the quick. He
warmly declared that Sir Samuel Griffith was sacrificing
“principles for expediency/’ that he was divorcing ‘politics
from Christian ethics.’’ He feared that he was suffering
from “ decay of conscience,” that “ the legist had swallow-
ed the Christian bones and all.” He did not believe that
the colony would be delivered from its troubles by forsak-
ing “ time-honoured paths or removing venerable land-
marks.” In the Upper 1 louse he deplored the re-introduc-
tion of legislation to prolong this evil. In one of his
speeches there he said:—“ I may say, in the language of
an Irish statesman, that I sat by its cradle, and I thought
that I had gone to its funeral, but events have not turned
out so. It has risen from the dead, as I suppose, and has
now become a very important matter for the consideration
of this and the other House. I have always objected to
Polynesian labour, because from the very beginning it has
been associated with all manner of crimes and abomina-
tions. I do not propose to detain you with a catalogue of
all the hideous atrocities with which Polynesian labour has
been associated. You know it as well as I do : and indeed
the often-told tale has become rather a tale to which we
are indifferent—not really so. but we have heard it so often
that we conclude we know all about it: so that I was more
than surprised when I found the Chief Secretary introduc-
ing this in his manifesto, and making it one of the chief
topics of legislation during this session. I have thoroughly
objected to Polynesian labour, because I never could re-
gard it as anything else than wicked. ‘ Wicked ’ is a word
not often used in this House, but I need not stay to explain
its meaning—you know w r hat I mean. Looking at it in


that light, I have thought what a pity it is that this fair
colony of Queensland should have a page in the volume of
its history soiled so filthily with the records of this Poly-
nesian labour. Looking at it from a religious point of
view—and that also is a point of view from which subjects
in this and the other Chamber are perhaps too seldom
looked at—it seems to me that this depression which has
overtaken the colony is only the consequence of our own
folly. We are only reaping what we have sown; but in
our anxiety to escape from the just consequence of our
own misdoings, we are seeking refuge from any source
whatever; and Polynesian labour has been caught at with
the idea that it will supply all our wants, re-establish our
broken commerce, and give everyone plenty of work and
plenty of bread to eat. Ido not believe a solitary word of
it. I believe that these are all devil’s promises, and that
not one of them will be kept.” He arouses the anger of
one or two hon. members as he proceeds, and the ancient
and venerable senators become excited, and the air is quite
electric with interjections. He refers to Dr. Pa ton’s well
known terrible charges of depleting the islands of all their
young and able-bodied men, leaving the wives and mothers,
the women and the children to fare as best they could; to
the fresh vested interests that would be created by another
ten years of the traffic; the impossibility of controlling the
captain and agents in securing the natives ; and that no
legitimate efforts by the Government to secure white
labour for the planters at suitable wages had
been made, and he utters his solemn protest
against the proposed prolongation of the evil;
but his words met with little sympathetic response. It
was like the cry of a St. John in the wilderness. There was
little opposition to the new enactments. A few warning
voices in the pulpit were heard, and a small section of the
Press continued to oppose the movement, but the bill was
carried through both Houses of Parliament with substantial
majorities.
Certainly, the new Act was an imnrovement
upon the previous ones. It was an admirable piece of leg-
islation, considering the unfortunate questions with which
it had to deal. Its regulations were very complete to pre


vent abuses in the procuring of the natives; the Govern-
ment agents were to be carefully selected and made re-
sponsible for the carrying out of all the stipulations of the
Act; better arrangements were made to prevent immor-
ality on board. A log book was to be strictly kept by the
agent, which was subject to close scrutiny by duly quali-
fied inspectors. Every fitment of the ships with regard to
health, food, clothing, intoxicants, and medical attendance
was carefully specified, and every arrangement possible
made to obtain the islanders and to bring them to our
shores under the most humane conditions. And their em-
ployment on the plantations was placed under the strictest
supervision. If, on landing, the inspector saw that an
islander was unfit for labour, he could order his return to
his island. The engagements with the kanakas by the
planters were to be made in the presence of the inspector,
and money deposited to bear the expenses of their return
when the term of their engagements expired. Proper ac-
commodation and food and hospitals and medical over-
sight were to be provided for them. The kind of work
upon the fields that they were allowed to do was strin-
gently defined; their wages were paid in the presence of the
inspector, who saw that any monies they wished so
placed, were safely deposited in the savings banks. They
could appeal to the inspector if any of their rights were
supposed to be infringed upon, and at the end of their
term of service they could be deported, if they desired,
back to their native isles. All this was arranged for in the
new Act.
And, it must be admitted, that under it most of the
evils associated with the employment of the kanakas
ceased. No recurrence of dastardly kidnapping scandals
happened, and the islanders were generally well treated on
the plantations. Successful efforts, too, were made to
civilise and Christianise them. Churches were built for
them and ministers were employed to teach them the truths
of the Gospel, and preach regularly to them. They might
be seen dressed in the ordinary British fashion and forming
habits common to those around them; some having sub-
stantial accounts in the savings banks; some indulging
themselves in cycling and other amusements, and others,


not wishful to return to their islands, marrying, and settling
in the colony. The sugar industry grew until more than
eleven hundred thousand acres of land were under cane
cultivation, and nearly one hundred and twenty-four thou-
sand tons of sugar were produced annually, and the value
of the amount exported reached over one million pounds
per year. The Government fostered the industry. What
was called the central mill system ” was established, at
a cost of Money could be advanced by the
Government to build a mill for crushing the cane and mak-
ing marketable sugar in the centre of a fertile district
which could be cut up into cane farms of one or two
hundred acres, and these were profitably worked by tile
owners, in most instances, however, with the help of
kanakas, as the labour of trashing the cane especially—
that is, clearing the dead leaves and other refuse away from
the roots —is regarded as unsuitable for the white man in
the tropical heat of the north of the colony where the
sugar grows most luxuriantly. The intense steaming heat
and dust, and the close stifling atmosphere between the
rows of cane, make the work of stooping to remove the
undergrowth almost unendurable for the white man, while
the black man is able to do the work without much ap-
parent discomfort or strain upon his powers of endurance.
About nine thousand kanakas found employment on the
plantations during the decade that followed this legisla-
tion upon the question, and as their work was confined
solely to field work the industry’ gave employment to thou-
sands of white men. It supplied labour for engineers,
artisans, shippers and labourers ; overseers, clerks, and
merchants, and stimulated the trade of the colony in many
ways, and though the number of kanakas did not very
rapidly grow, as the industry was extended, for the system
of working small farms increased, yet they w-ere constantly
being brought from their islands as they were needed.
They began to be regarded as a permanent kind of labour
on the cane fields; and much W’as said in support of the
continuance of this kind of coloured labour. They were a
far less dangerous coloured race than the shrewd, industri-
ous Chinese, or the subtle, intelligent coolie. They were
at home and happy in the work ; they were learning the


rudiments of civilisation and the doctrines of Christianity,
and going back to their islands with higher and nobler
views of life; and many asked why should they not be
brought from their native isles, where they lived in bar-
baric idleness, to take part in the world's industrial pro-
gress. and be bene-'.ted by their contact with a superior
race? Though it might have been better if they had never
been brought here, yet might it not be, that, in the pro-
vidence of God, overruling man’s greed and oppression, the
uplifting of these sable children of heathenism might in
that way be accomplished, and that Queensland was bear-
ing part of “ the white man’s burden ’ in bringing them
under her rule. All this was strongly argued. But when
the federation of the colonies took place, in the commence-
ment of this century, there arose a loud demand for a
" white Australia ” from one end of the Commonwealth to
the other. The Southern States had long regarded the
coloured labour on the Queensland sugar fields with sus-
picion and distaste, and the Labour parlies throughout the
States declared that the kanaka was only employed because
he was cheap, and that the white man could and would do
all the kinds of work required—even the trashing of the
cane —if he were only paid proper wages for doing it, and
if not. it was belter that (he industry should perish than
that the new Australian Commonwealth should be pol-
luted by the intermixing of this alien race with the white
population, and that any workers should be employed
under conditions which no employer dare to offer a white
man. The agitation was again loud and irrepressible. All
over Australia it became a burning question. From all
quarters there arose the cry. “ The kanaka must go.” The
capitalists and many others in Queensland, who believed
that the kanaka was well treated and was necessary to the
industry, and was comparatively innocuous in his influence
upon the white population, protested against any drastic
legislation by the Federal Parliament upon the question,
but in vain. A bill was brought in by Mr. E. Barton, the
Federal Premier, before the first year of the Common-
wealth had expired, that would end the importation and
employment of kanakas in five years. It seems as if the
work of Mr. Brookes, though he had passed away, had


suddenly been resurrected, and was receiving its con-
summation. His words were quoted in the Federal Par-
liament. Though dead, he was still speaking. His spirit
seemed to animate the masses and to lead them with an
ardour unquenchable, to demand that this old blot upon
the honour of Queensland should be for ever wiped away ;
that this black page in its history should end. Doubt-
less, too, many of the ameliorations of the condition of the
kanakas before this, arose from his persistent exposure of
the evils attendant upon the traffic; and the singular tri-
umph of those who fought for a “ White Australia,”
owed much of its sucess from the labours of this first
brave champion of the cause. So often death comes be-
fore the final crowning. But those who fight for right
and humanity can always be sure of ultimate victory, even
if they do not live to see it. To quote one of his favour-
ite hymns,
“ West too is he, who can divine,
Where real right doth lie.
And dares to take the road that seems
Wrong to man's blindfold eye.
For right is right, since God is God :
And right the day must win;
To doubt would be disloyalty.
To falter would be sin.”
Mr. Brookes took part in many public movements, but
contending against coloured labour was the chief work of
his life, and it was not in vain.


CHAPTER XI.
RELIGIOUS LIFE.
Strong souls are restless till the light
Streams oil them as the break of day ;
They cannot dwell ’mid shades of night,
Till morning dawns, they grope their way.
Around them cling ancestral ties,
Truth's thread-bare clothes, time's worn-out creeds;
But on they press till sunlit skies
Make them forget these sombre weeds.
They gain the heights where Love doth bless,
And feed the soul with wisdom's bread;
And now they /o<. w what others guess,
Apd dare to do what others dread
A MAN’S religious instincts and impulses are, without
a doubt, the most essential factors in the formation
of his character and the shaping of his career. They
are the deepest and most enduring of all the emotions that
affect him. His consciousness of responsibility to the
Unseen Ruler of the universe, and his sensitiveness to
the nearness of the great spiritual Presence, in whom he
lives, and moves, and has his being, must perpetually in-
fluence him, and overrule all other motive forces within
him. Some, doubtless, possess larger capabilities for a
religious life than others; they have keener susceptibilities
towards spiritual realities; they possess a more ready re-
sponsiveness to the all-pervading Spirit of God, than those
around them. But all, doubtless, have some measure of
these heavenly gifts; and at some time or other, as they
pass through life, these elements in their being, that are the
basis of the religious life, are awakened in their souls.
They may then cherish and cultivate them, till communion
with God becomes easy and habitual, or they may repress
and eliminate them until He fades away altogether from
their consciousness, and they live in the world without Him.
K


Happy, if in childhood 1 , these religious emotions are
awakened, and the associations around are helpful to their
development. All after years are affected by these youth-
ful experiences. An elevating and sanctifying influence
pervades the life. Such favoured ones naturally reach a
higher plane of existence than those who have never felt
these emotions. And when fostered and allowed to sway
the spirit, these souls become touched with a radiance
from the infinite and eternal. They “ hitch their chariot ”
to the stars. Their way through life cannot be common-
place. They become shining lights in the fixed orbits of
the Divine purposes. They move in the Divine order.
They are raised out of the mere mundane struggle for
material things and are conscious that their real life is
hidden with Christ in God. Their prayers and yearnings
after God fill their days with sacred possibilities, enlarge
their mental horizons, and give a strong assurance of their
ultimate blessedness in a world to come.
There are in this loud stunning tide
Of human care and crime,
With whom the melodies abide,
Of th' everlasting chime,
Who carry music in their heart
' Through dusk}' lane and wrangling mart;
Plying their daily task with busier feet
Because their secret souls a holy strain repeat.
Such are, without doubt, “ the heroes of the earth.”
Often misunderstood and ridiculed by those who have
never heard this heart-music, or have silenced it in worldli-
ness ; but amid many failures, perhaps, and errors, they
hold on their way, do their appointed work, and enter at
last into the heavenly rest.
Mr. Brookes was certainly a religious man. Whatever
tended to obscure this at certain periods of his life was
only a passing cloud. He never lost this “ master light of
all his seeing.” The strongest and most enduring fibres of
his being were his religious sentiments and convictions.
From his earliest days, as we have seen, he was conscious
of spiritual impressions and experiences. The influence of
his godly mother, though she died when he was very
young, was not lost upon him ; and the sterling piety of


his father deeply impressed him. His memory was full of
childish reminiscences of the singing of hymns, prayers,
church services, and intercourse with religious people,
and as he grew up the savour of these things clung to
him, and religious principles guided him, and habits of
devotion were formed. His diaries written in his early man-
hood and during the first years of his business life in
Queensland, unmistakably reveal this. While they record
his views of men, of books, of events, of places and the
circumstances that surrounded him, they are penetrated
through and through with his religious feelings and as-
pirations. His longing for the favour of God; his de-
sire for Divine guidance; his confessions of faults and
failures; his dread of being absorbed in earthly things;
his fear of bringing dishonour upon his Christian profes-
sion ; his sorrow over his want of moral and spiritual
growth; his cries for help in pending troubles and tempta-
tions ; and his pleadings for forgiveness when his feet had
stumbled upon the dark mountains—all are here fully re-
corded, and with a sincerity that cannot be questioned.
With a frankness seldom manifested, Mr. Brookes lets us
into the secret places of his being, and shows us all that
is passing there. He analyses his motives; he turns the
searchlight upon the innermost recesses of his heart, and
does not spare'himself in judging the unpleasant disclo-
sures seen. Such introspection and the open record of
his inner life, that we find in these early diaries are
very rare. We give a few illustrations. We quote
mainly from what was written between the years 1858 and
1864, when he was engaged in business, and eagerly look-
ing forward to enter public life. After that period his
daily records are not so full of his spiritual experiences.
The whirl of politics, the strain of business, and bis after
successful career may have deadened the intensity of his
religious feelings, or may have led to less inclination to
write them. During those years of struggle and aspiration,
we find him writing:—■
“My o.vn spiritual history this week is highly unsatis-
factory. I am much too easily absorbed in earthly en-
gagements. And the solemn enquiry especially presents
itself : ‘lf that be so now, what will be the state of my


heart and mind when in the maelstrom of political strife ?
Oh, my God, am I playing to myself and others the part
of a despicable hypocrite ? Grant me the world-cleansing
influences of the blessed Spirit. Thyself equip me with
the whole armour. I feel myself girding for the coming,
shock, but confess I am finding my own accoutrements.
Defeat under the circumstances is the only possible result.
I know' this, and heartily believe it. Lord, forgive me.
Prepare and take me thoroughly in hand. Mould me;
qualify me, and stand by me. Let me be absolutely
and for ever rid of such motives as worldly ambition, ad-
vancement of family, conspicuous position. Bestow upon
me, for I have it not, a solemnising sense of the magnitude
and immense responsibility of the labour before me. Great
Jehovah ! dwell in me.”
Again—“ 1 confess to many and daily promptings of
an ambition of a kind reaching no further than this w'orld.
To approve myself talented before the public, is a contem-
plation pleasing to my foolish vanity, and sometimes I
pursue the agreeable theme to ludicrous extremes. I
know this mental dreaming is highly enervating; that my
conclusions rest upon aerial premises, and that the time
thus spent is utterly wasted. What a fool lam to slowly
and intentionally shut my eyes to the mountainous dif-
ficulties and avalanche-like dangers all erecting themselves
straight in the path along which I purpose to travel so
jauntily and applaudingly! Thou great august Being! try
my heart and my reins. Purge me; refine me, cleanse me
from vain thoughts. Imbue me with Thy will. Qualified
by Thee I am fit for any work Thou shalt give me to
do, but not else.”
Another time he writes:—“Now', while writing, I de-
plore a distance intervening between God and my soul.
My devotional ardour is chilled, and temporal concerns
are enervating and stifling the spiritual life. This will not
do. It is a growing and advancing evil. What shall I
soon become if it is not arrested? Many times lately I
have enquired where is my communion with God, my reli-
ance upon him, my upward glance’s to Him for present
help ? Ah me ! I see shipwreck of faith and good con-
science staring me in the face, for I hear the surf breaking


Mrs. W. Brookes, died at “Oakden.”


upon reefs and rocks to which I am slowly and wilfully
-drifting. Is it come to this? Oh, Thou, the God of my
fathers, turn not a deaf ear to my cry for deliverance!
The enemy is coming in as a flood, and it is alone for
Thee to life up the standard against him. Losing my
confidence in Thee, recovery is impossible. Oh, leave me
not helpless and undone. I value Thy favour more than
life, and willingly resign earth's fleeting vanities. I desire
again in profound humility to prostrate my soul at my
Saviour’s feet, and to await the exercise of His unfailing
compassion. lam nothing. I can do nothing. lam
puffed up. My vanity is all on the alert. My hand is
eagerly stretched out for baubles. Oh, God! oh, God!
begin again with me. Put me in the furnace till this dross
is melted out. For my wife’s sake, for my family's sake,
now hold me up, for lam truly falling. I never was so
sorely tried, and in my distress I call upon Thee. Let my
prayer come before Thee as incense.”
On another occasion he writes of his feelings while wor-
shipping with Mrs. Brookes at the Wesleyan Church in
Brisbane :—“ I had strange thoughts concerning my spiri-
tual condition. The Holy Spirit gave me power to feel
my coldness and imperfections. I was led to question the
reality of my conversion. This is no new question to me,
but it occurred with vivid force to-day. I have long sus-
pected that my Christianity reached my heart but faintly';
to-day I feel the paramount necessity of a complete reno-
vation of my moral nature. ‘ Oh, that I could believe!
With all my idols part, And to my gracious God present
A humble contrite heart.’ My religion has been destitute
of love, so that I have resembled a watch with no main-
spring, useless for all practical purposes, though, perhaps,
passable enough to a cursory observer. I feel a change
coming over me in this respect, and it makes me thought-
fully thankful. I will not rest until I can use the lan
guage as my own which I have just read in family wor-
ship—' Thou hast loosed my bonds.’ The whole psalm
suited me. I dread a longer continuance in this incom-
plete religious state. Indeed, lam not fit for the Master’s
use till thoroughly fashioned after His will; not fit to
live usefully; not fit to die peacefully. Until He is mine


and I am His, I feel guilty of audacity in claiming His
comfortable promises. It as though a dog should steal
the children’s bread.”
Sometimes he records most gloomy hours. When busi-
ness cares in bad times distressed him, and his biother,
who was then his partner, sick, and he would be glad to
rush anywhere out of the sea of troubles that assailed him,
he cries:
My heart is melted. I feel disposed to abandon the
sinking vessel of our hopes and industries. ‘ Oh, God!’
I exclaim, ‘ hast Thou so severe a discipline in store for
us—an insolvency, a disgrace?’ I have not the slightest
idea what to do, nor much energy to make an effort to save
ourselves. I am cast upon my religious principles. I
can only trust in God. I believe in a special Providence,
and here I rest. My Father! my Father! wilt not Thou
make haste to our help? This day help must be vouch-
safed. I actually dread to go into the shop. Never in
my life did I feel so downcast and abject in spirit. God
help us!”
Again—“ I cannot help feeling that this present time is
a crisis. Although every day is a crisis when things are
looked at properly, there are times of prominence when
certain events take place, which rise like mountains on the
road of life. From these eminences we gain new views,
and additional power to review and estimate the road
travelled. When I look backward I see much for adora-
tion of the Divine goodness which has followed us.
About the future it is not wise to be anxious. I was
much struck with the Scripture, that among those charac-
ters that have their part in the lake of burning with fire
and brimstone, ‘ the fearful’ are noted with the distinction
of the whoremongers and the drunkard ! Lord help me
to come out from among the ‘ fearful,' and by Thy blessed
Spirit be enabled to commit myself, my brother and his
family, and all our affairs with calm, filial confidence to
Thee as our heavenly Father.”
These, and many other selections from his diaries which
might be given, showed how strong were the religious
emotions that then stirred him. Those who saw him busy
with the affairs of his shop, interesting himself in all social


movements, vigorously expressing his opinions on many
agitating questions by tongue and pen, preparing to en-
gage in the strife of party politics, probably little imagined
how deep and vibrating were these inner chords of the
Divine life that sounded in his soul. And yet there was
no conscious “doubleness in his life. He had a very
versatile nature, but he did not try to shape one face
towards God, and one towards his fellow-man. He strove
to live as he prayed, to be guided by God in all his goings.
He would have been the last to say that he came up to his
own ideal. He knew his many failures, his small vanities,
his errors in judgment, his lapses in fidelity to his spiri-
tual principles, and his sins, and these he acknowledged
with simple thoroughness and strove to rise out of them
into the purer and more blissful regions of rectitude and
childlike trust in God. He had, at that time, a very sen-
sitive nature, which was easily stirred by incidental circum-
stances, and the Christian friendships he formed were
warm and sympathetic. He used to attend the social
means of grace called in the Methodist Church, class
meetings. It was a weekly gathering of a few kindred
spirits under a leader, who sought to give counsel to the
perplexed, help to the discouraged, and general instruction
in the doctrines of the Christian faith. Most of the members
spoke, and sometimes related peculiarexperiences of the
power of religion over them, and by their personal applica-
tions of texts from the Scriptures to their circumstances,
opened up new and stimulating views of the truth. It was
generally an emotional hour. Hearts wanned hearts, and
speech became fervent and passionate, and the whole com-
pany would sometimes glow with rapturous sympathy and
love. Mr. Brookes found in these meetings much spiritual
enjoyment.
The leader of one of the classes he attended was
a gentleman well-known in Queensland, Mr. H. Jordan,
who was one of its most sterling and upright members of
Parliament in those days, a man who indeed “feared God,
and wrought righteousness”; of whom it is said he never en-
tered the Legislative Assembly without uncovering his
head and closing his eyes for a moment in prayer, as a
devout man does on entering a temple. When this worthy


man was first returned for Parliament, he conducted his
religious meeting at the church as usual in the evening
of the election day, and calm and unelated in his new
position, he asked for the sympathy and prayers of his
fellow-believers. And Mr. Brookes relates that at the
meeting he and another were asked to pray, and that while
he was praying for Mr. Jordan, that, in his new sphere
of labour for his country, he might be assisted and blessed,
his feelings entirely overcame him. “ The whole history
of the election came full upon my mind—its contingencies
now safely passed, its most happy results, together with
a feeling of warm friendly joy that Jordan should be selec-
ted; all these thoughts came upon me with such tumul-
tuous force that I was quite unable to proceed. Mr.
Smith took up the prayer, and we all felt that we were
being brought to right feelings in relation to political re-
sponsibilities. I could wish that I had more self-control,
as it is not to my taste to exhibit myself in this way, but
it was only before the members of the church, and but
two of them, except mamma and Jordan himself, per-
ceived it, who, I may, add, was infected by my weakness,
and could not conceal it." To be overcome in that way
was no discredit, though it was inconvenient. His was
not a hard nature. There was very little of the stoic about
him. He was easily affected. This sensitiveness leading
to ready sympathy with his fellow-members of the church,
often inspired him to utter helpful words and give happy
turns to his expressions which edified many weak and
troubled souls.
One manifestation of his religious zeal was to take a
deep interest in young men. and to strive to develop in
fhem thoughtful, pious and studious habits. He en-
couraged the formation of societies for them, freely lent
them books, and aided them by wise counsels. It pained
him to see them ignorant of the literature of their nation,
of the lives of great men, and of the noblest standards
of life. He tried to show them that existence held some-
thing better for them than idle sports, complacent loung-
ing, or even making money. He tried to arouse in them
an ambition to develop their best faculties, to choose
worthy pursuits, and to devote themselves to the true ad


vancement of the colony, which, in his opinion, was by
the increase of good citizens and its stalwart manhood.
He believed with Epictetus that “You will do the great-
est service to the State if you shall raise, not the roofs of
the houses, but the souls of the citizens; for it is better
that great souls should dwell in small houses rather than
for mean slaves to lurk in great houses.” Young men of
imperfect education, and who desired to improve them-
selves, ever found in him a sympathetic friend. Whenever
he discovered peculiar talent or ability, he strove to de-
velop it, and by an encouraging word and practical advice,
often aided gifted young people to find their true sphere.
He was very much interested in young men who aimed to
use their gifts in the service of the church, and to become
preachers of the gospel. While the noisy, bumptious,
empty-minded aspirant to pulpit honours met with little
encouragement from him, yet whenever he saw sincerity and
a desire for improvement he was ready at once to give a
helping and encouraging hand. He wrote an article in the
church magazine on “ Young Preachers, and How to Treat
Them,” which was full of wise directions, both to the
people and preacher. “ Perhaps,” he said, “ the young
man came to his work with diffidence, with the best and
utmost possible to him. prepared with scanty leisure and
meagre appliances, and humbly aware that his best is
not much, and a few words of gracious recognition would
relieve his depression, and inspire him with new hopes and
resolves. Who knows? that young man may be a Morlev
Punshon in time to come! Encourage him. Another
way of showing interest in him, and others similarly situ-
ated, is by the loan of suitable books. In vain does he
seek them in our Sunday-school libraries. What he finds
there are mainlv colourless, monotonous, sickly tales, in-
tended to be religious, but as innutritious as the remain-
der biscuit after a voyage. What he needs quite as much
as the right books is guiding away from useless books.
First the right books, then the directions how to read
them., information only obtainable from those who have
wasted hours upon hours in gaining it. After showing him
how to make the most from selected books, then he will
be advantaged by passing an hour a week in oral inter


course with some one who can introduce him to such
subjects as grammar, pronunciation, articulation, arrange-
ment of parts of a subject, style, expression, manner,
and by all these means he may make great progress to-
wards perfection.’’ He drew wisdom out of his own
experiences, as partly a self-educated man, what would
be serviceable to others at the outset of life; and he
spared no pains to impart it to them. He had been
through the toils of gaining knowledge for himself, and
he knew what self-education meant. He always urged
upon young speakers the careful use of words. His own
keen ear for language, his careful accumulation of a
copious vocabulary, and his exactness in the use and pro-
nunciation of words made him a very capable instructor
of aspiring young men. He used himself to read for many
years with a dictionary by his side, never passing a word
that was not familiar to him without obtaining its mean-
ing and its proper pronunciation. And this practice he
urged young men to adopt. Bad enunciation, the care-
less use of words, was always offensive to him, either in
the pulpit or elsewhere. Mutual Improvement Societies
and evening classes for young people ever awakened in
him a genuine interest, and he never seemed happier than
when he was surrounded with a company of young men,
and guiding them through the difficult pathways of self-
culture, or lecturing to them upon some heroic or literary
character, debatable current topic, or historical event.
At one time he was much in request as a lecturer, and
he took considerable pains to interest and inform his audi-
ences. He read widely on the subjects he intended to
discuss, and often carefully wrote his lectures. Not,
however, to read them from his manuscript, for this, in
his opinion, would spoil their delivery, but to fill his mind
with his theme. Neither did he commit them to memory,
and recite them; for, as he says, he had a bad memory
for set forms of words, either of his own making or of
others. But having his mind well stored with his subject,
he could trust largely to the inspiration of the moment for
the best expression of his thoughts; and generally lie
could readily shape his sentences tersely and effectively
as he stood before his audiences, adapting his style and


language to the occasion. To lecture was a labour of love,
and was done gratuitously, never, we believe, receiving a
fee for his work. He delighted in imparting knowledge
and stimulating the intellects around him, and also in
helping the formation of character. He lectured on such
subjects as “ Oliver Cromwell,” “ Aims in Life,” “ Labour
and Capital,” “J. B. Gough, the Temperance Orator,”
“ Farming,” “ Protection and Freetrade,” “ The Use and
Abuse of Newspapers,” “ The Crusaders,” and an “ Even-
ing with Handel, Haydn, and Mozart," illustrated by selec-
tions from their works. Some of these lectures were de-
livered several times to various church and literary so-
cieties in the city, and secured appreciative audiences.
He was once asked by a number of young men to form a
class for the study of elocution. They were discontented
with the methods generally adopted in the societies be-
longing to the churches, and so they appealed to him
to form one on a different basis. He agreed to do so.
They met in a hired room, and when they had all as-
sembled, much to their surprise, and which shows how his
religious impulses moved him in this kind of work, he
asked them to join him in prayer for the Divine blessing
to rest upon their studies. Some of them were worldly
young men, and scarcely appreciated this devout act. But
many years afterwards, when some had reached positions
of influence in the Church and State, they had not for-
gotten that prayer. After Mr. Brookes was dead it was
referred to with no small amount of feeling. He had little
faith in mere intellectual culture without religion. To know
God was to him the foundation of mental as well as moral
progress. He wanted young men to be manly, openly
avowing their faith in God and righteousness, and yet
with the utmost diligence cultivating their powers to en-
able them to take their place in the world as well-man-
nered, intelligent, and capable citizens. He abhorred cant,
and that sickly pretence of piety which is assumed some-
times to cover up mental deficiencies. The young man
with long hair and gloomy face, and sanctimonious up-
ward glances, fluently uttering religious platitudes, was his
particular aversion. He wanted robustness of mind as
well as a saintly mien. At one time the Young Men’s


Christian Association in Brisbane was worked on very rn-
satisfactory lines, and after a few years of struggling exis-
tence it utterly failed. Mr. Brookes, who was interested
in these Associations, thus comments on this incident:—
“During the last fortnight,” he wrote (March, 1889),the
Y.M.C. Association has ceased to exist, and has now its
money affairs in the hands of liquidators. It was born
some six or seven years ago amid acclamations and
jubilations, and was hailed as a powerful agency for the
elevation of the many young men in Brisbane, and visiting
Brisbane. For a while it seemed to fulfil that promise;
but for the last few years it has been torpid. Decay soon
set in. Young men found nothing in the institution at-
tractive. Sanctimoniousness gradually covered everything
as a pall. . . It was a place for the breeding and train-
ing of religious prigs. There was no fresh air at the
meetings, and its best friends despaired. It got into
money straits. The gentlemen who guaranteed its debt
had to pay the debt themselves. ... An attempt is
being made to set it on its legs again. I have strong
doubts of its success. I would prefer a club for young
men, in the management of which peculiar religious views
should not be too prominent, but only be a solid back-
ground. Young men who flaunt religion, are seldom
cheerful company, and are not remarkable for endurance
when the hot, flaming sun of temptation to immorality or
dishonesty beats suddenly upon them; and when they
herd together, they make each other worse rather than
better. The result is an institution offering a premium
to the most voluble insincere tongues.” These are very
drastically expressed opinions, and do not apply to most
Young Men’s Christian Associations to-day. The con-
dition of the Association in Brisbane at this time was un-
fortunate. Men of the goody-goody type, with very littb
grasp of the fundamental truths of religion or possession
of moral stamina, had somehow or other taken the lead
in its operations, and had given an air of pretentious
piety to it, without those necessary accessories of social
enjoyment and intellectual brightness which must ever be
associated with it to attract and benefit young men. Re-
ligion with Mr. Brookes was not designed to dull the in


tellect, or make life’s innocent pleasures less. He would
have it as the foundation upon which the whole of a true
life could be built. He loved to see the religious young
man as quick-witted and well informed, as pleasing in
manner and trusty and energetic in business, and as well
able to hold his own as the most polished worldling.
He was associated with the Wesleyan denomination nearly
all through his life. He attended the Sabbath services, and
for years was the organist of the church, and manifested
no little taste and skill in directing the musical part of the
public worship. He had considerable talent as a musician,
and many valuable criticisms from his pen on concerts
given, and on distinguished musical performers, were in-
serted in the columns of the journals. He was a member
of the Brisbane Musical Union Committee, and was one
of the leading violinists in the orchestra for many years.
And his musical gifts added much pleasure to those who
visited his home. The preachers and some of the friends
belonging to the church were often entertained at the
hospitable table of Mr. and Mrs. Brookes, and as he pos-
sessed fine conversational powers there was often at such
times a real “ feast of reason" and “ a flow of soul." Cleri-
cal visitors often found him a tough logician, and remark-
ably ready in repartee, and sometimes a lively discussion
would be ended by some quaint and humorous retort tnat
would “ set the table on a roar," while he would quietly
ask Mamma “ for another cup of tea ”; or he would sug-
gest “ a little music,” and then the instruments would be
tuned, and the books brought out, and he and his family
and friends would spend a pleasant hour or two in cul-
tivating “ music’s golden tongue." Most of his children
had a measure of this gift. His oldest daughter had a
charming soprano voice, and was well-known in musical
circles in the city. And so his home was frequently a
centre of intellectual and musical pleasure to many friends.
Family prayer, too, was for a long period a customary
ordinance.
He used to preach occasionally, too, in the churches
around the city, taking his appointments on the circuit
plan at one time with some assiduity and regularity, some-
times riding considerable distances to fulfil his appoint


ments. He describes one of his adventures when under-
taking to preach at Sandgate, then just beginning to be
known as a seaside resort, situated about thirteen miles
from Brisbane. " Last Saturday," he wrote, “ I went to
Sandgate, and losing my w r ay passed the night in the bush.
It was a fine night, though threatening rain. I held my
horse till daybreak, sitting at the foot of a tree, while he
fed. I lighted a fire and smoked half a dozen cigars, but
wished I had brought some tea and bread. I was very-
contented, and resolved on a subject to preach upon for
the following day. At daybreak I found the way with some
trouble, and arrived at Sandgate a little before seven
o’clock in a very sleepy state. I did sleep after breakfast,
and in the afternoon, but at seven in the evening every-
body collected, and I preached with comfort to myself,
and, I hope, with profit to those who listened. In the
morning I returned to town, and on the road had a rich
and inexpressibly comforting sense of God’s presence. I
was permitted to rejoice in an assurance of his pardoning
love. I could not restrain my feelings, and fairly wept
aloud for joy.” Sometimes his experiences in the pulpit
were not so satisfactory. He leaves the rostrum very dis-
satisfied with his sermons, and blames himself for not pre-
paring them more carefully. Sometimes he hardly thinks
that this is his work. But at one period of his life he could
be depended upon to take his place as an occasional
Methodist lay preacher, helping in this way to extend the
operations of the denomination. He held several im-
portant official positions in the church, and often gave
liberally to its funds.
His strongest denominational sympathies clung around
this church. It was the church of his fathers, and though
sometimes he did not agree with the actions of the
ministers and prominent laymen in that body, and once
or twice he became embroiled in disputes, and for a
short time left this church and worshipped with other
congregations, yet his interest in this evangelical church
never really waned, and he was ever ready to support
its institutions and to further its progress in the colony.
True, his views of Christian doctrines broadened as
time went on, and the old phrases so common with


the Methodists, which we find in his early a*ip
diaries, dropped away from his pen and lips ;W&p iW
faith in the essential verities which that coojs|ugjjitv
holds never ceased. He thought all the churches^&e' h
cramped by their antique creeds. The grandest trutrW*
were hidden under a mass of worn-out formulas. Dreary
platitudes were often uttered by the preachers, instead of
a vivid expression of their own perceptions of the facts of
the Gospels and the teaching of Christ. He would sw'eep
away much of the curious theological creations of in-
genious men. and let the simple revelations of God in
Christ shine in all their penetrating lustre upon sin-bur-
dened men. He would often speak very strongly against
the foolishness of men in shaping some creed that would not
bear the test of the spiritual consciousness, especially of
those who would trust their work upon their fellow men
with all the audacity of an infallible occupant of St. Peter’s
chair, and made belief in it the only means of salvation. In
writing to a friend, on returning Rev. Andrew Jukes’
striking book on “ The Restitution of All Things,” which
he appears to have read with pleasure, he refers to “ the
rubbish heaps of divinity with which the writers, with
nothing more useful to think about, have submerged the
world,’’ and he asks, where are the clear, sun-lighted,
bracing mountain heights, where, in the early ages men
and women could sit safely without risk of catching a
‘ terrible bronchitis induced by clerical fogs and mias
mas ? ” And he cannot understand how it entered men’s
heads to waste life, health, and fortunes in devising such
elaborate, intricate methods for converting the people.
And he argued that the departure from the simplicity of
the revelations made of God’s will in the New Testament
was the secret of the failure of the Church to Christianise
the world. The glory of God was revealed in Jesus
Christ, and to know Him was to know God. He held, that
all those utterances concerning God in the Old Testa-
ment, over which critics have quibbled, and those gradual
unfoldings of His purposes recorded there, during the
development of the race from its earliest stages of intel-
lectual and moral life, upon which have been based so
many strange conceptions of the Divine character and ques


tionable theological doctrines, need not trouble the
Christian thinker at all. The Bible was a growth, full of
the unfolding thoughts of God, through centuries of human
struggle and advancement, and must be interpreted by the
mind and will of Christ, in whom dwelt all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom. Whatever did not accord with
God’s revelation of Himself in Christ must be regarded as
an accommodation to the weakness of human understand-
ing and allowed to flicker away as a shadow before the per-
fect brightness of the sun. He used his Bible with this
light shining upon it, and so dark places became luminous
and crooked places straight. God in Christ became to
him an ever-present reality, an indwelling presence. All
things were full of His spirit, and spoke to him of the
ineffable love that was the root and crown, the centre and
circumference of all creation. The Incarnation was a
witness to the immanency of God in nature and man.
He laid great stress upon the indwelling of the Spirit that
was revealed in Christ. He would say sometimes, “If
Christ’s Spirit is not in me, then He is nowhere to me.”
1 his, to Mr. Brookes, made a man a Christian. It was not
his creed or his profession of attachment to any sect, but
was he conscious of the possession of the Divine Spirit in
his soul. This, of course, made Mr. Brookes tolerant of
varying views of Christian doctrine, and led him to recog-
nise some as Christians who were outside of the pale of
the Church. He believed that the Kingdom of God is
within us. God had manifested Himself in Christ that He
might manifest Himself in us, and redeem us from all our
imperfections and iniquities. This seemed to him the
main philisophv of the Christian religion. He had read
widely. He had studied the ancient religious and modem
Christian theologies; but he had come to the conclusion
that the possession of “Christ in us the hope of glory”
was the sum of all human wisdom and religious faiths. The
laboured attempts to explain the doctrine of the atonement,
and to find a logical basis for some of the many peculiar
theories propounded concerning it, evoked from him a
smile. The discussion of the doctrines of the Divine
sovereignty, of justification, of regeneration, of eternal
punishment, and the common round of systematic theo


logy had lost in his declining days much of its charm for
him; he had seen Gods righteousness and love in the
tender suffering heart of Christ, and had opened his soul
to the indwelling of His Spirit, and in that vision and in-
ward realisation of the Divine presence, he was filled with a
comforting assurance of the truth that nothing could dis-
turb. He had reached this sure resting-place through his
long years of thought and experience. He had grown in
wisdom, and his thoughts of God had widened with the
settings of the sun. God's love was so sure to him that he
felt he could not perish. It was impossible to drift from
beyond His love and care. In a small volume of poems,
written by F. W. Faber, which he very much prized, and
which he marked in many places with his pencil, there are
some lines which seem to embody his progressive insight
into the nature of God:
With age Thou grewest more divine,
More glorious than before ;
I feared Thee with a deeper fear,
Because I loved Thee more
Thou broadenest out with every year,
Each breath of life to meet:
I scarce can think Thou art the same,
Thou art so much more sweet,
Changed and not changed. Thy present charms
Thy past ones only prove ;
Oh, make my heart more strong to bear
This newess of Thy love !
These novelties of love ! when will
Thy goodness find an end ?
Whither will Thy compassions. Lord !
Incredibly extern! ?
Father, what has Thou grown to now J
A joy all joys above,
Something more sacred than a fear
More tender than a love 1
With gentle swiftness lead me on
Dear God ! to see Thv face,
And meanwhile, in my narrow heart
O! make Thyself more space
Some of Mr. Brookes’ friends probably regarded these
deep realisations of God as unorthodox, and as tinged with
mysticism, and they feared that he had become unsound in
the faith; but it was because they did not understand the
spiritual position he had reached. Orthodoxy makes very
L


little allowance for originality. It often dreads and mis-
represents independence of thought.—
A perfect pattern wouldst thou be
Of churchly orthodoxy;
Learn to live from thinking free,
Or, learn to think by proxy.
The Church has often lost some of its noblest sons and
strongest souls by its stringent adherence to its narrow
standards of belief. It has given little room for expansion.
It has forgotten that the spiritual horizon ever enlarges as
humanity grows, and that there will be always some within
its enclosures that catch glimpses of new regions of truth
and delight in them before they become visible to all.
Those who think and strive to gain visions of God for
themselves often only anticipate views that become after-
wards generally recognised. The heresy of to-day is fre-
quently the orthodoxy of the morrow. Mr. Brookes had
reached the resting place of many Christian believers to-
day. “ Back to Christ ” has been the harking cry of the
theologians, and now it is widely seen that in His words
and spirit there is something better than is found in all
human theological systems and intricate creeds; that to
know Him is truly life eternal.
Mr. Brookes’ natural radical tendencies, combined with
his clear perception of the essential elements of the
Christian faith, sometimes made him very impatient with
ecclesiastical assumptions and priestly pretensions. He
implicitly believed in the equality of all denominations
before God, and under the enactments of the State. He
was ready to resist any encroachments of clerical authority,
or of those churches that claimed to hold special privileges
or positions. Any attempt of bishop, minister, or layman
to assume a pre-eminence, or to “ lord it over God’s heri-
tage,” aroused in him at once an active spirit of resistance.
In his own church this was sometimes manifested, and on
several occasions more publicly. As far back as iB6O,
when questions of State support to churches and denom-
inational schools had to be settled, we find he was the will-
ing champion of democratic freedom. Bishop TufFnell,
the first Anglican bishop, had arrived in Brisbane when
these questions were being warmly discussed, and coming


from a British cathedral city, with his mind penetrated with
the old world ideas of the supremacy of a State Church —
“ drenched," as Mr. Brookes said, “ with cathedralism
and sacerdotalism,” he hoped to place his Church and him-
self at the head of all matters pertaining to education and
religion. He called a public meeting. There was some
amount of suspicion that it was called for the purpose of
claiming an undue advantage over the other religious bodies
with respect to these matters. A few lovers of religious
equality decided to attend, and if their surmises were cor-
rect, and resolutions proposed for the purpose, Mr.
Brookes was requested to move an amendment. The
meeting, he says, was packed with members of the Angli-
can Church, and resolutions were moved and being spoken
to that were opposed to religious equality, and in favour
of the support of denominational institutions by the State ;
and, consequently, at the first “ honourable opportunity,”
he rose to speak and to move his amendment. The
Bishop, in very bland and courteous tones, questioned his
right to address the meeting, as it was a meeting of church-
men, and the chairman was inclined to endorse the
Bishop’s views. But Mr. Brookes maintained that as the
meeting was advertised as “ a public meeting,” every
citizen had a right to attend and express his opinions. This
could not very well be disputed, and so amid some ex-
citement, the Bishop suggested an adjournment, and the
meeting broke up without carrying the resolutions. The
next meeting was convened as a meeting for “ the
parishioners of St. John’s,” which altered the aspect of the
whole situation.
Mr. Brookes, in looking back upon this occurrence, ex-
pressed his fear that he was not quite as respectful to the
Bishop as he might have been, not using the title of " My
Lordship,” but he thought his speech, which was reported
in the “ Guardian,” might have done something in expos-
ing the “tactics of the Bishop and his small fry of satel-
lites,” that it might have rendered some small service to
religious liberty, and led the Anglican clergy to see that
their party was not the public, and that it was useless to
give themselves airs and graces, and to claim priority in
making provision for the religious and educational needs


of the people. The battle for religious equality and a
free State education was subsequently won in Queensland,
but this was a very effective commencement of the cam-
paign, and doubtless had a lasting influence upon public
opinion. More than twenty-five years after, Mr. Brookes
showed that he still possessed the same views. There
seemed to be a revival of the claims of the Anglican
Church to a position of precedence in State functions, and
some concessions had been made to those claims. A
movement by the Non-conformist bodies was made
to protest against these assumptions of supremacy,
and a deputation waited on the Colonial Secre-
tary in relation to the precedence given to the Anglican
bishop at the opening of Parliament, and also in allow-
ing the band of the Defence Force to accompany the
soldiers to the Episcopal churches on the Sabbath Day.
Mr. Brookes, though retired from public life, took a deep
interest in this resistance to such breaches of religious
equality, and writing to the Baptist minister
of Brisbane, the Rev. \Y. Whale, who had
taken a prominent place in the deputation,
says, “ it is not a trifling matter,” that great principles are
at stake which underlie the “ very structure of our civil
and religious freedom and equality.” He also waited on the
Prime Minister, the late Hon. J. R. Dickson, who was a
strong churchman, and reminded him that the precedence
given to the Bishop of the Anglican Church was a grave
political error; that it was fostering that odious thing,
religious inequality ; “ that it called off public attention
from that which alone should be considered, public ser-
vice, public utility, solid claims to respect for personal
character, and valuable work done, and invited it to fix
itself upon mere pretension, frippery, trumpery, swagger-
ing assumption, hollow show, and distinctions indicating
only pride and vanity.” Also, he told Mr. Dickson, that
unless “ this nonsense was stopped it would become a
running sore, and cause an agitation to remove it from the
land.” He also comments upon the military bands play-
nig as the Defence Force was marched to the Anglican
churches. He calls it “a slap in the faces of the Non-
conformists;” also, “a rotten relic of bad, barbarous, Torv,


English times, and is linked naturally to Episcopal bless-
ing of military colours, and to the now faded notion that
‘ governing families/ ecclesiasticism make the general
prosperity of the Commonwealth so safe, that anybody
lower in rank than a king, a nobleman, or bishop need not
trouble himself about politics, which are much too danger-
ous a subject to be understood or handled by the common
people. The idea is paralysis to our colonial democratic
life, and we are under solemn bond to pull it up where-
ever it shows itself.” Mr. Dickson was, probably, much
impressed with the interview, and it doubtless had its
effect upon the action of the Government afterwards. This
passionate love of liberty once, however, led him into what
he admits was an indiscretion. An infidel lecturer, named
Dr. Tyerman, came to Brisbane, and announced that he
would lecture on Spiritualism and other debatable sub-
jects. An organised opposition endeavoured to prevent
his securing a hall in the city. One of the ministers, know-
ing probably his character, assailed him before he had an
opportunity of lecturing, and after the first lecture strongly
condemned him, and even more strongly condemned those
who went to listen to him. Mr. Brookes thought this was
an infringement upon the right of free speech and public
action, and defended the lecturer in the Press, and took
the chair at one of the lectures. But he found that he
had made a mistake. The lecturer was an open traducer
of the doctrines of the Bible, and a blatant opponent of
the Christian religion, and he discovered, to his sorrow,
that he was much out of place in the chair. And he self*
reprovingly says, as he looks back upon his action, "I
cannot say that I look upon this conduct of mine with pre-
sent approval. The necessity for my doing so again must
be very obvious before I should do it. Whether I did
wisely or foolishly is arguable, as everything is, but I
incline to decide in favour of the latter conclusion.”
Sympathy with liberty may sometimes lead to the patron-
age of evil-doers, who are ready to commit any crimes in its
name. Mr. Brookes had no real sympathy with infidels,
atheists, and those who had no veneration for the
Scriptures. He was a Christian believer, but he
loved free inquiry. He believed that nothing
could permanently injure the truth, and that men


should hear and judge for themselves respecting it; and
any action that seemed to savour of injustice or undue
repression of liberty of speech, stirred up his combative
impulses. But he found Dr. Tyerman was not a worthy
man, even if his opinions had been worthy of attention.
He had formerly belonged to the Wesleyan Church, then,
he became a lay reader in the Church of England; then
he rejected the teachings of the Bible, and professed to
be a Spiritualist, and on this downgrade he drifted still
further into unbelief and evil. He gave way to intemper-
ance, and at last died in delirium tremens. Mr. Brookes
regretted that he ever countenanced him. And he had
little faith in public debates on religion. He did not be-
lieve that truth was found or spread in that way. When
two rival champions for some supposed aspect of.it con-
tended upon the platform before a crowd of spectators
the attempt necessarily made to obtain a victory over each
other, generally led to the abandonment of all search of
truth, and sometimes to the loss of the love of it. He be-
lieved that a saving faith was best gained by quiet thought,
and reading, and prayer, and by listening to the voices
and impulses that speak and move in the inner life.
Christ's revelations of God and spiritual influences would
touch chords that vibrate in the soul, and in that response
the most precious elements of religion would be found.
He had gained this resting place by meditation, study, ex-
perience, and cherished aspirations after God, and noth-
ing could move him away from it. Creeds might change,
ecclesiastical systems might totter and fall, all things might
be shaken and be removed, but he had found the Rock of
Ages, and was secure. He had within him the “ kingdom
that cannot be moved,” and though others might be dis-
turbed by fresh upheavals of thought and strange and new
outbreaks of iconoclastic enthusiasm in the church and the
world, he knew it was only “ the removing of those things
that may be shaken as of things that are made, that those
things that cannot be shaken may remain.” This calmness
of faith grew more and more apparent as old age came.
His speculations in Divine things had ceased; his struggles
and contentions for the truth had given place to restful-
ness and peace. Doubts had vanished in the full assur-
ance of love.


CHAPTER XII.
DECLINING DAYS.
Age does not lack its compensations.
Earth’s westering sun brings heaven's light;
Declining years may have vexations,
But what are they with Home in sight ?
Fond memories blend in grateful visions
A veil of mercy softens all;
Hearts calmly make their wise revisions
And find but little to appal.
Serene, with courage unabating,
In camp, yet sheltered from the fray :
On-looking, peacefully awaiting
The triumph of a coming day.
WHEN Mr. Brookes ceased to represent North Bris-
bane, and especially when he was made a member
of the Upper House three years afterwards, he recognised
that his active work in the political life of the colony was
nearly done. He was conscious of failing physical
strength, and though not older than some men who still
retain their vigour, and continue their customary activities,
he found many of the infirmities of age were creeping
upon him and warning him that the time of the westering
sun had come. His mental vigour was unabated, but his
bodily strength was declining. He had reached his sixty-
third year when he was defeated for North Brisbane, and
the effects of his battling, strenuous life, often leading turn
to adopt habits prejudicial to health, now began to mani-
fest themselves. He was advised by his doctor to avoid
excitement, and live as quietly as possible. But he was
not without opportunities of employing his leisure agree-
ably. His visits to the Parliamentary Library, and his
books; his occasional appearances on the public platform,
his duties as a member of the Legislative Council,
his correspondence with his friends by using a type-
writer; and his attendance at the sendees of the Eagle


Junction Church, in which he frequently took part, all
tended to remove the monotony of existence which is some
times severely felt in life’s closing days. His memories
were not unpleasant or troublesome. He had lived a
clean life. His chief faults had brought no sorrow upon
others. He had not willingly wronged any man. Some-
times towards his political opponents his words had been
sharp and even scathing, but generally they were spoken
in good temper, and with a touch of humour which did
much to prevent a lasting sting. As he could say, “In the
House my banter was accepted as an amusing ingredient
in debate, but was not supposed to have any vitriol in it.”
The Hon. B. D. Morehead, with whom he was frequently
in collision, and whom he describes as a “light-hearted,
sprightly, witty gentleman, a little thin-skinned, but on the
whole able to receive as well as give smart verbal critic-
isms,” often was amused as well as irritated by his attacks.
Once when Mr. Morehead was in the lobby of the House
and was becoming annoyed with the sharp word-play that
was going on between them, and was turning away in
anger, Mr. Brookes allayed the ill-feeling by quietly saying,
” Mr. Morehead ” (who is a tall man), “ is the longest man
with the shortest temper I ever saw,” which raised a general
laugh, in which Mr. Morehead had to join.
One of his most trenchant attacks was upon
the late Hon. J. R. Dickson, who had wrong-
fully accused him of stabbing his leader, Sir
Samuel Griffith, in the back; but even this,
which was full of biting irony and stinging descriptiveness,
did not prevent a reconciling shake of the hands after ex-
planations were mutually given. He • had no rankling
memories of personal rancour. He had fought his battles,
and wounded others, and been often wounded in the fight,
but the wounds had healed and left but few unpleasant
scars. Up to almost the end he tcok a deep interest in
the questions that agitated the public mind, and in the
events that occurred around him. If this did not lengthen
his life, it certainly tended to keep him in mental vigour.
Many doubtless bring senile weaknesses upon themselves
by losing their interest in the life that throbs in human af-
fairs surrounding them. When the disastrous disputes arose


in Queensland between capital and labour, leading almost
to civil war, he watched the progress of the struggle with
keen solicitude and concern. He had always interested
himself in the welfare of the workers, and it irritated him
to see how they were led by men who were extremely
ignorant of economic laws, and who were fostering agita-
tions and strikes, because at such times they found their
best opportunities for popularity and pay. He was some-
times appealed to by the workers, and he sought to guide
them, and to check the reckless actions of their leaders.
On one occasion a representative of the Federated Trade
Unions came to ask him to speak at a meeting convened
to protest against the repressive measures which the Go-
vernment was compelled to adopt to preserve social order.
He asked for a copy of the resolutions intended for the
meeting, and he found that they were framed so as to in-
crease the ill-feeling that prevailed, and to injure the in-
terests of the toilers by their unwisdom. He suggested al-
terations, and hoped that his counsels would be accepted.
But all his efforts proved abortive. The most extreme re-
solutions were moved and carried, and he had to withdraw
from his association with them. It may be well to give his
views of this violent social disturbance in his own words.
In his speech in the Legislative Council, in 1891, in re-
viewing the whole of the struggle, he said:—
“I believe that the working classes of Queensland are
at heart sound and loyal to Her Most Oracious Majesty,
and are as law-abiding and as peace-loving a lot of people
as any colony can show. But lam more anxious to take
this responsible opportunity of expressing these opinions
because I speak here not to hon. gentlemen only, but,
through the reporters, to the whole colony; and I would
say further that if we search into the matter and try to
find out the real cause of the trouble and the strike, we
shall find it in the labour leaders and nowhere else. The
masters and men behaved well during the strike. Let me
say a word for the station-owners. I have been supposed
to be as hostile to the squatters as Hannibal to the old
Romans; but circumstances have come to my personal
knowledge which have shown dearly that in the most
disturbed districts the working classes had no more con


stant, faithful, liberal, or better advisers than the station-
owners ; and their conduct under the name of the Pas-
toralists’ Association shows that there was a dignity and
kindness and considerateness in all the manifestoes of that
association which I am sure cannot fail to have a good
effect upon those to whom they were addressed. But when
we come to see such a state of things as we have seen,
when sedition has been preached from waggons in the
open air in Brisbane, and treason of a still worse character
in the outlying districts, where the authorities were not so
strong —when we see such things as these—then I think
the time has come to deal with the matter properly. Were
I inclined, and I am not particularly inclined, to find any
fault whatever with the Government, as I have already
given them high praise for their conduct of public affairs,
if there was one spot on which I could put my finger it
would be this, that the Government did not put these
labour leaders in gaol half soon enough. They should
have been taken one by one, like rats in a trap, and put
into silence on the most abstemious diet known to gaolers.
With reference to the ill-feeling, that is a very congenial
paragraph also in the Speech (the speech at the open-
ing of Parliament). I believe that the ill-feeling will
die out. I think the working men will never again
allow themselves to be subjected to such an Egyptian
bondage and taxation as was imposed upon them by the
union leaders. One of the labour leaders has said that
good will come out of the strike. But there is one thing
which will come directly out of it, and which has already
come out of it. The working classes know it well, and will
act upon it in future, and it is this, not to lend too greedy
an ear to the ignorant, reckless men who have nothing to
lose, and whose personal ambition overrides every other
consideration. They will carefully abstain from following
such bad advisers in future. Moreover, another good will
come out of it, that they will remember in future not to
endanger their own little properties, their peace, and their
wives and children, by submitting to taxation amounting to
such large sums of money, of which they stood in sore
need, and depriving themselves of the opportunity of dis-
charging the liabilities upon their properties at the com


mand of the union agitators called labour leaders. The
working men will surely have seen that while they have
been pinching and remaining in debt to their butchers,
bakers, and grocers, these self-constituted leaders have
been living on the fat of the land in clover, so that I think
that good will come out of the strike in that respect, and
any ill-feeling will die out with the increase of intelligence.
The masters will find that their interests are not different
from the interests of their men, and that it is really to their
own pecuniary interest to study the welfare and comfort,
material and moral, of their men. And, on the part of the
men there will arise a desire to give honest work for hard
money, and lazy and desultory work will go out of fashion
amongst the working men themselves. There is one thing,
in regard to which I feel I may be touching upon irre-
levantly, but I will ask hon. gentlemen to bear with me
while I express the opinion which I have held very strongly
during the last two or three years I have been in retreat, as
it were. I have carefully avoided any public contact with
this agitation. I was often asked, but I carefully abstained
from having anything to do with it, yet still I would hav
liked to have had a finger in the pie; that is my nature, I
suppose. Ido observe one remarkable want. There seems
to be somebody wanted in Brisbane to call the attention
of the working men to the only way in which they can
benefit themselves, and that is by resorting to the good
old-fashioned rules of strict sobriety, industry, and thrift.
It working men will carry out those rules, there will be no
need whatever for them to go to politics for remedies. The
fact is that any political reforms for working men are mere
myths; and when they think they can control Parliament
by returning a number of persons called Labour candi-
dates, they never make a greater mistake. Labour candi-
dates will be mere nonentities in Parliament, and they will
have to come back to the way they ought to have begun —
to the reformation of themselves. Mind, that remark is
true in a limited sense as applied to the masters as well as
to the men; it goes all round, none of us escape.”
These are words worth pondering. He had always
been ready to espouse the cause of the working classes
when he thought they were wronged; and though this


speech evoked some adverse criticism, and some of the
workers were inclined to resent his censures, they felt
they were the faithful wounds of a friend. The cause of
labour had then been swung away from its centre by de-
lusive theories and designing men.
He took a warm interest, too, in the founding of the
Agricultural and Technical Colleges, believing that it
would be better to establish these for the sons of the
people than to aim to create a University at present for
the few. He thought the Grammar Schools at that time
aimed too high, and did not give their scholars the most
useful kind of education, and best adapted for the life
the large majority of the boys and girls would have to
live when they became men and women. What he called
the “ classical craze,” was, he thought, a “ superstition,”
and would be no loss if it died out in Queensland. While
he valued true education highly, he felt an impatience with
the mere cramming of the minds of the young with what
he dubbed “ obsolete inutilities.”
The first coming of General Booth in 1891 arrested his
attention deeply, and he attended the meetings that were
held, and wrote one or two articles upon the General’s
methods of raising the submerged classes, and thought
that the churches would be aroused by his visit out of
their apathy to more practical efForts to rescue the miser-
able evil-doers from their environments, and that many
worldly people would be led to believe that a higher spiri-
tual life was possible. While he did not believe much
in “ itinerant evangelists” who, he thought, were too anx-
ious to create excitement and tabulate results, he had
true sympathy with all genuine religious work. He de-
sired to see the progress of the colony in “ righteousness
and true godliness.” All religious movements and con-
troversies interested him. When the churches were agi-
tated over the introduction of the new theology, and its
vigorous preaching from one or two of the pulpits in Bris-
bane, he was a sympathetic spectator, and rejoiced that
the stagnant waters of the creed had been stirred by the
inflowing of new living streams of thought. He saw that
the time had come for a new statement of the old eternal
truths, that many doctrines had become what Carlyle
termed “ dead vocables,” and needed fresh vitality.


Sometimes in these closing days his liberty-loving, demo-
cratic spirit would flame up with almost volcanic energy,
and he would utter sentiments that aroused animadver-
sion, and brought his critics upon him like a crowd of
hornets. Such as his expressed sympathy with the Irish
citizens that gave Mr. Dillon, the Home Rule agitator, an
enthusiastic ovation in one of the city halls; his defence
of Sir Charles Lilley’s outspoken views on federation
and an independent Australia, in which he stated that
much which passed for loyalty was pure sycophancy,
and that Australia one day would be free, and cut the
cords that bound her to the old land. Mr. Brookes
then wrote in defence of this mistaken opinion of Aus-
tralian loyalty:— 11 Who has not noticed the Imperialistic
stream of tendency in many of our prominent men to
come within earshot of the fountain of honour, covetous
of some gimcrack, gingerbread decoration, as befitting
as a peacock’s feather in the rear end of a barndoor
fowl? This has worked like poison in the veins, and
led to a distinct decay of colonial manliness. In our
exaggerated blatant loyalty we have run imminent
risk of being treasonable to ourselves. The colony has
come to be alternately the footstool and the football of
the commercial classes of England, who delight in us
only because we are such excellent customers.’’ This
of course, aroused the displeasure of many loyalists among
his friends. It was so, too, when he would have the pub-
lic condone a destructive attack upon the property of an
employer of black labour; and when, as chairman of a
monster meeting in the Centennial Hall, Brisbane, to pro-
test against the reintroduction of a land grant railway
scheme by the Ministry in power he uttered, among other
biting words, that the Government “believed in nothing
but machinery, and had no idea of human nature nor
sympathy with human blood.” All these incidents sub-
jected him to a considerable amount of satirical strictures
and censure, but did not lessen his reputation for political
honesty or consistency. It was evident that though his
mental vigour was but slightly abated, his physical strength
was gradually decaying. He sometimes, though he strove
within him to keep a cheerful heart, felt a depressing


sense of lassitude and loneliness. Byron wrote that
loneliness was one of the worst woes that wait of age.
To see, he said," life’s loved ones, “ blotted from life's
page, And be alone on earth as I am now.” This
Mr. Brookes sometimes felt keenly. He never
fully recovered from the loss he had sustained in the
death of his muchrloved wife. His children—two
daughters and three sons—were all married; many of
his old comrades in past battles were dead, and sometimes
his remaining friends seemed to forget to visit him. His
last years were spent at Eagle Junction with his youngest
son, Mr. Mottram Evans Brookes. He and his wife en-
Eagle Junction House, where Hon. W. Brookes Died
deavoured to lessen this sense of loneliness in many ways.
Mrs. Brookes, with much toilsome solicitude, caring for
him in his growing infirmities, and striving to lighten the
burdened hours.
The bad times which the colony experienced in the
early nineties affected his finances, and he had to suffer
severe losses; but he bore up bravely, and his trust
in God never wavered. At first when he went to reside
at Eagle Junction, he was able to go almost daily from
his suburban residence to the city, and to regularly


attend his church, sometimes taking a service during the
absence of the minister, preaching in his own quaint way,
to the edification of the congregation. Also, he was seen
trying to keep up his waning strength by learning to ride
a bicycle, but gradually his limbs became more shaky and
tremulous ; slight shocks of paralysis affected him, and his
w r alks and rides were shortened until he was compelled to
remain in the house, and slowly move from one room
to another, or to the verandah. He gradually withdrew
his attention from the secular affairs of life and centred
them on heavenly things. He had been a voracious and
voluminous reader. No new book of any note had been
allowed to escape his perusal, but now his Bible and his
hymn-book and a few choice devotional works occupied
his reading hours. His conversation became more spiri-
tual, and he was evidently becoming prepared for his im-
pending end. He often said to those who visited him,
“ I am like a traveller standing at the railway station with
my portmanteau packed and in my hand, waiting for the
train to come.” He had written once on what he thought
w'ould be the beau ideal of death and its surrounding cir-
cumstances. “ Mine,” he said, “ would be to pass the
last days free from excruciating pain of body, with my
mind able to look tranquilly on worldly circumstances, on
family relationships, and glad to arise from attention of
these to anticipations of soon receiving an abundant en-
trance into the glory which eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, which it has never entered into the most soaring
imagination of man to even conceive of. I know- it is
possible to make a grand, unspeakably triumphant de-
parture after this manner. How immortally dewy and fra-
grant must be the memory to the survivors of those who
thus enter into the joy of their Lord He was not privi-
leged in this way to make his departure. He w-as ready
and willing to go, and calmly looked forward to meeting
his loved ones again—whom he had lost for awhile -
with expectant joy. But a few- days before he died he
was seized with another stroke of paralysis, and sank into
a state of unconsciousness from which he never recovered,
quietly breathing his last on July 16th, 1898, in his
seventy-third year. His remains were unostentatiously laid


to rest in the South Brisbane Cemetery, sincerely mourned
by many old friends. The obituary comments in the
Press were noteworthy. Mr. Brookes, it was said, would
live in the annals of Queensland history as one “ who died
loyal to his democratic principles.” He was “one of
whom Queensland could be reasonably proud, and whose
memory those who knew him would revere.” He was
spoken of as Queensland's “ little Gladstone,” and as a
“ champion of radical and social reform.” Also as one of
“ those men who leave the impress of their personality
photographed upon the minds of all who ever spent an
evening with him." “ All through his career he was
earnest, thorough, determined,” and what he did he did
with all his might. He was no trifler, idling through life’s
day, but one of the nation’s builders, living not for self
or pelf, but for the welfare of the State, and he will be
held in lasting remembrance as one who sought to lay
good and strong foundations for the greatness of this
nation for all time.
The lifilit lie Rave, still shines to save.
It is not buried in bis. grave ;
Like tile light of Cod it shincth.


INDEX.
A Clandestine Marriage - - 10
A Mother's Death - - - 11
A Tight Place - - - - 62
A Father's Influence - - 14
A Farewell Kiss - - - 38
A Terrible Story - - - 112
Ambitions - - -30-14 S
Brisbane Fifty Years Ago - 65
Brisbane To-day - - - 67
Booms .... 73-153
Books .... 18-19
Bereavement - - - - 51
Business Integrity - - - 81
Business and Politics - - 83
Coloured Labour - -107-124-5
Childhood's Impressions - 15-24
Calmness in Trouble - - 61
Debts 53
Death 175
Discovery of Gold - - - 55
Democratic Principles - 125-170
Dread of Insolvency - - 78
Educational Systems - 21-172
Election Addresses - - 100-125
Electioneering in the Early Days 101
Emigration Fifty Years Ago - 35
Finding a Wife - - -50
Gold Mining - - - - 59
Hereditary Influences - - 7
Hospitality - - - - 22
Hard Times .... 150
How to Speak in Public - - 29
Imperial Honours - - - 173
Introduction of Black Labour - y8
Kindness to the Poor - - 23
Kidnapping Kanakas 116-120-129
Lawyers 26
Loneliness - - - - 174
Love's Mysteries - - - 45
Legislation for Kanakas - 109-146
Mr. Meiklejohn's Experiences - 112
Nefarious Practices - - - 120
Novel Reading - - - -18
Old Age 167
Politicians - - - 87-91
Preservative Influences - - 30
Passion for Gold - - - 58
Quakers 123
Religious Realities - - - 146
Religious Experiences - 44-145
Religious Equality - - - 162
State Locusts ... 101
Squatters - - - 94-96-169
Social Grades - - - - 9
Self Education - - 27-40-154
The Ship Jason - - - in
The Salt of the Earth - - 14
Theological Progress 159-162-172
Trifling Incidents - - - 34
Traffic in Humanity - - - 108
Uncongenial Employments - 27
Waiting for Death - - - 175
Youth's Experiences- - 15-25
Young Men and Culture - - 156


BRISBANE:
CITY PRINTING WORKS, GENERAL PRINTERS,
III QUEEN STREET.
1902


Statue of the Late Hon. T. J. Byrnes.
This work was executed by E. L. Thumm, Monumental Sculptor, George Street,
Brisbane, Telephone 1895.
