

LIFE & SUFFERINGS
OF
CHARLES ABOLHPUS KING,
THE ESCAPED CONVICT OF 1840;
WITH A
DESCRIPTION OF CONVICT LIFE
IN GENERAL,
AND THE HARDSHIPS HE ENCOUNTERED AFTER
MAKING HIS ,ESCAPE.
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.
MANCHESTER:
Printed and sold by G. Jacques, Oldham Road.
1845.


LIFE OF C. A. KING.
In the latter end of the year 1817 I first drew the
breath my Maker gave me; lam not certain if in
London or the township of Salford: my circumstances
up to about 15 years of age was bright as regards the
present and future, till it pleased God to call my
parents away, when every hope in this world was
blighted.
I left my late home and proceeded to London, in
hopes of bettering my condition ; although London
abounds in many virtuous people and valuable insti-
tutions, I had the misfortune to fall in with individu-
als who are ever on the alert to draw the stranger
into vice, so that I found myself connected with
vicious parties before I became aware of it. Being
incarcerated for a short period in one of the prisons
in London, on being discharged, I returned home, but
not before having my mind tainted with evil practices.
I -returned back to what I considered my native
town, with a firm resolution to cultivate a proper
course of life, and finding on my arrival many of my
former friends looking with an eye of indifference upon
me, on account of my loss of character through pre-
vious imprisonment, (they having already learned.) I
endeavoured to find consolation in that society which
a few months before I should have loathed. I had
not long formed this connection, but I once more found
myself an inmate of our Borough Goal, charged with
a burglary. On being arraigned before the Recorder
I pleaded* fi guilty/’ being ashamed to call upon any
one for a character who had known my previous life.


The sentence I received was transportation for 14
years, and was then removed to my cell heavily
chained. After remaining-in this situation about three
weeks, an order was received from the Home Office to
convey all the prisoners for transportation on board
the Hulks, at Chatham.
The discipline and employment of convicts onboard
the Hulks is very severe; about half-past 5 in the
morning- they rise from their hammocks, and carry
them upon the upper deck; they then commence
clearing the interior of the vessel; after that duty is
completed they are mustered on deck for medical in-
spection and cleanliness. On leaving the Hulk for
Dock-yard they are met by a military guard, and after
having undergone a strict search, so that nothing is
conveyed from the vessel, they are marched in diffe-
rent gangs to their various occupations. Some of these
are comparatively easy ; others are very laborious,
those under heavy sentences having the most labori-
ous duties to perform. No man is allowed to leave
the gang he belongs to, not even a yard, without run-
ning the risk of being shot by the sentry on duty.
At 12 o’clock they are marched on board the Hulks
again, when at the bow end they undergo another
search, so that they convey nothing from the Dock-
yard. On descending between decks the Quarter
Master orders the dinners to be handed round to the
different messes. Eight men mess together, and there
are eight messes in each cell or apartment in which
the convicts reside; and generally after the spring-
assizes there is not less than 800 miserable wretches
confined on board these floating hells. After they
have taken dinner they once more retire to the upper
deck, where they are again received by a military
guard, and undergo another search, and resume their
daily toil.


One day whilst out at labour in the yard, we saw a
signal given to go on board, when we learned that we
had to prepare to go on board another ship then lying
at Sheerness, to convey us to our final place of desti-
nation. After having been stripped of our dock-yard
apparel, and receiving another of a lighter texture,
was received on board a little cutter, each man being
heavily ironed. On coming alongside the vessel we
were received by a military guard. Having received
all on board to the number of 300, we were allowed
to communicate to our friends and transact such other
business as our situations would admit of. The time
being expired for us to remain in England, we weighed
anchor, and in a little time many of us knew T that all
we loved was lost to us for ever. After five days’ sail-
ing we entered the Bay of Biscay, where we encounter-
ed a tremendous gale of wind accompanied by a heavy
rolling sea; at this moment the convict’s life is most
piteous,—indeed with the exception of a few, they are
unacquainted with the motions of a ship at sea; each
time she rose or was struck with some mighty wave,
they think they are about to receive a watery grave.
During this time not one convict is allowed on deck;
the hatches put on the tarpaulings are then battened
down, and a military guard placed over them on the
hatches. Having left the Bay of Biscay, and the
weather becoming fine, the hatches were taken off, and
mess duty for the soldiers was once more regularly
commenced. First thing in a morning each man re-
ceives his allotted portion of food for the day, viz :
three quarters of a pound of biscuit, three gills of
water, one pint of cocoa, six ounces of meat, eight
ounces of flour, and one pint of gruel. Reports are
received by the superintendent, if any offence is of
sufficient magnitude to merit flogging, if so he (the
offender) receives it if; not, he is locked up in a tall


box just large enough to allow the prisoner to turn,
with holes at the top for ventilation. Sometimes he
thinks it his duty to handcuff a man to the chain on
•/
his legs, and keep him in that condition for a week
or a fortnight. We put into Valparasio, to take in
fresh water, when we were visited by the British
Consul’s lady, who presented us with several thousand
oranges, which were received with gratitude. We
once more weighed anchor, and directed our course to
the land of our exile, having been near five months
tossed in chains on the watery ocean. The moment
we entered the harbour of Port Jackson (or Sidney)
we were saluted with a discharge of artillery from the
battery, and for the last time we dropped anchor in
the bay.
Having been on board for the space of four days
after the anchor dropped, we were visited by one of
the authorities, and then received orders to go on shore
We were then marched by a military guard to the
prisoner’s barracks ; here each prisoner remains pre-
vious to his assignment to his master or masters.
It was my good fortune to be allotted to a gentleman,
to act in the capacity of servant, which situation I
fulfilled for the space of twelve months. After being
returned to Government, I was forwarded to a road
party, or Stockade, and having a good character from
my last master, I received the privilege of being
messenger at the Stockade, wdiose duty it was some-
times to cook for the guard, and fetch wood and water
from the bush.
If a prisoner commits an offence, it is left to the
decision of the captain of the guard what punishment
to inflict: if it is corporeal punishment from the cat,
the unhappy wretch is instantly tied up to the
triangles : if the sentence is 50 lashes, there are
two floggers to inflict that punishment : one a right


hand, the other a left hand dogger, so that the back
of the criminal is like a chess-board ; sometimes it is
half-minute flogging, that is, one stroke every half-
minute.
It was during my bondage at the Stockade that
I first contemplated my escape, and became acquaint-
ed with a brother convict, named Patrick Marney,
when being out taking in water from a neighbouring
creek, we first proposed the idea of making our es-
cape. Marney, who had been many years in the
country, was very cautious how he entered on this
subject, till one morning when accompanied by one
of the soldiers into the bush for water, we came to the
resolution of putting into execution our design. The
observation made was, “ Now is our time,” the sol-
dier was struck—he fell—l snatched the musket
from him, and discharged the contents into the air,
and then flung it down a precipice ; we then made
our way, not knowing whither, in the interior of the
bush, and in less than half-an-hour some mounted
troopers, accompanied by the infantry, were scour-
ing the country in search of us. When we had been
a day and a night in the bush nature became ex- r
hausted; we half repented the course we had taken,
for death stared us in a thousand shapes. However,
that night we discovered a party of the Aborigines
of the country cooking some provisions; we went
towards them, and found they were females; we
joined with them in their meal, and then made our
way towards the sea coast, and directed our course
towards Sydney.
My unhappy companion suffered much from the
chain he had attached to his leg. How often have
I heard him wish he had never been born. After
piany hardships from hunger, we arrived at a place
called Botany Bay. On the next night we arrived


at Sydney, and discovered a vessel lying in the Bay.
I asked Marney if he thought he could swim to it.
He said he thought he could if his chain was off his
leg. I took a large piece of rock and smashed the
hazel; we then with much difficulty got on board the
vessel, and discovered that the man who was keeping
anchor watch was asleep on the windlas ; we then
went down on the half deck, and got some beef and
biscuits, the sailors being asleep in their hammocks
at the time, and then secreted ourselves. In a short
time the hatches were put on, and we had the un-
speakable joy to find that the vessel had not to un-
dergo the process of smoking, which is usual, and
in a few hours we found ourselves fast leaving that
land which to us had been a scource of misery and
bitterness.
I remember no more till I found myself upon the
deck supported by the sailors, who were endeavour-
ing to restore my faculties, which by long privation
had lost their power. The captain questioned me as
to who I was and what I was. I gave him a fictitious
statement, and told him I had a companion onboard.
Search was made for him, and he was brought upon
deck in a miserable condition : however after under-
going medical examination and prescription we both
recovered, and were placed to several duties on board.
One night the captain gave orders to put the vessel
about. I communicated my suspicions to my com-
panion, and we came to the resolution to jump over-
board and swim to an island on our lee-bow. The
captain and sailors called to us to come back, but we
felt it more prudent to proceed : when about half way
on our passage my poor companion says, “ Charley,
Tm sinking.” I bade him keep up his heart, for I
saw a-head of us something floating on the water: we
got to it; and discovered it to be an old man-of-war


♦
boat ; we got upon it and rested ourselves, and ulti-
mately got on land. One morning we were seen by
one of the natives ; onr appearance excited' his curi-
osity,’and he gave out a loud yell, which congregated
a number of them together; they instantly flew to-
us. We were instantly separated; I ran
towards him, and received a wound in my back from
a poisoned spear. 1 fell, nor do I remember any
more till I found my head upon the knee of a young
female of the country, who was then sucking the
poison from my wound; she motioned me to accom-
pany her to a small island where she supplied me
with food. A few days after we were visited by her
brother, a chief of the island, who saluted me with
warlike gestures, but I soon became reconciled to him
and likewise to his father, who was king of the island*
The young female took me to a place which was
evidently a burial ground, where I saw the body of
my poor companion ; it was not covered with earth,
but lay upon a little eminence formed of wood and
covered with willow-work; my heart sickened at the
sight. A few weeks passed away without anything
particular taking place* when one day whilst walking
along the sea shore with the young female, we saw a
vessel riding upon the offing; I made signal; the
crew lowered the boats, and in a short time I was on
board; she proved to be a French vessel. I signed
articles with the captain to join his crew, and then
went on shore to bid farewell to my preservers, and
to take one last look at my ill-fated companion, in-
dulging in a hope that he was in a happier world.
. , ■ . End of part first.—[Part Second will be published in a few days;]
Jacques, Printer, Manchester.
