





LIFE
Cl n pacific
CONTAINING
STARTLING PASSAGES OF ADVENTURE
II AIR- BREADTH ESCAPES,
DURING
A RESIDENCE OF ELEVEN YEARS IN NEW-HOUAND
THE CAROLINE ISLANDS.
FROM HIS OWN MEMORANDA.
PORTRAIT OF JAMES F. O’CONNELL,
|Ufo-|lork;
J. MERONE & CO., 102 NASSAU-STREET.
Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1858, by J. MERONE & CO., In the Clerk’s Office of the District
€&urt of the United States fer the Southern District of New-York.


ij
w
S 5
fc
o
o
o
m
w
>
M
h
M
%
K
tB
H
W
d
o
fe.
ta
PQ
a
is
fc f
<
o


THE LIFE
JAMES F. O’CONNELL,
» *
I was born in Dublin, the first thing I
remember of childhood is, being an in-
mate of a school at Monaster Evean, about
forty miles from Dublin ; whence myself
and two sisters were one day, forwarded
to Dublin, and shipped to Liverpool, con-
signed to the landlord of my father’s board-
ing house. We arrived in the evening,
and he carried us to the circus. I can re-
collect, as distinctly as though it were yes-
terday, my childish astonishment at what
appeared to me, the magnificence of the
building, the glare of light, the gorgeous
tinsel ornaments, and more than all, the su-
perhuman feats of the ring. The drolleries
of the clown filled me with a childish de-
light, which nothing in after years has par-
alelled. I thought the riders the most re-
markable and enviable beings I had ever
happened upon. Did I inherit this pas-
sion or not 1 When I was told that one of
the troupe was my mother, and a person
sparkling with jewels was pointed out to
me as that mother, I would not have ex-
changed my parentage for that of a duke.
I could hardly refrain from throwing my-
self into the ring, to assert before the audi-
ence, my claim to a portion of their ap-
plause, as the son of the person they were
so loudly cheering.
Our first meeting with our parents, after
a five years separation, took place in my
mother’s dressing-room. She stifled our
expressions of wonder at her princely vo-
cation, by maternal caresses, more tender
and repeated than gentle.
I spent about a year with my parents,
and then went in company with an uncle,
who was also an equestrian, to London.
My uncle did not keep a very strict eye
upon me, and I spent my time in loung-
ing about Deptford and Wapping. Here
.1 formed an acquaintance with the sailors,
and, at length, Captain Salmon, of the ship


Phcenix, took a fancy to me, and without
the knowledge or consent of any of my
friends, I shipped as cabin boy on board
his vessel,'
A short time after I joined her at Dept-
ford, she moved down to Woolwich, to
take in live freight, being chartered by
government for the transportation of fe-
male convicts to Botany Bay.
Here were two hundred “ladies ” —for
so I suppose we are bound to style them—
put on board of ship for the purpose of
being conveyed many thousand miles from
their native land, and what was probably
worse for them, obliged to labor honestly
for their bread. A few of them appeared
to regret their fate, and perhaps were about
to leave sweethearts behind them. But
the majority appeared to revel in the pros-
pect of a change of scene, and doubtless
thought themselves peculiarly fortunate in
being able to take a voyage-free of expense.
If occasionally a cloud would pass over
their minds at the thought of leaving deal-
friends behind, it was quickly dispelled by
the reflection that a re-union with those
friends at Botany Bay was more than
probable.
After a passage of five months, we came
within sight of the rocky heads of Sydney
Cove. Here was a meeting of friends;
and, if on leaving the shores of old Eng-
land, there had been some tears dropped
at the severing of attached hearts, they were
amply compensated by the joyous greet-
ings which attended our arrival at Botany
Bay.
After lingering about this place awhile,
I shipped on board a vessel called the Cape
Packet, Capt. Dillon, bound on a whaling
cruise. She was a half-rigged brig, of be-
tween one and two hundred tons, and was
owned by a Mr. Haynes, who had former-
ly been a convict.
At that time the Sydney whalers were
almost the only vessels that cruised to the
north of New Holland; since then the
American and English whalers have made
free with the leviathans that sport in those
waters.
In the Cape Packet, seven of the hands
were natives of the south sea Islands, call-
ed kanakas. We had been five months
on the ground and were taking the jacket
from the last whale necessary for comple-
ting our cargo, when a white squall came
frothing along the water, until the sea look-
ed, as far as the eye could reach, as if it
was filled with white cats coming to take
our vessel by storm. As the squall struck
us, we fell upon our beam-ends. All was
now confusion ; the vessel lay with her
keel out of water, struggling and working
like a living thing against the power of
the elements. Another moment and the
topsail and jib went to tatters ; her light
spars snapped and fell to leeward; the
first fury of the squall was over; the re-
sistance of our vessel to the wind was les-
sened, and she righted, quivering and trem-
bling. A steadier gale, accompanied by
thunder and lightning, followed ; yet when
we constrasted this storm with the horrors
of the white squall, we indulged a feeling


of security. This feeling was, however,
but momentary, for the appalling fact was
almost immediately ascertained that, rack-
ed and riven by the tempest, our vessel
was rapidly filling.
Before we could clear the stern and
quarter boats from the davit tackles, their
keels were in the water, and our utmost
exertion was necessary to prevent their
being swamped under the davit heads.
Each of the crew consulted his own safety.
We stripped the harness cask of its con-
tents and shoved away from alongside in
haste, to escape the vortex which we sup-
posed would be caused by her sinking.
We might however, have been more de-
liberate, as even after she was water-log-
ged, we could, while daylight lasted, see
the stumps of her masts.
In the boat with myself were five of the
kanakas. We put into the boat from the
vessel, only some pork and beef from the
harness cask; but every whale-boat is sup-
plied with a compass, a tinder-box, and a
water keg, in addition to the apparatus for
destroying whales. The water keg, how-
ever, was nearly empty, and the excitement
of danger and escape produced such a
thirst on the jfart of the kanakas, that they
drank all the water before I felt an incli-
nation to drink. This did not vex me
much as I believed we were only about
fifty miles from the land. We were how-
ever, four days in reaching it, and during
that time, four of my kanaka companions
died of thirst and exhaustion. The survi-
ving kanaka, proposed to eat of the bodyj
of the last one that died. I shuddered
with disgust, and he gave over the idea.
Even then we were in sight «f land, but
so completely exhausted from hunger, fa-
tigue, and want of sleep, that we could no
longer make exertion to reach it. My
wrists were swollen and weak ; my feet
having been in the water at the bottom of
the boat, were shrivelled and raw. We re-
signed our boat to the mercy of the waves,
and were drifted on shore to- a level sandy
beach. Hosts of the natives, who had
long discovered our boat as it slowly drift-
ed to the shore, waded out, took it by the
head and hauled it up. Some of them
immediately stepped into it and plundered
it of every thing movable—oars, irons, lan-
ces, tubs, &c. The reader may bo curious to
know why they did not put off to us in their
canoes ; but the aborigines of New Holland
have no canoes in which they venture up-
on the sea at all—as their boats are the
rudest known, inefficient and clumsy, like
every thing else belonging to them. We
were too weak to stand erect, and upon
reaching the beach, sank in the sand. We
made earnest gestures for water, but they
paid no attention to our wants till they had
stripped us of every article of clothing;
then some water was brought us in cala-
bashes, and some of the flesh of the kan-
garoo and bandycoot. Refreshed by these,
we lay down to sleep under the native
blanket—a wide strip of bark, doubled —
and never before was sleep so delightful or
refreshing to me.
Eight or nine months spent among


these savages, gave me time to obsei/e
their habits ; for my ignorance of the coun-
try, and the hindrance of the natives so
impeded my progress, that it occupied all
that time in travelling from the place
where the Cape packet was wrecked, to
Port Macquarrie.
At and about Port Macquarrie, and to
the Borth of that setlement, the aborigines
of New Holland are probably more sav-
age and filthy in their habits, and less ac-
quainted with anything like art, than on
any other part of the continent. In the
southern and western parts, the natives
have something like houses, but in nearly
every other part of the country, bark shel-
ter answers every purpose, and under this
they sleep. A large fire is built at one end
to keep away Poloyan, the devil, whose
power is recognized by all the tribes.
Like many other savages, they think it
more necessary to curry favor with their
devil than to worship the good spirit.
When a thunder storm comes up, they
prostrate themselves to the earth, and their
shoutings and howling are intended for
worship.
They are divided into small tribes, and
in some few of these, hereditary chiefs
hold sway ; in others, might makes right,
and the strongest assert a rule per force.
The connecting link between apes and
men, they have generally less resemblance
to the African negro than the New Zea-
lander, and particularly, when old, resem-
ble the monkey more than other human
beings do. In stature, they are generally
above the middle size, and their bodies
bear an apish proportion to their
those limbs being shorter than a European,
while the arms appear longer. In com-
plexion, they vary from copper color to
black; the latter being generally the least
ferocious race. Marriage is an institution
hardly recognized, and often dissolved at
will. Upon the birth of twins, one is kill-
ed ; and white or mulatto children of
black mothers are butchered as soon as
born, the husband acting as executioner;
and the mother consenting.
Cannibalism is a trait found more or less
among the tribes on all parts of the conti-
nent, but principally on the northern part.
I have seen parts of human .bodies in the
bags which the women carry on their backs ;
and am convinced, from direct oral ac-
counts, in which I put credit, that even
abandoned white runaways, after a resi-
dence with the natives, learn to eat human
flesh.
On my everland jaunt from the north
coast to Port Macquarrie, I encountered,
with one tribe, two runaway convict wo-
men, and with another, a convict man.
They had become so utterly degraded, as
to be scarce above the savages- in their
habits ; wore next to no clothing, and fell
into their indolent and filthy mode of ex-
istence.
After remaining at Port Macquarrie
about six weeks, I was shipped to Sydney
as a runaway convict. My story had the
less weight, because instances are not un-
frequent of convicts stumbling upon penal


or other settlements in their wanderings,
and many could tell as jgood a story as
mine, in everything but the slight circum-
stances of truth. Happy to find a convey-
ance back to Sydney, I embarked.
I then shipped in the bark John Bull,
whaler, Captain Backus. After we had
been from Sydney about four months, we
put in at the Bay Islands, New Zealand.
Bishop Marsden, at that time on a visit to
New Zealand, from his residence at Para-
matta, put on board of us a missionary who
was appointed to Strong’s Island, one of the
Caroline Archipelago, with his wife and
daughter. We were to cruise among the
islands towards Japan, with the intention
to reach the shores of Japan at a partic-
ular season when whales were supposed to
frequent the sea of Japan. At eight months
out, we had taken about eight hundred bar-
rels of oil, and were endeavoring to make
Strong’s Island to leave our passengers.
At nightfall we had made no land, but
knew from observation and the ship’s log,
that we were within a day’s sail of our des-
tination. We wore bowling along under
easy sail, the our quarter, when,
at about eight o’clock in the evening, the
vessel struck on a concealed coral itef
which is not laid down in thefcharts. Cap-
tain Backus was, as usual, drunk on the
hen-coop, when the vessel struck. The
boats were lowered ; but notwithstanding
the necessary precipitation with which we
prepared to leave the vessel, the boat in
which 1 escaped was furnished with pro-
visions and arms, and we were able also to
take away some ammunition and little por-
table articles. In the boat with mysell
were five seamen, and the wife and daugh-
ter of the missionary. He was in the boat
with the captain. In the four boats, the
whole crew escaped from the vessel, h or
five or six hours we kept together, but
when the morning dawned, there was only
one of the other boats discernible, and
that but faintly, a long distance astern, as
we crested a wave. Even in a latitude
which must have been within fifteen de-
grees of the equator, a night passed with-
out sleep or food, in an open boaj, washed
by a continual breaking of the sea over it,
chilled our frames ; we were faint, cold
weak, and dispirited. But the sufferings
of the ladies engrossed more of our care
than our own situation. As I sat steering,
I folded the shivering sobbing daughter to
my body with my left arm, while two ot
my shipmates assisted in protecting her by
placing themselves on each side. filie
mother was similarly cared for by other
seamen. We tendered them parts of our
clothing, but could not persuade or induce
them to accept anything of the kind. The
suffering of these women was indeed great;
but in all their affliction they bore holy
testimony to the efficacy of that religion
whose messengers they were ; their forti-
tude might have put even some of their
male associates in misfortune to the blush.
On shipboard, before our misfortune, the
discreet and feeling manner in which they
strove to impress upon rude sailors the
truths of religion, had convinced all of their


sincerity at least. In the boat we had
more affecting proof; they prayed frequent-
ly and fervently, and there were none to
scoff.
Broiling heat succeeded the chills of
night; the wind abated, flattened; at noon
we were becalmed, dying with heat and
fatigue upon a sea whose dead swell was
»
as smooth as glass. After two days and
three nights exposure, the daughter died at
about ten o’clock on the third day. For
some hours before, she had been apparent-
ly unconscious of her situation. She had
talked in her wanderings, of her father, of
her home, and of the Island to which she
was destined on an errand of mercy. The
mother was by suffering so far bereft of
sensibility, that the death of her child hard-
ly moved her. She scarcely appeared to
understand us when we informed her of it;
or, if she did, the announcement was re-
ceived with delirious jo^ r . With as much
attention to the forms of civilized society,
as our situation would permit, we commit-
ted the body to the ocean. The mother
in her weak state, hardly uttered a com-
ment, and in a few hours, followed her
daughter.
Upon the next morning after performing
these melancholy duties, we made the land.
We had been in the boat three days and
four nights; but, rejoiced as we were to
make the land, no immediate prospect of
profiting by it appeared; for it was circled
by a coral reef, in which it was past noon
before we discovered an opening. Effect-
ing a passage, we entered a smooth basin
of water, and saw hundreds of canoes
launching and putting off' to us. They
would approach witlMn a short distance,
then suddenly retreat, and at length com-
menced showering stones, arrows, and
other missiles upon us. We threw our-
selves in the bottom of the boat, and when
they had satisfied themselves that we could
or would offer no resistance, they were
emboldened to make a rush upon the boat,
which they towed to the beach. After we
were landed they stripped us of our cloth-
ing, and took every thing out of the boat
—whale irons, tubs, muskets, Ac. The
boat was then hauled up on the beach, and
our company, six in number, were led to
Ihe canoe-house. Besides myself, they
consisted of George Keenan, an Irishman,
belonging to Dublin ; John Johnson, an
Englishman ; Edward Bradford, of Bristol;
John Thompson, of Liverpool, and John
Williams, of London. Of the native pla-
ces of the two last named persons lam not
positive.
We were seated in the centre of the ca-
noe-house on mats ; and yams, bread fruit,
plantains, bananas, fish, and bits of cold
game, were brought to us. The building
was filled in every chink by natives, seat-
ed ; the men with crossed legs like Turks,
and the women on their heels. A con-
stant buzz of conversation ran through the
assembly, each talking to his neighbor and
gesticulating violently. Parties of two or
three would come down to where we sat,
walking with their bodies bent almost dou-
ble. They took hold of our persons very fa-


miliarly,women and men, and gave frequent
clucks of admiration at the blue veins
which were marked-through our skins, on
parts of the body which had not been usu-
ally exposed to be bronzed by the sun.
My companions feared the Indians were
cannibals, and that this examination was to
discover whether we were in good roasting
case, —a horrible supposition, —which was
strengthened by the building of two or
three wood fires, covered with small stones.
Their fear was so excessive that they gave
themselves up for lost; but, as I had been
somewhat acquainted with the manners of
the inhabitants of other Islands, I reason-
ed, from the apparent good humor of these
people, that they intended us no harm.
In a sort of desperate feeling of reckless-
ness, I determined to try the experiment
of dancing, upon our savage audience. I
proposed it to my comrades, and they en-
deavored to reason me out of what they
esteemed criminal, thoughtless conduct, in
the view of a horrid death. The prospect
was none of the most agreeable, certainly ;
but I was determined on my experiment
despite their remonstrances. I according-
ly sprung to ray feet, and took an attitude.
A cluck of pleasure ran through the sava-
ges, and one of them, readily understand-
ing my intention, spread a mat for me. I
struck into Garry Owen, and figured away
in that famous jig to the best of my ability
and agility; and my new acquaintances were
amazingly delighted thereat. There wasjio
loud acclamation, but anxious peering and
peeping over each other’s shoulders, the unig
versal cluck sounding all over the house.
Before my dance was finished, the cause for
which the fires were built became aparent,
to the no small relief of my comrades. It
was ascertained that the roasting prepara-
tions were made, not for us, but for some
quadrupeds, which we afterwards found
were dogs. Other preparations were ma-
king for a feast, and after my dance was
concluded, each of us was surrounded by a
group of natives who could not sufficiently
admire and examine us. The natives con-
tinued to treat us with great hospitality
and kindness.
Upon the fourth day after our landing,
there was an arrival of a fleet of canoes —
the head and other chiefs. We were again
inspected by the new comers, and it was
my fortune to be selected, with my ship-
mate, George Keenan, by the principal chief.
On the morrow my new fjiend —or master,
or owner —left the Island upon which we
landed, taking with him Keenan and my-
self. Eight or nine hours carried us to his
Island, where new feasting and lionizing
awaited us.
A grand feast celebrated the return of
the chief to his house, at which I repeated
the Irish jig which had taken so w r ell upon
mv first landing. I have no doubt that
in my heels was found the attraction which
led the chief !o select me from among my
comrades. We had been about three
davs at our new residence, when some of
the natives began showing us their tattoo-
ed arms and legs, and making signs not
entirely intelligible to us at first, though


their meaning became afterwards too pain-
fully marked. On the fourth or fifth day,
Greorgp Keenan and myself Avere put on
board of a canoe Avi|h six natives. They
paddled a short distance along the shore
of the island, and then turned into a creek,
wide at the mouth, but soon narrowing till
there was not room for two canoes abreast.
It Avas completely arched over Avith depen-
dant branches of trees; and altogether
the scene was romantic, and Avould have
been pleasing if avc had not been so utter-
ly in the dark as to the purpose of the
journey. At length avc reached a hut in
Avhich we Avere left by our conductors.
After we had waited there sometime, our
suspense was relieved by the entrance of
five or six women, bearing implements, the
use of Avhich Ave were soon taught George
was made to sit in one corner of the room,
and I in the other, half the Avomen with
me and the other half Avith my companion.
One of my women produced a calabask of
black liquid ; another took my left hand,
squeezing it in hers, so as to draAv th«
flesh tight across the back; then a little
sliA r er of bamboo Avas dipped in the liquid
and applied to my hand upon Avhich it left
a straight black mark. The third beauty
then produced a small flat piece of avoo#l
Avith thorns pierced through one end; this
she dipped in the black liquid, then rested
the ppints of the thorns on the mark on
rny hand, and with a sudden Woav from a
stick, drove the- thorns into ray flesh. One
needs much when the devildrives, so I sum-
moned all my fortitude, set my teeth, and
bore it like a martyr. Betweeen every blow
my beauty clipped her thorns in the ink.
I was too much engaged in my own
agreeable employment to watch my com-
rade, but George soon lot me hear from
him. He swore and raved without any
attention to rule ; the way he did it Avas
profane, but not syntaxical or rhetorical.
He Avished all sorts of bloody murder to
light on his tormentors; prayed that the
island might be sunk by an earthquake ;
hoped forty boats crews from a squadron
of armed ships would land and catch
the blasted savages tormenting the king’s
subjects. All this availed nothing but to
amuse the Avomen ; and even I could not
forbear a smile at his exclamations. The
operators suspended their work to mimic
him, and mocked his spasmodic tcvitches
of the arms and horrid gestures. He Avas
a standing butt for it long afterwards, and
when the natives wished to revile him,
they would act the tattooing scene, ending
with the exclamation, “ Narlic-a-nutt mu-
cha purk” —Narlic-a-nutt (his name) is a
coward; “Jim Aroche ma coo mot”—
Jim Chief brave ! After my executioner
had battered my hand aAvhile, she Aviped
it with a sponge. I hoped slys had finish-
ed ; but no! She held my hand up,
squinted at the lines, as a carpenter would
true a board ; then she began again, and
this Avas Averse than the first job. When
the Avomen had done with my hand, they
rubbed it over with cocoa-nut oil and pul-
verized charcoal. The Avomen then left
us, and we were permitted to eat.


In the afternoon there came a fresh sup-
ply of ladies, who continued tattooing op-
erations on my left arm. On the next
morning my hand was puffed up into al-
dermanic proportions ; but, after breakfast
the ladies came to decorate us still farther.
George howled piteously and succeeded in
begging off, but I was informed that I
could on no account be excused. Eight
days were occupied in tattooing the vari-
ous parts of my corporation; but, fortu-
nately, being a smSll man, the ground of
operations was not so extensive as it would
have been had I laid claim to more inches.
The hair on my body was twitched out
with sea-shells, as dexterously as pin feath-
ers are subtracted from the flesh of a
goose. It was a whole month before I re-
covered from the effects of this treatment,
being anointed continually with oil and
coal, which proved a sort of cosmetic not
very favorable to the delicacy of the skin.
To relieve our weariness, George made
a flute of a reed, and a fiddle of some light
wood ; while I, on my part, had music in
%
my sole. Our retirement proved tedious,
notwithstanding all that Zimmerman hath
said on solitude. The parrots squalled
and the dogs howled at a distance, and the
scene was romantic enough; but I was
more given to dancing than sublime con-
templation. "
We were heartily rejoiced when the ca-
noe was manned to carry us back to the
war canoe house. I came from the tattoo
hospital, a horse of a different color from
that which I had when I entered it, being
tattooed on my left hand, on both arras,
legs, thighs, back and abdomen. George
had escaped with a few stripes on the, left
arm, and those were unfinished. On our
return a feast awaited us, and George fid-
dled and piped while I danced.
I had supposed that ray tattooing was
over, but now by the Chief’s direction, one
of his daughters prepared to mark me still
more. She tattooed a ring under ray
right breast, another under my left should-
er, and two about my right arm. This
was but the prick of a needle to the exten-
sive printing business which had been pros-
ecuted upon my body at the tattoo-house,
and I made no complaint.
The feasting continued during the day ;
many dogs barked their last; jagow in
abundance was mauled to express its juice ;
and my comrade for his fife, and mysv*
for my heels, were in excellent odor with
the natives. Singing and dancing, with
feasting, and the arrival of distinguished
strangers, lasted all the second day ; and
it was not until night that I began to sus-
pect what it all tended to. At night I
learned that the young lady who imprint-
ed the last marks upon my arm and breast,
was my wife ! that last tattooing being
part of the marriage ceremony.
Upon the third morning my bride led
me away to the bath, and the day was
spent in feasting and dancing. There was
no quarreling or disturbance, no uproar 01
disorder. George also was provided with
a wife ; but his unwillingness to submit to
the process of tattooing, wedded him to a


woman of no rank—she, however, proved
a good woman to him.
My father-in-law was Ahoundel-a-nutt,
Chief of the island of Nutt, and the most
powerful chief on the group of islands en-
closed by the reef —set down on the charts
as one island —Ascension, but called by
the natives Bonabee. I resided under the
same roof with him ; he gave me his own
name, Ahoundel, but I was more frequent-
ly called Jem-aroche. George 'Keenan’s
island name was Narlic. •
My wife was only about fourteen years
of age —affectionate, faithful, and fond of
baked dogs. During my residence on the
island she presented me with two little de-
mi-savages, a girl and a boy —the latter of
whom stands a chance, in his turn, to suc-
ceed his grandfather in the government of
the island.
My wife endeavored to instruct me in
the language, and although I was a tolera-
bly apt scholar, yet my teacher had a very
critical ear, and the least deviation from the
island pronunciation, created vast merri-
ment both for her and others present. My
wife accompanied me in my walks and in
ray canoe excursions ; always at my side,
and looking up to me as affectionately as
ever a novel-schooled miss could, and with
twice as much sincerity. My father-in-law,
who was a practical joker, continued, in
the excursions in which he accompanied
is during the lengthened honey-moon, to
pop upon places where he knew that the
residents had never seen me. He would
direct me to enter a house suddenly, with
a howl, and strike an attitude. It would
invariably send all the occupants, usually
women, flying out at every place of egress.
The sight of Ahoundel on the outside, en-
joying a hearty laugh, would remove fear,
and this rude method of introduction sup-
plied both parties, the visitors and the vis-
ited, with rare amusement.
To excursions without him, Ahoundel
was very adverse. He would, in answer
to my inquiries about other Islands, telj
me they were inhabited by cannibals, and
assured me that if I ventured away from
him, I should certainly be eaten, George
and I, if we took excursions, did so in a ca-
noe borrowed of fishermen, because we
could not launch our' own unperceived.
Afraid of being eaten we kept'near the is’
land, sailing round it and paddling up the
creeks. When we were near a settlement
George would take a fife and make its shrill
notes echo in the still valleys and moun-
tains —“Narlic! Narlic! garlic! Narlic!”
—we would soon hear the,"natives shouting,
as they came running down to the creek
side, “ Narlic, cudjong! cudjong!” • Cud-
jong was the name which the natives had
bestowed upon George’s fife. We would
be invited on shore, and when inclined to
dance I used to land and shake a leg for *
their edification.
Accustomed to polygamy, the Caroline-
an woman sees nothing shocking in the
plurality of wives. It were nonsense to
assert that there is no jealousy and quar
reling —as it would be asserting a position
contradicted by reason and the nature of


things. Even in Christian countries we
often see that one wife is enough to quar-
rel with ; and it is not to be imagined that
Laowni (that was her name) and myself
had none of the disputes which appear in-
cidental to conjugal life.
Upon one occasion, when I was sick, a
journey was projected, as was the usual
course with invalids, I however refused
to be cured in that way, preferring ease
and quiet. All the preparations having
been made for the journey, it was taken
without me. I thought my wife might
have had the grace to remain at home
with her sick spouse, but she chose to ac-
company her father. Upon her return I
had pretty well recovered, and I welcom-
ed her by taking my wedding gift —a few
blue beads—from her basket, and break-
ing them between two stones, before ,her
eyes. As soon as I had done the mischief
Laowni ran from the house to a stone in
the edge of the water, where she sat down
and commenced crying like an infant. I
followed, and endeavored to pacify her,
but it was of no use ; the only answer she
made was to kick like a spoiled child.
The tide followed till she was in water to
her elbows ; then I was enabled to coax
her away, but still she ceased not bellow-
ing for her beads. If I had bitten off her
finger, it would certainly have grieved her
less. At night I went to sleep and left
detected her solacing her grief with a dog’s
drum stick ; but in the morning I found
her still pouting. All day she wore the
same sulks, giving me an occasional look
of any thing but adaption, but without
saying a word. At night I took George
with me, and instead of sleeping in the ca-
noe-house, which was then Ahoundel’s
quarters, went to his house proper. There
we built a small fire for its lighty j|nd just
as we had propounded to each other the sage
conclusion, that his Majesty of Nutt and
family were notin the best of humor, we
were surprised with a visit from that dig-
nitary himself, accompanied by a native—
who was particularly indebted to me for
detecting him in stealing my knife—and
two others,.all armed with spears. With-
out saying a word they sat down at a little
distance, biting their nether lips, as is al-
ways the custom when vexed or in a pas-
sion. I enquired the reason of their visit,
but received no answer. George shivered
beside me like a leaf, though I assured
him he need fear nothing, as the visit was
undoubtedly intended solely for me. At
length our agreeable state of suspense was
relieved by the appearense of Laowni, who
beckoned them outside, and we saw noth-
ing more of them.
This adventure showed the danger of
offending the daughter of a man who could
take my life with impunity, although
her weeping. She had refused to eat, Ahoundel respected the courage with
though fish and the most delicate bits of which I faced him—a courage as much af-
which I faced him—a courage as much af-
roasted dog had been offered her. Hap- fected as real.
pening, however, to awake at midnight, I With these people, after George and I


had become habituated to their customs,
and learned to appreciate, their character,
we resigned ourselves to circumstances,
and were content in the absence of almost
all hope of escape, to be happy. In about
a year from our arrival, Ahoundel grew a
little less cautious about our wandering ;
a forced remission of care, as we had be-
come too well acquainted with the people
to belike them all cannibals. Still he in-
sisted upon our being frequently in his com-
pany, The difficulty with Laowni, which
I have mentioned, and my father-in-law’s
conduct on that occasion, in which I sus-
pect he Was instigated by Namadow, left
my situation not quite so pleasent as be-
fore. Ahoundel seemed disposed to re-
pair his harshness with over affection, and
it was with the utmost difficulty that
George and I obtained permission to leave
Nutt for twenty-four hours.
Outside the reef which bounds Bonabee,
are two islands, one called by the natives
Hand, about twenty miles distant; the
other Pokeen, about sixty miles distant.
The latter called on the charts, Wellington,
Island, is inhabited ; Hand is not. The
inhabitants of Wellington Island resemble
those of Bonabee, except that they are ad-
dicted to cannibalism, a practice which is
unknown on Bonabee, except, perhaps, so
far as tasting an enemy’s heart goes. Hand
is visited for its cocoanuts, which are very
abundant. Keenan and myself visited it
once, and found it bounded by a reef,
through which there is but one passage.
Boche le mere was deposited in large quan
tities upon the sand atlowtide. We were
detained by a storm longer than we bar-
gained for, being weather bound ten days.
Upon Wellington Island we remained
nearly six months. The language was es-
sentially the same as at Bonabee ; the cus-
toms, similar ; the three castes of people
also existed there. It is oftener visited by
vessels than Bonabee, as the bits of iron
hoop, an officer’s coat, and other articles
in the possession of the natives proved.
Boche le mere and tortoise shell were plen-
tiful ; the latter in possession of the island-
ers, and the former neglected from an igno-
rance of the method and means to cure it.
The natives .of Wellington Island are in
the habit of frequently* visiting Bonabee,
bringing presents of mats, fruits, and oth-
er articles ; and it was upon the return of
a party from Wellington that we visited
their island. I did not believe, ’til my visit,
that the natives of Wellington Island were
then I had occular demonstra-
tion. It seemed with them an ungover-
nable passion ; the victims being not only
captives, but presents to the chiefs from
parents, who appeared tolesteem the accep-
tance of their children, for'a purpose so
horrid, an honor. Wellington Island laid
down on the chart as one, is in fact, three
islands, bound by a reef. One of them is
inhabited, and the other two are uninhabi-
ted spots, claimed by different chiefs, as if
to afford a pretext for war, and the gratifi-
cation of their horrible passion for human
flesh.
Shortly after our return from Pokeen or


a
H
>
H
O
o
►H
j;
o _
o
a
o
n
o
a
M
r*
p


Wellington Island, our four comrades
Johnson, Brayford, Thompson, and Wil-
liams, paid us a visit, as had been their oc-
casional custom. The reader maj' well
imagine we enjoyed these opportunities to
revive old associations, and speculate upon
t
the chances of our escape from Bonabee.
Upon this occasion our comrades propo-
sed to George and me, that we should
leave Nutt, andvspend a twelvemonth with
them, dividing the time with the different
chiefs with whom they were quartered,
and devoting the first month to an excur-
sion from island to island. This proposi-
tion was eagerly embraced by us. I had
frequently expressed to Ahoundel a wish
to the same effect, but he uniformly refu-
sed his consent. My visit to Wellington
Island was protracted by the strength of
the north-east trades, much bayond his
pleasure; and although this was not my
fault, that long absence had so proved the
necessity of my presence to him, that it
made him averse to my going from his
sight; a fatherly solicitude that was hor-
ribly annoying. Knowing therefore the
certain answer to an application for leave
of absence, I determined to take liberty
without. What I fancied a good oppor-
tunity soon offered. Ahoundel, and his
whole household and connections, launch-
ed the canoe for an excursion or visit.
I was excused from the party on account
of the presence of my friends, who de-
clined accompanying Ahoundel. When
they were fairly off, we stepped into the
«anoe, but had hardly got under weigh
when a rascally nigurt, who had evident-
ly been watching us, shoved his canoe
off and paddled before us like lightning,
shoving, or rather poling his canoe over
the shallows, and working like a wind-
miller in a gale with his single paddle
in the the deep water. When he reach-
ed a creek or inlet, into which he knew
Ahoundel had turned, he shot up the
opening, and we began to see his inten-
tion, and the meaning of the boohooing
he had kept up in preceding us. In a
few moments we saw the canoes of
Ahoundel in pursuit; we used the pad-
dle and sail, and cracked on, esteeming
it more a frolic than anything else. As
we had the start, it-was nearly two hours
before they neared us enough to be with-
in hailing distance. They then, com-
menced fair promises if wc would stop ;
offering us fish and bread fruit, and yams,
and using all the logic of persuasion of
which they were capable. Still we crack-
ed on ; but Ahoundeb’s canoe at length
shoved alongside of us, upon the weath-
er or outrigger side, and we gave up the
race as useless. My friend Namadow
was the first to lay hold of the outrigger,
and gave us the first intimation of their
rough intentions, by endeavoring to cap-
size us. We hung to windward to trim
the boat, and finding his strength ineffec-
tual to upset it, he had the brazen impu-
dence to climb on the platform with the
intention to board us. In the heat of
the moment I administered a settler witlr
my fist which knocked him into the vva


ter, then half a dozen of the Indians
laid hold of our outrigger at once, and
thinking it useless to struggle against
such odds, we all jumped out of the ca-
woe. Others of Ahoundel’s fleet had by
this time gathered around us, and the
Indians commenced beating us with the
flat sides of the paddles whenever we
showed our heads. Our canoe was smash-
ed to pieces, and ray comrades were allow-
ed to climb into others in the fleet with-
out-much beating; indeed they were as-
sisted in ; hut I did not fare so well.
Ahoundel made frequent feints with his
spear, and so did others, hut not one was
thrown, nor had any person any such mur-
derous intentions ; as I afterwards learn-
ed. their orders was to frighten and beat,
but not to hurt: a consoling circum-
stance of which I had not then the bene-
fit but considered myself a case. Du-
ring all this time my father-in-law was
upbraiding me with my ingratitude, re-
minding me of my rank, connexions, wife,
and the benefits he had heaped upon me.
I protested my purpose was only to make
an excursion with the intention to return.
The paddle pounding, had ceased after
the first attack, and this conversation was
carried on, or rather his scolding, while
[ was eyeing the spears and dodging in
anticipation of the blows. I made seve-
ral attempts to climb into Ahoundel’s
canoe, but my particular friend, who had
by this time been fished ou,t of the water,
rapped my fingers with his paddle as
aeon as they clasped the gunwale. The
fleet, -which had received additions from
Nutt, of people who came out of curiosi -
ty, seeing the fray, now turned towards
Nutt again ; and Jem Aroche, chief as
he was, was fain to crawl into the canoe
of a nigurt and return to the house of his
father-in-law. My shipmates accompa-
nied me, and Ahoundel satisfied that I
should not repeat my attempt to escape,
proceeded on his excursion. No women
accompanied our pursuers, as they were
set on shore before the chase commenced.
Three or four days passed before
Ahoundel and his party returned. Du-
ring that time I had ample opportunity
for reflection, and acknowledged to ray-»
self that ray punishment was not altoge-
ther undeserved, as my treatment of my
father had, to say the least, been un-
handsome.
When the party returned, Laowni im-
mediately sought me upon landing, as
she heard vague rumors of ray adventure,
and was not sure that I was not killed.
She was overjoyed to see me ; rubbed
her nose against mine in token of affec-
tion ; threw herself upon my neck, and
wept tears of joy at my safety. Ahoun-
dcl himself, made a sort of half apology,
and excused himself by recapitulating
the suspicious circumstances against me.
Laowni was clamorous in her complaints
of my treatment, and even appealed t«
her father by asking him how he would
like such usage if he was a stranger in
London.
Laowni drew all the particulars of the


attack from me, and worked herself into
such a rage with Namadow, the friend
who struck my hand, that she ran up to
him and struck him with her codjic, or
small wooden knife. It was a severe
blow that she dealt him, and he had no
refuge but flight, being below her in rank.
The others who had assisted in abusing
me, thought it necessary to propitiate
me with presents before they ventured
i-nto the canoe-house. Ahoundel was
I
much better pleased with Laowni’s at-
tack upon Namadow than I was. He
called her “ brave ” for it; not exactly
to her face, but as any father among us
would rather commend, than regret the
pranks of a spoiled child ; for such was
Laowni, his only daughter.
Our shipmates lengthened their visit
some days after their capture under the
suspicious circumstances of running away
with George and me. Ahoundel had the
justice to present them with a new canoe ;
the civility to invite them to prolong
their visit, and the delicacy to restore
their property so soon after the explana-
tion, that their visit could not seem a de-
tention, forced by the lack of means of
escape
After remaining restricted principally
to Nutt for about two years, George and
I determined upon an excursion, cost
what it might. After an abortive at-
tempt tCKget away in a borrowed nigurt’s
canoe, we obtained a larger one and start-
ed. To avoid suspicion it was borrowed,
as launching one of xny own would have
been attended with a parade that would
have led my honored father-in-law tc
suspect even more than was mv intention
I had taken the precaution to note on a
plantain leaf the names of the other is-
lands and their chiefs. Five or six hours
brought us to Chocoich, and upon near-
ing the chiefs canoe-h«use, George struck
upon his fife, flute, or cudjong, a lively
tune, while I kept the canoe in motion.
When we reached the landing a host of
the natives, many of whom had never be-
fore seen us, were ready to receive us.
With Wajor, the head chief, we remain-
ed one night, and were feasted and en-
tertained. A like reception we met at
other islands which, we visited in succes-
sion, occupying nearly a month in the
trip. Possessed of the names of the
chiefs, it was my custom upon ascertain-
ing the name of the island to enquire for
its chief, to whom I first paid my re-
spects. George’s flute and my looking
glass were assurances of good reception,
as their fame and ours had preceded us.
Notwithstanding the representations of
Ahoundel, that we were in danger of
being eaten if we ventured out his sight,
nothing but the most courteous treatment
was ever received by us. Mr tattooing,
speaking my relationship to Ahoundft-a-
Nutt, was better than letters of introduc-
tion. We were frequently accompanied
from island to island, and nigurs were
put into our canoe to save us the labor
of propelling it. During a month thua
most agreeably spent we met all our ship-


mates. These meetings were indeed the
most pleasant part of the excursion, as
the reader will well imagine. My friends
were much diverted at the respect paid
me on account of my tattooing ; so far
was it carried that the natives often in-
sisted upon my shipmates sitting down,
as a token of respect to Jem Aroche, alias
Ahoundel-a-Nutt, alias James O’Connell.
But, the most wonderful adventure
made during the excursion, the relation
of which will put my credit to a severer
test than any other fact detailed, was the
discovery of a large uninhabited island,
upon which were stupendous ruins of a
character of architecture differing altoge-
ther from the present style of the island-
ers, and of an extent truly astonishing
At the extreme eastern extremity of
the cluster is a large flat island, which at
high tides seems to be divided into thirty
or forty small ones by the water which
rises and runs over it. It differs from
the other islands in its surface, which is
entirely level. There are no rocks upon
it which appear placed there by nature.
Upon some parts of it fruit grows, ripens
and decays unmolested ; as the natives
can by no persuasion be induced to gath-
er or touch it. My companions at the
time of discovering this island, were
George and a nigurt; the latter having-
directed our attention to it, promising us
a surprise—and a surprise indeed it pro-
ved. At a little distance the ruins ap-
peared like some of the fantastic heapings
of nature, but upon a nearer approach,
George and myself were astonished at the
evident traces of the hand of man In
their creation. The tide happened to be
*
high, our canoe was paddled into a nar-
row creek ;so narrow that in places a ca-
noe could hardly have passed us, while
in others, owing to the inequality of the
ground, it swelled to a basin. At the
entrance we passed for many yards
through two walls, so near each other
that, without changing the boat from side
to side, we could have touched either of
them with a paddle. They were about
ten feet high; in some places in dilapi-
dated, and in others in very good preser-
vation. Over the tops of the wall, cocoa-
nut trees, and occasionally a bread fruit
spread their branches, making a deep and
refreshing shade. It was a deep solitude,
not a living thing, except a few birds be-
ing discernible. At the first convenient
landing, where the walls left the edge of
the creek, we landed ; but the poor ni-
gurt, who had seemed struck dumb with
fear, could not te induced to leave the
boat. The walls inclosed circular areas,
into one of which‘we entered, but found
nothing upon the inside but shrubs and
trees. Except the wall there was no per-
ceptible trace of the footsteps of man, no
token that he had ever visited the spot.
We examined the masonry, and found the
walls composed of stones, varying in size
from two to ten feet in length, and from
one to eight in breadth, carefully prop-
ped in the interstices and cracks with
smaller fragments. They were built of


the blue stone which abounds upon the
inhabited islands, and is, as before stated,
of a slatose formation, and were evident-
ly split and adapted for the purpose to
which they were applied. In many pla-
ces the walls had so fallen that we climb-
ed over them with ease. Returning to
our canoe we plied our nigur with ques-
tions ; but the only answer we obtained
was “ Animan !” He could give no ac-
count of the origin of these piles, of their
use, or of their age. Himself satisfied
that they were the work of Animan , he
desired no farther information, and
dared make no inspection, as he believed
them the residence of spirits. We re-
turned to the island of Kitti, where we
announced our intention to inspect the
ruins on the next morning. It was with
difficulty we got away from the islanders,
who declared that our lives would be for-
feited to our temerity. Arriving a sec-
ond time at this deserted Venice of the
Pacific, we prepared for a deliberate sur-
vey. We paid several visits to these
ruins, but could find no hieroglyphics
or other traces of literature. The walls
had evidently been built by a people
dissimilar to the Indians on the inhabi-
ted islands, and the latter persisted in
declaring that they were the work of
spirits.
At length I began to tire of exploring
smd to long for home ; for, strange as it
may appear, my consort Laowni, savage
though she were by classification, made
my island home quite an attractive spot
to me. Upon my return to Nutt, I found
my wife and father had learned my wan-
derings, by report from the islands I had
visited. Laowni was rejoiced to see me,
and Ahoundel pronounced George and
me brave, for venturing as we had among
strangers. We soon had a chance to put
this recommendation to the test; for we
were informed that Wajaica-Hoo had de-
clared war against Ahoundel-a-Nutt, on
account of my marriage. It appeared
that Laowni was promised to him previ-
ous to my arrival. The daughter never
much affected the match, as Wajai was
old and the husband already of some-
thing like a -dozen.
Ahoundel after sfhting the case, asked
me if I was willing to fight, and as I saw
no honorable mode of escape, I consent-
ed ; but George showed the white feath-
er and positively refused. Preparations
were immediately made to visit Hoo, and
“ carry the war into Africa” by answer-
ing Wajai’s challenge at his door. Na-
tives to the number of about fifteen hun-
dred were mustered from Nutt and the
contiguous small islands called Hans and
Parana. The order of sailing was thus :
Moonjobs (the highest rank) to the right
or in the van ;• Jerejobs (the second rank)
next, and the Nigurts bringing up the
rear. Each canoe was furnished with
smooth stones, which were stowed in the
bottom; and each native was furnished
with a sling, a spear, a bow and arrows,
and war club. The day and place had
been appointed with all the circumstance


of a duel; or rather of an ancient joust at
arms, with the exception that there was
no stipulation or limitation as to force on i
either side ; each party bringing all the
strength he could muster.' Wajai ■tfas
prepared to receive us, though with an ,
inferior force ; his canoes were ranged in
the water, in front of his settlement, and
as soon as we were near enough to dis-
tinguish features, our chief Ahoundel,
and Wajai, sprang simultaneously to
their feet, upon the platforms of their
canoes, and flourshing their spears, set
up a shout of defiance, the conches blow-
ing an accompaniement. The inferior
chiefs upon both sides then rose and join-
ed in the cry, and the engagement com-
menced with hurling the stones with
slings. These stones are seldom less,
than a pound in weight, and are thrown
with tremendous precision, the parties
being from thirty to forty yards apart.
Several canoes were broken and sunk on
both sides, and many men killed. The
stones exhausted, arrows and spears fol-
lowed, and the parties nearing each other,
till the battle was canoe to canoe, and
hand to hand. The natives would seize
each other by the hair, and thrust with
a small wooden spear or lance, without
barbs, and cut the flesh with sharp shells.
In the onset Wajai was killed by one of
the party in our canoe. A shout of joy on
one side, and a murmer of grief on the
other, suspended the battle a moment;
but it was soon renewed with unabated
fierceness. At length we forced a land-
ing, and the vanquished or broken foe,
failing to prevent it, also sprang on shore,
and disputed every inch of ground, to
the very doors of their houses. The
land engagement was fought with the
jagged spear and war clubs. An hour
and a half of hard fighting brought us to
the estate of Wajai. The women had
long before deserted the houses, taking
with them such of their effects as they
could conveniently transport, and the
men fairly overpowered, fled to the inte--
rior. Our party plundered the houses
of whatever moveables were left, set fire
to them, and returning to the beach,
broke up the canoes of the foe; and ta-
king with us the spears, mats, and other
plunder, we returned to Nutt. We
brought back such of our own dead as we
could find, and the body of Wajai and
other chiefs who fell upon the other side.
The usual preparations of jagow and
dog venison were made, and the bodies
of \Vajai and his chiefs were burned;
but previously to the entire consumption
of the bodies by fire, the heart of Wajai
was taken out, and presented to the chiefs
on a large plantain leaf. When it was
eaten or even tasted I cannot say, as I
was not present at the ceremony. The
presumption is, however, that eating the
hearts of the chiefs killed in war, is a
custom with them.
It was in the early part of the month
of November, that I discovered a vessel
from Nutt; the first vessel that I am
positive of seeing while on the island of


Bonabee. My comrades often said they
saw vessels, and I frequently imagined
that I did, but none approached near
enough for us to distinguish their class.
It was about sunrise in the morning
when I first discovered her, and I call-
ed up George immediately. We ran to
the top of the nearest hill, and anxiously
watched her, as well as the mist and oc-
casional rain would permit, for it was a
dull morning. After we had satisfied
ourselves that it was a European or Amer-
ican vessel, we ran down to the chief
and informed him that there was a ves-
sel in the offing, and that we wished to
board her. He was not half so much ela-
ted at receiving the information as we
were in imparting it. He eyed me some
moments—■“ What!” said he, <£ a ship ?
Cho ! cho ! ” (no, no.) I repeated my
assurance, and led him to the hill. My
wife and the whole household followed.
George and I bounded about for joy,
skipping up the hill, as if our feet could
not serve us fast enough. The pace of
our companions offered something of a
contrast: they were still incredulous,
and my wife and father were evidently
hoping against the truth of my discovery
as they saw in my joy anything but a
pleasant indication of my feelings respec-
ting remaining on the island. I pointed
out the vessel, and showed them that it
was not a war-canoe. I repeated my re-
quest for a canoe, assuring Ahoundel that
I would make the vessel sit down, or
come to an anchor. At the canoe-house,
wither Ahoundel, Laowni, my children,
and others followed me, Ahoundel grant-
ed his unwilling consent that I should
go off to the vessel, following it up with
questions, while Laowni anxiously watch-
ed the expression of my face for an an-
swer. <£ Do you love your wife? your
children ? Do you love them much —
very much ? Will you certainly return V 1
To all this I answered yes, yes ; and my
heart smites me now, as I recollect the
gratified expression of my wife’s counte-
nance upon receiving the assurance
Blunt, plain man that I am, I could hard
ly disguise my joy at the hope of an es-
cape, although at times, as I looked at
Laowni and her children, and the thought
of Ahoundel’s kindness intruded itself, I
could hardly conceal my grief at parting.
A large canoe was prepared to launch,
but the tide was out. We were obliged
to wait for it two full hours ! Oh ! the
impatience we felt —the snail-like pro-
gress of time ! Knowing perfectly well
had we been cool, the time of the tide,
still we could not avoid running down
every ten minutes to look. Meanwhile
I prepared a quantity of tortoise shells,
yams, bread-fruit, and cocoanuts, to take
off to the captain. We watched the ves-
sel—she tacked and stood off—our hopes
fell—she stood back again—we were re-
assured. She hove too, and we were
happy till we recollected that we were
tide-bound.
At length the tide served us to launch
the canoe. Ahoundel and Laowni ac-


companied us to the boat, the former re-
minding me of my promise to bring him
trinkets, the latter, melancholy, and half
doubting that she should see me again.
There was a fleet of some dozen canoes
beside mine. I was accompanied by
Keenan, a young chief, and two nigurts.
We went outside the reef, and had near-
ed the vessel so that we could distinguish
the men on her decks, when the nigurt
who had the steering oar, let the canoe
get into the trough of the sea. There
was a tremendous sea on, and it was care-
lessness on my part to let the paddle go
out of my hand. We were swamped. A.s
is usual with the natives, we all jumped
overboard ; two taking the out-rigger side
and the others striving to bail the canoe.
There was however, too much sea run-
ning, and all endeavors to bail the boat
proved futile, while the tide and the swell
were drifting us towards the reef. After
imminent danger of drowning, George
and I reached the reef. On gaining the.
rocks, I attached my mat to the pole of
the outrigger and *made signals of dis-
tress ; but the men in the schooner, sup-
posing us to be natives, paid no sort of
attention to it. We were two or three
hours on the reef before we were dis-
covered by the natives, and were taken
off. One of our party—the nigurt who
remained with the canoe —was drowned.
Upon reaching Nutt, Ahoundel was
astonished with the story of our e,soape,
coupled as it was with the loss of the ni-
gurt. He was astonished that two white
men should prove more fortunate swim-
mers than a native. At night the schoo-
ner stood off, and in the morning she was
not to be seen. At length I saw a speck
—it was the schooner! A half hour
more and the tide was right. The ves-
sel standing in, was now distinctly visi-
ble. and prepared with a fresh load of
tortoise shell and provisions, with G-eorge
and two nigurts, I set sail again. When
we reached the schooner shf was hove to,
with her boarding nettings up, and her
men mustered, with boarding pikes and
muskets at hand. Two or three other
canoes got along side at the same time
that we did, and others were coming off.
We passed under her stern, and read the
words “ Spy, of Salem.” She was brig-
rigged forward, and schooner aft. Pas-
sing round to her weather bow, I sung out
11 shipmates ! throw us a rope’s end —will
you V’ There was a bustle on deck, a
buzz of surprise, but no answer ; and in
a moment I heard somebody exclaiming
—Captain, the natives on this island
speak English.” The anxiety to get a
peep at us through the boarding netting
was now redoubled fore and aft. One of
the men, after much hesitation, threw us
a rope, and the Captain came to the gang-
way and asked us on board, requesting
us to keep the natives in the canoo,
which we did. The captain did us the
honor to ship the side ladder for us, and
George and I needed no second invita-
tion to come on deck; but, taking up
the tortoise shell with us, directed the


«’connell’s appearance before the public in the various
THEATRES.


natives to pass up the yams. To my first
question tl\e captain answered that the
name of the island was Ascension, the
group being laid down as one island on
the charts.
After some conversation with the cap-
tain, the schooner filled away again, and
we stood off with a fleet of canoes in tow ;
dashing and splashing through the water,
their outriggers foul of each other, get-
ting continually carried away. I un-
dertook to pilot the Spy inside the reef
to an anchorage, at Captain Knight’s re-
quest, At four or five o’clock in the
evening, she came to an anchor in the
harbor of Matalaleme. By the natives
who went that night to Nutt, I sent
Ahoundel a large broad axe and adze,
and to Laowni I sent heads, red kerchiefs,
and other trinkets; while George and I
remained on board, afraid to trust our-
selves ashore again.
Like all other cowards, Captain Knight
was cruel, and avenged attempts at pet-
ty pilfering by murdering the natives
In consequence of this conduct we were
soon compelled to leave the islands;
Fairly out of the harbor of Mantclalcme,
the deportment of Captain Knight mate-
rially changed toward us. In about
fourteen days we made Guam, one of the
Marian Islands, and here Captain Knight
would have left us, but the authorities
would not permit it. After leaving Gu-
am, I had some altercation with Captain
Knight. During the whole passage I
had been sick from a cold, exhaustion,
fatigue, and derangement of my whole
system, from the change of diet. I was
lying one on the heel of the how-
sprit, when Captain Knight approached
and gave me a kick. What business
have you here asleep sir?” I pleaded
my weakness and ill health, and he col-
lared me ; I returned his grasp with, in-
terest, when he freed himself, and run-
ning aft procured a brace of pistols. He
did nothing but talk, however; but on
our arrival at Manilla, he charged George
and me with being runaway convicts
from New Holland, mutineers, pirates,
devils, witches, hobgoblins, Ac., Ac., Ac
Accordingly, we were put in.chains, car
ried on shore, and deposited in the cala
boze.
Upon entering, we found ourselves in
a sort of reception room, more conveni-
ent for its purposes than genteel, or ele-
gantly furnished. It w.as separated from
the rest of the prison by an iron grating,
through which the friends of the priso-
ners conversed with them. Through this
grating we saw a large hall, tenanted by
prisoners, hut we ourselves passed up a
flight of stone steps, communicating with
the second story. Here, with Chinese,
Malays, Spaniards and Creoles, were we
locked up.
Sailors, many of whom visited us, were
in the frequent practice of making us
small presents. With the money thus
obtained we sent and purchased bread
and meat, but the eyes of Argus were
necessary to prevent verification of the


proverb, c ‘ many a slip ’twixt cup and lip,”
Even after our bit of meat was in the pot
with the rice, and we were superintending
its cooking, some dexterous Chinese thief
would wip it out with his chopsticks, if our
eye strayed from it one moment. Each
of the prisoners is obliged to prepare his
own food, in a portion of the prison set
apart for that purpose.
All sorts of ingenious modes of punish-
ment were practised upon the prisoners for
misdeeds while there. It would almost
seem the Chinese ingenuity of torture,
tempered by a little more regard for hu-
manity than the officers of his Celestial
Majesty possess. Stocks, confining the
culprit in all sorts of positions, many of
which were as ludicrous as uncomfortable,
clogs, irons and collars, and devices, the
description of .which would tire, were in
continual exercise. Flogging was going
on all day, but the poor devils of Chinese
came in for more than a proportionate
share of it, and the blows were laid on
with more hearty good will, as they were
heretics.
We were not without amusement.
George had brought his violin and flute,
of course, and I had not forgotten the ex-
ercise of my heels. Then in the various
assemblage there was ample amusement in
watching the different disposal of time, ac-
cording to character. The Chinese were
most of them merchants, in a small way,
vending tobacco, betel, and other “ no-
tions,” as a Yankee would say ; and there
is no better word in the world. Stock in
trade was not wanting, while there was a
chance to exercise their expert fingers in
tricks of sleight of hand. Others would
operate as barbers, tailors—they had a
thousand resources for busy idleness.
Spanish blood showed itself in games of
chance —cards, draughts, dominoes; and
the parties would set as gravely and in-
tently engaged as if they had been recrea-
ting in the palace of a grandee. An occa-
sional industrious one wove hats; and
cooking pilau was the periodical occupa-
tion of all hands.
We were never brought to trial, and I
amused myself by writing letters to such
English and American residents as I could
hear of. The American Consul, and Mr.
Sturgis, an American resident, visited us
about a week after our committal, and to
the latter gentleman I am much indebted
for his kindness.
I indulged in an occasional game of
draughts with one of my fellovr-prisoners,
a Spaniard. One day he tried to cheat
me and we quarrelled. As a punishment,
I was ordered into the lower prison, and
Q-eorge was moved with me. This apart-
ment sabred to the lowest rogues, was by
no means so pleasent as the upper one.
Here I assumed the amusement of dis-
patching letters ; continuing it until one
day, the deputy jailor came to me with
orders to put me in close confinement. I
resisted, and in the scuffle was severely
bruised, and my rigging dismantled. In
order to give me food for reflection, I was
seized down to a bench and beaten with


cow-hide*. Not to fatigue the reader with
a history of my sufferings and deprivations
in this prison, and the brutal conduct of
the American Consul, I will say that no
trial took place. I had been imprisoned
to satisfy the malice of Captain Knight,
and it was not pretended that anything
could be proved against me. We left
Mantilla in a Spanish vessel and went to
Macoa. From Macoa we were sent to
Canton. From Canton we sailed in the
Clipper Ship Flying Cloud, Captain Rad
kin, for New-York, at which port we arri-
ved in September. We had a pleasant
passage | George’s flute and fiddle enliven-
ing the day watches, and to complete the
band I manufactured a drum out of a half
barrel, by stretching a sheep skin over one
head.
Thus ends ray narration.


MUTINY AT SEA.
A NARRATIVE
cy SOME OF THE MOST STRIKING EVENTS OF A SEAFARING LIFE, WRITTEN Bv
CAPTAIN ELI All HOLCOMB, FROM RECOLLECTION, FOR THE BENEFIT OF OUR
SEAMEN AND WATERMEN ON OUR INLAND LAKES AND CANALS.
Not having the ship's book or my private journals to refer to I shall emu: giving daxe>
The wonderful pi evidence of God is ob-
servable in every transaction. The prima-
ry object of my undertaking this labor of
love is to ameliorate the distresses of a class
of our citizens that has been neglected,
and as it were trodden under foot, because
they were sailors. What love and respect
is due them in the darkest days of our bis-
torv : the landing of our fore-fathers at
Plymouth ; navigating an unknown shore
at the risk of their lives ! What depriva-
tions —what valor displayed with a few
small crafts defending our seaboard what
undaunted heroism since, when not only
our flag was ridiculed and scoffed at, but
our citizens pressed on board of men-of-war
of another nation, to fight their battles
even against their,own connections! In
the last war with England, how fearlessly
they contended for the respect of the
American flag, which now floats on every
sea, and came off victorious, though con-
tending with the most powerful nation in
the world. Are such bold, fearless, enter-
prising men, not to be esteemed and (oved
by their countrymen, whose property and
persons they are protecting through much
tribulation and suffering ? This happy
country, through their instrumentality, has
become respected by the nations of the
earth, as well as made rich ? and have we
so little esteem and regard for them, when
we meet them in the street, almost naked
and pennyless, in want of a home and a
friend, to pass by on the other side, indif-
ferent to their necessities ? Policy would or
should stimulate us to take thought of
them, because of their influence, and sym-
pathy would lead us to remember them,
because of their destitution. With so
much ardor and energy they invite our at-
tention as most useful allies. With so many
ties of natural kindred as they have to us,
the claims of blood would forbid their being
neglected by their own countrymen.—
Commerce owes them a debt she has nev
er discharged. Freedom owes them a
share of her treasures in acknowledgment


of the valor they have displayed in her
service, in the darkest days of her history.
For them the Bible has promises not yet
accomplished. By every consideration of
patriotism and gratitude —by every argu-
ment that can plead to interest our benev-
olence, the love of our native country, or
of our common kindred, we are bound to
lend a helping hand to raise them up, that
they may enjoy the comforts of freedom’s
soil, and Christian’s hope of a blessed here-
after. Then our merchant vessels can sail
the ocean without demons to man them ;
the lives of the officers will be safe from a
mutinous crew; drunkenness, which is
generally the cause of mutiny, at sea, as
it makes men brutes, forgetful of conse-
quences, will be reformed. The youth on
our canals and lakes seem to be trained in
that school of wretchedness, in the lowest
possible society, where every temptation is
before them, to demoralijse and fit them
i
for any desperate deed. This can be in a
degree remedied by providing a proper
place for them to spend their winter months
where they can improve their minds and be
obtaining an education, rather than spend-
ing their time in whiskey-shops, where eve-
ry species of vice is tolerated and encour-
aged.
I shall now take occasion to mention a
few occurrences which frequently happen
at sea, (you will notice the wonderful prov-
idence of God and his watchful care of
those who go down to the great sea and do
business in the mighty deep,) as they trans-
pired before the awful mutiny which I am
about to give you a full account of, that
you, reader, will be enabled to follow me
through the tragedy with an eye single to
the goodness of Him that willeth not the
death of him that dieth, but that he should
turn and live. Idoit to prove in the in-
stance of the conspiracy, how applicable
the sentence, “God maketh the wrath of
man to praise him.” They meant it for
evil, but I am persuaded God meant it for
good, inasmuch as it may be the means of
saving many a famishing soul, starving for
want of spiritual food. I shall now return
to the facts hinted at, the first when I was
a sailor before the mast, (so called.)
A man engaged at the end of the gib
boom, bearing his weight on the gib-stay
instead of the foot-rope, the tackle-fall gave
way and he went overboard. The vessel
was immediately hove too, pitching heavi-
ly. He endeavored to get up the boom by
means of the stay, working up hand over
hand. Another sailor and myself went to
the end of the gib-boom to lead the stay
in, that being the only way to save him.
When on the end of the boom, the vessel
gave a heavy pitch and carried away the
gib-boom. Three of us then being over-
board, the attention of those on board was
turned to the one who had been longest in
the water and was almost sinking, whom,
with the other, they got on board, myself
yet struggling to keep above water, being
but a poor swimmer. Being under the
bow of the vessel, as she pitched healy I
caught hold of the bob-stay though it took
me down, yet when she rose out it brought


me up, by which means I was saved.
This you may say was chance. I believe
that He whose footsteps are on the deep,
had something designed for me to do.
Another; after I had command of the
ship Ann, of Boston, belonging to David
Hinkley, a worthy enterprising merchant
of that city, on my passage from Boston to
Liverpool, England, in the Autum; after
receiving a pilot on board off the Skerries,
for Liverpool, a sudden gale came on at
about 11 o’clock at night. The tide not
answering to go in before the next morn-
ing the pilot hove too. The next day the
gale continued blowing furiously, and it
was so foggy that no land was to be seen ;
therefore the pilot dare not run. The
next night the weather was the same, car-
rying away our main-yard when lying too
under a close-reefed topsail, so that in case
of wanting that sail as a last resource, it
was utterly useless. By the most minute
drift I found we were near the banks, and
drifting towards them so fast that we could
not keep off till morning. I showed the
pilot where I judged the ship to be, and
requested him to run for the light-house,
as the only chance of saving the lives of
the ship’s company and passengers, as well
as the property, which he declined doing,
as he had not seen any land since he came
on board, and knew not where we were,
it being difficult for the best navigator to
determine the situation exactly, when lying
too, in a gale, with the tide running one
way and the other, from seven to nine
knots (or miles) an hour; yet as difficult
as it was, it was the only thing we could
do as we were situated. To trust to out
judgment to lay too, we should certainly
be lost before morning, and if we run, we
could no more than be lost, though by lay-
ing too, we might live some two or three
hours longer. Another consideration was,
it was now high tide, and if we hit the
channel we could run in. Near morning
it would be low tide, and though drifting
right in the channel, we should be lost.
I pointed out these things to the pilot, yet
he refused to run. Had there been any
appearance of the gale’s abating, I might
not have been so decided, but as there was
no appearance of any change for the bet-
ter, I said to the pilot, “ If you will not
run, I will. If Igo on shore I will run
on shore ; I will not lay too and drift on
shore. It is only determining our fates a
little sooner. By running, there is a small
chance ; by laying too there is none.” I
gave orders to the mate to have the fore-
top-sail close reefed as it was got on the
vessel; the foretop-mast stay-sail set, to
pay the vessel off before the wind. Theo-
dore Wright and lady, with my wife, were
the only passengers on board. After get-
ting the vessel before the wind, I put a
good man at the wheel and the pilot and
first mate to stand by him ; gave him the
course as I judged the light to bear, my-
self ; the second mate and some of the sai-
lors going aloft to look out for the light.
I told the second mate where I thought it
to be, and if he discovered it to run down
and let me know. I then went below and


pricked off the course and distance we run,
and then went aloft again, where I soon
discovered the light, and that if the ship
•was in the due course I gave them, she
was then in the channel between the banks.
I ran down and looked at the compass and
found that she had been due her course
when aloft. I said to the pilot, “We are
in the channel, I saw the light bearing
thus and so.”. Though he had been a
branch pilot, many years, he was so alarm-
ed that he knew nothing about any course.
He wanted to see the two lights. We
soon discovered the one light from the
deck, but he was still in the dark. In a
few minutes we discovered the two, at
which he exclaimed, “ Oh, my God, we are
safe ! Now I can take your vessel in as well
as though it was daylight.” “ Well,” said
I, “take her.” That night, at twelve
o’clock, we were safe at anchor in the riv-
er Mersey. That night fourteen vessels
that had pilots on board, were lost with all
on board, with the exception of one man.—
Was not this a providence ? I believe I
was actuated by that all wise Being who
heareth prayer and answereth our petitions
in due time. To God be all the praise.
I would here remark that my taking the
ship from the pilot would affect the insu-
rance ; the risk would fall on the ship,
but lives were preferred to property, and
in case the ship was lost, there would be
no one to tell the story.
At another time, after encountering se-
vere gales during the winter on the Ameri-
can coast, being favored with a warm,
pleasant day in January, eighteen miles
east of Cape Cod, where we were becalmed
a part of the day, the ship’s decks jnd rig-
ging so loaded with ice that she was al
most unmanageable, being warm, we got
the decks and rigging clear of ice. Hav-
ing every appearance of an easterly gale,
made every preparation to receive it, be-
ing in a dangerous place, a strong current
from the Bay of Funday setting us on the
shoals, where many a ship is lost. To-
wards evening a breeze sprang up from the
N. E., soon began to snow, the wind shif-
* .
ting to the south ; it soon got to S. W.,
blowing almost a hurricane ; put the ship
before the wind, to get, if possible, out ot
the Bay ; we got to the north of George’s
Bank, the wind hauled to N. E , we • car-
ried all sail possible to clear the south
shoal, just cleared that, the wind hauled to
S. E., we theh hove too, the wind blowing
a tremendous gale, the wind going twice
round the compass in one week, blowing
an awful gale and snowing. In twenty-r
seven days after leaving, within eighteen
miles of Cape Cod, we got into Martha’s
Vineyard, safe at anchor. It would re-
quire a more skillful pen to give to the
reader a just conception of our dangerous
situation ; for one week from the time we
bore away, the ship was reported in the
Bay by a schooner I spoke the day before
—a high premium was offered, but no on<?
would take the risk. One hour after, the
owner sent word to my wife that no insu-
rance could be effected. She received by
the same messenger the joyful tidings that


the ship had just arrived in Martha’s Vine-
yard. \
I wjll relate one more narrow escape —to
the east of Cape Dora, which place is no-
ted fur pirates, as well as is all Greece :
the Islands in the Archipelago that are in
habited by Greeks, are fearful places for a
merchant vessel to navigate.
I was bound from Asia Minor to Boston.
Before leaving port, we heard that two pi-
rate row-galleys were erasing in the Arch-
ipelago, ani.} that they had captured two
British armed vessels. The second day
4
out, being becalmed a part of the day, we
(Kscovered one of them a distance from us.
They were row-galleys with twenty sweeps
on a side, and had two men at each sweep,
so that they were easily distinguished from
any other craft. My ship had something
of the appearance of a man-of-war when
seen at a distance. They appeared to be
-afraid to venture too far out before satisfy-
ing themselves as to what we were. Be-
fore night, however, they seemed deter-
mined to try us at all hazards, and bore
away for us. We having four six poun-
ders, made every preparation to receive
them, and as the wind was, I thought it
possible to keep them on the starboard
side. We got our guns on that side, loa-
ded with double headed chain and grape
shot. They had more than eighty men ;
our number was less than twenty. At
about 6 o’clock, P. M., they came up with-
in about fifty yards, when, having a man
with a lighted torch at each gun, they were
ordered to fire all at once. The shot did
good execution. The boat appeared much
broken, and on my next voyage it was re-
ported that one of the pirate galleys was
destroyed at that time and place, and but
one man saved on a la tine spar to tell the
story. The English armed merchant ves-
sels taken and destroyed, and we spared !
Ought I not to praise ray Maker with my
breath ?
I shall now give from recollection, and
in my own language, a correct statement
of a conspiracy, to the facts of which I am
ready to attest at any time; facts which
are impressed on my mind as with indeli-
ble ink, which commenced at Smyrna,
Asia Minor. After my ship was loaded
and ready for sea, which was on Saturday,
a day on which the family with whom I
’had formerly lived for three years and four
months went into the country to spend the
Sabbath, I deferred sailing until Monday,
giving orders to the chief mate to receive
nothing on boarcl susceptible of the plague;
neither to suffer any one to visit the ship
from the shore or other vessels, and to al-
low none of the ship’s crew to go onshore,
as the plague was raging to an alarming
degree, and to be in readiness for weigh-
ing anchor when I came from the country,
Monday morning.
I had not yet been on board, but had kept
myself from exposure, as I was in the Van
Lennep family. ' On Monday morning I
arrived in Smyrna with Jacob and Richard
Van Lennep, where we were informed by
the clerk, that the plague had been com-
municated on board the ship, the second


mate having the black vomit. A Jew
doctor was sent to examine him, who, on
his return, pronounced it to be the plague.
T sent for a Turkish boat to take the mate
on shore, where he was again examined
by the same doctor, who still persisting
that it was the plague, we were obliged to
have him taken to the Plague Hospital,
where, two days after, he died. The car-
go was then landed and put in a ware-
house, to undergo a quarantine of forty
days. It was necessary that the crew
should go on shore, where they would per-
form a quarantine. I agreed with them
to go on a point about two miles from town,
where tents were to be made from the
sails of the ship, to screen them from the
heat of the day, and from the dew and
damp air of the night. They were not to
leave that place to go to town, or to any
other place where they would be exposed
to the plague, on condition that they
should be supplied with provisions daily,
and that their wages should go on during
the quarantine. After they had remained
there about twenty-days, I saw some of
them in town. I asked them how they
came to deceive me by breaking their
promise. I told them as they had broken
their covenant, and exposed themselves to
the plague, they need not return to the
point and that no wages would be paid them
for the time they had been there. They
returned to the point and enlisted the
others in their favor, and agreed among
themselves that they would stay till I vis-
ited them, (which I did every few days,
Jew I to see that they
were well supplied with
provisions, and whether they were well,)
and then kill me and the man who took
me up in the boat, and taking my gold
watch, and whatever else I might have
about my person, take the boat and flee
to some of the islands for a few months.
till it would be in a manner forgotten.
It so happened that I did not accompany
the man who supplied them with provis-
ions, until I heard of their plans. I then
sent them word that they would receive
no more supplies from me, as there was
sufficient proof that they had forfeited all
claims against me, by frequently being in
the city, where they must have been ex-
posed to .the plague. Most of them re-
mained there till the goods were again put
on board, another crew shipped, and the
vessel ready for sea; and no doubt they
would have given me trouble had I not
sailed under the escort of a British frigate.
Jacob Van Lennep was a passenger on
board of the frigate, and influenced the
Captain in my favor. After the goods
were on board it became necessary for me
to be on board occasionally ; consequently
I changed my lodgings to an Inn kept by
a widow lady. The night I went on board,
the house was thronged with the old crew.
The steward came to my room door. I
went to the door, and upon opening it the
steward raised his hand, drawing a knife
from his coat sleeve.. I shut the door on
him and locked it, and then rung the belL
A person coming up, I requested that a ser-
vant might be sent to Yan Lennep for the


clerk, who came and assisted me in get-
ting on board. Several of them came
alongside, with the intention of boarding
while we were getting under way, but
were kept oft’, and we sailed under the pro-
tection of the frigate. We had light
breezes through the night The next day,
(which was the Sabbath,) being in the
Gulf of Smyrna, with a head wind, the
crew being very slow and sluggish in wor-
king the sails, the frigate got far ahead of
us. After she got out of the gulf, she lay
too for two or three hours, waiting for us,
and then filled away. I thought my crew
and officers wished her to leave us, which
was evident from what followed. After
getting out of the gulf, the wind being in
the N. W., I bore away and ran down be-
tween Scio and the main. The weather
was pleasant but I had unpleasant forebo-
dings of something, I knew not what I
knew that we were in a sea where it would
not be strange if we met with piratical ves-
sels. My crew, I began to suspect of be-
ing acquainted with that business, being
all foreigners but one man, and he no help
to me, as he lived forward with the oth-
ers. His name was Henry Walch, a son
of a respectable doctor in Boston ; not a
very bright youth. Here I began to feel
myself alone. The officers and sailors
met frequently in groups forward, and un-
der the lee of the long boat, talking low,
as though consulting about something of
vital importance. The chief mate was, to
all appearance, a drinking person, calcula-
ted to poison he minds of the others, and
only a fit companion for such as could
drink from the same iniquitous bowl in
which he delighted. I now began to re-
flect on my situation, and what could be
done for my own safety and the safety of
Henry, and of the property under my care
which required deep thought and fortitude.
To show fear would only strenghten and
encourage them ; to be too severe would
but enrage them. I found that in chan-
ging crews I had bettered myself but little,
if any. Like a person with a burning fe-
ver changing from side to side—changing
his place, but not his pain—so I had chang-
ed my crew, but not their principles. 1
thought I could discover guilt in the
countenances of the officers and men as
they came to the helm. I determined on
one thing, which was, to put myself in a
situation of defence, eo that one, single-
handed, should not overpower mo, unless
I was taken unawares; and I hoped short-
ly to fall in with some man-of-war. 1
went below and loaded one musket and
put a bayonet on it, one brace of pistols
which I put under my pillow, and anoth-
er which I put into ray pockets, placing
one in such a situation that Avhen I stooped
to examine the compass, it would fall from
my pocket, so that the man at the helm
might discover that I was armed, which I
was in hopes would deter them for a time,
by thinking to themselves that the first
man who attacked me might lose his life,
or get wounded at least. What influence
this had I know not. Why they did not
put their diabolical plan in execution


while we were in the Archipelage, is a
mystery to me, unless they were fearful of
meeting some man-of-war, or being obliged
to share their booty with others of the same
stamp; but be that as it may, they suffered
me to pursue my course till We passed the
island of Milo, where we discovered a sus-
picious sail to the leeward of us, which
was to all appearance, a piratical vessel
standing towards us. I bore away for her
and gave her a bow gun, and made a for-
midable appearance by showing sixteen
guns. The strange sail immediately al-
tered her course and ran from us. But so
far as I was concerned, my condition was
not bettered. Had they boarded us and
proved to be pirates, as they most proba-
bly were, my crew and myself would most
probably have met the sword, or had the
privilege of walking the plank, two and two;
a merciful way the pirates have of getting
rid of the responsibility of shedding blood.
As soon as I found myself clear of the pi-
rate, I altered ray course for Malta, think-
ing to get assistance from the American
Consul. Before we reached Malta one of j
the crew refused to do duty. Had I been
ignorant of their plans, his disobedience |
would, in all probability, have brought on
the crisis, but I knew too well my situa-
tion to attempt to enforce obedience ; so I
made the best I could of the matter. But
I was soon relieved by the discovery of the
island from the mast head, when the sailor
returned to duty. We arrived at Malta,
one week from Smyrna. I wrote to the
Consul, telling him my situation ; but he
answered my letter, saying there were no
American sailors in port, neither was there
any others he could get for me, in conse-
quence of the plague raging so fearfully in
Smyrna, from which place we had just ar-
rived. I became well satisfied I could get
no help from Malta, and made up my
mind to try to fall in with our squadron,
off' Algiers. The next day I put to sea,
with a favorable wind, but it soon changed
and came ahead and remained so for more
than a week, during which we gained only
one hundred miles.
This was a week of watchfulness and
anxiety for me ; the officers and men were
stubborn and savage, constantly collect-
ing in groups on the forward deck, in close
consultation, as though they were plotting
something of importance. Up to this time
my orders had been obeyed, though with
reluctance. One week from Malta, we had
a good observation, and found ourselves
about fifty miles from the island of Sardin-
ia. The mate wrote up his log. This is
a book which every vessel must keep.
The observations are parefully noted
change of wind, deaths* and in short, a
careful history of the voyage, with such
remarks as the mate may choose to make.
On the day alluded to above, the*mate, af-
ter finishing his work in the log, brought
it into the after cabin, and laid it open be-
fore me. I cast my eyes upon the book
and. after looking over the reckoning, dis-
covered the mate remarked as follows ;
“ The men have been long in a state ol
MUTINY; and have threatened the Ufa


of the Captain. One man, a Spaniard, has
volunteered to do the deed with a dirk he
has in his chest; they then intend to heave
the Captain overboard, run the ship on the
Barbary coast, take the gold, (they sup-
posed there was a large amount of specie
on board,) load the boat with opium and
silks, and after sinking the ship, go to some
Island and report the vessel lost. But I
thought it only sailor’s talk until to-day ;
I now find they are bound as one man,
and fully determined to commit the deed
—and furthermore, they have threatened
my life.”
After reading these remarks, I sat still
for a moment, thinking of my situation.
Alone ! nothing in sight but the water be-
low and the blue sky above, and not one soul
on board in whom I could place the least
confidence ! But no time was to be lost;
something must be done, and that quickly.
If I altered the ship’s course, they would
suspect me of having discovered their plot,
and that would be immediate death for
me. And if we continued on, by night
we would be wher& they had resolved to
kill me and take possession of the vessel,
I had no time to lose, if indeed, I could do
anything to save my life. After a mo-
ment’s reflection, I determined to try to
save my life by stratagem. But how to
reduce my stratagem to practice, was the
important question. I resolved to make a
confident of the male —the very man
who had in the beginning headed the con-
spirators ! It was a desperate game, but
desperate as it was, I had no choice. I
called the steward, and told him to ask
the mate to step into the cabin. In a few
moments the mate made his appearance,
much agitated and shedding tears. I
pointed to the log and said to him, “ What
does all this rdean ?” He replied, “It is
a fact, Captain,”' “ What is a fact?” said
I.—“ Why, they intend to take your life,
and mine too, when we are up with Sar-
dinia, as written in the log.” I asked how
he knew it to be a fact now any more than
before? Why, said 1,-may it not all be
sailor’s talk now, as you thought it to be
before ? He said he had become convin-
ced by recent movements, and the unani-
mity which prevailed among them, that
they were determined to carry their plot
into operation. Yes, said I, you know it,
now they have threatened your life. You
now begin to think they are in earnest.
This is not entirely new to me, said I, for
I have read you for some time past, and
have been prepared for the worst. I told
him that I had marked him for the ring-
leader of the plot; the mate of the vessel,
the only person on board that I could make
a confident of, for him to head a mutiny,
and lead men on to commit such horrid
crimes was most wicked and unnatural. I
spoke in this manner to him for some
time, to satisfy myself of his sincerity. He
appeared humble, and in truth, he had rea-
son to feel humble ; for whatever part he
might have taken in the commencement
of the conspiracy, it was now quite certain
that he had lost favor with the others ;
and they, for their greater safety, had re-


solved to send him, with me, into eternity 1
The reason of their threatening the mate’s
life, as I learned, was the division of the
money; he contending for two shares, as
he was an officer, they insisting on an
equal division, as they were equally con-
cerned in the mutiny and would have to
suffer the same punishment in case of be-
ing detected.
Here I would pause for a moment.
Reader, imagine yourself in my situation,
with a blood-thirsty crew determined on
your destruction in a few hours; alone on
the ocean ; no creature being near to coun-
sel with ; all your enemies anxiously wai-
ting to arrive at the place agreed upon, to
assasinate you and divide the money —the
price of blood. The thoughts of leaving a
beloved wife and numerous relations who
are daily anxiously expecting your return,
after an absence of three years and nine
months, to bemoan your detention; to
think how anxious will be the inquiry of
every sail that heaves in sight, “ Is it the
ship Ann ? Does she bring no tidings of
her ?” How distressing the thought to the
throbbing heart —suspense —never hearing
of the awful tragedy. Weeping nights
and awful dreams are likely to follow an
affectionate breast till relieved by death.
The mutiny on board the Somers, which
must be fresh to your recollection, could
hardly have been a resemblance of this.
There were many American officers and
sailors to devise plans ; to watch their be-
havior, and at least some chance of over-
powering. the mutineers. But with me it
was far different. Only tw > against a
ship’s crew—the treacherous mate and my-
self, and he, in all probability, would have
left me to fight single-handed, in hopes of
their sparing his life.
It is difficult at all times to look into the
human heart; and still more difficult is it
to traee and understand the thousand cau-
ses which may operate upon and influence
it. But it was not very difficult for me to
see that the mate considered his life in
danger. *You will readily believe that
such a situation is sufficiently dreadful to
make the stoutest heart quail, I told him
to sit down, and as far as possible to com-
pose his feelings; and when sufficiently
calm, to go on deck and pursue his duty
fearlessly, and say nothing to any of the
crew, for that would be quick and certain
death for us both. I then said to the
mate, seeing I had to confide in him, that
there was but one way for us to save our-
selves, and that is by stratagem; a few
hours will find us near Sardinia, in the
night; the very time and place set apart
for the concluding act in this fiendish plot
And so difficult is the plan, that I have hit
upon for us to save our lives, that a single
mis-step, or a careless word, will cost us
both our lives. You are now satisfied that
the crew have doomed you as well as me ;
and you have made up your mind to save
yourself or die with me.
It is well known to the crow, I contin-
ued, that the American squadron is off
Algiers, and we must make them believe
that we are among the fleet to night, be-


fore we get up with the island. This will
prevent them from carrying their plans
into execution to-night. Now, to deceive
them, when you come on deck after din-
ner, I shall find some fault with you about
the rigging of the ship and her general
appearance, as not being in a fit condition
to be visited by our officers, with whom I
am expecting to meet every hour. I will
keep all hands on deck busily employed
at the rigging, and whatever command I
give you, I shall give my reasons so as to let
them hear me. By this means I shall keep
their hands and their minds employed. —
Myobject was to get them fatigued, so that
when they had an opportunity of going be-
low, they would feel disposed to sleep and
leave putting their plans in force for the time
being. ' Towards night I will request you
to go aloft and look out for a sail. In do-
ing that you must use all the skill you are
master of, and if you cannot discover any-
thing, just before sunset you must report one
on the starboard bow, just off the island of
Sardinia ; then after looking a few minutes
longer, report another large man-of-war oq
Uie larboard quarter, towards the Barbary
coast. This, you see, will lead them to
think that we are right among the Amer-
ican squadron, and as a matter of safety,
they will defer the execution of their hel-
lish project till we are clear of the fleet.
I then dismissed the mate, who went on
deck, and I was left alone to think of my
Ireadful situation. Shut up in ray own
cabin, surrounded by a rebellious crew,
who were only waiting for night to cut my
throat and heave me overboard. Nor was
this all. Before, I had been the posses-
sor of my own secrets ; and although they
might and probably would overpower me,
I was prepared to sell my life as dear as
possible. But in case the mate should
prove doubly treacherous, the more surely
to entrap me, I should be without even
that chance. It is one of the most difficult
things to do, to place confidence in a man
whom you know to have been a traitor.
Such was my case. I had now committed
my secrets to a man, who, a day or two
before was maturing a plan to cut my
throat, and take command of the ship him-
self. It was difficult to see how he could be
so black-hearted a villain then, and hon-
est now. One thing at least was certain.
A few hours would tell the story, and
whatever my fate was to be, I began to
feel anxious to know the worst.
After dinner, the mate came on deck.
I was as usual, walking the quarter-deck,
and any conversation between him and me
would be heard by the man at the helm,
and he, when relieved, would go below
and communicate it to the rest of the crew.
I turned to the mate and said, now we
have a fair wind, and very likely shall fall
in with the squadron and be detained,
perhaps lose a night’s run, and have some
of our crew taken out. I then made men-
tion of the rigging of the ship, as noi be-
ing seamenlike, and not as I would like to
have her seen by any of our men-of-war.
I gave orders to have all hands called up,
and when they were on deck, gave orders


to the mate about what I wanted done ;
managing to say all this in the hearing of
the men, who were busily engaged at their
wort; frequently expressing my fears that
the squadron would fall in with us before
we could put the ship in a condition to re-
ceive them. I kept them pretty steadily
at work, not knowing what moment my
blood was to stain the deck of my own ves-
sel. Towards night I requested the mate
to go aloft and look out for a sail. After
remaining on the topsail yard for some
time, he sung out “ I can’t see anything,
sir.” I then told him to go on to the top
gallant-yard, whieh he did, and in about
ten minutes sung out, “ Sail ho 1” “Where
away ?” said I. 4 ‘ On the starboard bow.”
“ What does she appear like ?” u Cant tell,
she is a great way off.” Pretty soon he
reported another on the lee-quarter, and
just before the sun went down, he repor-
ted them to be large vessels, like men-of-
war, standing towards us. Then, said I.
we are surrounded by our squadron. By
this time night had set in, and bow well
my plan had worked, could only be seen
by what followed. A slender thread it is,
upon which hangs human life. The least
failure in this stratagem would have been
instant death to the mate, and myself and
Henry. The very trick itself would tell
them of our weakness and our fears ; and
tell them also, in unmistakable language,
that all they had to do to-succeed, was but
to make the effort. I knew it to be a fact,
that when men are in imminent danger,
they note*with intense anxiety the min-
utcst circumstances, and attach the grea
test importance to them ; and however
small this manoeuver may appear to the
landsman who was never out of sight of
land, I have reason to believe that the
preperaiions made that afternoon to make
our vessel appear well in ease we should
fall in with the squadron, and my fre-
quent mention of our near approach io
it, added much io our safety, of seeing
the two sails at a great distance, just be-
fore sunset, and did make the crew defer
their plot till a' more convenient season.
The next morning we saw no sail; and
near sundown the mate resorted to the
manoeuvre before mentioned—how well
it succeeded the sequel will show. The
next morning we discovered a frigate
running .down for us, which proved to be
an English man-of war. He fired a gun
ahead of us ; we paid no attention to it,
because we wished to speak to him. He
fired a gu*n another shot ahead ; I knew
then I must show my colors, or he would
fire the next into us. I told the mate
to hoist the colors, Union down ; he did
so; they then hauled to windward and
stood off. 1 told the mate to take a reef
of the colors, and hoist them half-mast,
to show them that we were in distress ;
he did so, but they paid no attention to
it. It is impossible for me to describe
my feelings on this occasion. The flag
at half-mast is a signal of distress—a lan-
guage understood by all nations; and
that commander who disregards it, is un-
worthy the name. There I was with my


life threatened; and I had no good rea-
son to believe that I should live to see
another morning. But the Captain cared
little or nothipg for that—l could get
eo help from him.
We then hauled down our colors;
stood away. on our course, being then
past Algiers, and I did not intend to run
in sight of land for fear they might see
the coast clear of vessels, and take ad-
vantage of the times. In the afternoon
we fell in with the American sloop-of-
war Fire-Fly, Capt. Rogers, bound for the
squadron. I hoisted my colors and hove
too ; he sent his boat alongside, with or-
ders not to hoard , if we were from Smyr-
na, as the plauge raged there at an alar-
ming extent.
I requested the Lieutenant to ask the
Captain to lay too till I could come along
side. I went on board and related what
had taken place on board my ship, and
asked assistance. The commander re-
plied that he was short-manned, and
could spare none ; neither could be re-
ceive any of my men on board his vessels,
on account of the plague, and .as I was
not manned according to the marine law,
he did not feel bound to assist me. Af-
ter much conversation, I became satisfied
that I could not get the assistance I wan-
ted, and, requested him to supply me with
irons, and to lay by me until I could put
the ringleaders in irons. When the irons
were passed on board, the sailors looked
somewhat confused ; the irons on deck—
the man-of-war alongside—how different
—not suspecting me to have known their
plans. I told the mate to see how many
pair there were, and then told him to
have the stern boat run up and secured,
and then ordered all hands aft. They
looked pale and alarmed.
■ I spoke to the Spaniard and told him
rig
pjfcllD
to go forward and. bring the knife he had
threatened to assassinate me with, which
he did. I then asked him if that was
the knife he intended to kill me with f
He said, yes, sir. I threw the knife
overboard and ordered the mate to put
the villain in irons, hand and foot. He
said not a word. We then put five more
of the ringleaders in irons, and confined
them in different rooms, and gave them
strict orders to speak to no one except
myself.
I then hauled down my colors and filled
away on my course for Gibralter, order
ing the remainder of the crew to go to
their duty, and not let mo hear a word
from any of them ; and I also made them
show some respect to the mates, although
from ray heart I despised them.
I shall not try to ente&into their hearts
to describe their feelings, when in solita-
ry confinement they had full opportunity
to think of their situation. There can
be no doubt but the Spaniard spoken of,
who had volunteered to do the deed, was
a perfect murderer. It is difficult to see
how he could expect mercy, when he
owned to my face that he had volunteer-
ed to stab me. He was without doubt
an old pirate, and in all probability had
murdered many. Many have expressed
surprise that I had not punished them
when in my power, as far as the laws of
the land would justify me in. My motto
is* “ if thy enemies repent, forgive them.”
I believe the reflection of returning good
for intended evil, has been ten-fold more
satisfactory than that which could be an-
ticipated from being an instrument of
their misery. Their after conduct and
behavior manifested sorrow and repen-
tance. The all-wise Being preserved my
life, and I leave them in his hands.
- - DEC oo


'\ ' .
;; _ -


O R. X Gr X INT A. 31*
GEO, CHRISTY & WOOD'S ETHIOPIAN MINSTRELS,
414 BROADWAY, MW YORK
Profi.ssok J U DAGNALL wall amid on receipt of twenty five cents, plain Directions to beautify and
cure all discolorations of the Skin, such as Freeckles, Tan, Pimples Small box marks,Blotches, Worms in
the Skin,Redness, and all eruptions arising from the impure state of the system. The Brilliancy impai e
to chapped, rough Flesh and Hands, and the most ugly deformed skin also removing wrinkles when formed,
is truly wonderful, every men, woman and child should have these valuable recipes and avail themsc \ es
of an indispensable auxiliary to beauty given a clear brilliant and spotless skin. ,
One of the recipes will contain full apd accurate particulars how to make the hair grow full and
luxuriant and prevent it falling off. . .
The process is very simple, restoring the hair to parts from whence, by sickness or otherwise, it has fallen
off. It clears the skin from Dandruff, etc., also other impurities, in a manner superior to the most skilful
sharapooning, and makes the scalp as white as snow, speedily producing a growth of hair of extraordinary
length, softness, beauty and gloss, and changing the color from light to dark. Another to make die eye
lashes grow, long and luxuriant. Also to clear the sight, (riven the ball of the eye a whiteness to
alabaster Still added a recipe to clean and preserve the teeth and impart to them the whiteness of pearl,
without the aid of mineral or acidious compounds. These recipes are suitable for male and female, and
Gentlemen desirous cultivating there whiskers or moustaches will find in these recipes the process most
applicable attended with no expense ; also prepares and softens the beard for shaving. Those who value
there appearances and those wishing to restore their former beauty, should avail themselves of these
cultivators of nature’s beauty. They are entirely void of mineral, acideous and alcoholic compounds, and
attended with little trouble in their application and requiring very little expense. Space prevents giving
a single testimonial of the thousand received, stating the eminent virtues these valuable recipes contain.
Redd the notice of
Tlic New York National Democrat, April Gtl», 1854.
We have received from Prof. J. M. DAGNALL of this City, a copy of his invaluable recipes for beauti-
fying the skin, the hair and the teeth, clearing the sight and. causing whiskers and moustaches to grow |
on soil heretofore barren; this last will of course be eagerly sought, after by "Voting America. Ibe ;
\thole may be had for Twenty-five centS. Cheap enough.
Enclose .twenty-five cents in a letter and direct
PROFESSOR J. M. DAGNALL, NEW YORK CSTY.
No letters taken unless the postage is paid.
